A Plain and Necessary CONFVTATION Of diverse gross and Antichristian Errors,
DELIVERED To the University Congregation, The last Commencement, Anno. 1653. By
Mr. Sydrach Simpson, Master of Pembroke HALL in CAMBRIDGE.

Potentior est veritas quam eloquentia, potior spiritus quam ingenium, major
fides quam eruditio: and ut Paulus ait, Stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus.
Luther. Epist. ad Caspar. Bornerum. Profes. Lipsens.

Non est istud temeritas, sed fides; neque inconsideratio, sed ratio; neque
furor, sed fiducia. Hilarious lib. contr. Constantium Augustum.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West End of Paul's. 1654.

An Apology to the Reader, touching the following Reply to Mr. Sydrach
Simpsons Sermon.
IF it shall seem grievous to any, that I have dealt thus freely and plainly
with Mr. Sydrach Simpson, one of the first pastors of an independent
Congregation in England; let them consider how Paul dealt with those Brethren
Gal. 2. to whom (according to his Zeal, and the present occasion) he gave no
place by subjection, no not for an hour, that the Truth of the Gospel might
continue with the Galatians; and though those brethren seemed to be somewhat,
yet says Paul, what ever they are, it makes no matter to me, seeing God
accepts no man's Person: And so notwithstanding their Reputation, he did not
spare them. Yea, let them consider how Paul at Antioch withstood Peter to the
face for dissembling with the Jews in the case of the Gentiles, and for not
walking uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel: wherefore Paul did
publicly and sharply reprove him before them all. For no true believer is to
keep silence, when the Doctrine of the Gospel is corrupted by the Doctrines of
men, or to be modest in this matter. Wherefore I was compelled to speak thus
plainly to him, for his gross prevarication in the things of God; and I am well
satisfied in my conscience in the discharge of my duty, whatever shall be the
censure of carnal Christians, who have no true sense of the Glory of Christ's
Gospel, or of the profit of his People, whom yet Christ so loved, as to lay
down his life, and to be Crucified for them.

Again, if it shall offend any that I deal thus roundly against Humane
Learning; Let them know, that I am not against Humane Learning upon all
accounts, but do allow Humane Learning (so it be sober and serious) in its own
place and Sphere, as well as other Humane things: But I do oppose it as it is
made another John Baptist, to prepare the way of Christ into the world, or to
pepare the worlds way to Christ: And also, as men make it necessary, for the
true knowledge of the Scriptures; Yea, the very Unction for the Ministry.

And herein, according to the grace of Christ I both do and will contend
against it for ever: Seeing Humane Learning mingled with Divinity, or the
Gospel of Christ understood according to Aristotle, has begun, continued, and
perfected the M^ster^e of Iniquity in the outward Church. Wherefore I do in all
boldness appear for Christ the w^^dom of God, against Humane Learning the
wisdom of the world; knowing assuredly that he is as very Antichrist who
opposes Christ as the Wisdom o^ God, as ^e that opposes Him as the Power and
Righ^ousness of God: and men may as well bring into the Church of God another
Righteousness then Christ, and another Power then Christ, as another Wisdom
then Christ. Wherefore, as they who bring in Humane Righteousness, that is,
civil or moral Righteousness, or any Works or Duties of men for Righteousness,
into the Church of Christ, they are true Antichrists in so doing; seeing herein
they are contrary to, and do oppose Christ the Righteousness of God: And as
they who bring in Humane Power, or the Secular Arm into the Church of Christ,
to do, or leave undone, to reward or Punish, to promise or threaten, to
encourage or discourage by that, they are true Antichrists in so doing, seeing
herein they are contrary to, and do oppose Christ the Power of God; So also
they that bring in Humane Wisdom, or the Learning and Philosophy of men into
the Church of Christ, they also are true Antichrists in so doing; for herein
they are contrary to, and do oppose Christ the Wisdom of God. For Christ is,
and is to be the only Power, the only Wisdom, and the only Righteousness in the
Church of God; And he that brings in any other Power, Wisdom or Righteousness,
besides Christ Himself, that man is in very deed Antichrist. And in this matter
also, it was necessary that I should be bold for Christ against Antichrist.

3. Again, if any shall be offended that I speak thus freely against the
Universities, which are of such honorable esteem everywhere in the Nation,
especially with the Ignorant and Vulgar people, and with men of all sorts, who
have not the right Knowledge of Christ and his Gospel (wherein are so contained
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, that no part of this Treasury is
left out thereof, to enrich Heathenish Philosophy withal, which by the Gospel
is left as a desolate thing, empty and destitute of all true Wisdom and
Knowledge) I say, if any think that I have too deeply censured these
Universities; let them know, that I have done in this matter but as Wickliff,
Hus, Luther, and several others, holy men of God, and happy Instruments in the
hand of Christ have done before me. As for instance;

Wickliff terms the Universities, Castra Caimitica, Cains Castles; Synagogas
Satanae, the Synagogues of Satan, and affirms they were never Ordained or
Instituted by Christ.

John Hus, (or Otho Brunfelsius, if he set out the Contents of the Chapters)
calls them Satrapas Antichristi, the Lieutenants of Antichrist.

Luther in his book Contra Ambrosium Catharinum, showing out of Daniel the
Prophet, that Antichrist is Rex facierum, the King of faces, or appearances, he
affirms that the Universities are one of those faces of Antichrist, and that
they are very comely or sightly to look on, and yet indeed are a very chaos and
open gate of Hell, and that in these the most choice youth of Christian people
are prostituted, and are cast into the open throat of Hell; And that in these
Aristotle is read, whereby the wits of Christian youth are possessed and busied
with Humane and Heathenish Learning; Yea, are quite blinded and oppressed with
it.

He says also, that the Universities are the Woe, that the fifth Angel
(mentioned Revel. 9.) brought upon the earth: and that who ever it was that did
first institute and confirm Universities, he was a star fallen from Heaven to
Earth: to wit, from the Gospel of Christ to Humane Learning.

And in his Exposition on Psalm. 22. he calls the Universities the Mothers of
Learned men, the Gates of Hell, and says, they are called ( Scholae, i. e.
Ludi) Schools, that is, Plays by a fatal name, seeing they make sport with the
Scriptures, and cast lotts upon them, as upon the Garments of Christ, every one
dividing to himself a share of them, according to his own humane and
Philosophical apprehension. And he says, that the Doctors of these
Universities are by the same providence called Doctores Scholastici, i. e.
Ludicri, vel Illusorii: School-Doctors, that is, mocking or May game Doctors.

Again he says, those most glorious Mothers of studies, the Universities,
stink before God with most loathsome abomination.

These Universities are those Antichristian Soldiers, who put a Reed into
Christ's right hand instead of a Scepter: and this reed is Philosophy, that vain
deceit, or as the Apostle else where terms it, the Operation of Error: by which
Philosophy (says he) the unhappy people of Christ began to be governed, that
is, to be seduced, and to be led away from the Gospel of God. And this vain
Reed they put into his right hand, by preferring Learning before Godliness;
saying, (according to their usual manner of speaking) he is a Learned and a
godly man; hereby making Learning to take place of Godliness. And yet this
Philosophy is nothing but a weak Reed, which counterfeits a Scepter, rather
then represents it, and so is nothing but vain deceit; for there is nothing
propounded in such Doctrine but vanity and lying, Omnes Scholas esse hareticas,
vel Theologia Scholastica arguit.
though under the title of Knowledge and Religion.

In a word, he calls them Antichristi Lupanaria, the Stews of Antichrist.

Melancthon also terms the Universities, Melanct. in Apol. pro Mart. Luther.
Domos mendacii, Houses of lies, and says, it is manifest that they are all
heretical by their School Divinity, which all the Schools in Europe have
received from the University of Paris, and are thereby infected with heresy;
and he says, the students in the Universities, are not the people of the
Gospel, nor yet of the Law, but are the people of Aristotle's Morals.

And thus it is manifest that others have spoken freely and sharply against the
Universities before now. And therefore wise and Godly Christians will have no
just cause to be offended at me, who have spoken in like manner, having the same
cause.

Object. Now if any shall Object, that they all spoke against Popish
Universities, and that our Universities are otherwise now, then they were then,
and so there is not the same cause to speak against them now, as there was
heretofore.

Answ. To this I answer, That though the outward form of gross Popery be taken
away from them (as also from the rest of the People of this Nation) God having
put it into the hearts of the Civil power to reject it, after the light of the
Gospel had begun to shine to them, yet are the heart, bowels, bones, marrow,
sinews and blood of the Universities, the self-same now as heretofore; and
though the outside of it has passed under a very little change, yet the inner
parts of it remain as before, in the full strength of Antichrists Kingdom, and
that without any alteration at all. For the self-same Statutes of the
Universities and Colleges still remain with them in force, which were at first
given to them by their Popish Founders, through the help of Antichrist: and
these Statutes are of such Authority with them, that they depart from the Rule
of Christ's Gospel, to walk by the rules of sinful men, for worldly stipends and
rewards. Farther, the same Philosophy or Heathenism, and the same
School Divinity or Antichristianism, are yet instilled into the youth and
students, as were many hundred years ago, in the darkest times of Popery; and
these things are all in all in the University Learning and Education, insomuch
that no man is of any esteem and reckoning with them, know he the Gospel of
Christ never so soundly and truly, if he be not (as they speak) a good
Philosopher, and School-divine. So that the University for its inside is the
self-same now, as it was in Wickliff, Hus, or Luthers time, being informed and
possessed with the same Heathenish and Antichristian Doctrine, now as then:
Yea, many of the self-same outward and Antichristian forms and follies still
remain with them, more then with any other people in the Nation again, even to
their Hoods, Caps, Scarlet Robes, Doctoral Ring, Kiss, Gloves, their Doctoral
Dinner and Music: neither could they ever yet to this day find in their
hearts to lay aside their very Praevaricator, which is some notable Varlet
picked out of the University, and brought forth in the presence of all the
Heads, Students, Scholars, and all the great resort of Ministers and People at
their public Commencement, to make shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience
before them all, and in open defiance of the Gospel, which stands in faith and
love, to abuse, and deride, and jeer, and reproach all sorts of persons, of all
ages, sexes, professions, and this presently after their Divinity Acts, which
is a wickedness the very Heathen would be ashamed of, and which plainly
declares what kind of Divinity is taught and learned in the University, which
can endure, allow, countenance, and be merry at that which so highly
contradicts Gods Word, and grieves his Spirit: yet because it makes them merry
after a full dinner, and puts more joy into their hearts then the holy
Scriptures, they could hitherto dispense with all to this day.

And so however Religion for the outward form, has been much reformed in these
Nations; yet the Universities as the strongest Holds that Antichrist has had
amongst us, have still remained much what the same, not only as to the inward
substance of all things, to wit, their Statutes, Philosophy and Divinity, but
also in a great measure to their outward forms, as they were in their first
Antichristian Institution.

Wherefore it was necessary also, that I should be plain and free for Christ's
sake and his Churches, against these (as Luther calls them) stews of
Antichrist, and Dens of Thieves, who have been, and still are the constant and
fruitful seed of Antichrists Kingdom in the world, out of which it might
suddenly on all occasions and opportunities grow up afresh, how greatly soever
it had been before wasted and destroyed among the people, by the clear word of
God and his mighty Providence and Works accompanying it.

Now as it was necessary this work should be done, so through the Grace of
Christ was I made willing to do it, seeing no body else more fit and able did
appear. And well knowing, that he that provokes the Universities and Clergy
against him, provokes Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness
of this world against him; as is evident in the example of Wickliff, Hus,
Luther, Tindal and others: I have therefore according to Christ's Counsel, sat
down and counted the cost of this undertaking, and after all do say, the Lord
is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. And so I commit thee
Christian Reader, to that Grace which is from God, to keep thee in this new
hour of Temptation, if the Lord suffer it to come forth upon the earth.

4. Again, if any shall Object in reading this Reply, that I, my self make use
of Humane Learning, whilst I speak against it.

I Answer, what part of Philosophy is here made use of? or who of the Heathens
are here quoted? I have chiefly made use of the Testimony of some faithful
Christians, who have lived in several ages, and yet have all witnessed by the
same Spirit, the same Truth. And it is no more Humane Learning to quote
Believers in the Church since Christ, then to quote the Patriarks and Prophets
before Christ, or the Apostles and Evangelists which immediately followed him.

5. And last of all, If any say, I my self relate to the University, why then
do I speak against it thus?

I answer, that I neither do, nor will relate to the University, as it is
polluted with any of the Abominations herein mentioned: But as by the
Providence of God alone, I have been brought to that Relation in which I now
stand, and continue in it, against the wills and workings of many; so through
his good pleasure I will remain, till he shall otherwise dispose of me; and
during my sojurning with them, I will not fail to testify against their evil,
and to endeavor to win all those whom God shall persuade to receive his Truth,
from Heathenism to the Gospel, and from Antichrist to Christ.

Wherefore let none be offended that I am made willing to hazard and part with
my worldly accommodations for Christ's Names sake; but let them rather praise
the Grace of God, which has enabled me to witness a good confession, what ever
worldly disadvantage I might run into thereby. Wherefore welcome the Kingdom,
Righteousness, Power, Wisdom, Word of Christ, though they swallow up all my
earthly accommodations: For such love has the Lord put into my heart, that I
would not willingly conceal any thing of his most precious Truth, either to
gain or to preserve to my self the whole World. And so righteous Father, not my
will be done, nor theirs, but Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

FINIS.
Isa. 62.1. For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I
will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.


MAster Sydrach Simpson the last Commencement preaching to the University
Congregation in Cambridge, and to many others, especially Ministers there
gathered together at that time, from several parts of the Nation, among other
things, he let fall in that discourse of his, these gross and Antichristian
Errors.

The Rehearsal of the Errors.
1. He brought in that Scripture 2 Kings 6. v. 1, 2. which was his Text: the
words whereof are these, The Rehearsal of the Errors.
And the Sons of the Prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now the place where we
dwell with thee, is too strait for us; let us go we pray thee unto Jordan, and
take thence every man a beam and let us make us a place where we may dwell: and
he answered Go ye. This Scripture he used to prove the Lawfulness and
Religiousness of the present Universities, and the usefulness and necessity of
humane Learning to the Church and Ministry of the New Testament. And what the
Scripture speaks of those Schools, he brought to countenance, encourage and
justify these: adding, that if it were objected, That that was the Old
Testament: He did answer, That the old and the new were not distinct
Testaments, but Administrations: thereby holding forth, that the Universities
now, are answerable to the Schools of the Prophets that were then; and that the
Universities are as agreeable to the New Testament, as the Schools of the
Prophets to the Old.

2. That they who have endeavored to pull down Schools, have always been men
who were found enemies to Religion. So Julian the Apostate shut up the doors of
the Schools, because he would have all Religion to go down.

3. That the knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on
earth, and that all Divinity is swadled in Humane Learning.

4. That Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and that God took him so
fitted, and made him an able Minister of his Church.

5. That men's hatred to God does as well appear in their hatred to Humane
Learning, as if they hated the Scriptures.

6. That if the spirit teach without means, men may as well be without the
Ordinances as without the Universities and Humane Learning.

7. That men now are not to receive the spirit in that immediate way to
understand the Scriptures in which it was given to them who wrote the
Scriptures.

8. That men now are to get knowledge by studies and humane Learning, and not
by inspiration.

9. That Humane Learning is as the outworks to the Fort of the Gospel, and as
the outer Court to the Temple of the Gospel: and so if you will keep the Fort
well, you must keep the outworks strong; and if you will preserve the inward,
you must look to the outward Court.

10. But what is the bottom of all this ( to wit, of some men's appearing
against Humane Learning, as the unction of the Ministry, and against the
Universities as the Fountain of the Ministry) but this? that some say, They
are one with Christ; and as Christ has the Divine nature in him, so every
believer has; and he that has God in him, need not go to any man to learn;
whereas John 17. Christ speaks of believers as at an infinite distance from
him: And if believers be so united to Christ as they say, they will follow,
that Christ should not be the only begotten of God; and that Christ and we
should be equal, and be not our Lord, etc.

11. Arts and Tongues are the Cups in which God drinks to us.

12. We shall never keep up Religion, if we do not keep up Learning: but when
Learning goes down, Religion goes down too.

13. Seeing Religious Foundations are so Ancient, then keep them up: Your
Destruction will never be but from your selves.

These Notes were take from Mr. Simpsons mouth, and delivered to me by an
honest hand, and affirmed to be true for the substance of them; and I also
heard several others who were hearers of that Sermon, relating the same things.

Now because I find that this Doctrine has not only grieved the hearts of the
faithful, but also strengthened the hands of the carnal and evil People: The
things which he then delivered, being usually the thoughts of their hearts, and
words of their mouths; I thought it my duty, being set in my place for the
defense of the Gospel, to give a Public Reply to such gross Errors so
publicly delivered, to the danger of so many; and which one would never have
thought should have proceeded from such a man; especially after the day of the
Gospel has so far dawned, and the Antichristian shadows are so far retreated
and flowen away.

And so I shall begin with the first of these Errors, and proceed in the Order
in which they are set down.

1. ERROR.
He brought that Scripture, 2 King. 6.1.2. 1. Error.
Touching the Sons of the Prophets, asking leave of Elisha to go and build at
Jordan, to prove the Lawfulness and Religiousness of the Universities, in their
present Use and Customs, etc.

Answer.
Answer.
To this I Reply, that there is a vast difference between those Schools, No
Heathenish Learning was taught in the Church of God all the time of the
Old Testament.
and these Universities, as in many other things, so chiefly in this; That in
those Schools of the Prophets, named by him, the holy men of God freely taught
the Youth, who came willingly to them to learn, especially in the corrupt times
of Israel and Judah; I say they taught them only the Knowledge of the Books of
Moses, and of the other Prophets then extant, and no Heathenish knowledge, or
Disciplines of the Gentiles at all. And these kind of Schools began early in
the Church: For the Fathers before the Flood, and the Patriarks after, all
taught their Children and Families the Word of God; And so each of their
Families was such a School. And that we may not be at uncertainties in this
matter, it is manifest what Doctrine they taught, by that which God himself
says of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham (says God) that he will command
his Children and Household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and
to do Justice and Judgment: This was the sum of Abraham's Doctrine to his
Family. And this is farther confirmed by that of Asaph, Psalm. 78.2.3.4. Where
he says, I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old,
which we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us: We will not hide
them from their Children, showing to the Generation to come the praises of the
Lord, and his strength, and the wonderful works that he has done: Where we
plainly see what Doctrine the Children received from their Parents, and the
Parents taught their Children from one Generation to another; to wit, not vain
Philosophy, and the Disciplines of the Heathens, but the praises of the Lord,
and his strength and wonderful works. This also is manifest by the practice of
Jehosaphat King of Judah, who sent his Princes with the Levites up and down
throughout Judah, and they only took the Book of the Law of the Lord with
them, (and no Heathnish Authors) and taught the People, 2 Chronicles. 17.

And Ezra after the Prophets return from Babylon, took only the Book of the
Law of Moses, and read it to them, and the Levites also read in the Book of the
Law of God distinctly to the People, and gave them the sense, and caused them
to understand it. Nehem. 8.

And this also James the Apostle witnesses, Acts 15.21. saying, Moses of old
time has in every City them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogues
every Sabbath day.

So that the faithful Prophets of the Lord, during all the Old Testament, had
the chief care in their Schools to keep the Word of the Lord among them in a
right sense, according to the mind of the Spirit. For seeing the Lords People
are his Portion, they knew they were to be carefully Educated and Instructed in
the right knowledge of the Scriptures, to prepare them for the Lord, and to
make them meet for his Kingdom. And the keeping of the Word and Doctrine of God
pure, is one of the greatest matters of all in the Church of God: For as the
Word is, such is the Worship, such is the Faith, such is the Conscience, such
is all: Wherefore the Holy men of God, would by no means bring in the
Philosophy or Doctrine of the Heathens into their Schools, to teach that to
their Sons, or Scholars, but only the true, faithful, and unmixed word of God.

And if against this it be Objected, Object.
That Moses was learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians.

To this I Reply. Answ.
But did Moses ever teach any of that Learning in the Church, or publish any of
the Doctrines of it, or did he command or encourage any of the people of God to
learn it? Or did any other of the Prophets of the Lord many ages, teach their
Sons or Scholars, any of the Egyptian Philosophy, which was the Antientest, or
the Sinaradine Table of Hermes Trismegistus (the pretended Scholar of Moses) so
much boasted of, or any Heathnish Author whatsoever, of which there were many
then extant? I say, let them prove that but one Heathnish Author was read by
any of the Prophets to their Scholars, and then they will have some color
(...) taught Jesus, and the Resurrection from the dead.

Thus Peter first taught the Men of Judea, Peter.
and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, That God had made Jesus whom they had crucified
both Lord and Christ, having raised him from the dead, because it was not
possible for him to be holden of death, who was the Lord and Author of Life.

And Steven, Steven.
disputing with the Libertines, Cirenians, and Alexandrians, and diverse
Philosophers of Cilicia and Asia, did hold forth to them, nothing but Christ,
and that He should put an end to the Temple and Law, and should change all the
Customs of Moses. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by
which he spoke. Act. 6.

And Paul at the University of Athens, Paul.
reproved their Heathenism, and taught nothing among the Epicureans and
Stoics, and other sects of Philosophers, but the Resurrection of Christ and
his Kingdom and judgment. Act. 17.

He also disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus, and that for two years
together, and persuaded only the things touching the Kingdom of God, brought
into the world by Jesus Christ. Act. 19. And he so prevailed with his Doctrine,
that many which used curious Arts, brought their books together, and burnt them
before all men, and the prior of them was counted at fifty thousand pieces of
silver. So that as the Gospel pr^vailed, and the Name of Christ was magnified;
so did people renounce Philosophy, and burn their books of curious Arts: For
which Books our University would give as much money (if they could procure it
from good Benefactors) as they were valued at: So that as they, through the
efficacy of the Gospel, of Heathens became Christians, and threw away all other
Learning, and burnt their Books of great value, least they should infect
others: So on the contrary, in our Universities of pretended Christians, men
usually become true Heathens; never valuing the precious Gospel of God our
Savior, as they do other Heathnish and Philosophical Books.

Farther, the same Paul dwelt after at Rome two whole years in his own hired
house, and during all that time, Preached only the Kingdom of God, and taught
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all boldness: But taught
not one word of Philosophy.

He also at Corinth, a great and famous City of Greece, full of Philosophers
and Orators, taught nothing among them, but Christ Crucified, to the Jews a
Stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; But to them that believe both
of Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.

And as he made no use of Humane learning all this while; So in 1 Cor. 2. he
plainly renounces it, and rejects it; saying.

Ver. 1. And I brethren when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech
or wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God.

Ver. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him Crucified.

Ver. 3. And I was with you in weakness, and fear, and much trembling.

Ver. 4. And my speech and preaching was not with entising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and Power.

Ver. 5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of man, but in the
power of God.

Ver. 6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; Yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world which come to naught.

Ver. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom,
which God Ordained before the world unto our glory, etc.

Ver. 13. Which things, also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the holy spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual things.

In a word, this whole Chapter tends to the utter rejection of Philosophy, (
which is the wisdom of the world,) in the Kingdom of Christ, which is the
Kingdom of God.

He also in his Epistle to the Collossians chap. 2. gives forth another plain
Testimony against Philosophy, desiring ver. 2. that the hearts of the believers
might be comforted and that they might be kni^ together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the
Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the
Treasures of wisdom and Knowledge; And this (says he) I say, least any man
should beguile you with entising words: Wherefore v. 8 says he, Beware least
any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the Tradition of
men, after the Rudiments or Elements of the world, and not after Christ; for in
him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in Him, who
is the Head of all Principality and Power; Here is a sufficient caution again
Philosophy for the true Church for ever. For what need we (if we are true
Christians) to turn aside for Wisdom and Knowledge, and Learning, and curious
Arts to the Heathen, seeing God has given Christ to us, in whom is treasured
up all the heights, and depths, and lengths, and breadths of Wisdom and
Knowledge, whereby the whole world was made, and every Creature formed and
fashioned, and in which it has its being, subsistence, and operation; Yea in
this Christ dwells all the fullness of the Infinite and eternal God, and he is
the head of all Principality and Power, in earth and Heaven; and there is in
him alone, infinitely enough to make us wise and learned for ever, without
calling in the help and contributions of the vain Philosophers, and their
foolish wisdom. It is enough for Christian Schools, to be taught to know
Christ, by the Ministration of the Spirit; and all other Learning that is out
of Christ, though it seem to be never so high and deep, all faithful
Christians are to reject it, as mere Sophistry and Deceit.

And thus you see that the Apostles, as well as Christ, taught their Scholars
and Disciples only the Gospel, and spoke not one word for Philosophy, but
directly against it.

And the following Fathers, The Primitive Christians and Believers, taught no
Philosophy.
and next Teachers of the Christian Church after the Apostles, they also obeyed
the command of Christ, and followed the example of the Apostles in this matter.
For the Bishops and Presbyters, that is the Overseers and Elders, had tender
regard to the children of Christians, and did teach them as well as the people,
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel; They held forth to them, Christ Crucified, and
did exhort them to faith, new Obedience, the Confession of Christ, and patient
suffering, and did not at all ^ntermingle Philosophy with their Divinity, but
always rejected and condemned it, all along the first and purest times of the
Christian Church, till the Mystery of iniquity began to arise, and did
cunningly insinuate it self into the Church, by the means of Humane Learning.

And here it will not be amiss to Relate what Justine Martyr says of himself,
Justine Martyr forsook Philosophy, and betook himself only to the Scriptures.
as to this matter; who was before his Conversion to the Christian Faith, a
great Philosopher: and lived about 150. years after Christ's Nativity: He in his
Dialogue which Try^ho relates, How first he joined himself to that Sect of
Philosophers called the Stoics, and after to the Peripateticks, after to the
Pythagorean Sect, and after to the Platonists, but had no satisfaction in his
mind by all this knowledge: But at last he beholding the torments and
sufferings of Christians, and seeing them bear them with such comfort and
constancy, he did thereby conceive that it was impossible for that kind of
people to be subject to any vice, or carnality; which vices of their own nature
are not able to sustain any sharp adversity, much less the bitterness of death.
And hereupon he began to love and search after the Christian Religion: and
being afflicted in mind, he did withdraw himself into a solitary place, where
there met him an old Ancient Father of comely visage, and gentle behavior, who
began to reason with him, and to tell him that there was no knowledge of truth
among the Philosophers, who neither knew God, nor were aided by his holy
Spirit: And did farther reason with him of the immortality of the soul, of the
reward of the godly, and punishment of the wicked. Then Justine being satisfied
with his reasons, yielded to him, and demanded of him how he might attain to
that true knowledge of God, whereof he had spoken? Non ad humana^ cationes, sed
ad voluntatem Doctrinae Spiritu^ interpretatio est accommodanda. Justin. in
Exposit. fidei.
Who counseled him to read the Scriptures, adjoining therewith prayer, etc.

And as this ^ustine left all other Learning, and betook himself only to the
^criptures; so in the understanding of the Scriptures, he rejected all his
Philosophy, and Philosophical apprehensions; Saying, that the Interpretation of
the Scripture is to be accommodated to the will of the Doctrine of the Spirit,
and not to Humane reasonings* and that he might be sure and safe in all things,
he had constant recourse to the Scriptures thus understood. So that Justine
Martyr being effectually Co^verted, wholly le^t his Philosophy, and betook
himself to the Scriptures, and taught them to the Church, as he had been taught
them of God by his Spirit.

Constantine the Emperor ( though he were the first that brought in the
Mystery of Iniquity into the Christian Church, Constantine the Emperor, took
care for the teaching the Scriptures to Christians. E^s. lib. 4. de vita
Consta^ti^.
by mingling the Civil and Ecclesiastical states and Laws together) there being
in his time a great increase of Christians, through the Ministry of the Gospel,
and a great confluence of them to his Imperial City for the Words sake, he
wrote to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in a special Letter, Wherein he desired
him withal diligence and speed to procure fifty Volums of the Scriptures to be
written in parchment well and Legibly, and in such a bigness or Volume as might
be carried with greatest ease; for she further teaching and instructing of
those that came to attain the knowledge of the Christian Religion: Judging it
most meet, that Christian people should be instructed in the Doctrine of Christ.

And though afterward, when the suffering times of the Church began to be
over, Christians became more car^^l and secure ( and that in the very days of
Constantine) and so began to decline the word of faith, and to seek after
Philosophy; yet had God in all the ages of his Church some of his servants, who
did reject it, and did cleave only to the word: Among which, I shall only for
the present, produce the Testimonies of Berno, who lived above six hundred
years ago, and Zuinglius of latte^ times.

Berno who lived about the year 1008, and was a man furnished with all sorts of
Learning, Berno Augiensis Abbas. Se mu^tis ^am annis Poetarum figmenta, and
(...) interiorem ad (...) per (...) Epist ad Magnified.
says, That he had for many years rejected a^ ^ung the figments of the Poets
and the Histories of the Heathens, and the study of secular Letters, and had
converted the whole intention of his mind in the word of God, and the Divine
things contained therein: And accordingly, he taught no other Doctrine to any.

Cum juvenis adhuc, in omni Disciplinaru^ genere exercerer, certo affirmare
possum, me^^on minus quam reliquos aquales meos prosecisse, etc, Zuingl. lib.
de Certitud. and Veritat. Verbi Dei.
Hularicus Zuinglius also Pastor of Z^rich in Helvet^ae, ^ man who had been
educated in all kind of Learning, and was after through faith and the teaching
of God an eminent Instrument in his Church, he says thus of himself; When
(says he) I being yet a youth, was exercised in all sorts of Learning, I can
truly say, that I did not profit less then the rest of my equals: But when
about seven years ago, I betook my self to the study of the holy Scriptures,
then the things that I had before sacked in, or learned from Philosophers and
Divines, did procure me so much trouble, that being then moved by the Authority
of the Scriptures, I judged that all those things were to be cast away and
counted as dung, and that the true mind of God was only to be received from
his pure and simple word. And therefore I began humbly to entreat the Lord,
that he would vouchsafe me his own light: By which means it shortly came to
pass, that the reading of the holy Scripture did much delight and please me;
and they being nakedly and alone propounded, did flow unto me with more ease,
then if I had read them divided and distracted with variety of Comments. And as
he rejected Philosophy wholly, and entertained the word, So did he only teach
this word to faithful C^ristians, who are the only true School of Christ in the
world.

Now by all this it appears, that the Schools of the Prophets and Apostles, and
of Christ himself the Head of them, and of the most faithful Christians, that
followed Christ, in the first and latter ages, were in no sort like the Schools
in the present Universities, where humane Learning, according to the Statutes
of the Universities, prevails for the first seven years, and they think youth
cannot be made good Christians, except they be first made good Heathens.

The Schools of the Prophets and Apostles would not meddle with the Philosophy
of the Heathen, but led the children and youth presently to the word of God,
and therein to the true Knowledge of God in Christ: But these Schools first
lead youth from God and his word several years together, to the corrupt Reason,
Wisdom, Notions, Conceptions, yea to the Idolatry, Blasphemy, Atheism, Lusts,
Filthiness, and Villainies of the cursed Heathen, that thereby (in a strange and
Antichristian Method) they may be the fitter to know and understand the
Scriptures.

The Schools of the Prophets, taught only Moses and the Prophets to the Jewish
youth, and the Schools of the Apostles taught Christ only and his Gospel to the
children of Christians: But the Universities lead men both from Moses and from
Christ, both from the Law and the Gospel, to the Heathen, to make men hereby
able Christians and Divines.

The Queen of the South came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon; And the Universities leave Christ, who is Infinitely greater
and wiser then Solomon, and go to the utmost parts of the earth for wisdom
there. So that in these Universities, there has been the greatest Apostasy and
withdrawing from Christ, and the greatest dishonor and disparagement offered
to him, and his Gospel, as ever was known.

For is it not a matter of greatest wonder and amazement, that after that Word
which was with God, and was God, and is God blessed for ever, has been
manifested in the flesh, and that flesh of his has been justified by the
Spirit, to have the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in it bodily: and that this
wonderful person has come to his Church, in the same common nature with it,
filled with all the Righteousness, Wisdom, Truth, Power, Life, Peace and Joy,
and all the things of God: I say is it not strange, that He who alone
comprehends the fullness of all things and in whom are hid all the Infinite
Treasures of Divine and Heavenly wisdom and knowledge, that he alone should not
be counted sufficient and enough, no not by those who pretend his name, to make
us wise to Salvation (which is the only True, Excellent, and necessary wisdom
in the world) and to make the man of God perfect, and the whole Church of God
complete: but to the great dishonor of Christ, yea, to the very rejection of
Christ, the children of Christians must be led from the Doctrine of Christ* the
Son of the living God, to the Doctrine and Disciplines of the Wretched, Filthy,
Abominable, Wicked and damned Heathen and to spend the prime and flower of
their youth in these things? Who but Antichrist himself could have brought in
and set up such an Abomination of desolation in the Church of God?

And yet for the better credit of all things, must these be (...) them, that
their Divinity cannot be called the Doctrine of Christ, but of Antichrist,
being wholly contrary to the word of faith.

And therefore Mr. Simpson was the more to blame to flatter them in their
evils, and to deceive the world, in appropriating to them the glorious Title of
the Schools of the Prophets, who are in all things so contrary and
contradictory to them.

Now the sum and certainty of this matter, is this; That the Congregations of
Believers, where only the word of the Gospel is truly taught according to the
Ministration of the Spirit, whether to youth or men, they under the New
Testament are answerable to the Schools of the Prophets, under the Old, who
only taught Moses and the Prophets: And the Universities, wherein Philosophy is
first taught the youth, and after Divinity, and then both are mingled together,
to the utter perverting and corrupting the Gospel of Christ; I say, these
Universities in the time of the Gospel, are answerable to the High Places in
the time of the Law, where a Doctrine and Worship prevailed which was not
according to Gods word, but man's will: and where Judaism, and Heathenism were
mingled together into one mungrel Religion most odious and abominable to God
and his People: And so the Universities in the time of the Gospel, are only
answerable to the High Places in the time of the Law: but not at all to the
Schools of the Prophets, as Mr. Simpson pretends.

And now for the Conclusion of this matter (which I reckon, to be of great
concernment for the true Church to be thoroughly instructed in:) I shall bring
forth the Testimony of some Godly men: of whom some show how the Schools and
Universities of Christians came first to be corrupted, to wit, by departing
from the plain word of the Gospel, and bringing in Philosophy: And another
foretells the Reformation of the Schools of Christians, to wit, by rejecting
Philosophy again, and bringing in the word of faith: all which will serve as a
Confirmation of what has been already spoken.

Matthias Parisiensis a Bohemian by Nation, Matthias Parisiensis
who lived about the year 1380. wrote a large book against Antichrist, whrein
he affirms That Antichrist had seduced all Universities and Colleges of
learned men; Antichristum o^nes Vaive sitates and eruditorum Collegia
seduxisse, ita ut jam nihil sani doceant aut Christianis recte sua Doctrina
praeluceant. Illyrit. Flat. Catal. Test. Veritat.
so that now they teach no sincere Doctrine, neither give any true light to
Christians through their teaching; to wit, they being all corrupted through
Philosophy, and having through that corrupted all Divinity.

And John Hus, John Hus. Seduxit Antichristus a Divina sapientia, plena salute
and spiritu sancto, ad prudentiam and scientiam hominum and principum hujus
mundi: quam copiavit nimis vehementer, and dilalavit and authenticavit and
lucrosam divitiarum and honorum in hoc seculo effecit, ut ita Divina Sapientia
and Scientia esset neglecta a Christianis, inveterata and obducta, and quasis
vilis and inutilis ab iisdem reputata, etc. Joh. Hus. Lib. de vita and Regn.
Antichr. cap. 30.
that humble and faithful servant of Jesus Christ, and blessed Martyr, says,
That Antichrist has seduced all carnal Christians from Divine wisdom, which is
full of Salvation and the Holy Spirit, to the wisdom and Science of men and of
the Princes of this world, which (wisdom and Science) he has exceedingly
enlarged and increased, and made Authentical, and very gainful of Riches and
Honors in this world: that so by this means, Divine wisdom and science might be
neglected of Christians, and grow old, and be covered over, and be accounted as
vile and unprofitable by them; And that, only that which is high with men ( to
wit, Humane Learning) might be reckoned glorious, and excellent, and of great
Authority with Christian people.

The same Hus says, That this Humane Learning, Wisdom and Knowledge,
Antichrist does perfectly subject to himself and his Service, he being more
mighty and subtle through the Operation of Satan, then all worldly men, whom
with all their Learning, Disciplines, and Abilities, he strongly sub^ugates to
himself, and does especially serve himself of these: wherefore says Job chap.
41. sub ipso erunt radii solis, the heams of the Sun shall be under him, that
is, the holy Scripture, and the chief Doctors and Teachers of it: and he shall
prepare gold as dirt, that is, he shall have all the wisdom and learning of men
at his pleasure, and in great readiness, and with much ease shall gain it to
himself. And Antichrist by such men ( says I. Hus) does make his body or
Church strong against the Saints of God, and welfavoured and glorious, that it
may appear very taking to the world, and may win in all men to it that are not
taught of God and renewed by his Spirit. And thus Antichrist serves himself of
all Learning and Learned men; whereas Divine Learning, and the Teaching of God
he could never in any measure subject to himself, but is always rejected,
discovered, and overcome by it.

Martin Luther says, Martin Luther.
That whosoever it was, whether Alexander of Hales, or Thomas of Aquine, who
first instituted Universities; he was a Star fallen from heaven to earth, who
received the key of the bottomless pit, and opened it, and brought forth into
the Church Philosophy, long ago dead and damned by the Doctrine of the
Apostles; and from the smoke of the bottomless pit, that is, Philosophy, came
forth Locusts on the earth; that is, says he, populus Vniversitatum e
Philosophia natus, the people of the Universities, born and bred of Philosophy,
etc. thus Luther. M. Luther. De cap. civit. Babylon.


Abbas, Joachim Calaber, who was long before these, Joachim Calaber.
and flourished about the year 1230, in his Commentary on Jeremy the Prophet,
speaks to this purpose, That the sixth Angel, mentioned, Revel. opens the
bottomless pit, and brings out Philosophy into the Church; and out of the smoke
of this Doctrine Locusts proceeded, and are spread over all the Church into
every fruitful place; and these Locusts he says, are Scholastici and
Magistri, qui nunc facietenus blandiuntur ut decipiant, nunc caudetenus feriunt
unsubvertant simplices and incautos; that is, the Locusts are Scholars and
Masters, according to the Academical degrees, who sometimes flatter with their
countenances to deceive, and sometimes strike with their tails, that they may
subvert the simple and unadvised. And to these Scholars and Masters, the
ignorant and common people resort, and they open to them the old Cisterns of
heathenish Learning and Disciplines, long ago stopped up by the Doctrine of the
Apostles: and these Cisterns they open, by teaching Philosophy to the people:
But they shut up the living fountain of saving water, that is, the word of
faith: But the spirit of the Lord ( says he) in the following Prophets whom
the Lord shall raise up, idola studiorum carnalium visitabit, shall visit the
Idols of carnal studies, maintained and kept up by secular Stipends.

Further he says, that as Antichrist brings forth his mark, which is
Philosopical Doctrine in the Church of Christ, and by this mark all his
Teachers and People are known; so there shall rise up against these, such as
have the mark of Christ, or the sign of Thau in their foreheads, that is, the
open and manifest Doctrine of Christ crucified. And as the signs of Moses
destroyed the signs of the Magicians so shall the word or preaching of the
Cross destroy all Philosophical Doctrine, and Humane and secular Learning out
of the Church. And then the children, and youth, and, men of all ages, sorts
and conditions, shall be taught no other Doctrine in the Church of Christ, then
that which is found in the Scriptures, even in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and that not according to any humane and Philosophical understanding,
but according to the teaching and mind of the Spirit. And God by all his true
servants shall destroy the studies of carnal Doctors, and Masters in Divinity,
and shall dissipate all secular and Philosophical Learning, by the word of
Truth in their mouths. And so shall the Church be reformed aright, when the
Doctrine of Christ only shall be received and esteemed of, and shall live and
flourish among Christians.

And thus as Antichrist has laid aside the Scriptures, and all true spiritual
and divine Learning out of his Schools and Universities, and has brought into
them, instead thereof, Philosophy and Humane Learning (and so these Schools are
most unlike to the Schools of the Prophets) so in due time, when God shall
undertake to reform his Church, all this sort of Learning shall be cast out
again as dirt and dung, and the plain word of the Gospel only shall prevail and
flourish among the Christian People: which time the Lord hasten for his Elects
sake.

2. ERROR.
That they who have endeavored to pull down Schools, 2. Error.
have always been men who were found Enemies to Religion: So Julian the
Apostate shut up the doors of the Schools, because he would have all Religion
to go down.

Answer.
True it is, Answer.
that they who have sought the subversion of Christian Schools, wherein the
Doctrine of the Gospel is purely taught, without the mixture of Philosophy and
Heathenism, they all have been, and are very enemies to the true Religion: But
they that seek to put down Heathenish Schools, and to erect Christian, or to
reform the Schools of Heathen into Christian, or to remove Heathenism out of
Christian Schools, they are not before God and good men enemies to true
Religion, but the great friends of it, Nay, they that call Heathenish Schools
by the name of Christian, that they may still remain with the better credit in
their Heathenism without any true Reformation according to the Gospel. I rather
judge them to be enemies to the true Religion, and friends only to their
profit, preferment and ends.

Julian indeed did forbid that Christians should be instructed in the
Disciplines of the Gentiles, but says Sozomen (the Writer of the
Ecclesiastical History) he did this, Vetuit ne Christiani Gentilium Disciplinis
instrucrentur. Sozomen, Histor. Eccles. cap. 17.
because he thought, that by those Disciplines men might attain to a great
faculty to persuade, which advantage he would not have the Christians to gain
to the help of their Religion. Now certainly this was done, as Socrates
(another Writer of the Ecclesiastical History) does acknowledge, by the
singular providence of God, For seeing then Christians had begun to degenerate
from the Gospel, and to betake themselves to Heathenish Learning, Julian
attribu^^d all the glory and excellency of Christianity to that Learning, and
so thought with Mr. Simpson, that if Humane Learning were denied to Christians,
Christianity it self would soon be at end. Wherefore the Lord stirred up Julian
to put down the Doctrine of the Heathen in the Schools of Christians that it
might appear to all the World, That as the true Christian Religion is not
helped by Humane Learning, so neither is it hindered by the want of it: And that
there is more Light Knowledge, Truth, Wisdom, Power, Utterance given to
Christians by the Unction of the Spirit alone, which all receive who believe,
then through all Heathenish Disciplines: And also that it might be manifest
that true Christianity is founded on faith in Christ, and the gift of his
Spirit only, and not at all on Humane Learning. For what Humane Learning had
Peter and John? and yet in what Wisdom and Authority did they, being ignorant
and unlearned men, Acts 4.13.
Reprove, Convince, and Silence the greatest and ablest men of the Jews? And
what Humane Learning had Steven, and yet he confuted the Libertines, and
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and all the Philosophers of Cilicia, and Asia,
which disputed with him; and they all were not able to resist (not the Humane
Learning but) the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke. Acts 6.10.
And Christ has promised all his people, that when for his Names sake they
should be brought before Kings and Rulers, who usually have the greatest
accomplishment of Humane Learning, that then they should not study beforehand
what to say; for he would give them in that very hour a mouth and wisdom which
none of their Adversaries should be able to resist. And the power and virtue of
the Gospel, and the wisdom, knowledge, and utterance of Gods Spirit is more
gloriously manifest in plain men then in learned men; For in the one, the Grace
and Virtues of the Spirit are attributed to Humane Learning; But in the other,
to God only, who dwells in them. Wherefore that the Wisdom, and Knowledge, and
Light, and Power of the word of faith in true Christians might not be
attributed to Humane Learning, God stirred up an enemy to Christian Religion to
be so serviceable to it as to hinder Heathenish Doctrine from being taught in
the Schools of Christians, that so the Church might be restored to be, as in
the days of its Youth, when there flourished in it only the simple and plain
word of faith, without any intermingling Philosophy or Humane Doctrine. And if
Constantine had made such an order in his time, Julian had not had such an
opportunity to have renounced Christianity, and turned Heathen. For Julian
being instructed in the Philosophy and Disciplines of the Heathen by Libanius
his Tutor, by this means he came to love Philosophy better then the Gospel, and
so by degrees turned from Christianity to Heathenisme, which may be a fair
warning to all Christians, that they suffer not their children to be so
educated, lest at last, with Julian, they (at least in their hearts) loath and
reject the Gospel, and become with him Apostates and Pagans.

And hence it is most evident, that Heathenish Philosophy is so far from being
a profitable study for the children of Christians, Christianos de integro
Gentilium Disciplinam imbibere, nemo est qui Christianae Religioni prodesse
concesserit. Nam non est extra periculum Christianos Gentilium eruditione
institut, quippe quae docet multos esse Deos. Socrates Histor. Eccles. cap. 14.
that it is very dangerous for them to be so educated, as Socrates is forced to
confess; where he says, For Christians to be thoroughly instructed in the
Disciplines of the Gentiles, there is none will grant that this is profitable
to the Christian Religion: For it is not without danger for Christians to be
taught in the learning of the Heathens, seeing this teaches that there are
many Gods. And therefore says he, the Doctrine of the Heathen is not approved
by Christ or any of his Apostles or Disciples.

Wherefore said Luther, My counsel is, Meum consilium est, ut adolescens vitet
^hilosophiam ac Theologiam Scholasticam, ut mortem animae suae. Luth. Tom. 2.
fol. 434. b
that a youth should shun Philosophy, and School Divinity, as the death of his
soul.

3. ERROR.
That the Knowledge of Heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on
earth: 3. Error.
and that all Divinity is swadled in Humane Learning.

Answer.
I conceive that all Christians at the first reading of this, will acknowledge
that this Doctrine is not Divine, Answer.
but Philosophical.

The Philosophers say, that nothing is in the understanding, but that which is
first in the sense, (which is proportionable to that which Mr. Simpson speaks)
and yet they know not what they say, when they say so. But let us consider if
this be so: That the Knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by
things on earth; then how shall we know the Mystery of God, even the Father,
and the Mystery of Christ, who is God manifest in the flesh? Or how shall the
Mystery of faith, and of our union with Christ through faith into one flesh
and Spirit with him be known? Or the new birth, and new Creature, which has
all things new in it, and all those new things, the things of God? Or how shall
the free Justification of a sinner through the death of Christ, and his
Reconciliation to God be known, with all the rest of the things of the Gospel,
seeing nothing on earth can reveal the least part of these things? And if the
world by wisdom, that is, its Philosophy, knew not God, how can it by that
wisdom reveal God and his things which it never knew? Nay, the Apostle does
clearly testify against this carnal and corrupt Doctrine, in 1 Cor. 2.7, 8.
saying, We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which
God ordained before the world unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this
world knew; and by Princes of this world, he means not only wordly Powers, as
Chrysostom affirms, but also Philosophers and Orators, who often obtained the
chief Government among the nations. God has wrapped up his Gospel, says Paul,
into such hidden wisdom, that they are never able to search into it, or to
discover the least part of it, seeing God contrived it all, and appointed it
before the world unto our glory: and all their knowledge is but from the world.
Yea, he adds, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have ever entered into
the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him; In
which words God has shut out the natural man for ever, with all his study,
knowledge, abilities, and seize, from the having any right understanding
of his Kingdom, or the things of it: For the eye of man has not seen them at
any time, nor his ear heard them, nor has any knowledge of them entered into
his heart: so far is this Doctrine from truth, that the Knowledge of heavenly
things cannot come to us but by things on earth. But the Apostle shows how the
faithful come to know these high, holy, spiritual, and eternal things, which
lie infinitely beyond the knowledge and discovery of all men, to wit, by the
Spirit, saying, But God has revealed them to us by the Spirit; Ver. 10.
for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. So that the
people of God know the things of the Gospel, not by earthly things, as Mr.
Simpson affirms, (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Epist. ad Cor. Hom. 7.
nor by Philosophy and outward wisdom, which only reaches to earthly things,
but by the Spirit.

Farther, if all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning: then I do affirm that
all such Divinity has no great Depth; seeing the bottom of Humane Learning is
easily fathomed.

But can any Christian Heart think, that all true Divinity, which comprehends
in it the height, and breadth, and length, and depth of the love of God, which
passes knowledge, and all the unsearchable riches of Christ, and all the
infinite and incomprehensible Treasures of his wisdom, power, and
righteousness, of his love, goodness, truth, faithfulness, and of all the
fullness of the Godhead, wherewith he is filled, can be contained and wrapped up
in the narrow and scant bounds of Humane Learning? How much truer Doctrine had
it been to have taught, that all true Divinity is contained in God and his
word, and that we can know nothing of God aright but by his word, which holy
men have spoken by the Spirit, and believers do receive by faith, and out of
this word. All the Learning in the world does not contain in it self, neither
can it reveal to us aright, the least thing of God, or of his Mind and Will.

But I conceive he might speak thus, that all Divinity is wrapped up in Humane
Learning, to deterr the common people from the study and enquiry after it, and
to cause them still to expect all Divinity from the Clergy, who by their
education have attained to that Humane Learning which the plain people are
destitute of: For it is the old and new design of Antichrist to make the People
depend on the Clergy for all Divinity, though the people have the Scriptures as
near them, and the Grace of God usually nearer to them then they; seeing God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Again, if all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning, then must it sadly
follow, that all who want Humane Learning, must needs also want Divinity; And
then, how shall poor plain people, who live in lawful callings, and have not
the leisure to attain Humane Learning, how shall they do to be saved? Or what
help must they have to teach them Divinity, who have not opportunity to gain
Humane Learning?

And yet farther, if all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning; then Christ
and his Apostles had no true Divinity; for they had no Humane Learning to
swaddle it in, nor would have none; Shall we say now according to Mr. Simpsons
Doctrine, that they had no Divinity? I do with all boldness affirm that this
Doctrine is contrary to the Christian faith.

4. ERROR.
That Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and God took him so fitted,
4. Error.
(to wit, with Humane Learning) and made him an able Instrument in his Church.

Answer.
Not so, But God took Paul, not a good Scholar, and so made him an able
Preacher; Answer.
but he took him as a Blasphemer, and Persecutor, and as a cruel and enraged
enemy against Christ and his Truth, and People, and magnified the riches of his
mercy by converting such an one: and Paul having much forgiven him, loved much,
and through his great love, was the fitter to preach the Gospel, according to
that of Christ to Peter; Peter, do thou love me! feed my Sheep. Yea Paul
himself ascribes his painful and profitable preaching, not to his Learning and
Education under Gamaliel ( which also was, or ought to have been only in the
Law and Prophets, as has been proved) but to the free Grace of God bestowed on
him, saying, I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the Grace
of God in me: So that Paul became so excellent a Preacher, not by his fitting
through Humane Learning, but through the Grace of God.

And here I shall mind Mr. Simpson of a passage which I have read in
Chrysostom, which comes home to this matter in hand; it is in the third Homily
on the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says, That God had no need
at the beginning of the Gospel of Learned men, and Sophisters to preach the
Gospel, and to convince the world with Syllogisms; but did only use the word of
faith in the mouths of plain Handicrafts men, and Artificers: Wherefore (says
he) when the Greeks shall accuse the Disciples of Christ, as ignorant of
Letters, and unlearned, let us our selves who are Christians, accuse them more.
Neither let any one say that Paul was wise and learned; but let us say, Their
men were wise and learned, but ours were rude and ignorant; For in thus doing
(according to the truth) we shall have the greater advantage against them. For
if Paul were unlearned, and yet overcame learned Plato, his Victory was the
greater, and the Grace of God the more glorious. (...), etc.
Now this I say, ( says he) because the other day, I heard a certain Christian
discoursing ridiculously with a Greek, each of them in their Discourse
prejudicing their own cause: For the Greek spoke that which the Christian
should have said, and the Christian spoke that which the Greek should have
said. For the Question between them, being touching Paul and Plato, the Greek
endeavored to prove that Paul was rude and unlearned, but the Christian
through his simplicity did endeavor to prove that Paul was more learned and
eluquent then Plato. And so the Greek should obtain the Victory, if the
Christians Reasons should prevail. For if Paul were more learned then Plato,
then might men object that he overcame not the world through Grace, but through
Eloquence. Wherefore that which the Christian spoke, made for the Greek, and
that which the Greek spoke; made for the Christian. Wherefore (he says) when
the Greeks shall say the Apostles were rude, and unlearned, poor, mean simple,
obscure persons, let us acknowledge it as the truth; For this is not their
reproach but their glory; that being such, they yet overcame the Learned men,
the Wise men, the Philosophers, the Rhetoricians, the Orators, the Princes, and
all the world, as if they had not been men. For when any thing is done above
the State and power of Nature, this does exceedingly manifest and magnify the
Grace of God.

And so it appears that Chrysostom was of another mind in this matter touching
Paul, then Mr. Simpson; and that Paul was of another mind touching himself.

Now seeing Mr. Simpson does here insinuate that Humane Learning fits a man to
the Ministry of the Gospel: and seeing this also is the Opinion of all the
carnal and unbelieving people, I do desire them to consider what some Godly men
have spoken clearly from the word of God in this matter.

Chrysostom ( who knew the Mystery of the Gospel more clearly then any of the
Ancient Writers) in his Comment on the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
Chrysostom.
does wholly exclude Humane Learning from contributing any thing, either to the
speaking or receiving the Gospel. For (says he) to believe in Him that was
Crucified and Buried, and to be fully persuaded that he rose again, and sits at
the right hand of God, and has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and
that he is made of God, to the whole Church, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption; this Doctrine stands not in need of Humane
Wisdom and Reasonings, but of faith only, and that both in them that speak it,
(...). Chrysostom. in 1. Epist. ad Corinth Hom. 4.
and in them that receive it. For the Apostles did not proceed in this matter
in outward wisdom, but in faith, and so became more wise and excellent then the
worldly wise: and so much the more, as it is a greater matter to receive the
things of God by faith, then to be persuaded into them by the force of Argument.

He adds also, That to the receiving the Doctrine of the Gospel, neither is the
Wise man profited thing by his Wisdom, neither is the plain man hindered any
thing by his Ignorance; Yea, (...), etc. Idem. Ibid.
if I may speak a wonderful thing ( says he) Ignorance is more fit and ready
to receive the Gospel then Wisdom. And a Shepherd, and a Plowman will sooner
receive the Gospel and submit to it, then a Scholar who lives in the strength
of Humane wisdom and Reason.

He farther says there, that where the wisdom of God is, (...). Chrysostom.
( as it is in the Gospel) there is no need of man's wisdom, as where the Sun
is, there is no need of a Candle.

And he concludes there this matter thus. That the Preaching of the Gospel is a
heavenly thing, and that Humane Wisdom and Learning cannot help herein, but
rather hinder. And that therefore when Christ sent forth the first Teachers of
the Gospel, he took not wise and learned Philosophers, that the Cross of Christ
might not be made void, and that the faith of Christians should not stand in
the wisdom of man, but in the power of God: But he chose plain Fishermen,
Tent-makers, Publicans, Obscure, Simple, Poor, Contemptible, Ignorant and
Unlearned men; And these overcame Kings, Princes, People, Nations, Greeks,
(...).
Philosophers, Orators, Sophisters, they overcame the ancient Manners, Customs,
and the very Religion of the world, also their Laws, Judgments, diverse sorts
of punishments, and innumerable kinds of deaths; and by all this (says he) it
was manifest that their preaching was not in Humane w^sdom, but in the Grace of
God.

And thus does Chrysostom affirm, and prove that Humane Learning does not fit
men to the Ministry of the Gospel, but is rather a hindrance thereunto, and
that the Grace of God only fits them for this heavenly work.

Hear also what Wickliff says to this matter, Wickliff.
in his book entitled, The Path way to perfect knowledge; where he shows,
that it is not Humane Learning that helps to understand the Scriptures, and to
profit in the study of them, but something more high and heavenly; His own
words as these. He whose heart is full of love, comprehends without any
error, the manifold, abundance, and largest teaching of Gods Scripture; For
Paul says, the fullness of the Law is Charity; and in another place, the end of
the Law is Charity of clean heart, and good conscience, and of faith unfeigned;
And Christ says, Thou shall love thy Lord God of all thy heart, and of all thy
soul, and of all thy mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self: For in these two
Commandments, hangs all the Law and the Prophets: And as the root of all evil
is Covetousness, so the root of all good is Love.

Charity by which we love God, and the Neighbor, holds surely all the
greatness and largness of Gods speeches. Therefore, if we have not leisure to
search all the holy Scriptures, and to pierce into all the privities of them;
hold thou love, whereon all things hang, and so shall thou hold that which thou
learnest there, and also that which thou learnest not. For if thou know
Charity, thou know something, whereon also that hangs which thou know
not. And in that that thou understandest in Scripture, love is open; and in
that that thou understandest not, love is hid. Therefore he that holds love
in virtues or good life, holds both that which is open, and that which is hid
in Gods word.

And after speaking to the Clergy, he says, Therefore worldly fools, do ye
first repent of your sins, and forsake pride and covetousness, and be ye meek,
and fear ye God in all things, and love your neighbor as your self, and then
shall ye profit in the study of Holy Writ. And this is a far other way to
understand the Scriptures then Humane Learning. How the Ministers may come to
understand the Scriptures.


And after, he speaking of the Abominations of the University of Oxford, says
thus, The fourth Abomination, is, that it is now purposed to hinder Christian
men from learning freely Gods Law, till they have spent nine or ten years at
Art, or Philosophy, which comprehends many strong errors of Heathen men,
against the Christian Belief. It seems well that God will not cease from
vengeance, till it and other things be punished sore. For it seems that
worldly Clerks, and feignedly Religious, do this under pretense, that simple
men of wit and knowledge know not Gods Law to preach it generally against sins
in the Realm. But wit ye, worldly Clerks, and feignedly Religious, that God
both can, and may if it likes him, speed simple men out of the University, as
much to know the holy Scriptures, as Masters in the University. Wherefore ( he
says) it is no great matter, though men of good will be not poisoned with
Heathen men's error nine or ten years together; But let them live well, and
study the holy Scriptures, and preach truly and freely against open sins till
death. Thus he. Whereby he declares that the Scriptures are not to be
understood by Humane Learning, but by faith and love: And that Humane Learning,
does not prepare men to the knowledge of the word, but rather corrupt them with
Heathen men's Errors.

Tindal also, Tindal.
that Apostle of England ( as Fox calls him) and blessed Martyr, speaks thus
to this matter; They will say yet more shamefully ( meaning the Clergy) that no
man can understand the Scriptures without Philautia, that is to say,
Philosophy: A man must first be well seen in Aristotle, ere he can understand
the Scripture, say they. Now (says he) Aristotle's Doctrine is, that the world
was without beginning, and shall be without end, and that the first man never
was, and the last never shall be: And that God does all of necessity, neither
cares what we do. Without this Doctrine (says he Ironically) how could we
understand the Scripture, that says, God Created the World of naught, and God
works all things of his free will, and for a secret purpose, and that we
shall rise again, and God will have accounts of all that we have done in this
life.

Aristotle says, Give a man a Law, and he has power of himself to do, or
fulfill the Law, and becomes righteous with working righteously. But Paul and
all the Scripture says, That the Law does but utter sin only, and helps not;
Neither has any man power to do the Law, till the Spirit of God be given him
through faith in Christ. Is it a not madness then to say that we could not
understand the Scripture without Aristotle? Moreover Aristotle's felicity and
blessedness stands in avoiding all tribulations, and in riches, health,
honor, worship, friends, and authority, which felicity pleases our
spirituality well Now without these and a thousand such like points, could
thou not understand Scripture, which says, that Righteousness comes by
Christ, and not of man's will: And how that virtues are the fruits and gifts of
Gods Spirit, and that Christ blesses us in tribulations, persecution, and
adversity. How I say; could thou understand the Scriptures without
Philosophy, in as much as Paul, Col. 2. warned them to beware lest any man
spoil them ( that is to say, rob them of their faith in Christ) through
Philosophy and deceitful Vanities, and through the Traditions of men, and
Ordinances after the world, and not after Christ? -- And after -- But now ye
drive them from Gods word, and will let no man come thereto, until he have
been two years Master of Art. First they nuzzel them in Sophistry, and in been
fundatum; And there corrupt they their judgments with apparent arguments, and
with alleging to them texts of Logic, of Natural Philosophy, of Metaphysick
and Moral Philosophy, and of all manner of books of Aristotle, and of all
manner of Doctors, which yet they never saw, etc.

Again, Huldricus Zuinglius speaks thus to this matter. Zuingl. Libr. de
certitudine and Veritate Ver. Dei.
We must needs be taught of God and not of men ( to wit in the knowledge of
the Gospel) For this is the saying of the Eternal Truth, which knows not how to
lie. Joh. 6. But and if you do not firmly believe that you may be taught of
God, Quod si non firmiter creditis, vos, humanis Doctrinis desertis, divinitus
doceri posse, vera fide etiamnum vacui estis.
Humane Doctrines being utterly rejected, ye are yet destitute of true faith.
Neither have I my self devised this thing; For Hilarie also is of this opinion,
But there is no need of his Testimony, when we hear that both Christ, and all
the Apostles were of the same mind. And here the whole use of School Divinity
falls to the ground, and whatsoever is drawn out of the Philosophers. For all
these things do lean on humane Reasons, which when they have once possessed a
man's mind, he then thinks that the heavenly Doctrine is wholly to be directed
and framed according to the Rule of Humane Learning, Cadit hic Theologiae
Scholasticae usus universus, and quicquid ex Ph^losophis haustum est.
which he judges to be most firm and infallible. Which thing they sufficiently
discover in their words, saying, ubi cessat Philosophus, illic incipit
Theologus, where the Philosopher ceases, there the Divine begins; whereby they
signify thus much, that he is able to judge most rightly in Divine things, who
comes most furnished with Humane Learning. As if so be the light of our will
were more excellent, and more perspicuous then the Divine Glory; when yet we
hear Christ saying, I receive not Glory of men; but I know you, that you have
not the love of God in you, Joh. 5. For they who have the love of God, cleave
to no word so constantly as to the word of God; seeing this is the light that
enlightens every man that comes into the world. But no man is able to prove
that Philosophy is such a light. For which of the Philosophers instructed the
Apostles? Those simple, and in the judgment of the world, those foolish men,
unskilful, and unlearned fisherman, were elected and instituted of God, and
then were sent forth to preach, that they might become the Masters and Teachers
of the whole world: to wit, that God according to the saying of Paul, might
make ashamed all the strength of the world, and all the wisdom of the world.
Thus he.

Luther also says, It is an Error to say, that a man cannot be a Divine but
through Aristotle; Nay, says he, A man cannot be a Divine except he become
one, without Aristotle. Error est dicere, sine Aristotele non fit Theologus,
imo Theologus non fit nisi id fiat sine Aristotele. Tom. 1. fol. 10. Vivendo,
imo moriendo and damnando sit Theologus, non intelligendo, legendo aut
speculando. Luth. To. 2. fol. 57. In saecris rebus non est disputandum aut
Philosophandum: in Theologia tantum est audiendum and credendum, and slatuendum
in cord, Them est verax, etc. Rectius fecerimus fi Dialectica seu Philosophia
in sua sphara relictis, discamus loqui novis linguis in regno fidei, extrae
omnem spharam. Affectus fidei exercondus est in articulis fidei, non
intellectus Philosophicus. Luther.
And again, A man becomes a Divine by living, yea by dying, and by being damned
(to wit in his own sense) not by studying, reading, or speculating. And again,
In holy things we must not dispute or play the Philosophers; but in Divinity we
must only hear and believe, and resolve in our heart that God is true, though
the things he speaks in his word seem never so absurd to reason. And again, We
shall then do well, if we leaving Logic or Philosophy in their own Sphere, do
learn to speak with new tongues in the Kingdom of faith, without all Sphere.
For the affection of faith is to be exercised in the Kingdom of faith, and not
a Philosophical understanding.

And thus have these Godly men held forth and proved from the word, that Humane
Learning is rather a hindrance then a help to the Ministry of the Gospel, and
does rather unfit then fit men for it: and that the Grace and teaching of God
only, prepares and enables men to this Divine work, and no Humane thing at all.

Wherefore let all true Christians be advised, that Humane Learning is so far
from fitting men for the Gospel and the Ministry thereof, as is suggested, that
indeed there is nothing in greater enmity to Christ Crucified; nor more
contrary to the word of the Cross, then that; Yea nothing in all the world has
been such an Introducer, Favourer, Supporter, and Inlarger of Antichrists
Kingdom, as Humane Reason, Learning, and Philosophy; This has brought in all
the Hypocrisy, Superstition, false Doctrine, false Worship, Sects, Schisms,
Divisions, which have at any time prevailed in the Church during all the Reign
of Antichrist: And the Gospel of Christ, and the true belief and practice of
it, has not had at any time a greater and more subtle and plausible Enemy
then this. Yea farther, the gross ignorance and blindness of the rude world,
has not so perverted and falsified the word of the Gospel, nor rendered it such
contradiction and resistance, nor has brought such annoyance, to the faithful
who have received and confessed it, as Humane Science has done; For this has
enabled men stoutly to oppose the truth, and subtly to defend error as the
truth; this has made men bold and cunning to suppress Gods mind from the
World, and to hold forth their own mind to them, as if it were Gods, under the
pretense of the outward letter of the word, and a multitude of other evils have
sprung from this corrupt fountain. Wherefore the Apostle Paul is so far from
encouraging Christians to betake themselves to Humane Learning to fit them for
the Gospel, that He by the Spirit utterly forbids Christians Heathenish
Philosophy, lest they should be spoiled through the vanity of it, and be led
away from Christ. And thus in this matter has Mr. Simpson manifestly departed
from the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and of faithful men who have spoken from
it.

5. ERROR.
That men's Hatred to God, 5. Error.
does as well appear in their hatred to Humane Learning as if they hated the
Scriptures.

Answer.
I conceive Mr. Simpsons heart was hot within him, Answer.
out of his great Zeal to Humane Learning (the great goddess by which the
University lives) when he thus spoke; And it appears he is very tender of the
Reputation and Glory of it, who thus vindicates it, at as high a rate as the
very Scriptures. But Sir, do you know no more difference between the most
precious word of our eternal Lord God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and the
foolish, corrupt, and stinking Doctrine of men? is there no more difference in
your Divinity, between the word of Righteousness, Life, and Salvation, which
God has spoken by Christ, and Christ by his servants, and the word and
Doctrines of wretched men, full of sin, death, and destruction? And if the Law
it self, given by the Ministration of Angels, loses its glory before the
Gospel, as the Apostle testifies; How much more does Heathenish Philosophy,
brought forth, partly from the corrupt Reason of man, and partly from the
Inspiration of the Devil, become ^oathsom and abominable before it for ever.
And cannot we be enemies to this say y^u, without hating the blessed word of
God? Nay, the blessed word of God where it prevails in truth, does make men to
hate this, and to count it loss, and dung, and filth, and the most loathsome
baseness in the world, in comparison of it self. Wherefore, through the grace
of Christ, we will so love the Scriptures, which are Divine Learning, as to
hate Humane and Heathenish Learning for their sakes, seeing it has put a Veil
of Darkness in the Church, over this glorious Sun, the word of faith.

6. ERROR.
6. Error.
That if the Spirit teach without means, men may as well be without the
Ordinances, as without the Universities and Humane Learning.

Answer.
We do not say, that the Spirit usually teaches without means in the Church of
Christ; Answer.
But we say, he teaches by means of his own appointing; And how will Mr.
Simpson prove by any Scripture that Universities and Humane Learning, are
Means, which the Spirit of God uses to teach his Church by? where did ever the
Lord speak one word, that he would use the Disciplines of the Gentiles, as
means whereby to teach men to know the Mystery of Christ? Wherefore this is
strange Doctrine, that Arts and Sciences are the means whereb^ the Spirit
teaches the Church: For sure I am, the Lord never taught his Church, either of
the Old, or the New Testament by these Means: Only Antichrist has taught his
Church after this manner, and has set up Humane Learning as an Ordinance of
God, yea, as an Ordinance of the New Testament to learn Christ by; that
Christians might be trained upto know Christ the wisdom of God, by Humane
Learning the wisd^^^ of the world, which is in direct enmity to God.

The chief Ordinances whereby God helps his Church are the word of faith, and
the prayer of faith; And by the Ministration of the Spirit, he begins, and
carries on the Salvation of this Spiritual People: And these Ordinances the
true Church cannot want, neither does God do any thing in his Church without
them. But the Spiritual Church, for ought that I could ever yet read in the
word, may well want their Divine Ordinance of Humane Learning, and yet not want
any Ordinance of God, that he has appointed and sanctified for the Use of his
true Church.

7. ERROR.
That men now, are not to receive the Spirit, 7. Error.
in that immediate way to understand the Scriptures, in which it was given to
them who wrote the Scriptures.

Answer.
Surely Mr. Simpson will not deny, Answer.
that the Spirit is given to that whole Church which is the body of Christ;
seeing Paul says, if any man have not Christ's Spirit, he is none of his, he is
no member of his. Now the Spirit is always given to whomsoever it is given, by
the Father and the Son, as Christ taught his Disciples, promising them that the
Father would send the Spirit to them in his Name; and also, that he Himself
would send it to them from the Father. And was this promise only made to them,
and not to all the faithful also, who should believe in Christ through their
word? does not Paul say, Romans 12.13. of the whole Church, that by one Spirit we
are all baptized into one body, and are all made to drink into one Spirit* He
says also to the Galatians Chap. 4. because ye are Sons, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father. And thus it is
manifest that the whole Church of Believers, and every true member thereof, do
receive the Spirit of God. And do they not receive in alike immediately from
God* Who can give the Spirit of God to man, but God himself* when God promised
to, pour out his Spirit in the last days upon all flesh, did he name any
difference in the pouring of it out, saying, some shall receive it immediately,
and some mediately? No, but all that are counted worthy to receive the Spirit
of God, do receive it alike immediately from him; neither has Christ left any
Lieutenant or Deputy in the world, to give his Spirit to men in his absence:
But he himself is always present in his true Church to the end of the world,
both to teach them, and to give them his Spirit. He is too much in the darkness
of Antichrist, that denies this.

It is manifest then, that all the true Church alike receive the Spirit of God
and that they all receive it alike immediately from God, seeing no man nor
Angel can give the spirit of God, but God himself gives his own Spirit to whom
he pleases by his own word, which he himself Ministers by his own spirit; And
by this spirit did holy men speak the Scripture, and by this spirit only do
holy men of God understand the Scripture, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 2 12. Now we
have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that
we might know the things that are freely given to us of God, among which his
word has a chief place: and after says, that by the spirit they had the mind
of Christ, which others want, who yet have the same Letter of the word, and are
destitute of the Spirit. And so as the faithful spoke the word by the spirit
of faith, so through the same spirit of faith only, so given, do the faithful
understand it.

And though this thing be clear in it self, yet I judge it convenient to add
here the Testimonies of Luther and Calvin in this matter Luther says, The
Scriptures are not to be understood but by that very spirit by which they were
writ, which spirit can be nowhere found more readily and effectually, then in
those holy Letters of his which he has written.

Scripturae non nisi eo Spiritu intelligendae sunt quo scriptae sunt, qui
Spiritus nusquam praesentius and vivacius quam in ipsis sacris suis quas
scripsit literis inveniri potest. Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 309. a.

Idem Spiritus qui per os Prophetarum locutus est, in corda nostra penetret
necesse est, ut persuadeat fidelit^r protulisse quod divinitus erat mandatum.
Call. Institu. lib. 1. cap. 8.. 4.


And Calvin says, The same spirit that spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, it
is necessary that that should pierce into our hearts, to persuade us that they
faithfully delivered that which was committed to them of God. So that we must
necessarily have the same spirit to know his mind, that they had to utter his
mind. Wherefore it is evident that Mr. Simpson is not Orthodox in this point
neither.

8. ERROR.
That men now are to get knowledge (to wit of the Scriptures) by Studies, and
Humane Learning, 8. Error.
and not by Inspiration.

Answer.
This Doctrine carries the visible mark of Antichrist upon it; For it is only
the Inspiration of God, Answer.
that inables a man to know the things of God, and not a man's study or Humane
Learning: It is not in this case, in him that wills or runs, but in God that
shows Mercy. Wherefore Christ has said, no man knows the Son but the Father,
and he to whomsoever the Father will re^eal him; Wherefore Paul prays for the
Ephesians, that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of Christ: without which Spirit of Revelation; Christ and the Father
can never be known. What can Humane Learning, and the studies of men find out
of the Mystery of Christ, which was hidden from ages and Generations, as Paul
testifies, till the Spirit revealed it? Yea, Christ has taught, that God hides
these things of the Gospel from the wise and prudent, that is, the studying and
learned men, and reveals them to Babes; and that this is his good pleasure so
to do. And so no man can know Christ and his Gospel, and what is the faith,
hope, and love of the Gospel, but by the most present Teaching and Revelation
of God himself by his Spirit. Wherefore to deny the Inspiration of Gods spirit
now, and to ascribe all knowledge of the word of God to men's studies, and to
Humane Learning, is the most gross and palpable Doctrine of Antichrist and his
Prophets; whereas, all the People of God are taught of God Himself, in all the
things of God, as Christ has said; Because no man by his own studies and pains
can attain thereunto.

And in this matter, I shall also add the Testimony of Luther, and Latimer.
Luther says, No man sees one jot or tittle in the Scriptures, Nullus homo unum
iota in Scripturis videt, nisi qui Spiritum Dei habet: omnes habent obscuratum
cor, ita ut si etiam dicant and norint proserre omnia Scripturae, nihil tamen
horum sentiant aut ver^ cognoscant, etc. Spiritus enim requiritur ad totam
Scripturam and quamlibet ejus partem intelligendum. Luth. Tom. 3. fol. 169. a.
but he that has the Spirit of God: For all men have a darkened Heart, in such
sort, that if they could speak, and knew how to bring forth all things of the
Scripture, yet have they not any true sense or right Knowledge of them. For (
says he) the spirit is required to the understanding of the whole Scripture,
and of every part thereof.

And Latimer says, The carnal and Philosophical understanding of the
Scriptures, Carnalis and Philosophica Scripturarum intelligentia non est
sapientia Dei qua a sapientibus absconditur, parvulis revelatur, Latimer in his
Answer to Sr. Edwards Baintons Letter.
is not that wisdom of God which is hid from the wise, and revealed to little
ones.

9. ERROR.
9. Error.
That Humane Learning is as the Outworks to the Fort of the Gospel, and as the
outer Court to the Temple of the Gospel; and so if you will keep the Fort well,
you must keep the Outworks strong; and if you will preserve the inner, you must
look to the outer Court.

Answer.
Answer.
How highly has Mr. Simpson honored Socrates, Pythagoras, Plato and
Aristotle's, etc. to make them a strong guard for the Person of Christ? And how
highly has he honored their Learning, Humane Learning is not the outworks to
the Gospel.
to make it a defense for the Gospel? And how weak and feeble has he sought to
render the word of faith, that must be thus defended by the Arts and
Disciplines of men, as not being able to stand alone, and to defend it self?
Does this man truly believe in the Son of the living God, who make him such an
helpless Idol? or does he believe the word of the Gospel, which has given eyes
to the blind, and ears to the deaf, and feet to the lame, which has raised the
dead, and cast out Devils, and commanded the winds and waves, and they have
obeyed? I say, does he believe this word to be of God, which has done the very
works of God? and yet openly affirms to the world, that it cannot maintain it
self, or subsist without the help of Philosophy? Is that word, which mightily
and perfectly saves all the Elect, and that in despite of the world and the
Devil, and the gates of Hell, not able to save it self without Humane Help?
Must that word be secured by Aristotle, which delivers all the Elect from sin,
death and hell for ever? Are Grammar, R^thorick, Logic, Ethics, Physics,
Metaphysics, Mathematics, the weapons whereby we must defend the Gospel? Is
Mr. Simpson so ill a Proficient in Christianity, that he has not read, or does
not remember that of Paul, Ephesians. 6.12. where he says, We wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against Power, against the Rulers
of the Darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness in high places.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the
breast plate of Righteousness.

And your feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked.

And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God.

Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all Perseverance.

Here now are the true Christian weapons, whereby he defends himself through
the word, and defends the word against all the world.

And the same Paul, in 2 Cor. 10.3. says.

For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.

For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds.

Casting down Imaginations, and every High thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
Obedience of Christ.

And having in a readiness to revenge all Disobedience.

So that the faithful do not defend the Gospel by Philosophy, as is
heathenishly suggested; but by the Gospel they defend the Gospel; and the
Gospel has in it self that Wisdom, Righteousness, Strength, and those Virtues
which are infinitely able to defend it self against all the world, and against
all the powers of darkness. And how contrary is this Doctrine to Mr. Simpsons?
And thus much for his Outworks to the Gospel.

Now for his outer Court to the Gospel, I know no other outer Court the Gospel
ever had then the Law of Moses, Humane Learning is not the outer Court to the
Gospel.
which Law was the preparation to the Gospel, and the School Master to bring us
unto Christ; which Humane Learning never was. But Humane Learning is the outer
Court to Antichrists Temple, it is the Schoolmaster to bring men to
Antichrist. And thus would Mr. Simpson also turn the Law out of its place, and
set up Humane Learning in the stead of the Law, and so would make void both Law
and Gospel for Humane Learning sake; Surely one would think he has some
considerable advantage thereby, that he thus fences for it.

10. ERROR.
10. Error.
But what is the bottom ( says he) of all this ( that is, of some men's
appearing against Humane Learning, as the Unction of the Ministry, and against
the Universities as the Fountain of the Ministry) but this, That some say they
are one with Christ, and as Christ has the Divine nature in Him, so every
Believer also has: and he that has God in Him, need not go to any man to
Learn. Whereas Joh. 17. Christ speaks of Believers as at an infinite distance
from Himself; He their Lord, they his Servants. He in Glory they in the World.
And if they be so united to Christ, then it will follow, that Christ is not the
only begotten Son of God; and that Christ and we should be equal, and He not
our Lord, etc.

Answer.
Now does not all this declare a most woeful Ignorance of, Answer.
and enmity to the Gospel of God our Savior? For is our Union with Christ, the
Foundation of error? or have true, Believers no real Union with Christ, but
imaginary? Do not the Saints partake of the Divine Nature? does not Peter
expressly affirm it; 2 Pet. 1.4. where he says, exceeding great and precious
promises are made to us that we thereby should be made partakers of the Divine
Nature? and what is the divine Nature, but the very Nature of God? See Luther
on the place.

Again, are believers, as he affirms, at an infinite distance from Christ* If
this were true, what sad news would it be to the Church of God? How can this
Doctrine agree with these Scriptures? that Christ may dwell in your Hearts by
faith: and Christ in you the hope of Glory: and of Him are ye in Christ Jesus:
Again says Christ, I am the true Vine, and ye are the branches: and so as the
Vine is in the branches, and as the branches are in the Vine, so is Christ in
Christians, and so are Christian in Christ. Again, Joh. 14.20. At that day ye
shall know says Christ Himself, that you need not doubt of the Doctrine) that
I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you: And again Joh. 17.21. says
Christ, I pray not for these alone, that is, who now believe, but also for all
that shall hereafter believe in me through their word, that they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one, as we are
one* I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, that the
world may know thee* have sent me, and have loved them (...) thou have loved
me* Here now is no infinite distance between Christ and Believers, but a
wonderful and admirable Nearness, and Oneness, which the learned Ignorance of
Philosophy understands not, nor the ignorant Knowledge of any carnal Christian.

But sure this word of God is true, and the Saints receive it in faith, and
will not be deluded with any Philosophical, Sophistical, or Antichristian
glosses of False Teachers.

And thus does the holy word of God affirm plainly enough, that Christ and his
Christians are most nearly United; And yet does not this Union make an
Equality, and rob Christ of his due glory: seeing Christ is the Head and they
his Members; Christ the first born, and they his Brethren: And so as Christ
has the Pre-eminence in all things above them all, as becomes the Head and
first born, so They have Communion with Him in all things, as becomes his
Members and Brethren.

And whereas he jests, and says, He that has God in Him, needs not go to man
to learn; I do affirm this is true enough, and the Scripture has affirmed it
in several places; Isaiah says to the Spiritual Church, All thy Children shall
be taught of the Lord: And Christ says it is written, They shall be all taught
of God; he therefore that had heard and learned of my Father, comes to me. And
John says, 1 John 2.27. The Anointing which ye have received from him abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you* but as the same anointing
teaches you all things, and is Truth, and is no lie. And this Doctrine is so
manifest from the Scriptures, that he is of Antichrist that denies it: For God
inwardly teaches all his People by his Spirit his own self: and they so hear
the word by the Ministry of man, that it is always God that teaches them, and
not Man.

11. ERROR.
Arts and Tongues are the Cups in which God drinks to us. 11. Error.


Answer.
In what a sad condition then are the common and plain people, that they cannot
pledge him? Answer.
But only the learned Clergy keep these cups to themselves, as heretofore they
kept the Cup in the Sacrament.

But what strange Phrase is this? Savouring of the Ranters Religion; as if God
was the familiar companion of the Clergy, and sometimes drank to them in a Cup
of Hebrew, sometimes in a Cup of Greek, and sometimes in a Cup of Latin as if
sometimes he drank to them in a Cup of Logic, and sometimes in a Cup of
Ethics, sometimes in a Cup of Metaphysics. Is not this truly, Profana vocum
novitas, a Profane Newness of Speech, never before heard of to my knowledge in
the Church of God, and which the Apostle utterly condemns.

12. ERROR.
We shall never keep up Religion, 12. Error.
if we do not keep up Learning; but when Learning goes down, Religion goes down
too.

Answer.
The Church is founded on Christ, Answer.
and Christ and His Church (it seems) are both founded on Humane Learning. It
is no wonder now, that Mr. Simpson lays so great stress on it every where; And
that men of his Religion term the University, Fundamentum Ecclesiae, the
Foundation of the Church. And if Humane Learning do indeed uphold all Christian
Religion, let all Men and Magistrates come forth and uphold it in the Name of
God. But surely the Religion of the Gospel depends wholly on Christ, as Christ
on God: and there is no need of Humane Learning to support this, except God and
Christ are insufficient. We have a sure word and Doctrine of the Gospel, that
remains firm for ever, and inviolable, and inconquerable, in and through
Christ, and his Spirit, and the Father; and all the World shall shatter in
pieces, and Humane Learning, go down to Hell, and this shall stand fast for
ever: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, and not one jot or Tittle of my Word,
says Christ.

Believers, know that not one Point of your Religion depends on Humane
Learning; But all on Christ Himself, who is the true and living Word. Wherefore
these are the fears of Antichrist and his Prophets, that their Religion will go
down with Humane Learning, because it was set up by it; But the true Religion
of the Gospel of God our Savior was at first set up without it, and has
hitherto remained without it, and will abide so for ever. And to this the
Spirit, and the Bride give witness.

13. ERROR.
Seeing Religious Foundations are so Ancient, then keep them up: 13. Error.
Your Destruction will never be but from your selves.

Answer.
Religious Foundations! What Religion founded the Universities is well known.
Answer.
For by the council of four Monks, the Scholars of Bid, to wit, Rabanus,
Albinus, Claudius, and John Scotus, the University which had been translated
from Athens to Rome, was translated by Charles the great from Rome to Paris,
Studium Cantabrigiense institutum noscitur, Anno. 630 a Siguberto A^glorum O
^entalium R^ge, qui postea purpuram in cu^ullum commutavit. Arnoldus Wion
Duacensis, Benedictinus. lib. 5. cap. 94.
An. 791. And for our English Universities of Cambridge and Oxford; Thus it is
recorded, That the Study of Cambridge was instituted, Anno 630. By Sigi^bert
King of the East, Angles, who after changed his Purple or Kingly Robes, for a
Friars Cool or Hood. And the Lectures here were begun by four Monks, of which
brother Ode (as they termed him) read Grammar, according to Priscians Doctrine:
Terricus an acute Sophister read Aristotle's Logic, according to the
Institutions of Porphyrius, and Averr^es* Brother William, read Tullies
Rhetoric, and Gislebertus, read Divinity to them on Sundays, and Saints days.

And for Oxford, that was founded by King Alfred, Anno 895. by the persuasion
of Neotus the Monk, An. 895 Rex Alfredus hortante Neot^ Monacho viro
doctissimo, Oxonii publicam Academiam instituit, proposita Professoribus
literarum praemiis. Georg. Lilius in Chron. Britan. Regnante, Edvardo primo, de
studio Granibrig, facta est Vniversitas, sicut est Oxonium, per Curiam Romanam.
Robert. Remington.
and rewards were propounded for those that would profess Learning there.
Afterward both these Schools were made Universities, in Edward the firsts time
by the Court of Rome, as Robert Remington affirms.

Yea farther, by the very Names of the Colleges it is manifests, what Religion
set them up; some being founded in the honor of one Saint, some of another
Saint; one being founded in the honor of Christ, another in the honor of Jesus,
another in the honor of Immanuel, another in the Honor of the Trinity; Whereby
they have rent the Name of God in pieces, each one seeking to honor that name
of Christ most, in the honor of which his College was founded; Yea, some
Colleges have bin founded in the honor of Christ's body; as the Colleges of
orpus Christi, in both Universities: and one in Oxford, for the help of all
dead Souls, and for their rescue out of Purgatory: And so it is well known what
Religion founded them. And what Religion will in due time destroy these
Foundations (if they be not Reformed) is as well known.

For Wickliff, whom God raised up to be one of the most eminent Reformers of
the Christian Religion, since the Apostles times, speaks thus touching
Universities, Colleges and Students. Quia enim Christus non ordinavit istas
Vniversitates sive collegia, manifestum videtur, quod ista sicut Graduationes
in illis sunt vana Gentilitas introducta, in cujus signum tam Collegiati quam
and alii Graduati, quaerunt quae sua sunt, Charitatis Regulas deserentes: ex
quo pollulant invidi^, comparationes Personarum and Patria, and multa alia
seminaria patru mendacii. Wickliff in Speculo Militantis Ecclesiae. cap. 26.
Seeing Christ (says he) has not ordained these Universities, or Colleges,
it is manifest that both They and the Graduations in them are nothing but so
much vain Heathenism introduced, in Testimony whereof, as well the Collegiates
as other Graduates do seek the things which are their own, leaving the Rules of
Charity: From whence do arise envies, and comparisons between Persons and
Countries, and many other seed-plots of the Father of Lies.

-- Quantum ad Collegia in Studiis suis generalibus est idem Judicium. Nam per
ipsa Patriae and Personae, contra charitatis regulas acceptantur, and
intrinsecae invidiae, cum peccatis aliis and perjuriis ac Simoniis contra
instituta propria cumulantur. Conceditur tamen quod ex talibus Collegiis sicut
ex aliis Scotis eveniunt multa bona, non tamen tot, quot occasion peccati
Diaboli, and peccati primi Hominis, Ideo erubescat fidelis fructum talis
commodi allegare. Wickliff lib. de cura Pastoral. cap. 10.
Again, he having spoken of other Sects, says, Our Judgment concerning
Colleges is the same, as touching their General Studies: For through them,
Persons and Countries are accepted against the Rules of Charity, and inward
envies are h^aped up with other sins, Perjuries, and Simonies, against their
own Statutes. Notwithstanding it is granted, that out of such Colleges many
good things do arise, as well as out of other Sects, yet not so many as by the
occasion of the sin of the Devil, and the sin of the first man. And therefore
let a faithful man be ashamed to allege the fruit of such Profit.

Si Collegia ista sunt in conversatione a Domino reprobata, quis dubitat quin
sic nutrire eos non foret elcemosyna, sed factiones and partis contra Christum
stulta praesumptio. Nam omnes hae Sectae and omnes Novitates, quae non in
Christo Domino sundatae sunt, tentant Christum cum Satana, Mat. 4. cum spe^nunt
Ordinationem liberam Sectae ejus, and praeeligunt servilem sectam aliam minus
bonam; acsi nollent per gradus quos Deus ordinat in Sion coelestem ascendere,
sed per lationem Satanae ad Templi pinnacula transvolvere. Quae ergo ^lcemosyna
est sic fovere puerulum talem Diaboli in Castris Cainiticis contra Christum?
Idem.
Again says he, If these Colleges are in their conversation rejected of the
Lord, who doubts but that to nourish them in this way is no alms, but the
foolish presumption of a Faction, and party against Christ. For all these
Sects, and all Newnesses which are not founded on Christ the Lord, they tempt
Christ with the Devil, Mat. 4. seeing they despise the free Ordination of his
Sect, and do rather choose another sevile Sect, less good, as if they would not
ascend into the heavenly Sion, by the steps which God has Ordained, but would
fly to the Pinnacle of the Temple by the carrying of the Devil. What alms
therefore is it to cherish such a child of the Devil in Cains Castles against
Christ?

He also affirms that one Idiot through the help of the Grace of God, does more
good in the Church, then many Graduates in the Schools and Colleges: and that
Gods Inspiration of such, does more profit the Community of the faithful, then
all the Universities, and all their Studies and Privileges.

Thus has VVickliff witnessed in this matter, who was also Himself Master of
Baliol College in Oxford: And Philip Melancthon gives this Testimony of Him,
Equidem sapientem virum judico fuisse VVicklefum Anglum, qui omnium primus,
quod ego sciam, vidit Vniversitates fuisse Satanae Synagogas, that is, I do
indeed judge Wickliff of England to have been a wise man, who for ought I know,
first of all saw Universities to have been the Synagogues of Satan.

John Hus also, John Hus. Pedibus conculcabitur Corona superbiae. Nam multorum
Doctora^us and Magistratus, qui suffocato in ipsis prorsus verbo Evangelii, jam
invere, cunde nimis magnificant fimbrias and dilatant Phylacteria sua, and
amant primas Cathedras in Scholis and salutari in foro, vocari ab hominibus
Rabbi ^. cc per hoc cedunt in apparatu and armamento Corporis Mystici
Antichristi, quoniam Scriptum est, est Rex super-omnes filios Superbiae, Joh.
Hus. Lib. de Regno Antichristi. cap. 14.
that excellent Instrument of Jesus Christ, and blessed Martyr, says, speaking
on that Scripture, Isa. 28. VVoe to the Crown of the Pride of Ephraim, and the
Crown of Pride shall be trodden underfoot, says, The Doctor-ships and
Masterships of many, who having the word of God wholly choked in them, do now
too shamelesly make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their
garments, and love the chief chairs in the Schools, and to be saluted in the
Markets, and to be called of men Doctor; And by this they go in the apparel
and harness of the Mystical body of Antichrist, because it is written that he
is the King of all the children of Pride. And the Crown of Pride, of these
children of Pride shall be trodden down.

And thus as it is manifest what Religion founded the Universities; so it is as
manifest what Religion will in the appointed time destroy these Foundations, if
they be not truly and thoroughly Reformed. For surely as they are, if the work
of Christ go forward in the world (as it necessarily must do notwithstanding
the present defection) in the appointed time) they can no more be held up, then
the house built on the sand, in the time of Tempest. For the true Spiritual
Church is built on the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone, and so it is firmly founded upon a Rock,
and can never fall; But the Universities are built on the Philosophers and
Heathen, Plato and Aristotle being the chief corner stones, and so they are
built upon the sand, and neither can their own hands uphold them, nor the
Secular Arm establish them, in that day wherein the Lord alone shall be
exalted. But it is not men of moral and civil Religion and Righteousness, who
will do this work, and execute this vengeance; for the Inchauntments of the
Universities are too strong and mighty for all Humane Spirits: But the called,
chosen, and faithful Ones of Christ, when he shall summon them, and call them
to his foot, they shall not stand on- Complements, Formalities and Niceties;
nor regard frindship or enmity; but through the Power of Faith, shall break
through all that can be said and objected by the Wisdom, Policy, Prudence, and
Religion of man, and shall execute the righteous Judgments of the Lord, on
these Mothers of Harlots, and Fornications of the Nations.

And whereas he says, their Destruction will never be but of themselves: I do
verily believe that. For seeing their Root is rottenness, their Fruit must
needs be Destruction. Yea, the Lord will raise up his word in the midst of them
to destroy them: For the more the word of the Lord shall blow upon the
University, the more shall this Grass wither, and the flower thereof, that is,
Humane Learning fade away, till it be at last quite dried up. And this is the
Burden of the University, whose day is coming, when iniquity shall have an end.

And thus have I done with these things; There were many other things in that
S^rmon as contrary to the Gospel; which for brevities sake I have omitted.

Now what a sad thing is it, that such poysonfull Doctrine should be poured
forth into an University Congregation, and that by the Ministry of such a man?
and if the Ceremonies of the Law were in use under the Gospel, how ought we to
rend our Garments at the bearing of these things?

And now blessed Lord Jesus, who wast crucified, dead and buried, but art risen
from the Dead by the Eternal Spirit, and art ascended on high to fill all
things, have mercy on thy poor Church, which is so grievously rent and torn
this day, by Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and is thus hurt and consumed by
poysonable Doctrine of men, who seek themselves, and their own things, to the
harm and ruin of thy poor people! O thou Son of the Living God, who are the
way, the truth, and the life; how shall the Kingdom of Antichrist be brought
down, when the hands of such men, who seem Pillars in the Church, are stretched
forth so strongly to hold it up; And how shall the days of Antichrist be
shortened, when his Kingdom is coming forth again in the greatest deceivableness
of unrighteousness that has ever yet appeared in the World to delude the
Nations? O Lord remember all thy Promises, and make haste to destroy Babylon
the Great, with all its Mysteries of Righteousness, and Unrighteousness, and
let it sink as a Millstone in the Sea, without any hope or possibility of a
Resurrection. And seeing there is no hand of man stretched out for this work,
but all hands are against it; do thou destroy it O Lord without hand, even with
the Spirit of thy mouth, and brightness of thy coming according to the Truth of
thy Promises, and the unutterable sighs and groans of thy Spirit occasioned
thereby, in the hearts of all thy faithful and elect. Even so Lord, And let
thy Kingdom come, and make no long tarrying.

AMEN.
A TESTIMONY From the WORD Against DIVINITY-DEGRES IN THE University: OR, Any
Academical Degrees made us^ of for the Ministry of the GOSPEL.
THe Universities (whose soul and life do lie in humane Learning and
School Divinity) that they might gain the greater profit to themselves, and
glory to their children, have (after the example of the heathen) given their
children Degrees in D^vinity (as they in Art) and the glorious Titles of
Batchelors, Masters, and Doctors in Divinity, as so many Crowns of Gold upon
their heads, to win them honor and reputation with all people, who have been
under the delusion of Antichrist.

And in the confirming of these Graduations or Degrees, (which also is done for
a sum of money) they give the Graduates license and power to preach, and to
expound the Scriptures, and that by the sole Authority of the University.

For the Vice-chancelor, admitting a Bachelour in Divinity to his Degree,
Procancellarius Bacchalaureum Theologiae admittens, his verbis utatur;
Admittimas te ad enarrandum omnes Apostolicas Epistolas, i^ nomine Patris,
Filii, and Spiritus sancti. Doctorem admittens ita dicet, Admittimus te ad
interpretandum and prositendum universam sacram Scripturam tamve^etis quam novi
Testamenti, In nomine Patris, Filii and Spiritus sancti. cap. 20. De Ceremoniis
in Gradibus conferendis
uses these words in the name of the University, We admit you to declare all
the Apostolical Epistles, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And
so the Batchelour in Divinity, has Power according to his Degree, only to deal
with the Apostolical Epistles, but must go no farther. And admitting a Doctor
to his Degree, the Vice-chancelor says thus, We admit you to interpret and
profess all the holy Scriptures both of the old and new Testament, in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

And thus does the University, through power received from Antichrist, give
men, chiefly for money, Divinity-Degrees; and through those Degrees it gives
Authority and privilege to Batchelors in Divinity to expound part of the
Scriptures, and to Doctors to expound and profess all the Scriptures; and they
that gain these Degrees to themselves, are (as there is good reason) the great
men in account with the University, and also with the carnal people of
Antichrist, how destitute soever they be, of the faith and spirit of the Gospel.

Wherefore I cannot choose but give in my Testimony against this glorious and
gainful privilege of the Universities, to wit, their conferring upon their
children Degrees in Divinity, and creating them Masters in that Mystery, which
none can teach but God himself; and which none can learn, but true believers
who are borne of God, and are his true Disciples.

And so I do openly affirm, that Degrees in Divinity (for I meddle with none
else) given by the Universities to their children, are plainly and grossly
Antichristian, University-degrees in Divinity Antichristian.
being most manifestly contrary to the word of the Gospel, and the light that
shines in the New Testament.

For first, In the Gospel of God our Savior, we learn, That new and heavenly
birth makes men to be of the true Church, The Gospel against Divinity-Degrees
in the Universities.
and that the pouring forth of the spirit on these children of God, according
to the measure of the gift of God, makes Christians of several Degrees in this
Church, and not Academical Graduations.

Secondly, In this Gospel also we are taught, that all the Ministers of Christ
are equal, and not one superior to another, as these Degrees make them.

Thirdly, In this Gospel also we are taught, that the true amongst Christ's true
Disciples, does not stand in Academical Degrees, or worldly honor and
Dignities, but in the faithfuls near and exact following of Christ in word and
conversation; and that the sons of Zebedee, in desiring superiority and
pre-eminence above the other Disciples, contrary to the life and doctrine of
Christ, did grievously offend, and were therefore sharply rebuked of Christ.

Fourthly, Yea here, we hear Christ himself forbidding very thing to his
Disciples, that Antichrist and his prophets might have no cloak for doing the
contrary, where his Gospel is truly taught and published. For Mat. 23. Christ
does forbid his Disciples before all the multitude, to be as the Jewish Rabbis
or Doctors, who (says Christ) do their works to be seen of men, and disguise
themselves with different garments or habits from others (that they might be
the more taken notice of, and have the more respect) and do love the uppermost
rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the
markets, and to be called of men Doctor, Doctor; but says Christ to his
Disciples, Be not ye called Doctor, for one is your Master, even Christ, and ye
all are brethren, and so equal.

Whence it is evident, that this practice of Universities and Colleges in
giving men Degrees in Divinity, as they call it, and Titles, Habits, and
Dignities accordingly, is contrary to the express command of Jesus Christ, and
so is a mere Invention of Antichrist, to put Honor and Reputation on his
Ministers.

It is also manifest, that this practice of the Universities, has all along
made many Doctors in the Church, which yet never were Christ's true D^sciples.

It is also manifest, that these Degrees and Titles do cause men to be proud,
and to lift themselves up above their brethren, and to think themselves
something when they are nothing; such Graduates, u^ually pro^ing Theologi
Gloriae, Divines of glory; and not Theologi crucis, D^vines of the cross, as
Luther speaks; that is, proud and h^ughty clerks, and not the humble Ministers
of Christ cru^ified.

These Degrees also do break the simplicity of the people of God, and do
prejudice the communion of Saints.

Farther, these Degrees are a dangerous snare to simple people, causing them to
receive all f^r good Doctrine that is delivered b^ such men, though it be never
so erroneous and unsound, inasmuch as their high titles which they have gotten
in these High places, and the reputation of their learning, strikes an awe into
them, that the^ dare not once question what such men deliver, much less
contradict it.

Wherefore, as much of the mystery of iniquity is discovered and dissolved
already, so there is no doubt, but that this glorious relic thereof, to wit,
Divinity-Degrees, will also in due time follow, as the lightnings of God shall
enlighten the world.

And seeing so much of the light of the Gospel has shined forth in thi^ Age,
it were to be wished that the Universities, Heads of Colleges, and Clergy,
would not wilfully, for worldly honor, ^espects and advantage sake, shut their
eyes against it, or rather with open eyes, maliciously seek to extinguish it,
but that they would be contented, to have all their honor lie in their
l^keness to Christ, who was in the Church as one that served; and who was so
far from receiving honor and taking titles from men, to make himself of
account in the world, that being Lord of all, he made himself of no reputation;
and that they would reject all the pomp and pride of the fa^se Church, which
being destitute of faith and the spirit, makes It self and its Ministers
glorious, in outward names and Titles.

Now though this be a plain case in the Gospel, and there needs no Testimony
of men, yet for the fuller conviction of the world, I shall add the witness of
other believers, that it may appear, that I am not alone in this matter, The
Saints and Martyrs against Div^nity-Degrees.
though to have been alone with the word, would have been sure and safe enough.

In Edward the third's time, there was an excellent d^scourse set forth,
called, The Plowmans complaint, Plowmans complaint.
etc. which testifies against these Divinity-degrees, in these words,
Antichrist (says it) makes Masters too many, who teach the people with their
own teaching, and leave Gods teaching which is needful, and hide it with quaint
glosses from the mean people. But (says he) these Glosers object, that they
desire not the state of Mastery to be worshipped thereby, but the more to
profit the people when they preach the word. For they say the people will more
believe the preaching of a Master, that has taken a state of School, then the
preaching of another man that has not taken the state of Mastership. To which
he replies, That it is no need that Masters bear witness to Gods teaching or
word, that it is true and good, neither (says he) can any man by his state of
Mastership which God has forbidden, draw any man from his sin, rather then
another man which is not a Master, nor will be none, because it is forbidden
him in the Gos^el. And a little after he says, Seeing we are to bel^eve a m^ns
works more then his word, the deed shows well of these Masters, that they
desire Mastership, rather for their own worship, then for profit of the people,
etc.

After, John wickl^ffe that chosen servant of Christ, J^hn Wickliffe
did witness against these Antichristian Degrees, who says, The Clergy do
busily seek their own wo^ldly w^rship and glory, and by great gifts and va^ne
costs, to be called Masters in divinity, and to speak before Lords, and to sit
at meat with them, and not to teach truly the Gospel to all manner of men, by
meek l^fe, and freely, as Christ bids.

The same Wickliffe on Mat. 23. cap. 4. says, Although in some studies, the
name of Doctor imports excellency, Licet in qui bus^am sindus nom^m Docto^is
sit excell^ntius, cum fit vitus Gentilis ex multis honoribus and statibus
aggregatus, tamen in teatu Apo^toli ^^mitur simplicius, pro quocunque fideli,
qui notabiliter docet fid^m catholicam; and sic dici^ nomen Doctoris meritum
and laborem, and interimit superbiam and status eminentiem quoad mundium.
Wickliffe Tractat. in cap. 23. Mat.
seeing it is a heathenish Rite, heaped together of many honors and states, yet
in the text of the Apostle, it is taken more plainly, for any faithful man, who
does notably teach the catholic faith: and so the name Doctor, speaks desert
and labor, and takes away pride and eminency of State according to this world.

Breviter, omnis Secta, Satus vel operatio, quam Christus non approbat in suo
evangelio, est rationabiliter dimittenda; ideocum Christus non approbat sed
reprobat gentile M^gisterium supraedictum, patet quod est de Ecclesia
dimittendu^. Idem.
Again, says he, Every Sect, State and operation which Christ does not
approve in his Gospel, is in reason to be rejected; and therefore seeing Christ
does not approve, but reprove the forenamed heathenish Mastership, it is
manifest that it is to be discharged, and cast out of the Church.

Nota quod nomen Officii multum distat a nomine Graduat^onis Scholasticae,
gentiliter introductae. Wickliffe, in Sermon. Domini in Monte.
Again, says he, Note that the name of an office, does much differ from the
name of a Scholastical Graduation, heathenishly brought in.

He says also, That Christ has specially forbidden his Disciples, heathenish
or Scholastical Mastership; and that Christ would have the name of Master or
Doctor singularly reserved to himself, Cum periculum and superfluitas sit in
isto nomine videtur quod istud nomen sit rationabiliter fugiendum.
seeing he, by reason of his hypostatical union, has a certain excellen^y
which cannot agree to any other of mankind. And concludes, That seeing there is
danger in attributing to men the Title of Master or Doctor in Divinity,
therefore in good reason those Titles are to be shunned in the Church of God.

John Hus also says, That they who take to themselves Academical Degrees, and
Titles answerable, do go in the apparel and harness of the mystical body of
Antichrist, John Hus. Hus, libr. de Regno, etc. Antichristi. c. 14.
who is the King of all the children of pride, to wit, of the Masters and
Doctors in Divinity.

Again in another place he speaks to this purpose, Christ (says he) says,
Joh. 8. Neither came I of my self, but the Father sent me; so the Saints have
come in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the name of Jesus they have
performed their Priesthood, and he is the Crown of their glory: Ac per hoc
distinguuntur a quibusdam aliuade coronatis, ut Magistti and Doctores, and
Baccalaurei, nec non aliis varii generis titulorum in multiplici scientia hujus
mundi, etc.
and by this, they are distinguished from certain, who are otherwise crowned,
as Masters and Doctors, and Batchelors, and from others of other kind of
Titles, according to the manifold wisdom of this world: for these excelling
others by their pains, and through their own science and learning, are notably
beautified with their own titles and crowns, and therefore do rather perform
their office in their own name, then in Christ's. Thus he.

Luther Speaks much to this purpose also; Luther.
but I shall have occasion to use him more largely.

Zuinglius on that Scripture Mat. 23. Zuinglius. Audes hic bu^usmodi titulos
Magistrorum and Doctorum non ex Deo esse, quum Christus hoc vetat. Zuin.
Conradus Pellicane.

Melch. Adam. in vita Pellicane.


Be ye not called Doctor, for one is your master, Christ, etc. says thus: Thou
hear here, that these titles of Masters and Doctors, are not of God, seeing
Christ forbids them.

Conradus Pelican also, a godly preacher, having the sense of this on his
deathbed, desired his friends, that he might by no means be buried, as the
manner then was, in the habit of a Doctor, quia sperabat se resurrecturum ad
judicium non ut Doctorem, sed ut humilem Christianum; because he hoped he
should rise to judgment, not as a Doctor, but as a humble Christian.

Now me thinks, the clear and precious word of Christ alone, should take off
the Universities and Clergy, from giving and receiving these Degrees and
titles, if they do in good earnest profess themselves to be his Disciples; but
how much ought they to be ashamed and confounded, when they see other
believers, for the love of Christ and his word, utterly renouncing these things
before their faces, that they, if they persist, may be left wholly without
excuse before Christ and his Church.

And now for the conclusion of this matter, I shall hold forth to the
Universities, the true Degrees, which Christ the Son of God, did himself take
in the Church of God, and which all his Saints are to take after his example.

Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, the first and chief Teacher of the new
Testament, The true Divinity-degrees in the Church of God.
did neither commence Batchelour nor Doctor in Divinity, but he took five other
Degrees, wherein the University-Graduates are usually wanting.

Christ's first Degree in the Church was this, that He was the Son of God, as
the Lord said to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; and
again, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this is the
first Degree that Christ himself took in the Church, his Divine Sonship
according to his Humane nature. Christ's first degrees in the Church. His Divine
Sonship.
And this Degree all the faithful take with him, for they all are begotten of
God, and born of the immortal seed of his word, and their being the children of
God through faith, is the first Degree also, that they take in the Church.

2. Christ's second Degree in the Church, was his unction with the spirit, His
second degree. His Unction.
for being the Son of God, the spirit of God came and sat upon him in the
form of a Dove, which was his New Testament-Baptisme: and his first Degree was
confirmed to him by the Father, when he took this second; for whilst the spirit
rested on him, a voice from heaven said, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased.

And this second Degree also, all the faithful take with Christ, for they all
as his fellows, are anointed together with him, the chief among them; they as
members are anointed together with him the head, with the same oil of
gladness; and being sons, God sends the spirit of his Son into their hearts;
and the spirit of the Son in their hearts, is a sure testimony they are sons:
and their second degree also confirms their first; to wit, the Gift of the
spirit, their s^nship.

3. Christ's third degree was this, that after he was anointed by the Spirit,
and declared to be the Son of God, then for the proof of both, He was led by
the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, forty days and
nights together; and in all these temptations, His third degree. His victory
over temptation.
through his Sonship, and unction, he overcame the devil, and came away
Conqueror: And this was his third degree in the Church of God, that the
anointed Son of God, overcame the devil, in all the greatest and most grievous
temptations he could assault him with.

And this third degree also, all the faithful take with Christ; for when they
are the anointed Sons of God, Satan sets upon them, with all sorts of
Temptations, and they are led by the Spirit of God, to wrestle with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses set in high places, and
the rulers of the darkness of this world: and yet they in the strength of their
Sonship and unction with Christ, do also with him, tread Satan under their
feet, and go away Conquerors through the Grace of God in them; and this also is
their third degree in the true Church.

4 Christ's fourth degree in the Church was this, His fourth degree. His
teaching the word.
that after his Sonship, unction, and victory over the devil in all
Temptations, he then went forth as a fit and able Minister to teach the Gospel
of the Kingdom, against all the enmity and opposition of the world, Devil, and
false Church, as is taught us Mat. 4. v. 11. and 17.

And this fourth degree also, all the truly faithful take with Christ. For
after they through faith are the sons of God, and through their Sonship are
anointed, and through their unction, overcome the devil in all his Temptations,
then also they preach the Gospel of the kingdom, being all of them, a chosen
Generation, and royal priesthood, to show forth the virtues of him that has
called them out of darkness, into his marvelous light, as Peter testifies: and
they all speak as they do believe, and have experience: and their Sonship,
Unction, and Victory over temptation, is as sufficient a ground for them to
teach, as it was for Christ to teach; and so they without any regard of the
Laws of Antichrist, or Orders of the Clergy, go forth to teach the everlasting
Gospel, as Christ did before them; and this is the fourth degree of the
faithful in the Church.

5. Christ's fifth and last degree, which he took in the Church was this, that
he having both preached and lived the word, His fifth degree. His dying for the
word.
whereat the world and worldly Church were wholly offended, and enraged, did at
the last, willingly confirm his Doctrine with his death, and seal to the truth
of it, with his blood; exposing himself to the most shameful and ignominious
death of the cross, to confirm his Gospel to his Church; and this was the
highest and most glorious Degree that Christ took in his Church, as Christ
testifies, when speaking of his suffering, he says, Now is the hour come that
the Son of man should be glorified.

And this fifth degree also, all the truly faithful do take with Christ,
either in deed, if need require, or in preparation and readiness, and that
whilst they live in outward peace. All the blessed Martyrs have taken this
highest degree in the Church with Christ; and all the rest of his seed have
been, and are ready to take it also, when it is the good will of their heavenly
Father, seeing they can say in the same faith and spirit with Christ, even in
this matter, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not my
will, but thine be done: for they are come to do the will of him that sent
them, even to the laying down their lives.

Now these are the only degrees, that Christ himself took in the Church, and
which all the Saints take with him; and the true spiritual Church of believers,
allows and approves no other Degrees but these.

And what now are the University-Degrees in Divinity to these? they are Degrees
in Antichrists Church only, and every heathen or humane creature, Turk or
Infidel may take them as well as they, with a little time and pains, and money.

Wherefore (that I may turn my speech a little to the University) do thou
University lay this to heart, how much thou have departed from the Gospel of
Christ in this matter, as well as in all the rest; and have received the
Doctrine, and Laws, and Methods, and Manners of Antichrist, wherewith thou have
deceived thy self as well as the Nations. And thou University, have like thy own
mother Babylon, Mystery written on thy forehead, for thou have taken to thy
self this title, ALMA MATTER, the beautiful mother, which only belongs to
Jerusalem from above: and though thou have brought forth a company of
prodigious children, heathenish foolish, vain, vile and abominable, yet have
thou called them learned, and given them Degrees in Divinity, contrary to the
Degrees in the Gospel, and have sent them forth, into every City, County, Town,
and Village, as Ministers of Christ, yea as Sons of the morning, though
unbelievers and destitute of the spirit: And thus have thou deceived the
Nations, and given them a false Ministry in stead of a true, and by this false
Ministry, a false word in stead of the Gospel, and the world has not at any
time received a greater woe, nor more grievous plague then from thee: Wherefore
thus says the word of the Lord, The day of thy vengeance is coming, and the
years wherein thou shall be made desolate; and thy dainty and goodly things
shall depart from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all, and the voice
of Musicians and Pipers shall no more be heard in thee, for in thee is found
the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that have been slain upon the
earth: thy humane learning, to wit, thy Philosophy and School Divinity, and the
false Ministry that they have set up, and the false Christians, that have
proceeded from that Ministry, have devised and executed all these murders, and
massacres, on the true Saints of God.

FINIS.
Quis est sapiens and intelliget haec?

The Testimony of Martin Luther upon the whole matter, To wit, touching
Universities, Humane Learning, or Philosophy, Vniversity-Degrees, etc.
MArtin Luther in his Answer to Ambrosius Catharinus, expounding the Vision
concerning Antichrist, Dan. 8. speaks thus:

The twelfth and last face of Antichrist, is that Chaos, and open gate of Hell,
yet very comely to behold, to wit, the Universities, into which, perjurie, and
the abuse of Gods Name are the entrance, and the progress is a free and most
licentious conversation in all manner of wickedness. And yet under these sins
and destructions, Science and Sapience are promised. Yea Titles and Degrees are
given in stead of rewards.

But what do they perform at length? First, the more choice youth of christian
people are here prostituted, and are cast into the open throat of Hell, that I
verily think this destruction was figured by the Idol Moloch, to whom anciently
they made their choice children to pas^ through the fire. Afterward Aristotle
being read to them, and not rightly understood, the wits of christian youth are
exercised with heathenish and humane learning, yea, are quite blinded and
oppressed with it. And in stead of the Word of God, the doctrine of Antichrist
is delivered, that it may seem, the devil himself could not bring forth a more
subtle and effectual Invention and engine, Eutterly to extinguish the Gospel,
then to set up Universities. Wherein, under the pretense of Christian Doctrine,
nothing should be taught but that which is most contrary to the Christian
Faith. And if at any time it seems good to call forth the choicest to the
Government of the Churches, they call them out of these Stews and Dens.

And truly to me, this last face of Antichrist seems to be the most hurtful of
all, because this has the pretense of the Word, when all the rest have only
the color of Example; and this is plainly Schola Hidoth, the School of
Propositions, of which anon. For it is incomparably the greatest prejudice,
under the color of the Word, to teach things contrary to the Word; seeing the
face of E^amples is formed and strengthened by the face of the Word, which
otherwise would soon come to nothing, if the Word should reign in its genuine
sense; and also, seeing the pretense of Examples does only deceive the
manners, but the pretense of the Word, overthrows the Word. But if by any Grace
of God, the Universities should receive the Word (to wit, instead of Philosophy
and School Divinity) how soon would the Papacy, with all its faces or
appearances perish, seeing this face, to wit, the Universities, is the prop,
bones and whole strength of that kingdom of faces!

This deceitful face seems to be foretold Rev. 9. which Scripture it is worth
the while to rehearse, Rev. 9. from the first to the twelfth verse expounded by
Luther.
and a little to unfold, for John says, The first Angel sounded, and I saw a
star fall from heaven unto the earth, and to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit, Verse. 1.
etc. I will here make trial a little with my own apprehension. Now certain it
is, that by Angels through all the Apocalypse, is meant the Overseers of
Churches, as does plainly appear out of the second and third chapters, where it
is written to the Angel of Ephesus, Smyrna, and others. Further, that other
sort of Angels which sounds the Trumpet, of which there are seven mentioned,
chap. 8. cannot agree to any but the Roman Bishop, seeing no others are said to
sound with Trumpet. Now to sound with Trumpet, can be nothing else, as appears
by the consequence of the Text, and the following effects, then to make
Decrees, which none ever arrogated to himself, besides the Bishop of the Roman
Church. Neither is it said in vain, that they prepared themselves to sound,
see^ng chiefly in these Popes, there has been an impatient fury, and unquiet
Tyranny, to make Laws, and thereby to subject others to themselves.

But let us come to our first Angel, who was the first among three, who were to
bring three woes upon the earth, and this is He, who did first institute and
confirm Universities, whom it is not easy for me to name, Histories so varying
in this matter. But let him be whosoever he was, he was a star fallen from
heaven to earth, whether it were Alexander of Hales, or (which I rather think)
St. Thomas who only (after the Universities were approved, and this Angel had
sounded) was either the first, or chief Author of bringing in Philosophy into
the Christian world, being the most Aristotelian, yea plainly Aristotle
himself, to whom, as to the Earth, he fell from Christ the Heaven, having
obtained the authority of that most wicked Angel, approving such studies.

And he received the key of the bottomless pit, Ver. 2.
and opened it, and brought forth to us Philosophy, long ago dead and damned by
the Doctrine of the Apostles: and from thence ascended the smoke of that pit,
that is, the mere words and opinions of Aristotle and the Philosophers, as the
smoke of that great Furnace: for then Philosophy prevailed, and became of large
extent and power, so that Aristotle was made equal with Christ, in respect of
Authority and Faith. And hereby was the Sun darkened, (even Christ the Sun of
Righteousness and Truth; Moral virtues being brought in in stead of Faith, and
infinite Opinions instead of Truth) and the air also with the smoke of the
pit; that it may be understood, not to be an Eclipse of the Sun, but the
obscurity of the Air and Sun, by the smoke of the pit ascending, to wit,
humane Doctrines, obscuring Christ and his Faith, as the Sun and Air.

Ver. 3.
And out of the smoke of the pit, there came forth Locusts on the earth. Here
the people of the Universities, bred and born of Philosophy, are called Locusts
by a most fit name, because they are without a King, that is, Christ, and fly
in companies, as is said, Prove. 3. and also because they waste and burn up all
green things, wherever they light; and so the Grammarians think they have
their name Locustae, Locusts, a loco usto and vastato, from the place which
they burn and waste. And so, this people of the Universities, consumes and
burns up all the green pasture of Christ, that is, the fruit of Faith.

And power was given to them as the scorpions of the earth have power: to wit,
to wound the Consciences of men, because the green fruit of Faith being wasted,
which heals the Consciences of men, it cannot be but the Conscience must be
hurt and prejudiced.

Ver. 4.
And it was commanded them, that they should not hurt the grass of the earth,
nor any green thing; that is, that they should not hurt the Elect. For they do
not hurt all, neither do natural Locusts hu^t every green thing, but some
certain place: so it is here.

But only those men, who have not the mark or seal, of God in their foreheads;
that is, some grass they should hurt, to wit, those who have not Faith, which
is the mark of God, which we carry in a pure Conscience and free conversation,

Ver. 5.
And it was commanded them that they should not kill them, but only should
torment them five months. This seems to be spoken of Moral Doctrine, which
seeing it teaches us the knowledge of sin like the Law of God, it does not
kill, but only afflict a man with vain studies, wherein he is always learning,
and yet never coming to the knowledge of the truth: for they being killed with
the Letter, are quickened with the eternal Spirit, only they are tormented five
months, that is, the whole time of their sensual life, in which moral Virtues
reign. And we see by experience that all Moral Divines, are of a most evil and
unhappy Conscience, full of scruples and unquietness, and have power neither of
good nor evil: and therefore it follows,

And their torment is, as the torment of a Scorpion when it strikes a man.
Behold here a wounded conscience: for here he expounds what he had said before,
that they are not savingly killed, nor spiritually quickened.

And in those days men shall seek death and shall not find it, and shall
desire to dye, Verse. 6.
and death shall flee from them: to wit, the death of sin, which does too much
live in the conscience, and yet is not rightly known; for if it were known,
presently it being slain would perish: but this cannot Aristotle's Ethics do,
but it is the office of the Letter and the Spirit.

And the shapes of the Locusts were like to horses prepared to battle, to wit,
of Scholastical disputation and conflict. Verse. 7.
Praeparatis in praelium, and armatis omni genere Doctrinae, and art loquendi,
arguendi, respondendi, exhortandi^ potentes sunt ad invedendum and defendendum
quamcunque velint veritaelem, aut speciem veritatis, armati nihil ominus omni
apparentia fa^etiae and honestalis. J. Hus. Et super capita little Coronae: i.
e. Tituli Magistrales, vel dignitatum and graduum in Ecclesia investitura. J.
Hus.
He describes the war by this Allegory; for they are ready to argue pro and
contra (as they speak.) And on their heads were as it were crowns of gold: that
is, the Names and Titles of Degrees, as, Magister noster eximius: sacrae
Theologiae humilis and indignus professor, etc. that is, Our famous Master: and
the humble and unworthy professor of sacred Theology, and the like. And these
crowned ones, John Hus called Hypocritas Coronatos, Crowned Hypocrites: and by
reason of these Crowns, they have Authority and power among the multitudes of
carnal Christians, who are willing to entertain Antichrists pomp, into
Christ's Church. Yet have they not true crowns, but as it were Crowns of Gold,
which they are very proud of, and are much pufft up with them, though usually,
they are set on the head, of Ignorance and Error.

And their faces are like the faces of men, because their doctrine and life is
governed, not by the spirit of faith, but by the dictate of natural reason, and
by the light of nature illuminated by Aristotle.

And they had hairs like the hairs of women. For Philosophy brings forth
effeminate Ministers, given to ease and luxury; and in whom is nothing of
spirit, nor of manly abilities in Christ. For the haired are Priests, Verse. 8.
as you may see Psalm. 68. Isa. 3. and in other places.

And their teeth are like the teeth of Lions: consider only the Thomists in
stead of all other Divines; whether they be not biting, slanderous, and
devourers of all that speak a word against Aristotle's Divinity. Yea the
Thomists, Scotists and Modern men, bite one another among themselves, and
sharpen against one another, not any teeth, but the teeth of Lions, neither is
there any sort of men which war more fiercely or with greater hatred, then
those Sects of Divines, each of which desire to devour the other, that it may
reign alone.

And they have brestplates as it were brestplates of iron, and this is the
pertinacious and confident presumption of each Sect, Verse. 9.
on the truth and soundness of his opinion: and by these iron brestplates they
are unconquerable: and these are the Principles of each Sect.

And the sound of their wings was as the sound of Chariots, and of many horses
running to battle: the wings are the words of these that dispute and conflict,
by which they do impetuously, brawlingly and clamorously rush on one another
and fight: as we see in the tumults of Disputants both by words and writings,
where neither yields to neither, but each one is unconquerable. For he
signifies this pertinacious affection of disputing, by the rushing of chariots
and horsemen.

And they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were stings in their tails,
Verse. 10.
and their power was to hurt men five months. Here he explaines what before he
had propounded, to wit, that the fruit and end of this Divinity is nothing but
evil consciences, during all the time of the sensual lives of men. For that
Divinity is an abomination to those who are spiritual, because these are
without the bounds of the five months, in the spirit of Liberty.

Verse. 11.
And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose
name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon. Here we may learn that the
Rector General of all Universities, is not Christ nor the holy Spirit, nor any
Angel of God, but an Angel of the bottomless pit, that is, one that is dead,
and is among the dead and damned. Who is it then? even that Light of nature, to
wit, Aristotle, who does truly reign in the Universities, as Abaddon, and
Apollyon, that is, a Waster and Destroyer of the Church. For we have said that
an Angel signifies a Teacher or a Doctor in the Church. And certain it is, that
Aristotle who is dead and damned, is at this day the great Doctor of all the
Universities rather then Christ; for he reign^ alone, being exalted by the
Authority and study of Thomas, reviving freewill, and teaching moral virtues
and natural Philosophy, to wit, the three-headed Cerberus, or three-bodied
Gerion.

Behold the first no which the Church has from the Romish Antichrist by the
Ministry of Saint Thomas: and they whose duty it was chiefly to have
prohibited and extinguished these things, they chiefly have erected and
established them.

Thus Luther, Luthers second Testimony.
word for word, in the forenamed place. He also in his book De abroganda missa
privata, speaking of the Idol M^loch, says thus:

Moses and Jeremy have described the worship of this Idol to be after this
manner, that they did burn or offer to him their children in the fire,
supposing that hereby they did perform the greatest and highest service to God,
inasmuch as after the example of Abraham they do not spare their own children,
though they do this, not only not being called as Abraham was, but also
without faith, and in the highest wickedness; and therefore the Psalmist
testifies, Psalm. 78. That they offered not their children to God, but to
Devils. For whatsoever is not done by the call and command of God, is not done
to God but devils, who suggest this, though it be done under pretense of the
name of God.

Now hereby (says he) I conceive the Universities to be represented, in which
the best and choicest part of Christian youth is offered, as it were in burnt
sacrifice to God, that there they may be instructed, and be made as it were
wholly divine. For the common people believe there is no place under heaven, in
which youth can be better instructed, so that even religious people have
recourse hither. For to learn any thing out of the University, is to learn
nothing: but to have studied in the University, is to know all things. There
all Divine and Humane things are believed to be taught: for no man sends his
son hither with any other opinion then this, that he can nowhere be better
sent. They think they perform the highest service to God, that they offer
their sons to be formed according to the instruction of godliness, that thereby
they may become profitable and useful Ministers, Preachers, Governors, who may
wholly become Gods own portion, and be useful both to God and men.

And hereto appertains the name Moloch, which signifies a King, or kingly,
because this kind of study does honor them with Degrees and Promotions, and
renders them fit and able to govern others. For we see that all that are
preferred to Governments, are taken out of Universities: and he that is not a
Graduate or Member of an University, is not qualified for preferment, or to be
set over any people: but let the Ass first be crowned (to wit, with a Degree)
and then let him reign.

And parents do not see, and they that do see, do not regard, that youth are
usually here destroyed, though rude and vile manners, none commonly forbidding
them. Yea fornications, luxury, and other manifest sins do but mildly destroy
them, but that they are endued and possessed with Philosophical, heathenish,
humane, wicked, and impious opinions, this is the fire of Moloch, which no
tears can sufficiently bewail, seeing through this they especially are devoured
and perish, who are the most studious and modest youth in Universities. So
great is the fury of God upon this Valley of Tophet and Hinnom, that they
perish more grievously who learn most, and live modestly, then they who learn
nothing and are corrupted with lusts. For these learn nothing which is to be
unlearned again, seeing they know they do evil; whereas the other suck in
poison which happily or never they do vomit up again, holding that for good
which is evil, and instructing those with the like opinions, whom they take to
teach.

And to these pits of Hell it is to be imputed, that the Sun of the Gospel is
obscured with the smoke of the pit: Ut Academiis, ab initio mundi, satanas
nihil excogitaret praesentius, ad vastandum fidem and Evangelium toto orb.
for out of this smoke proceed those Locusts, which possess all Chairs, and
Pulpits, and administer all Governments, that Satan from the beginning of the
world, could devise nothing in all the world more strong and pernicious to
waste Faith and the Gospel, then Universities, Neither was it meet that this
evil should arise, but in the end of the world, when the world through the
prevailing of sin, being laden with the wrath of God, should draw near to hell
and damnation. For the miserable people must needs hear those things taught and
delivered out of the Pulpits, which those Molochites have learned in the
Universities. And they have learned nothing but the highest blasphemies of God.
Neither is it lawful to have anywhere any other Pastor then these.

In Jeremiah that valley is called Gehinnom, from whence Christ took that word
Gehenna, which what it signifies, I do not well know: but it seems to me to
come from Janah, which signifies to eat up; or to pill, or waste, as Tyrants or
Usurers, do pill and suck out the people: so that Gehinnom is the valley of
pilling or wasting the people, for these being set over the people as
shepherds, ought to feed them with the word of life, and they in stead thereof,
do insensibly waste and devour them, in their body, goods, and soul, with the
pestilent Doctrines of Universit^es. And such Teachers do the Univesities,
those S^nagogues of perdition, give us. Thus Luther.

These now are Luthers own words, which I have made legible to English men.
Wherein it is manifest that he condemns the Universities in the very
institution and constitution of them, and chiefly in their chief studies,
Humane Learning, and School Divinity, and also, as to that gross popish
Opinion, that they are the Fountain and Nurseries of the Ministry: and that
none are fit to teach, or so fit to teach, as those that have been educated in
them. Yea though these be raw, foolish, ignorant fellows, yet being
University-Graduates must they be set over Towns and Parishes, and the
miserable people must not only hear them and their doltish Doctrine brought
from the Uni^ersities, but also must be constrained by secular power and Laws,
to pay them well for such pains, which tends only to the ruin of their souls
for ever: and no hand is yet strongly and resolutely stretched out to deliver
the people from this intolerable bondage. For the necks of the people of the
world have never endured so grievous a yoke from any Tyrants, as from the
Doctrine and Domination of the Clergy. For worldly Tyrants, have only
afflicted men's bodies and temporal estates, which reached but to this short
life: but these spiritual Tyrants, the Clergy or false Ministry, when they
have got countenance, strength, and aid, from the wordly Magistrates, how have
they with their Academical, Philosophical, Heathenish Divinity, infected,
poisoned, and destroyed the people to eternal death, and no body durst shun
them, upon pain of temporal death or punishments. But now through the great
goodness of God, and his mighty Providence and Works from heaven, it is a more
happy age: and happy shall they be, who being called forth, shall do the work
of God against all discouragements and difficulties, and shall not with Ephraim
being harnessed turn their backs in the day of battle.

And now to return to our business again touching the Universities, let none
object that Luther speaks against Popish Universities only, for this is but a
weak and simple Defense, and altogether unable to ward off the mighty blow of
Gods word, from their heads and hearts. For the things condemned in the
foregoing Testimonies of Luther, are the self same for the substance of them,
as do live, prevail, and flourish in our present Universities, as has been
before declared, and I leave it to every faithful Christian to judge the truth
in this matter. But men would feign preserve their Titles, Degrees, Authority,
Dignity, State, Stipends, and therefore for defense of these things, they must
needs say something, though it be to never so little purpose: but yet by such
discourse they sufficiently declare how cool and icie they are for Christ's
interest, and how zealous for their own.

But certain it is, that as the Universities were set up at first as nurseries
for Antichrists kingdom, men being therein so educated (according to the
undertaking of Charles the great) in Philosophy and School Divinity, that it
might be said to them, Vos estis sal terrae, and lux mundi, Ye are the salt of
the earth, and the light of the world (which yet only agrees to the faithful
who are born of God) so have they still remained the same hitherto in
substance, though not without some small change of outward form.

For first, the Philosophy taught and studied in the University is the very
same that it was at first, The University-Philosophy.
and this Philosophy is nothing but the Religion of the heathen, for what the
Law was to the Jews, and the Gospel is to the Christians, Philosophy was and is
to the heathen; and in this study the poor lads wast the flower and cream of
their lives, to no purpose, but to make them more heathenish, corrupt, and
bold, then they were by nature. And,

2. For their Divinity which they usually learn in the Universities, The
Un^versi^y-Divinity.
out of the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Systems; and in which they are trained up,
to dispute either for it, or against it in the Schools (it being in
seriousnes^, all one to them what they hold and maintain in Religion, seeing
all is but opinion to them) and which they after teach to the peole, with
special regard to their own profit and advantage, this is not the true word,
and Ministry of the Gospel. For the Gospel is the word of faith, which word,
is the word in our hearts, according to the tenor of the New Covenant, wherein
God says, I will write my law in their hearts, and put it in their inward
parts; But now the University-Divines, the Truth being indeed dead in their
hearts, and having no presence nor power there, they take it up out of the
books and writings of men, wherein it has been buried, and by this means bring
forth a dead Doctrine to the world (which other men have spoken, but they have
no experience of) and not the word of life, which has quickened them; but
only a dead Letter, raised up like the l^ving Letter, which they present to
them, as the W^t^h of Endor raised up a dead Samuel in the outward habit and
appearance of the living Samuel, and presented him to Saul: so these
University-Divines bring forth the outward garments and appearance of the Truth
to the people, when they do best, but the substance, soul, and life of the
truth, they cannot bring forth, because they have not the l^ving word of God in
their hearts, but have only a dead word, which they gather out of the books
and writings of men. And this is the University-D^vinity.

And Lastly, The Preachers which the Universities send forth, The
University-Preachers.
are usually in the greatest enmity to Christ and his Gospel, of all other men
whatsoever, and do bring greatest prejudice to Christ's Kingdom, and advantage
to Antichrists. For when men without learning, and yet without the Spirit of
Christ, will undertake to teach the people (as many also now do) their
Ignorance is manifest to all, and is judged of all, and they through their
rudeness can never long deceive the world; but now, when men are as destitute
of the Spirit as they, and yet have Humane Learning, and the Letter of the word
in a Philosophical sense to help them, this is that that indangers and deceives
the world, the people supposing the doctrine of the Gospel according to
Philosophical learning, to be the Ministration of the spirit, and to be
sufficiently enough to instruct the Church. And so Antichrists kingdom is set
up with credit and renown by these: whereas the Ignorant Teachers, who are
destitute of the Spirit, are able to do him no considerable service. But Christ
will not have the Learned men to be Teachers in his Church through their
Learning, and as little will he have Ignorant men to teach in his Church,
because of their Ignorance; but whether men be learned or ignorant according to
the world, it is no matter in Christ's Church, where each man is to speak in the
Spirit of Christ, which makes alike, both the Ignorant and the Learned, wise in
Christ: and so the Learned man becomes Ignorant in the Church to be Learned in
Christ, and the Ignorant man without worldly Learning, forthwith becomes wise
in Christ; and the Learned and the Ignorant meet together only in the wisdom
of Christ, which is the wisdom of God, and swallows up at once, all the
Learning and Ignorance of the world alike, and will have all wise alone in it
self.

Wherefore all Universities being left and forsaken as to this matter, let
Learned and Ignorant men come alike to Christ to be made wise in him, who is
made unto us of God, our only wisdom.

FINIS.
THE Right Reformation of Learning, Schools and Universities according to the
State of the Gospel, and the True Light that shines therein.
THough I do not pretend to that wisdom which might direct the world ( farther
then the word of God is with me) yet shall I be bold, as one who desires to be
faithful to Christ, and profitable to his true Church, to offer my
apprehensions and advice, to the Called, Chosen, and faithful Ones of Christ,
that either now are, or hereafter may be in Authority in these Nations,
touching the instructing youth, and ordering Schools.

1. First, therefore, as to this matter, I do judge, there neither is, nor can
be, any greater evil then to bring up children in ease and idleness, and that
they should have nothing to do, but to do nothing; and to live freely and
without control, according to those natural lusts and corruptions which they
bring along with them, into the world, which do soon wonderfully improve
through such a careless and unnurtured life. And such children and youth,
usually become an early prey to the devil, who readily fills them, with all the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of the heathen.

2. I conceive it meet, that the Civil power, or chief Magistrates, should take
great care of the education of youth, as of one of the greatest works that
concerns them, and as one of the worthiest things they can do in the world;
inasmuch as what the youth now is, the whole Commonwealth will shortly be.

3. To this end, it is meet that Schools (if wanting) be erected through the
whole nation, and that not only in Cities and great Towns, but also (as much
as may be) in all lesser Villages: And that the Authority of the Nation take
great care, that godly men especially, have the charge of greater Schools; and
also that no women be permitted to teach little children in Villages, but such
as are the most sober and grave; and that the Magistrate afford to this work,
all suitable encouragement and assistance.

4. That in such Schools, they first teach them to read their native tongues,
which they speak without teaching; and then presently as they understand, bring
them to read the HOLY SCRIPTURES, which though for the present they understand
not, yet may they (through the blessing of God) come to understand them
afterward.

5. That in Cities and greater Towns, where are the greater Schools, and the
greater opportunities to send children to them, they teach them also the
Latin, and Greek tongues, and the Hebrew also, which is the easiest of them
all, and ought to be in great account with us, for the Old Testaments sake. And
it is most heedfully to be regarded, that in teaching youth the Tongues, to
wit, the Greek and Latin, such heathenish Authors, be most carefully avoided,
be their Language never so good, whose writings are full of the fables,
vanities, filthiness, lasciviousness, idolatries, and wickedness of the
heathen. Seeing usually, whilst youth do learn the Language of the heathen,
they also learn their wickedness in that Language; whereas it were far better
for them to want their Language, then to be possessed with their wickedness.
And what should Christian youth have to do with the heathenish Poets, who were
for the most part the Devils Prophets, and delivered forth their writings in
his spirit, and who through the smoothness, quaintness, and sweetness of their
language, do insensibly instill the poison of lust and wickedness into the
hearts of youth; whereby their Education, which ought to correct their natural
corruption, does exceedingly increase and inflame it.

Wherefore my counsel is, that they learn the Greek and Latin tongues,
especially from Christians, and so without the lies, fables, follies, vanities,
whoredoms, lust, pride, revenge, etc. of the heathens; especially seeing
neither their words nor their phrases, are meet for Christians to take into
their mouths: and most necessary it is, that Christians should forget the names
of their Gods and Muses, (which were but Devils and damned Creatures) and all
their Muthology and fabulous inventions,, and let them all go to Satan, from
whence they came.

6. It may be convenient also, that there may be some Universities or
Colleges, for the instructing youth in the knowledge of the l^beral Arts,
beyond Grammar and Rhetoric; as in Logic; which as it is in Divinity (as one
calls it) gladius Diaboli, the Devils sword, so in humane things, if it may be
of good use, if Reason manage that Art of Reason: but the Mathematics
especially are to be had in good esteem in Universities, as Arithmet^ck,
Geometry, Geography, and the like, which as they carry no wickedness in them,
so are they besides very useful to humane Society, and the affairs of this
present life.

There may be also in these Universities or Colleges, allowed the studies of
Physic, and of the Law, according to that Reformation which a wise and godly
Authority will cause them to pass under, both being now exceedingly corrupt and
out of order, both for practice and fees.

7. But why these Universities or Colleges should be only at Cambridge and
Oxford, I know no reason; Nay, if humane learning be so necessary to the
knowledge and teaching of the Scriptures, as the Universities pretend, they
surely are without love to their brethren, who would have these studies thus
confined to these places, and do Juramentum Magistrorum in receptionibus and
resumptionibus sol^nnibus. Jurent etiam, quod extra is^an Vniv^rsitatem nusquam
alibi in Anglia, praeterquam Oxoniae, in aliqua facultate incipi^^l, ou^
Lectiones suas solcuniter resum^nt, nec consenticut quod aliquis a libi in
Anglia incipiens, hic pro Magistro in illa feculiate habeatur.
swear men to read and teach them nowhere else: certainly it is most manifest,
that these men love their own private gain, more then the common good of the
people. But now seeing by the hand of God, a Kingdom is turned into a
Commonwealth, and Tyranny into freedom, we judge it most prejudicial to the
common good of a Commonwealth, that these two Universities should make a
Monopoly of Humane Learning to themselves, especially (as is said) seeing they
say, no body can well understand or teach the Scriptures without it; and so by
reason of this their incroachment, against the rule of love, through the former
Grants of Popes and King^, all men should be necessitated to send their
children hither from all parts of the Nation, some scores or hundred mile^, for
liberal education, to the great trouble and charge of Parents: especially this
considered, that the Universities usually, have been places of great
licentiousness and profaness, whereby it often comes to pass, that Parents
sending them children far from them, young and hopeful, have for all their care
and cost, after several years received them back again with their tongues and
Arts, proud, profane, wicked, ab^minable, and incorrigible wretches.

Wherefore doubtless it would be more suitable to a Commonwealth (if we become
so indeed, and not in word only) and more advantageous to the good of all the
people, to have Universities or Colleges, one at least in every great town or
City in the Nation, as in London, York, Bristow, Exceter, Norwich, and the
like; and for the State to allow to these Colleges an honest and competent
maintenance, for some godly and learned men to teach the Tongues and Arts,
under a due reformation. And this the State may the better do (by provision out
of every County, or otherwise, as shall be judged best) seeing there will be no
need of indowment of Scholarships, inasmuch as the people having Colleges in
their own cities, near their own houses, may maintain their children at home,
whilst they learn in the Schools; which would be indeed, the greatest advantage
to learning that can be thought of.

8. It would also be considered, whether it be according to the word of God,
that youth should spend their time, only in reading of books, whilst they are
well, strong, active, and fit for business. For commonly it so falls out, that
youth lose as much by idleness, as they gain by study. And they being only
brought up to read books, and such books as only contain wrangling, jangling,
foolish, and unprofitable Philosophy, when they have continued any long time in
the University in these unwarranted courses by God, they are commonly in the
end, fit for no worthy employment either in the world, or among the faithful.

To remedy which great evil, Colleges, being (as has been spoken) dispersed
through the great cities and towns of the Commonwealth, it may be so ordered,
that the youth according to Luthers counsel) may spend some part of the day in
learning or study, Luther. libel. de Instituend. puer.
and the other part of the day, in some lawful calling, or one day in study,
and another in business, as necessity or occasion shall require.

And thus shall youth be delivered from that ease and idleness, which fills the
hearts of University-Students with many corruptions, and noisome lusts, whilst
they fill their heads only with empty knowledge and foolish notions; whereby
neither can God be glorified, nor their neighbor profited.

9. And if this course were taken in the d^sposing and ordering Colleges, and
studies, it would come to pass that twenty would learn then, where one learns
now, and also by degrees, many men, (on whom God shall please to pour forth his
Spirit) may grow up to teach the people, whilst yet they live in an honest
calling and employment, as the Apostles did. And this would give them great
efficacy and power in teaching, whilst they lived by faith, through their
honest labor, and were delivered from the mischief of idleness: But and if the
faithful shall desire any one, that is more apt to teach, and has received a
greater measure of the anointing* then his brethren, to spend more of his time
in the word and prayer, then his calling will afford, at such times they ought
to supply him: and the law of love in the hearts of the faithful, will be law
enough in this matter, without calling in the aid of the Magistrate.

And by this means may the chargeable and burdensome maintenance of Ministers,
by degrees be taken away, and the Church of Christ, and the very nations
themselves, be supplied with a more faithful, Christian, and spiritual
Ministry then now it has, at a far less rate. For God has promised in the
last days, to pour out his Spirit on all flesh, and the sons and daughters,
and servants and handmaids shall prophecy, and then shall knowledge cover the
earth as waters the seas.

Now for conclusion, I do conceive that none of the faithful and wise, have any
just cause to be offended for speaking for the use of humane learning in this
reformed way, which the Gospel will permit, seeing by this means these two
errors of Antichrist would be dissolved among us; the one of making
Un^versities the fountain of the Ministry; which one thing, is, and will be
more and more (as Christ's Kingdom shall rise up and prevail in the world) a
millstone about their necks; and the other, of making the Clergy a distinct Sect
or Order, or Tribe, from other Christians, contrary to the simplicity of the
Gospel.

2. Let the faithful consider that this reformed use of Tongues and Arts,
justly has its place in the world. For if all men cannot be Chr^stians (as
Paul says all men have not faith) yet let them be Men, and improved in the use
of reason, and sober learning, where by they may be serv^ceable to the
Commonwealth in their age, whilst the Church of Christ has its own members and
officers, through the call of God, and unction of his Spirit only. For
Sufficit autem ut homines de his rebus, (scil. de artibus and scientiis)
quantum in Schola diclicerunt, noverint propter usus humanos. August. in act.
contr. Felicem.
humane learning has it is place and use among humane things, but has no place
nor use in Christ's Kingdom, as has been sufficiently proved.

And thus, have I freely offered my advice for mending things that are amiss,
and making strait the things that are crooked in this matter.

FINIS.

