Lord Del -- r's Speech.
THE occasion of this, is to give you my Thoughts upon the present juncture,
which concerns not only you, but every Protestant, and Freeborn man of
England, I am confident, that wishes well to the Protestant Religion and his
Country; and I am persuaded, that every man of you thinks both in danger, and
now to lie at stake. I am also persuaded, that every man of you will rejoice to
see Religion and Property settled; if so, then I am not mistaken in my
Conjectures concerning you. Can you ever hope for a better occasion to root out
POPERY and SLAVERY, than by joining with the P. of O. whose Proposals contain
and speak the desires of every man that loves his Religion and Liberty? And in
saying this, I will invite you to nothing but what I will do my self; and I
will not desire any of you to go any further than I will move my self; neither
will I put you upon any danger where I will not take share in it. I propose
this to you, not as you are my Tenants, but as my Friends, and as you are
Englishmen. No man can love fighting for its own sake, nor find any Pleasure in
Danger. And you may imagine, I would be very glad to spend the rest of my days
in Peace, I having had so great a share in Troubles; but I see all lies at
stake, I am to choose whether I will be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant
and a Freeman, and therefore the Case being thus, I shall think my self false
to my Country, if I sit still at this time. I am of Opinion, that when the
Nation is delivered, it must be by force or by miracle; it would be too great a
presumption to expect the latter, and therefore our Deliverance must be by
force, and I hope this is the time for it; a price is now put into our hands,
and if it miscarry for want of Assistance, our blood is upon our own heads; and
he that is passive at this time, may very well expect that God will mock when
the fear of Afflictions comes upon him, which he thought to avoid by being
indifferent. If the K. prevails, farewell Liberty of Conscience, which has
hitherto been allowed, not for the sake of the Protestants, but in order to
settle Popery. You may see what to expect if he get the better; and he has
lately given you, of this Town, a taste of the Method whereby he will maintain
his Army. And you may see of what sort of people he intends his Army to
consist, and if you have not a mind to serve such Masters, then stand not by
and see your Countrymen perish, when they are endeavoring to defend you. I
promise this on my Word and Honor, to every Tenant that goes along with me,
That if he fall, I will make his Lease as good to his Family, as it was when he
went from home. The thing then which I desire, and your Country does expect
from you, is this, That every Man that has a tolerable Horse, or can procure
one, will meet me on Boden-Downs, to morrow, where I Randezvouze: But if any of
you is rendered unable by reason of Age, or any other just Excuse, then that he
would mount a fitter Person, and put five Pounds in his Pocket. Those that have
not, nor cannot procure Horse, let them stay at home, and assist with their
Purses, and send it to me with a particular of every man's Contribution. I
impose on no man, but let him lay his hand on his Heart, and consider what he
is willing to give to recover his Religion and Liberty; and to such I promise,
and to all that go along with me, that if we prevail, I will be as Industrious
to have him recompensed for his Charge and Hazard, as I will be to seek it for
my self. This Advice I give to all that stay behind, That when you hear the
Papists have committed any Outrage, or any Rising, that you will get together;
for it is better to meet your Danger than expect it. I have no more to say, but
that I am willing to lose my Life in the Cause, if God see it good, for I was
never unwilling to dye for my Religion and Country.

FINIS.

