AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Occasional Conformity OF DISSENTERS, IN Cases of
Preferment, WITH A Preface to the Lord Mayor, Occasioned by his carrying the
Sword to a Conventicle.

If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. 1 Kings 18. 21.

DUBLIN: Reprinted by J. B. and S. P. at the Back of Dick's Coffee-House in
Skinner Row, for Jacob Milner, Bookseller in Essex-street, M DC XC VIII.

THE PREFACE.
My LORD,

I Know not that the following Sheets will at all affect Your Lordship, for I
cannot say, That Your Lordship did Communicate with the Dissenters before, or
does with the Church now; nor does it Import much whether you did either. The
Discourse is not meant for a Satyr on, Your Lordship, nor upon any Man else;
neither has it any Double Aspect, but directly Points at the Fact, which
whether it be a Crime or not, let their Consciences judge, who know themselves
Guilty.

My Lord, the Step Your Lordship made into the Chair, had something in it of
Surprise, and Your Management of it has more. The Figure Your Lordship made,
when You were the Man whom the King delighted to Honor, was very Magnificent;
and we find, that since that, Your Lordship does not bear the Sword in vain.

I bear Your Lordship Testimony, That I never heard any Man reflect, either on
Your Lordship's Morals or Management, (since Your being Lord Mayor) save only
in the Matter of Pinners-Hall: And since no body has opened their Mouths on
Your Lordship 's Behalf, I humbly crave leave to be Your Lordship 's Advocate
in one Point. One Principal Allegation against Your Lordship, is, That you
forced the Pious Conscientious Mr. M -- to the Meeting House, and there
enclosed him, nolens volens, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of an Act
of Parliament, in that Case made and Provided; Entitled, An Act for Liberty of
Conscience, etc. And that at the same time, Your Lordship caused the Sword
(that very Individual Sword, that had the Honor to be carried so far before
the King) even the City Sword of State, to be carried to a Conventicle or
Meeting House, called Pinners-Hall.

My Lord, I own the Fact in Your Lordship 's behalf, that Your Lordship 's
Sword and Sword Bearer was there; and I can find out but two Clauses in which
Your Lordship can be charged with a Mistake.

One is in forcing that Good Man against his Conscience. Liberty of Conscience
is a thing, that Gentleman, I confess, never was fond of. But since it is now
become every Subjects right, it is hard Your Lordship should refuse it Mr. M --.

But now, My Lord, I must crave the freedom to inform Your Lordship, That Mr. M
--, and Your Lordship, are exactly under the same Predicaments as to Liberty;
for if Your Lordship has, against his Will, obliged him to go to Pinners-Hall;
Your Lordship seems in as large a measure to be imposed upon, in being obliged
to go to the Cathedral Worship of St. Paul's.

Till Your Lordship arrived at the Magnitude You now sit in, You never suffered
Your self to be abridg'd of Your Liberty; and shall Your Power be Great in
every thing, but in the Management of Your self.

My Lord, either Your Profession before was Bad or Good: If it was Bad, Your
Lordship does well to alter it, and would do better to do so wholly. If 'twas
Good, why does Your Lordship alter it at all? But I beg leave of Your Lordship
to consider how 'twas possible to be both Good and Bad too? That Your Lordship
should Worship God one way in the Morning, and another in the Afternoon. My
Lord, Your Elevated Station places You above the Fear of Man, and he that is
above Fear, is above Shame. If Your former Profession was Good, Your Lordship
need never be ashamed of it: If 'twas Bad, You need not be ashamed to mend it,
for no wise Man is ashamed of growing wiser.

Humane Politics seldom agree with Nice Consciences; and if I could entertain
such base Thoughts, as to believe Your Lordship designs by this to gain
Parties, and make both Your Friends; I would think it also needful to assure
Your Lordship, that by it You will most effectually lose both Parties; but Your
Lordship is wiser than to need that Admonition. Your Lordship never was a
Trimmer in Your Life, and certainly You will not Trim it with Your Maker.

I neither press Your Lordship to go to Church or Meeting, but to use the
Authority Man has given you to procure Your self the freedom of using the
Judgment God has given You; That honest Mr. Sword Bearer may have his Liberty,
and Your Lordship Your own.

We were in hopes when Your Lordship first appeared in the Quire at Paul's,
that you were effectually convinced of your former Error, as a Dissenter; and
that Noble Quire should have been graced at its first Opening with so Noble a
Convert, as Your Lordship; but since we find Your Lordship is pleased to
practice such Latitudinarian Principles, as to be a Conformist in the Morning,
and a Nonconformist before Night; it puts us upon considering what this new
sort of a Religion that looks two ways at once, means.

The following Sheets, if Your Lordship should give Your self the trouble of
reading them, will directly point out to Your Lordship what is meant by this
blunt Preface. In short, That the Church or the Meeting House, is the
Placewhere Your Lordship may Worship, but that both Church and Meeting House,
at the same time, is preposterous, Derogatory to the Character of Your Lordship
's Wisdom, a Scandal upon the Grandeur of the Principal Magistrate of the City;
and a slight put upon God himself, as if Your Lordship were very indifferent
which way You did it, and consequently, whether you did it at all, or not.

Your Lordship sits in a Chair of Great Authority, and the Respect due to You
is Great, and your Example is very significant. Wherefore it is the Author's
humble Request to Your Lordship, That you will be pleased to consider, whether
the Example Your Lordship now sets us, is such as You would really advise any
body to follow, and if not, I have no more to say to the Matter; But that I am,

Your Lordship's Most Humble Servant, One, Two, Three, Four.

A DISCOURSE UPON Occasional Conformity.
WHEN I review the Past Times, and look back upon the various Scenes, which
they present us, as to Ecclesiastical Transactions within this Kingdom, there
seems nothing more strange than the Turns we have had from Popish to Regal
Supremacy, from the Romish Religion to Reformed, from Reformed back again to
Romish, and then to Reformed again, and so on through several Degrees of
Reformation, and back again from those Degrees to the first Steps of
Reformation, and then forward again.

King Henry the 8th, a Prince of a haughty Spirit, disdaining the Insolence
with which his Predecessors were treated by the Popes, gave the first shock to
the Roman Power in these Kingdoms. I will not say he acted from any Principles of
Conscience, whatever his Ambition and Interest led him to pretend, but that, as
it is in most Cases of Public Revolutions, was the Gloss; however it was,
having satisfied his Pride by subduing the Supremacy of the Pop and
Establishing his own; his Interest next guided him to the Suppression Abbeys
and Monasteries; the horrible Vices which were protected, as were as practiced
in those Nests of Superstition, giving his pretense of Piety a larger Scope;
and I Will for once be so free with the Character of that Prince as to suppose
what to me seems plain, that neither This Religion, or That, (...) of much
moment in his thoughts, but his Interest, as the Sequel made plain, by Seizure
he made of the Revenues of the Church. And yet the Justice Providence seemed
very conspicuous in that point, That those Houses who (...) the specious
pretenses of Religion and extraordinary Devotion, have massed to themselves
vast Revenues to the Impoverishing many (...) and in the mean time practiced
secretly most unheard of Wickedness, (...) under the same pretense of Zeal and
Piety be suppressed and impoverished by a Person, who merely to serve his own
Glory, triumphed over them, tending, Jehu like, to show his Zeal for the Lord.

Some do assure us, That the Eyes of this Prince were really opened as to the
Point of Religion; and that had he lived longer, he would most effectually have
established the Reformation in his time; but God, who gave him that light, if
he had it, however he might accept his Intention, as he did that of David's
building his House, yet he reserved the Glory of the Performance to his Son.

King Edward the 6th, of whom wondrous things are spoken in all our English
Writers, and more than we need suppose should be literally true; yet was,
without doubt, a Prince of the strictest Piety, not only that ever reigned, but
that ever lived, perhaps, since the Days of Josiah, whose Parallel our Writers
say he was.

The Reformation began in his hand; not but that the Protestant Religion had
been received in England many years before, by the preaching of John Wickliff,
William Tindall, and others, and had many Professors, and those such, who
gailantly offered their Lives in defense of the Truth.

But it got but little ground; for Religion has but few Votaries, while all its
Professors must also be Confessors, and while Exile or Martyrdom is all the
present prospect of Advantage to be got by it.

None will dare to be Dissenters in times of Danger, but such whose Consciences
are so awakened that they dare not be otherwise.

But in the Hands of this young Prince, the great work was begun, and in a
shorter time than could be imagined, was finished and established; the
Romanists fled or conformed; for we find but very few had any Inclination to
Martyrdom if it had been put upon them. Some indeed to show the Nature of their
Religion, Pleaded for Baal, and rebelled, stirring up the Ignorant People to
Murder their Gideon for throwing down the Altars of Baal; but like the
Ephramites of old, their Shiboleth was their undoing.

God, who thought fit to discover the Levity of those who had only Conformed,
and not Reformed, who, in exemplum Regis, had took up this as they would have
done any Religion, and also for the Trial and Glory of his Church, suffered all
this great Fabric, however of his own Working, to be overthrown at the Death
of this good King and a Deluge of Cruelty and Popery overwheim'd the People in
the Reign of the Queen, his Sister.

But Popery found more Dissenters than the Reformation had done, and the
Impression Religion had made on the Minds of those who had sincerely Embraced
it, was not so easily Defaced as the pretended Reformation of Others; for the
Glosses Men had put on their Actions, only as a Cover from common Observation,
was soon discovered, when the Safety of owning their Old Principles rendered
those Outsides no longer needful; but where the True Religion had got footing
in the Mind, it was still the same, whatever Alterations of Times might make it
Dangerous; and yet all People did not burn; but some being persecuted in one
City, fled to another; and Germany especially was a Sanctuary for the
Distressed English Protestants, that Country having been beforehand with us in
the Reformation.

'Twas here that our Exiled Clergy having Conversed with the Learned Reformers
abroad, and particularly with John Calvin, found, that though they were Reformed
indeed from the Gross Errors of Popery and Superstition, there was yet several
things which might be further and further Reformed; and being willing to arrive
to the greatest Perfection they were capable of in Religion, (that as near as
possible they might pursue the Great Example of Christ Jesus, whose Name they
professed, and for whom they could most gloriously die), they corrected in
themselves those things which they saw needful, and by Letters to their
Brethren in England communicated their Opinions, with their Reasons, exhorting
them to go on unto perfection as they had begun.

Some of the most Zealous for Piety and Holiness of Life, rejected this Motion;
and Others as Zealous and Pious, closed with it; and the Disputes were carried
so far sometimes, as to invade the Charity of one another; an humble
Acknowledgment of which you have in a most Christian Reconciling Letter from
Bishop Ridley to Bishop Hooper, two of the most Glorious Triumphant Martyrs
that ever confessed the Truth of Christ at the Stake.

For the present, the Fire of the Persecution, (as the Greater Light obscures
the Less), extinguished that of Dissension. But when Queen Elizabeth rescued
the Protestant Religion, and the Church enjoyed its Peace again, the Debate
revived: But the first Establishment of King Edward obtained so on the Minds of
Men, that the further Reformation was rejected; the other Party being not at
all convinced, though overruled, submitted their Persons to the Laws, but not
their Opinion; affirming, That 'twas the Duty of every Christian, to endeavor
to serve God with the greatest Purity of Worship that was possible; and that
this was the Purest Worship which came nearest to the Divine Institution, which
they believed the Established Liturgy did not, and therefore in Conscience they
must be Dissenters.

It must be owned, That the Original Authors of these Disputes were Learned,
Devout, and singularly Pious, strict in Conversation to excess, if that be
possible, and from thence, in a sort of happy Derision, were called Puritans;
of whom I shall say nothing, but leave for a Record the last Speech of a Famous
Foreigner, who had seen the way of living among those Dissenters, and speaking
of the Words of Balaam, Let me dye the death of the Righteous, and let my
latter end be like his, cried Out,

Sit Anima Mea cum Puritanis Anglicanis.
I shall not take upon me to observe the Difference between these Primitive
Dissenters and Our Present, which is too plain; nor to dispute the Substance of
the Point in Debate between them and the Established National Church.

I shall only observe, That the Reasons for the present Dissenters Separation
from the Established Church, are said to be exactly the same they were then; and
the present Dissenters are the Successors of those first, as the present
Conformists are the Successors of the first Reformers under King Edward the
6th, and Queen Elizabeth.

I must acknowledge, that it fares with the Church of England, and with the
Dissenters both, as it has always fared with Christ's Church in the whole
World; That while Suppressed and Persecuted, their Professors were few, and their
Profession more severe; but when a Religion comes to be the Mode of the
Country, so many painted Hypocrites get into the Church, who are not by their
Voices to be distinguished, that Guile is not to be seen, till it arrive to
Apostasy. The whole Ecclesiastical History, from the first Century of the
Christian Church, is full of Instances to confirm this, That the Prosperity of
the Church of Christ has been more fatal to it, than all the Persecution of its
Enemies.

I am now brought down to the present Time, when the Dissenting Protestant is
sheltered by the laws, and protected from the Violence which he suffered in the
Late Reigns, under the Arbitrary Commands of such State-Ministers who strove to
dash the whole Protestant Interest to pieces by its own weight: and nothing is
more apparent to those who are any thing acquainted with the late Management of
Affairs in this Land, than that the Court used both Parties alternately, as
Policy and occasion directed, to Suppress and Destroy one another; that the
whole House, which being so divided, could not stand, might at last fall of it
self.

But our Eyes are at last opened, and the Name of Protestant is now the common
Title of an Englishman, and the Church of England extends her Protection to the
Tender Consciences of her Weaker Brethren, knowing that all may be Christians,
though not alike informed; and the Dissenter extends his Charity to the Church of
England, believing that in his due time God shall reveal even this unto them.
If this is not, I wish this were the Temper of both Parties; and I am sure it
is already the Temper of some of each Side, and those few are of the Wisest,
most Pious, and most Judicious.

But while Frailty and Infirmity is an Essential to Humanity, and Pride and
Hypocrisy are the two regnant Vices of the Church, this Good Spirit cannot be
Universal, and we do not expect it.

But there is a sort of Truth which all men owe to the Principles they profess;
and generally speaking, all men pay it; a Turk is a Turk zealously and
entirely; an Idolater is an Idolater, and will serve the Devil to a tittle:
None but Protestants halt between God and Baal; Christians of an Amphibious
Nature, that have such Preposterous Consciences, that can believe one Way of
Worship to be right, and yet serve God another way themselves; This is a
strange thing in Israel. The whole History of Religions in the World do not
show such a Case: It Is like a Ship with her Sails haled some back, and some
full: It Is like a Workman, that builds with one Hand, and pulls down with
the other: It Is like a Fisherman, that catches Fish with one hand and throws them
into the Sea with another: It Is like every thing that signifies nothing. To say
a man can be of two Religions, is a Contradiction, unless there be two Gods to
worship, or he has two Souls to save.

Religion is the Sacred Profession of the Name of God; serving him, believing
in him, expecting from him; and like the God it refers to, it is in one and the
same Object, one and the same thing perfectly indivisible and inseparable;
there is in it no Neuter Gender, no Ambigous Article, God or Baal; Mediums are
impossible.

As to the different Modes and Ways, which are the Circumstantials of this
sacred thing I Call Religion; I will not say, but that as Ships take different
Courses at Sea, yet to the best of their Skill, keeping to the direct Rules of
Navigating by the Compass, they may arrive at the same Port; so Christians
taking different Methods in the serving this God, yet going to the best of
their Judgments by the direct Rules of the Scripture, may arrive at the same
Heaven; but this is nothing at all to the Case; for no Ship would arrive at any
Port, that sailed two ways together, if that were possible; nor no Man can
serve One God, and at the same time hold two Opinions. There is but one Best,
and he that gives God two Bests, gives him the Best and the Worst, and one
spoils the other, till both are good for nothing.

I have said already, that both the Church of England, and the Dissenter,
suffer in their Reputation for the mixed Multitude of their Members, which is
occasioned by their present Prosperity: If a Third Party were to Tyrannize over
them both, we should see then who were Professors, and who were Confessors; but
now it cannot be: Wherefore, I think 'twere well to put both Sides in mind of
one thing, which they are bound mutually to observe; and that is, That the
Personal Miscarriages of any particular Person or Member, is not really any
Reflection upon the Religion they prosess, nor ought not to be so accounted,
unless it be where such Miscarriages are the direct Dictates of the Doctrines
they Teach; and thus I would be understood in the present Case. Wherefore I
shall give my Essay as to what I understand a Real Dissenting Protestant is, or
ought to be.

He who Dissents from an Established Church on any account, but from a real
Principle of Conscience, is a Politic, not a Religious Dissenter. To explain
my self; He who Dissents from any other Reasons, but such as these, That he
sirmly believes the said Established Church is not of the purest Institution,
but that he can really serve God more agreeable to his Will, and that
accordingly it is his Duty to do it so, and no otherwise. Nay, he that cannot
Dye, or at least desire to do so, rather than Conform, ought to Conform. Schism
from the Church of Christ is, doubtless, a great Sin, and if I can avoid it, I
ought to avoid it, but if not, the Cause of that Sin carries the Guilt with it.

But if I shall thus Dissent, and yet at the same time Conform; by Conforming I
deny my Dissent being lawful, or by my Dissenting I damn my Conforming as
sinful.

Nothing can be lawful and unlawful at the same time; if it be not lawful for
me to Dissent, I ought to Conform; but if it be unlawful for me to Conform, I
must Dissent; several Opinions may at the same time consist in a Country, in a
City, in a Family, but not in one entire Person, that is impossible.

To come to the point; there are Dissenters who have separated from the Church
of England, and joined in Communion with Dissenting Churches or Congregations.
They have appeared Zealous, Conscientious, and Constant; have born the
Reproaches and Inconveniences of their Party, nay, suffered Persecution, and
Loss of Estates and Liberty or the Cause: And who could have so little Charity
as to doubt the Sincerity of their Profession? And yet these Persecuted,
Suffering Dissenters, to make themselves room in the Public Advancements, and
Glittering Gaudy Honors of the Age, shall Conform to that which they refused
under all those Disadvantages to do before. And which is worse than all this;
hear O Heavens! as soon as the present Honor is attained, the present
Advantage made, they return to the former Circumstance again, and are freely
received, a double Crime, as having done no Evil.

I know not, I profess, what these Persons can say for themselves, and
therefore cannot pretend to Answer their Objections; but I cannot omit one
Answer which some People give for them, viz. That this is no Conformity in
Point of Religion, but done as a Civil Action, in Obedience to the Laws of the
Land, which have made it a necessary Characteristick Quality, for admittance
into Public Employments, which they think it their Duty to accept, in order to
serve their Country, which they doubly perform by executing those Offices to
the Public Interest, and by Excluding those who would otherwise get into those
Places, and betray their Country and their Liberties.

I have never met with any considerable Excuse made for this fast and loose
Game of Religion, but this, and this I desire to consider a little particularly.

1. That this is no Conformity in Point of Religion, but done as a Civil
Action. How this can be possible, remains to be determined. It Is true, the
Morality of an Action consists in its End; but I cannot conceive that an Action
purely and originally Religious, such as the Solemn Ordinances of God's
Worship, can be made Civil Actions by any End, Design, Will, or Intention of
Man whatsoever. It Is true, an Oath, which is a calling God to witness, is an
Action both Civil and Religious, but still that was appointed and instituted to
that end, as is expressly noted, Heb. Naaman's bowing in the House of Rimmon; to
which the Prophet answered, Go in peace, which is understood as a permission,
is a thing still different; for Naaman only bowed for the Convenience or State
of the King, at the same time publicly disowning the Worship, as Interpreters
are of Opinion; besides, bowing the Head, though it may be a customary Act of
Worship at that place, yet is no Act confined to Worship only, and instituted
and directed so by the God who is Worshipped, but is an Act used in Common
Salutations. Thus we kneel to God, and to the King; but Sacraments are things
appropriated by the Divine Institution of God himself, as things which have no
other Signification or Import but what is Divine: Had Naaman desired to be
excused in offering Sacrifices to the Idol Rimmon, the Prophet would hardly
have bid him go in peace. Some Actions are not Civil or Religious, as they are
Civilly or Religiously performed, but as they are Civil or Religious in
themselves; for some Religious Actions are so entirely such, that they cannot
without a horrid Invasion of the Sovereignty of the Institutor be appropriated
to any other use, and such are in especial manner, the Two Sacraments
instituted by Christ; such was, before Christ, the Sacrifices by Fire; And the
Judgments of God on Nadab and Abihu, for attempting to offer Sacrifice with
strange Fire, stands as a terrible Instance of what we ought to think is the
Will of God in this matter.

Further, speaking directly of the Sacraments, Are they not the same thing,
though differently Administered in the Established Church, or in a Dissenting
Church; and how can you take it as a Civil Act in one place, and a Religious
Act in another? This is playing Bopeep with God Almighty, and no Man can tell
of them when they are about a Civil Action, and when about a Religious. But to
answer this pretense at once, Sacraments as Sacraments are Religious Acts, and
can be no other; if you do not take it as a Sacrament, the Case differs; but
how can you say you do not take it as a Sacrament; an Oath is to be taken in
the Sense of the Imposer; and a Sacrament, which is a Recognition of the most
Sacred of Oaths, must be also taken in the Sense of the Imposer; if the Person
Administering declared at the Administration, He did not give it as a Sacrament,
but only gave you a bit of Bread, and a draught of Wine as a Friend, or the
like, this was something; but can a Minister deliver the Bread to you, and say,
The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and you kneeling with Reverence take it
as such, and repeat the Responses at the Communion, and say Amen to the Prayer,
and say it is a Civil Action. This is such Bantering with Religion, as no Modest
Christian can think of without Horror.

2. Another Part of the Apology is, That without it they cannot be admitted
into Public Places of Trust; and if they are not admitted, such will get in as
will betray their Country and Liberties, and they do it purely to secure their
Country, which they think their Duty.

These are Patriots that will damn their Souls to save their Country; a sort of
a Public Spirit hardly to be found in the World, and indeed a Nonentity in it
self; for it is a Mistake; the Gentlemen who make this Answer, put the Case
wrong. For I would desire such to Answer a few Questions.

If the Service of their Country be so dear to them, pray why should they not
choose to expose their Bodies and Estates for that Service, rather than their
Souls; the Penalty of the Law in accepting the Public Employments is wholly
Pecuniary; the difference lies here, they choose the Trespassing on their
Consciences, before the hazard of their Estates, as the least Evil; for it is
plain, any Man who will suffer the Penalty, or run the Risque of it, which is
all one, may excuse the Conformity: For the Law does not say you shall so and
so Conform, but if you do not Conform, you shall incur such and such Penalties;
any Man that will incur the Penalty, may commit the Trespass.

So that all this Compliance is not, to be admitted to Places, that they may be
able to serve their Country, but to save the Five hundred pounds, and other
Penalties of that Act.

2. Why, if we believe the Power of God to be Omnipotent, should we imagine
that he is not able to protect our Country and Liberties, without our
perpetrating so wicked an Act to secure them, as doing Evil that Good may come,
which is expressly forbidden?

But we are told again, This is in it self no Sinful Act, and therefore it is
not doing Evil. This is tacitly answered before; tho it is not a Sinful Act in
it self, yet it is either a Sinful Act in a Dissenter, or else his Dissenting
before was a Sinful Act. For if he is satisfied he does well in Conforming now,
why did he not before? There is but one Answer for that, which is, He is
otherwise convinced; to which I reply, if that were true, he would then as a
Convert continue in this New Communion; but it is evident the same Persons
return immediately to the former Profession as Dissenters, and they can have no
such Excuse, unless it be, that they were convinced, and reconvinc'd, and then
convinced again.

Some have the Folly to argue against the Law it self, as a most Notorious
Imposition upon the Consciences of Men, by making the Sacred Institutions of
Christ a Drudge to Secular Interest, and a Cause of Men's Sins, by leading them
into Temptation. I could say enough to vindicate that part, tho I am no more
reconciled to that Law, than other Men, but it is remote to our Argument: It Is
an Act of Parliament, and what is so, is of every Man's own doing, and
therefore it is just every one should comply with the Terms, or suffer the
Penalty; but here is no Penalty, if no Crime; if no Preferments are sought, no
Honors accepted, there is no Crime; if Self-denial was as practicable as
Self-advancement, here is no need of the Crime. So that they who do this, seek
the Crime, that is the first Sin; then Mortgage their Consciences to avoid the
Penalty, and so add one Sin to another. But we are told by some, it is not
against their Consciences, they hope both Parties are Good Christians; there
are Differences between them which they don't understand nor meddle with, and
their Consciences are very well satisfied to Communicate with either.

I would ask such, if their Consciences would serve to Communicate with the
Church, why did they Separate? For Communicating with the Dissenter, is not an
Occasional or Casual Thing, but an open declared breaking off from the Church
Established. Now no Man can be said to separate from, and join to a thing at the
same time; if your Conscience is satisfied in Joining, it cannot be satisfied
in Separating, unless you can suppose your Conscience to be satisfied and
dissatisfied both together. If you have a Conscience of any Religion at all, it
must be of some Religion or other; if of this, it cannot be of that; if of
that, it cannot be of this: To Dissent and Approve, are different Acts, and can
never be fixed upon the same Object at the same time; as for a Man, Passively
Religious, that can Communicate any where that Man may from the same Principle,
and with far less guilt, Communicate no where, for such a Man, in downright
English, has prostituted the little Religion he had, if ever he had any, to his
Interest, and may be Turk, Jew, Papist, or any thing.

The latter part of the Charge leads me to consider another Point, which
relates to the Assemblies of the Dissenters, who admit, and by consequence
approve this way of proceeding. I do not pretend to examine by what Methods
such particular Churches do proceed. And I would be as tender as possible in
making Reflections. I wish they would be as Charitable in censuring this
Reproof.

I do think, with Submission, it is impossible to prove that any Person, whose
Case the foregoing Paragraph reaches, can be received again into
Church Communion in a Dissenting Assembly upon any other Terms, than as a
Penitent. I have heard of some, who have been said to have leave from their
Ministers for this Matter; if so, they have assumed some Dispensing Authority,
which I believe does not appertain to the Ministerial Function, nor is not
contained in the Mission of our Savior. But I do not affirm, That any such
thing has been really allowed.

As to the Relation of Churches, and the Members thereof, one to another, as
the Dissenters now Establish them; I am sure, the allowance of any Member in a
Promiscuous Communion with the Church of England and the Dissenter at the same
time, is not pretended to be allowed, nor is it consistent with it self. It Is
Preposterous, and Excentrick, and is Destructive of the very Foundation of the
Dissenters Principles, as is already noted, concerning Schisms in the Church.
In this Case, Charity can heal nothing, nor help nothing; it is of absolute
necessity that one Man be but of one side, at one and the same time. Either the
Conformist will mar the Dissenter, or the Dissenter will mar the Conformist.
For if I shall be admitted into the Communion of the Dissenter, and of the
Church together; then the Dissenter must have some other Reason for being a
Dissenter, than Purity of Worship.

Methinks Men should seem what they are; if a Man Dissent from the Church, let
him do so; and his Principle being well-grounded for such Dissent, let him hold
it; if not well-grounded, let him leave it; if he cannot suffer one way, let
him suffer another; and why should we not be as honest to God as our Country.

The Motives to serve our Country are strong, but there are ways to do it
without such a Violation of all our Principles and Profession; if not, trust
God's Providence with the Issue, who never wants Agents to preserve and deliver
his People when his time is at hand; and you can have small hope to expect that
the Office and Trust you shall Execute, shall receive any Assistance from his
Providence, when the first Step into it, is made by offering the greatest
Affront to his Honor, and committing the vilest Act of Perfidy in the World.

But if the gay Prospect of a Great Place, tempt any Person beyond the Power
that God's Grace is pleased to Assist him with, in that way let him abide, and
not be readmitted, because of his Gold Ring and Fine Apparel, without a
Penitent Acknowledgment. The Dissenters in England, can never pretend to be
Dissenters upon the mere Principle of Purity of Worship, as I have related in
the beginning of this Discourse, if such shall be received as blameless into
their Communion, who have deserted them upon the occasion of Preferment, and
have made the Sacred Institutions of Christ Jesus, become Pimps to their
Secular Interest, and then wipe their Mouths, and sit down in the Church and
say, They have done no Evil.

It Is also an Intolerable Affront to the Church of England, reflecting upon its
Doctrine as well as Practice; To make use of the Church for a Cover to sense
them against the Laws, at the same time continuing to disown its Communion, as
a thing not fit to be continued in.

And yet the Church of England is in the right to receive such of the
Dissenters as shall come to them, without the Ceremony of Recognition, because
it is agreeable to the Notion of a National Church, which they profess to be.
But Dissenters are bound to justify their Separation from them, or else their
whole Constitution falls to the Ground. Now, how a Separation and a Conformity
are Consistent, is to me an Inexplicable Riddle.

I question not here the Lawfulness of the Dissenters Separation; it is not the
business of this Discourse to define it; and I am as careful as I can in making
Reflections upon either; but I am bold to affirm, That no Dissenting Church can
with lawful Cause Separate from the Church of England, Establish Private
Churches or Communions, and at the same times allow the Members to Conform to
the Established Church too: This is incongruous, and one must destroy the
other. From whence I think it becomes the Dissenters, if they would maintain
the Doctrine they teach; if they would have us believe they Dissent purely on
the honest Principles of Conscience, and Purity of Worship, with such a one,
No, not to Eat. And it is not sufficient that the Offender be a Lord Mayor, or
any Greater Person; unless he would be Lord Mayor without a Breach of the
Sacred Relation he had entered into, he should be dealt with in that Case, as
the meanest Member of such a Society.

On the other hand, if a Man be called upon to be a Magistrate, and has Courage
enough to follow the Impartial Dictates of his Conscience, a Query lies before
him, What shall he do?

The Case is plain; Either refuse the Honor, or run the Risque; the first
indeed is the plainest and easiest Way, and the Ground of it is good, for he
whose Conscience Dictates to him that the Terms are Sinful, may refuse the
Call; for Preferments and Honors are a Bait that some have refused on mere
Points of Speculative Philosophy; and it is hard, Christianity should not carry
a Man as far. Well, but perhaps a Man has a mind to be a Sheriff and Lord
Mayor, and is a Dissenter; or perhaps he really thinks it is his indispensible
Duty to serve his Country, if he is called to that, or the like Office; or
perhaps he thinks it is a Duty he owes his Family, to advance his Children, and
the like, and he is a Professed Dissenter; What shall he do? Let him boldly run
the Risque, or openly and honestly Conform to the Church, and neither be
ashamed of his Honor, nor of his Profession; such a Man all Men will value,
and God will own: He need not fear carrying the Sword to a Conventicle, or
bringing the Conventicle to his own House: But to make the matter a Game, to
dodge Religions, and go in the Morning to Church, and in the Afternoon to the
Meeting, to Communicate in private with the Church of England, to save a
Penalty, and then go back to the Dissenters and Communicate again there: This
is such a Retrograde Devotion, that I can see no Color of pretense for in all
the Sacred Book.

I have heard, indeed, that some, who are Ministers of Dissenting Churches do,
or did at the same time Communicate with the Church of England. I do not
dispute how far a Minister may Conform as a Layman, though he cannot as a
Clergyman; but how any Dissenting Minister can Conform as a Layman, and at
the same time execute a Pastoral Charge over a Congregation, whom he teaches to
separate from the Church in a Lay-Communion, I cannot imagine.

It Is not as I have already noted, Conformity or Nonconformity, that I am
discoursing; but it is Conformity and Nonconformity at the same time, in one and
the same Person, that is the Point; and doing this for a Secular End, to save a
Penalty, and Privately; and then, as being ashamed of it to go back and sit
down as not having done it at all; and a Church Society admitting this without
taking notice of it. These are the Contradictions insist upon, and rather wish,
than expect to see rectified.

FINIS.

