THE Two Great Questions Further Considered. With some Reply to the Remarks.

Non Licet Hominem Muliebriter rixare.
By the Author.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCC.

(...) Since then his Passion has put him out of Temper, and transported him
beyond the bounds of Decency and good Manners, I shall leave him to come to
himself again, by the helps of Time, Sleep, and such other proper Remedies for
Men that are Crazed ad Distempered, and Address my self to that part of Mankind
who are Masters of their Senses.

Of all Men in this Town, the Author of the Two Reasons Considered, was never
yet suspected of being a Courtier, an Advocate for standing Armies, an Insulter
of Parliaments, but just the contrary, as will appear, if ever he is called to
show himself.

But because he took the Liberty to put his Thoughts in Print, on the
Extraordinary Iuncture of Affairs on Account of the Spanish Succession, and he
finds that some People are mistaken both in him, and in the Intent of his Book;
he therefore Craves leave of the Public to Explain himself in some things, in
which he little thought any Body would have been so weak as to mistake him.

THE Two Great Questions Further Considered.
BEFORE I enter into the Particulars of the Book I am going to vindicate, I
must desire the Reader to observe that this Book was wrote before the French
King had declared He would accept the King of Spain's Will, or had received the
Duke d' Anjou as King of Spain.

And therefore when I speak of the King of France's seizing of Spain, or
seizing of Flanders, I desire to be understood seizing it for himself to annex
it to the Crown of France, a thing that has all along by all the Princes and
States of Europe, been counted, and really is, inconsistent with the Peace of
Europe; and any Man, but such an Author as our Remarker, would understand me
so, when I say Page 22, and quoted by him, Page 9. It must certainly be the
Interest of England and Holland first to put themselves in such a Posture, as
may prevent the French King's seizing of Spain; and the next Words express it
directly, viz. And upon the first Invasion of the Territories of Spain, to
declare War against him in the Name of the whole Confederacy, as an Infringer
of the Grand Peace of Reswick.

I need but appeal to any Man's Reason whether the French King's seizing or
invading of Spain can mean any thing, but the French King's seizing or invading
of Spain, and is as explicit as Words can make it, and would certainly be a
Breach of the Peace of Reswick.

The Remarker, Page 6. tells the World the Question what the English ought to
do, is a Shooing-horn to draw on what some People mightily want a standing
Army, and then in his rude Dialect runs on against the Soldiery, and when he
has done, to put a Value on his Argument, magnifies our Nation to such a
degree, as no Man, who is sensible of the Power and Designs of our Neighbors,
can allow to be so much as rational.

I must first answer his presumptive Suggestion, and then proceed.

I take leave to assure all the World that shall read these Sheets, that by all
the Expressions of Forces, Posture of the Nation, and the like, I do mean, and
do desire to be understood to mean, such Force, and no other, such a Posture of
Defense, and no other, as by the King, Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, shall be thought necessary for the Safety of the Kingdom, and
Support of our Trade and Interest in the World.

Why else do I say, England should put herself into such a Posture? By England,
an Englishman always understands the Parliament of England, and no Man in his
Wits would imagine otherwise.

Now did ever Parliament in England talk in this Gentleman's Dialect? That we
have a Fleet, and no Army, no matter if all the World Confederated against us;
and did ever we get any thing by Foreign Alliances? Are Confederacies
advantageous to us? And the like.

Surely, they that are of the Opinion that England is able to Fight the whole
World, know very little of the World, and do not remember that in this very War
had we had no Confederates, the War had been in our own Bowels, whereas this we
got by Foreign Alliances, that we carried the War to our Neighbors Doors; had
not the Spaniards, Germans, and Dutch, joined in a Confederacy, the French King
had met with no Work to Divert him from giving King James such a Powerful
Assistance as might have prevented our Revolution, none but a Mad Man can deny
that 'twas the Union of the Confederates that was the Protection of England.

The Remarker tells us the Revolution was a Miracle, and so it was; but, says
he, 'Twas a Miracle that we did not do it without Foreign help. I am sure it
would have been a Miracle if we had; and I Appeal to any Man that has not forgot
the State of England at that time to be Judge of it.

That we should not reduce King James to Reason by our own Native Strength, was
a Miracle, says he; That is, that we did not rise and pull his Army to pieces;
if this Gentleman had not forgot his own Story, he could never thus contradict
himself.

If our own Native Strength is so much Superior to an Army, that it is a Miracle
they did now recover themselves without other help; then Ridiculus mus, the
dreadful Spectrum of a Standing Army is lost, and all our Danger of being
enslaved is at end.

I have as great an Opinion of the Bravery of the English Nation, as any Man;
but it does not use to be the Temper of the English to run on such
Rhodomantado's.

It Is no disparageing the English Na^ion, to say, That as Affairs now Stand,
they are not a match for the French Power without the help of Confederates. I
am no Traitor to my Country, as he is pleased to call me, if I own that our
Militia are not able to Fight a French Army. But Grant they were, it is not
Invasion of our Native Country that we are upon, God forbid, we should have
Occasion to Provide against that; but it is always the Interest of England to
keep Danger at a distance, and it has been the Practice of England to do it by
Leagues and Confederacies, as the only proper Method.

This Gentleman upbraids me with Reading truly; I have Read all the Histories
of Europe, that are Extant in our Language, and some in other Languages, and
amongst the rest, I have Read that Queen Elizabeth supported the Dutch, and
supplied them with Men and Money, that she did the like by the Hugonots of
France, and afterward made a League offensive with the King of France; and
why? All our Histories agree it was to keep the Forces of Philip the Second, so
employed that he should not be at leisure to turn all his Power upon her. Thus
she managed a War with him abroad, and kept England from being the Field of
Blood; and this England got by a Confederacy abroad.

And I Will give another Instance, which no Man can have the Face to deny; when
the Spanish Fleet lay at Anchor, and had yet received no such considerable
Damage from our Ships, as to prevent their Landing, the Dutch lay with their
Fleet on the Flemish Coast at the procurement of the Queen, and thereby
prevented the Duke of Parma bringing over 30000 Spaniards into England, which
if they had done, the Fate of England must have been tried by the Sword, and on
her own Ground. Behold the Benefit of Allies.

If I have Panegyrick'd on the Reputation of the King at the Head of a Warlike
Nation, I have done nothing, but what all the World own his Due, and what we
have the Authority of Parliaments for, who have owned him for the Savior of
these Nations from Popery and Arbitrary Power, at the Expense of his own
Personal Hazard. I need not Quote the many Addresses of Parliament, as the
Voice of the whole Nation, for my Authority: As for places at Court or
Pensions, the Author never had nor desired any, but hopes a Man may be allowed
to speak what Truth and Honor obliges every Man to do of a King, that has
deserved so much of the English Nation, without the Reproach of a railing
Scribler.

I must further Explain my self in Defense of what I thought no Man would have
had Baseness enough to Suggest. But when I speak of a sort of a People, who
have appeared such Champions of our English Liberties, as to damn all kind of
Force, as useless, burdensome to the Kingdom, Badges of Slavery, and all
Arguments to be only pretenses for supporting Arbitrary Designs, I should mean
by these the Parliament of England.

Far be it from the Thoughts of any honest Man to imagine such a thing; nor is
it rational that I could Suggest such a thing of the Parliament, for as his own
Words confutes him, The Parliament, says he, never did damn all Force as
useless. Very true, Sir, how then can you imagine any Man could mean the
Parliament who never did any such thing? Nothing can be so absurd, and there I
leave it.

But since I am charged with intending those whom I really never thought of,
nor no Rational Man could suppose, give me leave to tell the World, who it is I
do mean, when I say, There are a sort of People who have appeared such
Champions of our English Liberty as to damn all kind of Force as useless. I
mean the Pamphleteering Club, who have set themselves to Blaspheme God, and
Ruin their Native Country, and in Print to sow to the Seeds of Misunderstanding
and Distrust between the King and his People.

The Club where the Blessed Trinity is openly derided, in Print lampoon'd, and
shamefully in the Face of a Protestant Government abused and ridiculed.

That Club of Men who pretend to guide Parliaments, and prescribe to them what
they are to do; who are so openly against Force, that they leave us naked for a
Prey, even to the most Contemptible Treasons.

That Club that sent out a blasphemous Poem lately under the borrowed Name of
Clito, where the Deity of our Savior is denied, and then the very Being of the
English Monarchy undermined.

That Club that denies Englishmen the use of their Reason, and will not allow
that even the Parliament of England can appoint such Powers as are necessary to
our Defense.

These are the Champions of our Liberty, that I directly mean, who damn all
kind of Force as useless.

These are they who have sent out this Pamphlet into the World, and have
brought the Author of the Two Questions to the Bar of the House right or wrong;
these are the Men who tell us Confederacies and Alliances are useless, and all
Forces oppressive that say they are not yet rid of Slavery, because the King
has his Guards left; as if Forces in England by Consent of Parliament, could be
a Grievance.

Who though they cry up Parliaments, as those by whom Kings reign, yet will not
allow them to be Judges of what is, or what is no Convenience, but will have
the Lord Treasurer, Lord Chancellor, and Lord Admiral be named by the
Parliament, because the Word England is added to their Titles.

These, and none but these, are the Persons who I mean all along, when I say,
They have deluded the People of England* by their specious Pretenses; and
nothing can be plainer, than that they have carried on a Pen and Ink War
against the Reputation of the King obliquely, and sometimes directly
reproaching him, with Designs to enslave the Nation, whom he came to set free,
and to rob us of those Liberties which he ventured his Life to save.

These are the Men who I mean when I say, they have weakened his Hands, and his
Interest at home, which they have certainly done, by endeavoring to lessen his
Reputation, and to suggest to his Subjects, that he will invade their Liberties.

These are the Men who think they cannot be answered, without concerning the
Parliament in their Quarrel; who to bring the King into Contempt with his
Subjects, for whom he has done so much, and from whom he has received so many
Thanks and Acknowledgments, represent him attempting to destroy our Liberties
by standing Armies; and if they are answered, pretend to fright their
Adversaries with the Parliament, as if nothing could be said to the Point,
without reflecting on the Parliament.

To these People let me take the Liberty to say, though the Matter of Armies was
no way the Case in this Affair, that this Author does affirm, and will answer
it any where.

That a standing Army in England in time of Peace is not against Law, nor
inconsistent with the Constitution of England.

Provided it be by Consent of Parliament. To avoid all manner of Disputes in
this Point, my Authority is unquestionable, being the Parliament of England
themselves, or Convention, which is equivolent in the Sixth Article of the
Declaration of the Rights of the People, declared by the Commons of England.
These are the Words:

That the raising and keeping a standing within the Kingdom in time of Peace
(unless it be by Consent of Parliament) is unlawful.

This was once urged to these Gentlemen before, but as a thing they could never
answer; they took no notice of it, and here I leave it with this Remark.

That I do, and every English Protestant will always consent to have such, and
so many Forces raised, maintained, and kept up in England, and no more; as the
King, Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament shall think needful for our
common Perservation, and the Safety of the Nation's Interests.

This is the middle way between both Extr^ams, and nothing in the Book this
Remarker treats so scurvily, can give any rational Ground to charge me with
proposing farther.

Nor has the King himself attempted to keep up any Forces, but with Consent of
Parliament, and has ass^r'd us he never will.

I have done with this railing Author, and indeed had not meddled with him at
all, only to explain my self in the Persons, I mean throughout the Book he
reflects on; and methinks no Man could imagine any Author would be such a Fool
to treat the Parliament of England in such a manner, as I have done the People
I speak of, while he knows the Power of the Parliament to crush such a one with
the Breath of their Mouth.

Without troubling the Reader any more with my Remarker, or but by the by,
where I am obliged to come athwart him, I shall take this Opportunity to say
what I would have said before, had it been known that the King of France would
have declared his Grandson King of Spain.

And I shall lay it down as a further Answer to the grand Question.

What Measures England ought to take?

The League for the Partition of the Spanish Monarchy being not made public,
and proposed to the English Parliament, says some, is no League at all, and
therefore England has nothing at all to do with it.

If what such say be true, which yet I do not believe, then whenever His
Majesty please to call a Parliament, and acquaint them of it, it becomes an
English League, for no Man ever yet disputed, but that the Power of making
Leagues and Treaties, either for Peace or War, was committed to the Kings of
England, nor can he tell us of a League ever made in England, which was first
discussed in Parliament, when we had a King to be treated with.

All that I have yet said we ought to do, amounts to no more than this, that
England ought to put her self into such a Posture with the rest of her
Neighbors, as that she may be able to preserve the Peace lately purchased at
so dear a Rate, and to preserve her Trade, upon which the whole Nation so much
depends.

If People will have me to mean a standing Army whether I will or no, I cannot
help it; but I say again it may be done without a standing Army, and where is
your Argument then? Of which I could say more, but I have not room for it here.

I did affirm it was a weak thing of the King of Spain to pretend to give his
Kingdom by Will, and I am of the Opinion we shall hear that he really did not
do so; that is, that there was some Practices made use of to procure such a
Will, as in the true Sense of a late Will and Testament makes it void in its
own Nature.

But be it which way it will, it is an odd way of devolving the Succession of
Crowns; and here I cannot help meeting our Remarker again: That notwithstanding
all Deeds of Gift, or other Titles whatever, if the good People of Spain own
him as their King, and allow him the Sovereignty, he has the most undoubted
Title to the Kingdom of any in the World.

Though our Author is not worth answering, having a right Notion in his Head,
but not the Sense to put it into English, I shall tell him,

That in the main his Argument is true, and yet the Consequence is false. For,

The good People of Spain, as he calls them, whose Country is their own, have
all along agreed that their Crown shall descend by the direct Line, to the
lawful Issue of the House of Austria, Successors to Ferdinand and Isabella, in
whom the contending Crowns of Arragon and Castile were united; this our Author
may find stipulated in the Contract between those two Families, and signed to
by the Council, called by them the great Council of Spain, which is the same
thing with them as a Parliament. Thus the good People of Spain acquiesc'd, and
have all along submitted to the Successors of that Family, as their undoubted
rightful Kings.

Now if it be the Peopl^'s Act and Deed, that the Succession of the House of
Arragon or Austria shall possess the Crown of Spain, then the Duke d' Anjou has
no more Title to the Crown of Spain than the Czar of Muscovy, as I said before,
while the Dauphin and the Duke of Burgundy are alive, unl^ss the People of
Spain legally Convocated had Declared the Throne vacant.

And to go on with the Argument in the same Notion of the People's Right to
make Kings, which is what these Gentlemen are so fond of.

When the People of a Nation have by any public Act, Legally made, entailed
their Crown, or committed the Government of themselves, or what he pleases to
call it, to such or such a Family, and such and such Heirs, I hope they will
allow then that such and such Heirs have a Right, till the same which gave them
their Right, in the same legal Manner do publicly rescind, alter or repeal the
former Settlement on which that Right was founded.

If this be true, then where is this Public act of the People of Spain to
rescind the Former Title of the House of Arragon? To say they have not
disclaimed the Duke d'Anjou, what a ridiculous Argument is that, the Settlement
they have agreed to, is not Repealed, nor the Great Council of the State been
called to Debate it; nor is their any need of it, for the Heirs are in Being,
the Throne is not Vacant.

Now if you will form a Legal Title for the Duke d'Anjou, on this Gentleman's
Notion of the Peoples Right, it must be thus.

The Dauphin is the Immediate Heir, but he refuses to accept of the Crown for
himself, and his Eldest Son; then the Great Council of the State, which is the
People of Spain, ought in this Emergency to have been called, to Consider to
whom they would dispose of the Crown, or to whom they would Submit; and if this
be true, as I am sure by this Doctrine it cannot be otherwise, they may as well
bestow their Crown on the Emperor of Morocco, saving his being a Mohammedan, as
on the Duke d'Anjou.

Also, if all Titles be derived thus from the People, and any one that they
will Accept, is Lawful King: Why should I be blamed for saying, 'twas a weak
thing for the King of Spain to give away his Kingdom by his Will, which he had
no Power do?

It had been much wiser to have called the Great Council of the Nation
together, and have caused them to settle the Succession, as they thought fit, as
the only Persons who had a Right to do it.

Another Consequence I must draw from this Doctrine of the People's Right,
which the Gentlemen are not Historians enough it seems to know.

If it be the Peoples Right to dispose of the Government as they see fit, as in
the Case of a Vacancy of the Throne No body doubts; then let the Title to the
Crown Spain, be whose it will, it is none of the Duke d'Anjou's; for in the
famous Treaty of the Pyrenees, where the Match was made, from whence this Title
does proceed; the Reconciliation made by the French to the Crown of Spain was
Signed on both sides, by the Princes of the Blood on behalf of the French, and
by the Grandees and Plenipotentiaries on the behalf of Spain; and this was to
signify, that it was an Agreement, not Personal only, but National; and that
therein the People of Spain did renounce all Subjection to the Issue of that
Marriage.

Now to pretend this can be rescinded by the Will of the late King, or the call
to the Duke d'Anjou from Six or Seven Counselors nominated by the King, this
is to destroy all the Pretense of the Right of the People, and so humbly
Conceive by their Doctrine, the present Title of the Duke d'Anjou is fallen to
the Ground.

What the People of Spain may do when a French Power may have put the Duke
d'Anjou in Possession, and they see no Body to help them, I cannot tell, but at
present he has no visible Title, either from the Call or Consent of the People,
or by Legal Succession.

It Is next proper to Enquire what is all this to us who is King of Spain?

I Confess I see less Cause to apprehend Danger from Spain, under this way of
Succession, than I should have done if the French had attempted to Possess it
as a Devolution to their Monarchy, and put it all into one Government, which is
what I meant, and what any Man that understands English must understand by it,
when I said, Page and quoted by him, P. 13.

If the French carry the Spanish Monarchy. Truly, If the French carry the
Spanish Monarchy, that is, obtain the Possession of it to themselves, I appeal
it to all the World if we are not in a dangerous Condition; and how foolish is
it to say with our Author, P. 14. I care not who is King of France or Spain, so
the King of England Governs according to Law. It Is a barbarous and impudent
Reflection on the King, who never yet has broke any of our Laws, and has no
Relation to the Case in hand, but to show that the Publisher wants Manners as
well as Sense.

But now the French King has resolved to make the Duke d'Anjou King of Spain,
what is our Danger from that?

I shall not go much on Conjecture, but I shall go on the same foot as before.

France can Propose no Benefit fairly by it, but the drawing the Spaniards off
from the Confederates, and Leagueing them with himself.

If he will do thus, he will strengthen his Interest very much, as well as
weaken his Enemies; but then He must be sure not to Encroach upon the Spanish
Monarchy; which if he does as I said in the other part of this Discourse, he
will find the Duke d'Anjou King of Spain, as well as a Prince of Bourbon.

But if the King of France should put the Duke d'Anjou upon such Methods of
Government, as should recover the Spanish Greatness, and make that Wealthy
Nation Masters of themselves again, as they formerly were, and find out ways to
Unite the Interests of the two Nations, the Balance of Power in Europe is
again quite overturned, and there is our Danger.

Before I descend to Particulars, I Will explain the Terms, to avoid the
Impertinence of another Remarker.

If the King of France should find out a way to Unite the Interest of the two
Nations, by this I understand in short, making the Prosperity of one, necessary
for the Safety of the other, and so vice versa.

I could explain my self how this may be done too, but it is too large for a
Pamphlet, joining Interests is joining Nations. Affinities, Leagues, and
Treaties, are trifles; where has there been more Inmarriages, than between the
two Northern Crowns? And yet never more Jealousies, nor difference of Interest.

Where has there been more Antipathies, more contrariety in Temper, and
Religion, than between the Dutch and Spaniards? And yet their Interest has
overcome all Animosities, and made them strict Confederates.

To say a strict Confederacy and Conjunction of Interests between Spain and
France will do us no harm, is the Effect of a stupid Ignorance; and no Man can
say it, but he that has the Face to say Foreign Alliances are of no use to us.

It Is plain, the Trade we drive to Spain, is without Dispute, the best, the
greatest, and most profitable Trade we have; it is plain and known to all Men
that understand that Trade, that it is driven by way of Factory, and carried on
by Englishmen, and by English Stocks; I Will lay the present Case upon one
Article only.

If the French obtain so much by their Amity with Spain, that upon every Breach
with France, our Merchants and their Effects shall be seized in the Spanish
Dominions, as is the Custom of the Country: Whenever the French please to
Insult us, we are at their Mercy; if we break with them, we are ruined.

Why have we all along been so tender of a Peace with Spain? Why so careful not
to Affront them? Why so ready to Protect them with our Fleet and Forces, but
because our Effects there are so Considerable, that the very Soul of our Trade
is Dependant upon it, and is there no Danger in having all this lie at the
Mercy of the French?

Some think all the World must Trade with us, and our Manufactures will Force
their own way, and the French can do us no harm, says our Wise Remarker, If the
Lords of the Treasury would take care to prevent the Exportation of Wool.

He might as well have thrown that upon the Parliament too, unless he can make
it out that the Lords have not prevented it.

But he is as blind a Merchant, as he is a Geographer, when he says, P. 21.
Portugal is environed with the Territories of France and Spain, when every Body
knows, not a Foot of the Territories of France comes within a Hundred Leagues
of Portugal; and in the same Page talks of Forces Landing in Holland, and
forcing their way through the Spanish Netherlands into Germany, which is no more
that Road out of Holland into Germany, than to go to West-Chester, is the Road
to Edinburgh? I suppose this Gentleman never went up the Rhine in Germany: And
then to mend the matter, tells us that is the Way to come on the back of Spain,
in which he forgets to Consult his Map again, where he would have found the
whole Kingdom of France, with the Swiss-Cantons, or the Savoyards, between
Spain and the nearest part of Germany, besides the Alps, and the Pyrenees to
get over, and the French to be sought with: This is such a Marcher of an Army,
the Devil would not be a Musqueteer under him.

And thus Infatuated he is in Trade; though there were really no Wool went out
of England, yet the French, Dutch and Germans would always be advancing upon
our Manufactures, our English Wool is a great Commodity in France, but in
Holland, and at Hamburg, it is not half so valued, and yet they out do us in
many of our Manufactures.

Besides, Scotland and Ireland are Back-doors, at which our Wool manifestly
goes Abroad in quantities, the rest is by Stealth, and what can the Lords of
the Treasury do in that. But he that loves to Cavil, will have something to say
to every Body.

I think I have stated a Case wherein a Union of Interest between France and
Spain will be very Fatal to Trade. I Refer the Reader to what I have hinted in
the former Book for more of the like.

I descend now to Matters of Strength; all Men must allow that the Prosperity
of this, and of most Nations, depends upon Peace; for if Peace be not
preserved, Trade must suffer; and if Trade suffer, the Poor suffer, and so on.

Now, as is already noted, the Balance of Power is the Life of Peace, and here
is your Balance broken; as I said before, I say again; it is not enough to say
we have a good Fleet, though it be the best in the World, and I do not think our
Remarker can prove that to be a Contradiction any more than he can prove that
to go by Germany is the way to come on the Back of Spain.

If our Fleet were Masters at Sea, it is true it might preserve us from
Invasion, and we are not afraid of it, but a Thousand Men of War would not
entirely suppress the Privateers of France and Spain from injuring our Trade,
and snapping up our Merchants; nor would a Fleet ever reduce the French in
Conjunction with the Spaniard to Peace with you, if they were whole and
unbroken in their Land Forces.

Nor is it enough if a Fleet could secure our Ships; if your Peace be
precarious, it is no Peace; and if you are not a Master for your Adversaries,
you shall have no Peace at all any longer than they please.

Why do all Nations covet to strengthen themselves by Leagues and
Confederacies, but to put themselves into a Condition to be feared by their
Neighbors; and if we leave our selves without Forces, and without Alliances
abroad, we are like to be very little valued by Neighbors.

From all these Considerations I think this Conclusion is very natural. That
England ought so to act, as to oblige the French to perform all the Leagues,
Articles and Agreements which they have entered into with us, and which the King
for Preservation of our Peace and Trade has thought fit to engage them in for.

Of what Value will the French King make any Treaties with the English Nation,
if at his Pleasure they shall be laid aside, without any Notice taked by us: If
he esteems us not in a Condition to resent a Breach of Faith, when our Interest
is so much engaged, what Notice can we expect he should ever take of us in any
Treaty.

This is certainly the way to make it true, that no Nation will trouble their
Heads to confederate with us; if when we have confederated with them, we let
the Enemy insult us all, and bauk our Confederates in such Resentments, as the
Nature of the King requires.

If the French King can be reduced to Reason without a War, and an Army or
Fleet, no Doubt it is best, but any of them are less Evils than a Union of
Interests between Spain and France, and such a Confederacy, as may hereafter
league against England, to the Destruction of our Confederates, and of our
Trade.

The Debate here is not a standing Army in England, but the Kingdom of Spain
falling into the French Interests, let the King and the Parliament alone to the
Methods, if it may be done by paying Foreign Forces, or by no Forces, in the
Name of God, Amen: But to say it is nothing to us who is King of Spain, is as
ridiculous as to say it is no matter to us who has the Kingdom of Ireland.

And if I were to speak of annexing the Spanish Dominions to the Crown of
France, I believe it would be less Loss to England to give the French the whole
Kingdom of Ireland, than to suffer it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
THE Reader is desired to mend the following Errata's that have escaped the
Press, the Author living in the Country, and not having revised the Proofs till
after the Book was printed off. In the Preface, line 3. read the Contempt; p.
2. l. 10. for Reasons r. Questions; p. 3. l. 6. r. that if we have; p. 4. l. 4.
f. now r. not; p. 6. l. 1. f. but r. that; l. 23. dele to; p. 7. l. 21. f. no
Convenience r. not Convenient; p. 9. l. 1. r. Standing Army; p. 11. l. 11. f.
late r. last; p. 13. l. 30. r. Crown of Spain; p. 14. l. 2. f. Reconciliation
r. Renunciation; l. 14. dele so; p. 16. l. 12. f. Inmarriages r.
Intermarriages; p. 17. l. 29. f. that r. the; p. 18. l. 1. f. in r. into; p.
20. l. 11. f. King r. thing.


