REASONS Humbly offered For a LAW to enact the CASTRATION OF Popish
Ecclesiastics, As the best way to prevent the Growth of POPERY IN ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin in Warwicklane, 1700.

REASONS Humbly offered for a Law to enact the Castration of Popish
Ecclesiastics, etc.
THE Honorable House of Commons having been pleased to take into their
Consideration the unaccountable growth of Popery amongst us of late, and to
appoint a Committee to consider of Ways and Means for preventing the same: It
is thought fit, among the crowd of Proposals for that end, to publish what
follows.

We may, without intrenching upon the Province of Divines, make bold to assert,
That when the Church of Rome is called in the Sacred Scriptures, The Mother of
Harlots, and of the Abominations of the Earth; there is something else meant by
it than a mere Religious Impurity, or going a whoring after false Gods, as
their Saints and Angels, and multitudes of Mediators between God and Men
undoubtedly are. We need but cast our Eye upon Platina's Lives of the Popes,
and turn over a few Leaves of the Historys of most Nations of Europe, to be
convinced that the Romish Clergy have ever since the Pope's Usurpation been
branded with Uncleanness. The wanton Observation made by Henry the 4 th of
France, as he passed one day betwixt a Friary and a Nunnery, That the latter
was the Barn, and the former were the Threshers, was found to have too much of
truth in it in all those Countries where Monasterys were overturned or searched
upon the Reformation. The vast heaps of Childrens Bones that were found in
draw-wells, and other places about them, were speaking, tho not living
Monuments of the horrid Impurity, as well as barbarous Cruelty of those
pretended Religious Communities. To insist any more upon this, were to accuse
the Age of inexcusable Ignorance in History, and therefore we shall conclude
this Introduction with an Observation from Fox's Acts and Monuments, That
before the Reformation the Priests alone were computed to have 100000 Whores in
this Kingdom; which must be understood of what the Dialect of those times
called Lemmans, from the French L'amante, that is, in the modern Phrase, kept
Misses; besides their promiscuous Whoredoms with the Women, they confessed, etc.

This horrid Uncleanness of the Romish Clergy cannot appear incredible to those
who consider, that besides their being judicially given up of God to work all
manner of Uncleanness with greediness, their Vow of Chastity, and being
forbidden to marry, lays them under a temptation peculiar to their Order.

It will yet appear less strange if we consider their way of living, and
opportunity: They eat and drink of the best, are caressed in all Families of
their Way; have an advantage of knowing the Inclinations, and of private
converse with Women by their Auricular Confession, and by their pretended Power
to give Pardon; have a Door open to persuade the committing of one Sin for
expiating another, and accordingly improve it.

This is so far from being a Calumny, that the Popish Laity themselves in all
Ages and Countries have been sensible of it; and therefore most of the Popish
Kingdoms solicited the Council of Trent to allow Priests marriage. But the
Pope, for Reasons we shall touch anon, did not think fit to grant it; tho
AEneas Silvius himself, afterward Pope, was so fully convinced of the
necessity of it, that he said, Tho Priests were forbidden to marry for very
good Reasons, yet there were better Reasons to allow it.

They that have traveled in Popish Countries, and observed their Priests and
Monks, know, that generally speaking, they carry about them no marks of that
Austerity and Mortification which they pretend to. They look as fat, and
generally fatter than other Men; which is an infallible Token that they fare as
well, if not better, than others do. You shall see as white and plump a Hand
under a Monk's Hood, as in any Family of Quality; and a Foot as clean and neat
many times in a Sandal, as is to be found under a Spanish Leather Shoe and silk
Stockin: Nor is it any Secret, that in the Neighborhood of Convents there is as
good Diet prepared for the use of Monks and Nuns, as comes to Gentlemen's
Tables. Nay, those very places of Retirement, with their large Gardens, adorned
with Walks and Shades, and many times watered by pleasant Fountains or
murmuring Streams, together with their idle way of living, seem to be
accommodated to inspire them with amorous Sentiments, against which their Vows
of Chastity, and the Rules of their Order, are so far from being Preservatives,
that they only add Fuel to their Flames, and make them commit Sin with the
higher relish. So that when they go abroad from their Monasterys, they are like
so many fed Horses neighing, as the Scripture expresses it of the lustful Jews,
after every Woman they see; and if they have not opportunity of giving vent to
their Lusts that way, they many times do it by other methods, which Nature, as
well as Religion forbids to name. This we may justly suppose to have been the
Motive that induced Emanuel de Saa in his Aphorisms to maintain that
Fornication, Adultery and Sodomy did not make a Priest irregular, whereas
Marriage did.

If besides their being forbidden to marry, we consider that they are provided
for by the sweat of other men's Faces, have no Familys to take care of, have no
hard Labor to mortify and keep them low, and are under no Obligation to study
hard, we shall find that there is no Reason to wonder if they be more inclinable
to Venery than any other Men whatsoever: and since by experience it is found to
be so, forbidding them Marriage may well be called a Doctrine of Devils, both
as to its Original and Effects. That it comes from the Devil, the Father of
Lies, and by consequence the Author of every false Doctrine, is not to be
controverted, since the Law of God and Nature commands us to increase and
multiply, and fits us for it; and that it might be in a regular way, God
himself instituted Marriage in Paradise, and the Apostle tells us, that
Marriage is honorable in all: and that this Doctrine is devilish in its
Effects, is evident from the horrid impurity of the Romish Clergy
abovementioned, and the Mischiefs they do by it to particular Persons,
Families, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

We come next to take a view of the Cause, why the Court of Rome does so stiffly
insist on the Celibacy of their Clergy, which will further demonstrate the
reasonableness of Guelding them, to prevent their infesting this Nation.

Tho Rome pretends to have changed her Religion, and has actually changed her
form of Government, by taking an Ecclesiastical instead of a Temporal Head; yet
it is visible she has abated nothing of her Ambition, to be mistress of the
Universe, and did in a great measure effect it by her Papacy, to which so great
a part of those called Christian Nations submitted before the Reformation. So
as Catiline, when Rome was Heathen, thought it necessary to debauch the Women,
and then to carry on his Conspiracy against the Government by their Interest,
because of the influence lewd Women had upon the loose Rabble, and that they
could either murder their Husbands, or bring them over to his Party. Rome since
it became Antichristian, has enjoined Celibacy upon her Clergy, that they
might be rendered the more apt to debauch Women, and to make use of their
Interest in order to deprive the Civil Magistrates of their Right, and to usurp
the Temporal, as well as the Spiritual Sword.

1. Because they know that Nature having inclined all Men to propagate their
Species, their Priests so and so circumstantiated, as beforementioned, could
not possibly refrain from the Act, tho they were not allowed to do it in a
regular way: and therefore so many Women as they debauch, which they knew by
their Circumstances and Opportunity must needs be innumerable, so many
Proselytes they were sure of.

2. Because they knew that their Clergy being pampered and restrained from the
use of the Marriage Bed, must needs be more inclinable to Venery than other
Men, and consequently more pleasing Companions to insatiable Women, and
therefore the better fitted for the practice of creeping into Houses, and
leading captive silly Women, laden with diverse Lusts, as the Apostle expresses
it.

3. Because they knew that their Clergy by this means having an Opportunity of
bringing to their Lure a buxom Wife, who perhaps has a sickly, weak, or absent
Husband, a Green Sickness Daughter, or a wanton Maid; they would by the same
Means become masters in a manner of all that belonged to the Family, have the
command of their Purses, know all their Secrets, and improve all to the
advantage of the Sea of Rome, which indulged them thus with a Mahomet's
Paradise.

4. By restraining their Clergy from Marriage, they knew it would make them the
more impetuous to satisfy their desires; and that they might have the better
Opportunity of doing it, they are enjoined by their Directory in confessing
Women to examine them most as to the Sins of the Flesh, which they tell 'em
they must discover on pain of Damnation. This being a ready Method to inflame
them mutually, attended with Secrecy, and the Priests pretended Power of giving
a Pardon, they knew it could not miss of the designed Effect; they knew also
that so many of those silly Women as they captivated, so many Champions and
Advocates for their Religion they should have in Families, Courts, or
elsewhere; for they might assure themselves that such Women would not easily
part with a Religion that did so much gratify their depraved Appetites, by
allowing them as many Men, tho not Husbands, as they have Priests or
Confessors. And therefore many of the wise Popish Laics have been of Opinion
themselves, that no Man ought to confess a Wife but her Husband, and that a
Daughter ought to be confessed by none but her Father.

5. Another, and that none of the least Reasons why they forbid Marriage to
their Ecclesiastics, is, That if they had Wives or Families, they could not so
easily be sent on Missions, and encompass Sea and Land to make Proselytes. They
would not be so ready, nor so fit to engage in Assassinations, Conspiracies,
and Rebellions against Princes and States, at the Commands of their Superior:
Nor could they by their Whoredoms so much propagate the Interest of the great
Harlot; for then their Wives would be so many checks and spies upon them.

From all which it seems reasonable to infer, that the best way to rid this
Kingdom of Popish Priests, and to prevent the growth of Popery, is to make a
Law, that all of them who shall be discovered in England, except such as are
thought fit to be allowed to Foreign Ambassadors, shall be Guelded, as they are
in Sweden; where since the same was Enacted into a Law, and practiced upon a
few of them, that Kingdom has never been infested with Popish Clergy, or
Plots, nor their Women reproached with want of Chastity.

This will appear the more reasonable, if we consider that the Havoc they are
allowed to make of Women's Chastity, is one of the principal things that induces
lustful Fellows to take Romish Orders upon them, and to engage in desperate
Designs to promote the Interest of that Church. This any Man may easily be
convinced of, that will give himself leave to consider, what dangers other Men
of better Principles, and who may have Opportunities of satisfying Nature by
lawful Marriage, do many times expose themselves to, for the Satisfaction of
their brutish Passions, and how they frequently sacrifice Honor, Interest, and
Estate, with the peace of their Families and Consciences, to their irregular
Appetites of that sort.

The Case then being thus, let us consider what a deluge of Uncleanness may be
poured out upon this Nation by 1000 or 2000, supposing there were no more of
those Popish Ecclesiastics in England at a time; especially since they look
upon it to be their Interest to debauch the Nation, as one of the best
Expedients to advance Popery, as was evident from the practice of the late
Reigns: and therefore it seems to be the natural way of obviating the growth of
Popery, to make the Romish Ecclesiastics incapable of promoting it by that
Method which they like best, and find most successful.

It will still appear to be more reasonable, because they have vowed Chastity,
and by their own Confession have no occasion for those Seminary Vessels;
therefore if they resolved to live as they have sworn to do, they would
willingly unman themselves as Origin did; so far would they be from having any
reason to complain, if others should do it for them.

It can no ways be reckoned cruel, since it may be done without hazard of Life,
as common Experience shows both in Man and Beast, and by consequence less to be
complained of, than those Laws which condemn them to the Gallows. There have
been more Priests put to death in England, than ever were guelded in Sweden;
yet Experience teaches us it has not had near so good an effect. This is
demonstrable from the many Conspiracies against our Princes and Nation, that
the Priests have formed since the enacting of those Laws, and from the great
progress their Idolatry makes among us at this very day; whereas Sweden, since
the enacting of that Law, has been liable to none of these Misfortunes. This
Law of Castration occasioned a pleasant Raillery upon the Jesuits at Brussels
by Queen Christina of Sweden. When those Fathers came to congratulate her there
upon her Conversion, they entertained her, among other things, with the
wonderful Effects of their Missions in the Indies, and other remote parts: That
Princess applauded their Zeal, but at the same time rebuked their Indifference
for her Country of Sweden, where their Endeavors were so much needed: She
pleasantly told them, That tho the Law of Castration was a Bar in their way,
they ought not to prefer the keeping of those things of which they stood in no
need, and of which she hoped they made no use to the advancement of the
Catholic Faith. But this, tho the severest Reproof in the World, has never been
able to bring the Romish Clergy to so much sense of their Duty, as to renew
their Attempts of converting Sweden. This may serve to confirm the Story told
us of an old Capuchin in the Menagiana, the Works of the Abbot Menage, that he
rejected the Advice of his Physicians to be cut of the Stone, for fear it
should make him Impotent, tho he was then 80 Years of Age.

Namque ad Vivendum castrari valde recusat,
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causam.
The Romish Clergy have so much accustomed themselves to those impure
Pleasures, that they will be sure to avoid those Countries where they must be
rendered incapable of enjoying them.

If it be thought that the Laws already made will be more effectual against
them, there is no need of repealing them, tho a new one of Castration be added.
Since that has had so good an Effect in Sweden, we have no reason to despair
of the like here. It Is generally concluded, that our English Women are as
tempting as any in Europe, and are therefore as likely to prevail on a Romish
Priest to venture hanging to enjoy their Favors as any others: But if they be
rendered incapable of it, the temptation will have no force; and so the Priests
will save their Lives, our Women will preserve their Chastity, and our Religion
and Liberty will be freed from their Attaques.

The only Objection of weight that can be made against it is, that it may
provoke our Popish Allies, and other Popish Princes, to treat Protestant
Ministers in the like manner. To which we answer, That admitting it should be
so, it is not half so bad as to have them broke on the Wheel, Hanged, or sent
to the Galleys. In the next place, there is not the like Reason for treating
Protestant Ministers in that manner, for they generally marry; or if they be
guilty of Uncleanness, are thrust from the Ministry. And in the last place,
there is no Reason why we should have any more regard to our Allies, or other
Popish Princes, than they have to us. We hear every day of the cruel
Persecution in France and Germany, notwithstanding our mildness to the Papists
here; so that our enacting a Law of Castration cannot possibly make them
persecute the Protestants more severely than they do, but may rather put a stop
to it.

And indeed it is to be wondered at, that the Protestants should be so much
wanting in their Zeal, and so little sensible of their own Interest, when we
have so Warlike and Zealous a Protestant Prince upon the Throne of Great
Britain, as not to agree on Methods for obliging the Papists to forbear that
barbarous Persecution of their Brethren. Endeavors of that nature were used in
some of those Reigns when Popery had so much Interest at Court, that it seemed
to have a share of the Throne; therefore it is strange if nothing should be
attempted toward it in this Reign. To effect this would, humanly speaking,
seem to be no difficult Work, since the Naval Strength of Europe is in the
Hands of the Protestants; and that the Strength of Great Britain and Holland is
now under the Command of one Prince who is the Hero of his Age.

This our own Safety seems to require, and Charity and Compassion to our
Brethren beyond Sea does loudly call for; but if for Reasons of State, or
otherwise, it be found impracticable for us to interpose in behalf of
persecuted Protestants abroad, there is nothing can hinder us, if we be willing
to secure our selves against Popery at home, by putting the old Laws in
Execution, or enacting new ones.

This seems to be absolutely necessary, if we consider, either the State of the
Protestants beyond Sea, or our own Condition at home.

If we look abroad, we shall find the Protestant Interest, which was once so
considerable in France, quite ruined; and one of the chief Causes of its being
so, was the neglect of our English Governments since Queen Elizabeth's time: we
have done nothing effectual for them since then, which was a mighty oversight,
both in respect of Duty and Interest. That it was our Duty, will scarcely be
denied by any Man that has any true Impressions of the Protestant Religion.
That it was our Interest is demonstrable, because, had the Protestants of
France been supported by our Mediation and Assistance, they would never have
concurred in any ambitious Design of their Monarchs against the Protestant
Interest, or this Nation: and perhaps the fears of that Court, that they might
prove a Curb upon their Designs of that nature, was none of the least Causes of
their having ruined them by the most ungrateful, as well as the most barbarous
Persecution that ever was known. From all which it will naturally result, that
it is the Interest of England to save, if possible, the Remnant of the
Protestants in France, by some effectual Interposition.

If we look a little further into the State of the Protestants of the Valleys
of Piedmont, we shall find that Ancient Church almost totally ruined and
dispersed. If we turn our Eye toward Hungary, Transylvania, and Poland, the
Reformed Interest is almost quite exterminated in those Countries, as it is
totally ruined in Bohemia: What danger it is liable to in the neighboring
Country of Saxony, is known to every one, since that Country, whose Prince was
the first that embraced the Reformation, is now under a Popish Government; and
if we come nearer home to the Palatinate, there we shall also find a Protestant
Church, once the most flourishing, and best reformed in all Germany, under an
unreasonable and cruel Persecution. If we consider the Treaty of Reswick, by
that we shall find the German Protestants despoiled of eight or nine hundred
Churches: The once famous Protestant City of Strasburgh delivered in prey to
the Church of Rome; and the Protestants in Alsace, and the neighboring
Principalities on each side, as the Duchy of Montbelliard, County of Veldents,
etc. subject to Popish Encroachments. In a word, if we look throughout the
whole Empire, and take a view of the Diet at Ratisbon, we shall find the Popish
Interest every where rampant, and incroaching upon the Reformation, contrary to
the Fundamental Laws, and most Solemn Treatys of the Empire. If we cast an Eye
upon Swisserland, the little Republic of Geneva, and the Principality of
Neufchatel, there also we shall find the Protestant Interest threatened and
languishing.

If we look Northward, there we find the Protestant Kingdoms of Sweden and
Denmark ready to engage in a War with one another, and that the Quarrels
betwixt them are fomented by those who carry on an Interest, which is
destructive both to the Protestant Religion, and the Civil Liberties of Europe.
This is sufficient to discover the bad State of the Protestant Interest abroad.

If we consider the posture of Affairs at home, it is evident from a late
printed Letter, said to be wrote by a worthy Bishop, and dedicated to a Member
of Parliament, that Popery comes in upon us like a Flood. It is not to be
denied that there is a Party in the three Nations, who favor the Title of an
Abdicated Popish Prince and his pretended Succession, against the present
Government, and the Succession established by Law. It is not to be forgot, that
their Interest was so strong as to advance a Popish King to our Throne; and tho
they could not keep him there, because he dismounted himself by a furious
Career, yet they have endangered us since by repeated Plots against his present
Majesty's Life, and endeavoring to bring in a French Invasion upon us. It is
also known, that there are mighty discontents fomented and nourished in all the
three Nations, in relation to Trade, Parties, and different Pretensions; and
that this gives the Popish Clergy an opportunity of adding fuel to our Flames,
which makes it likewise evident that the Protestant Interest is in danger at
home.

This is further demonstrable from the Trouble the Papists have from time to
time given, and continue to give to our Government and Parliaments; what is the
meaning else of those Proclamations formerly and lately emitted, commanding
Papists to retire from London? etc. What else is the meaning of those Bills
brought in to prevent their disinheriting their Protestant Heirs, and to hinder
their sending Children abroad to foreign Seminaries, to be bred up in Idolatry,
or made Priests, Monks and Nuns? This, besides the danger that accrues thereby
to our Religion and Libertys, takes vast Sums of Money out of the Kingdom
yearly. They likewise give trouble to our Parliaments, by bringing in Bills for
discovering Estates and Money given to superstitious Uses, which is every way
mighty prejudical to the Kingdom, and enables the Papists to breed Vipers in
our Bowels, in order to rend us in pieces.

Then since it is undeniable that we are in danger from the Papists, whether we
consider the State of Affairs at home or abroad, and that the Laws hitherto
enacted have not been able to prevent the recourse of Popish Priests, etc. nor
the growth of Popery in this Kingdom; what should hinder us from trying new
Methods, and particularly this Law of Castration?

It would certainly be a Punishment very proper for them, and might make them
read their Sin in their Judgment; since it is evident that by their own personal
Villainy, and their loose Doctrine of Pardons, etc. which incourages People in
Licentiousness, they make more Proselytes than by any other Method.

Those, who perhaps would scruple to be any ways Instrumental in taking these
Priests, when the Penalty inflicted upon them by Law is Death, would not have
reason to be so scrupulous to take and discover them when the Punishment is
only Castration, and therefore would be more diligent to put the Laws in
Execution upon them.

It must also be reckoned a deserved Punishment, since under the Seal of
Confession they commit Uncleanness with those they have the Trust of as Ghostly
Fathers, so that it is a sort of spiritual Incest, and a destroying People with
Arms that make no Report; both which Crimes are capital in all well governed
States, and therefore the Punishment of Castration, in such a Case, must needs
be accounted mild.

If it be objected, that tho some of the Romish Clergy be guilty of
Incontinence, yet all of them are not so, and therefore such only are to be
punished in that manner as are convicted of the Crime: It Is easy to answer,
That it is equally true, that all of them are not guilty of Conspiring against
the Government, nor is it possible to convict all of 'em of perverting the
Subjects; yet the 27 th of Elizabeth makes it Treason for any Popish Priest,
bred up beyond Sea, to be here, or to return into England without submitting to
the Government, and taking the Oath of Supremacy. And indeed it is but
reasonable it should be so, for their being here supposes their Design; and
therefore there is as much reason to punish them, tho we cannot prove the Overt
Acts upon them, as there is to punish Thieves for coming into our Houses in an
illegal manner, tho we cannot prove that they have robbed us, or stole any
thing. If we find a Wolf, or other Beast of Prey among our Flocks, we take
their design of destroying them for granted, and treat them accordingly, tho we
don't see the Limbs of our Cattle in their mouths. And therefore since the
Practices and Principles of the Romish Clergy are so well known, their being
found in the Nation ought to be sufficient Conviction.

It still remains a Question, how they shall be discovered? But the Answer is
at hand: Let a competent and certain Reward be proposed for such as shall do
it, and the like Reward, and a Pardon to any of their own Number that shall
discover the rest; or let Provision be made for some of every English Seminary
beyond Sea that turn Protestants, plant some of them in the several Ports of
the Kingdom; and let some of each of those Seminarys be likewise constantly in
London to assist in Searches, and view those that are taken up on Suspicion:
And at the same time let provision be made for such as will inform of all the
Popish Clergy that haunt the great Families of that Opinion in England, and we
need not doubt of an effectual discovery in a little time: for besides the
influence that the hopes of a Reward will have, those Goatish Fellows, the
Romish Clergy, do many times disoblige Familys of their own way, by attempting
to debauch their Wives, Children or Servants, some of whom have so much Virtue
as to reject the Temptation, and to hate the Tempters; and many times their
blind Zeal occasions them likewise to take indiscreet Methods to pervert
Protestant Servants, who would not be wanting, in case of such provision as
abovementioned, to discover those dangerous Fellows.

To inflict this Punishment of Castration upon them, is so much the less to be
thought cruel or unreasonable, since it is so ordinary in Italy, and other
Popish Countries, for the meaner sort of People to geld their own Sons, that
they may make the better market of them for singing Boys, and Musicians, or to
be Catamites to Cardinals, and other Dignitaries of the Romish Church. In those
hot Countries the Roman Clergy are much addicted to that damnable and unnatural
Crime: and such of them as are not, keep lewd Women almost avowedly; they are
indeed more upon the Reserve, and live according to the Maxim of Caute, tho not
Cast, in such Countries where the Government is Reformed, or where the
Protestants are numerous; but then they are under the greater Temptation to
perpetrate their Villainies, on the pretext of Confessing Women: therefore
there is the more Reason to enact a Law of Castration against them in this
Kingdom.

We have the more ground to think, that such a Law duly executed would have a
good Effect, because the Lust of the Flesh is so bewitching and natural to the
greatest part of Mankind, and continues to have a predominancy in them for so
great a part of their Lives, that it has occasioned, and does occasion more
disorders, and is apter to engage Men over whom it obtains the ascendant in
more desperate Undertakings than any other passion whatever. Histories are full
of Examples of Princes and great Men, that have ruined themselves and their
Countries in the pursuit of their irregular Amors. We have no need to turn
over foreign Stories, or to go out of our own Nation for Proofs of this. It is
not so long ago as to be forgot, since we had the chief Affairs of State
managed, and Parliaments dissolved, etc. at the beck of Courtisans. The
Interest of Popery and Tyranny in the late Reigns was chiefly advanced by such.

Do not we find, even in private Persons of all Ranks, that where that Passion
is not kept in due bounds, or cured by the proper Remedies of a suitable Match,
that Honor, Health, and Estates, nay Life it self, is many times sacrificed to
the pleasure of the Flesh; and therefore the Apostle had Reason as well as
Revelation on his side, when he ranked all that is in the World under the three
Heads of the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; and
gave that of the Flesh the preference. It is plain from Experience, that the
other two are made generally subservient to it, as is visible every day from
that excess in Jewels, Apparel, and Household Furniture, and the vast Expense
which the Gallants of both Sexes put themselves to in one or all of these, in
order to obtain the Favor of their Paramours.

From all which we may make this Inference, that if the Romish Clergy were made
incapable by a Law of enjoying that which they account the greatest pleasure of
Life, they would avoid those Countries where such Laws are put in execution, as
they would avoid the Plague. 'Twould be happy if by this means we could deliver
our Posterity from those Conspiracies, Civil Wars, Dreadful Fires, Massacres,
Assassinations of Princes, and other Mischiefs which these Kingdoms have been
liable to from the Papists, and against which all our other Laws have hitherto
signified but little to preserve us.

We have also found, by sad experience, that they have had so much influence as
to get the Ascendant over some of our Princes, by tempting them, as they have
done the French King, with the hopes of an Absolute Sway, and we know not what
Visionary Empires. By this means they prevailed with them to overthrow our
Laws, the recovery of which has cost the Nation so much Blood and Treasure,
that after Ages are like to feel the smart of it: Tho they have run one of our
Princes off the Stage, and have well-nigh ruined their great Champion beyond
Sea, as they did formerly the Spanish Monarchy, by spurring on those Princes to
persecute Protestants, and establish Despotical Government. They will never
give over that Game, but inspire all Princes to whom they can have access,
either by themselves or others, with one or both of those Designs; and
therefore it is the Interest of England to use all possible means to secure the
Nation against those Romish Clergymen, for which Castration is humbly conceived
to be the properest Method, and is so far from being cruely, that it may well
be reckoned as great a piece of Clemency to Romish Priests, as Transportation
is instead of the Gallows to other condemned Criminals.

In short, it will be so far from being a real diskindness to the Popish Laics
of this Nation, that it will be the greatest piece of Friendship to them
imaginable: this we hope they will be the more readily convinced of, if their
Wives, Daughters, and Maidservants, cry out against this Law, for then to be
sure they have some particular concern in the matter.

We hope that our Popish Laics in England are Men of as good Observation as
those in other Countries, and particularly in France and Italy, where their very
Proverbs are sufficient to demonstrate, that they have no great Opinion of
their Clergymens Chastity. It is not possible to expose those goatish Fellows
with more severity and contempt, than the Italians do by saying fate Lui
Coronna, by way of sarcasm, of a Stallion that they don't think performs his
part; alluding to the Priests shaven Crowns, as if that Sacerdotal Character
were sufficient even to invigorate a Horse. Their other Proverb of fate lo
Prete, let us make him a Priest, when they have any ungovernable Wanton in a
Family, that overruns all their Females, is akin to the other; and their
covering their Stone-horses with a Monk's Frock, when they find them
indifferent for a Mare in season, is a scandalous Reproof of those brutish
Clergymen. Answerable to these is the French Proverb; Qui veut tenir net
Maison
Qu'il n'y souffre ni pretre in Moin ni pigeon.
Comparing the Popish Clergy to the Pigeons for their venereous Inclinations;
and may be Englished thus, They that would keep their Houses Chaste and Neat,
From thence must Priests, Monks, Nuns, and Pigeons beat.
As all Proverbs of that sort are founded upon something universally known or
conceived to be true, it is not at all for the Honor of the Popish Clergy,
that their Chastity should be thus reflected upon in Countries where they are
the sole Directors of Conscience, and have their Religion established by Law.

But that which fixes it yet more upon them, is, that in the Pope's Chancery
the Tax for eating Eggs in Lent, is greater than that for Sodomy; and the
Penalty upon a Priest that marrys, is greater than upon those that commit that
monstrous and unnatural Villainy just now mentioned. From all which it is
manifest, that they did not speak at random who informed us that the Celibacy
of such an innumerable multitude of Popish Ecclesiastics, is the maximum
Arcanum dominationis Papalis, and that the Priests Testicles are the greatest
Promoters of the Pope's Empire. This will appear yet more plain, that it is of
the highest Importance to them, since the Church of Rome maintains, that
Marriage is a Sacrament, and that all Sacraments confer Grace, and yet denis it
to her Clergy; a manifest Indication that they have their graceless Designs to
promote by it, especially since at the same time the want of those Parts which
they will not allow them to make use of in a regular way, renders them
incapable of being Priests according to their Canons; but yet they are so kind
to their gelded Martyrs, as to allow it to be sufficient if they have them
about them, in Powder, or any other way.

These things confirm, in a literal sense, the odious Characters given the
Church of Rome in the Revelations, Chap. 17, 18, etc. As the great Whore, with
whom the Kings and Inhabitants of the Earth have committed Fornication; the
Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, having a golden Cup in her
hand full of Abominations, and of the Filthiness of her Fornications, etc. Then
since by the Testimony of God and Man, the Romish Clergy is such an impure and
lascivious Crew, it makes a Law of Castration a just and adequate Punishment
for them.

To conclude; Since our King and Parliament have both testified their Zeal and
Forwardness to suppress Immorality and Profaneness, it follows naturally that
such a Law as this deserves their serious Thoughts; for it is impossible to
suppress reigning Vice, so long as those goatish Fellows are suffered to swarm
among us. They not only corrupt the Morals of People themselves by such
Practices and Principles as abovementioned, but bring over and encourage
others to do it; particularly those Italians, etc. who sell and print Aretin's
Postures; and in order to debauch the Minds of Women, and to make them guilty
of nnnatural Crims, invent and sell 'em such things as Modesty forbids to name.
It Is evident, that as Popery advanced upon us in the late Reigns, Debauchery
gained ground at the same time, for they naturally make way for one another;
and therefore we can never suppress Immorality, without securing our selves
effectually against Popery. If this should be attempted by a Law of Castration
against Romish Priests, it must be owned that it would be more charitable and
humane to save our selves from Popish Superstition, and all its mischievous
Consequences, by that Method alone, than to practice it, together with other
Punishments, upon such of those Wretches as come to the Gibbet for Treason; the
cutting off their Privities in such Cases, and throwing 'em in the Fire, just
before they be totally bereft of Life, can be of no manner of use, whereas
Castration alone beforehand might have saved us from the danger of their Plots,
and prevented themselves from coming to the Gallows.

FINIS.

