"POLONIAN LIBERTY": THE FIRST ENGLISH RECOGNITION OF JOHN SOBIESKI
WRITTEN BY JOHN MILTON THE RAREST OF ALL HIS FIRST EDITIONS IN ENGLISH
50 [MILTON, John.] A Declaration, or Letters Patents of the Election of this
present King of Poland John the Third... containing... his eminent Services in
War, especially in his last great Victory against the Turks and Tartars,
whereof many Particulars are here related, not published before. Now faithfully
translated from the Latin Copy. London: Printed by Brabazon Aylmer... 1673.

Sm. 4to., full crimson morocco.

First editon of Milton's last publication, which, "like his first, appeared
anonymously... a final reminder that its translator was a man of broadly
European culture, interested to the end in international affairs" (Parker, I,
638).

This version in the English language of the Latin document -- "newly arrived
from Poland" describing the election and accession of John Sobieski to the
independent throne of Poland -- "would seem to be the rarest of all Milton
first editions... except for the privately printed Epitaphium Damonis [in
Latin, c. 1640, British Library unique]" (Parker, II, 1151).

Only five other copies are known; the British Library, Christ's College,
Cambridge, in U.K., and, in America, Texas, Yale, Indiana (Harmsworth). New
Wing adds Library of Congress (perhaps -- Harmsworth) and Harvard, which Parker
indicates has been missing since 1947 (it has since been found, we are pretty
happy to say). Parker's note at II, 1212, remarks that "the exhibition
catalogue of the Illinois Collection of First Editions... claims to include
`every first edition of Milton's works', but omits this one".

New Wing D 779; Parker, II, 1151, 1212, App. 2, no. 80. Masson, Life of
Milton, VI, 725-7.

72. LR, v. 83-84; Phillips (1694), p. liii (not in Darbishire); Masson, VI.
725-7. The collation of A Declaration: 40: A-B4; pp. [ii], 12, [2]. The
contents: pp. [i-ii], blank; p. [1], title; p. [2], blank; pp. 3-12, text; pp.
[13-14], blank. It is through Phillips that we know of Milton's translation of
this work. Wood and Aubrey omitted the Declaration in their bibliographies, but
Toland noticed Phillips's entry, and the translation was reprinted in School.
There is no reason to doubt Phillips's attribution; the publisher, Brabazon
Aylmer, also published Milton's Epistoloe in 1674, and later his Brief History
of Moscovia. French wrote that `No satisfactory explanation for his [Milton's]
having performed this unusual task at this period in his age has been offered',
but surely none is needed beyond the business acumen of Aylmer, who, if he did
not request the translation, readily saw the need of it.

Milton's name does not appear. This may be a reason for the great scarcity of
surviving copies. Wing (D779) lists only three, but the following five or six
libraries, perhaps with some others, have copies of the first edition: British
Museum, Christ's College, Harvard (missing since 1947), Indiana (Harmsworth),
Texas, and Yale. Except for the privately printed Epitaphium Damonis (1640?),
this would seem to be the rarest of all Milton first editions, though some
additional libraries may have copies catalogued solely under `Declaration', or
`John III', or `Poland', or `Sobieski'. Articles of Peace (1649), containing
Milton's anonymous 'Observations', is a close third in scarcity, with only ten
copies known to me.

A DECLARATION, OR Letters Patents of the Election of this present King of
POLAND JOHN the Third, Elected on the 22d of May last past, Anno Dom. 1674.
Containing the Reasons of this Election, the great Virtues and Merits of the
said Serene Elect, His eminent Services in War, especially in his last great
Victory against the Turks and Tartars, whereof many Particulars are here
related, not published before. Now faithfully translated from the Latin Copy.
by John Milton.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1674.

Letters Patents of the Election of the most serene King of POLAND.
In the name of the most holy and Individual Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit.

WE ANDREW TREZEBICKI, Bishop of Cracovia, Duke of Severia, JOHN GEMBICKI of
Uladislau and Pomerania, etc. Bishops to the number of Ten.

STANISLAUS WARSZYCKI, Castellon of Cracovia; ALEXANDER MICHAEL LUBOMIRSKI of
Cracovia, etc. Palatines to the number of Twenty Three.

CHRISTOPHERUS GRZYMALTOUSKI of Posnania, ALEXANDER GRATUS de Tarnow of
Sandimer: Castellons to the number of Twenty Four.

HILAREUS POLUBINSKI, High Marshal of the great Dukedom of Lituania,
CHRISTOPHERUS PAC, High-Chancelor of the great Dukedom of Lituania, Senators
and Great Officers, to the number of Seventy five.

WE Declare by these our present Letters unto all and single Persons whom it
may concern: Our Commonwealth being again left Widowed, by the unseasonable
death of that famous MICHAEL late King of Poland, who having scarce reigned
full five years, on the tenth day of November of the year last past, at
Leopolis, changed his fading Crown for one Immortal; in the sense of so
mournful a Funeral and fresh Calamity, yet with an undaunted Courage, mindful
of her self in the midst of Dangers, forbore not to seek Remedies, that the
World may understand she grows in the midst of her losses; it pleased her to
begin her Counsels of preserving her Country, and delivering it from the utmost
chances of an Interreign, from the Divine Deity, (as it were by the only motion
of whose finger) it is easy that Kingdoms be transferred from Nation to
Nation, and Kings from the lowest state to Thrones; And therefore the business
was begun according to our Countrey-Laws and Ancestors Institutions. After the
Convocation of all the States of the Kingdom ended, in the month of February at
Warsaw, by the common consent of all those States on the day decreed for the
Election the 20th of April; At the report of this famous Act, as though a
Trumpet had been sounded, and a Trophy of Virtue erected, the wishes and
desires of Foreign Princes came forth of their own accord into the Field of
the Polonian Liberty, in a famous strife of Merits and good will toward the
Commonwealth, every one bringing their Ornaments, advantages and Gifts to the
Commonwealth: But the Commonwealth becoming more diligent by the prodigal
ambition used in the last Interreign, and Factions, and disagreeings of minds,
nor careless of the future, considered with her self whether firm or doubtful
things were promised, and whether she should seem from the present state to
transfer both the old and new honors of Poland into the possession of
strangers, or the military glory, and their late unheard of Victory over the
Turks, and blood spilt in the war, upon the purple of some unwarlike Prince; as
if any one could so soon put on the love of the Country, and that Poland was
not so much an enemy to her own Nation and Fame, as to favor strangers more
than her own; and valor being found in her, should suffer a Guest of new Power
to wax proud in her; therefore she thenceforth turned her thoughts upon some
one in her own Nation, and at length abolished (as she began in the former
Election) that reproach cast upon her, under pretense of a secret Maxim, That
none can be elected King of Poland but such as are born out of Poland; neither
did she seek long among her Citizens whom she should prefer above the rest (for
this was no uncertain or suspended Election, there was no place for delay;) for
although in the equality of our Nobles many might be elected, yet the virtue of
a Hero appeared above his equals, therefore the eyes and minds of all men were
willingly and by a certain divine instinct turned upon the High Marshal of the
Kingdom, Captain of the Army John Sobietski. The admirable virtue of the Man,
the High Power of Marshal in the Court, with his supreme command in Arms,
Senatorial Honor, with his civil Modesty, the extraordinary Splendour of his
Birth and Fortune, with open Courtesy, Piety toward God, love to his
Fellow-Citizens in words and deeds; Constancy, Faithfulness, and Clemency
toward his very enemies, and what noble things soever can be said of a Hero,
did lay such Golden Chains on the Minds and Tongues of all, that the Senate and
People of Poland and of the great Dukedom of Lituania; with Suffrages and
agreeing Voices named and chose him their KING; not with his seeking nor
precipitate counsel, but with mature Deliberations continued and extended till
the third day.

Certainly it conduced much for the honor of the most serene Elect, the
Confirmation of a free Election, and the eternal praise of the People electing,
that the great business of an Age was not transacted in one day, or in the
Shadow of the night, or by one casuul heat: for it was not right that a Hero of
the Age, should in a moment of time (and as it were by the cast of a Die) be
made a King, when as Antiquity by an ancient Proverb has delivered, that
Hercules was not begot in one night; and it has tought that Election should
shine openly under a clear Sky, in the open Light.

The most serene Elect took it modestly that his Nomination should be deferred
till the third day, plainly showing to endeavor, lest his sudden facility of
assent being suspected, might detract from their Judgment, and the World might
be enforced to believe by a more certain Argument, that he that was so chosen
was elected without his own Ambition, or the envy of corrupted Liberty: or was
it by the appointed Counsel of God that this debate continued three whole days,
from Saturday till Monday, as if the Cotimian Victory (begun on the Saturday,
and at length on the third day after accomplished, after the taking of the
Cotimian Castle) had been a lucky presage of his Royal Reward; or, as if with
an auspicious Omen, the third day of Election had alluded to the Regal name of
JOHN the Third.

The famous Glory of War paved his way to the Crown, and confirmed the favor
of Suffrages to his most serene Elect. He the first of all the Polonians showed
that the Seythian swiftness (troublesome heretofore to all the Monarchies of
the World) might be repressed by a standing Fight, and the terrible main
Battalion of the Turk, might be broken and routed at one stroke. That we may
pass by in silence the ancient Rudiments of Warfare which he stoutly and
gloriously managed under the Conduct and Authority of another, against the
Swedes, Muscovites, Borussians, Transylvanians and Cossacks; though about sixty
Cities taken by him from the Cossacks be less noised in the mouth of fame; yet
these often and prosperous Battles, were a Prelude to greatest Victories in the
memory of man. Miriads of Tartars had overrun within this six years with their
plundering Troops the coast of Podolia; when a small force and some shattered
Legions were not sufficient against the hostile assault, yet our General
knowing not to yield, shut himself up (by a new stratagem of War) in Podhajecy,
a strait Castle, and fortified in haste, whereby he might exclude the cruel
destruction which was hastening into the bowels of the Kingdom, by which means
the Barbarian deluded and routed, took Conditions of Peace; as if he had made
his inroad for this only purpose, that he might bring to the most serene Elect,
matter of Glory, Victory.

For these Four last years the famous Victories of Sobietski have Signalized
every year of his Warlike Command on the Cossacks, and Tartarians, both joined
together; the most strong Province of Braclavia, as far as it lies between
Hypanis and Tyral, with their Cities and Warlike people, were won from the
Cossack enemy.

And those things are beyond belief which two years ago the most serene Elect,
after the taking of Camenick, (being undaunted by the Seige of Laopolis,)
performed to a Miracle by the hardness and fortitude of the Polonian Army,
scarce consisting of three thousand men, in the continual course of five days
and nights, sustaining life without any food, except wild herbs; setting upon
the Tartarians, he made famous the names of Narulum, Niemicrovia, Konarnum,
Kalussia, obscure Towns before, by a great overthrow of the Barbarians. He slew
three Sultans of the Crim-Tartars, descended of the royal Gietian family, and
so trampled on that great force of the Scythians, that in these latter years
they could not regain their Courage or recollect the Forces. But the felicity
of this last Autumn exceeded all his Victories; when as the fortifications at
Chocimum, famous of old, were possessed and fortified by above forty thousand
Turks, in which three and forty years ago the Polonians had sustained and
repressed the Forces of the Ottoman Family, drawn together out of Asia, Africa,
and Europe, fell to the ground within a few hours; by the only (under God)
Imperatorious Valor and Prudence, of Sobietski; for he counted it his chief
part to go about the Watches, order the Stations, and personally to inspect the
preparations of Warlike Ordinance, to encourage the Soldiers with voice, hands,
and countenance, wearied with hunger, badness of weather, and three days
standing in arms; and he (which is most to be admired) on Foot at the head of
the foot-forces made thorough and forced his way to the Battery, hazarding his
life devoted to God and his Country; and thereupon made a cruel slaughter
within the Camp and Fortifications of the Enemy; while the desperation of the
Turks whetted their valor, and he performed the part of a most provident and
valiant Captain; at which time three Bashaw's were slain, the fourth scarce
passed with difficulty the swift river of Tyras; eight thousand Ianizaries,
twenty thousand chosen Spachies, besides the more Common Soldiers, were cut
off; the whole Camp with all their Ammunition, and great Ordinance: besides the
Assyrian and Phrygian wealth of luxurious Asia, were taken and pillaged, the
famous Castle of Cotimia, and the Bridge over Tyras, strong Fortresses, equal to
Castles on each side the River, were additions to the Victory. Why therefore
should not such renowned Heroic Valor be crowned with the legal reward of a
Diadem? All Christendom have gone before us in example, which being arrived to
the recovery of Jerusalem under the conduct of Godfrey of Bullion, on their own
accord gave him that Kingdom, for that he first scaled the walls of that City.
Our most serene Elect is not inferior, for he first also Ascended two main
Fortresses of the Enemy.

The moment of time adorns this Victory unheard of in many ages, the most
serene King Michael dying the day before, as it were signifying thereby that he
gave way to so great valor, as if it were by his command and favor, that this
Conqueror might so much the more gloriously suceed from the Helmet to the
Crown, from the Commanders Staff to the Scepter, from his lying in the Field to
the Regal Throne.

The Commonwealth recalled the grateful, and never to be forgotten memory of
his Renowned Father, the most Illustrious and Excellent James Sobietski,
Castellion of Cracovia, a Man to be written of with sedulous care, who by his
Golden Eloquence in the public Counsels, and by his Hand in the Scene of War,
had so often amplified the State of the Commonwealth, and defended it with the
Arms of his Family. Neither can we believe it happened without Divine
Providence, that in the same place wherein forty years ago his Renowned Father
Ambassador of the Polonian-Common wealth, had made Peace and Covenants with
Cimanus the Turkish General, his great Son should Revenge with his Sword the
Peace broke, (Heaven it self upbraiding the perfidious Enemy). The rest of his
Grandsires and Great-Grandsires, and innumerable Names of Famous Senators and
great Officers have as it were brought forth light to the serene Elect by the
emolous Greatness and Glory of his Mothers descent, especially Stanislaus
Zelkievius, High Chancellor of the Kingdom, and General of the Army, at whose
Grave in the Neighboring fields, in which by the Turkish rage in the year 1620
he died, his victorious Nephew took full revenge by so remarkable an overthrow
of the Enemy: The immortal valor and fatal fall of his most noble Uncle
Stanislaus Danilovitius in the year 1635, Palatine of Russia, doubled the Glory
of his Ancestors; whom desirous of honor and not enduring that sluggish Peace
wherein Poland then slept secure, valor and youthful heat accited at his own
expense and private forces, into the Taurick fields; that by his footing and
the ancient Warlike Polonian discipline, he might lead and point the way to
these merits of Sobietski, and being slain by Cantimiz the Tartarian Cham, in
revenge of his Son by him flain, he might by his Noble blood give luster to
this Regal Purple; neither has the people of Poland forgot the most
illustrious Marcus Sobietski elder Brother of our most serene Elect, who when
the Polonian Army at Batto was routed by the Barbarians although occasion was
offered him of escape, yet chose rather to die in the overthrow of such valiant
men, a Sacrifice for his Country, than to buy his life with a dishonorable
retreat; perhaps the divine Judgment so disposing, whose order is that persons
pass away and fail, and causes and events happen again the same; that by the
repeated fate of the Huniades, the elder Brother of great hopes removed by a
lamented slaughter, might leave to his younger Brother surviving the readier
passage to the Throne. That therefore which we pray may be happy, Auspicious
and fortunate to our Orthodox Commonwealth, and to all Christendom, with free
and unanimous Votes, none opposing, all consenting and applauding, by the right
of our free Election, notwithstanding the Absence of those which have been
called and not Appeared, We being led by no private respect, but having only
before our eyes the Glory of God, the increase of the ancient Catholic Church,
the safety of the Commonwealth, and the dignity of the Polish Nation and Name,
have thought fit to elect, create, and name, JOHN in Zolkiew and Zloczew
Sobietski, Supreme Marshal General of the Kingdom General of the Armies,
Governor of Neva, Bara, Strya, Loporovient, and Kalussien, most eminently
adorned with so high endowments, merits and splendour, to be KING of Poland,
Grand-Duke of Lituania, Russia, Prussia, Mazovia, Samogitia, Kyovia, Volhinnia,
Padlachita, Podolia, Livonia, Smolensko, Severia, and Czerniechovia, as we have
Elected Created Declared and Named Him; I the before said Bishop of Cracovia
(the Archiepiscopal See being vacant) exercising the Office and Authority of
Primate and by consent of all the States thrice demanded, opposed by none, by
all and every one approved, conclude the Election: Promising faithfully that we
will always perform to the same most serene and potent Elect Prince, Lord John
the third, our King, the same Faith, Subjection, Obedience and Loyalty
according to our Rights and Liberties, as we have performed to his blessed
Ancestor, as also that we will crown the same most serene Elect in the next
Assembly at Cracovia, to that end ordained, as our true King and Lord, with the
Regal Diadem, with which the Kings of Poland were wont to be crowned, and after
the manner which the Roman Catholic Church before-time has observed in
Anointing and Inaugurating Kings, We will anoint and inaugurate him; Yet so as
he shall hold fast and observe first of all the Rights, Immunities both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, granted and given to us by his Ancestor of Blessed
memory; as also these Law's which we our Selves, in the time of this present
and former Inter-reign, according to the Right of our Liberty, and better
preservation of the Commonwealth have established. And if moreover the most
Serene Elect will bind himself by an Oath, to perform the conditions concluded
with those persons sent by his Majesty, before the exhibition of this present
Decree of Election, and will provide in best manner for the performance of them
by his authenick Letters; which Decree of Election we by Divine aid, desirous
to put in execution, do send by common consent, to deliver it into the hands of
the most Serene Elect, the most illustrious and reverend Lord Bishop of
Cracovia, together with some Senators and chief Officers, and the illustrious
and magnificent benedictus Sapieha, Treasurer of the Court of the Great Dukedom
of Lituania, Marshal of the Equestrian Order; commiting to them the same Decree
of intimating an Oath, upon the aforesaid premises, and receiving his
Subscription; and at length to give and deliver the same Decree into the hands
of the said Elect, and to act and perform all other things which this affair
requires, in assurance whereof the Seals of the Lords Senators, and those of
the Equestrian Order deputed to sign, are here affixed.

Given by the hands of the most illustrious and reverend Father in Christ, the
Lord Andrew Olzonski, Bishop of Culma and Pomisania, High Chancellor of the
Kingdom, in the general ordinary Assembly of the Kingdom, and great Dukedom of
Lituania, for the Election of the new King. Warsaw the 22th day of May, in the
year of our Lord 1674.

In the presence of Franciscus Praszmouski, provost of Guesna, Abbot of
Sieciethovia, chief Secretary of the Kingdom; Ioannes Malachowski, Abbot of
Mogila, Referendary of the Kingdom, etc. with other great Officers of the
Kingdom and Clergy, to the number of fourscore and two. And the rest, very
many great Officers, Captains, Secretaries, Courtiers, and Inhabitants of the
Kingdom, and great Dukedom of Lituania, gathered together at Warsaw, to the
present Assembly of the Election of the Kingdom and great Dukedom of Lituania.

Assistants at the solemn Oath taken of his sacred Majesty on the 5th day of
the Month of June, in the Palace at Warsaw, after the Letters Patents delivered
upon the Covenants, and Agreements, or Capitulations, the most Reverend and
Excellent Lord Francisco Bonvisi, Archbishop of Thessalonica, Apostolic
Nuntio; Count Christopherus a scaffgotsch, Caecareus Tussanus de Forbin, de
Jason Bishop of Marseilles in France, Ioannes free-barron Hoverbeck, from the
Marquess of Brandenburg, Ambassadors; and other Envoyes and Ministers of State.

FINIS.

