REFLECTIONS Upon the Late GREAT REVOLUTION.

LICENSED,

April 9. 1689. James Fraser.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Late Great Revolution.

Written by a LAY-HAND in the COUNTRY. For the Satisfaction of some Neighbors.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Late GREAT REVOLUTION.
PRovidence having placed me in so low a Sphere, that I have had nothing to do
in the great Revolutions of which our Land has lately been the Scene; I must
not pretend to judge of what has past: But although I have not been an Actor, I
cannot say I have been altogether an unconcerned Spectator of the great Changes
these last Three Months have produced: For what I did not know in the Cause, I
thought I might yet lawfully admire in the Effects; which truly have been so
miraculous, that it is as much the Worlds Wonders as ours: So that if ever
People had cause to apply the Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. ver. 23. we
certainly may say, This is the Lord's doing, and I Am sure it ought to be
mavelous in our Eyes. But alas! as if we meant to vie Miracles, and to show
that we can be as obstinate as God can be gracious, we are so far from
admiring, that we will neither own nor accept the Wonderful Deliverance that
God has wrought for us. A sign, I fear, that we are unworthy of so great a
Mercy, while we can be so insensible of, and so unthankful for it: And, like
the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, instead of going on to possess that
Canaan God seems to have designed for us, we are for making a Captain to return
again into Egypt; and to put our Necks into that Yoke, which neither we nor our
Fathers were able to bear. And I wish our present Murmurings and Discontents do
not provoke God to deal with us as he did with the Israelites, and swear that
we shall not enter into, nor enjoy that Rest we so despise.

But if Passive Obedience be so necessary a Duty, and we are indispensibly
obliged to obey our Kings whatsoever they be; the Children of Israel had
certainly a great deal of reason to quarrel with Moses and Aaron, for making
them Rebels, depriving them of the Honor of suffering for a good Cause, and
making them do so many ill things. For certainly the Children of Israel were as
much, and as truly the Subjects of Pharaoh, as any body can be to any of our
Modern Kings. For they were all born in his Land, governed by his Laws, and he
and his Ancestors had reigned over them by a long Prescription of Four hundred
Year; and if this is not enough to give a King a Title, I doubt most of our
Monarchs may despair of showing a better. But to that I know it will be
answered, That 'twas God Almighty's own Doings; and that as Abraham might
lawfully sacrifice his Son when God commanded it, so they might lawfully Rebel
when they had God's Authority for it; for God being the Great King, may dispose
of Kingdoms as he pleases. To which I shall make no other Return, but humbly
offer this Quere, (which I should be glad to see resolved) Whether God can, or
ever did command an unlawful thingg? For his Proposal to Abraham was only for
Trial; for you see, he would not permit him to kill his Son when it came to it:
But the Children of Israel went through with their Design; therefore if in it
self it had been so great a Sin, he would not have commanded, much less
assisted the Israelites in the Execution of it. To see Men then murmur against
God, and quarrel with Providence, only because it would not suffer them to be
oppressed as the Israelites were, nay destroyed and ruined; seems so
unaccountable a Ground for Dissatisfaction, that it deserves to be examined
into.

And I must own, that I have so much both of Esteem and Reverence for some of
our Discontents, that I cannot think them so weak, as to have a Platonic Love
of Suffering; or so wilful, as to oppose the Truth if they are convinced of it:
Therefore suppose they have (at least as it seems to them) some good Reason,
which makes them thus not only deny, but resist their own Interest. And here
Conscience and Zeal both stand up for them, (the two best Champions in the
World when in the right, but the most unruly and dangerous when in the wrong;)
and Conscience telling them they cannot comply, Zeal tells them they must
oppose and declare against such Proceedings. But yet for all this, how hard a
Task soever it seems, I should not fear encountering, nay overcoming these two,
had I not two greater Difficulties to contest with, that is Prepossession, and
Prejudice. For we daily see by sad experience, that People may be as fully
persuaded of, and as zealous for an Error, as it is possible to be for Truth it
self. For which I need go no further for an Instance, than St. Paul, who says,
Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Of which he gives us an account in
the two following Verses; Being (as he himself terms it) exceedingly Mad
against them. But that we might not be ignorant what we are to ascribe this
extravagant Zeal and extraordinary Fierceness to, he tells in the preceding
Verses of this 26th Chap. and also in the 3d Verse of the 22th, That from his
Youth up he had been brought up in Jerusalem, at the Feet of Gamaliel, taught
according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers, and was zealous
toward God, as ye all are this day. So that it is very apparent, it was his
Education that inspired him with his Zeal. For the Pharisees were not only the
strictest, but the most dogmatical Sect among the Jews; and while they thought
they, and only they, had the Law of their sides, they not only despised, but
hated all that were not of their Opinion; and thought it not enough to instill
their own Doctrines and Principles into their Disciples, unless at the same
time they impressed upon them an absolute Horror and Detestation of all others:
So that here was Prepossession and Prejudice to the height; and we may see the
Effects of it in St. Paul; for it made him proof against all the Miracles of
our Savior and his Apostles, (for living in Jerusalem, it cannot be supposed
but that he must both see and hear of them) so that nothing but a Call from
Heaven it self could convince him. But I say not this, that I intend to apply
it particularly to any of our Times, but only to show in general the
Unhappiness of such a grounded Prepossession and Prejudice, and the difficulty
of treating with it, because Truth it self will appear unwelcome to such, if it
contradict their received and admired Opinions.

But after all this, it must be allowed, that never any prejudice was taken up
on so justifiable grounds, as that our Churchmen may have to the very
appearance of Rebellion; for living in the late War, and seeeing the dismal
Effects of it, by the sad ruin it had wrought both in Church and State, they
might reasonably think they could not run too far from such pernicious
Principles. But alas! there is an extreme of the other hand, which perhaps may
be as dangerous, and therefore ought as carefully to be avoided. For if, like
some of our over Zealous Reformers in the Church, who having both seen and
detested the Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, thought they were
to hold nothing in Common with them; if, I say, like these, our State-Reformers
should fling away and abhor and detest all that was done in 41. as the one
would soon run us out of our Religion as Christians, so the other would out of
our Birthright and Privileges as English men. But as I hope no body will
reject their Creed because believed by the Papists; so I think it would be full
as unreasonable for a People to despise and destroy their own Rights and
Liberties, because they were asserted by a Company of Rebels so long ago.

But all this while I have been only skirmishing with some of their Out-Guards,
their main Body and Strength too remains yet entire: Which I shall own
invincible, if they can make out those two great Points. First, That Monarchy
is Jure Divino, properly so called; and Secondly, That if the King Command us
any thing contrary to our Laws, we are yet in Conscience obliged to obey, and
yield Obedience either Active or Passive. These are indeed the Foundation
Stones on which the great Doctrines of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience are
built; and if the Foundation prove firm and true, I cannot, no I dare not deny
the Superstructure, but (...) yield my self their Convert; being, I bless God,
more desirous to be overcome by Truth, than to conquer without it. And coming
with this Resolution, I hope I may, for Argument sake, be allowed to say what I
can for the Cause I have undertaken. To which purpose, I shall desire leave to
Consider these two things; First, From whence Kings in general do derive their
Authority (which answers to the first Point of Monarchy being Jure Divino;) and
Secondly, What is that particular Authority that is vested in our Kings (from
which I hope to clear the second Point.)

I.
But first of the First, And since Jure Divino is the thing pretended to, I
think I cannot take a better Method, than to let Gods own Word and Law decide
the Question. For I take it to be the best as well as the last Judge in such
Points; and therefore I shall confine my self to the Sacred Scripture, and
bring no Proofs nor Argument on this first Head, but what that affords me. And
if I can from thence prove these Three things: First, That Monarchy was not at
the first Instituted by God Almighty: Secondly, That after Monarchy was
permitted and established among the Jews, the People did make and set up their
Kings; and Thirdly, That those Kings which were named and appointed by God
himself had not an absolute Power, but were under Conditions and Covenants: If,
I say, I can make out these three things, I shall then suppose I have done all
that can be expected from me, and that I have sufficiently confuted the Jure
Divino Title. I.


And now when I come to treat of my First Point, it is possible some may expect
that I should by History trace Monarchy back to its Original source; but our
present dispute being, Whether it be Jure Divino or no? I thought (as I said
before) that Gods Word would be our best Guide; and therefore shall confine my
self to the Sacred Writ, although it must be owned, that if there be any
intimations at all about the Matter we are now in quest of, they are for
several Centuries so dark and obscure, that Negative Inferences are the best
Proofs we can produce; but if our Advesaries can bring a piece of Canonical
Scripture that is Affirmative on their side, I shall not only be very glad to
see it, but also very willing to submit to it; for I am sure it was never my
design to contest either Gods Will, or Gods Word; and the latter being the
surest way to come to the knowledge of the former, (it being given us for that
very end) I hope it will not be unreasonable in me to expect that the Claims to
Jure Divino should be made out by express Scripture, for the Grant ought to be
very clear that conveys such an inestimable Privilege.

Now I conceive a thing may become Jure Divino two ways; First, by being
immediately Instituted by God Almighty; and Secondly, by being positively
Commanded; of which the Church both Jew and Christian can afford us Instances,
among the which I should reckon the Passover with the Jews, and the Lords
Supper with the Christians, they both of them being not only immediately
Instituted, but also their observation positively Commanded by God himself. And
although I cannot say I rank Kings in that Classis, yet I do own an Order of
Men to be Jure Divino, and that is the Bishops; for that of St. Joh. 17.18. As
thou have sent me into the World, even so send I them into the World, seems to
me so powerful, and so full a Commission, that I dare not reject it. And when
our Monarchical Men can show me a Text of Scripture, wherein our Savior does
as fully make over his Regal Authority to Kings, as he does there his
Prophetical to the Apostles, I shall then certainly pay them the same
deference. And because Examples do illustrate things much more than simple
Positions, I shall now suppose, that some of us of the Church of England went
into the Indies in the Nature of Apostles, to Preach and Plant Christianity
among them; and succeeding in the design, I should then ask, Whether it were
lawful to set up what sort of Church Government we pleased among these new
Converts, or whether they did not think we were obliged to establish
Episcopacy? But of the other side, supposing that we went as Conquerors, and
had made an absolute Conquest of a very large Territory, might we not then
lawfully set up what kind of Civil Government we pleased, and such as we
thought might be most beneficial and agreeable to our new Subjects? Or are we
in Conscience indispensibly obliged to set up Monarchy wherever we have the
Command, although it should happen to be extremely disadvantageous to the State
in its present Circumstances? And the Answer that every body shall in such a
Case be able to give themselves, will I suppose sufficiently clear the Point of
Jure Divino. But for all this, the other side are very free to make out their
Title to it; and if they can prove that it was Originally Instituted by God
Almighty, or that we are positively Commanded to obey Kings exclusively to all
other sort of Government (for if that, and only that, be Jure Divino, I
conceive it would then be a sin to submit to any other.) If, I say, they can
make out both or either of these from Scripture, I yield; but till that is
done, it may not be amiss to see what Account the Historical part of the Bible
gives us of the beginning of Monarchy. And here it must on all hands be owned,
that for the first Sixteen hundred years, that is, the whole space from the
Creation to the Deluge, there is not any mention or least intimation of such a
thing as a King; and yet according to the Calculation of some of the Learned,
the World was then as full of People, and consequently there was as much need
of Government then as now. But what want there was of it, I know not; but that
there was no such thing as Monarchy then in the World, we have a great deal of
reason to believe. For this I can be very sure of, that in the Holy Line, that
Branch of the Posterity of Noah wherein the Church was to be preserved, and
from whence the Messiah was to spring, there was no King for near Fifteen
hundred years after the Flood, and yet one would have guest, that that People
that were so particularly favored of God, that they had the Enclosure of his
other Laws and Ordinances, (as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Ordinances unto Israel. He has
not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws);
should not have been excluded for so many hundred years from this Jure Divino
Ordinance, had it originally been instituted by God. But that it was not
commanded to them, is, I think, pretty evident, not only from their being so
long without it, but also from the very severe and bitter Reproofs they meet
with from Samuel, when they desire a King. And after that God had complied with
the People, in setting a King over them, he was yet at the expense of a
Miracle, as you may find it, 1 Samuel 12.18. to convince the People of their sin
and folly in asking one; who in the 19th Verse, confess, We have added to all
our sins this evil in asking us a King; which methinks is no very good Argument
of its being Jure Divino. It Is answered, I know, to this, That God was their
King; which does not cross, but confirm what I say; for he who is the King of
all the Earth, did not think fit to govern them by Kings.

But how long soever it was before Monarchy was set up in Israel, it must be
owned, that it had a much earlier admittance among other Nations; for Nimrod,
who was the first King, at least, the first we find mentioned in Holy Writ, did
certainly begin his Kingdom in the Second Century after the Flood. But truly
the Character that is given of the Man, would not make us very much in love
with the Order to which he gave both Beginning and Name; for that his Kingdom
was founded by Force and Violence, is very clearly intimated; and that he got
the Name of the great Hunter, by his driving Men (not Beasts) out of their
Possessions: for poor Ashur, the Son of Sem, who had fixed himself in the Land
of Shinar, was forced to fly for it, and to get him over Tigris, where indeed
he laid the Foundation of another great Monarchy, that of the Assyrians. For
Nimrod carrying on his Kingdom by the same means he began it, made it necessary
for some that were his Neighbors, to set themselves up Kings, that they might
be the better able to oppose him: and Pride and Ambition being very natural to
Men, every body began to aspire to Dominion; so that in a short time every
little Village and Hamlet had its particular Monarch: for we find the Land of
Canaan pretty well stockt with Kings when Abraham comes to sojourn among them.

And this is all the Account that I can from the Scripture collect of the
Original of Monarchy. But I think it is a little remarkable, that as the first
City was built by Cain, so the first Kingdom was set up by Nimrod, who was of
the Posterity of C^am. So that the very Foundations of Monarchy seem to be laid
from those Two Persons, who have a particular Curse and Brand upon them in Holy
Scripture; and they that showed so little Respect to the Paternal Authority,
(from which some would derive the Original of Monarchy) are the beginners of
the Kingly Power; which is another very good Proof of its being at first Jure
Divino.

I could have said a great deal more on this Head; but my Design being to make
an Essay, not a Book, I shall proceed to the Second thing I undertook to prove
from Scripture; that is, That after Monarchy was established among the Jews,
the People had a share in the Election, and did frequently set up, and make
their own Kings.

That the Kings of Israel and Judah did owe their II.
Crowns at the first to the Peoples Importunity, is, I think, so evident, by
what I have already cited out of Samuel, that I shall suppose it needless to
repeat it here; for although God did comply with the Peoples Request, yet we
cannot say he approved it, but barely permitted it, as he did Divorces among
them, and perhaps on the same account, the hardness of their hearts; but from
the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19.8.

But it is not from this Topic that I intend to prove the People had a hand in
making their own Kings; but I shall bring Instances of several Kings, of whom
it is said, by Name, they were set up by the People; and I will set them down
in order, as I find them recorded in the Sacred Story. But perhaps you will
wonder that I should begin my Catalogue with Saul and David, who being
particularly chosen and appointed by God Almighty, one would think the People
should have nothing to do in setting them up. But yet you will find they had,
if Scripture is Authentic in the Point. For although Saul was solemnly
Anointed by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10.1. chosen by Lot at the Assembly of the Tribes at
Mizpeh, ver. 21. and declared King, ver. 24. Yet you may see how soon he was
despised, even by those that had desired a King; for in the 27th Verse of that
very Chapter, you will find them asking, How can this man save us? and they
despised him etc. and he was glad to hold his peace, and went home to his own
House at Gibeah, where he follows his Rural Employment; for in the next Chapter
we find him not very like a King, but like a good Husband, driving his Cattle
home himself; Behold Saul came after the herd out of the field, 1 Samuel 11.5.

But after Saul had signalized himself by the Defeat of Nahash, and the People
seemed to have a very warm sense of their late deliverance, Samuel very wisely
takes them while they are in good Humor, and says, Come, let us go up to
Gilgal, and there renew the Kingdom: And the people went up to Gilgal, and
there they made Saul King before the Lord, 1 Samuel 11.14, 15. Which methinks
seems to infer, that Samuel thought the Peoples Approbation necessary for the
Confirmation of the Kingdom to Saul; for after that, they all owned and obeyed
him, which they did not before: And although this is a pretty clear Proof as to
Saul, yet those that I shall produce about David, are, I think, more strong and
pregnant; for although David was by God Almighty designed and declared King,
during Readiness Lifetime, and at Readiness Death was in a very good posture to have
possessed himself of that Kingdom, to which he seemed to have so good a Title
(for he had a Victorious Army with him, with which he might certainly very
easily have vanquished the small remainder of Readiness baffled Forces); yet he
does nothing like that, but comes and settles himself and Family quietly at
Hebron, where the Text says he dwelt, 2 Samuel 2.3. But how long he was there
before the men of Judah came to make him their King, the Story does not
express; but thither they came (of their own accord, it is to be supposed), and
there they make him King over the House of Judah, 2 Samuel 2.4. But for all he
had the same Title to the Crown of Israel, God having promised him both, yet he
does not pretend to any Dominion over them, till they themselves come and make
him their King, as you will find it, 2 Samuel 5.3. and 1 Chronicles. 11.3. but that
was not till Seven Years and an half after he was King of Judah: So that it
seems Israel took a fair time to consider of it; for Ishbosheth reigning but
Two Years, it must be Five Years and an half after his Death; and what
Government was in that Interregnum, is hard to say, because the Scripture says
nothing of it; but what they did so many years after, is yet called the
fulfilling of Samuel's Prophecy to David; for the Text tells you, They anointed
David King over Israel, according to the Word of the Lord by Samuel, 1 Chronicles.
11.3. From whence we infer, That when God Almighty does the most directly and
immediately raise a single Person or Family, the People are his Instruments to
do it, and bring it about, as is, I think, very apparent in this Case of David;
as also in that of Jeroboam: for although the Prophet Ahijah had given him Ten
Pieces, to signify the Ten Tribes he should reign over, and had also told him,
1 Kings 11.37. I will take thee, and thou shall reign according to all that thy
soul desires, and shall be King over Israel: Yet for all these great Promises,
he was glad to run for it, and play least in sight all Solomon's days; so that
he had no advantage by it, but only great hopes, till the People fulfilled that
which was but Prophecy before, 1 Kings 12.20. And it came to pass, that when
all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him to
the Congregation, and made him King over all Israel: So true is sometimes that
saying, Vox Populi est Vox Dei. But this last Instance does afford us another
Observation, which I think ought not to be past over in silence; and that is,
That God does not tie himself to a Family or Line; For if Jeroboam will serve
God, as David did, he will build him as sure a house as he built for David, 1
Kings 11.38. By which we may see, that God is no Respecter of Persons, and that
Kings have no surer Tenor in Gods Favor than other People; for his Promises
are as conditional to them, as to the meanest man; and if they fail of their
Duty, God may, and oftentimes does take the Forfeiture, as we see here both in
the Case of David and Jeroboam. But when, and how far those Forfeitures are to
be taken, ought to be left to that Almighty Wisdom and Providence, that turns
every thing to good. But to return to the Story, from which I think I have not
much digrest as to the Matter, though I may have a little Inverted the Order;
for according to that, I should not have treated of Jeroboam before Solomon.
But the truth is, I cannot say there is such Proofs of the Peoples setting up
Solomon, as for the Two preceding Kings; and yet there are some Circumstances
in the Story, from whence one may infer something of that kind: However, it may
prove something which may be of some use in our present Dispute; and that is,
That a King may have a Successor, even while he lives; for David, you see,
commanded Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, to anoint Solomon King,
etc. that, as David says in the following Verse, he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be King in my stead, 1 Kings 1.34, 35. Now the occasion of
this unusual way of proceeding, I suppose, was this; David had a mind that
Solomon should succeed him, and finding that Adonijah had got a strong Party,
thought the best way to secure the Throne to Solomon, was, to put him in
present Possession of it: Although, by the way, it must be remarked, that
Adonijah was the Elder Brother, and so, according to our Rules of Succession,
had the better Title; from whence it may be inferred, That that Rule may
sometimes be inverted without sin; and it is the more remarkable, because that
God had taken such particular care of the Right of the First born in private
Families, so that a Father had not power to make a Favourite-Child the Eldest,
nor to put by the Son of a hated Mother from that double Portion to which his
Birthright entitled him. And yet the very first time that Succession to the
Crown of Israel can be pretended, that Order, you see, is inverted, and
Solomon, the Youngest Son set up. But to go on with our Story; David, on the
former account, finding it necessary to turn over the Crown to Solomon, during
his own Life, yet thinks it fit to give the People an Account of his
Proceedings, and the Reasons of them; for he tells them, that God had chosen
Judah to be the Ruler, and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and
among the sons of my father, he liked me to make me King over Israel. And of
all my sons (for the Lord has given me many sons) he has chosen Solomon my
son, to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel, 1 Chronicles.
28.4, 5. And after that David had given Instructions to Solomon about building
the Temple, and both the King and People had made their Oblations of what they
had which was fit for the Work, the Congregation of the People continuing yet
together, it is said, Chap. 29. ver. 22. And they made Solomon, the son of
David, King the second time, and anointed him unto the Lord, to be the chief
Governor. So that it seems David thought the Peoples Approbation necessary for
the Confirmation of the Crown to Solomon; else truly that very solemn Sacrifice
and Invitation, of a Thousand Bullocks, a Thousand Rams, and a Thousand Lambs,
had been a very unnecessary Expense: And then it follows in the 23d Verse,
Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord, as King, instead of David his father,
and prosper'd, and all Israel obeyed him. And although it is said of his Son
Rehoboam, both 1 Kings 11.43. and 1 Chronicles. 9.31. that he reigned in his
Father's stead, yet 1 Kings 12.1. 1 Chronicles. 10.1. we find there was something
else necessary to make him his Successor; for in both places it is said, all
Israel were come to Shechem to make Rehoboam King: And when he was so imprudent
as to disoblige them, and would not comply with them, they did not think it
their duty to comply with him, nor would they allow him Second Thoughts in the
Case, nor admit of any Treaty, but stoned Adoram, that he sent to them, and
immediately made Jeroboam King; So that of Twelve Tribes, there was but One
that made Rehoboam King. But now the Kingdom being divided into Two Branches,
perhaps it may be expected that I should speak to them both. But the Succession
in the Kingdom of Israel being so broken and confused, although it might afford
me more Instances both of the Peoples making and pulling down Kings; yet I
shall, with the Tribe of Judah, adhere to the House of David, and from the
Story of that Crown, bring my main Proofs for the Confirmation of the Argument
I have in hand; but since the Story of Israel may afford some very good and
useful Observations, I hope I shall not be thought to deviate very much from
the Design of this Paper, if I make a little stop here, to pick them up by the
way, that so when I return to my Discourse of Judah again, I may meet with no
more interruptions.

The Observations that might have been made on Jeroboam, I have in part
superseded, by taking notice of them in another place; and therefore shall only
repeat the Heads of them; which were, 1st, That the People were the Instrument
of making good God's Promise to him: 2dly, If Jeroboam had served God as
sincerely as David, he should have been as great a Favorite: 3dly, That
Jeroboam not performing those Conditions on which he was raised to the Crown,
it was very just in God to take the Forfeiture, and to extirpate the House of
Jeroboam. And although Baasha does seem to come as ill by the Crown as any body
recorded in the Sacred Story; for he not only conspires against, but slays the
King his Master, 1 Kings 15.27, 28. yet for all this he is owned by God
Almighty, being the man, that was promised, shall I say, or rather threatened
to Jeroboam; for old Ahijah tells Jeroboam's Wife, Moreover the Lord shall
raise him up a King over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam, 1
Kings 14.14. And although Baasha did take great care to fulfill the latter part
of this Prophecy as fast as he could, yet he walking in the way of Jeroboam,
and continuing in his sin, God sends his Prophet to upbraid him, and tell him
what he had done for him: Forasmuch is I exalted thee out of the dust, and made
thee Prince over my people Israel, and thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam,
etc. behold I will take away the posterity of Baasha, etc. 1 Kings 16.2, 3.
from which we may infer these Two things,

1. That Usurpers are raised by, and may pretend to reign by God's Power; and
therefore may claim the same Obedience that lawful Kings (so that the
Affirmation of St. Paul, There is no power but of God, ought to be taken in the
largest and literal sense.)

Our Second Inference is, That Baasha and his Family were rejected, not for his
Treason, but his Idolatry; not for killing Nadab, but for sinning like
Jeroboam. And truly this Observation will run through most of the Kings of
Israel, who, generally speaking, came to the Crown the same way, and afterward
walked in the same steps Baasha did: But if any of them had but broken down the
Calves, and rooted out Idolatry, no question but their Posterity should have
been established; for you see, that Jehu's imperfect Piety, in destroying Baal,
and rooting out the House of Ahab, that first introduced that Worship into
Israel, was rewarded with his Sons sitting on the Throne to the 4th generation;
and had he but gone on to do that to the Golden Calves that Josiah afterward
did, who knows how long his Posterity might have governed Israel? But after his
Promised Succession was at an end, the Crown was never settled in any Family,
but the Kingdom so broken by continual Conspiracies, that we hardly meet with
any thing else that is remarkable, unless it be God Almightys Justice, who from
that time to the end of that Monarchy, suffers the Son to be pulled down by the
very self same method and me ans the Father was set up; so that there was
nothing but Blood and Confusion among them, with which the People were so
tired, that they do not seem to concern themselves at all in the matter, but
submit to them that were uppermost; else it would seem pretty strange, that
Pekah the Son of Remaliah should with Fifty Men assault and take the Palace
Royal in Samaria, kill the King that then Reigned, and put the Crown on his own
Head, as you have it, 2 Kings 15.25. For as it would have been a madness in
Pekah to have attempted it with so small a force, if the People had stood by
Pekahiah: so on the other side, had the People joined with Pekah, a much
greater number would certainly have appeared with him. So that I suppose the
People sat Neuters, and did not concern themselves of either side, but obeyed
him that proved the strongest. And although that is a method that I should not
much recommend, yet we do not find that God or his Prophets do any where
reprove them for it; so that it seems there was no fighting about Titles in
those days. There might indeed be a great many more Observations raised from
the Story, but any attentive Reader will be so well able to do it for himself,
that I shall neither forestal his Diligence, nor tire his Patience with any
more at this time; but resume the thread of my Discourse, and go on with the
Story of Judah. And it must be owned, that from the time of Rehoboam (where we
last left) to Vzziah, or Azariah, which you please to call him, there is no
express mention of the Peoples setting up their King's: But, as I observed
before in Rehoboam, we are not, from the Texts saying, such an one Reigned in
his Fathers stead, to conclude, that he did it without the Peoples suffrage and
good will; and truly for the most part there are some general words, as that
the People brought them Presents, as to Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.5. (and
Presents was the way by which in those days People owned and expressed their Duty
and Homage, and the refusing them was an interpretative denying of their
Authority, as you see in the Case of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.27.) or, when the Kingdom
was confirmed, as they say of Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.3. he then slew his Father's
Murderers: So that it seems there was something previous, even to the
impow'ring him to do that Act of Justice. And although I cannot say, these Phrases
do downright affirm, yet they do intimate, that there was something to be done
by the People.

But whether Amaziah was set up by the People, or no, I shall not now dispute;
but sure I am, they pulled him down, and deprived him, not only of his Crown,
but of his Life also, as you may find it in 2 Kings 14.19. But of that we have
a larger Account, 2 Chronicles. 25.27. Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away
from following the Lord, they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and
he fled to Lachish, but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there. Now
that his turning away from following the Lord, did give his Subjects Authority
to depose, and to kill him, is that which I should be very loath to affirm,
although it seems to be set down there as the ground and occasion of their
conspiring against him; but this, I suppose, I may safely aver, That his
forsaking God might be one great Reason why God forsook him, and left him in
the Power of his Subjects: For all the Promises to the Jews, being of temporal
good things, and the possessing of Canaan, and long life and prosperity in it,
their great reward, they might very reasonably make their good or bad success
the great Criterion by which they might judge how they stood in God Almighty's
Favor, and whether they had pleased or displeased him. But now among us
Christians, whose Promises are of another Nature, I should be very far from
making that a general Inference, though from the very same Event. For alas! it
is yet too fresh in some of our Memories, when the best of Kings, and of Men,
was delivered up to his Subjects: But I think I may borrow the Expression of
the Prophet Esaias, and say, that not for his own sins, but for the transgression
of the People he was stricken: Wherein God's Justice was to be admired, in
making their greatest sin the greatest judgment that could have been inflicted
on a rebellious People. But to return to Amaziah: I must confess, that I can
never read that Story but with wonder, to find, that the People are neither
upbraided with it, nor punished for it. For although we read, that he took
vengeance on his Father Joash's Murderers, and that the People of the Land slew
all those that conspired against King Amon, 2 Chronicles. 33.25. yet we do not find
any body so much as called in question for his Death: So that certainly there
was some Circumstances that did much alleviate it; and that the Fact was not in
it self so foul, as at this distance it appears to us: for although Vzziah, for
to get the Crown, might promise them Impunity, yet I question whether God would
have confirmed the Sentence: and Isaiah, who prophesied in the Days of Vzziah,
should not have been more partial to the People, than he was to the Kings; for
you see he could tell Hezekiah pretty plainly, of his little Vanity, in showing
his Treasures to the King of Babylon's Ambassadors; and not only reproves the
Pride of the Women for, but also repeats all the little foolish Toys that
belonged to their Dress in his Days; and he that was so strict in these lesser
matters, methinks should not in silence have past over so foul a Fault as that
of King-killing; and yet, to my great wonder, I do not find any one Passage,
either in the Story, or Esay's Prophecy, as does so much as seem to reflect on
that Fact, as an ill thing.

There is another Prophet indeed (who lived in his Grandson's time) who is
thought by some to reflect on this Crime very heavily, as the beginning of this
sort of sin in Judah; Amaziah being the first of their Kings who was murdered,
though many had been murdered in Israel, Mieah 1.13. I will not therefore
insist too much upon this, but go on to observe, That although they would not
suffer Amaziah to enjoy his Life; after he had quitted both Crown and Kingdom,
yet they had that Honor and Justice for him too, after he was dead, that they
not only interred him in the Royal Sepulcher, but set his Son also on the Royal
Seat; For all the people of Judah took Vzziah, and made him King in the room of
Amaziah his Father, 2 Chronicles. 26.1. And he is indeed the first King that is so
expressly said to be set up by the Authority of the People, although their
Suffrages, as I hope I have sufficiently proved, was thought necessary for the
establishment of most of them.

But although Vzziah was the first, you will find he was not the last that was so
set up. But before we come to speak of them, we will consider one Passage in
the Reign of Vzziah; and that is, his going into the Temple to burn Incense;
which being against the Law, we will see a little how the Priests demean
themselves, and whether they thought they were obliged to sit still if they
could not persuade him off it, and rather suffer him to do it, than resist him.
But by the Preparation Azariah the High Priest makes for a Scuffle, I fancy he
did not understand the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; for the Text tells you, 2 Chronicles. 26.17. that Azariah enters after the King, with fourscore Priests which
were valiant Men: But what occasion he had for such a Train, or why their
Valor should be so particularly taken notice of, if they were to have no use
of it, but were to submit, I cannot so easily conceive. But the 18th Verse
says, they did actually oppose the King, and bid him get him out of the
Sanctuary, for he had nothing to do there. Nay, in the 20th Verse they do
thrust him out; but that indeed was after the Leprosy was come out upon him.
But although this Story might afford several Inferences which would not be beside
our present Question, yet they are so very obvious, that I may trust my Reader
to make them; therefore shall proceed, and must own, that from Vzziah to
Josiah, there is no express mention of the Peoples interposing, or setting up
of Kings; but upon Amon's Murder, you see, they did take upon them; for you
will find it both in 2 Kings 21.24. and 2 Chro. 33.25. But the people of the
land smote those that had conspired against King Amon; also the people of the
land did make Josiah his Son King in his stead. And I hope it may be said, that
God Almighty did approve their Choice, he being the best King and the best Man
that we read of in the whole Catalogue of the Kings of Judah; he performing his
Duty both to God and his People so very well, it would have been a shame to his
Subjects, if they had not requited him, by paying him all that Observance and
Duty to which he could have any Pretense. But although he may be an Example to the
best of Kings, the Scripture giving him this Eulogie, And like unto him there
was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with
all his soul, and with all his might, according to the Law of Moses: Neither
after him arose there any like him: Yet from him we may best learn what an
intolerable Mischief a Wicked King is; for tho Josiah was so very good, yet
there was an old Arrere of his Grandfather Manasseh, that all his Virtue and
Goodness could not clear: For, Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the
fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah,
because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal: And the
Lord said, I will remove Judah out of my sight, as I have removed Israel; and
will cast off this City Jerusalem, which I have chosen, and the House of which
I said, My Name shall be there, 2 Kings 23.26, 27. Therefore what Reasons have
both Church and State to deprecate such a King as will infallibly intail Ruin
on both? For you see, that God's House, even that House that he had chose to
set his Name there, shall be involved in the common Destruction. Therefore were
I to add a new Clause to the Litany, it should be, From such a King as
Manasseh, Good Lord, deliver us. But above all, we ought to be fearful of, and
pray against an Idolatrous and Bloody King; for those are the two Crimes with
which Manasseh is particularly charged, and which hastened the Captivity of
Judah, and consequently shortened the Life and Reign of the good and beloved
Josiah, to whom it was particularly promised as a Blessing, that he should not
live to see the Ruin and Desolation that was to be brought on the Nation after
his Death. After which, the people of the land took Jehoabas the son of Josiah,
and made him King in his fathers stead in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.1. and 2 Kings
23.30. But although he inherited his Father's Kingdom, it seems he did not his
Virtues; for it follows in ver. 32. That he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and so his Reign was very short; for Pharaoh Necho makes him a Prisoner, and
carries him into Egypt, and makes his elder Brother Jehoiakim King in his
stead; in whose days the King of Babylon first came up against Judah; and after
his death, Jehoiachin succeeds, whom Nebuchadnezzar carries to Babylon, and
makes Zedekiah King, in whom the Succession was quite inverted, (for he was
Uncle, and not in the Direct Line;) and the Monarchy also ending with him, I
should here have concuded this Part of my Discourse, but that I cannot omit one
Observation, and that is, That there were several Kings of Judah alive at the
same time: It is certain Two, Jeconiah and Zedekiah; but for any thing I know,
there might be Three; for we do not read of the Death of Jehoahas, who was
carried Prisoner into Egypt; and by his Age I Am sure he might survive
Zedekiah's carrying to Babylon; for he was but Twenty three Years old when he
began to reign, and his own Reign, with all the Three Kings that succeeded him,
do not make Twenty three Years more before the Captivity. But now I would fain
know, what the Royalists of our Age would do in such a Case, and which of the
Three they would own? For there was great Variety; One set up by the People;
the second, as Heir to him whom the King of Egypt had set up; and the third,
set up by the King of Babylon. But I do not find, that the Jews had any such
Scruples at that time, but always obeyed them which were in possession (as long
as they were so) let them be set up by whom they would; and the Scripture gives
them the same Epithete, they are all called Kings, without ever disputing their
Titles. Nor are the People reproved for obeying Zedekiah, although they knew that
Jehoiachin (who had certainly the better Title, and had also reigned as King)
was alive. But although the People are not rebuked for submitting to Zedekiah,
whom Nebuchanezzar had set over them; yet Zedekiah is for not obeying the King
of Babylon, to whom he had past his Word that he would: So that we may see,
that Kings are obliged by their Oaths and Promises, as well as other Men.

Which brings me to my third Particular I was to prove, which is, That at the
first setting up of Kings among the Jews, their Power was not Absolute; but
that they were obliged to certain Covenants and Conditions. And although I will
not pretend to prove it of every individual King; yet if I can do it of the
first and second, and also the solemn repeating of it after an Interregnum, I
shall hope I have done all that can be expected from me: For whoever succeeds
to a Crown, is supposed to take it on the same Conditions his Predecessors had
it; which it would be superfluous for the Story to repeat every time. III.


And therefore I shall not make a long Preface to a Point that I hope so easily
to dispatch; for I suppose, that a few plain Scripture-proofs will (for I Am
sure they ought to) go farther than a long Rhetorical Discourse: And how few
Instances soever I can bring, yet I shall begin at the Springhead, and make
the first Kings, Saul and David, Witnesses to the Truth of what I now assert,
and prove, that such a Compact and Agreement between the Prince and People, is
the very Cornerstone of Monarchy it self.

And that I may do this the more fully and clearly, I must beg my Reader's
Pardon, tho I carry him so far back as the Inauguration of Saul the first King
of Israel. But I shall not tire his Patience so much as to repeat all that I
have already said of Samuel's displeasure at the People, for rejecting God, and
defiring a Man to be set over them for their King, 1 Samuel 10.19. And tho
Samuel, to terrify them, had represented the King they desired, rather in the
shape of a Tyrant, that would destroy and ruin, than of a Prince that was to
defend and save them, 1 Samuel 8. from the 11th to the 19th; yet seeing they
would not be discouraged, but still persisted in their Resolution, Nay, but we
will have a King over us, God was so merciful to them, as to give Rules to this
unruly King that Samuel had described: As I think we may safely collect from 1 Samuel 10.25. Then Samuel told the People the manner of the Kingdom, and wrote it
in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord. For had God designed that the King's
Will should have been his only Law, it had, I Am sure, been a very superfluous,
if not an impossible Task, for Samuel to have writ that down: And besides, the
laying it up before the Lord, does infer somethign of extraordinary weight and
sacredness in that Book, that was to be placed in that holy Repository, with
the Records of that Covenant which God himself had vouchsafed to make with his
People. Now upon these Considerations, I think, I may safely call this the
Original Contract that was between the Kings and People of Israel. But we may
guess, it was not an Absolute Arbitrary Power (such as our Neighbour-Prince
pretends to over his Subjects) that was by this made over to Saul; for although he
saw many of his new Subjects did despise him, yet he was glad to hold his
peace; or, as the Margin says, He was as tho he had been deaf, 1 Samuel 10.27. So
that it seems Samuel thought it necessary the People should be farther obliged,
than at present they thought themselves; and therefore proposes their going up
to Gilgal, there to renew the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 11.15. And all the people went to
Gilgal, and there they (that is, certainly, the People) made Saul King before
the Lord in Gilgal, and there they sacrificed Sacrifices of Peace Offerings
before the Lord. And that the joining in a Sacrifice, and both Parties eating
and partaking of the same Sacrifice, or at least eating together at what they
called a Feast, was both the most usual and solemn way of making Covenants in
those days, both among Jews and Gentiles, is a thing so well known, that I need
not insist on it; else both Sacred and Profane Story would furnish us with
Proofs enough, were it necessary. But the Agreement which I suppose was then
made between King and People, begot such a mutual Kindness and Confidence in
one another, that the Text adds, There Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced
greatly; and from that time we never find any Dispute between them. And so I
shall proceed to his next Successor, David; and the Proofs of his making such a
Covenant with the People of Israel, are as clear and full as can be desired.
Upon what Terms the Men of Judah first admitted him, is not so plainly set
down; but it being their own voluntary Act to make him King, we may suppose,
that they would take care to see their own Interest secured. But it is very
apparent, that after Abner designed to revolt to David, he will make his
Conditions with him first: And Abner sent Messengers to David, saying, Make thy
League with me, and behold my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all
Israel to thee. And he said, Well, I will make a League with thee, etc. So
Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty Men with him: And David made Abner,
and the Men which were with him, a Feast, 2 Samuel 3.12, 13, 20. at which, I
suppose, the Bargain was made of both sides; for, as I before observed, few
Contracts were concluded without the Ceremony of Eating and Drinking together.
And after that, Abner says, I will arise, and go and gather all Israel to my
Lord the King, (for now he owns him to be so, although he would not call him so
before) that they may make a League with thee, and that thou may reign over
all that thy Heart desires; as it follows in Verse 21. So that it seems the
King's making a Covenant with the People, was to precede his Reigning over
them, although David had been both chosen by God, and Anointed by Samuel so many
years before. And when upon Abner's death, that first Treaty with the Men of
Israel was broken off, we do not find that David pretended to any Authority
over Israel, till of their own accords, about five years and a half after, All
the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron, and King David made a Covenant
with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they Anointed David King over Israel,
2 Samuel 5.3. And yet, as I said before, if ever any King could pretend to be
Jure Divino, it must be David; but for all that, he is content to come to the
Crown like other Men, and does not assume it to himself till given him by the
People.

There is another thing also that I desire may be observed; which is, That the
Phrase before the Lord, both in this place, and 1 Samuel 11.15. is indifferently
applied both to King and People. For here it is said, the King made a Covenant
with the People before the Lord; and there, that the people made Saul King
before the Lord. From whence I think we may collect, that being mutual, the
Promise was as obliging, as it was solemn of both sides, for both are expressed
in the same words. And we may also conclude, that when we meet with that Phrase
of eating and drinking before the Lord, and making King unto, or before the
Lord, as it is 1 Chronicles. 29.22. it is designed to signify the mutual stipulation
between King and People: So that we may infer, that Solomon did take the Crown
upon the same Terms his Father David did, although the word League or Covenant is
not expressed. And if the three first Kings did thus receive the Crown from, and
oblige themselves to the People, we may safely suppose that their Successors
did the same thing, although it is not particularly affirmed of every one. Nor
do we find any more mention of it till King Joash's coming to the Crown. And
when the Kingdom was restored (after the Usurpation, or Interregnum, shall I
call it, of Athaliah) all the old Rights and Customs are both mentioned and
repeated, as you may find it, 2 Kings 11.4, 17. How Jehoiada brought Joash into
the House of the Lord to the People, and made a Covenant with them, and took an
Oath of them in the House of the Lord; and in the 17. Verse, And Jehoiada made
a Covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the People, that they should be
the Lords people; between the King also and the People; all which you will find
repeated, 2 Chronicles. 23.3, 16. And if this is not a pregnant Proof of the Truth
of what I have said, that the Kings of Israel and Judah were not Absolute, but
were under Obligations and Conditions to their People, as well as subjected to
the Laws of God; if this Instance, I say, with the rest before mentioned, may
not be allowed for Proofs, I shall despair of bringing a Proof, either for this
or any thing else, out of the Bible; but if these will pass, I suppose they may
be sufficient to convince any impartial Reader, therefore shall presume it
would be superfluous to multiply Quotations in so plain a Case.

And now I have gone through the three things I proposed to clear out of
Scripture: How well I have performed my undertaking, I shall leave to better
Judgments; and that my Readers may be the better qualified to be my Judges, I
desire they would do as the Noble Bereans did, Acts 17.11. Search the Scripture
daily whether these things are so; for as I advance nothing upon my own
Authority, so I do not desire any thing should be credited only because I say
it; for in Points of such importance, it is very fit every body should judge for
themselves.

And if these things are so, Kings must be contented to own their Power as well
as Birth to be of humane extraction. But yet I must beg leave to deny an
Inference that some would make from that, who say, It Is no act of Disobedience
to God, to resist our Prince; nor of Obedience to God, to submit to him, if he
does not derive his Power from God, and act by his Authority and Commission;
for I would fain know whether it is not possible to make a humane Contract so
strong, that it shall be a Sin against God to break it? For according to this
way of arguing, I might give away an Estate, and settle it as firm as Law can
make it, and yet afterward I might, without doing the Party any wrong, take it
from him again without his consent, because he has no Grant to show from Heaven
for it. And this Instance I think may be pretty applicable to this Case: The
People at the first Institution and setting up of Monarchy among them, make
over so much of the Power, and such and such Rights and Privileges to the
King, which if afterward they refuse to make good, they are and ought to be
looked upon as Rebels and Traitors. But on the other side, suppose the Person to
whom I had made over some part of my Estate, should upon that pretend a Title
to my whole Estate, and would let me enjoy no part of it, might not I lawfully
resist him? And what answer they would give to this, may serve to the other
Case; and that brings me to my second General, What Power and Authority it is,
that is actually vested in our Kings? Under which the Doctrines of
Non-resistance and Passive Obedience shall be considered.

II.
Having on the former Head examined both the Original of Monarchy, and also
proved that it was Limited and Conditional among the Jews; and it being agreed
on all hands, even by the greatest Assertors of the Prerogative, that our
Savior did not make any Alteration in the Rights of Princes, but what he found
them possessed of, he gives them leave quietly to enjoy; I think we may safely
conclude, that since he made no augmentation to the Princes Power, he laid no
new Obligation on the Subject, but the King is to Govern, and the People to
Obey, according to the Rules agreed and established between them; for the truth
is, there can be no universal Rule given in the Case; for the Magistrates
Power, and the Measures of the Subjects subjection, are only to be judged of by
the particular Laws and Constitutions of that Kingdom; for that may be very
lawful in one Place which is not so in another: Therefore our Savior did give
not only the Wisest, but the Justest Resolution, to that ensnaring Question of
the Jews about Tribute, that ever was, when he said, Render unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, Mat. 22.20. For
although he does by name reserve nothing but Gods dues, yet I think it can
hardly be inserved from that Negative Argument, that the People should part
with their dues; for the Command is only in general, to give to Caesar that
which of right belongs to Caesar: so that I cannot think this Text gives Princes
any Title to what is not their due; but you see he does not pretend to tell us
what is Cesar's due, because no general Rule could be given in that Case, the
Rights of Kings and People varying almost in every Country. Therefore it is from
the Statute-Book, not the Bible, that we must judge of the Power our Kings are
invested withal, and also of our own Obligations, and the measures of our
Subjection. And here I might have a fair opportunity of expatiating, and both
tell you the advantages, nay the necessity of Government in generals, and
discourse also of the several kinds that are in the World. But my design being
Brevity, I shall only take notice of that wherein we are particularly
concerned, and that is Monarchy; which, generally speaking, is the best
Government in the World. But of that there are several sorts, as an Elective
Monarchy, and an Hereditary one; and those that Reign by Succession, may be
distinguished into two kinds more, an Absolute and a Limited Monarchy; the
latter of which I take to be the happiest Constitution under the Heavens:
Therefore next being born within the Pale of the true Church, I think to be
born an Englishman is one of the greatest Privileges any ones Birth can
entitle him to; a happiness that I am sure is envied by our Neighbors, though
I doubt not valued so much as it ought to be by them that enjoy it; although
they have the opportunity of a Comparison, which they say is the only way to
judge either of happiness or ease; for if we look but on our next Neighbors of
the other side the Dike, we shall soon see the difference, and what a
misfortune it is to be subject to the Arbitrary Power of a lawless and
merciless Tyrant.

How they came under those unhappy Circumstances at first, is not my business
at present to examine; but I Am sure it ought to be the business of our whole
Lives to bless God that we are not yet under the like; and next our Thanks to
God, we ought to commemorate the Courage of those Noble Patriots, who from the
beginning of our Monarchy have opposed the Encroachments that some of our Kings
would have made upon our Laws and Liberties, which, blessed be God, were
derived entire to us, and I hope we shall transmit them so to our Posterity,
notwithstanding all the endeavors that have been used for the subversion of
them. For I think I may challenge the whole World to show so equal and so happy
a Constitution of Government as is this day in England, which is so exactly and
harmoniously composed, that I know nothing to compare it to but its self: for
as Virtue does commonly lie in the mean, so our Legislators have wisely picked
out all the good that was in all sorts of Government, but shunned the Extremes
that any one might have betrayed us to: For here the Populace have liberty
without a Democratical Confusion and Fury; the Nobility have all the
Privileges to which Aristocracy it self could entitle them, without the
necessity of running into Factions and Cabals for it; and the King's Power so
equally balanced between the Two other, that his Power can hardly ever
degenerate into Tyranny, nor, on the other side, while he governs by Law, can
he ever want Authority, either to protect or correct his Subjects, or means to
reward Virtue, or discourage Vice, which are the great Ends for which Civil
Government was at first instituted. And as the several parts of our Government
have such a mutual dependence one upon the other, so they have the same
opportunities of reciprocally endearing and obliging one another: So that I
have often thought, with reverence be it spoke, that we have a kind of Trinity
in our Government, as well as in our Faith, to which I Am sure they ought to
have another resemblance, and that is their Unity: for their Power is so equal
in the great Point of Legislature, that one cannot properly say, that one is
greater, or less than another; for as all have Negative Voices, so neither, nor
both the Houses without the King, nor the King without the Two Houses, can do
any thing; but the Consent of the whole Three is necessary both to the making
and abrogating a Law; for all Three Parties being equally obliged to execute,
and obey those Laws when made, it was very reasonable they should all give
their Consents to them before they were made. And since the Legislative Power
is in all Nations esteemed the Supreme, and ours being so divided, it seems to
be a little improper to call any One of the Three the Supreme Power. It must be
acknowledged indeed, that the Executative Part of the Power is, by the Consent
of the other Two, committed to the King, and that only by way of Trust, and
under such Limitations, that it cannot properly be called the Supreme Power,
although he may fitly enough be styled the Supreme Magistrate of the Nation,
because he, and none but he, has the Power to make men keep the Laws, and to
punish them for the Breaches of the Law; but that under such Restrictions and
Limitations, that the Title of Chief Magistrate of the Nation is given to him
much upon the same account that the Mayor of a Town is called the Chief
Magistrate of that Town; for, without all doubt, all the Members of that
Corporation, and the Inhabitants of that Town, are obliged to obey their Mayor,
when his Commands are according to their Charter; and he has also power to
punish the willful Breaches of it, in any that are within his Jurisdiction; but
yet every body knows his Power is limited: and so truly is our King's, and that
in the most important things, and where he would certainly choose to show his
Power, were it absolute; that is, in the raising of Money, and punishing of
Capital Offenders; for of all things the Sword of Justice should be solely in
the Power of the supreme Magistrate (if he were really absolute); but that we
know our Kings have not, for he has no other way to right himself than what
the meanest Subjects have: For suppose he should accuse any one of High
Treason, he must first Indict him, and then undergo all the tedious Forms and
Processes of Law, before he can Convict him: So that I cannot say, that the
King has in that particular any privilege beyond the Subject; for Traitors are
to have as fair play for their Lives as any other Offenders, although the
punishment (as it ought to be) is more severe when it is inflicted; for the King
being a public Person, and one that by his undertaking the Administration of
the Law, is more exposed to danger; for by the very Execution of Justice, he
certainly provokes the Offender, and if he be of any Quality and Rank, his
Friends and Relations too: So that truly by the Rules of Equity, both the Law
and the People ought to set a double Fence about the King's Person, and take
particular care to secure him from those Hazards to which his High Place and
Office may render him more liable than more inferior people. So that those
particular Laws which are made in favor of the Prince, are rather the Effects
of the Justice and Kindness of the People, than Evidence of the Privilege and
Prerogative of the King; several Instances of which the Reign of our late King
Charles the Second might furnish us with; but as it would be tedious to repeat
them all, so truly all may be comprised in that one, of putting the Militia
into the King's Power; for the remembrance of the late Rebellion, and the sad
Effects of it, were then so fresh in every bodies memory, that they thought
there could be no greater Inconvenience, than that of the King's wanting Power
to maintain that Authority with which the Law had invested him; and so for his
farther security, they past that, and several other Acts which were extremely
for the King's advantage: And surely none of our Non-Resistance Gentlemen but
must own, that they were a considerable Addition to the Prerogative: And
whosoever shall pretend they were the Right of the Crown before, teaches the
King to be ungrateful as well as unjust.

I know it is alleged by some, That a Sovereign Prince receives not his
Authority from the Laws, but the Laws receive their Authority from him. From
which they would infer, That a King is neither subject to, nor bound up by the
Laws any farther than he pleases. But I must beg leave to deny both this their
minor Proposition, and the Conclusion, although I grant the major, from which
they say the other Two will necessarily result; but for my part, I cannot see
the necessity of such Consequences, although I should grant there was a
personal Power antecedent to all the Civil Laws; for that was the Paternal, and
not the Regal Authority. For sure none will affirm, that is the Law of Nature,
as the former certainly is: for without all doubt the People had power to Elect
a King, before there could be any such thing as a Sovereign Prince born in the
World. So that it is evident, that the power of the People is not only
antecedent to that of Kings, but also that the Kings did receive and derive
their Authority at first from the People. So that it is no incongruous, much
less impossible supposition, That Kings do derive their Authority from the
Laws; for certainly they must owe their power to that which gave it a Being;
and that is that Original Contract which is made between the People and the
Person or Family they shall think fit to advance to the Kingship; which ought
to be the Boundary of the Prince's Authority, as also of the Subjects
Submission. But however the Case may stand in other Countries, God be thanked
us so in England.

For our Ancient History tells us what sad Confusion there was in this poor
Island after the Conquest of the Romans, when every little Captain set up for a
King; and there was always such inveterate hatred between those small
neighboring Princes (if they deserve to be called so) that they would rather
call in and submit to Foreigners, who devoured and enslaved all sides, than
yield to one another: And on this account both Danes and Saxons were at first
called in. And although the Saxons had established an Heptarchy among us, yet
they found they were too many for this small Plat of Ground; for they were
always encroaching, and fighting with one another: wherefore growing weary of
that, Horn tells you, in his Mirror, chap. 1. How they chose themselves One
King, to maintain and defend their Persons and Goods in Peace, by Rules of Law,
and made him swear, That he would be obedient to suffer Right, as well as his
People should be. And these are the Terms on the which our first Monarch,
properly so called, (for truly before they did not deserve the Name of Kings;
for I Am sure their power was not so great, or perhaps so extensive, as that of
a Lord Mayor of London) did ascend the Throne; and that the same Terms and
Conditions were agreed to, and confirmed by his Successors, might be easily
proved, would it not take up too much time; but yet King Edgar thought it worth
their while to collect and transcribe them. And we find William the First was
willing to wave his Title of Conqueror, and by confirming the Ancient Rights
and Privileges of the People, be received as their Legal, not their
Conqueror, or Arbitrary Governor: For although Conquest may give one power,
it cannot of its self give one Right to rule a Nation; for the Consent of the
People, either tacit (that is, when they like their new Governor so well,
that they never offer to resist, but quietly comply and submit to his
Government, receive the advantage of his Protection and Laws, and pay him, in
return, what his Laws require) or explicit, (that is, when they make Conditions
and Terms for themselves, before they will submit) is so necessary, that no
King can be long safe without it. And since the way of explicit Contract has
been the general Method of our Predecessors, therefore whatever Objections are
made against that known saying of Bracton, Lex facit Regem, it will hold good
in Law; and I verily believe none of our Kings would exchange the Title that
the Law gives them to the Crown, for all the Evidences the Clergy can furnish
them with out of the Gospel, to prove their power absolute and arbitrary.
Therefore since it is the Law that must tell us with what power our Kings are
invested, perhaps Bracton may give us as good an account of it as any body,
when he says, The whole Power of the King of England is to do good, and not to
do hurt; which he explains, by adding, Nor can he do anything as a King, but
what he can legally do, lib. 3. c. 9. From whence, I suppose, the old Maxim,
That the King can do no wrong, first sprung. For while he acts by Law, it is
evident he cannot; and for what he does against Law, he does not do it as a
King. Nay, the same Bracton seems to think, That he actually unkings himself by
it; for he says, Non est enim Rex, ubi dominatur Voluntas, and non Lex: By
which certainly he does not mean, that he ceased to be a good King; for that he
need not have been at the pains of telling us; for our own sad Experience would
soon have convinced us of it; but having told us before, That he can do nothing
as a King, but what he can legally do; without all doubt his meaning was, that
we are not to look upon him nor obey him as our King, when he commands any
thing contrary to Law.

But there has been so much writ on this Subject already, that as it would be
hard to say any thing new upon it, so it would be both tedious and superfluous
to repeat the old. But I suppose I may safely take for granted what all sides
allow; and that is, That ours is a limited Monarchy: For all must own, that if
our Kings act as they ought to do, they must keep within the Boundaries of the
Laws. And where the Regal Authority is circumscribed, and the King's Power, as
King, has its Non ultra; yet that the Peoples Obedience should know no
Measures, but is extended ad infinitum, is to me, I must confess, a very
unintelligible Doctrine. For if we are equally obliged to render Obedience,
either Active or Passive, to the Kings Commands which are contrary to the Law,
as we are to those which are consistent with it, and authorized by it; I must
crave leave to say, that Law is a very superfluous, because a very
insignificant thing; nay, certainly, if the Case be so, it were much better be
taken away; for perhaps it may betray some poor ignorant People, who, it is
possible, may think it gives them some Right, when indeed it gives them none.
But if they shall think fit to make any distinction between the Obedience we
are to render to the King, when he speaks like a King, by the Consent and
Authority of the Laws; and what we are to pay him when he speaks in his
Personal and Private Capacity: If, I say, they shall think fit to make any
distinctions in the Case, I should desire them to set the Boundaries; for
truly, according to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience (in the Latitude they now
take it) I know no body else that can fix them. But I would fain know of them,
whether there is not such a Rule in Divinity, That where there is no Law, there
is no Transgression. And if no Transgression, certainly no Obligation to
undergo any Penalty; for the same Text tells us, in the same Verse, Romans 4.15.
That the Law works wrath; that is, that the Law obliges to the Punishment
threatened to the Breakers of it: But, Where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, and consequently, no wrath; and if they will please to apply
this to the Point in hand, I think I need not add any thing to it; but proceed
to show, that besides the general and implicit Obligation that our Laws lay
upon all that have any share in the Government, or any Interest in the State;
our Kings have a more particular and actual Obligation to govern by them, and
to submit to them. For that August Ceremony of their Coronation was not
intended only to please and amuse the Vulgar with the Gaiety and Splendour of
the Show, but was instituted for Wiser Ends, that by the Magnificence and
Solemnity of the Action, it might fix upon the Hearts both of King and People
the remembrance of those Vows and Engagements they at that time mutually make
to one another; and I do not at all doubt, but the Custom was derived from the
Jews, and is the same thing that I have so largely treated on in my First Part:
For here King and People make a solemn Covenant before the Lord; and that
nothing may be wanting to the Resemblance, they partake of a Common Meal
together; which was the ancient way of confirming and ratifying all Compacts
and Agreements betwixt Party and Party: And I think I may not improperly style
the Coronation, the Marriage-day between the King and Kingdom; for although in
Hereditary Monarchies there is a kind of Pre-contract, as there often is
between private Persons, which may be so obligatory, that nothing but Death can
dissolve it; yet the Wisdom of the Law does not think that sufficient, but
requires a formal and public owning of it, for these Two Reasons, among many
others. First, For the Satisfaction of the Parties themselves, and to give them
the greater Confidence in one another. Secondly, That the Number of Witnesses
may be some Check to them, and make them think how notorious their Perjury will
be, after they had confirmed their Vows before a Multitude.

So that, as we before proved, the King's Power was Limited; so now I think we
may say, it is Conditional also: For I cannot but suppose, that all that shall
read this Paper, understand the Nature of a Covenant so well, that I need not
tell them, the Obligation is mutual, and that if I break my part of the
Covenant, I have no Right to challenge the Performance of the other side. But
if Kings have any particular Privilege of breaking their Words, and forswearing
themselves, they would do well to produce their Grant of Exemption from the
Rules of God and Nature; for we know where it is said, I will not hold him
guiltless that takes my Name in vain; in which Law I do not remember any
Exception. But I know to this 'twill be replied, That they shall answer for it
to God, but are not accountable to their Subjects for the Breaches of their
Oaths: And if so, I do wonder why they were at first imposed; for I think I may
not improperly urge what St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for the
righteous man, but for the lawless, etc. So it is not a good King that we desire
to tie up; for we know he will be a Law to himself; but it is the Lawless King
that we would set Bounds to. But if the most sacred and solemn Oaths give the
Subject no Right at all to require or expect Performance, I know not of what
Use they are, unless it be to Damn the King, which surely will be but small
Consolation to a Christian Subject. But this by the by.

But since such Covenants have in all Ages and Nations been counted so
obligatory and sacred, that the Apostle tells you, Gal. 3.15. Tho it be but a
Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no Man disanmilleth, or adds thereto.
Nor can any after-act (as he proves very well in the 17th Verse) make it void:
Therefore by this Doctrine I cannot see what Authority any third Person has to
acquit either King or People of their Oaths to each other: So that I hope I may
without offense say, That Kings are obliged by their Covenants, since God
Almighty owns himself to be so; for Moses desires the People should take
particular notice of it, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore, that the Lord thy God he is
God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him
and keep his Commandments: That is, God will be sure to perform his part of the
Covenant, if the People keep theirs. And in Psalm. 89.34. My Covenant will I not
break, says God. And it seems to be a Title wherein he takes more than ordinary
delight; for both Nehemiah and Daniel desiring to procure his Favor, and to
make him propitious to his People, begin their Addresses to him in these very
words: O Lord God, the great and terrible God, that keeps Covenant and Mercy,
etc. Neh. 1.5. and Dan. 9.4. therefore since it is one of the Attributes and
Excellencies of God, that he is true and faithful to his word, it should be no
part of the Privilege of Kings to be at liberty to break theirs.

Now all Covenants being Conditional, where there is a possibility of the
Parties breaking their part of the Covenant, there is also a possibility of
their forfeiting the advantages of it, and the right they had to claim
performance of the other side. Now that Kings can break their Word, and Oath
too, as well as meaner Men, we have had a little too late experience. Therefore
it is a point of great concern, to know how far, and when it may be lawful for
the Subjects to take the forfeiture for their Kings brench of Covenant.

And here God forbid that I should attempt to make the Government Precarious,
or to make Kings accountable for every little Failure: For as every breach of
the Law in a Subject is not Treason, so every violation of it by the Prince is
not the forfeiting of his Prerogative. Nay, they are so very few Cases wherein
it is possible to be done, that perhaps our Late unhappy King James is the first
Instance of it in our Nation; not but that we have had as bad Kings, and worse
Men to rule over us: But none but himself did ever attempt, in so many
Instances to destroy the Constitution, and overturn the very Foundation of our
Government. For 'twas neither his Mal-administration in general, nor the
several particular Injustices that were committed in his Reign, that I look
upon as his great Crimes: For although the Proceedings against the Bishops and
Magdalen College, were very ill things, and made a very great noise, yet sure
none can say that he forseited his Crown by those particular Breaches of the
Law. No, there was the time for showing and exercising true Passive Obedience;
for had the Bishops done any thing but just what they did, they had not done
their Duty; but their Patience and Submission to those Injustices did extremely
well become them: For 'twould be a sad World indeed, if every body that thought
themselves hardly or unjustly dealt withal, should fly in the face of Public
Authority, and have power to resist the lawful Magistrate. No, I would rather
choose to live under the greatest Tyrant in the World, than in such an Anarchy;
for where there is any Law, private Persons are not, nor ought not to be Judges
in their own Causes, and that is one Reason why an unjust Sentence is
Obligatory; for in such Cases private Persons must suffer, rather than by force
right themselves. For it is an old saying, Better a Mischief than an
Inconvenience; that is, Better a private Person should be wronged, than the
public Peace disturbed; and the calling Authority in question for every little
Complaint, would be a greater inconvenience than thousands unjust Sentences
against particular Persons; for although Justice be never so much violated, yet
if the Law it self be preserved entire, and the Constitution and Basis of the
Government remain firm and unshaken, the Subject must be content to suffer, and
neither Oppose nor Depose their King. But yet, after all, there is some things
that may be done by Princes, which the greatest Asserters of the Monarchical
Right hold to be Forfeitures of it; particularly, the selling of them, or
betraying them to a Foreign Power and Jurisdiction: to which I shall crave
leave to add two more; the setting up a False and Spurious Heir in an
Hereditary Monarchy; and the overturning all the Established Laws, and setting
up Arbitrary Power in a limited one. And if I can prove our late King James to
have been guilty of all three, surely I need not say much more to prove that he
has forfeited his Right, or that his Subjects are actually freed from their
Allegiance to him.

1. And as to the first point, I shall not trouble my self to enquire into the
particulars of the Private League, which they say he made with the French King,
for we have public matters of Fact enough, to prove all that is necessary in
this Point: For the sending an Ambassador to Rome, and owning of the Popes
Authority so far, as to receive his Nuncio and Provincial Romish Bishops, and
that against so many Laws and Statutes that are expressly against it; and not
only that, but making Privy Counselors, and advancing to the Helm of State
those very Persons that by our Laws are not allowed to live in the Kingdom. And
to what end could all this tend, but to bring the Nation under the Papal
Jurisdiction and Slavery?

2. The second, of setting up a suspected Child to be Heir; as it is a thing of
which we have no President in all our Story, so it is a Sin for which we have
yet no name; but I should call it Civil Adultery; it being doing that to the
Public, that a false Wife does in a private Family. It is a thing indeed
against which there is no Law, because, like that of committing Paricide, the
Lawgivers thought no body could ever be guilty of it; and truly I believe he
is the first Instance of a Father that ever set up a suspected Child against
his own Children. And if this is not an inversion, or rather a subversion of
the Succession, I know not what is. And yet, to my wonder, I can see some
people pass this by very patiently, who can rail with a very good grace against
the Parliament; I cannot say for giving the present King a Right, but
anticipating the Title he had to the Crown, and that with the consent of the
next Heirs too; so that they cannot say there is any wrong done in the Case And
yet some make a horrible outcry, as if both the Constitution of the
Government, and the Laws of Succession, were all subverted and broken by it:
when they have only set up a Prince of the Blood, for which there is Presidents
in our own Chronicles. For Henry the 7th. by Name, had no Right of either side,
but what he derived from his Mother (who was Heir of the House of Lancaster)
and his Wife, who was the true and undoubted Heir of the House of York, and
consequently of the Kingdom. But although he Reigned by her, he would not
suffer her to Reign with him, for he would allow her neither Power nor Title;
so that this is no new thing among us; but the setting up of that spurious Brat
I am sure has no parallel: And if there was to be Inversion in the Case, surely
it should sooner be made for the sake of a Noble Prince, who merited all that
could be done for him, than for the setting up of an unknown, but in all
probability base-born Child; the very thoughts of which all true English Men
ought to abhor.

3. But how foul soever the two former things may and ought to appear, it is
the third that knocks the Nail of the head. But I think I may reasonably
suppose it superfluous for me to enter into a long Discourse of the Illegality
of the Dispensing Power, which is so fully displayed in the Trial of the seven
Bishops, that it may supersede all that can be said on the point. But although
Charles the Second wished he had had the Power of dispensing with tender
Consciences on some particular Emergencies; yet none but our late King James
ever pretended to have Authority to dispense with, and silence all the Laws of
the Nation. But when he assumed to himself the Power of dispensing with those
Laws he could neither make nor abrogate, he did at once both Unking himself and
release his Subjects. For as the English Kings have no Right but what the Law
gives them; so the People owe no duty but what the same Law obliges them to;
and when our Kings go about to invalidate the Laws, they destroy that very
Power that gives the Monarchy both Being and Authority. And that this was the
very Case of the late King James, I dare appeal to any body that knows our
Laws, unless it be those vile despicable Wretches, whose names will be Infamous
to all Posterity, who pretending to sit to Judge according to Law, gave
Sentence contrary to the Law. But it was very much for the honor of that Noble
Profession, that there was so many sets of Judges turned out, and that they
were so many years before they could pick out Twelve Men that were Rogues
enough to be entrusted by them; and even here they were happily deceived, for
among four which I suppose they thought themselves secure of, two of them, when
they came to the trial, approved themselves honest Men. But if we talk of
Treason and of Traitors, none sure, since the very Foundation of Monarchy in
this Nation, have deserved that Title so well as J. and C. for I am loath to
know them by the Names of Lord C. and Lord Bishop of Chapter (but since there was a
Judas among the Apostles, I hope it will be no scandal to our Excellent and
Reverend Bishops, that there was one Traitor among them.) But certainly two
such Traitors both to King and Kingdom, Church and State, England never bred.
But I hope they will meet with such full rewards for their Treasons in this
World, as may deter others from following them, and also secure them from that
sadder vengeance in the World to come, which I am sure I heartily wish.

I could here add a great deal more on this Head, but that I suppose it
needless; for having proved before, that our King's Power is both Limited and
Conditional, and consequently that he can forfeit his Right to the Government;
I think I need not, now I have made out those three things, use any other
Arguments to prove King James has actually done so, although I might insist
upon his Deserting, as well as subverting the Government.

III.
But after all that I can say, I do not expect every body should have the same
Sentiments I have. But having endeavored from the beginning to clear the way
before me, and to prove all my Points as I went, that I may not leave my Reader
in a Maze at the last, I shall consider and answer, as well as I can, the Chief
Objections that may be made against what I have now said, which I think may be
reduced to these Four Heads. First, That it is against the received Opinion of
Monarchies being Jure Divino, and being first Instituted by God. Secondly, That
it contradicts several plain Texts of Scripture. Thirdly, That having sworn
Allegiance to King James, his doing an ill thing will not acquit us. Fourthly,
That it is doing the same thing we condemned so in the Rebellion in 41. And I
should have added a fifth, but that I hope I have in part anticipated all the
Objections can be made against the Succession.

1. Now to the First, I shall only desire them to consider what I have said in
my First Part, about the first beginning of Monarchy in the World, and
particularly the establishing of it among the Jews. But although I there deny
its first Institution to be by God's immediate Appointment and Direction; yet I
would not be understood so, as if I meant to exclude God from having any thing
to do in the setting up or making of Kings; for I know, that by him Kings
reign, and it is by his Counsel and Inspiration that Princes decree just things:
For, alas! without him the mightiest Monarch in the World can neither think a
Thought, nor stir a Step; for in him (as St. Paul says) we live, and move, and
have our being, Acts 17.28. So that in some senses God may be said to be the
Author of all our Actions; for the Prophet says, Shall there be evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. And without him we are not able
to do any thing; for St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 3.5. That we are not sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God:
And if not able to think, certainly not able to act, without his Concurrence
and Assistance. And if a Sparrow shall not fall to the ground without our
Father, and the very Hairs of our Head are numbered, as our Savior tells us,
Mat. 10.29, 30. surely that God that takes such care and notice of little
inconsiderable things, will not let Kings and Kingdoms be without his Care and
Providence: And yet for all that, they may be, as St. Peter styles them, an
Ordinance of Man. The truth is, some of our Prerogative-men treat the King as
the Papists have done the Virgin Mary, think they cannot speak too highly of
her; and so they make her a perfect Goddess, and ascribe Honors to her which
are not her due. But although I have as great Veneration for her as I can or ought
to have for a Creature, and acknowledge her to be Blessed among Women; yet she
was but a Woman still: So I must look upon Kings as Men still, and own them to
be the Chiefest, I wish I could always say, the Best of Men. And although God may
in his secret Decrees design the making such Persons Kings; yet he makes the
People the Instruments of raising them, and it is from the People that they
immediately receive their Power, as I showed at large in the Stories of David
and Jeroboam. But tho God do not choose a King by any miraculous Declaration of
his Will in the Case, yet (if that will satisfy) I will grant that he may
direct and incline the Hearts of the People to choose one rather than another;
and when they once have chose, God certainly does confirm it, so that it is not
in the Peoples power to choose again, unless by the King's fault his Power is
forfeited, and so it revolves to the People. For I should be very unwilling to
live under any Government where God has nothing to do; but all that I contest
is, that Kings are not so immediately set up by God, that upon that score they
should be unaccountable to their People, especially where they are not the
Supreme Power, as it is evident they are not in England. And that one
Circumstance does make so great an alteration in the Case, that it almost
supersedes what I have to say to the several Texts of Scripture that may be
urged against what I have here said: But yet that I may both take away all
Objections, and give all the Satisfaction imaginable, we will consider all
those Texts distinctly, and see how far they may be applicable to our Case.

2. And the properest Method of doing it, I suppose, will be by taking them in
order as they lie: And the first that offers it self to our Consideration, is
that of our Savior, Mat. 22.21. Render therefore to Caesar the things that are
Cesar's, etc. But having had occasion in another place to treat of that Text, I
shall desire my Reader to turn some few Leaves back, and shall only add to what
I have there said, That I do acknowledge it a Duty to render to Caesar, nay to
every body, the Things and Dues that belong to them; but think that we fully
discharge our Duty to the King, when we pay him all the Obedience that the Law
gives him Right to challenge, or lays any Obligation upon the Subject to
perform: And if they can by this Text prove we do not do so, or that we are
obliged to render unto Caesar the things which are not Cesar's, they will indeed
then say something to the purpose. But this being the only Rule that our
Savior gave in the Case, and it being acknowledged, that our Savior did not
intend to make any Alteration in the Rights of Princes, but leaves them as he
found them; it may not be amiss to consider a little how he found that Matter,
and what particular Commands God gave to the Jews concerning their Obedience to
Kings. And I must declare, that I have read the Old Testament over with all the
attention I am capable of; and unless it be in the Proverbs, I cannot find one
Text that gives us any Direction, much less Command, about Subjection to Kings,
but only what our Divines draw by way of Inference from the Fifth Commandment:
But whether God intended it in that sense they have now put upon it, I think
might bear a Dispute: But if he did, it must be only by way of Prophecy, for
there was not a King in Israel for near Five hundred Years after the giving of
the Law: And this I Am sure of, that upon the setting up of Saul, when Samuel
had the King and People Face to Face, although he often repeats their Duty and
Obligation of fearing the Lord, and obeying him, yet not one word of Command to
the People to obey their new King, which I have sometimes wondered at; and the
only Account that I can give of it, is this: That being they were resolved they
would be like other Nations, and would have a King to reign over them, God
complied with them in the thing, but would have nothing to do with the Compact
between them, but leaves them to agree that Matter between themselves as well
as they can; and accordingly we find, that tho God chose the Person, as in the
Case of David, yet they would not admit him King, till they had made a Bargain
with him, as I have showed at large in the First Part of this. So that upon the
whole, and as far as I can discover, the Power that our Savior found Kings
invested with, was what the People first consented to, and afterward by Laws
obliged themselves to: But there can be no Universal Rule, because that the
Laws vary according to the differing Constitution of Government that is in
several Nations: Therefore our Savior gave the properest and the fullest
Answer, by bidding them render to Kings what by the Municipal Laws of that
Kingdom was their Due.

The next Text is that of our Saviors rebuking St. Peter, Mat. 26.52. Then
said Jesus unto him, Put up thy Sword into thy place; for all they that take
the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Now for the better understanding of
this Place, it may not be improper to compare the several Relations of this
very Passage, as it is diversely recorded by all Four Evangelists; and although it
is the most at large in St. Matthew, yet he omits one very necessary and
remarkable Particular, which is related by St. Luke, chap. 22.49. And when they
which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord, shall we
smite with the Sword? But Peter being a little too zealous, would not stay for
his Lord's Answer, as the others did; but without leave makes use of his, which
occasions him this Reprimand from Christ, and upon a double account. First,
Striking without his Lord's Commission; for I do not question but it would have
been a fault in him to have cut off any bodies Ear, as well as Malchus's.
Secondly, Thinking that Christ wanted his Defense; and tho Christ had so often
foretold, That the Son of Man was to be betrayed, and given up into the hands
of Sinners; yet now he would pretend to rescue him from those very Sufferings
he came on purpose into the World to undergo. For St. John lays the stress of
the Argument there, Put up thy Sword into the Sheath: The Cup that my Father
gives me, shall I not drink it? Joh. 18.11. So that the unseasonableness of the
Defense is all that he there reproves, and seems to me to be the chief thing
aimed at by St. Matthew, when Christ says, Think thou that I cannot now pray
to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? But how then shall the Scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
Mat. 26.53, 54. But allowing it was unlawful for St. Peter to strike without
Christ's leave, yet I cannot see how that Text would support all that they
would build upon it; for the Chief Priest's was not the Supreme Authority of
that Nation at that time; for they owned to Pilate, Joh. 18.31. That it was not
lawful for them to put any man to death: And whether they had any better
Authority to take him, is more than I think can be proved; for St. Matthew
intimates, that they sought to take him by craft and subtilty, and could not
have accomplished it but by his Servant's Treachery; and after they had
apprehended him, and brought him to Pilate, who was the Chief Magistrate under
Caesar, yet he would not pretend to judge him, because he belonged to Herod's
Jurisdiction, till Herod returned him to him. So that here is no reason to
suppose, that Malchus's being the High Priest's Officer, was an Aggravation to
St. Peter's Guilt; for the High Priest had no Power himself in those Causes; so
that there was no Resistance of the Supreme Magistrate, or Public Authority in
the Case. But our Savior did very justly condemn Peter's taking so much upon
him, as to presume to strike without his Lord's leave, when he stood by.

But now the two main Texts of Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2.13. should come to be
considered; but they enterfering a little one with another, we shall endeavor
to reconcile them, before we discourse of either; for nothing can be more
directly contrary, than St. Peter's calling that the Ordinance of Man, which
St. Paul says is the Ordinance of God. But I must confess I cannot see that
there is any greater necessity of bringing St. Peter to St. Paul, than Paul to
Peter; for they are both Canonical, and both equally true; and were it not that
all Texts are to be pressed to maintain the Doctrine of Monarchy's being Jure
Divino, I should think there were no great difference in the Case: For having
before so fully proved, That Kings were at first set up by the People, St.
Peter had a great deal of reason to call them the Ordinance of Man; but after
they were established, it was then the Ordinance, Order, or Command of God,
call it which you will, that the People should obey them as far as they had
obliged themselves by Law to do: And I do and must own, that any Subject who
refuses Obedience, either Active or Passive, in any of those Instances which
the Laws and Constitution of the Government require him to submit to; that Man,
I say, does actually resist the Ordinance or Command of God, and does deserve
the Penalty the Apostle threatens, take the Word in what Latitude you please.
And this I take to be the clearest way of reconciling the two Texts. And I will
also own, that the Apostles gave very good Advice, and that the Christians of
those Times were obliged to follow it; and if there be now in the World any
Christians in the same unhappy Predicament, I should think it their Duty to
follow it also: But, God be thanked, we are in much other Circumstances than
they were at that time; for they were under the Command of Arbitrary Tyrants,
whose Will was their only Law: Whereas we are under no Law but what we have
made our selves, and our King's Power is both Limited and Conditional, and,
properly speaking, we cannot call the King Supreme, for I think I have before
showed, that there is a possibility for a King to be guilty of Treason, or at
least that which is tantamount to it; for they can forfeit their Regal
Authority, as I do not at all doubt but our late King actually did. So that
unless they will be pleased to prove, that it is the duty of all Kingdoms and
States to put themselves into the same Circumstances, and make themselves
Slaves on purpose that they may be obliged by this Command of St. Paul's; I
think we may very lawfully plead exemption from some of the Inferences they
would draw from it; not but that I will own there is such a duty as Passive
Obedience, a Virtue which even in our Constitution we may have the opportunity
of exercising, perhaps oftener than they desire; although of late it has been so
great an Idol, that not only our Laws and Government, but even our Religion and
Posterity were to be sacrifis'd to it. But if it was really the effect of a
tender Conscience, I would very willingly be informed how they came to be so
particularly partial to this Rule of St. Paul's, for there are a great many
Commands of our Saviors which seem to be as obliging, to which they do not pay
so great deference. For I am sure there is such Precepts, That if any man smite
thee on the right Cheek, turn to him the other also; and that we shall give to
him that asks, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away; and
of him that takes away thy goods, ask them not again; and many such like we
shall find in the 5th. of St. Matthew and 6th. of St. Luke. Now if these were
duties to the Primitive Christians, how come we to be excused from them? and I
can think but of two Answers; the one that they were Temporary; (but that will
not be allowed for something I know) and the other, and I think the better is,
that the Circumstances of the Christians are so much altered in Worldly
respects, that what was a proper means to bring people in, and make them in
love with the Gospel, when they saw the great Patience and Meekness of the
Professors of it, would not now be so proper a way to preserve it. For now that
the Laws have set the Boundaries to every Man's Right, (which neither Law nor
Gospel allows any body to infringe) to take away those Fences, would be so far
from advancing Christianity, or rendering it more Beautiful and Lovely, that on
the contrary it would let in Confusion, and authorize Rapine and Disorders: so
that a litteral Performance of those Duties, would, in our present
Circumstances, destroy one of the great designs of Christianity, and certainly
that can never be a Duty which is against the very end for which the Command
was at first given; and whether an illegal and unlimited Obedience in the
People would not destroy the very end of Government, which we know is the
safety of the People, I shall desire may be a little better considered. But now
suppose some tender Consciences should think themselves obliged to obey those
commands of turning the Cheek, and not asking their Goods again in the very
literal sense of the words, yet might they not keep this to themselves, and
exercise the Virtue when occasion offered it self? or was it necessary for them
to cry this their Opinion in all the Market Towns of the Countries? Nay, to
thunder Damnation against all that were not of their mind. How this may be
applied I believe every body can guess; and also what, in all probability would
be the effect of such Proceedings; but a word to the Wise is enough.

3. I come now to the 3d. and in appearance the most difficult Objection, how
those that have taken the Oaths of Allegiance to King James can be absolved
from the Obligation of them? But if they will allow what I should hope, I have
before sufficiently proved that the Kings Power is both Limited and
Conditional, I should think this great question might be very easily solved;
for every body knows that a Covenant is a mutual Obligation, and has force no
longer than while the Conditions are performed on both sides; but if one of the
Parties shall wilfully break his part of the Covenant, he does not only forfeit
the Right he had to challenge the Performance of the other side, but does by
his breach actually void the Covenant, and consequently releases the other
Party from all the Obligation he was under.

But besides this, there is another Consideration, which being of weight ought
not to be omitted; and that it is an uncontestable Maxim of our Law, which
makes it Treason for to resist the King de Facto, although it be in defense,
and to maintain the Right of the King de Jure. So that Possession is not only,
as we used to say, eleven Points of the Law, but is in this Case all twelve.
And if any body can think it their Duty to commit Treason, it would be pretty
strange; but if they do, however they may satisfy their Consciences, it is
probable they will not the Law so easily. Nor is this Law, if thoroughly
considered, so unreasonable in it self, as perhaps it may at first appear: For
it is an acknowledged Aphorism, That the safety of the People is the Supreme
Law; and therefore to be prefered before Titles to Succession. For the
Lawmakers might easily suppose, that no Person who was actually in Possession
of the Throne, would willingly quit it unless forced to it; for I verily
believe our late King James is the first Instance, of any Prince that ever ran
away from his Government, and quitted the Crown without striking a stroke for
it, and that when he had any Army to defend it; and truly for that we must own
our selves extremely obliged to him, he having prevented that, which that Law
seemed to fear, and desired to avoid; that is a Civil War. For the Law supposes
that a greater Inconvenience to the People, than to be Governed by one that had
not a right Title to the Crown: And truly all the Proofs that are brought out
of the Gospel for Obedience to Princes, do confirm this Maxim of our Law; for
neither our Savior nor his Apostles bid Christians enquire into the Right and
Title of the Roman Emperors; but bids them to obey them under whose Government
it was their lot to fall: For few of them could pretend a legal Title to the
Crown, and sometimes there were several Persons set up by several parts of the
Army; and then he that got the Mastery, proved his Title by his Success; so
that the Right of the King de facto is confirmed both by Law and Gospel, and
therefore must be unquestionable, when there is no such thing as a King de Jure
to oppose him: For by the Forfeiture King James made of his Right, I do not at
all doubt but our present King is de jure as well as de facto. Nay had King
James never done any thing amiss in his whole Reign, but that of deserting the
Government at that very nick of time, it would certainly have justified our
Compliance with the present King. For although King James had thought it
necessary for the security of his Person to withdraw himself, yet sure there
was no necessity of his leaving us without all Government and Defense. For
might he not have appointed a Vice Roy or Deputy, as he does in Ireland, that
might have kept possession of the Throne in his Name, and to whom the Subject
might have resorted, both for Justice and Protection? But instead of that, he
steals away himself, orders his Army to be disbanded, and so abandons the
People solely to the mercy of the Foreign Force, whom he leaves in the
Possession of the Authority which he quitted. And if silence and submission may
be interpreted consent, he did by that resign both Crown and Kingdom to him.
But however he meant to dispose of himself, it is evident he left those of his
Subjects, that would have adhered to him (as there is reason to believe a great
many would, if he had stuck to them) in a very ill Predicament; they having
then no power to resist, and now no right to do it. For all that shall now
attempt his restoration, are by the Law made actual Traitors; and I do not at
all question, but that he would take care to see they should be treated as
such, if by their means he should recover the Crown: For the resisting of the
King de facto, is a Treason that not only makes them liable to that Kings
punishment whom they oppose, but leaves them to the discretion of the King they
served; for the Law gives him power to execute them for Traitors, who should
now restore him to the Throne: And both the Example and Doctrine of his dear
Brother and Ally of France, will soon teach him which is the best, because much
the readiest way of requiting those who should procure his Re-establishment.
For it is a dangerous thing to oblige a King of his Principles too much, as we
may learn from the Barbarous treatment of the poor Hugonots in France; who
without all dispute gave that King the Power to use them, or rather abuse them
so. And such we have a great deal of reason to believe, shall be the requital
of those of the Reformed Party, who should do the same thing for King James,
that they did for the now Tres Grand Louis,

And since we English have no Obligation to our Kings but what the Law lays
upon us; when we are by that set at Liberty, methinks we should not think it
our duty to enslave our selves contrary to the Laws, and known Constitutions of
the Nation, especially since there is nothing else required of us, but to
accept of that Deliverance which God himself has wrought for us. For there is
very few that have had any other part to act in this Great Revolution, than
That of standing still (as Moses says to the Israelites) and seeing the
Salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.13. Of which that we may be worthy, pray God
make us more sensible of it, and more thankful for it; and this I suppose may
be enough, because a great deal more than I at first intended to have said to
the third Objection.

And to the Fourth I hope there will be no great occasion of saying much; for
certainly no body that can either consider, or compare, can think the Cases of
1648. and 1688. Parallel. For the great (I had almost said the only) fault of
that good King, and true Martyr, was his complying too much with his People,
(and yielding that to their importunity which both Law and Conscience told him
he should not have consented to) a fault that I dare say his Son James would
never have been guilty of.

But it must be acknowledged indeed, that in the Case of the Ship Money he did
assume a Power the Law did not allow him; but 'twas the only Instance of his
doing it in his whole Reign: And it is evident, that in that too he did not
design his Subjects Wrong; for no body was forced to pay it; but they that had
a mind to contest the thing, as some did, had liberty so to do: For there were
Trials in Westminster Hall about it, and Sentence given against the King: From
which we may gather these two things: First, That the Judges were neither
overaw'd nor turned out by the King, for doing Justice. Secondly, That the King
did not think himself above the Law, but submitted to it; so that it seems
there was no such thing as the Dispensing Power known in those days, but the
Rights of the People were preserved inviolate. I wish I could have said, the
Rights of the Crown had been so too; and then perhaps we should never have
known the vast difference that there was between the Father and the Son: But
whoever will please to compare the Cases, will find full as great difference
between the Causes, as the Persons. For in the former, it was the most open and
notorions Rebellion that ever was recorded in Story; whereas all the Fault that
the generality of the English can now be charged with, is (if it be a Fault)
the Complying with the Necessity that King James himself laid on them, of
submitting to the Power he left in Possession; and which I am sure they were
not in a Condition to resist. And now methinks it should hardly bear a Dispute,
Whether it is any bodies Duty to make themselves Traitors according to the Rules
both of Law and Gospel (as I have showed above) for the Restitution of him that
subverted the Laws, deserted the Government, and I doubt still designs the
Destruction of the Nation. And truly the Causes and Occasions of those two
great Revolutions in 48, and 88, were not more distant than their Designs and
Ends were; the first intending the Subversion, and this latter the
Establishment and Preservation of the best and purest Religion in the World.

But perhaps some may say, This is not the best way of doing it; for it is an
Old Saying, and a True, That the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the
Church, which, like a Palm Tree, grows fastest when it has the greatest weight
upon it: And that it is a very idle Outcry that some make, That they would take
their Religion from them; for that dwells in the Heart, and no body can take
that from me, unless I please. But although it is very true, that the Heart is the
Seat of true Religion; yet I think it savors a little too much of Presumption,
for any body to undertake to preserve it there by their own Strength. But
suppose that they were, and that they were sure their Faith should not fail
under the severest Trials; yet is the Public Service of God, the Opportunities
of going into the House of God, and there pouring out our Prayers and Praises
before him with the Congregation of the Saints; is this, I say, so despicable a
Blessing, that it is not worth keeping if we can? We see how holy David bemoans
and laments his Banishment from the Temple, and how he longs and languishes for
the return of those blessed Privileges, so that he envies the very Birds that
were permitted to nest near the Altar; and yet he had as true a sense of God
and Religion, and as plentiful Effusions of the Spirit to supply such a Want,
as any of us can pretend to. But alas! it would not be only a temporary
Deprivation that we should bewail; for whoever now shall attempt to bring back
King James, does as much as in him lies, to cut off both himself and his
Posterity from the solemn Public Worship of God for ever. And although I know God
can support under any Condition, yet they will find a great deal of difference
between those Sufferings they wilfully bring upon themselves, and those which
are of God Almighty's laying: For I can securely rest upon his Word; for I know
that he is faithful, and will not suffer us to be be tempted above that we are
able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that we may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. But if we will not escape when he affords us the Means,
What Promise is there either of Support or Deliverance from those Dangers we
wilfully bring upon our selves? And 'twill certainly be very just in God, to
suffer us fall under that Ruin we have courted, in which, I doubt, we shall
have very little comfort; for it is not the Sufferings, but the Cause, that
makes the Martyr. Therefore I beg leave to conclude with the Words of St. Paul,
2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3. and beseech you that you receive not the Grace of God in
vain; for as God may truly say, he has heard us in a time accepted; in the day
of salvation he has succored us; so may I also, Behold, now is the accepted
time; Behold, now is the day of salvation. And let us all be careful that we
give no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. But that we may
all with one Heart and one Mouth bless God for his wonderful Deliverance, and
pray for the Prosperity and long Life of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, whom God
grantlong to Reign.

Amen.
FINIS.

