Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, DECIMO
SEXTO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661.
In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

And there continued till the 19th of May, in the 14th year of His Majesty's
said Reign: And thence Prorogued to the 18th of February then next following.

And there continued to the 27th of July, in the 15th year of His Majesty's
Reign: And thence Prorogued to the 16th of March then next following.

And on the 5th of April 1664. in the 16th year of His Majesty's Reign, two
Bills passed the Royal Assent.

DIEVET MON DROIT


LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1664.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XVI. Caroli II. Regis.
An Act for the Assembling and Holding of Parliaments once in Three years at
the least; And for the Repeal of an Act, Entitled, An Act for the preventing
of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments.

WHereas the Act made in the Parliament begun at Westminster the Third day of
November in the Sixteenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King
Charles of blessed memory, Entitled, An Act for the preventing of
Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments, is in
derogation of His Majesty's just Rights, and Prerogative inherent to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, for the Calling and Assembling of Parliaments;
And may be an occasion of manifold mischiefs and inconveniences, and much
endanger the Peace and Safety of His Majesty, and all His Liege people of this
Realm.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said
Act, Entitled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the
long Intermission of Parliaments, And all and every the Articles, Clauses and
Things therein contained, is, shall be, and are hereby wholly Repealed,
Annulled, and utterly made Void, And are hereby declared to be Null and Void to
all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if the said Act had never been had, or
made; Any thing in the said Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made in the Reign
of King Edward the third, Parliaments are to be held very often, Your Majesty's
humble and loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, most humbly do beseech Your most Excellent
Majesty, That it may be Declared and Enacted, And be it Declared and Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That hereafter the sitting and holding of Parliaments
shall not be intermitted or discontinued above three years at the most; but
that within three years from and after the determination of this present
Parliament, and so from time to time within three years after the determination
of any other Parliament or Parliaments, or if there be occasion, more often,
Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors do issue out Your Writs for calling,
assembling and holding of another Parliament, to the end there may be a
frequent calling, assembling, and holding of Parliaments once in Three years at
the least.


