royal blazon or coat of arms Anno Decimo Gulielmi III. Regis. An ACT for
Confirming and Establishing the Administration of the Goods and Chattels of Sir
William Godolphin Knight, deceased.
MOST humbly show unto Your most Excellent Majesty, Your most Dutiful Subjects,
Francis Godolphin Esquire and Charles Godolphin Esquire and Elizabeth his Wife (Your
said Suppliants Francis Godolphin, and Elizabeth the Wife of the said Charles
Godolphin, being Administrators of the Goods and Chattels of Sir William
Godolphin Knight. deceased) That diverse good Laws have been made to prevent the
Conveying Estates of the Subjects of this Realm for the Maintenance and Support
of Superstitious Uses. And whereas Sir William Godolphin Knight. a Subject of this
Your Majesty's Kingdom of England, who Lived at Madrid in the Kingdom of Spain,
being there surrounded by Friars, Priests and Jesuits, as he lay Bedrid, was
influenced to consent to an Act before a Public Notary, on or about the
Thirtieth of March, One thousand six hundred ninety six, whereby it was
signified, that Four Persons named therein (viz.) Don Mathias de Escolar Abbot
of the Basillians, Geronimo Guerrero Procurator General of the Jesuits, Don
Balthazar de Cabredo a Secular Priest, and Don Antonio de Cendoya a Lawyer,
should be his Testamentarios, which Designation is thus explained in the
Instrument (viz.) To the end that as soon as he the said Sir William Godolphin
departed out of this Life, they should Make and Constitute. his Last Will and
Testament, expressing therein the Gifts, Legacies, Foundations of Memories,
Good-works, Patronages and other Dispositions which he the said Sir William had
Communicated to them, to be disposed of in such Manner and Form as should
appear to them the said Testamentarios, to be most Requisite and Convenient,
giving to each of the said Four a Legacy in the said Instrument, and certain
Sums for Superstitious Uses, adding Two other persons (viz.) Francis Arthur and
Bruno Bernardo de Quiros, to be joined with the former Four, to Execute the
Will which should be made after his death by the said Four for the Good of his
Soul, which was declared his Universal Heir in the said Instrument, thereby
Revoking, Disannulling and Making Void all other Wills, Codicils, Powers to
make Wills, or any Dispositions, which he the said Sir William Godolphin might
have made heretofore either by Word or Writing, or in any other Form, to the
end they might have no Force, nor avail in any Court of Justice or otherwise,
and desiring that Power should be fulfilled and execited, and the Will which
should be made pursuant thereunto, as his last and determined Will, in such
Form as might make it most available in Law. And whereas after the passing the
said Notarial Act, (viz.) about the latter end of June in the same year, the
said Sir William Godolphin proposing to make his Last Will Nuncupative or
Testamentary Disposition, did then declare several Legacies he would give to
certain of his Relations in England, which Legacies were by his order set down
in Writing, and Read to, and Acknowledged by him to be his Last Will, and which
has been since proved by the Oaths of Three Witnesses, Sworn by Commission out
of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, and Administration of all the Goods of
the said Sir William Godolphin granted to the Two Principal Legatees, viz.
Francis Godolphin and Elizabeth Wife of Charles Godolphin (being also the only
surviving persons next of Kin, in equal degree to the said Sir William
Godolphin) with the said Testamentary Disposition annexed in the Words
following: (viz.) Memorandum, That in or about the latter end of June or
beginning of July, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred ninety
six, Sir William Godolphin Knight. then residing at Madrid in the Kingdom of Spain,
and in the place of his usual habitation there, being then sick of the sickness
whereof he Died, but being of sound and perfect Memory, having an Intent to
declare and make his Last Will Nuncupative or Testamentary Disposition, did
order and direct Don Antonio Cendoya to put down in Writing these following
Legacies to be the Gifts, Legacies and Bequests of him the said Sir William
Godolphin, in that his last Will; and the said Sums of Money and Legacies were
accordingly wrote down, at the Will and Request of Sir William Godolphin by the
abovesaid Don Antonio Cendoya, and afterward the said Writing, which contained
and Specified the several Gifts and Legacies following, was Read to the said
Sir William Godolphin, and Approved and Declared by him to be his Last Will;
the which Gifts*, Gave and Bequeathed to his Nephew Francis Godolphin Esquire all
his Lands in England, and also to his said Nephew Francis Godolphin Seven
thousand Pounds Sterling, besides to each of his Four Children, viz. One Son
and Three Daughters, One thousand Pounds Sterling: Also he gave to his Niece
Mistress Elisabeth Godolphin, Wife to the Honorable Charles Godolphin Esquire,
Four thousand Pounds Sterling, and likewise to the said Charles Godolphin her
Husband, One thousand Pounds Sterling, and to his Uncle Master Francis Bluet
Two hundred Pounds Sterling. All which Last Will, Gifts and Bequests were Wrote
down and Read to the said Sir William Godolphin in the Spanish Tongue, and were
Approved, Agreed unto, and Owned by him as his Last Will in the Spanish Tongue;
likewise in the Presence of us who were desired to take Notice thereof: All
which we Testify upon Oath, Witness our Hands this Eighteenth day of September
(New Style) Anno Domini, One thousand six hundred ninety six, Thomas Gray, John
March, Lewis Cavelero; Sworn, Signed and Executed in Presence of us William
Thomas, Jezreel Jones, Samuel Alston. And whereas according to the Laws of this
Realm, no Man can give Power or Authority to another, to make his Will for him
after his Death; And if it were otherwise, the Estates of such of His Majesty's
Subjects, who should happen to dye beyond the Seas, would run great Hazard of
being Alienated from the right Heirs and Relations of the said Persons, under
Color of such delegated Authority; and yet nevertheless forasmuch as some
Persons who have been Trusted in the Management of the said Sir William
Godolphin's Estate in England, have with several others Employed therein beyond
the Seas, used great endeavors to set up the said Notarial Act, and a
Pretended Will or Disposition, made, or supposed to be made after the said Sir
William Godolphin's Death, under Color of the same. And whereas by such
Pretext, the Legal Administrators of the said Sir William Godolphin have been
hitherto delayed, and hindered in Recovering his Estate, whereby to discharge
the several Legacies in the said Testamentary Disposition, as well as to
Possess themselves of the Residuary Part, which being not otherwise disposed of
by the said Sir William in his Life time, of Right belongs to them as next of
Kin. For Remedy therefore in the Premises, may it please Your most Excellent
Majesty, that it may be Enacted and Declared, And be it Enacted and Declared by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Clauses in the said
Notarial Act of the Thirtieth of March, One thousand six hundred ninety six,
whereby any Powers or Authorities are pretended to be given to the Persons in
the said Notarial Act Named, or any of them, or any others, to make the said
Sir William Godolphin's Will after his Death are Null and Void, and shall be
Deemed and Taken to be Void and of none Effect; And that the other Clauses in
the same Notarial Act mentioned, whereby the said Sir William Godolphin
Declares his Soul his Universal Heir, are likewise Null, Void and of none
Effect in Law. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Wills, Codicils, Powers to make Wills, and Dispositions in any manner made or
declared by the said Sir William Godolphin, before the making the said Notarial
Act of the Thirtieth of March, One thousand six hundred ninety six (the same
being therein solemnly Revoked, Disannulled and made Void) shall be, and the
same are hereby Declared to be Revoked, Disannulled and made Void to all
Intents and Purposes; and that the said Administration Granted to the said
Francis Godolphin, and Elizabeth (the Wife of the said Charles Godolphin) his
Sister, of the Estate of the said Sir William Godolphin, with the said
Nuncupative Will before mentioned Annexed (the same being solemnly declared by
him some few days before his Death, in the presence of Three Credible
Witnesses, who were duly Sworn by Commission out of the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury) is well Granted, and shall be deemed and taken to be good and
effectual in the Law, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, in all Courts of
Law and Equity, the said Notarial Act of the Thirtieth of March, One thousand
six hundred ninety six, or any Powers thereby given, for the making the said
Sir William Godolphins Will after his Death, or any former or other Will, or
pretended Power to make a Will, Made, Given, Granted or Declared by the said
Sir William Godolphin, before the making the said Notarial Act, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And it is Declared, That nothing in this Act contained, shall be construed to
make void the Specifical Legacies, in and by the said Notarial Act Given to the
said Don Mathias de Escolar, Geronimo Guerrero, Don Balthazar de Cabredo, Don
Antonio de Cendoya, Francis Arthur, and Bruno Bernardo de Quiros, but that such
Legacies, with any other Sums specially mentioned therein, shall remain a
Charge on the Estate of the said Sir William Godolphin, to be paid out of the
same, so as and provided that the said Don Mathias de Escolar, Geronimo
Guerrero, Don Balthazar de Cabredo, Don Antonio de Cendoya, Francis Arthur, and
Bruno Bernardo de Quiros, or some of them, do Account unto the said Francis
Godolphin, and Elizabeth the Wife of the said Charles Godolphin, the said
Administrators for the Estate of the said Sir William Godolphin, in the said
Kingdom of Spain, or other places beyond the Seas, and pay the same as they the
said Administrators shall direct.

And whereas it does appear, That the said Sir William Godolphin did by a
Writing before his going out of England, Solemnly declare his Intention of
leaving Three thousand Pound Sterling, to and for the Education and Maintenance
of Poor Scholars, the Relief of Decayed Virtuous Gentlemen, the Redemption of
Prisoners, the placing out Poor Children to Trades, or other such like Pious
and Charitable uses, under the direction of certain Persons named in the said
Writing, (who are all since Dead) and did also express his Intention of giving
to the Poor of the Town of Camilford, in the County of Cornwall, the Sum of
Twenty Pounds, to the Poor of the Town of Liskerd, in the said County, Ten
Pounds, and to the Poor of the Parish of St. Mabin, in the said County also,
Ten Pounds; Now to the end the said Pious and Good Intentions may not be
Frustrated, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Administrators of the said Sir William Godolphin do enter into several
Recognizances in the High Court of Chancery, at the time when the Estate of the
said Sir William Godolphin now in that Court, shall be delivered up to them, to
secure the Payment of the said Three thousand and forty Pounds, in manner
following, (That is to say) the said Francis Godolphin one of the
Administrators in one Recognizance, to secure the Payment of one Moiety
thereof, or Fifteen hundred and twenty Pounds, and the said Charles Godolphin
on behalf of his Wife Elizabeth, the other Administrator, in another
Recognizance, to secure the like Sum of Fifteen hundred and twenty Pounds,
being the other Moiety; which said Sums shall be taken out of such part of the
Estate of the said Sir William Godolphin, now beyond the Seas, as shall first
come to the hands of the said Administrators, after the Charge deducted for
recovering the same; and in case so much shall not be recovered of the Estate
beyond the Seas, within the space of Three years, the compliment of the said
Sum, shall be made up by the said Administrators, out of the Residue of the
said Sir William Godolphins Estate in England, if any such there be, after just
demands Paid, and Legacies given in the said Nuncupative Will satisfied; and
the said several Sums of Fifteen hundred and twenty Pounds severally Secured by
the said Administrators, shall be by them proportionably (that is to say) by
each of them for his part, respectively Applied to such Pious and Charitable
uses, as are before particularly specified and mentioned; and the said
Recognizances or either of them, shall not be discharged, without a Certificate
from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Lord High Chancellor of England,
or the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, or one of them now or for the time being,
that the Sum of Fifteen hundred and twenty Pounds, Secured by such Recognizance
appears to have been applied, vested, or disposed for such Pious and Chartable
uses, as may answer the Intention of the Donor, to the satisfaction of the said
Lord Archbishop, or Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the
time being.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
such and so much of the Personal Estate of the said Sir William Godolphin, now
in the Court of Chancery, as shall be sufficient to pay the Legacies of Sixteen
thousand two hundred Pounds, Given and Devised by the said Nuncupative Will,
shall be immediately Applied to the Payment thereof, and of such just Demands
incident to the Account of the same, as shall be Allowed in the Court of
Chancery; and that the Residue of the said Sir William Godolphin's Personal
Estate, in the said Court or elsewhere in England, after such Legacies and just
Demands incident to the Account of the same, as is aforesaid, and the other
Provision of the Three thousand and forty Pounds for Charities made by this
present Act are paid, shall go and be Applied to and for the answering and
paying such other Legacies and Bequests, other than such as are for any
Superstitious use, as shall appear to be given or devised by the said Sir
William Godolphin, to be paid out of his Personal Estate in England, by any
Writing under his Hand, after the Tenth day of March, One thousand six hundred
ninety five according to the Style of England, Testified by Two Credible
Witnesses, or by any Nuncupative Will reduced into Writing by the direction of
the said Sir William Godolphin after the said Tenth day of March, so as the
same be made appear before the Four and twentieth day of June, which shall be
in the Year, One thousand six hundred ninety nine, unless prevented or delayed
by the means of the Administrators, or either of them, and if no such other
Legacies or Bequests shall be made appear before the said Four and twentieth
day of June, which shall be in the said year, One thousand six hundred ninety
nine, to be given by the said Sir William Godolphin, and to be paid in such
manner, as aforesaid, then the residue of the Personal Estate of the said Sir
William Godolphin, or so much thereof as shall remain after such Legacies
satisfied (if any such be made to appear) shall be to the said Administrators,
to be distributed according to the Laws in that behalf.

Provided always, That in case any Legacies shall be proved to be given by the
said Sir William Godolphin after the said Tenth day of March, One thousand six
hundred ninety five, to Charitable Uses in England, That then the Three
thousand and forty Pounds aforementioned, shall be applied for satisfaction of
the same; and the residue, if any be, of the said Three thousand and forty
Pounds, after such Legacies for any Charitable uses are satisfied, shall be
applied to and for such Charities as are herein before appointed; and in case
the said Three thousand and forty Pounds, shall not be sufficient to satisfy
and pay the said Legacies for Charitable uses, Then and in such Case so much as
the said Three thousand and forty Pounds shall fall short of answering the
said Legacies for Charitable uses, shall be paid out of the Residue of the said
Sir William Godolphins Personal Estate in England, that shall remain after the
several Legacies, Bequests and Demands thereout before mentioned are satisfied;
and so much of the said Sum of three thousand and forty Pounds, as shall be
applied to and for the satisfaction of the said Legacies for Charitable uses in
England, shall be Taken and Deemed to be well applied, and the Recognizances
herein before appointed to be given for the same, as to so much as shall be so
applied shall be discharged; Any thing herein before contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.


