Uniformity Examined: Whether it be found in the GOSPEL, OR, IN THE PRACTICE OF
THE CHURCHES of CHRIST. By WILL. DELL, Minister of the Gospel.

2 COR. 4. 13. We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written,
I believed and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak.
Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by J. COE for HENRY OVERTON in Popes Head Alley. 1646.

Uniformity Examined.
OBserving that our Brethren of Scotland, together with the Assembly of
Divines, and the rest of the Preshyterian judgment, do often both in their
discourse and writings, exceedingly press for Uniformity; I have been urged in
my spirit, to think upon the matter, and to consider whether there could be any
such thing found in the word of the New Testament, or in the practice of the
Churches of Christ. And for my part, I ingenuously profess I cannot yet
discover it, and would be glad if any would instruct me further in this
particular, so he do it from the Word.

Now Uniformity what is it, but an unity of form? and the form they mean, no
doubt, is outward: for the inward form, as it cannot be known by the outward
senses; so neither can it be accomplished by outward power. And therefore (till
I know their meaning better) I conceive that by uniformity they understand an
unity of outward form in the Churches of God: yea some of them do declate so
much, calling the thing they would have, External uniformity.

Now such a thing as this* (after so much meditation and recollection, as my
other employments, and the many distractions that necessarily attend my present
condition, will permit me) I cannot discern in the word of the Gospel. For
Christ speaking of the Church of the New Testoment, says, John 4* 23. The hour
comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit
and Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and and
they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth. In which words it
is most evident, that the worship of God in the time of the New Testament, is
inward and spiritual, consisting in faith, hope, love, and prayer, the
op^ration of the three former, etc. And so, is so far from Uniformity as has
been explicated, and as they understand it, that it is not at all capable of
it. And therefore I cannot but wonder at the strange workings of darkness in
the minds of men, who would have an external Uniformity in a worship that is
inward and spiritual, and of which the outward form is no part at all, but is
merely accidental, and so absolutely various.

Again, as I find not this Uniformity in the doctrine of the Gospel, so
neither in the practice of the Saints, who had the spirit of the Gospel, as
that practice is represented to us in the Word.

In Acts 1. 14. I read how the Apostles being together with the women, and Mary
the Mother of Jesus, and his brethren, continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication: and Acts 2. v. 44. and 46. how all that believed were together,
and continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and did break bread from
house to house, etc. And in all this there was Unity, but no external
Uniformity, neither name nor thing. Again, Acts 4. 23. Peter and John being let
go by the Magistrates, went to their own company (which many of our Clergy
would term a Conventicle) and reported all that the chief Priests and Elders
had said to them; and when they heard it, they lift up their voice to God
(...), with one accord, and prayed. Here was inward Unity, in faith, and love,
and joy, and spiritual prayer, bur no external Uniformity: and verse. 32. The
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one soul. Unity still,
but nothing of external uniformity. Further, we read Acts chap. 7. and chap.
8. that Stephen and Philip, who by the Church were ordained Deacons and were to
serve only for the Ministry of the Table, yet by virtue of the anointing,
preached the word of God freely, and powerfully: and how all the Members of the
Church of Jerusalem, who were neither Ministers nor Deacons, being scattered
abroad by persecution, went preaching the Word every where, where they came, in
that case of necessity: the unction of the Spirit, of which all believers
partake alike, being one fundamental ground of such Ministry, where there are
no Believers to call to the Office: and in all this, though there was unity of
faith, spirit, and doctrine, yet I am sure they will say, there was no such
uniformity as they would have. Again, Asts 20. Paul the first day of the Week,
preached to the Disciples of Macedonia, from the Evening till Midnight (which
Dr. Pocklington in a printed Sermon says, was out of order, that is, out of
Prelaticall order, or Presbyteriall uniformity) and after brake bread and did
eat, and talked with them a long while, till break of day: and going from
thence, he arrived at Ephesus, and there called the Elders of the Church
together, and appeals to them after what manner he had been with them, to wit,
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, (I wish the Assembly would mark
that, and mark it again) and with many tears and temptations, etc. and how he
had held back nothing profitable for them, but had taught them publicly, and
from house to house (which I wish were more in use now-a-dayes, if it might
obtain so much leave from uniformity) and had preached to them R^pentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, our chief work toward God
since our fall and corruption being Repentance, which is the change of the
creature toward God, through Gods own work in the creature, and this is not
done without the sorrow of the flesh; and our chief work toward Christ, who is
given to us as a head, being Faith or Union. And in the end, exhorts the
Presbyters to take heed to themselves (who according to the Church principles
of this age, want no admonition themselves, seeing they are become a peremptory
rule to all others) and to the flocks over which the holy Ghost (and not
Patrons) has made them overseers, to feed the Church of God which he had
purchased with his own blood, etc. But in all this neither practices himself,
nor preaches to them, nor commands them to preach to others, or impose upon
others any such kind of thing as external uniformity. And so surely they that
so vehemently urge this thing, that they make it all in all in their
Reformation, have some other teacher then the Apostle, who being taught of
Christ as Christ was taught of God, yet knew no such thing at all in the
worship of God, as uniformity.

And yet further, that the world (if it be possible) may be the more convinced,
observe a little more seriously the practice of Christ and the Saints, in
reference to this point, and you shall see nothing less then external
Uniformity. See this in the prayer of Christ, (prayer for the duty it felf
being nothing but so much spiritual worship as being the voice of the Spirit
in the flesh, both in head and members) This Christ sometimes performed with
his eyes lifted up to heaven, sometimes being prostrate with his body on the
earth, and so several times several ways: and as he, so the Saints have some
prayed standing, and lifting up their hands, as Moses, some kneeling and
lifting up their hands, as Solomon, some standing and not lifting up their
eyes, as the Publicans, etc. And what external Uniformity in all this? And as
for praying so for preaching, Christ sometimes preached in a ship, sometimes on
the shore, sometimes in the City of Jerusalem, someimes in the Temple,
sometimes in the desert, sometimes early, sometimes late, as if he intended on
purpose to witness against that piece of the mystery of iniquity which in
after ages should be called Uniformity. So Paul preached sometimes on the Jews
Sabbath, sometimes on the first day of the week, sometimes each day of the
week, sometimes in the day, sometimes in the night, sometimes prayed in the
house, sometimes on the shore; he circumcised Timothy among the weak, refused
to circumcise Titus among the perverse, became as a Jew to the Jews, as a Greek
to the Greeks, to the weak as weak, to the strong as strong, all things to all
men, that he might win some: and what external Uniformity was here? And then
for the Sacraments, Christ administered the Sacrament of the Supper immediately
after supper, Paul at midnight, and it may be others in the morning, or at
noone: and what external Uniformity in all this? And for government; sometimes
the Apostles met together into a Council and in that Council ordered things
not of their own heads, or by plurality of voices, but by the Word and Spirit,
and what they ordered by the Word and Spirit, they put in execution by the
power of the Word and Spirit, and not by the power of the World. At other times
Ministers and believers did things by the Word and Spirit among themselves, by
the mutual consent of both; or else believers alone among themselves, if there
were no Ministers present. And where the number of believers were more, they
stood in need of more Officers, and where fewer, of fewer Officers, and all
these things are the free ordering of the Churches, who have Christ, the
Spirit, and the Father among them and in them, and so are taken out of the
bondage of men into the freedom of God. That truly I see not the Gospel more
setting its spirit against any thing of Antichrist, then against this point of
external Uniformity. For if we have one Lord, Christ, Spirit, Faith, Baptism,
God, all other things are free to the Churches, as God shall order by them, and
no otherwise; and the reason, and wisdom, and prudence of man, have no place
in this world, where the Sun of righteousness shines as the only light.

But against this that has been said, do lie some objections: as first,

The Prophet foretold that the Lord should be one, and his Name one, and does
not this imply external Uniformity?

I answer, nothing less: for the Apostle explicates plainly and clearly, whar
it is to have the Lord one, and his Name one among believers, Ephesians. 4. chapter 4. 5.
6. where he says, there is in the spiritual Church, one Body, and one Spirit,
one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, through all, and in all. Whereby you see, that among
believers there is a manifold Unity, but no external Uniformity; yea, the
prayer of Christ the Son for the Church, unfolds clearly the promise of God the
Father to the Church, John 17. Christ prays, that they all (who are many among
themselves according to the flesh) may b^ one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, (that is, according to the unity of the Spirit, not external
Uniformity) that after this manner they also may be one in us.

But again it is objected out of 1 Cor. 14. that the Apostle requires that all
things may be done in the Church decently and in order: and does not this imply
external Uniformity?

I answer, that they will hardly admit in their parish Churches such a decency
and order as the Apostle there means, neither are they capable of it. For he
says before, When the whole Church is come together into some place, that all
may prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all be comforted: and that
during this exercise of prophesying, if any thing be revealed to another, the
former is to give place; and he must speak that has the clearest light, seeing
the Spirit, to whomsoever it is given to profit withal. And that though all
may prophecy one by one, yet all may not prophecy at once, for t^en it would
not be order, but confusion, which the Apostle would have avoided, saying, Let
all things be done decently and in order. And this decency too he persuades to
by the word, he does not in force by secular power. And if they will call this
Uniformity, for Church Members to prophecy one after another, according to the
variety of the gifts of the Spirit, and not many or two o^ three at once or the
same time, we willingly agree with them: but how far this thing is from their
sense, every one knows.

Thus you see these objections answered, and I am confident there are no more
can be brought but may as clearly and easily be answered as these.

And therefore, I say, I wonder and wonder again, that we having covenanted
and agreed together solemnly, to endeavor for a Government most agreeable to
the word of God, should in the mean time be left so void of the spirit and
light of the Gospel, as to fall upon external Uniformity, which is no where to
be found in the Gospel, nor in the practice of primative Christians.

Yea, while I consider more seriously of the Matter, me thinks external
uniformity is a monstrous thing (how glorious soever in their eyes) and not to
be found either in nature or in grace, either in Christ's Kingdom, or the
Kingdoms of the world.

In nature is no external uniformity extended to all the works of nature, for
look into the world and see if there be not variety of forms; heavenly and
earthly bodies having several forms; and in the earth each bird, beast, tree,
plant, creature, differs one from another in outward form. If the whole
creation should appear in one form, or external uniformity, what a monstrous
thing would it be, nothing differing from the first chaos? but the variety of
forms in the world is the beauty of the world. So that though there be a most
admirable unity among all the creatures, yet there is nothing less then
external uniformity.

Again, as there is no external uniformity spread over the great world, so
nor yet over the little world, or man. For look upon a man consisting of ^ead
and members, unto which the Apostle compa^es the Church, and you shall not
find all the members like one another, neither in regard of their outward
forms, nor operations: for the hand does not move as the foot, nor the foot act
as the hand; and if all the members should appear and act in one form, what a
monster would a man be? And yet among the members though there be no external
uniformity, yet there is admirable unity.

And yet again, look in to the Kingdoms of the world, and you shall see no
such thing in them as external uniformity: Here in England you shall observe
that York is not governed as Hull, nor Hull as Hallifax, nor that as Bristoll,
etc. neither is one County governed uniformly as another; there is no
uniformity in the government of Kent and Essex, nor one town governed like
another; in Godmanchester, the youngest son inherit, in Huntington the Eldest,
nor one Corporation governed like another, nor one Company in the City
governed as another; and yet between all Counties, Cities, Towns, Corporations
Companies, there is unity, though no external uniformity. Yea, look upon the
famous City of London, and there are, it may be, an hundred thousand families,
or more in it, and each one gove^n^d after a several manner, and among all
these families there is no external uniformity, and yet they all agree well
enough into the unity of a City.

Nay further, to bring but one man to an uniformity of life and practice, by an
outward Law, would be the most absolute tyranny in the world, and make his life
worse then death. To compel every man by a Law every day in the week, or every
Monday, Tuesday, etc. in the week, to an uniformity of life, that he shall rise
at the same time, use the same postures, speak the same words, eat the same
food, receive the same Physic, sit, and stand, and walk, and lie down at the
same set times, who ever heard of such a cruel bondage? What an absurd and
intolerable thing then is uniformity in the life of a man, taking away all
freedom of the soul? But how much more evil and intolerable is uniformity
in the life of a Christian, or of true Churches of Christ, taking away all
freedom of the spirit of God, who being one with God, works in the freedom of
God, and is not to be bound with any authoritative or coercive power, of poor,
dark, ignorant, vain, foolish, proud, and sinful men.

What now then do the Presbyters mean by Uniformity? Would they have the Word
preached, and the Sacraments administered, and the Name of God called on, and
all this done in spirit and truth in the Churches of Christ? This truly is
Unity and not Uniformity, and such an unity as no man can compel. But would
they have the Word preached, the name of God called on, Sacraments administered,
the spiritual discipline of the spiritual Church managed, the virtues of
Christ, and graces of the Spirit in the Saints exercised, and all this in one
and the same outward form, or uniformity? This is the burden of the Saints, the
bondage of the Church, the straitning the Spirit, the limiting of Christ, and
the eclipsing the glory of the Father. And how wise soever these men may be in
natural and carnal things, yet their wisdom is but foolishness in
spiritual things, in which there is no more uniformity, then in the workings
of the Spirit, who works severally in several Saints, and severally in the
same Saints at several times. And therefore they that would tie the Church to
an uniformity which works not of it self, but as the Spirit works in it, let
them first tie the Spirit to an uniformity, and we are contented. But these men
seem to run a sad hazard, who would thus reduce the workings of the Spirit in
Christians and Churches, to an outward uniformity, according to their own mind
and fancy, and so would rule and order, and enlarge and straiten the Spirit of
God by the spirit of man; seeing it is worse to sin against Christ in the
spirit, then against Christ in the flesh.

And therefore till I be otherwise taught by the Word, I cannot conceive that
there ought to be or is possible to be any such external uniformity in the
Churches of Christ, as these men strive, wrestle, sweat, contend for, I will
not say are ready to fight for, but that several Churches of Christ having
unity of doctrine, faith, the spirit, ordinances, etc. may have diverse forms of
outward administrations, as God and Christ by the spirit shall lead them; and
that every Church is in these things to be left free, and no Church forced by
any outward power to follow or imitate another Church against its will, not
being freely led unto it by the Spirit of God.

Neither do I think that God has set up any company of men, or Synod in the
world, to shine to a whole Nation, so that all people shall be constrained to
follow their judgment, and to walk by their light, seeing other Ministers and
Christians may have more light and spirit then they. Neither has Christ
promised his presence and spirit to Ministers more then to believers, nor more
to an hundred then two or three: and if two or three Christians in the Country
being met together in the name of Christ, have Christ himself with his Word and
Spirit among them, they need not ride many miles to the Assembly at London, to
know what to do, or how to carry and behave themselves in the things of God.
And therefore for any company of men of what repute soever, to set up their own
judgment in a Kingdom, for a peremptory rule from which no man must vary, and
to compel all the faithful people of God, who are the very members of Jesus
Christ himself, to fall down before it, upon pain of being cast into the
burning fiery furnace of their indignation, heated seven times more hot th^n
ordinary, through the desired access of secular power to their power, is a far
worse work in my eyes, then that of King Nebuchadnezzar, setting up a golden
Image, and forcing all to fall down before it; seeing spiritual idolatry is so
much worse then corporal, as the spirit is better then the flesh.

And therefore I do think (let them teach me better by the Word that can) that
uniformity (the great Diana of the Presbyterians, and the Image that falls down
from the brain and fa^cy of man) has no footing in the Scriptures, or in the
practice of the Churches of Christ: And that the Presbyterian uniformtty is
near a kin to Prelati^all co^fo^mity, and is no other ^hen the same thing under
another word, after ^^e manner of Prelacy and Presbytery; and do conclude that
Unity is Chri^^ia^, Uniformity Antic^^^^^^an.

And (...) I have (...) among many occas^ons, to discover to (...) me still
prevail and (...) very name of Ref^^mation And al^o to give occasion (...)
discourse more fully (...) power of the Word.

(...) ^

^

^INIS

