Anno XIV. CAROLI II. REGIS. AN ACT FOR THE UNIFORMITY OF Public PRAYERS and
Administration of SACRAMENTS, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And for
establishing the form of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests
and Deacons in the Church of England.

Printed (...) London by His Majesty's Printers, and Reprinted at Edinburgh,
ANNO DOM. 1662.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Anno decimo quarto CAROLI II. REGIS. An Act for the Uniformity of Public
Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And
for establishing the form of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops,
Priests and Deacons in the Church of England.
WHereas in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth, there was one Uniform
Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the Administration of Sacraments,
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England (agreeable to the Word of God and
usage of the Primitive Church) compiled by the Reverend Bishops and Clergy, set
forth in one Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, and
enjoined to be used by Act of Parliament, holden in the said first year of the
said late Queen, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and
Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, very comfortable
to all good people desirous to live in Christian conversation, and most
profitable to the Estate of this Realm, upon the which the Mercy, Favor and
Blessing of Almighty God is in no wise o readily and plentifully powered, as by
Common Prayers, due using of the Sacraments, and often Preaching of the Gospel,
with devotion of the Hearers: And yet this notwithstanding a great number of
people in diverse parts of this Realm, following their own sensuallty, and
living without knowledge and due fear of God, do wilfully and schismatically
abstain and refuse to come to their Parish-Churches, and other public places
where Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and Preaching of the
Word of God is used upon the Sundays, and other days Ordained and Appointed
to be kept and observed as Holy days. And whereas by the great and scandalous
neglect of Ministers in using the said Order or Liturgy so set forth and
enjoined as aforesaid, great mischiefs and inconveniences, during the times of
the late unhappy troubles, have arisen and grown; and many people have been led
into Factions and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the Reformed
Religion of the Church of England, and to the hazard of many souls. For
prevention whereof in time to come, for settling the peace of the Church, and
for allaying the present distempers which the indisposition of the time has
contracted: The Kings Majesty (according to His Declaration of the five and
twentieth of October, one thousand six hundred and sixty) granted His
Commission under the great Seal of England, to several Bishops and other
Divines, to re-view the Book of Common Prayer, and to prepare such Alterations
and Additions as they thought fit to offer; And afterward the Convocations of
both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, being by His Majesty called and
assembled (and now sitting) His Majesty has been pleased to Authorize and
require the Presidents of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops and
Clergy of the same, to re-view the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of
the Form and manner of the Making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons; And that after mature consideration, they should make such Additions
and Alterations in the said Books respectively, as to them should seem meet and
convenient; And should exhibit and present the same to His Majesty in writing,
for his further allowance, or confirmation; since which time, upon full and
mature deliberation, they the said Presidents, Bishops, and Clergy of both
Provinces, have accordingly re-viewed the said Books, and have made some
Alterations which they think fit to be inserted to the same; and some
Additional Prayers to the said Book of Common Prayer, to be used upon proper
and emergent occasions; And have exhibited and presented the same unto His
Majesty in writing, in one Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, or
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches; and the
Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons,: All which His Majesty having duly considered, has fully approved
and allowed the same; and recommended to this present Parliament, that the said
Books of Common Prayer, and of the Form of Ordination and Consecration of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with the Alterations and Additions which have
been so made and presented to His Majesty by the said Convocations, be the Book
which shall be appointed to be used by all that Officiate in all Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and in all Chapels of Colleges and Halls in
both the Universities, and the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, and in all
Parish-Churches and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and by all that Make, or Consecrate Bishops,
Priests or Deacons, in any of the said places, under such Sanctions and
Penalties as the Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

Now in regard that nothing conduces more to the settling of the Peace of this
Nation (which is desired of all good men) nor to the honor of our Religion,
and the propagation thereof, then an Universal agreement in the Public
Worship of Almighty God; and to the intent that every person within this Realm,
may certainly know the rule to which he is to conform in Public Worship, and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, and the manner how, and by whom Bishops, Priests and Deacons are, and
ought to be Made, Ordained and Consecrated, Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by the advice, and with the consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, That all and singular Ministers, in any Cathedral,
Collegiate, or Parish Church or Chapel, or other place of Public Worship
within this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, shall be bound to say and use the Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer,
Celebration and Administration of both the Sacraments, and all other the
Public and Common Prayer, in such order and form as is mentioned in the said
Book, annexed and joined to this present Act, and Entitled, The Book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England; together with the
Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches;
and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons: And that the Morning and Evening Prayers therein
contained, shall, upon every Lords day, and upon all other days and occasions,
and at the times therein appointed, be openly and solemnly read by all and
every Minister or Curate, in every Church, Chapel, or other place of Public
Worship within this Realm of England, and places aforesaid.

And to the end that Uniformity in the public Worship of God (which is so
much desired) may be speedily effected, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that every Person, Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, who now has
and enjoys any Ecclesiastical benefice, or promotion within this Realm of
England, or places aforesaid, shall in the Church, Chapel, or place of
Public Worship belonging to his said benefice or promotion, upon some Lords
day before the feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, openly, publicly, and
solemnly read the Morning and Evening Prayer appointed to be read by, and
according to, the said Book of Common Prayer at the times thereby appointed,
and after such reading thereof shall openly and publicly before the
Congregation there assembled, declare his unfeigned assent, and consent, to the
use of all things in the said Book contained and prescribed, in these words,
and no other.

I A. B. Do here declare my unfeigned assent, and consent to all, and every
thing contained, and prescribed in, and by the Book entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung,
or said in Churches; and the form, or manner of making, ordaining, and
consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And that all and every such
person, who shall (without some lawful impediment to be allowed and approved
of by the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse to do the same within the
time aforesaid, (or in case of such impediment) within one Month after such
impediment removed, shall (ipso facto) be deprived of all his Spiritual
Promotions; And that from thenceforth it shall be lawful to, and for all
Patrons, and Donors of all and singular the said Spiritual Promotions, or of
any of them, according to their respective Rights, and Titles, to present, or
collate to the same, as though the person, or persons, so offending, or
neglecting, were dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person who
shall hereafter be presented, or collated, or put into any Ecclesiastical
benefice, or promotion within this Realm of England and places aforesaid, shall
in the Church, Chapel, or place of public worship, belonging to his said
benefice, or promotion, within two Months next after that he shall be in the
actual possession of the said Ecclesiastical benefice, or promotion, upon some
Lords day openly, publicly, and solemnly, Read the Morning and Evening
Prayers, appointed to be Read by, and according to, the said Book of Common
Prayer, at the times thereby appointed, and after such Reading thereof, shall
openly, and publicly, before the Congregation there assembled, declare his
unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things therein contained and
prescribed, according to the form before appointed. And that all and every such
person, who shall (without some lawful impediment to be allowed, and approved
by the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse to do the same within the time
aforesaid; (or in case of such impediment within one month after such
impediment removed) shall (ipso facto) be deprived of all his said
Ecclesiastical benefices and promotions; And that from thenceforth it shall and
may be lawful to, and for all Patrons, and Donors of all and singular the said
Ecclesiastical benefices and promotions, or any of them (according to their
respective Rights and Titles) to present, or collate to the same, as though the
person or persons so offending, or neglecting, were dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in all places where
the proper incumbent of any Parsonage, or Vicarage, or benefice with Cure, does
reside on his living, and keep a Curate, the incumbent himself in person (not
having some lawful impediment, to be allowed by the Ordinary of the place)
shall once (at the least) in every month openly, and publicly Read the
Common Prayers and Service, in and by the said Book prescribed, and (if there
be occasion) Administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church,
in the Parish Church, or Chapel, of, or belonging to the same Parsonage,
Vicarage, or benefice, in such order, manner, and form, as in and by the said
Book is appointed, upon pain to forfeit the sum of five pounds to the use of
the poor of the Parish for every offense upon conviction by confession, or
proof of two credible Witnesses upon Oath, before two Justices of the Peace of
the County, City, or Town-Corporate where the offense shall be committed,
(which Oath the said Justices are hereby empowered to Administer) and in default
of payment within ten days, to be levied by distress, and sale of the goods
and Chattles of the offender, by the warrant of the said Justices by the
Churchwardens, or Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, rendering the
surplusage to the party.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Dean, Canon,
and Prebendary of every Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, and all Masters, and
other Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any College, Hall, House
of Learning, or Hospital, and every Public Professor, and Reader in either of
the Universities, and in every College else where, and every Parson, Vicare,
Curate, Lecturer, and every other person in holy Orders, and every
Schoolmaster keeping any public, or private School, and every person
instructing, or teaching any youth in any House, or private Family as a Tutor,
or Schoolmaster, who upon the first day of May, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at any time thereafter
shall be incumbent, or have possession of any Deanery, Canonry, Prebend,
Master-ship, Head-ship, Fellow-ship, Professors place, or Readers place,
Parsonage, Vicarage, or any other Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion, or of
any Curates place, Lecture, or School; or shall instruct or teach any youth as
Tutor, or Schoolmaster, shall before the Feast Day of Saint Bartholomew, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at or
before his, or their respective admission to be incumbent, or have possession
aforesaid, subscribe the Declaration or Acknowledgment following, Scilicet,

I A. B. Do declare that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take
Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking
Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by Him; And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established: And I do declare that I do hold there
lies no obligation upon me, or on any other person from the Oath commonly
called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration
of Government, either in Church, or State; And that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known
Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom. Which said Declaration and Acknowledgement
shall be Subscribed by every of the said Masters, and other Heads, Fellows,
Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any College, Hall, or House of Learning, and
by every public Professor and Reader in either of the Universities, before the
Vice Chancellor of the respective Universities for the time being, or his
Deputy; And the said Declaration or Acknowledgment, shall be Subscribed before
the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, by every other
person hereby enjoined to Subscribe the same, upon pain that all and every of
the persons aforesaid falling in such Subscription, shall lose and forfeit such
respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship, Fellowship,
Professors place, Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity,
or Promotion, Curates place, Lecture, and School, and shall be utterly
disabled, and (ipso facto) deprived of the same; And that every such respective
Deanery, Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors place,
Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion,
Curates place, Lecture and School shall be void, as if such person so failing
were naturally dead.

And if any Schoolmaster, or other person Instructing, or Teaching Youth in
any private House, or Family, as a Tutor, or Schoolmaster, shall Instruct, or
Teach any Youth as a Tutor, or Schoolmaster, before License obtained from his
respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, according to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, (for which he shall pay twelve-pence only) and
before such subscription, and acknowledgment made as aforesaid; Then every such
Schoolmaster, and other, Instructing and Teaching as aforesaid, shall for the
first offense suffer three months Imprisonment without bail, or mainprise, and
for every second, and other such offense, shall suffer three months
Imprisonment without bail or mainprise, and also forfeit to his Majesty the sum
of five pounds; And after such subscription made, every such Parson, Vicar,
Curate, and Lecturer, shall procure a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of
the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, (who are hereby
enjoined and required upon demand, to make and deliver the same) and shall
publicly and openly Read the same, together with the Declaration, or
Acknowledgment aforesaid, upon some Lords day within three months then next
following, in his Parish Church where he is to officiate, in the presence of
the Congregation there assembled, in the time of Divine Service; upon pain that
every person failing therein, shall lose such Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice,
Curates place, or Lecturers place respectively, and shall be utterly disabled,
and (ipso facto) deprived of the same; And that the said Parsonage, Vicarage,
or Benefice, Curates place, or Lecturers place shall be void as if he was
naturally dead.

Provided always that from and after the twenty fifth day of March which shall
be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred eighty two, there
shall be omitted in the said Declaration, or Acknowledgment so to be Subscribed
and Read, these words following, Scilicet.

ANd I do declare that I do hold there lies no Obligation on me, or on any
other person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change, or alteration of Government either in Church or State,
and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath and imposed upon the
Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. So
as none of the persons aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be at all obliged to
Subscribe, or Read that part of the said Declaration, or Acknowledgment.

Provided always, and be it Enacted that from and after the Feast of Saint
Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
sixty and two, no person, who now is incumbent, and in possession of any
Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, and who is not already in Holy Orders by
Episcopal Ordination, or shall not before the said feast day of Saint
Bartholomew, be Ordained Priest or Deacon, according to the form of Episcopal
Ordination, shall have, hold, or enjoy the said Parsonage, Vicarage, Benefice
with Cure, or other Ecclesiastical Promotion within this Kingdom of England, or
the Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; But shall be utterly
disabled, and (ipso facto) deprived of the same; And all his Ecclesiastical
Promotions shall be void, as if he was naturally dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person
whatsoever, shall thenceforth be capable to be admitted to any Parsonage,
Vicarage, Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical Promotion or Dignity whatsoever,
nor shall presume to Consecrate and Administer the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, before such time as he shall be ordained Priest, according to the form,
and manner in and by the said Book prescribed, unless he have formerly been
made Priest by Episcopal Ordination, upon pain to forfeit for every offense,
the sum of One hundred pounds; One moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the
other moiety thereof to be equally divided between the poor of the Parish where
the offense shall be committed, and such person, or persons as shall sue for
the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall be allowed; And to be disabled from taking, or being admitted into the
order of Priest, by the space of one whole year then next following.

Provided that the penalties in this Act shall not extend to the Forreiners or
Aliens of the Foreign Reformed Churches allowed, or to be allowed by the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors in England.

Provided always, that no title to confer, or present by lapse, shall accrue
by any avoidance, or deprivation (ipso facto) by virtue of this Statute, but
after six months after notice of such voidance, or deprivation given by the
Ordinary to the Patron, or such sentence of deprivation openly and publicly
Read in the Parish Church of the Benefice, Parsonage, or Vicarage, becoming
void, or whereof the incumbent shall be deprived by virtue of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Form, or Order
of Common Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies, shall be
openly used in any Church, Chapel, or other public place of, or in any
College, or Hall in either of the Universities, the Colleges of Westminster,
Winchester, or Eaton, or any of them, other then what is perscribed, and
appointed to be used in and by the said Book; And that the present Governor,
or Head of every College, and Hall in the said Universities, and of the said
Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton, within on month after the
feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two; And every Governor or Head of any of the
said Colleges, or Halls hereafter to be elected, or appointed within one
month next after his Election, or Collation, and Admission into the same
Government, or Headship, shall openly and publicly in the Church, Chapel, or
other public place of the same College, or Hall, and in the presence of the
fellows and Scholars of the same, or the greater part of them, then Resident,
Subscribe unto the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion, mentioned in the
Statute made in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
and unto the said Book, and declare his unfeigned assent, and consent unto, and
approbation of the said Articles, and of the same Book, and to the use of all
the Prayers, Rites, and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders in the said Book
prescribed, and contained according to the form aforesaid; And that all such
Governors or Heads of the said Colleges and Halls, or any of them as are or
shall be in Holy Orders, shall once (at least) in every quarter of the year
(not having a lawful impediment) openly and publicly read the morning Prayer
and Service, in, and by the said Book appointed to be read in the Church,
Chapel, or other public place of the same College or Hall, upon pain to lose
and be suspended of, and from all the Benefits and Profits belonging to the
same Government or Headship, by the space of six months by the Visitor or
Visitors of the same College or Hall; And if any Governor, or Head of any
College or Hall, suspended for not subscribing unto the said Articles and
Book, or for not reading of the morning Prayer and Service as aforesaid, shall
not, at or before the end of six months next after such suspension, subscribe
unto the said Articles and Book, and declare his consent thereunto as
aforesaid, or read the morning Prayer and Service as aforesaid, then such
Government or Headship shall be (ipso facto) void.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to use the morning and
evening Prayer, and all other Prayers and Service prescribed in and by the said
Book, in the Chapels or other public places of the respective Colleges and
Halls in both the Universities, in the Colleges of Westminster, Winchester and
Eaton, and in the Convocations of the Clergies of either Province in Latin,
any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person shall be,
or be received as a Lecturer, or permitted, suffered, or allowed to Preach as a
Lecturer, or to Preach, or Read any Sermon or Lecture in any Church, Chapel,
or other place of Public worship, within this Realm of England, or the
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, unless he be first
approved, and thereunto Licensed by the Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop
of the Diocese, or (in case the Sea be void) by the Guardian of the
Spiritualties, under his Seal, and shall in the presence of the same
Archbishop, or Bishop, or Guardian, Read the Nine and thirty Articles of
Religion, mentioned in the Statute of the Thirteenth year of the late Queen
Elizabeth, with declaration of his unfeigned assent to the same; And that every
person, and persons who now is, or hereafter shall be Licensed, Assigned,
Appointed, or Received as a Lecturer, to Preach upon any day of the week in any
Church, Chapel, or place of Public worship within this Realm of England, or
places aforesaid, the first time he Preaches (before his Sermon) shall openly,
publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers, and Service in, and by the
said Book appointed to be read for that time of the day, and then, and there
publicly and openly declare his assent unto, and approbation of the said Book,
and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders
therein contained, and prescribed, according to the form before appointed in
this Act; And also shall upon the first Lecture-day of every month afterward,
so long as he continues Lecturer, or Preacher there, at the place appointed for
his said Lecture or Sermon, before his said Lecture or Sermon, openly,
publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers and Service in, and by the said
Book appointed to be read for that time of the day, at which the said Lecture
or Sermon is to be Preached, and after such Reading thereof, shall openly, and
publicly, before the Congregation there assembled declare his unfeigned
assent, and consent unto, and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of
all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained and
prescribed, according to the form aforesaid; And that all and every such person
and persons who shall neglect, or refuse to do the same, shall from thenceforth
be disabled to Preach the said, or any other Lecture or Sermon in the said, or
any other Church, Chapel, or place of Public worship, until such time as he,
and they shall openly, publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers, and
Service appointed by the said Book, and Conform in all points to the things
therein appointed and prescribed, according to the purport, true intent and
meaning of this Act.

Provided always, That if the said Sermon, or Lecture be to be Preached or
Read in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or Chapel, it shall be sufficient
for the said Lecturer openly at the time aforesaid, to declare his assent and
consent to all things contained in the said Book, according to the form
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person who
is by this Act disabled to Preach any Lecture, or Sermon, shall during the time
that he shall continue and remain so disabled, Preach any Sermon, or Lecture;
That then for every such offense the person, and persons so offending, shall
suffer Three months Imprisonment in the Common-Goal without bail or mainprise,
And that any two Justices of the Peace of any County of this Kingdom and places
aforesaid, and the Mayor or other chief Magistrate of any City, or Town
Corporate, within the same upon Certificate from the Ordinary of the place made
to him, or them of the offense committed, shall, and are hereby required to
commit the person, or persons so offending to the Goal of the same County,
City, or Town Corporate accordingly.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
at all and every time, and times, when any Sermon, or Lecture is to be
Preached, the Common Prayers, and Service, in, and by the said Book appointed
to be Read for that time of the day, shall be openly, publicly, and solemnly
Read by some Priest, or Deacon, in the Church, Chapel, or place of Public
worship, where the said Sermon, or Lecture is to be Preached, before such
Sermon, or Lecture be Preached; And that the Lecturer then to Preach shall be
present at the Reading thereof.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act shall not extend to the University
Churches, in the Universities of this Realm, or either of them, when or at such
times as any Sermon or Lecture is Preached or Read in the said Churches, or any
of them, for, or as the public University Sermon, or Lecture; but that the
same Sermons and Lectures may be Preached or Read in such sort and manner as
the same have been heretofore Preached or Read; this Act, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the several good
Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, which have been formerly made, and are now in
force for the Uniformity of Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, within
this Realm of England, and places aforesaid, shall stand in full force and
strength to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the establishing and
confirming of the said Book Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, or
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches, and the
form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons herein before mentioned to be joined and annexed to this Act; and shall
be applied, practiced, and put in u^e for the punishing of all offenses
contrary to the said Laws, with relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
in all those Prayers, Letanies, and Collects, which do any way relate to the
King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be altered, and changed from time to
time, and fitted to the present occasion, according to the direction of lawful
Authority.

Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that a true
Printed Copy of the said Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and Ceremonies of the
Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the
Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in
Churches, and the form and manner of Making, Ordayning and Consecrating of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, shall at the costs and charges of the
parishoners of every Parish Church and Chappelry, Cathedral Church, College,
and Hall, be attained and gotten before the Feast Day of St. Bartholomew, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon pain of
forfeiture of three pounds by the month, for so long time as they shall then
after be unprovided thereof, by every Parish, or Chappelry, Cathedral Church,
College, and Hall, making default therein.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Bishops of Hereford, St. Davies, Asaph, Bangor, and Landaff, and their
Successors shall take such order among themselves, for the souls health of the
Flocks committed to their Charge within Wales, That the Book hereunto annexed
be truly and exactly Translated into the British, or Welsh Tongue, and that
the same so Translated and being by them, or any three of them at the least
viewed, perused, and allowed, be Imprinted to such number at least, so that one
of the said Books so translated and Imprinted, may be had for every Cathedral,
Collegiate, and Parish Church, and Chapel of Ease, in the said respective
Diocesses and places in Wales, where the Welsh is commonly spoken or used
before the First day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty five; And that from
and after the Imprinting and publishing of the said Book so Translated, the
whole Divine Service shall be used and said by the Ministers and Curates
throughout all Wales within the said Diocesses where the Welsh Tongue is
commonly used, in the British, or Welsh Tongue, in such manner and form as is
prescribed according to the Book hereunto annexed to be used in the English
Tongue, differing nothing in any Order, or Form from the said English Book, for
which Book, so translated and Imprinted, the Churchwardens of every the said
Parishes shall pay out of the Parish-mony in their hands for the use of the
respective Churches, and be allowed the same on their account; And that the
said Bishops and their Successors, or any three of them at the least, shall set
and appoint the price, for which the said Book shall be sold; and one other
Book of Common Prayer in the English Tongue, shall be bought and had in every
Church throughout Wales, in which the Book of Common Prayer in Welsh is to be
had, by force of this Act, before the First day of May, One thousand six
hundred sixty and four, and the same Book to remain in such convenient places,
within the said Churches, that such as understand them may resort at all
convenient times, to read and peruse the same, and also such as do not
understand the said Language, may by conferring both Tongues together the
sooner attain to the knowledge of the English Tongue, Any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding, and until Printed Copies of the said Book so to
be Translated, may be had and provided, The Form of Common Prayer established
by Parliament, before the making of this Act, shall be used as formerly in such
parts of Wales, where the English Tongue is not commonly understood.

And to the end, that the true and perfect Copies of this Act, and the said
Book hereunto annexed, may be safely kept and perpetually preserved, and for
the avoiding of all disputes for the time to come; Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the respective Deans and Chapters of every
Cathedral or Collegiate Church within England and Wales, shall at their proper
coasts and charges, before the twenty fifth day of December, one thousand six
hundred sixty two, obtain, under the great Seal of England, a true and perfect
printed Copy of this Act, and of the said Book annexed hereunto, to be by the
said Deans and Chapters and their Successors kept and preserved in safety for
ever, and to be also produced and showed forth in any Court of Record, as often
as they shall be thereunto lawfully required; And also there shall be delivered
true and perfect Copies of this Act, and of the same Book into the respective
Courts at Westminster, and into the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved
for ever among the Records of the said Courts, and the Records of the Tower, to
be also produced and showed forth in any Court, as need shall require; which
said Books so to be exemplified under the great Seal of England, shall be
examined by such persons as the Kings Majesty shall appoint under the great
Seal of England for that purpose, and shall be compared with the Original Book
hereunto annexed, and shall have power to correct and amend in writing, any
error committed by the Printer in the printing of the same Book, or of any
thing therein contained, and shall certify in writing under their Hands and
Seals, or the Hands and Seals of any three of them at the end of the same Book,
that they have examined and compared the same Book, and find it to be a true
and perfect Copy; which said Books, and every one of them so exemplified under
the great Seal of England as aforesaid, shall be deemed, taken, adjudged, and
expounded to be good and available in the Law to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, and shall be accounted as good Records as this Book it self
hereunto annexed; Any Law or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial or hurtful unto the Kings Professor of the Law within the
University of Oxford, for or concerning the Prebend of Shipton, within the
Cathedral Church of Sarum, united and annexed unto the place of the same Kings
Professor for the time being, by the late King James of blessed memory.

Provided always, That whereas the six and thirtieth Article of the Nine and
thirty Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces,
and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand five hundred sixty two, for the avoiding of diversities of
Opinions, and for establishing of consent, touching true Religion, is in these
words following, viz.

That the Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and Ordaining of
Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth, and
confirmed at the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such Consecration and Ordaining, neither has it any thing that of
it self is superstitious and ungodly; And therefore whosoever are Consecrated
or Ordered according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the
aforenamed King Edward unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or
Ordered according to the same Rites; We decree all such to be rightly, orderly
and lawfully Consecrated and Ordered; It be enacted, And be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Subscriptions hereafter to be had
or made unto the said Articles, by any Deacon, Priest or Ecclesiastical person
or other person whatsoever, who by this Act or any other Law now in force is
required to subscribe unto the said Articles, shall be construed and taken to
extend, and shall be applied (for and touching the said six and thirtieth
Article) unto the Book containing the form and manner of Making, Ordaining and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons in this Act mentioned, in such
sort and manner as the same did heretofore extend unto the Book set forth in
the time of King Edward the sixth, mentioned in the said six and thirtieth
Article, Any thing in the said Article, or in any Statute, Act or Canon
heretofore had or made, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of this Church of England, together
with the form and manner of Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons heretofore in use, and respectively established by Act of Parliament in
the first and eighth years of Queen Elizabeth, shall be still used and observed
in the Church of England, until the Feast of St. Bartholomew, which shall be
in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two.

Printed at London by His MAJESTY'S Printers, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno
Dom. 1662.


