THE Mischief of Dissensions: OR, A PERSUASIVE TO Dr. Stillingfleet DEAN of St.
PAUL'S, TOGETHER WITH His RESPONDENTS, etc.

TO A Seasonable Alliance from their Literal War.

SHOWING The Danger thereof, especially at this Ambiguous Juncture of Time and
Affairs.

(...). LONDON, Printed for John Kidgell at the Atlas in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
WE being at this present tossed with various Perturbations, it must needs be
very unseasonable to increase our Calamity in being our own molesters; this is
ever dangerous, but now it seems desperate, by reason of the thick Cloud of
Popery threatening us; and how soon it will shower down on our heads we know
not. Therefore the practick part of Religion must be chiefly in these times
regarded, as requiring our utmost industry, seeming to call upon us, (...),
Seek it quasi Via tutissima, as the safe way, and only way too, conducing to
our Happiness, without which we may to our Eternity dig for Felicity, but find
nothing but that such precious Mines are not in our English ground.

But herein consists the excellency of fraternal Amity, in that it exceedingly
promotes the honor of God, in the disappointment and detriment of our Enemies;
and hence no wonder that evangelical injunction of our blessed Savior is so
often inculcated, (...), Love one another, which for these many years has been
laid aside, as if Christianity it self had been out of date, and its redemption
and reedification not endeavored in our late Civil Wars with respect to
religion, the unhappy occasion whereof was exhibited, in that stroke given in a
Sermon Preached at Guild Hall Chapel, called The Mischief of Separation, which
Sermon (it is feared) has indeed done more Mischief than good. No sober
considering men, whether Conformists as well as Nonconformists, denying it to
be otherwise than ill timed, confessing it to give our deadly Enemies, the
Papists, encouragement, who doubtlesly cannot be otherwise than exhilerated at
our Protestant Dissentions, in that it gives them opportunity to prosecute
their execrable Projects with the greater vigor and success; it is therefore
our needful and indispensable work, as we would expect the Benediction of God
from above, Peace and Tranquillity among our selves, in laying aside these
fruitless divisions, and utterly abandoning and for-saking them with that most
just Excommunication, that we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.
So then let us in one blessed unanimous consent join with one shoulder, to bear
the burden of Reformation, and consequently of Unity and Concord, the
inseparable companions of an hearty Reformation, which will tend to the
obtaining and augumenting of our prosperity and felicity both Temporal and
Eternal.

To my Worthy Friend S. P. Esquire.
SIR,
OF late having found a dismal and sore Specimen of Contention in a Literal
War, between Dr. Edward Stillingfleet Dean of Paul's and several of the
Nonconformists; I fear Sir these Civil Wars between our selves may produce
evil Consequences: for the fire of Protestant dissensions, especially at this
time kindled and blown up, may dismally give the Popish party advantage to
their designed ends of consuming us, by adding fuel to the fire of their
malice: but doubtless our Concord would be cool Water, tending to quench or put
out that fire of Hell, much conducing to the flourishing of our Nation and
Religion; for could I be willing to pawn my blood, that this much pleases our
Enemies, viz. to see us together by the Ears, that they may come in for a
share, yea, and a bloody one too.

Therefore in my Judgment, better is it for us (especially at this juncture of
time) though in some things dissenting, yet to unite, rather than break open a
Gap, for our Enemies to enter at, and destroy us.

I am persuaded that Certamen Religiosum is of all Wars the most dangerous; for
as it disturbs the mind, scandals Religion, hardens Infidels, dishonours God,
it also frequently is the Incentive to the Field, etc. But I could wish it were
better considered, as also that the Doctor had forborne the first unhappy
stroke: But Sir, alas! great evils usually attend high Promotions, common
experience teaches us how hard a matter it is for a man to swallow the great
Goblet of Promotion, and not to be choked therewith: Indeed it will be matter
of Solace to our minds, if we can say like Job, That Gold we have not made our
hope, nor fine Gold our Confidence; but how difficult is it to have a copious
affluence, and the Heart not had therewith? Then no wonder, that it is a very
hard matter for a Rich man to be saved. For if affiance in Riches possesses
the Room of any man's Heart, it is a great evil, in that it strongly inclines to
conceit of our selves; an Impiety to which man's corrupt Nature is strongly
propense; especially amidst plentiful fruition; which conceitedness tends to a
contempt of our Brethren, which is odious in the eyes of a Pure God: For he is
Love, (as says the Apostle) and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him; as also that of St. Paul, Love endures all things. It is certainly
a Grace of the first magnitude, very magnificent and splendid, beautiful both
in the eyes of God and man: But we had need be cautious, according as Paul most
excellently and sweetly advises in Galat. chap. 5. ver. 15. If ye bite and
devour one another, take heed that ye be not devoured one of another.

And leave it to any rational man, if Protestant Dissentions be not the very
road to Popish destructions; their projects doubtless being embarked on these
two bottoms, to debauch and divide us; at leastwise, with diabolical Cunning
to endeavor the Debauchery of the Wilder sort, and the Division of the Sober;
that those who only affect the Theory of Divinity, may not want matter of
dispute, remaining still restless, never attaining the practick part; and
doubtlesly men only acquiring speculative Notions, without any application, is
the principal reason why so many unorthodox Opinions are broached and imbibed,
and the Judgments of others hereby corrupted, the Popish Party by diverse
cunning insinuations assuming several shapes of Professions, in matters
relating to Religion, gradually infuse their own impious and ungodly
principles. What shall we suppose of the Quakers, omitting nominating any more,
save the Arminians, which professedly deny Popery, but upon my serious
deliberate Thoughts find them leaning toward it, as it were hanckering after
the Onions and Garlic of Egypt; their Opinions seeming to me as a Gate or
inlet for Popery?

And know we not by experience, that this both has been and is the practice of
the Jesuits, etc. to insinuate themselves especially among the Quakers, etc.
or the weaker illiterate sort of People? As they enter not themselves (I fear)
into the Kingdom of Heaven, so are they likewise an impediment or hinderance to
those that would, if not sometimes a Total obstruction.

And, Oh how fearful a thing is it, Sir, for us to encourage these wicked
Enemies of God, these ill-wishers to his Church, and dividers thereof! this
fire from Hell to consume us (if God prevent not); therefore it is time these
Coals of Contention be extinguished, lest they catch hold and consume us.

But if so be our Disunion is so pernicious, so greatly complying with, and
gratifying the evil intents of our enemies, then certainly the most effectual
way to be our own Friends, likewise to frustrate, and disappoint the Projects
and Expectations of our deadly Enemies, is to unite in Love; and
notwithstanding there may be some dissension in Judgment, not to let it grow so
wide as to cause an absolute difference in affection. Indeed I would desire,
and much would it conduce to our good, if these Jarrings were forborne,
considering we are Brethren, and why should we fall out by the way? and seeing
on both sides amongst the Orthodox, there is no difference in fundamental
Points.

But he that gives the first stroke does worst; Nocens tacet, Truth must be
defended, therefore a sober impartial Vindication cannot be blamed; but there is
a time for this: nevertheless in my thoughts the present time calls for our
Divines to be endeavoring to cut the Sinews of Popery, to batter down the
Walls of Babylon; Let us beware of temporizing, let not Promotion blind, or
Uncharitablenesss bias; let no man confide in his Parts, Learning, Wealth or
Dignities, but consider Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, but from the Lord only; and if so, let us endeavor to find it be in
mercy; for Wealth, and Promotion; may as well be a Curse as a Blessing a Knife
that is sharp may be serviceable, but to cut our Throats withal, is greatly
hurtful; a Sword by how much the keener, by so much the more excellent, but in
the hand of a Madman by so much the more deadly.

And therefore let Brotherly Love remain, following the Advice of the Blessed
Apostle, If a Brother offend, not to despise him, but in the Spirit of Meekness
to restore such an one, considering with thy self that thou may also be
tempted. But alas poor frail Creatures that we are! how apt to despise an
Erring Brother, and how little sensible of our own weakness, and how apt our
frail Natures are to decline or turn aside to our Enmity and Contentions which
are very dangerous, and Divisions which are Church-ruining! How lovely and
pleasant a thing is it then for Brethren to live together in unity! It is the
new Commandment, yea, and a Command in special, and verily a necessary
essential part of true Christianity; and does not disobedience to one Divine
Command render us conscious of breaking the whole? And if Hatred to our
Brethren be an Evidence of one cordially embracing Christianity, what then will
become of our Bibles? but if they which are Verbum Dei be true, it is an
Evidence of an unholy unchristian temper.

But alas how miserable are we become through our various divisions! how
desolate do we sit! a thing greatly to be lamented; I find mostly that our
Differences are in Affection. In Judgment we have many, and really exceeding
Erroneous, viz. the Romists, to whom we neither seek, or or hope for
Reconciliation, believing them to be in their vile Principles, irreconcilable
to the very Law of God; endeavoring as it were practically to rend the
Decalogue out of the Bible, by their wicked Principles of Impiety with respect
to the first Table, and of Immorality in reference to the second.

The Antisabbatarians pluck out to their power the fourth, notwithstanding a
Memento prefixed before it, as also fixed in the heart of the Decalogue.

The Antinomians they are for taking away the whole Law at once, denying it,
and rendering it wholly useless to Christians, whether as a Rule, or in it is
coactive or punitive power.

The Socinians also, a most dangerous and wicked Enemy, a dreadful disturber of
the Church, and Violator of the Gospel, endeavoring with Arrian to quench the
Deity of the Son of God, denying also our Redemption by the Blood and
Satisfaction of Christ, to the high dishonor of the riches of Gods Grace, and
hurt of Souls, endeavoring to deprive us of the benefit of the New Testament.

The Antiscripturists, who are the Enemies to the Scriptures, cashiering both
Old and New Testament.

And the Antitrinitarians, who are blasphemers of the whole Trinity.

And the Familists, who leaving the sure Rule of the Word, trust to Satanical
Delusions.

Not to leave the Separatists who absent all public Communion, pretending that
for which they have no ground, viz. to live above Ordinances; Poor Creatures!
because they know not the marrow of them, they live above that which they know
not.

But these I wave, which, or most of which are far distant from the Communion
of the Church of England, whether as to the Conforming Orthodox party, who
embrace the Pure Doctrine of the Book of Homilies, or as to their dissenting
Brethren of the Non-Conformists. And therefore these moderate differences ought
not to make immoderate distances: But I must needs grant, that difference in
Judgment frequently causes alienation in Heart, and swelling of mind; and
hereby do we see, that those Friends who have been near allied, and held an
intimacy of acquaintance, when they have come to clash one against another in
Opinions, have also forsaken their former intimacy, and frequently grown
Enemies, in opposing and censuring each other: and by reason of this disunion
come so many Invectives in Pulpit and Press. For to tell the truth, in some
Churches there is so much inveighing against their contrary Party, as that it
has amazed me to consider, whether these men thought they had their Commission
from God to preach the Gospel, or to declaim against a particular party of
Protestants?

But if so be that we are unanimously Protestants in the main, dissenting only
in some particular Opinions, in the holding and maintaining of which depends
not Salvation or Damnation, is it not very unreasonable, that the poor Souls
attending their Ministry should be denied the wholesome Bread of Life, and held
to that Hay and Stubble which neither is Food suited to their Nature, or
Nourishment? What good does it any man on a Sabbath day to enter into the
Church, and instead of a good practical Sermon, which tends through Gods
grace to warm the Affections, and influence the Practice, to hear a speech of
Reviling or contemning the Dissenters? if this person be one desirous to hear
Gods Word, and regards the way ad vitam aeternam, I durst be confident he
approves not hereof, this being the way rather to starve than feed his Soul.

Let there not therefore be such Invectives in Pulpit and Press, which tend not
to the profit of the good, but to incensing the Malice of the bad; for hereby
many are influenced to Raillery, and contemning others, but for what they
understand not; only receiving and entertaining Prejudices, (which tend much to
Gods dishonor;) for it (through Satan's subtility, and Natures horrid
corruption) conduces to an imbittered opposition of Religion and holy men, qua
tales, as they be holy; and so consequently if God bestows not repenting
Grace, they persist in this height of Impiety, growing worse and worse,
obdurated in evil, and destitute of good, till at last they become Vessels of
Gods fury and Wrath, as they have before sold themselves to the Vassalage and
mischievous drudgery of the Devil.

And others Heads are puzzled about unedifying Controversies and Debates,
whilst their Hearts are empty of the power of plain practical Divinity, and
likely so to remain, because unconcerned hereat, most miserably prying into
Religion more for Curiosity than Salvation.

But it cannot be denied, but that the good honest practical Divines of both
Persuasions have, and do much esteem each other, living and loving as Brethren;
and whatever some may either say or act, it is my observation, never finding
otherwise, but a Sober Orthodox Conformist regarding, and entertaining good
opinions of the Non-Conformists, and so, e contrario. For as it is dangerous to
impose upon other men's Consciences, so likewise it is not good or safe to
condemn another, because capable of acting some indifferent thing in it self,
notwithstanding I dissent herefrom, yet cannot but confess it not to be
necessary to Salvation, or dangerous of it is loss; why then should I judge and
censure him as an Heretic, or a person not worthy of having any Communion
withal.

And verily, Sir, this Union in heart, and living in love as Brethren, is the
way for Protestant Churches to flourish: let none be silenced, or hindered, let
all Protestant Ministers unanimously join in preaching Christ in his Person,
Offices, Merit and Spirit, etc. and not lie idle, in Jarring at one another;
this is not the way for their Masters work to be performed: Vae mihi si non
Evangelizavero, says that blessed industrious Apostle, who preached Christ in
season, and out of season, rejoicing that Christ was preached, although out of
envy, as well as out of good will, and declaring his resolution as to that his
Heaven-spirited Joy, that he would rejoice; so that the Interest of Jesus
Christ might be propagated, Paul would be pleased, and his Joy excited: But in
order to it is more free course, Unity was found necessary, therefore shall we
find him in tracing his Epistles as we read, exceedingly exhorting hereunto,
and dehorting from Strifes, Envyings, Debates, etc. Now in Galathians, Chap. 3.
Verse. 1. you shall find him calling them Foolish, O foolish Galathians, etc. by
reason of their Apostasy from the Doctrine which he had taught and they
embraced; but trace him down to the end of the Epistle, and you shall find him
often calling them Brethren; which instructs us in a good Lesson, viz. That in
difference of Judgment and Opinion, let there be no division in Affection; for
it is a sore temptation, and bait of the Devil, to raise alienation and
aversation in the Affections, when he perceives the Opinions not agreeing: But
Division it is the deadly plague of the Church, mortally tending to it is
overthrow and ruin. But the Church, which should walk in conformity to Christ,
who is Love, whose Spirit is the Spirit of Meekness, alas! how does it, and
has it for these many years dreadfully degenerated, and those therein
professing Membership to Christ endeavored to rend in pieces his Interest? But
in all Ages he has reserved to himself faithful Witnesses, standing up for his
Glory and his Churches good; endeavoring our Peace and Reconciliation.

And seeing the sum of Evangelical Obedience is Love, let us walk according
to that Rule, that Peace may be upon us; how often have we it repeated and
inculcated upon us, Bear one another burdens, and be kind, be tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, backed with this indisputable incitement, because Christ
for Gods sake has loved you?

Nay, can we be ignorant, how grand a design Satan the deadly Enemy of the
Church has, to rend it with multitude of Divisions, well knowing how effectual
a way that is to suppress the increase of the Gospel, and to advance the
interest of his Kingdom; most clearly discerning, that if we closely should
follow the most blessed counsel of the Apostle, viz. To be all of the same
mind, to speak the same thing, would be dangerous, that he might have none of
us: But that in this life, leading a life of simple Christianity, at peace with
God, and also among our selves; which is praegustus Coeli, even the foretaste
of Heavenly felicity, working in us an aptitude and meetness for the fruition
of eternal Glory and Beatitude, as also comfortably conducting us in the way
thereunto, to the sorrow and vexation of our deadly Enemies, whether Satan, or
his Children incarnate, the Popish party.

But as we have Enemies without doors, working to their utmost the impeding of
this happy Unity, so likewise have we within doors, that strongly oppose it;
and, as the usual Proverb is, We enter the World with a Pope in our Bellies; we
are naturally apt to be puffed up: it is well known that empty Vessels give the
greatest sound; likewise empty men, who are unacquainted with Religion in it is
Excellency and Power, having all unfurnished save a Head big with some giddy
Notions of what the Heart affects not, together with some Learning, by which
this speculative Divine is puffed up, and whilst he thinks himself to know
something, in reality knows nothing; and hence no wonder that often such men
prove Churchtroublers.

Others also conscious of a Crime near akin and sometime consequent of the
former, viz. Conceitedness, which much affects Singularity, by carrying a man
often rather to broach Heterodox Opinions, than embrace Orthodox; that some may
be his followers, and it may be go suo nomine, with the Badge of his own Name,
and so he become famous, or rather (to say truth) infamous.

Others are turned aside by Interest and the power of Unbelief, Demas-like,
loving this present World, and prizing it as the Place of their Acquiescence
and Happiness, Idolatrously loving Gold more than God, and (foolishly) a good
Purse better than a good Conscience; not practically minding, that the man that
would obtain Salvation, must Ungod the World, not in thinking gain to be
godliness: But although he in words and profession may acknowledge a better
good than this World, yet in Heart and consent of the Will, embraces no other;
no wonder, because the God of this World blinds the man's eyes, insomuch that
selfish Interest shall turn him which way it pleases, this is indeed greatly I
to be lamented!

Others by the deceitfulness of Riches are choked, and temporize, in
conforming to the Humors and Doctrines most in fashion, to maintain or
increase their Honor, unwilling steadfastly to adhere to a despised Gospel, and
a persecuted defamed Truth, not supposing Nuda Veritas will be a Covert to
shelter them from the Censures of the great ones, or gratify the Itch of
Ambition, in tending toward higher Promotions: But, Sir, let them contemplate
that thundering Menax in the Gospel, He that denies me before men, him will I
deny before my Father, and before the Angels of God. But oh how natural is it
for man to set up his Riches for his God, and to fall down and worship them?

Others by putting confidence in their Parts, Learning, Wisdom, and Strength of
Reason, are hurried and driven to Errors in Religion: for notwithstanding
Religion is not contrary to Reason, yet it is above it, fo far forth as it is
carnal or humane, immensly overreaching, surpassing and surmounting our poor
shallow Capacities; hence the holy Apostle in 11th of the Romans, having
seriously considered and contemplated the Decrees, Wisdom and Counsel of God,
how does he seem to abandon all his Reason, though certainly very perspicuous,
and fall into a Passionate admiration of the infinite Wisdom of God? saying, O
the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out!

But when by shallow Reason, as all humane is in it self considered, men would
dive into Gods depths of Wisdom and Counsel, oh how greatly are they deceived!
what false Ideas of Religion do they conceive, into what multitudes of Errors
do they plunge themselves, to their own harm, to the Churches detriment and
molestation, in their not resting on Divine Revelation any further than it
would suit with carnal Reason? I am persuaded this has much more damnified the
Church than the Persecutions of it is most malignant Opposers; it being a
Goddishonouring, crediting him so, as no further to rest in his Word than
carnal Reason can fathom, it is Truth to believe no further than we can by our
Reason and Wisdom trace: Hence issued the most notorious Heresies that ever
infected the Professing World. It is therefore a needful Maxim to make Gods
Word our Rule; better is the most illiterate person making this Word his
Conduct, than the Learnedest Hero resting in the validity of his Reason: And
hence no wonder the Apostle makes this Challenge; Where is the wise? where is
the Scribe? where is the disputer of this World? God has chosen the poor
things of this World, etc. and the things which are not, to bring to naught the
things which are. God will have the Revenues of his Glory, and he will have no
flesh to glory in it self; he will bring down the Pride of all flesh one way or
other: But let Reason have the place of Ancilla Pietatis, to be Godlinesses
Handmaid, and let Religion be the Mistress, and have the pre-eminence, then
Reason in it is due place is a noble and excellent gift and endowment,
subservient to Religion, and in that place it is a good Servant, but otherwise
a wicked Master.

By these or the like means through the horrid depravedness of Nature, and the
desperate corruption of Heart, men are seduced, blinded; and biased; to
prevent which, a heart circumcised to love God is necessary, whence most
sweetly flows mutual Love to one another; for no man that is (...), but will
be (...) also: he that hates his Brother, and yet says he loves God, we have
a Divine warrant from the Word to call that man a Liar.

Mystical Union to Christ, and real Implantation into him, is inseperably
accompanied with fraternal Union: What, love the Head, and not the Members! it
is verily impossible. Can a man be in Christ, and yet out with his dear
Members? No certainly; Christ's true Friend will never be his Members Enemy.

The Holy Spirit inhabiting a man's Heart, even that Spirit of Love and Meekness
which are the Fruits of that Holy Spirit, which certainly it will bring forth
in that Garden where this blessed Wind blows: Now whether or no Strifes,
Dissensions, Heats, etc. be fruits of this Spirit, I leave all to judge who
shall peruse this Paper.

And, Sir, it is an essential part of the Church of Christ to be conformable to
its Head, and certainly in some measure conformable to his Will are the true
Members thereof, however the carriage of some selfish Pretenders to
Churchmembership may be, whose intent may be rather to devour than feed the
Flock, but in this Censure (mentioning it only by the way) without regard to
any particular man's Person.

But, Sir, I fear our late Literal Skirmish between the Doctor, his Vindicators
and Respondents, has done us no great good; it has not tended to beat down
prevailing Popery; it has not been of use to furnish the minds of the People
with Arguments against Popish Errors, in well grounding them in the
Fundamentals of true Christianity; a work exceedingly requiring and calling for
all the Diligence, Parts, Learning and Industry of our Divines to be busied
about, seeming now to be as it were the Vnum necessarium, of indispensible
necessity; the Practical preaching up of Christ in his Offices, Priestly,
Prophetical and Kingly, the undermining of all which are to the utmost
endeavored by the Papists, yea and ruin too if possible: But it is certain
the Lord will maintain his Honor in spite of all opposition. And, Sir, how
needful is it for our Divines to preach Jesus Christ and him Crucified? A
suitable Doctrine for this Juncture of time, wherein the dismal Cloud of Popish
Errors and Superstitions threatens to fall on us.

But supposing the Doctor is in very truth speaking what the Non-conformists
justly deserve, (as one of his Admirers said in my hearing) yet it was
unseasonable, and this pernicious gloomy season required silence here, and an
open Mouth against Popery. But I will wave that; Magna est Veritas and
praevalebit: I designed not when I began to write, to meddle with the present
Controversy, otherwise than to hint, of what I could not escape.

But this I am in fine persuaded of, let us war, and fight, and jarre, and
bite one another, we are hereby our own destroyers, and at last may be our own
Butchers; and this time calls for a work of far greater necessity, and weighty
importance, yea and the Concern thereof so exceeding ponderous, that if we thus
continue, it may have a sad end, and that so grievous, that our selves and
Posterities may have imposed on us the Yoke of Popery, which neither our selves
or Fathers have been able to bear. Which Yoke to prevent, let us unanimously
adhere to the Truth of the Gospel, and with one shoulder bear the burden of
Reformation; in order to which end let us be exhorted to Unity, and dehorted
from Division; for us to expect a flourishing Nation and Religion, and to
trample on our Enemies, whilst we continue in Strifes and Contests among our
selves, is a thing impossible; but Union makes this feasible, yea and a thing
with facility to be performed: And therefore let us, seeing Christ's Body is a
Body of Unity, that Spirit of Jesus a Spirit of Love, according to the earnest
Exhortation of the Apostle, Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of peace: See his Argument; For there is one Body, and one Spirit. It was
Christ's Intercession to his Father, Oh how Pathetick is that his Prayer in John
17th,! That they may be one as we are one, that they all may be one, that they
also may be one in us, that they may be made perfect in one. And this tends
much to Gods glory, the Supreme ultimate end of his true Worshippers, according
to that in Romans 15th. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God. And
I cannot but mention another Scripture, very pertinent to the purpose; 1 Cor.
1. 10. wherein the blessed St. Paul does most earnestly beseech them, by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they all speak the same thing, and that
there be no Divisions among them, but that they be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and the same Judgment. And to the Philippians we shall find him
pressing it as the only thing to be desired, coming in with an Only let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come to see
you, or else be absent, I may hear of your Affairs, that ye stand fast in one
Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel. And truly
Sir, why should the Apostle so adjure us to Unity, were it not of high
Concernment to the Promotion of Christianity? for if we inspect but his
concluding Farewell to the Corinthians, in the Second Epistle, Chap. 13. Verse.
11. Finally Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

We know not how great a Mischief a little fire of Contention may do; it may
verily increase to more ungodliness: Division is the Devils Music, but it will
center in our sorrow. But Unity it is Christ's delight, let us follow it,
because Gods Injunction, Follow Peace with all men; and because a branch of the
Covenant of Promise, I will give them one heart; and because an Evidence of a
Discipleship to Christ; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye love one another: For which also we have the Practice of the Primitive
Christians for our Presidents; The Multitude of them that believed were of one
heart, and one soul.

And in short, There is but one God, one Christ, one Faith, etc. Therefore, as
the Wise man says, let us hear totum hominis, Fear God and keep his
Commandments, and let us not waste our inch of Time, troubling our heads about
all the Controversies in the world. We must know this for certain, that there is
but one way left us for Salvation: Let us hearken to the sum, He that
believes on the Son, has Life, but he that believes not on the Son, shall
not enter into Life, but has the wrath of God abiding on him. Again, He that
would be my Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow me:
Here is no Glossography, plain Terms, the Simple may understand it with
facility, though the Wise cannot practice it without the Operations of
Omnipotent Grace, therefore our Duty is in leaving Disputing to fall upon
Practice.

But how greatly is it to be bewailed, and how dolorous a Complaint may we take
up, in that we are circumvented with multitude of erroneous Principles, and
hereby the breach of Division grows wider and wider; and I profess, let what
will be said, That to teach us Wisdom and Unity, God will send some severe
Dispensation, and it is well if Gods Judgments are not impending over our heads
for this our sin; shall we then go on to provoke the Lord? Certainly he will
vindicate his own Glory, when we have tasted by fearful Experience the smart of
Gods Judgments for our Divisions, and he has let in our Enemies on us, and
suffered our Fears to overtake us, and let us suffer together, then shall we
certainly cry, e bello Pax; No more War, we have experimented its evil, but
candid Peace shall return; but till God by an eminent Act of his Righteousness
puts forth his hand, and executes Judgment, there is little hope hereof, we
being so greatly degenerated, and the malignant Diseases of our Minds grown
inveterate.

But then, Sir, to conclude, how daring are we, when the Symptoms of our uineby
the malicious intentions of our Enemies is presaged, which through abundant
mercy has been detected, and thereby hindered; to which Plotts, and
Conspiracies against our King, Government, Persons, and Religion, have we given
much advantage, and encouragement by our Divisions, yet has God freely been
Gracious still in detecting and defeating them hitherto, and shall we be so
foolish and unkind to God, as to still persist in our Iniquity, and as it were
wilfully to draw down Judgments on our own heads, and provoke God to withdraw
his protecting Providence from us?

I would persuade all men to Obedience to the Higher Powers, for they be of
God, and it is Gods will that we should obey Magistrates, and not speak evil of
Dignityes; they are an Ordinance of God, and we highly advance Gods honor in
esteeming and submitting to his Ordinances; but Conscience prohibiting what the
Magistrate enjoins, whom should I obey, God or Man, judge ye? Conscience in
man's Soul is Gods Vicegerent, and Conscience wronged will reproach, whose
reproaches are intolerable; for my part I rather choose that the whole world
should defame me, than my own Conscience accuse me; for Conscience is a bosom
Friend, and consequently if a Friend a most sweet and intimate, if enraged, it
is an enemy, from which there is no flying, it will pursue a man in every
place, company, action, etc. if therefore one Christian that expects
salvation by Faith in Jesus, can act that which another professing the same
Faith cannot, let them not censure, bite, and devour each other; this is the
temper rather of ravenous Woolfs than of Christ's Lambs.

And Sir, my Respects and Service to you, craving your Acceptance of this poor,
but I can say well-meaning Epistle, wherein as I have said, so do I reiterate,
that Unity is the way for our Church and State to flourish; it promotes the
twisted Interest of Gods glory and our good; it plucks down Satan's Interest,
and Popish Plotts and Projects it discourageth greatly: And if still we will
have no regard to the Commands of the Gospel, to the Love of Christ, to the
Fellowship of the Spirit, which is Love, which works Love wherever it
dwells. If we will have no respect to the Glory of God in the Propagation of
the Gospel, if we refuse to love our Nation* our Families, our selves, our own
Souls) and Bodies, let us go on in Divisions, Strifes and Contentions, but be
content to suffer what miseries follow, which most certainly will come upon us,
and if God in infinite free Grace and, Mercy prevent not, be our total
Destruction and Overthrow.

Eor preventing whereof, let us unanimously with one Consent, with one
Shoulder, bear one another Infirmities, and endeavor to serve one another in
Love; That this Heavenly Benediction may fall upon us, our Church and Nation,
viz.

That the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make us perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, thorough Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for Ever,
and Ever. Amen.
So heartily, Sir, desires and prays, Your sincere and Willing Servant, A. E.

FINIS.

