THE WAY OF TRUE PEACE and UNITY In the true CHURCH OF CHRIST, In all humility
and bowels of love presented to them. By WILLIAM DELL, One of the least and
unworthiest of the Servants of God, in the Gospel of his dear Son.

Psalm. 120.7. I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war. Utrum nos
schismatici sumus an vos, nec ego nec tu, sed Christus interrogetur ut indicet
Ecclesiam suam, August. contr. liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 85. London, Printed for
Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, at the West End of Paul's near
Ludgate. 1651.

To the Honorable the Commons of England Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IT is written, that the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ: and now when all almost, that is great and honorable,
and noble and Royal, and wise and learned, is found against this Counsel and
design of God; how highly are you hon^ured of him, and how happy are you, that
You yet are found for it? You after a manifold Apostasy and def^ction of many
of your Members, seem yet to remain as pillars in the House of our God; yet you
seem to be, among those called and chosen, and faithful ones, that now continue
with the Lamb, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in his engagement
against, and conquest over the TEN-HORN'D BEAST: And to turn aside, from this
work, would be, to give up your selves to double ruin, to wit, both from
heaven and earth. And therefore the Lord make you faithful, that you may do
this work for God, and to fulfill his Word; and not for your selves, and to
fulfill your own Ends.

And now as you are busy about the Peace of the Kingdom, to settle and
establish that upon a right and sure foundation; so God has engaged my heart,
to meditate the peace of the Church. And though I have excluded your power from
having a hand in this Work, yet I have not, in any measure, wronged you, as you
shall perceive, but rather endeavored to preserve you, from dashing your
selves, against that Rock, against which, all the ignorant and unwise Rulers
and Kingdoms of the world, both have and yet shall, dash themselves in pieces.
It shall be your wisdom to be built up, together with the Church, on Christ;
but it would be your confusion, to go about to build the Church on your selves
and your power; seeing this building is too weighty for any foundation, but
Christ himself. Your power will do well in the Kingdoms of the world, but not
in Gods Kingdom, which is Christ's inheritance, from the beginning to the end.
You shall be happy, to be subject in it, but none must be Lord or Lawgiver
here, but Christ himself. Let not the Devil who in these last times, has in
many places translated the mystery of iniquity, from the Ecclesiastical Kingdom
of the Clergy, into the temporal Kingdom of the Magistrate, any longer keep it
there; seeing, it will be as pernicious in this, as in that: for it will be, no
less dangerous an evil, for the Magistrate to make himself Lord and Lawgiver
in the Church, then for the Pope, or General Council, in all the Kingdoms
called Christian; or for the Archbishop, or National Assembly in particular
Kingdoms. Men have commonly thought, that to preserve the godly in worldly
peace and prosperity, is to preserve the Church; whereas, to preserve them in
faith, hope, love, in union and communion with Christ and the Father, in and
through the Spirit, this only is to preserve the Church; and this oft-times, is
better done by Christ, whose work only it is, in affliction, then in
prosperity. Wherefore do You look to the care of the State, and trust Christ
with the care of his Church, seeing he is both faithful and able to save it
perfectly. The peace of the Church lies in Christ only, and no part of it out
of him, no not for a moment; and this their peace, Christ is able to preserve
in Himself, in the midst of the most cruel and desperate evils of the world.
Now what the true Church of Christ is, and wherein its Peace and Unity lies, is
here in some measure declared, for the good of the faithful everywhere, and
particularly for Your good; lest you being glorious instruments in the hand of
God, for one work, should miscarry in another. And this I have done, through
God, not because I was worthy to do it, but because, it was worthy to be done.
For why should the Church, any longer be ignorant of the things that belong
unto its peace? and why should the Members of it, any longer lie as scattered
bones, dry and dead, and not gathered up into the unity of a living body? and
who could longer endure, to see unskilful Physicians, under pretense of
healing the Church, wound it still deeper; and under pretense of procuring its
peace, hurry it into endless dissentions and divisions? In this case of
necessity, I could not but speak, both out of duty and love, and I hope none of
You will despise to hear, who consider, that God, when he lays aside the wise
and prudent, chooses Babes and Sucklings, to perfect his praise, out of their
mouths; that so he himself, may be the more glorified and admired, in his weak
and mean instruments. Now let his praise be above the earth and the heavens;
and let him give you the honor that all his Saints have: and this is his hearty
desire, who humbly writes himself

Your servant in the Gospel, William Dell.

To his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, And the Honorable
Lieutenant General CROMWELL, Together with the Council of War.
THE presence of the Lord having turned your course backward like Jordan, from
what it was a year ago; and all former enchantments and divinations used
against you, being dissolved, through the renewing of the same presence of God
with you. after a manifest withdrawing of it; and You through a blessed
necessity, being now doing that work of God, which once you had little mind
to, viz. The procuring the Peace of the Kingdom, by subduing the great enemies
of P^ace, and removing all the enmity against peace, that was inwrapped in our
very Laws, and degenerated Constitution of the Kingdom: I thought good, whiles
You are thus busy about the peace of the Kingdom, which is a peace without
you, to put you in mind of the true peace of the true Church, which is a peace
within you, and an eternal peace, as the former is but a temporal; for what
advantage will it be for you, to have peace among men, and to want peace with
God? to do the work of God in the world, and to be destitute of the work of God
in your own hearts? to destroy the enemies to worldly peace, and yet to
maintain in your own hearts the corruptions of unrenewed nature, which are the
enemies of heavenly peace? Take heed therefore, that your present employments,
do not so over-ingage you in this world, that you neglect the world to come:
take heed, lest by seeking your selves, you have your reward here: but do the
work of God, for God; and whilst you act for God, live in him, and let him be
your reward, and not the creature.

And now here in this Dicourse, shall you see a better Peace and Agreement,
then you are striving for, (though your work also be excellent and glorious)
even such a Peace and Agreement, of which Christ himself, is the immediate
Author and Prince, and which he communicates, not to the world, but to them he
chooses out of the world, even the Peace of God in Jesus Christ, by the Spirit,
which has its foundation in Christ; and its influence into each Communion of
Saints, all the world over: And this Peace can no more be brought about by your
Sword, then by the Magistrates Scepter; and therefore take heed, lest you now,
having power in your hands, to another purpose, should so far forget your
selves, as to do that your selves, which you have condemned in others.
Therefore suffer the Word only, to be both Scepter and Sword in the Kingdom of
God, and let the true Church remain free, in the Freedom which Christ has
conferred upon it; or else, the Lord, whose own the Church is, will as
certainly in his due time, take the sword out of your hands, as he has done
the Scepter out of the Magistrate's, and throw you into one destruction with
him. But I am persuaded better things of you, though I thus speak, and even
such things, as are suitable to the light of the Gospel, and to the virtues and
graces of Christ and his Spirit, which have been hitherto (and I hope, will yet
still be) very manifest, not only in You Honorable Ones, who have the chief
Conduct, but also in very many of the Council and Army besides. And upon such a
gathering together of Gods people, and Saints, (let the world (if it please)
still laugh at that word) who can but think, he has some choice and singular
work in hand for his own glory? The Lord God Almighty has already done great
and wonderful works by you, and is yet doing greater, if you will continue to
believe and obey; and in all these things he only is to be exalted, and not
You. For has not that Day of the Lord of Hosts dawned? yea the morning of it
is already gone forth, Which is upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up, and he is to be brought low and the Lord
alone is and must be exalted, in this day.

Now the Lord cause you to dwell and continue in that Church, which is the body
of Christ, and habitation of God, and give you peace with those that are
reconciled to God by Christ, and to one another in Christ, by the Spirit; in
which union and communion, I remain.

Your assured Servant, W. D.

TO THE READER.
SUCH are the noises of waters, and thundrings, and earthquakes among us; and
so great and continued are our shakings and confusious, through hatred and
love, hopes and fears, joys and sorrows, triumphs and indignations, that there
is no silence in heaven, for so much as half an hour. Wherefore, though I (...)
here, touching so sweet and glorious a thing, as PEACE, and (...) ^eclare from
the very word (or else I had said nothing) wherein the true peace of the true
Church consists; and also, how the faithful, and Churches, may preserve that
peace, in their Communion with one another, which they have, in the Son, and in
the Father: yet men's heads and hearts are now so full, that it is to be
doubted, but few will regard it. Notwithstanding, considering that there is
among us, an election of grace, and a flock of Christ, who both know, and will
hear his voice at any time; I thought good to speak this in their behalf, for
whose profit all the creatures of God were made in the world, and all the gifts
of Christ are given in the Church. And though I am very conscious, of my
rudeness of speech, in this Discourse, 2 Cor. 11.6.
as also of my weakness and infirmity in many things, having not yet attained
to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
and so dare not say, that every jot and tittle here, is of the pure river of
water of life, without any humane mixture; yet they that are spiritual, and
able to judge, will own all in it, that is of the word and spirit of truth, and
will not reject silver tried four or five times, because it is not tried seven
times. And what is weak and imperfect in it, the true Church of Christ (for
whose dear sake and love I have spoken all this) seeing it is, ^cclesia Regi^a
misericordiae, cujus viscera sunt merae miserationes and remissiones peccatorum.
as Luther speaks, The Queen of Mercy, whose very bowels, are mere compassions
and forgivenesses of sins, will easily pass it by, and forgive it. And as for
men, haughty and high in their own spirit, contemning and disdaining any thing
that agrees not to their palate; I do as easily despise their censure, as they
lightly pass it. It is enough, that I seek the glory of Jesus Christ, the Son
of the living God, and the welfare of that Church, that is his body; and for
the rest, let me become as vile as the Apostles were made to the world, who
were counted the filth and off souring of all things; or as Mr Baily,
Rutherford, Bastwick, Pryn, Love, or any other of my old enemies in Parliament
and City, not worth the naming, Cito vos omnes, ut respondeatis mihi coram
Attissimo and justissimo Iudice, post paucos annos.
have sought to make me. All whom, unless God give them repentance to life, I
cite, as once Hierom of Prague did his enemies, in the like cause, To appear
within a few years, before the most high and righteous Judge, Jesus Christ, to
answer all that they have done wickedly, if not maliciously, against his Name,
Truth, Gospel, Spirit, People; and that under the form and pretense of
godliness. And now well knowing, that the more any thing is of Christ, the more
enmity and opposition it Will meet with from the world, and from the worldly
Church. I commit Christ's own word and cause to his own care and protection, who
lives and reigns for this very purpose, to uphold his own despised truth,
against the glorious, but deceitful doctrines of men; and to make all his
enemies his footstool. And so waiting in this assured hope, if thou love
Christ, I remain,

Thine in him, William Dell.

The Contents.
THE Introduction. page 149 The Gospel propounded, is neither, 1. Between the
Church and the world, p. 150 2. Nor between the Spiritual and Carnal children
of the Church. ibid. 3. But between the faithful, or true children of the true
Church. p. 151
The true Church described. p. 152 The true Church of God, differs from the
Churches of men, in 13. particulars. from p. 153 to p. 157 How this Church may
be known. p. 158 How we may be joined to it. p. 159 The Church a great mystery,
as well as Christ. p. 160 Seven bonds of this Churches Unity. viz. ibid. 1. One
body. p. 161 2: One Spirit. p. 165 3 One Hope of our calling. p. 167 4. One
Lord. p. 169 5. One Faith. p. 172 6. One Baptism. p. 175 7. One God and Father
of all, who is above all, through all, and in all. p. 176
These seven bonds are sufficient, for the Unity and Peace of the Church,
without any additions of man's devising. 178. How the true Church of believers,
thus made one by God, may be preserved one, in their communion among
themselves. p. 180 To this end, 1 They must know, some things otherwise, then
yet they do. ibid.

Particularly, they must be instructed touching the government of the church.
ibid.

This Government is twofold. 1. Immediate, And this also is twofold. 1. The
Government of Gods special Providence. p. 181 2. The government of his
spiritual presence. p 182 These two Governments the true church never wanted in
any age, nor in this. p. 184
2. Mediate. This also is Christ's Government, and not man's. p. 185
And it is Christ's ordering all things by the faithful, among the faithful, in
reference to the communion of Saints. ibid. This is drawn forth into several
particulars, which are these. 1. To whom Christ has committed the power of
ordering and managing all things in the true Church. 186 And here, 1. To whom
the keys of the church are given. 2. What they are.
2. What kind of power it is, which the true Church has; set down, in 6.
particulars. 188 3. What is the extent of this power. 190 4. What is the
outward instrument of it. ibid. 5. What the true church can do, by virtue of
it. And this comprehends these particulars. 1. It can gather it self together.
192 2. It can appoint its own Orders. 193 What rules it is to observe herein.
194 3. It can choose its own Officers. 196 And here, 1. What Officers are to be
chosen. 197 2. Out of whom. ibid. 1. By whom. 198 What the true church, as the
case now stands, is to do, in point of choosing officers. p. 199 And if need be,
can Reform them, p 200 Or depose them. p. 201


4. It can call its own Councels, if it need any. ibid. Certain reasons why the
church may now well want Councels. p. 202 And if it will have any, what rules
it is to observe touching them. p. 204
5 It can judge of all Doctrines, both of its Officers and Councels. p. 205

And thus the judgment of believers is to be rectified in these things, for
the preserving peace among themselves.




2. The practice of the true church is to be rectified in other things. The
practical Rules that are more absolute and general in the way of peace, are
these. 1. That the true Church keep it self, distinct from the world. p. 206 2.
That the true Church content it self, with its own power, for its own affairs.
p 207 3. That the true church do not fetch or force men unto it, against their
wills. 209 4. That the true church make void, the distinction of Clergy and
Laity, among Christians. p. 211 5. That the true church keep equality between
Christians and Churches. p. 212 6. That the true church keep the Officers of
the church, in subordination to the Community. p. 213 7. That all true
Christians and Churches, do take Christ alike, for their Head, and do not set
up visible heads or Ring leaders, to themselves of men, no not of the best men.
p. 214 8. That the true Church keep out all error in doctrine. p 215 5 Ways by
which this may be effectually done, without the help of the Magistrate. p. 216
The great Question, touching the Magistrates power to keep out error, answered.
p. 224
9. That the true church, do not enforce Uniformity, in outward orders and
discipline. p. 225


Practical rules for peace more special and occasional in point of difference,
among the faithful. Here the weight of things, is to be first considered. If
the things wherein believers differ, be circumstantial and ceremonial only,
then there are,

5. Rules to be observed for the preserving peace. p. 233

If the things wherein they differ be points of Doctrine, yet such are not
absolutely necessary to salvation, then there are

7 Rules to be observed for the preserving of peace. p. 235

If the Doctrine wherein the difference lies, is such as is absolutely
inconsistent with true faith and salvation, yet then, 1. The person is to be
heard. p. 237 2. If after full hearing, it is manifest to be a Doctrine
contrary to the faith of Gods Elect, then the true Church ought, 1 To condemn
the Doctrine. p. 241 2 To excommunicate the person. ibid.
And this is the last punishment the true Church can inflict. p. 242
The conclusion of all. ibid.
THE Way of true Peace and Unity, in the true Church of CHRIST.
HAving now for a long time time together observed with a said heart and
troubled spirit, the grievous differences and dissentions, among the faithful
and Churches of Christ, and perceiving also, that there is yet no healing of
this error, many or most of them not clearly understanding, wherein their true
peace and unity ought to consist; and so, are still prosecuting former, with
later mistakes, till their wound is become almost incurable; I found my heart
inclined and engaged by God, to propound to others, that way of Peace, which my
self have learned from the Word. And this I desire to do, not that I might seem
to be something, or be accounted of, any more, then the meanest of all Gods
people, being indeed unworthy to minister, so much as a cup of cold water, to
the Church, the Spouse of Christ, much less so incomparable a treasure as the
word of God is, in comparison of which, all the world is not to be mentioned;
but merely out of love and compassion to the infirmities of my brethren, whom I
see walking in the light of their own fire, and in the sparks, which they
themselves do kindle, whereby they are in great danger to lie down in sorrow;
whilst in the mean time they neglect the true light, which alone is to shine in
the Kingdom of God, till all ignorance and darkness be done away. And as my end
and scope is, to bring all men, from all humane doctrines, and conceptions of
carnal wisdom and prudence, to the Word of God; so I desire all men that are
spiritual, and able to judge, to allow of no more in this Discourse, then they
shall find agreeable to this word; and what ever the Word of God in the true
sense and meaning of it, shall disapprove or condemn; so far, let them also
disapprove and condemn with it, as I my self also do; knowing well, that no
Word ought to have any place in the Church of God, but the Word of God, which
alone carries light, life, righteousness, wisdom and power, sufficient and
enough in it self, to do the whole mind and work of God in his Church.
Wherefore what I have freely learned, I shall freely communicate, desiring
every one to regard his own salvation, seeing now after so clear a discovery of
truth, he can have no cloak, nor the least excuse for his sin.

Now that he that reads may understand, it is necessary for me, speaking of the
unity and peace of the Church, to tell you now at first, that I intend not to
propound any way of peace, either between the Church and the World, or else
between the carnal and spiritual children of the Church, as having learned no
such thing out of the word of God.

First, Not between the Church and the world: The peace propounded, is, 1. Not
between the Church and the world.
for the Lord never intended any reconciliation and agreement between these, in
the spiritual and eternal things of the Kingdom of God; for these, are two
distinct seeds, and sorts of people; the one from beneath, the other from
above; the one the seed of the woman; the other the seed of the Serpent; and
between these two, God has put such an emnity, that no man can take away.
Wherefore they, who never minding these two different seeds; between whom God
has put such irreconciliable enmity, would make all the people of one or more
whole Kingdoms a Church at once, and would reconcile all of them together, in
the things of God, and in the ways of his worship, according to devices and
methods of their own; these men know not what they do; for they walk in the
darkness of their own hearts, and not in the light of the Word; which shows us
clearly, that it is as possible to reconcile Michael and the Devil, as the
Angels of both.

2. Nor between the carnal and spiritual children of the Church.
2. Neither secondly, do I find any way in the World, to reconcile all those
together, who are commonly called The visible Church, seeing even among these,
there are two distinct sorts of children, as Paul teaches us; one sort of
those, that are born after the flesh, as Ishmael and Esau; and another of
those, who are born after the spirit, as Isaac, and Jacob: and there is as
great enmity between these in the Church, as between the former in the world;
for they that are born after the flesh, are always persecuting them that are
born after the spirit, but never agreeing with them.

Now of these two sorts of Christians, one makes up the body of Christ;
Spiritual Christians make up the body of Christ.
the other, the body of Antichrist. The spiritual children, make up Christ's
true body, as it is written, He gave him, to be the Head over all things, to
the Church which is his body; for these being born of the Spirit, do also
partake of the Spirit, and so are the true flesh of Christ, as all that flesh
is, in which the Spirit dwells; and these all worship God in the spirit, and
have no confidence in the flesh, that is, in no fleshly Forms, Ceremonies, or
Worship.

The carnal children of the Church make up Antichrists true body: For as
Christ's body consists of spiritual Christians, Carnal Christians the body of
Antichrist.
so Antichrists of carnal; For Antichrist sets up in the temple of God, as well
as Christ; and as Christ get his body together of spiritual Christians; so
Antichrist gets his body together of carnal Christians: and these have a form
of Religion, or godliness, but they have no spirit or power in that form: yea,
under the form of godliness they exercise the greater power of ungodliness: And
Christ and his Spirit, and all their things, are nowhere more opposed, then by
those in the Church, who have the letter of the word, but want the spirit of
it, being taught of men only, and not of God. So that, all that part of
Christianity, that is destitute of the Spirit, and has the name only, and not
the anointing of Christians, this makes up the body of Antichrist. And now
there can be no more agreement, between these two bodies, of Christ and of
Antichrist, that is, between spiritual and carnal Christians, then between
Christ and Antichrist themselves, the heads of these bodies. And as I find
nothing in the word, so neither do I propound any thing for an agreement here:
for to go about to reconcile there, where the Father never intended, nor the
Son never undertook any reconciliation, would not be a work of wisdom, but of
weakness.

So then the way of peace I shall speak of, is between the children of peace,
Peace between the children of p^ace.
touching whom God has promised, That he will give them one heart, and one
way; and for whom Christ has prayed That they all may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: And these are the
elect made faithful, called to be Saints, and sanctified through their calling;
and these are the true Church of God.

The peace then I seek by this Discourse, is the peace of the true Church:
Wherefore I shall first declare the Church it self, whose peace I seek; and
then after declare, wherein this Churches true peace and unity lies; and also
how it may be preserved among themselves, it being first wrought by Jesus
Christ.

For the Church it self; what I have learned touching it, I shall speak
plainly, and something largely, because the right understanding hereof is so
absolutely necessary to our present business, and yet there are very many, and
very great mistakes and mis-apprehensions touching it, even among the faithful.

The right Church then is not the whole multitude of the people, What the right
Church is not.
whether good or bad, that join together in an outward form or way of worship;
for in this Church there are Whoremongers, Idolaters, Thieves, Murderers, and
all sorts of wicked and unbelieving persons, which are so far from being the
Church of Christ, that they are the very Synagogue of Satan, and children of
the Devil, and therefore I shall not speak of this Church. But the Church I
shall speak of, is the true Church of the New Testament, which I say is not any
outward or visible society, What it is.
gathered together into the consent or use of outward things, forms,
ceremonies, worship, as the Churches of men are; neither is it known by seeing
or feeling, or the help of any outward sense, as the Society of Mercers, or
Drapers, or the like; but it is a Spiritual and Invisible Fellowship, gathered
together in the unity of faith, hope and love, and so into the unity of the
Son, and of the Father by the Spirit; wherefore it is wholly hid from carnal
eyes, neither has the world any knowledge or judgment of it.

This true Church is the Communion of Saints, which is the communion believers
have with one another: not in the things of the world, or in the things of men,
but in the things of God; for as believers have their union in the Son, and in
the Father, so in them also they have their communion; and the communion they
have with one another in God, cannot be in their own things, but in Gods
things, even in his light, life, righteousness, wisdom, truth, love, power,
peace, joy, etc. This is the true Communion of Saints, and this Communion of
Saints is the true Church of God. How the Church of God differs from the
Churches of men.


Now this true Church of God, differs from the Churches of men, in very many
particulars, as follows.

1. Members come unto the Churches of men, either of their own minds, or else
by the persuasion, or by the forcing of others; and so, but after the will of
man; but none come to this true Church but from the drawing of God the Father,
and his own calling, according to his own purpose.

2. In the Churches of men; members are admitted through an outward confession
of doctrine; but none are admitted into this true Church, but through a new
birth from God and his Spirit, Joh. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God (which is the right Church of the New Testament)
For that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and so remains without in the
world; but that which is born of the spirit is spirit, and so has entrance
into the true Church.

3. In the Churches of men there are more wicked then righteous; but in this
true Church of Christ the people are all righteous, not one excepted, as it is
written, Thy people shall be all righteous, Isa. 60. For they all have their
iniquities forgiven them, and they are all redeemed and washed with the blood
of the Lamb.

4. In the Churches of men, the people for the most part, are only taught of
men, who are their heads and leaders, and whose judgments they depend on, and
follow in all things; but in the right Church, the people are all taught of
God, as Isaiah says, Thy children shall be all taught of the Lord: and Christ
says, They shall hear and learn from the Father: and John says, The anointing
they have received, teaches them all things.

5. In the Churches of men, the greatest part are hated and rejected of God, as
being strangers and enemies to Christ; but in the true Church all the members
are dear to God, as Christ is dear; and loved of God, as Christ is loved, as
being one flesh and spirit with him.

6. The Churches of men are of men's building, contriving, framing, fashioning,
beautifying: but the true Church is built only by Christ, as it is written,
Zach. 6.12. The man whose name is the BRANCH, he shall build the Temple of the
Lord, even he shall build it: And again, Math. 16 18. Upon this rock I will
build my Church: The true Church is such a building, which neither Men nor
Angels can frame, but Christ alone.

7. The Churches of men are all of them more or less the habitation of
Antichrist, who (as Paul says, 2 These. 2.4.) as God sits in the Temple of
God, that is, not in the true Temple of God, but in the Churches of men, which
arrogate to themselves that name and title; showing himself that he is God: For
Antichrist always dwells there, where men have a form of godliness, denying the
power: but the true Church is built together, to be the habitation of God, in
the spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. And again, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temples of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them.

8. The Churches of men are as large as men will make them; for they that have
chief power in these Churches, interesting themselves in wordly Magistrates,
through their favor and help, make their Churches as large as the Magistrates
Dominions: thus the Church of Rome was made of as large extent as the Dominions
of the Emperor, and of other Princes, in whom the Pope had interest. And so
likewise, the Church in other Kingdoms, was made as large as the Dominions of
the temporal Magistrate; and all under their power, must be forced to be, of
their Church: But the true Church, which is the Kingdom of the Son, is only
the preparation of the Fathers Kingdom, and so will admit no more into it, then
the Fathers Kingdom will admit into it; the Sons Kingdom, and the Fathers being
of a like latitude and extent; and so the Sons Kingdom is no larger then the
Fathers, nor the Fathers then the Sons: The Fathers Kingdom will not receive
any into it, that have not first been of the Sons Kingdom; and the Sons Kingdom
will not admit into it, what the Fathers Kingdom will not, after receive; but
the Son delivers up, his whole Kingdom to the Father, and the Father receives
it all, without any exception.

Now from hence these three things are evident.

1. That the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, etc. are not the Church, but the
world, as well as the Kingdoms of France, Spain, Hungary, etc. but in all
these, and all other Kingdoms, the faithful who are taken into union and
communion with Christ, and with one another in him, they are the Church, and
not the Kingdoms themselves.

2. In particular Assemblies, whether Parochial or Congregational, all the
company that meet together bodily, and have outward communion in outward
Ordinances, are not the Church; but those among all these, that meet together
in one Faith and Spirit, in one Christ and God; for herein only stands the true
communion of Saints, and the true Church of the New Testament is to be judged
hereby, and by no outward things whatsoever.

3. That it belongs not to Magistrates and worldly Powers, to say, which is the
Church, and, which is not the Church; who do belong to it, and who do not; but
it belongs to Christ only to point out his own Church, seeing he only knows
it, and it only stands by his election and collection, and not by man's.

9. The Churches of men knit themselves together into such Societies, by some
outward Covenant or Agreement among themselves: But the true Church is knit
into their Society among themselves, by being first knit unto Christ, their
Head; and as soon as ever they are one with him, they are also one with one
another in him; and are not first one among themselves, and then after one with
Christ: So that the true Church is a spiritual Society, knit unto Christ by
Faith, and knit to one another in Christ, by the Spirit and love; and this
makes them infinitely more one, then any outward Covenant they can engage
themselves in: the union wherein God makes us one, passing all the unions,
wherein we can make our selves one. And so when some believers perceive the
grace that is given to others, they presently fall into one communion, without
any more ado. Wherefore they that are of the Church, the body, cannot deny
communion to them that are in true union with Christ, the head, when they do
perceive this grace. For this is considerable in this matter, that we are not
first one with the Church, and then after one with Christ: but we are first one
with Christ, and then one with the Church, and our union with the Church flows
from our union with Christ, and not our union with Christ, from our union with
the Church: Christ, Ioh. 17. prays, That they all, that is, believers, may be
one in us: So that our union is not first among our selves, and then with the
Son, and with the Father: but it is first with the Son, and with the Father,
and then with one another in them: And Christ is the door through which we
enter into the Church, and not the Church the door, through which we enter into
Christ: For men may join themselves to Believers in the use of all outward
Ordinances, and yet never be joined to Christ, nor to that communion which
Believers have in Christ; but a man cannot be joined to Christ, but he is
joined to all Believers in the world, in the communion they have with Christ,
and with one another in him; which upon all occasions he enjoys with them,
wherever he meets with them. So that the true Church is knit up together into
one body and society, by one Faith and Spirit; the Churches of men by an
outward Covenant or Agreement only.

10. The Churches of men have humane Officers, who act in the strength of
natural or acquisite parts, who do all by the help of Study, learning, and the
like: But in the true Church, Christ and the Spirit are the only Officers, and
men only, so far, as Christ and the Spirit dwell and manifest themselves in
them: and so when they do any thing in the Church, it is not they that do it,
but Christ and his Spirit in them, and by them: And therefore says Paul, Seek
ye a proof of Christ speaking in me? which to you wards is not weak but mighty:
who ever is the instrument, Christ is the only Preacher of the New Testament;
and that which is the true Gospel, is the ministration of the Spirit; for holy
men spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit; and were first anointed with
the Spirit, before they preached: Judas who preached the word, and was not
anointed with the Spirit, proved a traitor to Christ; and who ever preach the
word without the Spirit, are the successors of Judas, and also traitors to
Christ.

11. The Churches of men have the government of them laid on men's shoulders,
whether single persons, as Pope or Archbishop; or combined, as the General
Council, or a National Assembly; but the true Church, has its government laid
only on Christ's shoulders, as the Prophet foretold, Isa. 9. Unto us a child is
born, a Son is given, and the government shall lie on his shoulders: and Zech.
6.12. He shall build the temple of the Lord, etc. and he shall sit and rule
upon his throne: for none can rule the true Church, but he that built it. For
if the Church be gathered together in Christ, as the true Church is, Christ is
always in the midst of them; and if Christ is ever present with them, his own
self, how comes it to pass that Christ may not reign immediately over them?
Wherefore the true Church, reckons it sufficient authority, that they have
Christ and his Word, for the ground of their practice; and what ever they find
in the word, they presently set upon the practice of it, and never ask leave
either of civil or ecclesiastical powers; but the Churches of men will do
nothing without the authority of the Magistrate or Assembly, though it be never
so clear in the word of God: For in their Religion they regard the authority of
men, more then the authority of God.

12. The Churches of men, are still setting themselves one above another; but
the assemblies of the true Church are all equal, having Christ and the Spirit,
equally present with them and in them: and therefore the believers of one
congregation cannot say, they have power over the believers of another
congregation, seeing all congregations have Christ and his Spirit alike among
them, and Christ has not anywhere promised, that he will be more with one,
then with another. And so Christ and the Spirit in one congregation, do not
subjected, neither are subject to Christ and the Spirit in another
congregation: as if Christ and the Spirit in several places, should be above
and under themselves. But Christ in each assembly of the faithful is their
head, and this head they dare not leave, and set up a fleshly head to
themselves, whether it consist of one or many men: seeing Antichrist does as
strongly invade Christ's headship in many, as in one man; in a Council, as in a
Pope.

Lastly, The churches of men, the gates of hell (which are sin and death) shall
certainly prevail against; but the true church of Christ, though the gates of
hell do always fight against it, yet they shall never prevail against it; as
Christ has promised, Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock I will build My church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

In these things among other, the true Church of Christ differs from the
churches of men: By which we may clearly see, that the true Church is not an
outward and visible society or corporation, neither can it be pointed out by
the finger, lo here, or lo there, seeing it is not confined to any certain
place, time, or person, but it is wholly a spiritual and invisible society (as
I have said) that is assembled in the Son and in the Father, who are the true
pale and circumference of this Church, and out of whom, no part of it is to be
found.

Now hereupon it will presently be said, if the true Church be invisible, as
you have affirmed, then, 1. How shall we know it? 2. How can we join our selves
to it?


To both which, I hope, I shall return a clear answer: And first to this
Question,

How shall we know the true Church seeing it is invisible? How the true Church
may be known, though spiritual and invisible.


I answer; Just so as Christ the head is known, is the church his body known,
and no other way; now Christ is known,

1. By the revelation of the Father; when Peter confessed Christ to be the Son
of the living God, Christ told him, that flesh and blood had not revealed it to
him, but his Father: now the members of Christ can no more be known, without
this revelation of the Father, then Christ the head of these members, seeing
the Apostle has said, that as he is, so are we in this world; so that he had
need of other eyes then the world sees withal that would discern the true
Church, and of another Revelation then any that flesh and blood can make.

2. Christ was known by the Spirits resting on him, Ioh. 1.33. And I knew him
not (said John Baptist) but he that sent me to baptize with water the same said
unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Spirit; and I saw and bare record,
that this is the Son of God. After the same manner the Church of Christ is
known, to wit, by the Spirits coming and remaining on it: So that whatever
people have received the Spirit of Christ, of what sort or condition soever
they be, they are the Church of Christ; and they that are destitute of this
Spirit, are not of the Church.

3. Christ was known by the works he did, Ioh. 10.37. If I do not the works of
my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though you believe not me, believe the
works; that ye may know, that the Father is in me, and I in him. And thus also
is the true Church known, by doing the works of Christ; seeing Christ has
said, He that believes in me, the works that I do shall he do, etc. And thus
the body of Christ, is known by its living the life of the head, which is the
life of faith and love; and the members of Christ are known, by their doing the
works of the head.

Thus then you see, that though the true Church be spiritual, and cannot be
known by our outward senses, yet we have certain tokens of her spiritual
presence; whereby we may reckon, that in this or that place, there be certain
of her members. As by a natural example; though the soul of man in it self be
spiritual and invisible, and cannot be discerned by any of our senses, yet may
we have sure tokens of its presence, by the effects and operations of the soul,
in that body wherein it dwells; as the exercise of reason, understanding,
discourse, etc. so likewise the true Church which is invisible in it self, may
yet be known by some certain signs, as by the word of faith, which sounds
nowhere but in the Church, through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; as also
by the life of Christ; and presence and operations of his Spirit, etc. And thus
you see how the Church, though it be spiritual, may be known.

Well, Quest. 2.
but how can we be joined to such a spiritual and invisible Church?

I answer, Answ.
Is not Christ a spiritual and invisible head? How we may be joined to the true
Church, though invisible.
And how can thou be joined to such a head? Sure our joining to Christ, the
head; and to the Church, his body, is of one nature; and that which joins us to
Christ, the head, will assuredly join us to the Church his body. Now through
faith and the spirit only, are we joined to this head; and through faith and
the Spirit only, are we joined to this body; and we cannot be of this
spiritual body and society, but by being taken up into one faith and spirit
with them: And so it is no more a difficult thing to be joined to the true
Church, because it is spiritual and invisible, then to be joined to Christ
himself upon the same account; that is, it is no more difficult to be joined to
a spiritual and invisible body, than to a spiritual and invisible head; and all
acknowledge Christ to be such a head, and all must acknowledge the Church to be
such a body.

If any shall say that they cannot presently agree to these things, because
they have had far different apprehensions of the Church heretofore: I desire
all such to consider, that if the true Church were only an outward and visible
society and corporation of men, that were to be governed by outward and visible
officers, according to outward and visible forms and orders, there would then
be no great mystery in the Church; for these things lie within the easy reach
of every man's reason: But now, whole Christ is a great mystery, The Church the
body, as well as Christ the head, a great mystery.
hid from ages and generations; that is, not only Christ, the Head of the
Church, but also the Church, the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.32. This is a great
mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church: And this latter mystery
(though both indeed make up one and the same mystery) of the Church, or Christ
the body, can no more be known by humane sense or reason, then the former of
Christ the head; the revelation of the Father, and the anointing of the Spirit,
being equally necessary, for the right knowledge of both. And, as Antichrist
has had his mystery of iniquity, in opposition to Christ the Head, in setting
up a visible and carnal Head, instead of the invisible and spiritual: so also,
he has had his mystery of iniquity, in opposition to the Church the body; in
erecting a visible and carnal body or Church, instead of an invisible and
spiritual: for without all peradventure, the head and the body must be suitable
each to other; and of the same kind and nature: And so, as a visible and
carnal head, the Pope, was in no measure suitable to an invisible and spiritual
body, the true Church; so likewise a visible and carnal body, or Church, made
and constituted by a mixture of Civil and Ecclesiastical laws and power, is in
no measure suitable to a spiritual and invisible head: But what a kind of Head
the true Christ is, such a kind of body or society the true Church is, The
Church just such a body as Christ is a Head.
and both are spiritual and invisible. And as the Lord in the former age, has
been pleased to reveal to the Church, the mystery of the Head, after a long
time of its obscuring and darkning, under the reign of Antichrist: so now we
wait in hope, that he will in this present age, reveal the mystery of the body,
which has been no less obscured then the former; that so, the whole mystery,
of whole Christ, may both be known and accomplished among us, according to the
riches of his glory, by the Gospel. Wherefore all the faithful are desired, as
occasion serve^, to make known, what God has taught them in this matter, to
supply, what is here spoken, weakly and imperfectly.

And thus having declared what the true Church of Christ is, Wherein the Unity
of the true Church lies.
and rectified some ancient and general mistakes touching it, I shall now
proceed to make known from the clear and evident word, the true and only bonds
of the Churches union, peace and agreement, as the Apostle has delivered them
to us, by the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.

There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling; One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One God and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all. Where note in general, that among
all these bonds of the Churches unity, the Apostle makes not so much as any
mention of UNIFORMITY; Indeed the Rhemists (being through the just judgment of
God blinded) from this very place, urge and press Uniformity (which is the very
word they use) as being the great and mighty engine, first to advance the
mystery of iniquity to its Throne, and after to preserve it there. But it will
appear anon by the Apostles Doctrine, that no Conformity or Uniformity, are any
bonds of the true Churches peace and union; seeing the Church, is such a
Kingdom, as is not preserved in its peace, by any outward forms and orders, as
the Kingdoms of the world are, but by inward principles: Wherefore I shall
proceed to speak of those spiritual bonds of the spiritual Churches unity,
which the Apostle names; and they are in number, seven; the first whereof, is,

ONE BODY.
There is one body, says Paul; The right Church of Christ is but one body
consisting of many members; The right Church is one body.
and this is not a natural or Political, but a spiritual body, even the body of
Christ. Paul in several of his Epistles, takes pleasure to set forth the unity
of the Church by this similitude; as in Romans 12.4, 5. As we have many members
in one body, and all members have not the same office; So we being many, are
one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. And again, 1 Cor.
12.12. As the body is one, and has many members; and all the members of that
one body, being many, are but one body, so also is Christ: Where he calls the
body, by the name of the head, both making up one Christ.

Now this Unity of Body, comprehends believers of all ages, This one body
comprehends Believers of all Ages.
and of all sorts.

1. Of all ages; for all believers that has been in the world heretofore, or
now are, or shall be hereafter, do all make up but one body of Christ, though
born and brought forth of God in several times and ages of the world; as in a
natural example, a child is not born all in a moment, but is brought forth by
degrees; and though one part be born, and another not yet born, this does not
hinder unity of body in the child; so the bringing forth the Church into the
world in several ages, does in no wise hinder this unity of body.

2. As this unity of body, comprehends believers of all ages, so also of all
sorts and conditions, Of all sorts.
Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, etc. all which are made one body in Christ.
Paul in Ephesians. 2.15. speaking of Jews and Gentiles, says, That Christ of these
twain (who differed as much as mankind could) he has made in himself, one new
man: For Christ melting these two, by his Spirit, which is as fire, causes each
to depart from himself, and makes both together, one new man, or body of Christ
in himself; and thus makes peace: For as long as men remain different bodies,
or men, there is no peace amongst them; but when Christ makes them one body in
himself, he makes peace between them; unity of body being a most necessary bond
of peace in the Church; as the Apostle testifies, Col. 3.15. Let the peace of
God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called, in one body.

Now from this unity of body in the true Church we may note very considerable
things, all to our present purpose.

1. That unity of body in the Church, Many things to be considered from the
Churches unity of body.
flows from unity of head: for here the members do not first conspire into an
unity of body among themselves, and after choose a head to their body; but
first, these members are united to the Head, and then to one another in, and
with the Head; and so because there is but one true head, Christ: there is but
one true body, the Church.

2. As the members of the natural body, are born such, through a natural birth,
before they do or can exercise any acts or offices suitable to such members, and
do not first exercise such offices, and then after are made such members; as
for instance, the eye does not first see, and then or therefore, is made an eye
in the body; or the ear first hear, and then or therefore is made an ear in the
body: but the eye, is first born an eye in the body, and then sees; and the ear
is born an ear, and then hears, etc. So in the spiritual body of Christ; each
Christian has his membership, merely from a new or spiritual birth, and has
his office from his membership, and not from any action or operation of his
own, before he was a member. In this spiritual, as in the natural body, the eye
is born an eye, and therefore it sees, and the foot is born a foot, and
therefore it walks, and each believer, is only that, which he is through a new
birth, and cannot be placed, in such and such an office by men; no more then
men can place, a seeing eye or walking foot in the natural body, but they must
be born there, ere they can be there. Each member in the true Church, is born
in his place and office by God, and is not placed there by man, and when the
Church perceives this grace in its members, it suffers them to exercise those
places and offices in the body, in which God has produced or brought them
forth, by his Spirit.

3. This unity of body, stands well with a difference or distinction of
members, and the difference of members, does not hinder, but help the unity of
body: for says Paul, The body is not one member, but many, and if they were
all one member, where were the body? And therefore in the body, there are
diversity of members, and each member has its several form and office; If the
whole body were an eye, where were the hearing, and if the whole were an ear,
where were seeing, smelling, walking, etc. So in the unity of Christ's body,
there are diversity of members, with diversity of gifts and offices; 1 Cor. 12.
and so one has the word of wisdom, another the word of knowledge, another the
word of faith, another the gift of healing, etc. Every member in this body
being in office, and having received the Spirit to profit withal. And so again,
Romans 12.6. Having then gifts differing, according to the grace that is given to
us (he speaks of all the members of the body, which have some or other gifts,
given to them) if it be prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion
of faith; if ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he that teaches on
teaching, or he that exhorts on exhortation, etc. So that in the true Church,
unity stands with diversity, but in the false, unity will not stand without
uniformity.

4. In this true Church, or one body of Christ, notwithstanding diversity of
members and offices, there is still an equality among them all; seeing all
alike make up one body; in which regard one member is as necessary to the body
as another, and no member can say to another, that I contribute more to the
making up of the body then thou; the most honorable member, cannot say thus to
the most mean, not the Apostles themselves to Believers among the Gentiles; for
we are the body of Christ, as well as they, and they are the body of Christ no
more then we: wherefore no member, for diversity of office, is to lift up
himself above another member, who is as necessary as it self, to the making up
the body, and also is every whit as useful in its place.

5. As in the natural body, each member is contented with its ^wn place and
office in the body: so is every member through the grace given unto it,
contented with its place and office in the spiritual body, and not one either
envies or despises another.

6. The members of the natural body, do not each live to them selves, but all
of them serve one another, and each of them serves all; as the eye sees for the
foot, and the whole body, and the hand works for the eye, and the whole body,
etc. So among believers, none lives and acts for himself only, but each
believer serves all, and all serve each one in love.

7. Members that are united into one body, have a true sympathy with one
another, both in good and evil things, 1 Cor. 12.26 And whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it.

8. Among the members of the body, there is no law of force, but only a law of
love; no member compelling another, but each member serving another by love:
and if one member be infirm, the rest help it, and do not reject it: the more
they care for it, and do not the more despise it.

And this now is the first bond of the true Churches unity, Unity of body.

Now they break this first bond of unity, Who break this bond of the Churches
Unity.
that either live out of this one body of Christ, or else live in it, but not
as members.

1. They that do content themselves, in joining to some outward and visible
society and corporation of men, though called a Church, and think that by being
knit to them in ways of outward worship, and ordinances, they live in the
unity of the Church, when as yet all this while they live out of that one body,
that is born of the Spirit, which is the only true Church, and body of Christ:
he that lives out of this spiritual body, though he live in the most excellent
society in the world, yet he breaks the unity of the Church, not living in one
body with it. And thus many break the Churches unity, that never think on it.

2. Again, they break this bond of the Churches unity that live in this one
body, but not as members; And such are they, who having got the advantage of
the Magistrates power, will needs lift themselves up above their fellow
members, and exercise authoritative, coercive, domineering power over them,
whereas the very Apostles themselves, were not Lords of the Church, but
fellow members with the faithful; living in one body, and under one head with
them, and so did all by love and persuasion, and nothing by force and violence.
Now those members that exalt themselves above their fellow and equal members,
what do they else but usurp the place of the Head? and so break in sunder the
unity of the body, which stands in the unity of the Head? He that in a single
or combined unity* sets himself up above other Believers, by giving Laws, and
by prescribing and commanding Forms and Rules to those that are every way his
equals, he advances himself as another head besides Christ; and so Anti christ
is nearer to us then we are aware; and many men that are so forward and fierce,
to make and enforce Rules and Orders, colourably to procure the Churches peace,
they are the first men that do themselves break this first bond of the Churches
Unity, to wit, Unity of Body, which makes all Believers equal members, equally
subject to one Head.

The second bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE SPIRIT.
There is one body, and one Spirit, The right Church is one Spirit.
says Paul* and through unity of Spirit, they become one body. Now as the body
of man consists of many members, and but one soul comprehends, quickens, moves,
and governs all these members, making the eye to see, the hand to work, the
foot to walk, etc. So the body of Christ, which is the Church, consisting of
many members, has yet but one and the same HOLY SPIRIT, which comprehends,
quickens, moves and governs them all, and brings them into a most near and
intimate society together, and inables each member, to its several office,
according to its place and use in the body of Christ.

And as a member, being cut off from the body, the soul does not follow it, to
cause it to live out of the unity of the body: So he that is divided from the
true body of Christ, the Spirit, does not follow him to make him live single by
himself; and so neither is the body of Christ without the Spirit, nor the
Spirit of Christ without the body.

And as the same soul in several members, acts severally, and yet is but one
and the same soul in all; so the same holy Spirit in several Believers, works
severally, as it pleases, and yet is but the same holy Spirit in them all.

So that the whole body of Christ, that is all Believers in the world have but
one and the same holy Spirit in them, and this unity of Spirit in the Church,
is one strong bond of its peace. Among mankind in general, and more nearly
among kindred, there is unity of flesh, but because there is difference of
spirit, there is much envy, hatred, strife and variance in that unity of
flesh; but now the members of the body, are not only one flesh, but one soul or
spirit too, and so there is always peace and agreement between them. And so the
true Church of Christ is not only one body, but one Spirit too, and this makes
it one indeed. For as this Spirit, is the love and connection of the Father and
the Son; so it is also our love and connection in the Father and the Son; and as
the Father and the Son live in unity of Spirit, so all Believers live the unity
of the same Spirit in them.

Now they on whom the Spirit was first given, after Christ was glorified, had
also with the Spirit the gift of tongues, the Spirit given being for the
communion of the Church, and so they spoke with the tongues of all, the Church
having through the communion of the Spirit, its society and consociation: For
he that speaks by the Spirit in the Church, where all are one Spirit in Christ;
he speaks with the tongues of all; and when a Believer hears another speak, it
is, as if he himself did speak; and when one speaks, it is, as if all spoke;
for he speaks in the unity of Spirit with them, and so speaks the same doctrine
of the Gospel and mind of Christ, which they all have equally heard and
learned from God.

Hence it is evident, that it is nothing to have the outward form of a Church,
even as our souls could wish; except there be, inwardly in that Church, the
Spirit of Christ; for it is not unity of form will ever make the Church one,
but unity of Spirit: That Church then that is destitute of the Spirit, in its
laws, orders, constitutions, forms, members, officers: what true unity can that
have, in all its uniformity?

And this is the second bond of the true Churches Unity* Unity of Spirit.

Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break ^his bond of Unity.
that live in their own spirits, and not in Christ's; for they that live in a
different spirit from the true Church, what unity can they possibly have with
it? They then that live in their own humane reason, understanding, thoughts,
council, wills, ends, they live quite and clean out of the unity of this Church,
yea, in direct enmity against it; seeing our own corrupt and earthly spirits,
are most contrary to the Holy and Heavenly Spirit of Christ, in which the
Church lives. Wherefore we may learn hence, what to judge of those men, that
cry out much for the peace of the Church, and yet themselves, neither live in,
nor are led by, the Spirit of the Church; but either by their own Spirits, or
Antichrists.

2. They that labor to join men into one body with the Church, that are not
one Spirit with it, do mar the peace of it: For as unity of Spirit in the
Church is the bond of peace, so diversity of Spirit is the breach of peace, and
therefore to preserve the peace of the Church, none are to join themselves to
this one body, that are not of this one Spirit.

3. They that being of the Church, do any thing in it by their own Spirits, and
not by Christ's, prejudice the peace of the Church; for the true Church is such
a body which is to have all its communion in the Spirit. And therefore when any
pray or prophecy, or the like, in the strength of natural parts, or humane
studies and invention only, and do not pray and prophecy in the Spirit, they
break the unity of the Church; for the faithful have communion with one
another; only so far forth as the Spirit is manifested in each.

Now if any shall say, Quest.
How may I know Christ's Spirit in these acts and duties from a man's own?

I answer, Answ.
That as by the Word of God we can judge of all other Words and Doctrines; and
as by the Faith of Christ we can judge of all other beliefs, so by the Spirit
of Christ we can judge of all other spirits; and can know where is the same
spirit, and where is a different or a contrary spirit; as the members of the
body can judge of the one-ness of Spirit that is among themselves.

The third bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE HOPE OF OUR CALLING.
Even as ye are called in one hope of your calling: The right Church have one
hope of their calling.
As all Believers are called by one calling (which is the inward and effectual
voice of God to the soul, by his Spirit through the Gospel) so they are all
called into one blessed hope of obtaining the Kingdom and glory of God. And no
one is called to this hope more then another, or has more interest or share in
it then another. Fishes that live in the Sea, though some be greater, and some
less, yet none has more interest or share in it then another; but all being
alike produced in it, enjoy it alike: and creatures that live on the earth,
though some be greater, and some less, yet all enjoy the Sun and Air alike; and
yet nearer, the members of the body, though of different quantity, form and
office, yet all have alike interest in the head and all its senses, and in the
soul and all its faculties: So all the faithful enjoy Christ alike, and in him
the Spirit and the Father; and no Believer has more interest in Christ and
God, then another.

So that all the faithful are called to the same things, and God gives not
more, nor better things to one then to another, but he gives immortality,
glory, eternal life, the Kingdom of Heaven* which is the inheritance of the
Saints, or which is all one, himself, alike to all, and makes all to sit alike
in heavenly places in Christ* and in the Father.

All the faithful then are equally called to an Unity of hope, and none can
hope for greater or better things then another. It was a very carnal thing in
the Mother of Zebedee's children, to desire of Christ, That one of her Sons
might sit at his right hand, and another at his left hand, in his Kingdom,
where all alike sit at his right hand, and none at all at his left. Indeed in
the Kingdoms of men, some have greater estates then others, and are in higher
Honor and Authority; and this breeds envy, and emulation, and strife, and
distances, etc. but in the Sons Kingdom, and in the Fathers, all that are
counted worthy to dwell therein, do alike inherit all things; All things are
yours, says Paul: And he that overcomes shall inherit all things; says John:
And the least believer has no less, and the greatest has no more; and this
causes unity and peace among them. We see what a strong bond of peace and
agreement, unity of hope is in them that travel together, that fight together,
that labor together; and so much more in them who are equally called by God to
the Kingdom of God.

And this, is the third bond, of the true Churches Unity: Unity of Hope.

Now they break this bond of the Churches Unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
that live out of this hope of the Church, whose hope is in earthly, carnal,
base things; who pretending to be Christians, yet live only in the hopes of
men, in hopes of worldly profit, honor, preferment, and the attaining and
enjoyment of the things of this life, which they, according to the eagerness of
their hopes, prosecute mightily, by all ways and means. These men, I say, break
the Unity of the Church: for what true Unity can they have with the true
Church, that live not in unity of hope with it? Seeing worldly hopes carry men
one way, and the hopes of Believers carry them another: carnal hopes make men
leave God for the world; and the hope of Saints makes them leave the world for
God: Wherefore they that differ in their hopes, which are their ends, must
needs differ in their ways and works; and so he that lives out of the hope of
the Church, lives also out of the unity of it.

The fourth bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE LORD.
The right Church has not many Lords, but One; The right Church has one Lord.
and this one and only Lord, is the Lord Jesus Christ: And so all the subjects
of this Kingdom are fellow servants to one Lord, to whom they do owe equal
obedience; and this also is a strong bond of Unity.

For when there are diverse Lords, there are diverse minds, and wills, and ends,
and so diverse laws; and these breed divisions, and dissentions, and wars among
men; but where there is but one Lord, there is also but one Law; and where
people live by one Law, under one Lord, unto whom all are equally subject, this
breeds peace and union.

Now the Lordship of the Church, is the Royal Prerogative of Christ, and no
creature must presume to arrogate this honor to himself; seeing unto the very
Angels he has not put in subjection this world to come, whereof we speak. And
for men, Christ has charged his own Apostles (who if there were any difference
among Believers, might undoubtedly challenge the pre-eminence) I say, Christ
has charged even them on this sort, Matthew. 23.10. Be not ye called Masters,
for one is your Master, even Christ; but he that is greatest among you, shall
be your servant: That is, you may and ought to be servants to one another, but
not masters: and this same doctrine the Apostle James preaches, Iam. 3.1. My
brethren (says he) be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation: it is not fit for brethren, who are equal among
themselves, to make themselves masters over one another. Christ also has
spoken again, so plainly to this matter, Math. 20. that one would wonder, that
ever the Beast, or his image, should dare to arrogate to themselves, Lordship
over the People of God, in so clear a light; Ye know (says Christ to the
twelve) that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they
that are great exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so amongst
you: he speaks it peremptorily; that some Believers should not exercise
dominion and authority over Believers; no not the greatest over the least, all
being fellow servants alike, under one Lord. Wherefore they that are puffed up
in their hearts against their fellow servants, might better think thus with
themselves, why Christ is our Lord, as well as theirs, and is as much over us
as over them; and we are not over our fellow servants, nor they under us; but
both of us are equally under Christ, and Christ is equally over us both; and so
Christ has given us the same laws, he has given them; to wit, that we should
believe in him, and love one another; and he expects the same obedience from
us, as from them; and so we are not to command one another; but are all alike
to be commanded by him. It was the evil servant, that beat his fellow servants
upon hopes of the delay of his Masters coming.

And this is the fourth bond of the true Churches Unity, Unity of Lord.

Now they break this bond, of the Churches Unity, Who break this bond of the
Churches Unity.
that either make themselves, or others, Lords over the Church, besides Christ,
and parcel out this one Kingdom of the Son to many Lords, to the great
dishonor of Christ, and disunion of the Church.

The Pope was the first that professed himself to be the general Master in the
whole Church of God: and after the Pope, a general Council took this honor to
it self; and by degrees, this last became as hard, yea, a harder taskmaster to
the Church, then the former. After, when particular Kingdoms fell off from the
Pope and his Antichristian Church, the mystery of iniquity, was not by this
means wholly dissolved; but only was contracted and brought into a less
compass; for then the Archbishop made himself general master of the Church in
each particular Kingdom, as the Pope before had done in all; and after the
Archbishop rises up a National Assembly, as the General Council after the Pope;
and each of these in their courses, usurp Lordship over the Church of Christ,
to the sad dissolution of its unity.

Most evident then it is, that during the time of the Apostasy, the Church
has been most miserably Lorded even amongst us; for the Priest he Lorded it
over the People, the Archdeacon over the Priest, the Dean over the Arch
deacon, the Bishop over the Dean, and the Archbishop over the Bishop; under
which woeful bondage the Church cried out, as Isa. 26. O Lord our God, other
Lords besides thee have had dominion over us. And is this bondage of the Church
now eased, by casting off those strange Lords? Yea, do not men rather seek to
increase it, by setting yet stranger over it, whose names are so full of
mystery, that the common people cannot understand them? for now they would have
the Classical Presbytery set over the Congregational, and the Provincial over
the Classical, and the National over the Provincial; for so it is Voted, THAT
IT IS LAWFUL AND AGREEABLE TO THE WORD OF GOD, THAT THERE BE A SUBORDINATION
OF CONGREGATIONAL, CLASSICAL, PROVINCIAL AND NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES FOR THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH: The Assemblies vote for their government.
Now here is mystery, and nothing but a certain rising up into the old power,
under a new name. And mark how they prove this subordination of Congregational,
Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies, to wit, by that Scripture, Mat.
18. where it is written, If thy brother trespass against thee, and will neither
hear thy admonition nor council, nor the admonition and council of other
brethren, TELL THE CHURCH; that is, the Congregation of the faithful. Now from
this place they prove the fore mentioned subordination of Assemblies, just as
the Pope once proved himself to be above the Emperor, to wit, because it is
written, Genesis 1. That God made two great lights, the Sun to rule by day, and
the Moon by night. Now if this might be brought about, which they design, the
Church would be so far from being eased of its strange Lords that it should
have them exceedingly multiplied; for what is a National Assembly, but an
Archbishop multiplied? and what a Provincial Assembly, but a Bishop multiplied?
And a Classical, but a Dean and Arch deacon multiplied? And thus the former
Lords being removed, they would in their stead, cause the Church to swarm with
Classical, Provincial and National Lords, and would by no means suffer Christ's
own Kingdom to return to his own Lordship and Dominion. And thus whilst they
by secular power, seek to enforce these Ecclesiastical Lords over the Church,
they absolutely break in pieces the unity of it, even whilst they bear the
simple people in hand, that they above all other men seek to preserve it:
seeing the plurality of Lords, is always the cause of Schisms and divisions in
the Church, which can never be one but under one Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The fifth bond of the true Churches Unity, is, ONE FAITH.
The true Church of God has but one Faith, The right Church has one faith.
wrought by one Spirit, apprehending the same Christ, or the same living and
eternal truth of God. So that Abraham, and Moses, and David, and all the
Prophets, and all the Apostles, and we who now believe, and all that shall
believe hereafter, all have, and do, and shall live in the same mystery of
faith; that is, Believers in all Ages, do not live their own lives, but all
live the life of Christ in their own soul and bodies, each one receiving
equally from Christ; the life of Christ, which they all live alike in him,
being one with him; as the branches live equally, the life of the Vine; and one
branch, lives it not more then another. Through faith then every Christian is
carried out of himself, and all his own things into Christ* whom he apprehends
with all his fullness, for his own; and in this faith, all Christians are equal,
and none has a better or worse faith then another.

So that in regard of faith also, there is among the true Church unity and
equality.

For all Believers have one and the same faith, of the operation of God,
wrought by the same Spirit, which raised up Christ from the dead; and that
faith which the Spirit works, neither sin, death nor the devil can possibly
prevail against; and so the faith of the operation of the Spirit, is altogether
invincible in all the faithful.

Among true Christians, some are not justified by faith, and some by works, but
all are saved through faith, without the works of the law.

Among true Christians, one Believers faith does not apprehend one word, and
another, another word; but the faith of each, and of all apprehends one and
the same word of truth and life, which is Christ himself, Yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever.

Among Believers, one does not live his own life, and another Christ's, which
indeed would make them very different and unequal, but all live Christ's life
alike, and none their own.

And thus is the whole Church knit together in Unity of Faith.

Now this unity of faith is mightily able to preserve peace among Believers,
Unity of faith preserves peace.
notwithstanding diversity either of inward gifts, or outward works.

1. Unity of Faith preserves peace, notwithstanding diversity of inward gifts,
1. Notwithstanding diversity of inward gifts.
inasmuch as we are not made members of Christ's body, through such and such
gifts, but merely through faith; and so he that has one or a less gift, is
equally a member of Christ, through his faith, with him that has another or a
greater gift; and so unity of faith, which makes us all one body in Christ, is
to keep us one, notwithstanding diversity of gifts and operations; and
diversity of gifts are in no wise to divide where there is unity of faith.
Further, among them that believe, where there is the more gift, there is only
the more labor; but there is not another, or a better Christ; and where there
is the less gift, there is the same Christ, equally enjoyed through faith: He
that had five Talents given him, brought in five that he had gained; and he
that had ten, ten: but he that brought in most Talents, had not more of Christ
then he that brought in fewer; and he that brought in fewer, had not less of
him, then he that brought in more; but each having Christ alike by faith,
brought in the exercise of his several gifts. And so unity of Faith is to keep
us one, notwithstanding diversity of inward gifts.

And secondly, it is to keep us one, notwithstanding diversity of outward
works. 2. Notwithstanding diversity of outward works.
For unity of Faith makes all believers righteous alike, though they differ in
outward work; For in Christ's Kingdom each ones righteousness is reckoned by his
faith, not by his outward works. And therefore Paul, Heb 13.7. having reckoned
up many excellent works of the Fathers, does not enjoin us to follow their
works, but their faith, saying, Whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation; seeing the unity of the Church stands in unity of faith;
and there may be unity of faith in diversity of works; for faith uses freely
any outward laws, manners, forms, works, so far as they may tend to the
mortifying of our bodies, and the edifying of our neighbors; wherein faith
also will judge for it self, and will suffer no body to judge for it: and in
all change of works, faith is the same, and changes not; and the Church still
remains one, through unity of faith, in the midst of variety, and diversity of
outward works. And therefore where men are accounted Christians for such and
such outward works sake, and this unity of faith is not taught and received,
there the gates of hell do certainly prevail.

And this is the fifth bond of the true Churches unity, Unity of Faith.

Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of the
Churches Unity.
that live out of this faith of Gods Elect, seeing it is written, That the just
shall live by faith: And therefore they that live by sense in the things of the
world, or by form in the things of God, they live out of this faith and unity
of the Church.

1. They that live by sense in the things of the world, break this bond of the
Churches unity; even such as mind, and affect, and love, and desire earthly
things, and have all their joy, comfort, sweetness, satisfaction, support and
confidence in the creature; these live out of the unity of the Church; seeing
the life of sense is clean contrary to the life of faith: Faith carrying us to
live in God out of the creature, and sense carrying us to live in the creature
out of God.

2. They that live by form in the things of God, whether it be called
Conformity, as the Prelates called it; or Uniformity, as the Rhemists do also
break this bond of the Churches unity. For to live upon this or that form of
religion, or worship, so as to think our selves good Christians therefore, and
others evil, that shall live otherwise, is to fall apparently from the faith of
the Church, seeing faith does not live upon this or that form of Religion, but
it lives on Christ only in every duty; and whatsoever form it may use for a
help to the infirmity of the flesh, yet in the use of forms it lives above
forms in Jesus Christ, and his fullness.

The sixth bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE BAPTISM.
The true Church, which is the body or flesh of Christ, has but one and the
self same Baptism, by which it is purified; which is the Baptism of the Spirit:
For the Apostle speaks here of that Baptism wherein the whole Church is one;
which is not the Baptism of the sign, which has often been altered and
changed, but the Baptism of the substance, which comprehends all believers, and
all ages, and under several and various dispensations; and was the same before
Christ's coming in the flesh, as since; believers both of the Jews and
Gentiles, of the Old and New Testament, drinking all alike into one Spirit,
though these more plentifully then those: So that, though many have wanted the
Baptism of water, yet not one member of the true Church, has wanted the
Baptism of the Spirit, from whence our true Christianity begins.

Now this Baptism of the Spirit, is the only Baptism that has power and
efficacy to make Christians one: For through the Baptism of the Spirit it is,
that the Church is made one body, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Greeks, whether
we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit: The true
Church, drinks all into one Spirit (as ye have heard) and not into many; and
through one Spirit are baptized into one body, and not into many; and believers
are never truly one, till they partake of this one Baptism.

Now this Baptism of the Spirit, as it is but one, so it is administered only
by one Christ; as John Baptist witnesses, Math. 3.11. saying, I indeed baptize
you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier then I,
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit,
and with fire: For as none can give the Son but the Father, so none can baptize
with the Spirit but the Son; for this is Christ's proper and peculiar Baptism
from the Throne of his glory, and no man's whatsoever; this he has reserved in
his own power, and has not given it into any man's power.

And this is the sixth bond of the true Churches unity: One Baptism.

Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
that content themselves only with the Baptism of water being destitute of the
Baptism of the Spirit; and so remain in the uncleanness of all their old
corruptions and lusts, and in all the filthiness and pollutions of flesh and
spirit; by reason of which they can have no true peace and agreement in heart,
and Spirit, and Nature, with those who are cleansed from these pollutions, and
are washed and justified purified and sanctified in the name, and by the Spirit
of God; For what agreement can there be between them that live in all the
corruptions of sinful men, and them that live in the renewing of the Holy
Spirit? So that it is not the washing of water but the washing of the Spirit,
that is the true ground of the true Churches unity; and they that want this
Baptism of the Spirit, though they have been baptized with water never so much,
live quite and clean out of the unity of the Church.

The seventh bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE GOD AND FATHER OF ALL,
WHO IS ABOVE ALL, AND THROUGH ALL, AND IN YOU ALL.
And this, though it be last named, yet it is the first fountain and original
of the Churches unity, even One God and Father of all. The right Church has
one God, and Father of them all.


The true Church is a Kingdom of brethren, The true Church is a Kingdom of
Brethren.
who have all, one God and Father, from whom all receive alike the divine
nature; which being one and the same in all, without any difference, makes them
all one, and equal, that are born of God. For among these, none have a better
Father then another; nor none has a more excellent nature then another, but
all receive the same nature from the same God and Father; and so are brethren
in the Lord; and this also is another strong bond of unity.

For they having all one God and Father; First, all are alike dear to him,
Where all are, 1. Alike dear to God.
because all are alike born of him, and so he loves not one more or less then
another, but comprehends all in one and the same love with Jesus Christ. And
this truly known, will restrain believers from wronging one another, when they
know, that such are every whit as dear, to God, as themselves; and that God
has as great and tender love to them, and care over them.

Secondly, All are alike near to us, 2. Alike dear to us.
because of this one God and Father; and so among true Christians there can be
no such divisions, and factions, and sidings, as among worldly people; because
one Christian is not nearer to us then another; and so we do not take part with
one against another, but all are alike near to us: and so without any respect
of persons, we embrace all that are born of God, with an equal love, and seek
the good of each one, yea, of every one as well as any one.

Now this God and Father of the Church, This one God and Father of the true
Church, is,
he farther describes that he is,

1. ABOVE ALL; 1. Above you all.
The Father is above the children, and they are not above one another, but he
is above them all, ruling and overruling them; and so they are not to live in
their own wills, which might cause difference, but in their Fathers will, which
causes unity; and thus his being above them all, keeps them in peace; Whereas
we see, where children live without due subjection, having no body above them,
as it falls out sometimes among Orphans, there they are often unquiet and
grievous to one another: But God is above all his children, and so keeps them
in due subjection to him and in quietness and love with one another, daily
composing their differences through his unity.

2. He is, THROUGH ALL; 2. Through you all.
as having communicated to all his own nature; and so according to this nature
of his, which he has communicated to all alike, and all alike possess, he is
through them all. And hereupon they all must needs be one, because God never
differs from himself, but his nature is at unity with it self in all, in whom
it dwells; and brings them all out of the differences of their natures, into the
unity of Gods.

3. He is, IN THEM ALL. 3. In them all.
God is such a Father as has his presence in all his Children; he has a
special presence in them, dwelling in them after the manner he dwelt in Christ,
though not in that measure; for God dwells in Christ and Christians otherwise
then in the rest of the creatures; to wit, by communicating his nature to them
through his union with them: And wherever God communicates his nature, there he
is present most truly, powerfully, and gloriously indeed: And such a presence
of God in his Church as this, keeps it in constant and unchangeable unity: For
how can they who have God thus dwelling in them, and who again thus dwell in
God, be at odds among themselves?

And this is the seventh bond of the true Churches unity: ONE GOD AND FATHER,
etc.

Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
who have not this one God and Father of the Church to be their God, and their
Father, who will needs call God Father, and yet are none of his children; who
will be of the Church of God, and yet are not born of God; and so live
according to their own natures, and not according to Gods; all these, I say,
break the unity of the Church, seeing we can no longer live in peace, then this
one God and Father is above us, and through us, and in us. All they then that
will needs be members of the Church through outward profession, and yet are
none of this spiritual brotherhood, as having no descent from this heavenly
Father, they break this unity of the Church, even all the children that are
only born after the flesh, and so still live according to the natures of men,
and are not born of the Spirit, to live after the nature of God.

These now are the seven bonds of the true Churches true unity and peace; There
is no other bond of the Churches unity besides these seven.
and there is no other bond of unity necessary for the Church, besides these:
For if there had, the Apostle being guided by the Spirit, would never have
omitted it. And therefore the more are they to blame, who making a great noise,
and lifting up their voice on high for unity, peace and agreement in the
Church, yet do wholly neglect these seven bonds of the true Churches unity; and
cry up one instead of them all; and that is External Uniformity. It is a wicked
thing to cry up Uniformity in the stead of this Unity.
So that now among them, one body, and one Spirit, and one hope of our calling,
and one Lord, and one Faith, and one Baptism, and one God and Father of all,
are nothing at all to the Churches unity, but their uniformity is all in all;
and whoever breaks that (which yet they have no Scripture of God to enjoin, no
nor once to name) he is the man, with them, that breaks the Churches peace; and
so, Antichrist-like, they have exalted their single uniformity above this
sevenfold unity of the Church, and so have (as much as in them lies) made the
word of the Spirit void, through their carnal (that I say no more) traditions.
For a man may break all these seven bonds of the Churches unity, and yet be a
very good member of their Church, if he only observe their uniformity; but if
he break this, he is a Schismatike and an Heretic, and not worthy to live in
their account, though he live in all the bonds of this true and spiritual unity.

Wherefore to escape these snares, let all believers know assuredly, that these
seven bonds named by the Apostle, which are all spiritual, and of God, and not
one of them carnal, or of man, are the only bonds of the true Churches true
unity; and that whoever of their own minds presume to add to these, are guilty
of adding to the word of God, themselves being but wretched creatures; and so
involve themselves in all the curses written in his Book, among which death and
hell have their place. And let us further know that whoever do combine together
to make themselves one, out of the forenamed unity, though they call
themselves the Church never so much, yet they are but sects, and schisms, and
divisions, and factions rent from the true Church of God: for such men choose
and frame to themselves some singular way of worship, form, order, etc. whereby
they think they excel other Christians, and so cause the simple and ignorant
(which are the multitude of people) to follow them; especially having
countenance of worldly authority; by which means both they and their followers,
depart from the true unity of the Church: For when, this sevenfold spiritual
unity is neglected, Christianity is torn in pieces, into as many sects as the
world and Devil please, till there be no footsteps left, either of faith or
love. So that whatever these men pretend, most certain it is, that all
confedaracies in the Church, of outward orders forms, rites, laws, ceremonies,
disciplines, which are necessarily enforced by the secular power, seduced by
the Ecclesiastical, will never hold the Church together; but all these are, and
have proved, and will prove, rather a wall of partition in the Church, then a
bond of union; and if they seem to work union, yet it is no other then the
mingling clay and iron together, which no pains nor art can perfectly compound.
For all peace and union in the Church, knit by other bonds, then are here
named, is no spiritual union, neither will it stand.

And therefore dear Christians and believers, seeing we have seven bonds of
unity, all of Gods own making, to make us one, let not diversity of forms and
rites, which are but sorry things of man's making, separate and divide us: but
seeing each of these bonds are able to make us one, how much one, should all of
them together make us?

And thus having showed from the word, how all Christians and believers are
made one by God; the next thing, I shall aim at, is, to show how they may
continue one among themselves, in reference to that communion they have with
one another, How the union which God has wrought among Believers, should be
preserved in the communion, which they have here in this world, with one
another.
whilst they sojourn in this world, flowing from the former union; that so all
darkness and mistakes, which now, even many believers are grievously inwrapped
in, may be dispelled and done away, and we may live in this pure and perfect
union with one another in God, making all outward things subservient hereunto,
and none of them prejudicial.

And to this purpose I conceive, we are, To preserve that peace among our
selves we have in Christ. 1. We must know some things otherwise then we do.
1. To know some things: And both otherwise then yet we seem, either to know or
do them. And 2. To do other things: And both otherwise then yet we seem, either
to know or do them.


1. To preserve our peace we have in Christ, we must be instructed aright, in
the matter of the Churches GOVERNMENT, because the mistake in this thing is so
great a cause of controversy and division among us at this day. For if the
true Church has its true government, without any such forms and laws and
power, as is now so earnestly contended for, there is no reason we should fall
out and divide for these things.

Now the Government of the Church, is two fold.

1. There is that Government, Particularly the Churches Government. Church
government two fold.
which God exercises immediately by himself.

And 2. That Government which he exercises mediately, Immediate, Mediate.
and by the faithful.

The first of these, that is, Gods immediate Government, Gods immediate
government two fold.
is also twofold: 1. The Government of his special providence. 1. The
government of his special providence.
2. The Government of his spiritual presence.


The first sort, of Gods immediate Government of his Church, is the Government
of his special providence, and this is a most strange, wonderful and glorious
Government. This was that Government of God, over the Church of Israel, when he
took his own Nation, out of the midst of another Nation, by temptations, signs,
wonders, by a strong hand, and a stretched out arm, and great terrors, when he
led them through the red Sea, and through the wilderness, in paths that were
not trodden, when he fed them with bread from heaven, and water out of the
Rocks, when he suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for
their sake, and through multitudes of enemies and oppositions, led them into
the Land of Canaan. Thus, God led that Church, from bondage to liberty, from
tribulation to quietness; from a sordid condition, to honor and renown; from a
strange land, to a land, of inheritance; and from slavery to a Kingdom. And
this was a glorious Government indeed; standing in Gods immediate conduct from
heaven, far above all humane councels, wisdom, stratagems, or any thing else of
man's contriving and acting: and this government of God is so far beyond all
humane apprehensions that according to this, it is said, His way is the Sea,
and his path in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known.

And is not this kind of Gods government, of the spiritual Church of the New
Testament, every whit as wonderful and glorious, as was that of the visible
Church of the Old Testament? For though the beginning of it was small and low
in the world, yet did it receive increase with the increase of God, and was
preserved, maintained and enlarged in the world, notwithstanding all the rage
and cruelties of the persecuting Heathen Emperors, for three hundred years
together; and ever since, God himself has taken the conduct of this Church,
and has carried it through difficulties, distresses, reproaches, prisons,
torments, deaths to ease liberty comfort, joy, salvation, glory, life,
happiness; and this has been Gods glorious government of the Church hitherto.
And at this present time the Church of God wants not this government, among all
the troubles, confusions, wars, and desolations of the Kingdom, but God is now
as near his true Church as ever, and supports it, and comforts it, and guides
it as a skilful Pilot, in such sort, that though the floods lift up their voice
and billows against it, yet they cannot sink it; For the Lord on high is
mightier then the mighty waves of the Sea: And so still, even at this day, the
Lord leads his flock through the midst of Wolves and Lions, yea through the
midst of Devils, in admirable and invincible safety, and gives them light in
darkness, councels in difficulties, and success in all attempts, above and
beyond, both all the power, and all the expectation of the world.

Now note here, that this kind of government of the Church, God does not
manage, according to the wisdom and thoughts, no not of his very people, but
wholly according to the council of his own will, and the thoughts of his own
heart: doing things, that they must not know yet, but must know afterward;
yea, such things as for the present seem absurd, and absolutely destructive.
And this is the usual way and order of Gods governing his Saints. That of
Luther, on Genesis 39. is worth our minding here. I (says he) have often
endeavored to prescribe certain ways and methods to God, Ego saepe certas
rations conatus sum Deo praescribere, quibus uteretur, in administratione
ecclesiae, etc. Luther. in Gen 39 tom. 6. fol. 542.
which he should use in the governing of his Church. Ah Lord (said I) I would
have this to be thus done, in this order, with this event. But God did
altogether contrary to what I did desire. Then again thought I, why, my council
is not differing from the glory of God, but it will make much for the
sanctifying of thy name, the gathering and increasing thy Kingdom, the
propagating the knowledge of thy word; and to be brief, it is a most excellent
and profitable design. But God no doubt laughed at this wisdom of mine, and
said. Go to now, I know thee to be wife and learned, but this was never my
manner, that either Peter or Martin (meaning himself) should teach, or form, or
govern, or lead me. For I am not a passive, but an active God, who use always
to lead, govern, form. Now (says he) it is very grievous, that our wisdom
should be only passive, and that we are commanded to mortify and slay it; and
therefore many, who could not endure this mortification, have fallen horribly.
And thus this kind of Gods government, is wholly according to his own wisdom
and council, and wholly without, yea contrary to ours. And thus we are in some
measure acquainted with the government of Gods special providence, over his
Church.

2. The second sort of Gods immediate Government of his Church, is the
Government of his spiritual Presence, 2 The Government of his spiritual
presence.
or Gods government within us. For the right Church, is the City of God, and
has God in the midst of it, being built and framed, and that according to
every part of it, by the Spirit, to be the habitation of God; this is the
temple of the living God, as God has said, and God is in it of a truth: And if
any would know what this Church is called, the name of it is, THE LORD IS
THERE. And so the whole guiding and ordering of this Church, depends wholly on
God, who dwells within it. For God will not dwell in his own Church, and sit
still, whilst others that are without it, shall govern it; but the government
of the right Church, lies on his shoulders, who is Immanuel, God with us, and
in us. And so this government of the Church, is one of the invisible things of
God, in the Church: Christ who fills it, governing it, by a most present and
powerful, but invisible influence; leading it into truth, by the Spirit of
truth: into patience, by the Spirit of patience; into love, by the Spirit of
love; into power, by the Spirit of power; into humility, meekness, patience,
heavenly mindedness, and into the fullness of all Righteousness, by that Spirit,
which contains all these graces in it self, and works them in all those, in
whom it dwells. In this government we hear the voice behind us, saying, This is
the way, walk in it, when we turn either to the right hand, or to the left. In
this government we have not outward laws to order us, as the Kingdoms of the
world have, but an inward law written in our hearts by the Spirit of God, as
God has said, I will write my law in their hearts, and in their inward parts;
and this law, is the word of life; for the living Church or body of Christ, can
only be governed by a living word, which is called, the law of the spirit of
life.

And according to this Government also, God guides the true Church wonderfully,
the soul not seeing the ways and councels of God, whereby he forms and fashions
the Church, according to his own mind, and good pleasure, clean contrary to
humane reason and judgment; for he brings them to mourning, to bring them to
comfort; brings them to despair, to bring them to faith; to death, to bring
them to life; yea, even to hell, to bring them to heaven: leading his chosen
people after such a manner, that nothing would follow but faith, which looks
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. And
thus, when the soul is in the midst of many fears, woes, agonies, temptations,
till it feel in good earnest, the true sorrows of death, and pains of hell, and
in this darkness sees no beam, nor the least glimmering of light; and wants all
counsel, and knows not which way to turn it self: then Christ comes and
manifests himself to the soul, and counsels, and directs, and comforts it, and
leads it into the path of life, and redeems it from all distress, subduing the
world, and the devil, and sin, and death, and hell under it; yea, and carrying
it into all the fullness of God.

The Church never wanted this twofold Government of God in any Age.
Now these two sorts of Governments, to wit, the one of his special providence,
and the other of his spiritual presence, the true Church never wanted in any
Age: And in this present Age, when the Prelatical Government has been
dissolved for several years together; Can any Christian think, that the right
Church of Christ has been without all Government? Nay, all this while it has
been governed most powerfully by his special providence, and most sweetly by
his spiritual presence: So that neither the world, nor the devil have been able
to prevail, neither against its grace nor comforts: And for an outward, formal,
visible, enforced Government, after the manner of civil Corporations, or
worldly Kingdoms; the true Church can as well want such a Government at all
times, as at any time; yea, and it is best without it, as being farthest
removed from the tyranny of men, and more immediately under the Government of
Christ, its only King and Lawgiver.

And therefore they that are so violent for an outward and visible Government
of the Church, after the manner of the Kingdoms of the World; It were to be
wished, that they that are so busy about outward orders in the Church, were
themselves acquainted with inward temptations.
I do heartily wish, that if it be the good pleasure of God, they might
sometime or other be exercised with temptations of despair, and with the sense
of the wrath of God, and everlasting burnings: For by this means their idle and
vain thoughts and speculations of governing the Church of God by humane power
and methods, would soon vanish, and they would soon give over to trouble
themselves, and the faithful, about things that have neither power in them to
free from eternal death, nor to procure eternal life.

And thus much for that twofold Government of the Church, which God himself
exercises immediately in and over it; whereof we must not be ignorant, The
mediate Government of the Church is Christ's, and not Man's.
if we desire to preserve the peace of the Church, both in our selves and
others.

Now besides this immediate Government of God, there is another sort of
Government of the Church, which Christ exercises mediately by the Church: And
this also is Christ's Government, and not man's; and men who have not known not
understood the former Government of Christ, have mistaken this also, through
the same unbelief; wherefore, they not so much as minding the former Government
of Christ, which is immediate, and by himself, have made this mediate
Government of the Church by man, to be all; And this also, I say, they have
understood most grossly and carnally, and not according to the Word, but
according to their own ignorant and seduced hearts. I shall not trouble the
Reader with their particular mis apprehensions in this matter; seeing it is far
more profitable to content our selves with the plain and evident truth, then to
enquire after variety of errors. Wherefore letting alone their darkness, I
shall only endeavor that the light of the word may shine unto us in this
matter, that herein also we may be taught of God, if it be the will of God.

This mediate Government then of Christ, in the true Church, What the mediate
Government of the Church is.
I conceive to be nothing but this, Christ's ordering all things by the
faithful, among the faithful, in reference to the communion of Saints.

Now because many Christians desire instruction and light in this matter, I
shall be willing to hold forth to them that measure of knowledge, which I have
received herein; being desirous also to learn my self of them that can teach me
better by the Word. And that I may proceed the more distinctly, I shall
propound several things, to which I shall speak in order; and they be these:

1. To whom Christ has committed, the power of ordering and managing all
things in the true Church, in reference to the communion of Saints. The
particulars contained in this mediate Government.
2. What kind of power this is which the true Church has. 3. What is the
extent of this power. 4. What is the outward instrument of it. 5. What the true
Church can do, by virtue of it. And this comprehends these particulars. 1. It
can gather it self together. 2. It can appoint its own order. 3. It can choose
its own officers; and if need be, reform them, or depose them. 4. It can call
its own councels. 5. It can judge of all Doctrines, both of its Officers and
Councels.

And all these things I reckon needful for the true Church to know, for the
preserving among themselves that peace and unity they have in Christ.

They first thing then is,

1. To whom Christ has committed the power of ordering and managing all things
in the true Church, in reference to the communion of Saints.
I Answer; He has given it to the true Church it self, as formerly described,
even to each and all the members of it: for as natural power belongs to all
natural men alike, so spiritual power (which is the true Church Power) to all
spiritual men alike. Church Power given to the whole Church alike.
Christ in a Believer is the root of true Church Power; and because Christ
dwells in all Believers alike, through unity of faith: therefore all Believers
partake alike of spiritual and supernatural power; and no one partakes of this
power more then another, any more, then he partakes of Christ, more then
another; but Christ in them all, is the self-same power of God, to do all
things that are to be done in the Kingdom of God.

And according this sense, that place in Math. 16.19. is to be understood;
Math. 16.19. explained.
where Christ says to Peter, And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The Pope
and Papal Church, under color of this place, have made great merchandise, and
have exceedingly abused, and cheated the Nations, for many hundred years
together; but the light of the Gospel has shined forth, and the days of their
traffic are at end: And yet since, others have been trucking with the world,
by their false interpretations of this place, and have thought to use it, to
their great advantage; but the day has so far dawned, that their shadows also,
are flying away.

But not to keep you longer, from the words themselves; Peter had said to
Christ, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: And Christ replied to
Peter, Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but
my Father which is heaven; and then adds, Unto thee will I give the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, etc. that is, not to Peter as an Apostle, or Minister, but
as a Believer, who had the Revelation of the Father, The Keys, given to all
tha^ have the revelation of the Father.
touching the Son: and so also, they are given equally, to each faithful
Christian, who has the same Revelation with Peter, as also to the whole
communion of Saints. And so, these Keys are not given to any particular person
or persons, consisting of flesh and blood, or employed in such or such an
Office; but that man, whoever he be, that has the Revelation of the Father, he
it is, to whom these Keys are given, and to none else: and so they are given to
each Believer in particular, and to the whole Church of Believers, in general.

But what are these Keys, about which, Quest.
there has been so great a do in the Church?

I answer, Answ.
They are not any outward Ecclesiastical power whatever, that men have devised,
to serve their own turns withal; What the Keys are.
but to pass by the many false conceits, wherewith many former and present
Writers, have and do still trouble the Church; John does tell us plainly, Ioh.
20.22. what Matthew means by the Keys of the Church. Christ (says he)
appearing to his Disciples after his Resurrection, breathing on them, said,
Receive the holy Spirit [here are the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven] and then
adds, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they
are retained; that is, when ye have received the Spirit, then you have received
the Keys, to bind and loose, to remit and retain sin, and that not according
to your wills, but wholly according to the mind, and will, and direction of the
Spirit. And so, Christ then before his ascension, gave these Keys, truly to his
Disciples, but more solemnly and fully at the day of Pentecost; when the Spirit
was given by Christ glorified: and after, the Gentiles, who by the preaching of
Peter received the Spirit, even as the Apostles did, they also received these
Keys; and so all, that have received the Spirit, have the Keys of the Kingdom
equally committed to them, and the power of binding and loosing by the
ministration of the Spirit. And so these Keys, appertain not only to greater
Congregations of Christians, but to the very least communion of Saints, as
Christ has promised, Where two or three are met together in my name, there am
I present in the midst of them: Where we see, that two or three, gathered
together in Christ's name have as much power, as Peter, and all the Apostles;
because Christ, is equally present with these, as with those. Again, Christ
has commanded, that if the offending brother, will not hear the admonition of
two or three other brethren, the offended brother should tell the Church, Mat
18.17. Now the Church, is not the Officers, but the Congregation of the
faithful, seeing men are not of the Church through any Office, but only through
faith. And by all these things it is evident, That the power of
Church Government, that is, the power of acting and ordering all things, among
the faithful, belongs to every faithful man alike, in the Congregation of the
faithful.

2. What kind of power this is, which the true Church has.
I answer in general, that it is a power suitable to the Church or Kingdom, The
true power of the true Church, is a spiritual and heavenly power.
whereof it is the power: now as the Church we speak of, is that Church, which
is born of God, and of the Spirit, and so is not at all of this world; so the
power, that is agreeable to this Church is the power of God, and his Spirit,
and not at all of this world; that is, it is not any civil or secular power; I
may add, nor any Ecclesiastical power (according to the common understanding
it) that has any place in the true Church, but merely a spiritual and heavenly
power, without any conjunction or mixture of the other; seeing Christ's power is
perfect, and every way sufficient for his own Kingdom, and Christ's Kingdom is
Gods Kingdom, as well as the Fathers: and so men may as well carry worldly and
secular power, into the Fathers Kingdom, as into the Sons, seeing this, is no
other then the Kingdom of God, though it be among men, and no other then the
Kingdom of Heaven, though it be upon earth; which has not been understood nor
considered by them, who have been so busy to being secular power into a
spiritual Kingdom, as if Christ's own power, in his own Kingdom, were either
weak or imperfect.

More particularly, this true power, of the true Church, is (as I said) Christ's
power in the faithful, which is, the self-same with Christ's power in himself;
and so,

1. It is not a power of violence, but a power of influence, even such a power
as the Head has over the members, and the soul over the body; it is not a
coercive, but a persuasive power, a power that makes men willing that are not
willing, and does not force the unwilling, against their wills.

2. This power is humble, and not proud, as worldly power is; for the power of
the world, sets men over others, but the power of the Church, sets men under
others; I (says Christ of himself) am among you as one that serves: and again,
He that will be the chief among you, let him be the servant of all.

3. This power, is for edification, and not for destruction; as Paul
acknowledges, again and again, that the power the Lord gave him, was this, and
no other power, 2 Cor. 10.8. -- 13.10
viz. not to cast men out of their native Kingdoms, but to translate them into
Gods Kingdom; not to take away their outward Liberties or Estates, but to bring
them into the Liberty and Inheritance of the Saints; to bring men to eternal
life, and not to destroy men, by temporal death.

4. This power, seeks the good of others, more then its own, yea good of
others, with the neglect of its own: So Moses was not busy, to have a most
rebellious people, blotted out of the Book of life, but rather desired, his own
name might be blotted out of that book, that (if it had been the will of God)
theirs might have been written in. And Paul desired that himself might be
separated from Christ, that his brethren and kinsmen after the flesh, might
have been united to him. And if this power seek the good of others after this
high rate, even to the neglecting, as it were, and laying aside their own
eternal good, how much more to the neglecting and laying aside their temporal
good, their worldly profits, advantages and dignities?

5. This power, does not make others suffer, to enlarge the Church, but suffers
it self, to bring this about; So Christ, as Wickliff says, through his
poverty, humility and suffering injury and death, got unto him, the children of
his Kingdom, and not by force; and the Martyrs enlarged the Church of Christ by
dying themselves, and not by causing others to die; the blood of the Martyrs,
being the seed of the Church.

6. This power, only acts to a spiritual end, salvation, and only according to
spiritual Laws; but not, to any temporal and worldly ends, according to civil
and humane laws.

And thus you see, that this true Church power, for the nature and quality of
it, both in general, and in particular, differs very much, both from the
apprehensions and practice of the most of our Ecclesiastical men.

3. What is the extent of this true Church power?
I answer; that this power extends it self full as far as the Church, but no
further: Christ's power extends it self to the whole Church, but no further.
For what has the Church to do, with those that are not of the Church? What
have we to do (says Paul) with them that are without? For Church power, which
is spiritual, is no more suitable to the world, then worldly power, which is
fleshly, is suitable to the Church. The power of the Church, which is Christ's
power, only reaches so far as Christ's Kingdom; that is, the people that are
born of God, and his Spirit. True, Church Government reaches as far as Christ's
and the Spirits effectual influence and operation, but no further; that is, to
all that are willing, but to none that are unwilling. As nothing has more
troubled the Church, then to govern it, and give it Laws after the manner of
the world, by secular force and power; so nothing has more troubled the world,
then to govern it, and give it Laws, after the manner of the Church, by the
aforesaid compulsion. Wherefore as the Government of the world is not to be
spread over the Church; so neither is the Government of the Church to be spread
over the world: but as the world and the Church are distinct things, in
themselves, so they are to be contented with their distinct Governments.

4. What is the outward instrument of this power?
The word the only outward instrument of Church power.
I answer, The word only, which is the only scepter and sword of Christ's
Kingdom, to govern his people, and subdue his enemies. Christ himself the Head
of the Church, used no other instrument to govern his people by, but the word
or the preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and declaring what he had heard
from his Father; and at his departure out of the world, he told them, That as
his Father had sent him, so did he send them, and no otherwise; that is, to do
all in the Church by the power of the word, and nothing by the power of the
world. And so, the true Church does all in it self only by the Gospel; by the
Gospel it binds and loses; by the Gospel, it remits and retains sin; by the
Gospel, it quickens to life, and wounds to death; by the Gospel, it receives
in, and casts out; by the Gospel, it works faith, renues the life, acts,
orders, guides and governs all things; and that Church that has another
scepter and sword besides the word, that has orders, and constitutions of men,
to govern by, and plurality of votes in Classical, Provincial and National
Assemblies to bind and loose by; that have their own Laws and Orders to be
their Scepter, and the Authority of the Magistrate to be their Sword in their
Kingdom; I say, if these be the ways and instruments of their Governments,
assuredly the Church they boast of, is another Church then Christ's, and is no
other in very deed, but a Kingdom of sin and darkness, and death; and when its
form of godliness, which it has put on to deceive, shall after a few years
vanish away, it shall return into the shape of its first beginning.

And therefore let us know, whatever rules, orders, or humane inventions, men
do study and devise to govern their Churches by, the true Church of Christ
shall ever be known by the scepter and sword of the only Gospel preached in
it, which is fully sufficient for the regiment of the Church; else Christ were
an imperfect Lawgiver: And all those that do affirm, that the votes,
determinations, rules and constitutions of Councels, are better for the well
ordering and governing the Church, then the pure and naked word of the Gospel,
by the ministration of the Spirit, in my judgment they speak blasphemously.

Let us now hear what Luther says to this purpose; Christians (says he) ought
to be governed by that word, and no other, Christiani eo verbo, and non alio
regi debent, quo Christiani, id est, liberi a peccatis siunt; hoc est, solo
Evangelio Dei puro, sine additionibus Conciliorum, Doctorum, Patrum, etc.
Luther. Epist. ad Carol Ducem Subaudiae tom. 7. f. 483.
whereby they are made Christians, that is, free from sin; and this is, only by
the pure Gospel of God, without the addition of Councels, Doctors, Fathers. For
what is it to govern Christians by that word, which though they keep, yet
neither do they become Christians, nor continue such? nay, they cease to be
Christians, and lose Christ. And of this sort is every word besides the Gospel:
and salvation reigns in us, not by the laws of men, but by the power of Christ.
Farther, they that are not Christians, are to be restrained other ways, then by
the traditions of men; for these are to be let alone; and as Paul says. We are
not to mingle with them. There is the secular sword, there is the Magistrate
for these, and it belongs to him to restrain those that are evil, from evil
deeds, by the power of the sword. But the Bishop, or Overseer, governs
Christians without the sword, only by the Word of God; seeing it is certain,
they are not Christians, except they be spontaneously good; and such they are
made by the force of the spirit of faith; as Paul says, Romans 8. As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, Quae ergo insanta est. spontance bonos urgere legibus
malorum? Sunt uon parum multi, leves and futiles homunciones, putantes rem
Evangelicam gladio and pugnis esse promovendam. Ibid. Reputate animo, quo
gladio ipse Papatum, etc.
they are the children of God. What madness then is it to urge them that are
willingly good, with the Laws of the evil? And yet, says he; There are not a
few light and vain men, that think that the business of the Gospel, is to be
promoted with weapons and cuffes.

And the same Luther, in his Epistle to the Christians, and Preachers of
Erphurd, says, Consider in your mind, with what sword, I subdued the Papacy,
and the whole state of religious men, who before were dreadful to all; of whom
it was said, Who shall fight with the Beast, that has power to make war with
the Saints, and to overcome them? And yet (says he) I never touched them with
so much as one of my fingers; but Christ destroyed and overthrew all that
detestable Kingdom, by discovering their iniquities, by the Spirit of his
mouth, that is, by the Word of the Gospel.

In which passages of his (besides what is spoken before) it is apparent, that
there is no other instrument of the true Churches power, but the word of the
Gospel, which is the only scepter and sword of Christ's Kingdom.

5. What the true Church can do by virtue of this power.
Now the true Church by the power it has received from Christ, can, What the
Church can do through the power it has received from Christ.


1. Gather it self together, when, and as often as it pleases. 1 It can
convene and meet together, as often as it pleases.
The company of Believers have power to gather themselves together for their
mutual good, instruction, preservation, edification, and for the avoiding or
preventing of evil, and that without the consent or authority of any
extrinsecal and foreign power whatever; else Christ were not a sufficient
founder of his Church.

And if every free Society, not subjected to tyranny, has power in it self to
congregate and come together, as convenience and necessity shall require; as is
evident in all civil Corporations, and in all Fraternities and meetings of
love; much more has the Church of Christ, which is the freest Society in the
world, power to meet together into a communion of Saints, though it be without
and against the consent and authority, of the powers of the world.

And thus the Disciples, immediately after Christ's resurrection, though the
People and Rulers were wholly set against them, did often meet together among
themselves, though privately, and Christ himself came and stood in the midst of
them, and finding them in that way of Communion, said, Peace be unto them: And
so by his own presence did both justify and encourage such meetings. And
after, the Apostles, with other Believers, to the number of an hundred and
twenty, met together in an upper room, to pray, and to choose an Apostle in the
stead of Judas, Act. 1. And at the day of Pentecost they all met again, Act. 2.
Though the Elders of the Church, and Rulers of the state, were utterly against
their meetings. And again, Act. 4. Peter and John, after the threatenings of the
Rulers and the Jews, went and met with their own company, which was now
mightily increased by the Ministry of the Gospel, and declared to them all
things that God had done by them, and the Rulers had done against them;
whereupon all of them joined together in the praise of God, for the success of
the Gospel, against the power of the world. And again, Act. 6. the Church of
its own accord met together to choose seven Deacons; And a multitude of other
instances, might be produced. By all which it appears, that the Church of
Believers has power of it self to appoint its own meetings, as convenience or
necessity shall require for the good of the Church. And therefore none are to
presume to deny the Church, this power which it has received from him, that
has all power in heaven and in earth: Neither ought the true Church to suffer
this power to be taken from them, which they have received from so good a hand;
but still to use their own Christian meetings, though the Powers of the world
never so much oppose them, as the Apostles and Believers in their time began,
and as Believers after, for 300 years continued, notwithstanding the barbarous
cruelties of the persecuting Emperors.

2. As the Church of the faithful, has power from Christ to meet together; so,
secondly, to appoint its own outward orders: 2. It can appoint its own orders.
For the Church whilst it dwells in flesh and blood, uses some external Rites,
by which it is neither sanctified in soul or body; but they are things merely
of outward Order and decency: And these things each Church or Communion of
Saints may order by it self, according to the wisdom of the Spirit; so it
observe these Rules. Rules to be observed in the Churches appointing its Orders.


1. That they do all things in love, seeing all Laws without love are tyranny;
and so whatsoever is not from, and for love, is not to be appointed; and if it
be, it is again to be abolished; seeing no Text of the Scripture it self, if it
build not up love, is rightly interpreted.

2 They are to do all things for peace, and all outward Orders in the Church,
must be to procure, and to preserve Peace among the faithful, and not to break
it. They are most unhappy and pernicious Orders, that do not only offend a few
of Christ's little ones, (which it self is a sad thing) but do grieve, disquiet
and prejudice the peace of the generality of the faithful.

3. They must do all things after the wisdom of the Spirit, and not after the
manner of the world: Nunquid Ecclesia per mundum gubernanda est, and non potius
contra morem mundi, eo quod scriptum est, nolite consormari huic seculo? Jo.
Gers. Decl. Viror. Ecclesiast,
seeing the Church is not to be ordered according to the manner of the world,
but rather against it; as the Apostle says, Be not conformed to this world.

4. They must appoint nothing as of necessity: For there is no more pestilent
doctrine in the Church, then to make those things necessary, which are not
necessary: For thus the liberty of faith is extinguished, and the consciences
of men are ensnared. We doubt not but Believers may order any outward things
for their own good, so they do not impose them necessarily on any; as if the
observing of them were righteousness, and the omission of them sin. And so the
Church after all its Orders, it is to leave indifferent things as it found
them; that is, free, and at the liberty of the faithful, to observe, or not
observe, as they shall see cause, or judge convenient. For all these kind of
things are indifferent in their own nature; and God regards no more the manner,
and form, and time, and circumstances of spiritual duties, then the manner, and
form, etc. of our eating, and drinking, and working, and marrying, and trading;
for all which, it is sufficient, if they be done in Christian wisdom and
discretion, without being tied necessarily, to a set and unchangeable form.

5. They may persuade their Orders (if they see cause) by the spirit of love
and meekness, but must not enforce them, upon pain of secular punishment, or
Church censure; as those use to do, that make themselves Lords and Tyrants in
the Church. For these outward things the Church can order, only for the
willing, but not for the unwilling. And so, if some Believers shall think good,
upon just grounds, to do otherwise in these outward things, then the generality
of the Church, yet ought the Church to be so far from censuring them, that it
is to entertain Communion with them notwithstanding any such differences. For
when Christians are knit to Christ, by faith, and do receive and walk in his
Spirit, all other things are indifferent to them, to do, or not to do; to use,
or not to use, at their own freedom And Christ only being sufficient for all
his; whatever is besides Christ, is a perishing thing; and so is so far from
being to be imposed, that in it self it is not to be valued.

Now if the Church do appoint any outward Orders, these rules it is to observe;
yea, the spiritual Church does always observe them and never made rules in it
self, upon other terms, then are here set down.

But on the contrary, the carnal Church, or Churches of men, The carnal Church
minds outward Orders more then the power of godliness.
they especially trouble themselves about these outward things; and of these
they make Laws, and Constitutions, yea, sin and righteousness; and by these
things they judge the Church, and the members of Christ: In such sort, that
they that will submit to their Rules and impositions, shall be the Church of
Christ; but they that will not, shall be reckoned Heretics and Schismatics.
And hereby they declare, that they are fallen from the power of godliness, to
the form, and from the substance of Religion, to the circumstances; inasmuch as
they advance empty forms and shadows, in the place of righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Spirit. And to these we may say, with Peter, Why tempt ye
God, in putting such a yoke upon the Disciples and Members of Christ?

And though this kind of Church, will with these things still be troubling us,
and biting us by the heel, yet in the power and prerogative of the seed of the
Woman, we will, by degrees, bruise its head, till at last we break it quite in
pieces,

Now one thing more I shall add, touching the Churches power to appoint its
own Orders, as conceiving it very necessary to be known; and that is this:

That the true Church has power to appoint these outward Orders, The Church is
to appoint Orders for its Officers, and not its Officers for it.
not for it self only, but also for its Officers (which also are part of it
self) and it is not to suffer its Officers to frame or impose such on it. For
the Church is not the Officers, but the Officers are the Churches; as Paul has
taught us, saying to the Church, All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas. And so the Officers are the Churches, and are to be ordered
by it, in these things, but are not to order it. And if the Officers of the
Church, forgetting that they are servants, shall presume by themselves to order
outward things for the Church, without the Church, as now is done; the Church
still remains above the Officers, and has power to interpret, change, or
wholly take away all those things, as it sees occasion: to wit, so far as they
are a stumbling block to the weak, and a grief to the strong, and tend to work
division among the faithful. Presumptuous Officers are they, and know not where
Christ has set them, who instead of being ordered by the Church, go about to
order it, and make themselves the Lords of the Church, being but the servants
of it.

3. The true Church has power to choose its Officers, and if there be cause, to
reform them, or depose them.
The Church has power to choose its own Officers. 3. To choose its Officers.
True indeed it is, that as in the natural, so in the spiritual body, every
member is in office; and that the Ministry of the New Testament, being the
Ministration of the Spirit, is common to all that have received the Spirit.
Wherefore, if every Believer, has received the Spirit to profit withal, and
has power and privilege, as opportunity serves, and necessity requires, to
speak the word, that the power and virtue of Christ may be declared through
them all: there is no doubt, but any Community of Christians may, by a common
consent, choose one or mo, to speak to all, in the name of all. Agreeable to
this is that of Paul, 2 Timothy 2.2. where he commands, That the office of
teaching be committed to faithful men, who are able to teach others. Where the
Apostle, contemning all superfluous ceremonies and pomp of ordaining, only
seeks, that the Ministers may be fit and able to teach, and without any more
ado, commits the Ministry of the word unto them.

More particularly in this matter we shall require after these three things, 1.
What Officers are to be chosen? 2. Out of whom they are to be chosen? And, 3.
By whom they are to be chosen?


For the first, What Officers are to be chosen? What Officers the Church is to
choose?
Paul teaches us this, saying, They must be faithful men, apt and able to teach
others. For as among natural men in the world, they that have most natural
power and abilities, are fittest to be the Officers: so among spiritual men in
the Church, they are fittest to be the Officers, that have most spiritual
power, that is, such in whom Christ and the Spirit are most manifest; and of
this, the faithful of all sorts are Judges. Wherefore no natural parts and
abilities; nor no humane learning, and degrees in the Schools, or Universities;
nor no Ecclesiastical Ordination, or Orders, are to be reckoned sufficient to
make any man a Minister, but only the teaching of God, and gifts received of
Christ, by the Spirit, for the work of the Ministry, which the faithful are
able to discern and judge of.

2 Out of whom these Officers are to be chosen? And that is, out of the flock
of Christ, and nowhere else. Indeed Antichrist bringing in humane learning,
instead of the Spirit, chose his Ministers only out of the Universities: but
the right Church chooses them out of the faithful; seeing it reckons no man
learned, and so fit to speak in the Church, but he that has heard and learned
from the Father. Moreover it is plain, that as natural power is founded on a
natural gift, and he must needs be a man, that is capable of humane power; so
supernatural power is founded on a supernatural gift, and he must needs be a
Believer, that is capable of this spiritual power: And so a man must needs
first be of the Church, ere he can have any power or office in it. Wherefore
all unbelievers and carnal men are so far from having any power in the true
Church, that they have no place in it; and are so far from being Officers, that
they are not members: For they that neither have, nor know spiritual power
themselves, how can they exercise it among others?

3. By whom they are to be chosen? 3. Who chooses them.
And that is, by the Congregation, or Community of Believers: For if every free
Society has power to choose its own Officers, much more has the true Church
this power; being (as is said) the freest Society under heaven. And so the true
Church is not to have Officers thrust over them by others, but is to choose them
its self.

If any object against this, Object.
that Paul commanded Timothy and Titus to appoint Elders; and that Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 14.23. did choose Elders in every Church with prayer and fasting.
And therefore it may seem, that the Congregation has not power to choose its
own Ministers, but that some chief Ministers must appoint other Ministers in
each Congregation.

To this I answer: Answ.
That if there were any Ministers among us, that did hold the place of the
Apostles, living and acting evidently in the virtues of Christ, and in the
knowledge and power of the Spirit, I would not doubt to allow them as much
authority, in ordaining Ministers, as Paul and Barnabas, or any of the other
Apostles had: But since it is very evident, that very few of these have the
Spirit of the LORD upon them: how should they have Authority to appoint
Ministers, who cannot themselves be reckoned Believers, or spiritual?

But secondly, If they were true Ministers, through the anointing of the
Spirit, yet could they not appoint Ministers in other Congregations, without
their own consent and approbation, but those whom the whole Church chooses, they
are to commend to God by prayer; and if they should refuse to do this, yet he
who is chosen by the Church, is sufficiently its Minister, through the Churches
choice alone. Neither did Paul, or Barnabas, or Timothy or Titus, appoint any
Minister, by their own single Authority, without the consent of the Church; as
may appear by those Scriptures, 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. where Paul says, The
Overseers, or Elders, as also the Deacons, or Ministers, should be blameless
and unreproveable. Now neither Timothy, nor Titus, knew of themselves who were
blameless in those places, but only received the Testimony of the Church,
which chose them to that office.

Further we see, Act. 6. that the Twelve Apostles together, did not, by
themselves, appoint any to a lower office, to wit, to be Deacons, without the
Churches own choice of them: But say the Twelve to the multitude of the
Disciples, Look ye out among your selves seven men of honest report, full of
the holy Spirit, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. And those
whom the Church chose, the Apostles confirmed. Wherefore if it were not lawful
for the Apostles, at their own pleasure, to appoint men to minister so much as
alms to the necessities of the poor, without the choice and consent of the
Church; much less was it lawful for them to appoint any, among Believers, to
the hard and difficult work of the Ministry, without their own choice and
approbation. By all which it is clear, that the Congregations of the faithful
have power in themselves, according to the doctrine of the Gospel, to choose
their own Ministers.

And therefore seeing the true Church of God cannot possibly be without the
word, seeing it is born, and nourished, and increased, and strengthened, and
preserved, and comforted, and perfected by it: And seeing the generality of the
Clergy of these times, are ignorant of the mystery of the Gospel, and destitute
of the Spirit; it must come to pass, that either the Church must perish for
want of the word, or else (according to what we have heard) Believers must meet
together, as they can conveniently, up and down the Kingdom; and such Meetings
must choose one or mo fit persons, from among themselves, to be their Elders in
the Lord, and then by prayer to commend them to the work of the Ministry, and
so to acknowledge them for their Pastors. And there is no doubt, but what
Believers met together in the name of Christ, do in this matter, it is done
through the working and approving of God himself. And besides this way, I see
no other, how (in this great defection of the Clergy) the Church may have the
true word of God restored to their meetings and assemblies again. Now this
thing that is so directly cross to the way and working of Antichrist, for many
Ages together, and is so opposite to Fathers, Schoolmen, Councels, Doctors,
Antiquity, Custom, and the general practice of the Kingdom, cannot be hoped to
be accomplished at once, but by degrees, as the lightnings of the Gospel shall
enlighten the world, and the Spirit shall be poured forth. And therefore in
this matter, let some begin, and the rest follow, as this practice shall be
cleared up to them from the Scriptures. For none are to be forced in this
matter (if Authority should entertain this truth) but the Spirit is to be
allowed its own liberty, to blow, when and where, and on whom he lists.
Neither ought this to trouble any, if all do not presently agree with them; it
is sufficient, if at first a few begin, whom others may follow afterward, as
God shall persuade them.

Now as the Church has power to choose its Officers; so if they prove evil, it
has power, either, 1. To reform them. Or, 2. To depose them.


1. It has power to reform them, if so be that they may be brought to
repentance and amendment: Yea, as all the evils of the Church do commonly first
flow from the Officers, so the reformation of it is first to begin with them.
And who shall reform the Officers of the Church but the Church it self? Seeing
the Officers will be sure to tolerate one another in their Vn-Gospel and Un
Christian courses, against the life of Christ, and true practice of the word,
because it is their own case. Wherefore seeing the Generality of the present
Clergy, Hi profecto non venient in concilium, ut judicentur ab ali^s, ut
emendent ea quae ipsorummet conscientia, adeoque totus mundus emendanda esse
clamat, sed omnes alios jud^care and subjugare; suam illam potentiam retinere;
and quicquid ipsorum obstat libidini conculcare, e medio tollere conabuntur.
Bullinger. Ep ad Edward sext.
are arrived to this height of evil that they will not be contented to be
servants, but will needs make themselves Lords over Christ's Flock, plotting and
striving to procure and maintain their Ecclesiastical state by secular power,
seeing they have left off to preach Christ, and the Gospel, and only preach of
state affairs, raging and railing against the most just and necessary
proceedings of the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom, as not suitable to their
designs; seeing they are daily depraving the sayings and writings of men more
righteous then themselves; yea, and dare cast a veil of their falls Expositions
over the very Scriptures, to darken them, and make them as Sackcloth to the
world, that the glory of the Father, and the mind of Christ, might (if it were
possible) be wholly obscured; yea, seeing they are become so vile, that they
had rather Christ himself, with his Gospel, and true Church, should all perish,
then that they should suffer the least diminution of their power, dignity,
riches, dominion and tyranny: What remains, but that the Societies of
Christians should meet together to reform these evil Officers? And whereas they
are now met to reform the Church, it is far more necessary, and would be far
more profitable, for the Congregations of the faithful, to meet together to
reform them, if yet they be capable of reformation; which I confess is much to
be doubted, seeing they sin against so clear a light.

2. If the Officers of the Church prove incorrigible, the Church has power to
depose them, seeing they have no indelible character, whatever the Romish
Church affirms. Wherefore as the true Church has power to choose its Ministers,
and to continue them, as long as they remain faithful in their work; so also it
has power to remove them, if they forsake the truth and power of the Gospel.
For as in civil Societies, not subjected to tyranny, Officers that prove evil,
are moveable by them that made them; so likewise the Church has power to
remove, if it see cause, this spiritual Officer; yea, the spiritual Officer is
so much the more moveable then the civil, by how much the more he is
intolerable, if he be unfaithful: for the civil Officer can only hurt in the
things of this life, but the spiritual in the things of eternal life. Wherefore
the Church has the greatest necessity to remove him, and choose another; seeing
this salt, when it has lost its savor, is good for nothing, but to be cast
upon the dunghill. And to this, worthy Mr Tindal, Tindal. Practice of Popish
Prel. p. 344.
a blessed Martyr, witnesses, saying, If they (that is, the Ministers) err from
the word, then may whosoever God moves his heart, play Paul, and correct him;
and if he will not obey the Scripture, then have his brethren Authority by the
Scripture, to put him down, and send him out of Christ's Church, among the
Heretics, which prefer their false doctrines above the true word of Christ.

4. The true Church has power to call its Councels.
If the Church of the faithful stand in need of a Council, it may call one, 4.
Can call its Councels.
if it pleases, and it has power so to do: and the Council is not to call and
appoint the Church as is now done, but the Church is to call and appoint the
Council; and the Council is to have its Authority from the Church, and not the
Church from it. And for the world, it can no more call the Councels of the
Church, then the Church can call the Councels of the world; the Councels of the
Church and the world, being as distinct, as the Church and the world themselves
are.

Now I said, The Church, if it need a Council, may call one; because the Church
of Believers now seldom needs a Council, seeing all things are so clear in the
word of God, with which the faithful are so well acquainted.

There are many other causes why the right Church may very well be without
Councels; As,

1. Because Councels, as the manner was, were either called or congregated by
the Pope, Certain reasons why the true Church may very well want a Council.
a mere Usurper in the Church; or by secular and worldly Princes, who advanced
themselves to the same power in the Church, though upon another account. And
according to their ends and designs, Councels for the most part, have been
guided and pointed.

2. Because they have, for the most part, been made up of Bishops and
Ecclesiastical men, who have only sought the interest and advantage of the
Clergy, to the prejudice of the body of Christianity; by which means they have
set up their own Kingdom and tyranny over all other Christians.

3. Because, being gathered and met, they have especially meddled with outward
rites and Ceremonies; and touching these, have made binding and coercive laws,
to the overthrow of Christian liberty, and the ensnaring and enslaving men's
consciences.

4. Because if they have meddled with Doctrine, they have rather perverted and
obscured the clear word of the Gospel, then truly explicated and unfolded it.

5. Wherein they have done well, yet this evil has always gone along with it,
that they have made People rather look to men then unto God, and that in the
very things of God; and to take divine things from them, by a humane faith,
rather then from God himself, and his immedia^e word, according to the faith of
Gods Elect: and so have given forth themselves in their opinions and
judgments, as a foundation to the Church, in the stead of Jesus Christ.

6. Because, they always determine the things of God, by the plurality of
Votes, and do not weigh but number the suffrages, and so the greater part,
still overcomes the better; and the many that are called, carry the Vote
against the few that are chosen; Whereby it comes to pass that the truth is
subdued, and error is established, by a plausible Authority.

7. Because such Councels, commonly ^ttribute to themselves, Nam quid
expectemus ex generalium Conciliorum determinationibus, docent ^os proxima
aliquot seculorum exempla, jam ind. ab an^is quandragintis aut amplius. Quo
enim crebriora cei^re concilia, tanto magis invaluit superstitio, and error in
doctrina, abusus in ritibus, superbia, luxuries, avaritia, omnisque corurptio
in docentibus, vel sacerdotibus, denique soedissima omnis disciplinae
obliteratio. Bulling. Epist ad Edvard. Sextum.
infallibility; and so, set themselves up, as a peremptory rule, by which the
whole Church, must walk, and none must presume to say to them cur ita facitis?
why do ye so? though they do never so ill. They say, they cannot be judged, by
any other Christians, because they are subject to none, bu^ all other
Christians are subject to them, and are to be judged by them: They say, they
may pronounce all other Schismatics, and Heretics, but no body must pronounce
them so, though they be so. And after they have once drunk of this cup of
abomination, what hope can there be, that any thing hereafter, should be done
right among them?

8. And lastly, because after so many Councels, things have not been the
better, but the worse in the Church, through their means: for it is not dead
laws and orders, wrtten by men, will do the true Church any good; but the
living law of God, written in their hearts, by the Spirit, as God has promised
to do, saying, I will write my law in their hearts, and put in it their inward
parts. For as the law of sin has been written in our natures, to corrupt us;
so the law of the Spirit of life, must be written also in our natures to reform
us. Wherefore, after all their Decrees, Laws, Rules, Orders etc. the Church
commonly has been so far from being bettered, that it has become more
ignorant of the Word, superstitious, formal, profane then before.

All these things being seriously considered, the Church may very well want
Councels.

Now if any shall say. Yea, but had not the Church a Council in the Apostles
times, as we see Act. 15? Object.
and did not they order and decree matters in the Church?

I answer, the Church had a Council then, Answ.
but far differing from the Councels now adays; for,

1. That Council was not called, nor packed together by secular power, but
freely met together, by the general consent of the Church of the faithful: For
by the Believers at Antioch, it was agreed, that Paul and Barnabas should go to
the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, about the matters in controversy.

2. This Council did not consist only of the Apostles and Elders, but of the
brethren also, and whole Church; and the whole Church, as well as the Apostles
and Elders, did agree and order what was done in that matter.

3. That free Council, consisting of the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, did not
determine any thing by their mere power and authority, but debated the business
by the word and by the word concluded it: And so it was not the Authority of
the Council did any thing, but the Authority of the Word, that did all in that
matter; as you may see in the fore named place. And in these regards that
Council differs from ours.

Rules to be observed in calling a Council.
Now if notwithstanding all this, the Church upon some occasions, desire a
Council (for herein (as in all other outward things) it is free) it must mind
these things.

1. That it has power it self to call one, as the Primitive Church had. And
what men can object against this, of worldly Princes calling them; let them not
say, what they did, but what they ought to have done. Ex ejusmodi coetu. i.e.
fidelium, delig^ndi erunt h^mines ad concilium; hoc v^ro esset pulcherrimum
conciliu^, q^od ab ipso Spiritu Sancto regeretur.

In hanc sententiam and Lyra scriptum reliquit, Ecclesiam no^ aestimandam esse
ex summis illis, aut spiritualibus ordinibus, sed ex vere credentibus. Luth.
Libel. de notis verae Eccles. tom. 7. f. 152.




2. As the Church it self is to choose its Council, so it is to choose it, out of
its self; For the Councels of the Church are to be chosen out of the Church,
and not of the world; out of the faithful, and not out of unbelievers. For the
natural man that neither knows nor savours the things that be of God, can be of
no use here; but he must be able to know the word of God from the doctrines of
men and to separate the precious from the vile, that is employed in this
matter. And so the natural, carnal and litteral man must be declined here,
where the things are wholly spiritual and divine; and the spiritual man only,
who speaks spiritual things by a spiritual rule, must be heard and regarded;
and so a man must first be of the Church, ere he can be of the Council.

3. As the Church is to choose men out of it self, for its Council, so likewise
it is to choose brethren, as well as Elders; and Ecclesiastical men are not to
meddle alone in the matters of the Church, and to thrust out other Christians,
as if they were necessarily to be concluded in, and by them.

4. In choosing Elders and Brethren to this work, great care is to be had, that
they choose not men of worldly power or place, lest worldly power, and
Authority, and honor, might seem to bear sway in the things of the Kingdom of
God: but they are rather to make choice of men destitute of these things, that
it may appear, whatever they do, is done only by the clear evidence of the
word, and influence of the spirit, and so only by the law of love, all secular
power and force being excluded.

5. The Church has power to judge of all Doctrines, and that both of its
Officers and Councels.
The Clergy and Ecclesiastical men have been wont to challenge to themselves
the knowledge and judgment of Doctrines, and have excluded ordinary Christians
from it; whereas in truth, the judgment of doctrine belongs to the people,
and not to the Ministers. And all Christ's Sheep have power to judge of the
doctrine the Ministers teach, whether it be Christ's Voice, or a Strangers, John
10. and Christ commanded them to take heed of false Prophets, which come to
them in sheeps clothing, being inwardly ravening wolves, Mat. 7. And the
Apostle commands them, to try the spirits, whether they be of God: and has
said, Let one or two speak, and the rest judge, 1 Cor. 14. etc. by which, with
many other Scriptures it is evident, That Ministers are not to judge of
doctrine for the People; but the People are to judge of the doctrine of the
Ministers, and according as they find it to be of God, or not of God, to
receive it, or reject it. For every one is to be saved by his own faith, and
not by another man's; and so is to take heed how he hear the things of faith at
his own peril; and he is not (if he will be wise to salvation) to take up
things on trust, in a matter that concerns, either his eternal life, or eternal
death.

2. As the Church is to judge of the Doctrine of its Officers, so also of its
Councels: For the Church judges of them, and their doctrine also by the word,
and does not take all, that they determine for truth, to be certain and
unquestionable: Yea, in the first Council of the Apostles, Act. 15. Other
Churches and Christians had both liberty and power, to try both the doctrine
and Spirit of the very Apostles, in that matter, and were not to swallow it
down whole, as they say, because the Apostles had determined it, and they were
holy men; but the faithful were to judge, whether or no, they had judged
according to the word, and if not, they might have resisted them, as Paul did
Peter. And Paul gives this liberty to Christians; yea, we have it from Christ
himself, whether Paul had allowed it or no, to try the very Apostles
themselves, and the very Angels of Heaven, whether they bring the right word or
no: for Christ, commanded the Apostles, to teach the Nations, to observe and
do, whatsoever he had commanded them, and nothing else; and says Paul, If I,
or an Angel from heaven, bring you any other doctrine, let him be accursed. So
that the Church has power, to examine, try and judge, the doctrine of the
Apostles and Angels, much more of other men, who have not received such an
anointing, neither do live in so clear a light of God.

And thus I have declared, the things, which seemed to me both convenient and
necessary, for the true Church to know, for the preserving of that peace among
themselves, which they have in Christ.

Now as the judgment of the Church, is to be rectified in these things; so the
practice of it, is to be rectified, in other things, for the preserving it in
peace.

The things wherein the practice of the Church, is to be rectified in the Way
of Peace, are either, 1. More absolute and general. Or, 2. More special and
occasional, in case of difference among the faithful.


Among the things that are more absolute and general, which are to be done, to
procure and preserve the peace of the Church: these nine things, that follow,
have not the least place.

1. Practical Rule for Peace.
1. The true Church is to preserve it self distinct from the world: The Church
is to keep it self distinct from the world.
and is neither to mingle it self with the world, nor to suffer the world to
mingle it self with it. For if the Church and the world, be mingled together in
one Society, the same common Laws, will no more agree to them, who are of such
differrent natures, principles and ends, then the same common Laws, will agree,
to light and darkness, life and death, sin and righteousness, flesh and spirit.

For the true Church are a spiritual people, being born of God and so they
worship God in the Spirit, according to the law of the Spirit of life, that was
in Christ, and is in them: but the carnal Church, is of the world, and only
savours the world, and so will have a worldly Religion, Forms, Orders,
Government, and all worldly as it self is. Now whilst these two are mingled
together, what peace can there be? for what fellowship has righteousnesness
with unrighteousness, and light with darkness, and Christ with the Devil? And
so what agreement have Believers with unbelievers, or the true Church with the
world? Wherefore it is not the way of Peace, to mingle the Church and the
world, but to separate them, and to keep them distinct; that those that are of
one nature and spirit, may be of one communion among themselves: and this way
of Peace God himself teaches us by Paul, 2 Cor. 6.17. saying Come out from
among them my people, and be ye separate: for to separate the Church from the
world in its communion of Saints, is the only way to preserve peace in both;
seeing the Church will best agree with it self, and the world with it self.

The second Rule.
2. The Church being thus distinct from the world, is to be contended with its
own power, for its own affairs; The true Church is to be contented with its own
power, for its own affairs.
and is not to introduce, or entertain any power in it, that is not of it.
Wherefore, the true Church, being such a Kingdom as is not of this world,
stands in need of no worldly power; and being a spiritual and heavenly Kingdom,
is only to have and exercise a spiritual and heavenly power; seeing this power
alone, and by it self is able to accomplish the whole good pleasure of God in
the Church, and to work all the works in it, that God has to do.

And so, it is strongly to be suspected, that those men, that dare not commit
the success of their business to Christ's power alone, but will call in secular
power, over and above, to help them: I say, it is more then probable, that they
have underneath some secular end, seeing Christ's power alone is fully
sufficient to do all things that are necessary and profitable for his Kingdom.

Besides, this worldly power never works peace, but always disturbances in the
Church, putting all things out of Gods way and method, into man's, and working
man's will rather then Gods; yea, man's will against Gods; and it is wholly
contrary to the very nature of the Church; and how then can it agree with it in
any thing?

Object.
If any shall reply, that worldly power does well in the Church, because it
keeps down many profane persons that would not be kept down by the word.

I answer; Answ.
That so far as such profane ones are governed by worldly power, they are of
the world, and not of the Church; and worldly power had better govern them in
the world, its own proper sphere, then in the Church, which is beyond their
line; especially seeing the Church has power enough in it self, to govern
those that are of it; and they that will not be governed willingly in the
Church, as Christians, let them be governed against their wills, in the
Commonwealth, as men. For the Government of the Church is over men, as
Christians, as spiritual; but the government of the state is over men, as men,
as natural and carnal. The first of these governments belongs to Christ, and
the latter to the Magistrate; And if the Magistrate be faithful in his Office
and headship, there is no doubt to be made of Christ's faithfulness in his. But
now, if the Magistrate will not content himself with his own Kingdom and power,
but will needs intrude on Christ's also; and not reckoning it enough to govern
men, as men by his worldly power, will also by the same power, be tampering
with the very Church: this both renders him troublesome to the faithful, and
the faithful troublesome to him: Him troublesome to the faithful, in that he
uses a power over them, that is neither suitable to them, nor their affairs; and
them troublesome to him, because in Gods Kingdom, as they hear not the voice,
so neither do they obey the command of a stranger

The Pope he arrogates both swords to himself, when neither belongs to him, and
therefore in due time shall perish by both, and if the Magistrate shall assume
to himself power of both Kingdoms, Christ's, and the Worlds, when of right but
one belongs to him, to wit, the Worlds, and not Christ's; it will be very
dangerous, lest by encroaching on Christ's Kingdom, he lose his own.

Let the Magistrate therefore use his power in the state, and let him suffer
Christ to use his power in the Church, seeing his presence is always there;
and then there will be quietness in both, but else in neither; seeing Christ
will as assuredly trouble the Magistrates Kingdom, as the Magistrate trouble
his.

The third Rule, is,
Not to bring or force men into the Church, against their wills. The true
Church is not to force men unto it against their wills.
The Kingdoms of the world are unquiet, because many that are unwilling, are
under those Regiments; but Christ's Kingdom is therefore quiet, because all the
people in it are willing; and none of them are forced in, but all are persuaded
in, as it is written, God persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem: That
is, the Gentiles were to be persuaded, and not forced into the Church. And so
Christ commanded his Disciples to go and teach all Nations, and not to offer
them outward violence; and to persuade peace, but not to threaten or enforce
it. Ea est Ecclesiae natura, ut nusquam magis requiratur interna persuasio. Nam
and ad fidem nemo co gi potest invitus, and Deus toto se cord vult amari, and
denique hypocrisis peccatum est imprimis Deo exosum. Quo fit, ut toto Ecclesiae
gubernandae ratio, hunc scopum habere d^beat, ut in Ecclesiam vocentur plurimi
persuasi, and in Ecclesia continc^ntur non alia ratione. Itaque quo magis ea
ratio aberit ab imperio, hoc magis est apta, reg^nde, augendae and confirmande
Ecclesiae Chamter. de Oecumen. Pontific.
For such is the nature of the Church, that inward persuasion is required
nowhere, more then here. For none may be compelled to the faith against their
wills, and God will be loved with the whole heart; and also hypocrisy is a sin
chiefly hated of God. Whereby it comes to pass, that the whole manner of
governing the Church must have this scope, that they that are persuaded, may be
first called unto it, and after kept in it, upon the same account. And so, the
more this manner shall be free from dominion, so much the more fit it is to
govern, increase and confirm the Church. And this way only was used as long as
the Apostles lived, and those that succeeded them in the same Spirit; and that
unquestionably for 300 years after: Yea, and when the Church came to be
countenanced by worldly authority, yet this same freedom still was allowed; of
which I shall produce a few testimonies.

I read, that Constantine the Emperor would have no man enforced to be of one
religion more then another.

Also the same Constantine, in his Epistle to his Subjects inhabiting the East,
says, Let no man be grievous one to another: Secundum hanc itaque nostram
voluntatem, sano ac rectissimo judicio decrevimus, nemini prorsus d^negandam
esse potestatem, christianam observantiam v^l religionem eligendi ac sequend^;
sed unicuique dandam esse hanc facultatem, ut animum suum illi religioni
addicat, quam ipse sibi competere putat, quo nobis Deus consuctam in omnibus
diligentiam and probitatem praestet. Eusebius l. 10. c. 5. Fox. vol. 1. p. 131.
but what every man thinks BEST, that let him DO. For such as are wise, ought
thoroughly to be persuaded, that they only mean to live holily, as they should
do, whom the Spirit of God moves to take their delight and recreation in
reading his holy will; And if others wilfully will go out of the way, cleaving
to the Synagogues of false Doctrine, they may at their own peril. As for us,
we have the worthy House of Congregation of Gods verity, which he, according to
his own goodness and nature, has given us. And this also we wish to them, that
with like participation and common content, they may feel, with us, the same
delectation of mind. And after, Let no man hurt, or be prejudicial to his
neighbor, in that wherein he thinks himself to have done well. If by that
which any man knows, or has experience of, he thinks he may profit his
neighbor, let him do the same; if not, let him give over, and remit it till
another time. For there is a great diversity between the willing and voluntary
embracing of Religion, and that whereunto a man is forced and constrained.

I read also that Ethelbert King of Kent, Being converted to the faith, Fox
vol. 1. p. 150.
ann. 586. after his conversion, innumerable others daily did come in, and were
converted to the faith of Christ, whom the King did especially embrace, but
COMPELLED NONE; for so he had learned, THAT THE FAITH AND SERVICE OF CHRIST
OUGHT TO BE VOLUNTARY, AND NOT COACTED.

The Church then, at first, consisted only of the willing, and such as were
persuaded unto it by the word, till Antichrist began to prevail, and then they
fell from persuading to forcing; and they no longer went about to make men
willing, by the word, but to get power from the Kings of the earth, to force
them against their wills. And this main piece of the mystery of iniquity, was
perfectly brought forth by Boniface the third, who was the first that used
these words in the Church, Volumus, mandamus, statuimus, ac praecipimus, We
will, we require, we appoint, we command: which is not the voice of the true
Ministers of Christ, but the true voice of thieves and murderers. And from that
time the peace of the Church decayed apace, when there were more unwilling
forced unto it, then willing persuaded. And true peace will never be restored
to it again, till men shall abandon the power of force, and only use the
persuasion of the word, that the Church may consist only of a willing people.

The fourth Rule, is
To make void the distinction of Clergy and Laity among Christians; The true
Church has no distinction of Clergy and Laity.
For the Clergy or Ecclesiastical men have all along, under the reign of
Antichrist, distinguished themselves from other Christians, whom they called
the Laity; and have made up a distinct or several Kingdom among themselves; and
separated themselves from the Lay in all things; and called themselves by the
name of the Church; and reckoned other Christians but as common and unclean, in
respect of themselves. Whereas in the true Church of Christ there are no
distinctions, nor sects, nor difference of persons; no Clergy, or Laity; no
Ecclesiastical, or Temporal; but they are all, as Peter describes them, 1 Pet.
2.9. A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar
people, to show forth the virtues of him that called them out of darkness into
his marvelous light. And so all Christians, through the Baptism of the Spirit,
are made Priests alike unto God; and every one has right and power alike, to
speak the word; and so there is among them no Clergy or Laity, but the
Ministers are such who are chosen by Christians, from among themselves, to
speak the word to all, in the name and right of all; and they have no right nor
authority at all to this office, but by the consent of the Church. And so
Presbyters and Bishops, or (which is all one) Elders and Overseers in the
Church, differ nothing from other Christians, but only in the office of the
word, which is committed to them by the Church; as an Alderman, or Common
Council man in the City differs nothing from the rest of the Citizens, but only
in their Office, which they have not of themselves neither, but by the Cities
choice; or as the Speaker in the House of Commons, differs nothing from the
rest of the Commons, but only in his office which he has also by the choice of
the House; and thus, and no otherwise, does a Minster differ from other
Christians, as Paul says, Let a man so esteem of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ and dispensers of the mysteries of God.

But Antichrist, he has cast out the simplicity of Christian people, and
brought Sects into the Church, dividing it into Clergy and Laity: and this
distinction, they have made visible by their garments, disguising their Clergy
in their habit from other Christians, that they might appear holier then they,
and of another order from them. And this distinction, has proved a Seminary of
implacable discord, and heart-burning in the Church; For hereupon, the Clergy
have prefer'^ themselves above others Christians, and have exercised authority
and coercive power and domination, and very tyranny over them, and have made
themselves their Lords, and given them Laws, rules, forms, orders, after their
own minds, and agreeable to their own advantages, and would not so much as
suffer them to judge, whether they were agreeable to the word of God or no; as
if other Christians were their Subjects, Slaves, Vassals, yea very dogs. And
hence again, the Laity (as they called them) have envied and maligned them, and
hated and opposed them, and as they could get power, have been subduing them,
and have looked upon them, as men of a d^fferent sect and interest from
themselves, whose prosperity, was their ruin, and whose power, was their
inslaving: and all this was to the making void Christian brotherhood and
communion. Wherefore the right Church, to preserve in it the peace of Christ,
must admit of no such distinction of Laity and Clergy, but all Christians must
equally remain it it, Kings, Priests, and Prophets unto God.

The fifth Rule is.
To keep equality in the Curch, and that both between Christians and Churches:
for this also is an excellent way to preserve peace.

1. To keep equality between Christians. For though according to our first
Nativity, whereby we are born of men, there is great inequality, some being
born high, some low, some honorable, some mean, some Kings, some Subjects etc.
yet according to our new or second birth, whereby we are born of God, there is
exact equality; for here are none better or worse, higher or lower, but all
have the same faith, hope, love; the same God, Christ, Spirit, the same divine
nature, the same precious promises; the same incorruptible Crown, and
inheritance of Saints in light. And therefore says Paul, Gal. 3.28.
speaking of this true Church, There is neither Jew nor Greek. nor bond nor
free, nor male, nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Indeed in the
world, and before men (I say again) there is distinction of persons, and
inequality; but in Christ's Kingdom, and before God, all Believers aae equal:
and this equality preserves peace. But when in this Kingdom, some will be
advancing themselves above others, like Diotrephes, that would have the
pre-eminence; and some will be striving to sit at the right hand, and some at
the left, whilst they leave others to sit at the footstool; this is that which
breeds difference among the very Disciples, who envied Zebedees children for
such a desire. And therefore Christ, to preserve peace, forbad Lordship in his
Church, and commanded service and tells them, that the nature of his Kingdom,
is not to place men one over another, but one under another, and that the
greatest must be the least; the greatest in the way of the spirit, must be the
least in the way of the flesh.

2. As equality among Christians is to be kept for the preserving of peace, so
also among Churches: For all Churches are equal, Equality among Churches
as well as all Christians; and there is no Church can set it self before, or
above another; all being sisters of one Mother; beams, of one Sun; branches of
one Vine; streams* of one Fountain; members, of one Body; branches of one
golden Candlestick; and so all equal in all things. Wherefore there may, and
ought to be a consociation of Churches, but no subordination, which makes void
at once, both equality and unity. And so that Church, or those Churches that
will set themselves above other Churches that are their equals; as the
Classical above the Congregational, etc. they are the breakers of Christian
peace and unity; and the unskilful vote of the Assembly for the subordination
of Churches, was not a way to make peace, but to mar peace in the Church of God.

Moreover, no Church can be subjected to another, Christ the Head, is subjected
in the subjection of any true Church that is of his body.
but Christ who is present in it, and is King and Lawgiver, is subjected too;
which no true Church will either require or allow. For if the true Church will
not subject the Word of God, which they have received, to any men or Angels,
but will judge all by it, and will suffer none to judge it; much less will they
subject Christ the Lord of all, to any other power or authority; for so they
should dishonor and disanul their Head. Where two or three are met in Christ's
name, Christ himself is among them, and the Head of them; and so they can
submit to no body else, seeing Christ has made no greater, nor surer promise
of his presence, to any body then to them.

The sixth Rule, is,
To keep the Officers of the Church in subordination to the whole Church or
community; and not to suffer them to get head over it: The true Church keeps
its Officers in subordination to it self.
seeing the very nature of ruling the Church, is not Dominion, but Service. We
read, Act. 11.2. that when Peter had preached in the house of Cornelius,
Regendae Ecclesia ratio, n^n imperium est, sed (...).
a Gentile or Heathen, the Church of the circumcision, to whom Peter was
Minister, contended with him, that he went in to men uncircumcised, and did
eat with them (for as yet they knew not that the Gentiles were to be called)
And Peter wa^ fain to give an account to them of the whole matter, and to show
them, that he was warned of God in a Vision, to do so, etc. And this was a
sign, that Peter was a servant of the Church, and in subordination to it, and
no Lord over it. And after, verse. 22. when the Church at Jerusalem heard, that
the Grecians at Antioch had received the Gospel, they sent Barnabas to Antioch
to forward and perfect the Work. And also the Church at Antioch sent forth Paul
and Barnabas, to the work of the Ministry in diverse Towns and Countries. All
which are an evident sign, that the Church was above the Officers, and not the
Officers above the Church.

Now this also will preserve peace in the Church, to keep the Officers in their
proper place, and to let them remain as servants in the Church, which Christ
has commanded; and not to let them grow up to be Lords and Masters, which
Christ (knowing the evil and inconvenience thereof) has forbidden. For if the
Officers get above the Church, though they be never so good, they are masterful
and troublesome; and though never so bad, yet will they get a party in the
Church for themseves, and so work disturbance; but if the Church remain as it
ought, above the Officers, it quits them when they grow evil and unruly, and
chooses better in their stead, and so preserves union. Whereas fixed and
unmovable Officers, when they do degenerate, are the causes of all
disturbances and confusions, both in Church and State.

The seventh Rule, is,
For all true Christians and Congregations to take Christ alike for their Head,
All true Christians and Churches take Christ alike for their Head.
and not to set up visible heads, or Ringleaders to themselves, of men; no not
of the best men. For whilst some said, we are of Paul; others we of Apollos;
others, we of Cephas; they were all in this matter carnal, and divided, both
from Christ, and among themselves; whilst several, set up several heads, whom
they especially owned, and after whom they were called. Whereas each that
believed, by the Ministry of Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, were through the same
faith and spirit with them, as near to Christ as themselves were; and so were
not to set up a fellow member, as a Head, to the division of the body. I say,
each believer, and Communion of Saints has Christ equally for their Head, and
so ought not to set up, any outward or visible Head for them to join to; for
this is to rend the body in pieces, and to work great division and distraction
among the faithful.

And therefore I conceive it is a mistake among some brethren, to call the
Congregations of Christ, by the names of men, though godly and eminent; and to
say, Mr. such an ones Church, or Mr. such an ones Church; and so to put the
Church under several Heads, which works distinction and division; whereas they
should rather say, the Church of Christ, in such or such a place; it being,
wherever it is, one Church, under one Head and Governor, Jesus Christ.

And therefore let us know, that it is part of the mystery of iniquity for the
Church, or faithful, to have one or more visible Head^ to go to, not being
contented with Christ alone. And though this has been, and will be, the
practice of the carnal Church: yet the spiritual Church and people, do only
own, and have recourse to Christ, their true and spiritual Head. And so they
all, living as one body, and members one of another, under one only Head, live
all in invincible peace and unity; whereas difference of outward Heads and
Ringleaders, always breeds difference and divisions among Christians.

The eighth Rule, is,
For the true Church, to keep out all error in Doctrine; The true Church keeps
out all error in Doctrine.
seeing this breeds, not only division, but confusion and ruin also in the
Church. Wherefore the Congregations of Christ must be the more careful and
watchful in this matter. When some false Apostles taught at Antioch, that,
Except Christians were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be
saved; which was a most dangerous error against Christ, and the Gospel; the
whole Church, first, at Antioch, and presently after, at Jerusalem, met
together to keep it out: which accordingly, through God, they did. So that what
ever Doctrines are evidently against the Word of truth, and Gospel of our
salvation, the Church is to take care to keep them out, as it loves its own
peace and unity.

Now if any say, By what means may the Church be able to keep out error? Quest.


I Answer, Answ.
It may certainly keep out. Error by these means. The ways whereby the true
Church keeps out Error.


1. Let the Church suffer none to teach among them, that are not themselves
taught of God; though they have never so great natural parts, and never so much
humane learning. For, when they are the Teachers that are taught of God, they
will only teach the truth, which they have heard and learned from God: And the
line of every man's teaching must extend no further. But when they teach, that
are not so taught, they will in many things vary from the truth, as it is in
Jesus; yea, and under a form of sound doctrine, will give forth an unsound and
false sense, to the deceiving of many that are weak and simple; and so under
pretense of Christ, will utter the voice of a stranger, and endanger the
mis-leading of some sheep for a time.

2 Let the faithful examine every thing that is taught by the Word of God, and
not receive doctrines upon trust, from their Teachers, who, through the
reputation of their learning and holiness, may easily lead them unawares into
error. And therefore let the Church compare the present Doctrine, Preached and
Printed, and generally received, with the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, which without doubt is sure and certain, seeing those holy men of
God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit: And whatever Doctrine shall
be found contrary to, or different from, that Doctrine, let them reject it as
reprobate silver; seeing the Church is to be built upon no other foundation of
Doctrine, then that of the Prophets and Apostles. And though, through Gods
especial goodness, the Doctrine of the Gospel be again revived among us, at
this present time, yet ought we not to sit down content with the present state
of things; but to search and see if our present Doctrine do not yet err from
the Primitive purity and brightness of the Gospel, and that in many
considerable points; and whether some, or many corruptions do not yet remain
among us, to be purged out, by the light and truth, of the Apostles Doctrine.

Wherefore to conclude this thing, let us know, that the Church cannot possibly
keep out Error, longer then it precisely keeps it self to the bare and naked
Word of God, and tries all Doctrines of their Teachers by it.

3. The Church, that it may be able to keep out Errors, must desire of God, the
Spirit which he has promised; that this Spirit of Truth may lead them into the
true and spiritual knowledge of the word, and understanding of the mind of
Christ. For no man can make any right Judgment of the word he hears of reads,
without the teaching of the Spirit. And by this Anointing, as we shall be
certainly taught, which is Truth: so also we shall discern which is Error, and
that by so clear and true a light, that we shall not mistake. Wherefore
Christians must take heed, that they do not think, with carnal people, that the
ability to judge of divine truths and humane and Antichristian errors, depends
upon humane learning, Arts and Sciences; for thus it will come to pass, that
they judging themselves unable to judge of matters of Religion, will wholly
leave the judgment of them, to those whom they conceive after this manner
learned: whereby they leave open a wide door through which the Teachers may
bring in all sorts of Errors upon them. But Believers must know, that the gift
of the Spirit only, without all humane learning, is sufficient to teach us
perfectly, which is Truth, and which Error; and to make us able, to judge of
all doctrines of men and Angels; and that all humane learning in the world,
without the Spirit, is not able to do this. And so a poor, plain, Country man,
by the Spirit which he has received, is better able to judge of Truth and
Error, touching the things of God, then the greatest Philosopher, Scholar, or
Doctor in the world, that is destitute of it.

4 Another notable means to keep Error out of the Church, is to restore in it,
that most ancient Gospel Ordinance of Prophesying, which, how much soever, it
have been out of use during the reign of Antichrist, yet is no other then the
very commandment of the Lord, as Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 14 31. where he says,
When the whole Church is met together, ye may all prophecy one by one, that
all may learn, and all may be comforted; and adds verse. 37. If any man think
himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things I
write unto you, are the commandments of the Lord Wherefore brethren labor that
ye may prophecy. So that prophesying in the Church, is Gods own Commandment,
as every Prophet and spiritual man must acknowledge.

Now this divine Ordinance of prophesying, is three ways helpful, to keep out
Error.

1. For first, When one man only speaks in the Church, and no man is suffered
to speak besides him, as he is very subject to be puffed up, and to conceit,
that wisdom only dwells with him; so he i^ more ready to vent the thoughts of
his own heart, and to speak the Dreams and Visions of his own head. But when he
knows the Word of God is not come to him only, but to others also, and that
they have wisdom and spirit, to speak in the Church, as-well as he, this will
both keep down his pride, and make him careful what he speaks, when he knows,
there are those present in the Congregation, that are able to reprove his
darkness by light. And this prophesying, is a strong bit and bridle in the jaws
of Error, that it cannot run that race in the Church, it does desire.

2. When one man only speaks, and the doctrine he preaches proves to be
erroneous, as it is ordinarily in the common Ministry of the Kingdom, it comes
to pass, that Error is not only preached, but also goes away uncontrouled, and
no way is left for the restraining Error proportionable to that of propagating
it; no body being permitted to speak, to keep the people from the poison of it.
And thus whilst the liberty of public speaking is permitted only to one man
in a Congregation, and to onesort of men in the Kingdom, any Error may suddenly
be spread over the whole Kingdom (as we see by daily experience) without any
sufficient and proportionable remedy to prevent it.

But now, when the right or power of prophesying, is allowed to the whole
Church, the Minister can no sooner vent any Error, but there is some believer,
or other, whose heart God shall move, ready to convince it by the word of God:
And so, Error is as soon discovered, and detected, as it is published; and as
soon destroyed, as it is detected; the word of God, though from a private
Christian, being more mighty to destroy Error, then Error can be, to uphold it
self against the word.

3 Prophesying is a most useful means to keep out Error, in this regard,
because it gives the Church light, how to choose faithful Teachers out of its
own children, when it stands in need of any supply in this kind. Seeing
through the exercise of prophesying, the Church knows and discerns which of its
members are most spiritual, and most clearly taught of God, in divine things;
and who have received the most excellent gifts from Christ; and so are most fit
and able to hold forth the word of life, in most evidence and power of the
Spirit, that so the Church may be supplied with Pastors of her own Sons, and
not seek out after unknown persons; nor be constrained to use mercenary men,
who have been brought up to preaching, as their trade to live by; whereupon,
but few of them, can be expected to be other then hirelings, who will make
their Ministry serve their own advantage, and frame the Scripture to sound such
doctrine, as may best serve their own turns.

And in these three regards the use of prophesying helps the Church to keep out
Error. Object.


Now if any shall object against this, That it may seem very rash and absurd,
after an able, learned man has spoken in the Church, for an unlearned
Mechanic presenly to rise up and speak.

I return this answer; Answ.
That the true people of God are all taught of God; and the true Church is a
Kingdom of Prophets, through the anointing of the Spirit; and so, they esteem
not that, to be learning in the Church, which is from man, but only that which
is heard and learned from the Father; and so they neither reckon him that has
humane learning, to be learned here; nor him that is destitute of it, to be
ignorant. Yea farther, in this society, God will have him, who is most
unlearned, according to humane literature, to speak, that the virtues of Christ
may the more evidently appear in the Saints; and the knowledge of heavenly and
divine truths, may not be attributed to gifts, parts, learning or studies, but
only to his Spirit, which can even in a moment, teach the ignorant, and make
the simple, wise; and open the mouths of babes and sucklings, yea and of the
very dumb, to perfect his praise by. Whereas when a man of great parts and
learning, speaks with wisdom and knowledge in the Church, this is commonly
attributed to his wit and study, and so God loses all or most of his praise;
but if a plain, ignorant man, shall speak spiritually and divinely, and hold
forth the mystery of the Gospel in a clear light, then men must needs
acknowledge God to be the Author, of such grace, and say, God is in him of a
truth; and so, God is acknowledge the Author, of his own gifts, and he himself
is admired in his Saints.

It will be again objected.

Yea but if every one have liberty to speak in the Church, will not this breed
great confusion and disturbance?

I answer, no, not in the true Church, which are a people met in the name of
Christ, and who have Christ himself present in the midst of them, and so every
one demeans himself answerably to the presence of Christ, that is, in the
wisdom, meekness, and modesty of the Spirit. And there also every one speaks,
not after the rashness of his own brain, but according to the revelation of
God, as it is written, If any thing be revealed to another, let the first hold
his peace; So that no man is to speak here, but by Revelation, or an inward
teaching and discovery of God. And where men speak thus, as the true Church is
to speak there can be no confusion, but most excellent order and decency. Yea.
God himself, who is not the Author of confusion, but of peace in all the
Churches of the Saints, he has appointed and commanded Prophesying, as the way
of peace; and therefore do not thou dare to say, it is the way of confusion,
seeing God knows better how to order the affairs of his own Church then thou
do.

Wherefore, seeing Prophesying, is Gods Ordinance in the Churh, for the peace
of it; if any sort of men, shall, nowithstanding what has been said, still
attribute to themselves a proper and incommunicable Ministry, or the only
power to speak in the Church; I shall but use the Apostles words to them, and
so pass on from this thing; 1 Cor. 14 36.
What? came the word of God only unto you? and is it to come out only from
you? Nay, it is come to every believer as well as to you; and it is also to
come forth from all them, unto whom it is come; seeing they cannot but speak
what they do believe.

5. The last means I shall name, whereby the true Church may keep error out of
it self, is, To exercise its power in judging Doctrines; as Paul commands, 1
Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the rest judge. If
they that publish Doctrine, should also be judges of it, and the people be
bound to subscribe to their judgment, error would not only, by this means,
have opportunity to be vented, but would also be established and confirmed,
without the least contrad^ction. But now God has appointed it otherwise in the
Church; for whoever speak there, the hearers are to judge of the truth of the
Doctrine; and accordingly are either to receive it, or reject it, having power
to do either as they see occasion: and so error cannot prevail in that Church
where the faithful have liberty to judge of all Doctrines, and do exercise
that liberty. But where they, that publish Doctrine, are also the judges of it,
and the people are bound up to the Doctrine of the Teachers, and may not
question or contradict it, there error reigns, as in its proper Kingdom.

And thus, by these means, error may certainly be kept out of the Church, that
the Church may live in truth and peace.

But here now a great question will be moved, Quest.
and that is this,

Whether the Magistrate has not power to suppress error by the sword; Whether
the Magistrate has power to suppress error.
and whether the Church may not use this remedy against error, as well as all
those before named.

I answer; Answ.
that many men of great eminency, have attributed such a power to the
Magistrate; and have done him the honor, besides his throne in the world, to
erect him a throne in Gods Kingdom, at the least equal to Christ; thinking that
Religion would soon be lost, if he should not uphold it. And to make this good,
they have produced many Scriptures of the Old Testament; which seem to arm the
Magistrate against the authors and spreaders of errors.

But I desire the wise-hearted to consider, whether as clear Scriptures may not
be produced out of the Old Testament, to prove, that temporal power in the
world belongs to Ecclesiastical men, as that spiritual power in the Church
belongs to worldly Magistrates. And to this purpose (because I would not be too
large in this matter, now) I shall desire him, who has a mind to be
instructed, to read and weigh the Reply of the French Prelates to the Lord
Peter's; which he may find in Fox his Book of Martyrs, vol. 1 p. 467.

Wherefore, seeing the Scriptures of the old Testament, are every whit as
strong, to give Ministers power in temporal matters, as Magistrates in
spiritual; it is without all question, the only sure and safe way to determine
this cause by the new Testament, or the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles,
by whom in these last days God has spoken fully to the Church, and after
whose doctrine there is no other word to be expected. And because herein I
find no such power given to the Civil Magistrate, to judge and determine in
spiritual matters, therefore I conclude, he has none.

Now if any shall say, This is a great wrong to the Magistrage, Object.
to thrust his power out of the Church, and to confine it to the world.

I answer, Answ.
That to make the Church and Ecclesiastical Kingdom, standing in outward Laws,
orders, authority, dignity, promotion government, all which are to be granted,
established, and managed by state power, and yet to deny the Magistrates
authority and influence into these things, which flow from his own power, and
consist in it, and by it, this is to streighten and to wrong him indeed. But to
declare the true Church to be a spiritual Kingdom as Christ has made it, and
not at all of this world, but the very Kingdom of heaven upon earth, and
thereupon to deny him power in it, is no more to prejudice the Magistrate, then
to deny him power in heaven. Seeing the Sons Kingdom which is heaven on earth,
is to be as free from worldly and humane power, as the Fathers Kingdom which is
heaven in heaven: Christ being to be all, in all, in this, as God is to be all
in all, in that.

And so to deny the Magistrate, that power which Christ never granted him, is
no wrong to him at all; but to grant him, and gratify him with such power,
would be a great and intolerable wrong, to the truth and Church of Christ, as
in many other things, so in this present matter, we are speaking of, as you may
see, in the following particulars.

For the putting the power of the sword into the Magistrates hands, to suppress
error, is attended with these evils.

1. Hereby the Magistrate is made a Judge of Doctrines, and has power given
him, to pronounce which is truth, and which is error, being yet no more
infallible, yea everywhit as liable to err, as the meanest of the people. And
what Magistrate is there, that has the power of the sword, but will uphold his
own Religion and judgment to be the truth, though never so false, and will
sentence what ever is contrary thereunto, to be error though never so true?
and so the truth and word of God, which only is to judge all, and it self to be
judged of none, by this means is made subject to the judgment of vain man, and
shall either be truth or error, as he pleases to call it; and error, when it
pleases the Magistrate, shall be adorned, with the glorious title of truth;
and shall have his authority to countenance and uphold it. And how great a
prejudice, this has been, and is to the truth, and how great an advantage to
error, it is very easy to judge.

Now if any shall say, that the Magistrate may not judge of doctrine by
himself, Quest.
and use his sword accordingly, but he may take to him the council and advice
of godly and able Ministers, as now of the Assembly, and so may judge and
punish, according to their judgment.

I answer; Answ.
Is it fit, that the Magistrate in so great matters should be blind folded
himself, and see only by other men's eyes?

Again, if the Magistrate judge, according to the judgment of the Ministers,
and depending more on their knowledge then his own, shall draw his sword
against whomsoever they shall persuade him; What higher honor does he attain
to in all this, then to become their Executioner? Yea, if he punish amiss he
may prove a very murderer Pilate, in this case, may be a sea-mark to all the
Magistrates in the world, who following the council and judgment of the High
Priests, put the Son of God himself to death, as if he had been the son of
perdition: Which, I say, may serve, for a sufficient warning, to the end of the
world, to all Magistrates, that they confide not on the judgment of the
Clergy, but that they be sure themselves, in what they do.

2. The putting power into the Magistrates hands, to suppress error by the
sword, gives him full opportunity to destroy and slay the true children of God,
if at any time he shall mistake, and judge them Heretics. For what power men
ignorantly allow a godly Magistrate, against true Heretics: the same power,
will all Magistrates arrogate to themselves, as their just due against all
those that differ from themselves in matters of Religion, though their
judgment who so differ from them, be never so true. And thus the Magistrate,
who is a most fallible Judge in these things, instead of tares, may pluck up
the wheat; and kill the faithful, instead of Heretics, at his own pleasure,
till he have destroyed all the faithful in the land.

Wherefore, let all Christians take heed, how they favor the Magistrates with
this power, to punish those, whom he judges Heretics: for if he shall change
his mind, as he easily may, seeing he is but a man, or if another shall
succeed him, of another mind, that very Sword may be sheathed in their own
bowels, which now they draw forth against other men's.

3. When the Magistrate assumes power to himself, to suppress error, this makes
Ministers negligent in studying the Scriptures, the Magistrate doing that by
force, which they ought to do by the word and so saves them their labor: For
when once the Ministers, shall have so far interessed themselves in the
Magistrate, as to procure him, to call for the Jailer and Executioner, against
whomsoever shall oppose their Doctrine, they will then need no great pains to
study the word, that they may be able to convince the gainsayers, and persuade
the rebellious, seeing the Magistrates sword, at all adventure, is to defend
their Doctrine; and all the objections against it, either from reason or
Scripture, the hangman is to answer. And so the Pastors having their work, as
they conceive, thus done for them, to their hands, do commonly betake
themselves to ease and idleness, and to the prosecution and enjoyment of
worldly things, and grow careless, and negligent of the Scripture, and word of
God, whereupon error steals in apace upon the Teachers themselves, whereby, by
degrees they corrupt, and seduce very many. And thus whilst the Magistrate
thinks to chase out error before him, one way, he lets it in behind him seven
ways.

4. This takes men off, from the certain means to destroy errors, which is the
word, and leads them to that, which can never destroy it, which is the sword of
the Magistrate; and so the Devil here in has a notable Stratagem; For he fears
not all the Swords, and Halters, and Weapons, and Prisons in the world, to
destroy error withal, but as securely contemns all these things, as Leviathan
a Bulrush; and yet does earnestly stir up the world, to use these things
against him, and his errors as the only means to subdue him. Whereas the only
thing he fears, is the word of God, which is that mighty power, than can bind
the Devil, and destroy his Kingdom, and break down all his strong holds of
errors and Heresy, and he is in no sort able to stand out against the power
thereof. Wherefore in his great cunning, he causes men to lay aside this, that
is able to prevail against him, and to go to the sword of the Magistrate, which
will do him no harm. And thus the sword of the Magistrate, presuming to lift it
self up against Error, instead of the word of God, is so far from destroying
Error, that it upholds it; and strengthens Satan's Kingdom, whilst it seems to
destroy it.

By these things it appears, how great an Error and evil it is, for any to
attribute to the Magistrate or for the Magistrate to assume to himself, power
to suppress Error by the sword.

If any shall yet demand, Whether the Magistrate can do nothing at all, Quest.
toward the suppressing of Errors?

I answer, Answ.
This he may do; he may and ought, and if he be a godly man, he will
countenance and encourage faithful Ministers (that are called of God, and
anointed by the Spirit) to this work of the Gospel; and having done this, he
need not trouble himself any farther; for the word preached, will do all the
rest. And let it not be doubted, but if the truth of God do enter the Lists
against Error, it will be infinitely able to prevail of it self alone, without
calling in any power, or borrowing any weapons from the world.

The ninth Rule, is.
By no means, to enforce Uniformity, in the outward orders and discipline of
the Church. The true Church does not enforce Uniformity, in outward Orde^s and
Discipline.
For such Uniformity, has been in all ages, not only the hinderance, but the
very break neck, of the Churches peace and unity.

Now because this is so vehemently and strongly urged by the unskilful builders
of this age, I shall the more fully acquaint the Reader with the State of this
business, from the very beginning of the Gospel; and show when this part of the
mystery of iniquity, first invaded the Church of God.

Most manifest it is, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, were only
intent about the Doctrine of Salvation, and so accordingly preached and pressed
nothing but faith in Christ, and love to all the Saints; as being the only
necessary things, which Christians were to regard; And for all outward Rites,
and Ceremonies, and forms, wherein Christ had made them free, Fox vol. 1. page
72.
they commanded them, to stand fast in that liberty. And so they gave no heed,
nor regard, to the observation of days and times, neither bound the Church, to
any Ceremonies or Rites, except those necessary things mentioned, Act. 15. to
wit, things strangled, and blood, which was then ordained by the holy spirit,
not without urgent and necessary cause. For when the murdering and blood of
Infants, was commonly laid to the charge of Christians by the Heathens, they
had no other Argument to help themselves, but their own Law, by which they were
commanded to abstain from the blood of common Beasts, much more from the blood
of innocent men. And therefore that Law seems to be given by the holy Spirit,
and also for the same end, to be continued in the Church, so long as the cause
thereof, that is the persecutions of the heathen Gentiles continued. And
besides these, we read of no other Ceremonies or Rites, which the Apostles
greatly regarded, but lest such things free, to the Liberty of Christians,
every man to use therein his own discretion, for the using, or not using
thereof. Whereupon, as concerning all the ceremonial observations of days,
times, places, meats, drinks, vestures, and such others, of all these things,
neither was the diversity among men, greatly noted, nor any Uniformity greatly
required. Thus Christian Liberty prevailed in the Church, and Christian men did
not much struggle about indifferent things, till the Asians and Romans, Iraen
and Mebex. l. 4.
began to dis-agree about Easter Day: to compose which controversy, Polycarpus,
a godly Martyr, went to Rome (ann. 157. and in the reign of Antoninus Pius) to
Anicetus, then Bishop there: and though these two, to wit, Polycarpus and
Anicetus, differed in their judgments and opinions in this matter, yet they
still retained Christian communion, and avoided all breach of peace.
Afterward, in the reign of Commodus, the Christians enjoying some respite from
pesecution, began to contend again among themselves, about the ceremony of
Easter; and neither yet did the difference prevail so far, as to break the bond
of love and communion of brotherly life: though they of the West, pretending
the tradition of Paul and Peter (which yet indeed was the tradition of Hermes
and Pius, and not theirs) kept one day; and they of Asia, pretending the
tradition of John, kept another. After this, Victor, Bishop of Rome, rose up a
great stickler in the controversy of Easter, and would needs have
excommunicated the Churches of Asia for not yielding to his judgment; to whom
Iraeneus writing, touching the diversity of outward things, Nihilo tamen minus
omnes illi, pacem inter se retinuerunt, and retinemus etiamnum; and jejunii
dissonantia, fidei concordiam commendat.
used by the Primitive Christians, has these words, Notwithstanding the
variety of ceremonies among the former Christians, they all kept peace among
themselves; and we (says he) still retain it; and the difference of our
fasting, commends the unity of our faith. And thus the Doctrine of Christian
liberty remained sound and entire, till this Victors time, which was ann. 200.
And he earnestly endeavored to draw, or rather enforce, the Churches of Asia
to his opinion. And then began the Uniformity of keeping that Feast to be first
required, as a thing necessary; and all they to be accounted as Heretics and
Schismatikes, who dissented from the judgment of the Bishop of Rome.

Now against this judgment of Victor, Polycrates and many other Bishops and
brethren of Asia, declared; and the matter had burst out into a great flame,
had not some godly men of those times, brought forth the word of God to quench
it. Among whom Iraeneus, as Eusebius relates, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26.
speaks to this effect, That the variety and difference of ceremonies, is no
strange matter in the Church of Christ, when as this variety is not only in
the day of Easter, but also in the manner of fasting, and in diverse other
usages among the Christians. For some fast one, some two days, some more; and
others counting 40. hours both day and night, reckon that for their full fast
day. And this so diverse fashion of fasting in the Church, began not in our
time, but in theirs who lived before us. And yet notwithstanding they with all
this diversity, were in unity amongst themselves; and so be we: Neither does
this difference of ceremonies any thing hinder, but rather commend the
agreement of our faith.

And he brings forth the examples of the Fathers, of Telesphorus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and such others, who neither observed the same
usage themselves, nor prescribed it to others; and yet notwithstanding kept
Christian charity with such as came to communicate with them, though not
observing the same form of things, which they observed; as well appeared by
Polycarpus and Anicetus; who although they agreed not in one uniform custom of
rites, Communionem tamen inter se habuerunt, yet had communion with one
another. And thus Iraeneus, in his practice answering his name, persuaded the
peace of the Church, notwithstanding diversity of forms and rites: And so
Christian liberty was still preserved in the Church, against the tyranny of
Uniformity, till the Nicene Council.

And farther, Socrates, Socrat. l. 5. c. 19
the Writer of the Ecclesiastical History, who lived after the days of
Theodosius, speaking of the fasting before Easter, says, The Christians that
dwell at Rome, Perspicuum est, Apostolos liberam potestatem in eadem, cujusque
menti and arbitrio permisisse, ut quisque nec metu, nec necessitate inductus,
quod bonum sit ageret.
fast three weeks continually before Easter, besides the Sabbath, and the
Sunday: but those that dwell in Illyria, and all Greece, and Alexandria, fast
six weeks before Easter. And speaking of the several sorts of fasting in
several Churches, says, And because no can bring forth any Commandment
written of this matter, it is plain, that the Apostles left this fast free to
every man's mind and will, that no man might be compelled by fear and
necessity, to do that which is good.

And in the same Chapter, he relates many several forms and usages in several
Christian Churches, and concludes that matter, thus; But, says he, Verum omnes
Ecclesiarum ritus, qui in singulis urbibus regionibusque usurpantur, scriptis
mandare, ut valde laboriosum est, ita vix aut ne vix quidem fieri potest.
to commit to writing all the rites of Churches that are used in each City and
Country, as it would be very troublesome, so hardly could it be done.

And yet further; I find that Austin, who was sent into England by Pope
Gregory, ann. 598. among other questions to the Pope, propounds this as one:
That seeing there is but one faith, how it should happen, that the customs and
ceremonies of Churches should be so diverse?

And Gregory returns this answer, The custom of the Church of Rome, what it is,
you know; wherein you have been brought up from your youth: but rather it
pleases me better, that whether it be in the Church of Rome, or in any French
Church, where ye find any thing that seems better, to the service and
pleasing of God, that ye choose the same, and so infer and bring into the
English Church (which is yet new in the faith) the best and pickedst things,
chosen out of many Churches. For things are not to be beloved for the place
sake, but the place is to be beloved for the things that be good. Wherefore
such things as be good, godly and religious, those choose out of all Churches,
and induce to your people, that they may take root in the minds of English men.

So that yet you see, the Church was not enslaved by any enforced Uniformity,
but kept its own Christian freedom, till Antichrist grew up to more height,
and got the secular power of Princes, to do what he listed in the Church; and
then he, and his Clergy, made laws of all that seemed good in their own eyes,
and enforced men to them, against their wills. And thus he reigned for many
hundred years together, till the determinate time of the Apostasy began to be
fulfilled; and then God poured forth his Spirit upon some chosen servants of
his, to oppose Antichrist, as in other parts, of the mystery of iniquity, so in
this also of Uniformity. Among others who after the general falling away,
opposed this Uniformity, was John Gerson, John Gerson against Uniformity.
Chancellor of Paris, who lived about an 100. years before Luther, and in many
things received much clear light from God: he in his Sermon before the King of
France, in the name of the University of Paris, pro pace and unione Graecorum,
in his 7th. consideration speaks thus;

Men ought not generally to be bound by the positive determinations of Popes
(and it will as well hold of all others, Homines non non generaliter astringi
debent, per determinationes positivas Paparum, ad tenendum and credendum, unum
eundemque gubernandi modum, in rebus quae non proxime recipient, vel si^e
medio, fidei nostrae veritatem, vel legis Evangelicae
who arrogate to themselves an Ecclesiastical Supremacy, whether they be
Councels or Assemblies) to hold and believe, one and the same manner of
Government, in things that do not immediately concern the truth of our Faith,
or of the Evangelical Law. And he says, this consideration well taken and
understood, would be the principal key, to open a door of peace, between the
Greeks and Latins, who differ in many outward Forms and Rules: as in Baptism;
the Latin Church says, I baptize thee; the Greek, Baptizetur servus Christi,
Let this servant of Christ be baptized* And in the Supper* the Latin Church
used unleavened, the Greek leavened bread, etc. And herein he spoke as a
Christian, that said, Quaelibet provincia abundet sensusuo, Let every Province
abound in its own sense. Note also (says he) that a good Prince, permits
diverse Laws and Customs, of diverse of his Subjects, so they be not evidently
against the Law of Nature: And not to do so, would often be the destruction of
the Commonwealth As the Lord of Arras, a City of Picardie, was wont to say,
that Flanders would be governed otherwise then France or Burgundy. And this
consideration (says he) rightly understood (to wit, not to press Uniformity in
the Church, but to let the Church use its liberty in these things) would be an
excellent beginning of the Reformation of the Church, Luther against Uniformity.
notwithstanding the contradiction of many of the Court of Rome.

Luther also, that chosen Vessel of Christ, did clearly oppose this evil of
Uniformity: He thus delivers his judgment touching Uniformity of Ceremonies:
Si una Ecclesia alteram non vult imitari externis istis, quid opus est
conciliorum d^cretis cogi, quae mox in leges and ammarumlaqueos vertuntur?
Initetur ergo altera alteram libere, aut suis moribus sinatur scui; modo unitas
spiritus salva sit in fide and vero, quantumvis sit diversitas, and v^rietas in
carne and elemento mundi.
If one Church will not follow another, of its own accord, in those outward
things, what need is there that it should be compelled by the Decrees of
Councels, which presently are turned into laws and snares of souls. And
therefore let one Church freely imitate another; or let it be suffered to use
its own way, so that unity of Spirit be preserved in Faith and the Word, though
there be variety and diversity in the flesh, or Elements of the world.

Again, the same Luther, after he had set down a Form of Celebrating the
Supper, for the Church of Christ, at Wittingberg, concludes thus, In quibus
omnibus cavendum, ne legem ex liberate faciaemus, etc. That is, In all which
we must take heed, that we make not a law, of liberty; or constrain them to
sin, who shall either do otherwise, or shall omit some things, so they permit
the words of blessing to remain entire, and do all act here in Faith. For these
ought to be the Rites of CHRISTIANS, that is, of the children of the
FREEWOMAN; who may keep them willingly, and of their own accord, having power
to change them, when, and as often as they will. And therefore there is no
cause, that any should either desire, or establish, any necessary Form, as a
law in this matter, whereby he may either ensnare, or trouble men's consciences.
And therefore we read not in the ancient Fathers, or Primitive Church, any
example of any such Rite, but only in the Roman Church. And if so be they had
established any thing for a law in this matter, we ought not to have kept it;
Quod legibus hic obstringi, nec possent, nec debent; Because these things
neither could, nor ought to be bound by Laws. Moreover, if diverse men shall use
a diverse Rite, let none either judge or contemn another, but let every one
abound in his own sense, and let us all favor and judge the same things,
though for Forms we act diversely: and let each Rite please others, lest by
diversity of Rites, follow diversity of opinions and sects, as it came to^ pass
in the Church of Rome. For outward Rites, though we cannot want them, as
neither meat nor drink, yet they commend us not to God, but only Faith and
love commend us to him. And therefore let that of Paul take place here, That
the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Cujus exemplar sicubi and aliis
placuerit imitari licet: sin minus, i^^ctioni libenter locum dabimus, parati, a
vobis and quibusvis aliis, commodiora accipere.
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirt; and so no Rite nor Form
is the Kingdom of God, but faith within us, etc.

And at the end of the same form, for the Church of Wittenberg, which he writes
out for Nicholas Hausmannus, a Godly Minister, he says, Which Copy, either you
or others may follow if you please; if not, we willingly give place to the
anointing, being our selves to receive from you, or any others, more profitable
things. These things he spoke like a Christian indeed, and we acknowledge the
voice of Christ in him; as in others, that act these things peremptorily, and
command and enforce them by secular power, we are sensible of the voice of
strangers, and of such strangers, as are Thieves and Murderers.

Melancton also, persuades certain Christians to unity, who differed in
Uniformity, Melancton against Uniformity.
in these words. Seeing we do agree among our selves in the chief Articles of
Christian Doctrine, let us embrace one another with mutual love; Cum de
praecipuis articulis doctrinae Christianae in ter nos co^stet, complectemur nos
mutuo amore, neque dissimilitas and varietas rituum and ceremoniarum,
disjungere debet mentes nostras.
and let not unlikeness, and variety of Rites and Ceremonies, [and Bucer
quoting this place, adds, no nor of Ecclesiastical government] disjoyn our
minds.

Upon all these Testimonies, which these godly men give from the light of the
word, which we acknowledge in them, it is evident, that all forms are to be
left free, to the faithful and Congregations of Saints, and when any shall set
down any form, the Congregations of the faithful may use them, so far forth as
they please; or may add, or alter, or wholly reject them; and no Laws are to be
made in this matter, (which the secular power should enforce) to ensnare
Consciences, and to infringe Christian Liberty, and to straighten the Spirit in
those in whom it dwells, and to obscure the virtues of Christ in his people.

Wherefore it is most evident, that they are most horribly mistaken, that now
urge external Uniformity on the Church, as the only means of Unity, who scarce
minding, I am sure not naming one body, one spirit, one hope of calling, one
Lord, Faith, Baptism etc. to make the Church one, do earnestly and fiercely
labor for one outward Form, and Order, one Directory, one Confession, one
Catechism, one Discipline, [and to have these things of their own devising
enforced on the Church, by the power of the State] as the only means their
hearts can find out, to make the Church one. But the Seers, are blind in this
matter, and the Prophets prophecy false things. For if the unity of the
Church, stand only or chiefly in Uniformity, what woeful division will be found
in it? For the Fathers before the flood, lived in one form, the Fathers after
the flood, in another; the Believers under the Law in an other; the Believers
under the Gospel in another; yea these being free from all forms, used any,
according to the wisdom of the Spirit: Christ himself, and John Baptist, who
both lived in the same time, observed no Uniformity between them; for John
lived retiredly in the wilderness, and came neither eating nor drinking; and
Christ lived in the frequency of the world and did both eat and drink. And
their Disciples observed no Uniformity; for John's Disciples fasted often, and
Christ's not at all, in those days. Besides, at first, the believing Jews used
another form, then the believing Gentiles: and after among the Gentiles, the
Greek Church used one form, the Latin another; and several Churches under both
several forms; and so the Church on earth, according to the infirmity of the
flesh, still uses some or other form; and the Church in Heaven, is without all
form. Now then, if we shall have no Unity, but where is Uniformity, what an
Earthquake of confusion and division will this make through the whole Church of
God in all ages, and under all Gods own dispensations in the world, yea through
the whole Church in Earth and Heaven? Wherefore, I dare be bold to affirm, that
imposed and enforced Uniformity, is one of the greatest enemies, to the true
Churches unity, that Antichrist himself could devise. And therefore, let not
the true Church suffer it self to be reduced under this bondage again, through
specious pretenses of Reformation; but let the Church know, it may use what
forms seem good to it self; and that its true unity stands, in being one body,
and one spirit, etc. as has been before declared. And thus only, the Church
in all ages is one; yea thus only the Church in earth and heaven is one.

And therefore, I desire the faithful to know, that Uniformity is to be kept
out, or if it be brought in, it is to be cast out, for the preserving of peace
in the Church. For, that God might make Jews and Gentiles one, He abolished the
Laws of Commandments contained in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. Whence it is
evident, that God so highly valued, the peace of the faithful, that to bring
this about, he repeals his own Institutions, and dissolves his own outward
Ordinances. Now if the Ceremonies of Gods own ordaining, were to be made void,
rather then to continue to the prejudice of the Churches unity: how much more
any Ceremonies, or outward rules of our own or other men's devising? Let him
that reads understand.

And these are the practical rules, in the way of the Churches peace, that are
more absolute and general.

And now we hasten to the rules that are more special and occasional, in case
of difference among the faithful. In which case, Rules to be observed to
procure and preserve peace in the Church, when the faithful differ, among
themselves.

The weight of things wherein they differ, is to be considered.

Rules to preserve peace when the difference among the faithful is in
circumstantial things.


we are necessarily in the first place to consider, the weight of the things,
wherein they differ; to wit, whether those things be such, as are necessary to
salvation, or no.

If they be not such things as are necessary to salvation; then first, they are
either things Ceremonial and Circumstantial; Or secondly, very truths
themselves; yet such, wherein a Christian may for the present err without
danger of salvation.

If the difference be in Circumstantial and Ceremonial things, we should mind
these things to preserve peace.

1. That we ought not to contend for vanities; nor to trouble our selves and
the Church of God, with trifles, and things of no weight or moment at all. It
is a wonder to us in these days, that the ancient Christians should so
earnestly contend about the day, on which Easter, as they called it, was to be
celebrated, and upon difference herein, should divide into Sects as they did;
seeing there always shone light enough in the Gospel, to declare this to be a
slight circumstance not worth the minding. The Apostle exhorts the Philippians,
to strive together for the faith of the Gospel, but no where for the form of
it, in one thing or other.

2. We ought not, for contrary mindedness in these things, to avoid Christian
converse and communnion with one another; for strangeness of Christians in
these cases, both breeds and increases suspicions and jealousies, and causes,
that we harbor hard thoughts, brother against brother, and it takes away all
opportunities of conference, and of understanding and persuading one another,
and so of Reconciliation.

3. In these things, whereof neither commend us to God, we are not to condemn
one another: for to condemn one another for every difference in judgment,
produces innumerable Sects in the Church; then which nothing can be more
destructive to the peace of it; seeing such deadly enmity arises among Sects as
we see by daily experience. And therefore, that rash judgment, that produces
these Sects, is the great enemy to the peace of the Church, and the great
advancer of the Devils work of division.

4. To be contented with the substance of Gods Kingdom in the faithful.
4. Let us know, wherein the essence of Gods Kingdom stands, to wit, in
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Spirit, in Faith and Love, etc.
and not in outward Ceremonies and Orders; and where the power and substance of
Gods Kingdom is, let us be contented, though there is a difference in form and
circumstances. Let us take careful heed, that we do nothing against the power
and substance of godliness, under pretense of the form and circumstance. The
highest good in the Church, is salvation in Christ; and the end of all gifts,
given to all Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, is to bring us
all to the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God. And if so be
that this be done, the Church is not to be troubled with other things; yea, all
other things are to give way to this. Where the heavenly things themselves are
present, we ought not in these days of grace and truth, to contend about the
shadows of them.

To take care in these three things of great importance.
5. In case men differ in judgment, in these circumstantial things, such as are
in present power, ought take care especial,

1. That they do not entertain men into the communion of Saints, 1. That they
equally admit men of different judgments in these things, into the communion
of Saints.
that are only of one judgment: but that every one to whom the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven are given, may have free liberty to go in and out, and find
pasture. It is a most Antichristian thing to make another key to the Kingdom of
Heaven, or true Church, besides that which Christ has given; for then it will
soon come to pass, that Christ's keys will not be sufficient without man's also;
yea, soon it will come to pass, that man's key shall be sufficient, without
Christ's; that is, it will not be reckoned sufficient for men to be believers,
and to have received the gift of the Spirit, to make them of the Church, unless
they also conform to the judgments of such and such men; but to be of their
judgments, will be enough to make them of the Church, though they be destitute
of faith, and the Spirit. And thus, by making another key to Gods Kingdom,
besides the key that Christ has given, and so to let in those that should be
kept out, and keep out those that should be let in; this must needs be avoided
as extremely prejudicial to the peace of the Church.

2. That they equally use and employ them.
2. They must take care that they do not prefer Christians to places of public
Ministry and employment, that are only of one judgment, but that they dispose
of them alike, to godly men, of either judgment; lest otherwise, many smell
the design of Antichrist underneath; which is, that none shall buy, or sell, or
have any place in the Church, or Universities, but only such as have taken a
certain mark into their foreheads and right hands. And though the outward mark
of the mystery may change, yet the inward mind and meaning of it does not
change with the change of form.

3. If one sort of Christians be not to be admitted as members, 3. That they do
not destroy the one, to uphold the other.
or preferred as Officers in the Church more then another, much less is one
party to be destroyed for another; for thus would Satan also be a Prince of
Peace, who would destroy Christ's Kingdom to exalt his own, that he might
possess all quietly and alone: but Christ's way is to reconcile those that
differ in these things, and of twain, to make them one new man in himself. And
so we shall be like Christ, if we seek to bring both into one, in love, and not
to destroy either, by force.

These Rules are to be observed, as means of peace, if the things be
circumstantial.

Now if they be very truths, wherein Christians differ, yet such, If the
faithful differ in very truths, but such as are not absolutely necessary to
salvation, they must observe these rules to preserve peace.
wherein they may err, without danger of salvation, then these Rules are of
use.

1. To hear them speak their judgments, with freedom, and not to condemn them,
unheard; for thus may thou soon condemn the innocent, and make thy self
guilty.

2. To understand fully, what thy adversary means, before thou contend against
him; lest if thou want this wisdom and patience, thou oppose not so much his
judgment, as thy own conceit. Much better is it, calmly to hear a man's mind,
from himself, then hastily to guess at it; yea, to conclude it is so, before
thou have heard him speak. If thou can but have patience to hear him relate
his own mind, perhaps in the end, thou shall understand, it differs little
from thy own, in substance.

3. Reproach not any thing thy adversary speaks, with this, That thou never
heardest it before: for this may not so much discover his error, as thy
ignorance; and that which seems to thee a new error, if it be truly examined by
the word, may prove an old truth. And if thou will needs condemn whatever
savours of novelty how shall the truth we yet know not, be brought in; or the
errors, that yet remain with us, be purged o ut?

4 Be not over confident in what thou hold, upon thy own judgment, or other
men's, strengthened from multitude, custom and antiquity; for men have erred
most grossly, even in those things, wherein they have thought themselves most
certain: And therefore, Prove all things, that thou may hold fast that which
is good. It is much better to hold fast the truth, upon clear grounds from the
word, then upon the strongest presumptions of thy own heart.

5. In these differences make the word the Judge, and not men. The word of God
is the sole and perfect Judge, in all the things of God. And therefore one said
well, Qui ponit legem judicem, ponit Deum qui autem addit hominem, addit and
bestiam: That is, He that makes the Law Judge, makes God Judge; but he that
makes man Judge, makes a beast Judge; For every man is brutish in his
knowledge: And then only are we sure of any thing, when we have the word of God
for it. Neither is it sufficient to take the word in any fashion, for Judge in
these matters; but we must necessarily attain the knowledge of it, by the
teaching of the Spirit; seeing we see so many differences of judgments among
men, that make use alike of the same outward word for their rule. Now though
all have the same outward word, yet all are not of one mind, except they
attain to one Spirit; for Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. that only the Spirit of God
knows the things of God: Neither does man's sense, or reason, understand the
things of the Spirit, but the spiritual man judges all things. And hence it
follows, that we can only judge aright of divine truths by the word, and we
can only judge aright of the word, if we have the Spirit, to be the
interpreter of it to us.

6. If thou can not prevail with him, by the word, that he should agree with
thee, wherein he differs; then observe that moderate and Christian rule of
Paul; where he says, As many as be perfect, be thus minded; Phil. 3-15, 16.
if any be otherwise minded, God shall also reveal this to him: And so let us
wait with patience, till God of his good pleasure shall please to teach him, as
he has been pleased to teach us; because, without this teaching, he can never
know it aright, though thou teach him never so much.

7. And lastly, When in many inconsiderable points of Religion, we cannot agree
with many that are truly faithful, nor they with us; let us, according to
Paul's rule, leave the final judgment of these things to the due time
appointed of God; as Paul has said, -- Judge nothing before the time: And if
you ask, what time this is? Christ has told us, saying, If any one bear my
word, and believe not, I judge him not; but the word that I have spoken the
same shall judge him at the last day. For the things of God are so far beyond
the sense, reason, knowledge, judgment and discerning of all the men in the
world, that many times the purest things are reckoned vile, and the most
spiritual things, carnal; and the very highest things of the mystery of God and
Christ, but conceits or errors; and therefore it is fit, that the judgment of
these things, which are so far beyond humane comprehension, should be deferred
to the last day, Gods judgment being better in his own time, then in ours.

Now in case the doctrine, wherein we differ, be such as is absolutely
necessary to salvation, and without believing which, men can have no interest
in Christ, yet even in this case, If the difference be in doctrine, absolutely
necessary to salvation, what the faithful must do in this case.


1. Hear them speak, and be rather confident, that the truth of God will
prevail over their error, then fearful, that their error will prevail against
the truth; and so strive not, for secular power, to shut up men's mouths, and to
restrain men's writings, though they speak and print things that seem never so
contrary to the truth of God, and doctrine of the Gospel For if men have not
liberty to divulge their doctrines publicly, they will spread them privately,
to infect and corrupt many, ere it can be known or prevented; and if men vent
errors publicly, if there be as public liberty, to preach the truth; I doubt
not the success of the truth against it at any time, with all that belong to
God. And it is the only Gospel way, to conquer error by the truth, and all
humane, yea, and devilish doctrines, by the Gospel, which is the ministration
of the Spirit, and therefore so mighty, that all false teachers and false
doctrines, must needs fall down before it; seeing, stronger is that Spirit,
that is in it, then that spirit that is in the world, which is its own spirit,
and the devils. And if the Gospel of Christ, have given already, such proof of
its power, in former times, when the whole world lay in horrible ignorance, and
error, and darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness the people; and yet
the Gospel alone without any conjunction of earthly power, of States and
Kingdoms with it, did bind the devil, and cast him out of his possessions and
dominions, and overthrow all false Religions, men had received from their
forefathers, through many generations; and changed the manners, customs,
opinions, Religions, and very natures of men, and utterly dispelled errrors and
heresies of all sorts; I say, seeing the Gospel, has already given such large
testimony of its power, and made so great a conquest of the world, when it was
wholly under the power of the devil; I see no reason, that we should now so
doubt the power of it, as to suffer no man, to say any thing, but what likes
us, or what is indeed agreeable to the word; as if error should have now gotten
more power, to make void the word, then the world power to make void error.
Wherefore, if the word be suffered, to have free passage, I dare rest on that
alone (and so dare all, that have felt the power of it, in their own hearts)
for the conquering and destroying, all errors and Heresies whatsoever in the
true Church of God. And now it would be profitable to hear what some other men,
who have walked in the same light and Spirit, have said in this matter.

Zuinglius (in his book, Zuingl. respon. ad libel. Strethionis, tom. 2. f. 302.
quoted in the margent) speaks thus, Haec unica, eaque sola via est, qua ad
concordiam proxime perveniri potest, etc. that is, This is the one and only
way, whereby we may most suddenly attain to concord; if whatsoever things may
be, or are commonly said for any opinion, or against it, be freely propounded
in the Churches, so that the people be allowed, free judgment in all these
things. For God, who is not the God of discord, but of peace, nevers suffers
those who are gathered together in his spirit, to err or be deceived. And if
this way were observed, we should shortly see the Churches of Christ, enjoying
sweet peace and concord. But now as often as there are some Princes and Cities,
that would have the doctrine of the Gospel free to all, presenly there are
others that would stop and hinder the course of it, and so long there must
needs arise great discords and dissentions. And hence I would have you judge
whether you or we, are departed from the Church of God, and the doctrine of it.
For we suffer those writings that proceed as well from you, as from the
Papists, to be openly and freely read, and read again; and the evils which are
taught in them, we slay by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
but you think, all this business may be dispatched, with PUBLIC EDICTS AND
COMMANDS. And therefore do you be judge, whose cause is most to be suspected;
ours, who suffer the doctrine of our adversaries to be published in our
Churches, and overthrow them by the word: or yours, who reproach our doctrine
before the simple people, as heretical; in the mean time by your good will,
neither suffering them to read it nor understand it. Thus far he.

Luther also, Luther. Farrag. epistol. tom. 7. s. 509.
in his Epistle to Frederick and John, Dukes of Saxony, speaking against that
Spirit, which he calls Spiritus Alstetinus, a proud, haughty, enthusiastical
spirit, that despised faith, and love, and the cross, and the whole Scriptures,
as low things, not worth their minding, and gloried in strange Revelations, and
superlative holiness which they had, above other believers: And these enemies
of the Gospel, especially were gathered together in Alsteta; and Luther writes
to the Dukes, in whose Province this Town was, to this purpose touching them:
Quod vero praesentis interest negotii, Lu^hers rule, how the Magistrate shall
deal with the Ministers; to wit if they contain themselves within the bounds of
the Gospel, to suffer them; but if they raise seditions and disturbances, to
suppress, or banish them.
nolim ab illustrissimis D. V. praedicandi officium praecludi cuiquam, etc.
That is, But for what pertains to our present business, I would not, that the
office of preaching should be denied to any, by your most illustrious
Lordships; but let there be granted to them free Liberty to preach, and let
them exhibit the best proof of their learning. For I said, by the Testimony of
Paul, It must needs be, that there must be sects; and the word of God must
strive, and wage war in camps. And therefore it is evident in Psa. 67. that the
Evangelists are called Armies; and that Christ in the Psalms is called more
then once, the King of Armies. Now if their spirit be a right and approved
spirit, it will easily subsist before us without all fear: and so if our spirit
be right, as we hope it is, it will fear neither them, not any body else. But
if they transgress the bounds of the Gospel, and will not contain their hands,
but will do their work with violence, it is the duty of your most Illustrious
Lordships, when they grow fierce and seditious, to repress them, or to banish
them out of your Dominions; saying, we will easily grant to you, to fight with
the word, for the proving and examining which is true Doctrine: but we will
restrain the fierceness of your spirits, and contain your hands; for these
things belong to our Magistracy. And therefore they that will not herein obey,
let them depart the Country: For (says he) we who are Ministers of the word
may preach, but we must do no violence; and Daniel has witnessed, that
Antichrist shall be destroyed without hands; And Isaiah says, that Christ
shall fight in his Kingdom with the spirit of his mouth, and the rod of his
lips, etc.

Also Albertus, Duke of Borussia, Albertus Duke of Borussia.
when the great controversy fell out, between Andreas Osiander, and Morlinus,
and other Ministers, touching the Righteousness whereby a Christian is made
righteous before God, he would not forbid either side, either the Pulpit or
Press; but left them free to both alike, and desired them to forbear reproaches
one against another, Me^ch. Adam. in vie^ Osiand.
and to debate the business quietly by the word of God.

Likewise the Bohemians, The Bohemians.
in a certain exhortation of theirs, to Kings and Princes, to stir them up to
the zeal of the Gospel, subscribed by Procopius and Conradus, Fox. Mortyrolog.
vol. 1. p. 858.
and other Captains of the Bohemians, have these words; They say (that is the
Papists) it ought not to be suffered, that we should be heard, in confessing
our faith. Now, how may that be proved by the holy Scripture, since Christ
heard the devil, as is written, Mat. 4? And they are not better then Christ nor
we worse then the devil. If they be righteous, and have the truth with them, as
they say they have, and we be unrighteous, why do they fear? since the truth
ought not to be afraid of falsehood; and Zorobabel declared, That truth is of
all things the most mighty, and overcomes all things. For Christ is the truth,
2 Esdr. 3.
John 14. I am the way, the truth; and the devil is the father of lies, John 8.
Therefore if the Pope and his Priests have the truth, let them overcome us with
the word of God: but if they have lies, then they cannot long abide, in all
their presumption. Wherefore, we exhort and beseech, all the Imperial Cities,
all Kings, Princes, Noblemen, rich, poor, for Gods sake, and for his
Righteousness, that one of them, write hereof to another, and that there may be
some means made, how we may commune with you safely, and friendly, at some such
place, as shall be fit, both for you and us: and bring with you your Bishops
and Teachers, and let them and our Teachers fight together with the word of
God, and let us hear them; and let not one overcome the other by violence or
false subtilty, but only by the word of God etc.

By all which it appears, That let men's Doctrine be what it will, they ought to
be heard, and convinced by the word, and not presently to be silenced, and
subdued by force.

Now secondly, 2. If the doctrine after hearing of it be found damnable, the
community, is
if upon hearing and debating things by the word, it shall clearly appear, that
our adversaries hold such things, which are so false and erroneous, that they
cannot be reckoned believers and members of Christ, that hold them; not can
retain those Doctrines, without unvoidable damnation; then in this case, the
true Church, has Authority from the word, to do these things.

1. To condemn the doctrine. 2. To excommunicate their persons.
1. The Church ought to condemn the doctrine, 1. To condemn the doctrine.
as contrary to the Gospel, and to that eternal and unchangeable, and most
clear and certain truth, which Christ has heard from the Father, and delivered
to his Church; which is the faith once given to the Saints, and never to be
altered. And so to tell the people, what Doctrine it is; even such, as carries
in it an utter enmity to Christ and his Spirit; and so consequently death and
damnation; and that therefore they are to take heed of it, as they love
eternal life, and would void eternal death.

And thus Christ condemned the Doctrine of the Scribes, and of the Pharisees,
and of the Sadduces, and bid his Disciples, Beware of them; and Paul, the
Doctrine of Hymeneus and Philetus, which did e^t as a canker, etc.

2. The Church in this case, may also excommunicate the Person; 2. To
excommunicate the person.
yea, though he should be silent and not seduce others; seeing believers (...)
have no true (...) the word of life, in which all the true communion of the
faithful stands. Wherefore such p^^sons may justly be cut off from the Society
of the faithful. But herein also, these Rules are to be observed; to wit,

Rules to be observed in excommunication.
1. That this censure be not proceeded to, for every varying from the truth (as
is already said) but for denying such truths, or holding such errors, as make a
man incapable of salvation.

2. That this be not done, till all other ways have been tried, to reclaim him.

3. That this be done, not by two or three persons, but by the whole Church, or
communion.

4. That it be done, not by their own, but by Christ's Authority, who is always
present in his Church, as the Head of that body; and that it be done, not by
any humane Passion or violence, but by the efficacy of the holy Spirit, who is
always present among believers, as the Spirit of those members.

And this Excommunication thus regulated, is the last punishment the Church can
inflict, Excommunication, the Churches last punishment.
by the warrant and authority of Christ: and it cannot imprison any, or banish
them, or fine them, or put them to death: for we must not expound that place of
Paul, Hareticum hominem devita, as Hugo Charensis did, to take a Heretic out
of his life; but him that is a Heretic, we must avoid, we must not kill; the
former being Christ's rule; the latter, Antichrists.

Now these things have I spoken and propounded to the faithful and Churches of
Christ, Conclusion.
wherever the providence of God shall cast this Book, which may travel farther
on this errand, then weak flesh can do: and I so propound them all, as being
most ready, my self, to hear from any what they can propound in more light
(...) in these matters, they will ye^ (...) over and preserve Peace and Unity
in the true Church of Christ: The desire of which, through Gods goodness, is
much stronger in my heart, then any private interest or respect of mine own.

FINIS.

