Bylaws proposed by the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Committee of Nine,
Pursuant to an Order of the General Court for the better Manageing and
Regulating the Companies Affairs. And Approved of in a General Court of the
East India Company, Holden the 17 th. of January, 1694/5.
I. THAT as often as the Governor or Deputy Governor of this Company, shall
happen to Die, within the Year after he is Elected and Sworn into his Office,
There shall be called a General Court of Adventurers, qualified as by the
Charters are directed, Who shall within fourteen days, or sooner, after the
Death of such Governor or Deputy, Elect one other Person into the place of the
Deceased, to Execute the said Office, during the Residue of the Year.

II. That whenever the Court of Committees, shall find the Companies Affairs to
be in a Condition, to afford a Dividend to the Adventurers, The State and
Condition of the Company, be particularly represented to a General Court, To
the end that their Direction and Consent may be given, both as to the Quantum
of such Dividend, and the time for making the same, without which No Dividend
shall be made.

III. That the Accomptant General do so keep the Companies Books, That he may
Attest the same upon Oath, if required: Wherein he is from time to time, to
enter the true Value of the Joynt-Stock of this Company, And the better to
enable him to keep up the said Accounts, that they may not be behind hand, The
respective Warehouse-keepers and other the Companies Officers, entrusted with
any of the Companies Goods or Moneys, be hereby enjoined, within one Month
after every Sale, to produce unto the said Accomptant their respective
Accounts, to be by him entered into the Books in due form. And that once in
three Years, a true Valuation or Balance be drawn out by him, and approved of
by the Court of Committees, And that the same be entered fairly into a Book, to
be kept for that purpose, to lie open from time to time, for the Perusal of all
Persons concerned. And that the first Balance be drawn and presented
accordingly, some time between this and the Tenth of December, 1695.

IV. That all Alienations and Assignments of any Part of the General
Joynt-Stock of this Company, to any Person whatsoever, shall be entered and
registered in a Book or Books, to be provided for that purpose by the Company,
which shall lie open for the View of all Persons concerned.

V. That whereas Their Majesty's by Their late Instrument, Dated the 28th. of
September last, have therein, among other things, vested the Sole power of
choosing all Sub-Committees, in the General Court of the Company, It is hereby
ordered, That within Ten days at the furthest, after the Publication of the
Election of a New Governor, Deputy Governor, and Twenty Four Committees, the
said Governor or his Deputy, do call a General Court, for the Electing of all
Sub-Committees out of the Twenty Four Committees aforesaid, for the Year
Ensuing, Pursuant to Their Majesty's said Instrument. Provided, That this
By-Law shall not extend, to debar the General Court at any time, from Choosing
a Committee, out of the Generallity, to examine into the State of the Companies
Affairs, as they shall think fit to direct.

VI. That in the first or second Meeting of the Court of Committees, after
every Annual Election, The said Court shall Elect and Choose, all the Companies
Officers and Servants here in England, that are under an Yearly Sallary, by the
Balloting Box, and not otherwise.

VII. That all the Companies Presidents, Agents, Factors and other their
Servants, who shall at any time hereafter be sent to India in their Service,
shall be Elected by the Court of Committees, by the Balloting Box, and not
otherwise.

VIII. That none of the Companies Servants in India, of what degree soever they
be, shall be advanced, removed or displaced, but by the Court of Committees,
and the Decision declared by the Ballotting Box, and not otherwise. Provided
that nothing in this By-Law, shall be understood, to abridge the Liberty for
the Companies Presidents and Councils, or Agents and Councils in India, to
suspend, or remove to any other Subordinate Factories, any Factors, Writers, or
other the Companies Servants or Officers, until the Companies pleasure be
further known therein.

IX. That no Orders or Instructions from England, shall at any time hereafter
be obeyed, as the Order of the Company, by any of their Agents, Factors and
Servants in India, excepting only such, as are signed by the Governor or his
Deputy, and Twelve or more of the Committees for the time being.

X. And for the more easy and safe Dispatch, of the Business of this
Corporation, to the Honor and Benefit thereof, It is hereby further Ordered
and Appointed, That there shall be frequent Courts of Committees held, And that
before the said Court so Assembled, There shall be laid by the Committee of the
Treasury for the time being, once every Month, a True Account of the present
State of the Companies Cash, together with a particular in Writing, in a Book
to be kept for that purpose, What Moneys have been taken up at Interest, for
the Use of the Company, the Precedent Month, and of whom, and upon what Terms;
As also what Interest Money has been paid off by the Company, within that
time, and to whom so paid off.

XI. And for the preventing of Fraud and Deceit, as much as may be, in all the
Transactions of the Company, It is hereby further resolved and ordered, That in
all Cases whatsoever, Where the Governor, Deputy Governor, Committee-Man, or
any other Officer of this Company, shall have any dealing or business with this
Corporation, upon their own Account, separately, or jointly in Conjunction with
any other, for or in respect of Buying for, or Selling to this Company, any
Bullion or other Goods whatsoever, or in the making any other Bargain or
Contract whatsoever, by, to, or with this Corporation, That then in such Case,
Such Governor, Deputy Governor, Committee-Man, or Officer, so having any
Business with this Corporation as aforesaid, shall at the time of his or their
Negotiating the same, or being present at such Negotiation, declare and publish
to the Court of Committees, or any Sub Committee, with whom such matter is
Negotiated as aforesaid, Whether he is directly or indirectly concerned in, the
Goods proposed to be Sold, or other Matters then Negotiating. And it is also
hereby ordered, That no Governor, Deputy Governor or Member of the Court of
Committees, shall Vote, or Make Allowance for any dammaged Goods, which he or
they be directly or indirectly concerned in: And if any such Governor,
Deputy Governor, Committee-man or other Officer whatsoever, shall at any time
wittingly and willingly offend, contrary to these said Rules and Ordinances,
Such Person or Persons so offending, and being declared Guilty thereof by a
General Court, shall immediately become, and be deemed and reputed to be,
incapable for Seven Years time next after, of holding, or enjoying, or being
chosen again into, the Office of Governor, Deputy Governor, Committee-man, or
any other Office of, or belonging to the said Company. Provided that nothing in
this By-Law, shall be understood, to oblige any Governor, Deputy Governor or
other Member of the Court of Committees to declare, whether they are concerned
in Goods bought by themselves, or others for them, at any Public Sale by the
Companies Candle.

XII. And it is hereby further Resolved and Ordained, That in all Cases, where
any Question or Debate shall at any time arise, or be made, in the General
Court or Court of Committees, touching or concerning any Irregularity, or
Misdemeanour committed by any Person or Persons, Members of this Corporation,
That then such Person or Persons, touching or concerning whom such Question or
Debate is, or shall be had, or made, for any Irregularity or Misdemeanour as
aforesaid, shall have and give no Vote relating thereunto, but shall, first
having been heard whatsoever he, or they can allege in their own defense,
withdraw and be absent, during such Debate concerning him, or themselves, in
any matter or thing, wherein he or they be concerned as aforesaid; Provided
always, That this Law shall not extend, or be construed, to hinder more than
three Persons at one time, from being present, or Voting at any General Court,
or Court of Committees, during such Debate as aforesaid.

XIII. And it is hereby further Ordered and Resolved, That if any Governor or
Deputy, or any one or more of the Court of Committees, or Sub-Committees of
this Company, shall wittingly or willingly, at any time hereafter, act contrary
to any the Rules prescribed in the several Charters, granted to this Company,
Or to such Bylaws as are, or shall be made by the General Court, Or shall Sign
any Warrant, for the giving or paying away any Money, not relating to the Trade
and Affairs of the Company, without leave first had of the General Court, And
that the Company are damnify'd thereby; That then, and in each of the said
Cases, Every such Person being Governor, Deputy Governor, or of the Court of
Committees, or Sub-Committees, and all other the Members of the said
Corporation, who shall order, consent, agree to, or wittingly approve of the
same, and be Convicted thereof by a General Court of the said Company, within
three Years time after the Fact done, and declared Guilty by their Vote, Each
and every such Person, shall for every such Offense, forfeit to the Use of the
said Company the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds, to be answered and paid, to the
Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies.

XIV. That if any of the Companies Officers, shall without Order from the Court
of Committees, or Sub-Committees of the said Company, respectively, at any time
hereafter, make out any Warrant for payment of Money; Or if the Cashire General
shall pay any Sum of Money, without a Warrant, first Signed by the Governor or
Deputy, and four of the Committees for the time being; Or if any of them shall
wittingly and willingly, do any other Act, or thing, in the Execution of their
several Offices, whereby the Company shall receive any Damage, Every such
offending Officer shall, for each Offense, Forfeit and Pay to the said
Governor and Company, the Sum of Fifty Pounds, and be also turned out of his
Place: Provided That this By-Law shall not debar the Accomptant General from
making out Warrants, nor the Cashire General from Paying any Sum or Sums of
Money, due upon Bills at Interest, or Bills of Exchange drawn upon the Company,
and accepted by the Governor or Deputy, or for Moneys due for Interest on
Bills.

We have seen and Perused these Bylaws, and do approve thereof, and as much as
in us lies, do hereby Ratify and Confirm the same. Given under our Hands and
Seals, this Eighth day of April, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of Our
Sovereign Lord William, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1695. J. Summers. C.
S. J. Holt. Geo. Treby.



