AN ACT For Constituting A COMMITTEE For the Army and Treasurers at War.

Thursday February 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.



seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

AN ACT For Constituting A COMMITTEE For the ARMY And Treasurers at War.
FOr the more effectual and speedy bringing in and orderly Mannagement,
disposing, and issuing forth of all Moneys that heretofore have been, are, or
before the tenth Day of October next ensuing shall be appointed for the use and
payment of the Armies Garrisons and Landforces of this Commonwealth and the
incident Charges thereof.

Be it Enacted by this Present Parliament, And it is h^r^^^ ^nacted by the
Authority thereof, That Tho. (...) elder Esquire Col. John Downs, Colonel Thomas
^ister, Edmond West Esquire Richard Lucy Esquire (...) Anthony Samuel Esquire or any three
of them, shall be, and are hereby appointed and authorized to be a Committee
for the Army and Forces aforesaid, and shall have full Power and are hereby
Authorized to set down and give such Order as they shall think fit and meet for
the full Assessing, Re-assessing, Due Collecting, Leavying, and Payment of all
and every the Sum and Sums of Money, that now are, heretofore have been, or
within the time aforesaid shall be Appointed, set apart, or Ordered, for the We
and purposes before expressed: And such Orders and Directions as shall be
therein Given by the said Committee, shall be Observed and Obeyed by all and
every the Commissioners, Assessors, Collectors, Sub-Collectors, Receiver, and
other Persons whatsoever, that have been, are, or shall be Entrusted with, or
Employed in the Assessing, Leavying, Collecting, Receiving, or Payment of all
or any part of the Moneys beforementioned. And the said Committee for the Army
are hereby further Authorized and Empowered upon any neglect of Duty, abuse of
Trust, or Complaint made of other Miscariages of any Person or Persons already
Employed or Concerned in the Apportioning, Assessing, Leavying, Collecting,
Receiving, or Payment of any part of the aforesaid Moneys, to Hear and Examine,
Redress and Determine of and concerning the same, and as well therein, as in all
matters of Difference that are, or shall happen to be, between any the
Counties, Cities, Towns, or Places in England and Wales, or between any the
Hundreds, Divisions, Town-Ships, or Hamlets therein, to Order, Conclude,
Adjudge, Execute, and do as they in their Discretion shall think fit; and to
punish all and every such Person and Persons as shall neglect or abuse any
Trust Committed, or that shall be Committed to them in or concerning the
Premises, be it by Fine or Imprisonment of the Parties offending, the Fine not
exceeding Twenty Pounds, to be Employed to the Use of the Army; and shall take
care for the speedy Execution of their Orders, Directions, and Instructions, by
appointing of Forces or otherwise to cause Obedience thereunto.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Committee
for the Army shall have Power, and are hereby Authorized by their Warrants,
from time to time to Issue forth Assign, and Dispose of all and every such sum
and sums of Money aforesaid, or any part thereof, as are or shall be due and
payable to the Forces and Garrisons that are or shall be Employed in the
Service of this Commonwealth, according to their present allowance of Pay, or
such other allowance of Pay, Orders, or Establishments as shall be Appointed by
the Parliament, or Council of State, and also for the Payment and Satisfaction
of such Provisions of Clothes or Virtuals as shall be by Order of Parliament,
or by the Council of State from time to time contracted for, and bought for the
Use of the said Forces and Garrisons, or other the Landforces of this
Commonwealth, and for payment and satisfaction for such Druggs and Medicaments
and other Necessaries, for any sick or wounded Soldiers, whilst they continue
in the Army, as the said Committee for the Army shall find Necessary to be
bought and provided for the Use of all or any part of the aforesaid Forces, and
for all other the Incident Charges of the Army and Forces aforesaid, and other
the purposes in this Act Expressed.

And the said Committee for the Army shall be and are hereby Authorized and
Empowered from time to time to Order, Direct, and Appoint the transmitting and
sending such sum and sums of money, as they shall from time to time find
necessary to be allowed and sent into Ireland and Scotland for the use and
payment of the Forces that are or shall be employed in the Service of this
Commonwealth, in either of the said places, and to give their Orders to the
Treasurers at War hereafter in this Act named, their Deputy or Deputies for the
payment of the said Forces and Garrisons and Incident Charges thereof, out of
the Moneys that shall be so transmitted and sent to either of the said places,
according to such Warrants as they shall receive in that behalf from the
Parliament, the Council of State, or Commissioners for the Army, according to
their present allowance of pay, or such other allowance of Pay or
Establishments as shall be hereafter made by the Parliament or Council of
State. And the said Committee for the Army shall be and are hereby empowered to
Impresse, Take up, or Employ such Carriages by Land and such Ships or Vessels
not being in the pay or service of the Commonwealth, as they shall find
necessary for the safe Carriage and Transporting of such Treasure as shall be
by them appointed and assigned to be sent into Ireland and Scotland, or to any
other place for the use of any the Forces in the service of this Commonwealth,
and to pay for such Carriages and Ships as they shall have occasion to use for
the purposes aforesaid. And the said Committee for the Army shall be and are
hereby Empowered and Authorized to Nominate, Appoint, and Employ such Clerks,
Agents, Messengers and Servants, and to make and give unto them such Sallaries,
Allowances, and Satisfactions, as they shall think fit, having respect to the
profit and advantage of the Commonwealth.

And Be it further Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Committee for the Army shall in every Warrant granted
by them, express for what purpose the Money contained in the same is to be
issued. And the Treasurers at War hereafter in this Act named, and all other
former Treasurers at War are hereby enjoined and required to observe such
Warrants or Orders as they shall receive from the Committee for the Army, or
any three of them for the purposes aforesaid, the which said Warrant or
Warrants, together with the Receipt thereupon under the hand of the person or
persons to whom any sum shall be directed to be paid; or his Assignee or
Assignees, shall be to all and every the said Treasurers at War a sufficient
Discharge.

And Be it Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
James Nelthorpe Esquire and John Lawson Esquire shall be, and are hereby appointed to
be Receivers-General and Treasurers at War for the Receiving, Paying and
Issuing forth of all Moneys that heretofore have been, or before the tenth Day
of October, 1660. shall be appointed for the use and payment of the Forces
aforesaid, and Charges incident thereunto. And the respective Receivers in the
several Counties, that now are, heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be
appointed to receive any part of the Moneys herein before mentioned, shall
forthwith after the Receipt thereof transmit and pay, or cause to be paid, the
Moneys by them so received unto the said Treasurers at War, and
Receivers-General herein before named, or where or to whom they shall appoint
to Receive the same, and the Receipt of the said Receivers-General and
Treasurers at War, shall be to the said respective Receivers, and to all other
Persons, who shall by Virtue of this Act pay any Money unto them for the
purposes aforesaid, a sufficient Discharge: And the said Receivers-General and
Treasurers at War herein named, for their pains in Receiving, Paying, and
Issuing forth of all such Moneys as shall be by Virtue of this Act Received by
them, and Defraying the necessary Charges and Expenses they shall be put unto
in the doing thereof; And in consideration that they shall execute the
Employment of Treasurers at War, until the Tenth Day of October, One Thousand
six hundred sixty, shall have and receive after the rate of four and twenty
hundred pounds by the Year, together with such extraordinary Charges as shall
be occasioned by the Portage, or transporting of Monyes by Land or Sea, which
the said Committee for the Army, or any three of them, are hereby authorized
and appointed by their order to allow unto them, from time to time, as they
shall think fit. And Be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Committee or Commissioners for the Army, for the time
being, or any three or more of them, do at or befory the end of one whole year
now next ensuing, and from thenceforth yearly once every year, call to account
the said Treasurers at War, or the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of
them, or such of them as shall be deceased (if any shall happen so to be) for
all the Monyes which shall be by them received, either as Receivors-Generall of
the Assessme^ts, or Treasurers at War out of the Assessments, or by any other
ways or means, saving and excepting such Monyes as shall be by them received
at the Receipt of the public Exchequer, and to give unto them, engrossed in
Parchment under their hands, a Discharge for so much of the said Monyes as
shall be by them duly and justly accounted for. And it is likewise Enacted and
Declared, That the first and second Remembrancers of the public Exchequer,
upon tender unto them of such Discharge as aforesaid, shall record and inroll
the same in the respective Offices, which being so Recorded and Enrolled, or
the Inrolment or Exemplification thereof shall be unto the said Treasurers at
War, their heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and their and every of their
Estates real and personal, a good, valid, and sufficient Discharge to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, without any other or further Account to be
rendered or made for the said Monyes, so accounted for as aforesaid, or any part
thereof.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the A^thority aforesaid, That the
said Treasurers at ^arr, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, do and
shall, when they shall be thereunto required by the said Committee or
Commissioners for the Army, or any three or more of them, within such time, and
according to such Rules, as shall be appointed, direct, or given in that
behalf by the said Co^mittee or Commissioners, or any three or more of them,
pass and perfect their Accounts for the Monyes so to be accounted for as
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof.

And Be it Enacted, and it is hereby further Enaeted, That John Blackwel and
Richard Dean Esquires, late Treasurers at War, shall forthwith pay unto the
present Treasurers at War by this Act constituted, all and every sum and sums
of Money remaining in their hands as Treasurers at War, and do henceforth
forbear, and are hereby discharged, to receive or dispose of any Monyes, any
way assigned for the Armies and Forces of this Commonwealth.

Thursday, February 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.


