blazon of the Protectorate
An Act for the better Preventing and Suppressing of Profane Swearing and
Cursing.
FOr the better preventing and suppressing of the detestable Sins of profane
Swearing and Cursing, Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the
Authority thereof, That if any person or persons shall hereafter offend by
profane Swearing or Cursing, in the presence or hearing of any Justice of the
Peace of the county, or chief Officer, or Justice of Peace of the city or Town
Corporate where the same shall be committed, or shall be thereof convicted by
Confession of the party, or by the Oath of one Witness or more, before any such
Justice of Peace of the county, or chief Officer or Justice of Peace of such
city or Town Corporate where such Offense is or shall be committed (for which
end every Justice of Peace, and every such Head-Officer as aforesaid, have
power hereby within their several Precincts to administer an Oath, and are
enjoined to keep a Record of such conviction, and to make certificates
quarterly of the Name of every person so convicted, and the degree of such his
or her Offense, to the Clerk of the Peace for the county where such conviction
shall be, to be by him Recorded) That then every such Offender shall for every
time so offending, forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of that Parish where
the same is or shall be committed, for the first Offense, according to the
Degree and Quality of such person and persons so offending, in manner and form
following; viz. Every person and persons who writes or styles himself, or is
usually written or styled Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, Baron or Lord, the sum
of Thirty shillings; Every person and persons who writes or styles himself,
or is usually written or styled Baronet or Knight, the sum of Twenty shillings;
Every person and person who writes or styles himself, or is usually written
or styled Esquire, the sum of Ten shillings; Every person and persons who
writes or styles himself, or is usually written or styled Gentleman, the sum
of Six shillings and eight pence; And all other person and persons whatsoever,
under the Degrees before expressed, shall forfeit and pay to the uses
aforesaid, the sum of Three shillings and four pence: And that every such
Offender and Offenders shall forfeit and pay for the second Offense, in manner
and form following; viz. Every such Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, Baron or
Lord as aforesaid, the sum of Three pounds; Every such Baronet or Knight as
aforesaid, the sum of Forty shillings; Every such Esquire as aforesaid, the sum
of Twenty shillings; Every such Gentleman as aforesaid, the sum of Thirteen
shillings and four pence; And all and every other person and persons whatsoever
so offending, under the said Degrees, the sum of Six shillings and eight pence:
And that every such Offender and Offenders for the third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth Offense, and every of them being thereof convicted as
aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay to the uses and purposes aforesaid, the
penalty and forfeiture by this Act imposed on every such person, according to
his Degree and Quality aforesaid, for such second Offense. And be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons, of
what Degree or Quality soever, who shall upon Information, Presentment or
Indictment before any Justice of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
Justices of the Peace in every Shire* City or Town (who have hereby power and
authority to enquire of, hear and determine the same) by Confession or Verdict
be found guilty of any the Offenses aforesaid the tenth time, shall besides
incurring the forfeiture by this Act imposed on such person for such second
Offense, be adjudged a Common Swearer or Curser, and be bound with Sureties to
the Good Behavior during three years; and that for every like Offense
afterward, upon the like conviction, every such Offender shall incur the like
Forfeiture, and give the like Security as for the tenth Offense: And that if
any person that shall be so bound as aforesaid, shall at any time aftewards,
while he stands so bound, be convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense,
the same shall be adjudged and taken to be, and the same is hereby Adjudged and
Declared to be a Breach of the Good Behavior by every such person and persons.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Woman, whether
she be Wife, Widow or single Woman, that shall commit any of the Offenses
aforesaid, in the presence of any Justice of Peace or Head-Officer aforesaid,
or shall be of such Offense convicted as aforesaid, shall for every such
Offense incur the like forfeiture, penalty and judgment, as if the same
Offense had been committed by the Husband of such Wife or Widow, or by the
Father of such single Woman, and according to the Degree and Quality of such
Husband and Father respectively herein before expressed. And be it likewise
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the Forfeitures
aforesaid, shall be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of every person and
persons before specified so offending, by Warrant from such Justice of the
Peace or Head-Officer aforesaid, by Distress and Sale of the said Goods and
Chattels, restoring the overplus: And in default of payment of the said
Forfeiture, or Security given for the same, in case no sufficient Distress
shall be found, the Offender, if he or she be above the Age of Twelve years,
shall by Warrant from such Justice of the Peace or Head-Officer, be set in the
Stocks, there to remain for the space of three whole hours for such first
Offense; and for the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and
ninth Offense, and every of them, for the space of six hours; but if the
Offender be under the Age of Twelve years, and shall not forthwith pay the
Forfeiture aforesaid, That then he or she shall by Warrant of such Justice of
the Peace or Head-Officer, be whipped by the Constable, or by the Parent or
Master of such Offender, in the presence of the Constable. And be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for
any Constable, Headborough, Churchwarden, Overseer of the Poor, or any other
Officer, to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, or for any other person or
persons whatsoever, by Warrant from any Justice of Peace, or such Head-Officer
as aforesaid, to apprehend and bring, or cause to be apprehended and brought
before any Justice of Peace, or Head-Officer as aforesaid, the Body of any
person or persons offending contrary to this Act, to the end all such persons
may be proceeded against as to Justice shall appertain. And it is further
Enacted, That in any Action brought against any Justice of Peace, Constable, or
any other Officer or person acting or doing, or commanding to be acted or done,
any thing in pursuance of this Act, touching or concerning any the Offenses or
Matters aforesaid, The Defendant in every such Action shall and may plead the
General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence: And upon the Nonsuit
of the Plaintiff, or Verdict passing for the Defendant, the party Defendant
shall have and recover his and their treble Costs. And be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That this present Act shall be in force from and after
the First day of August, One thousand six hundred and fifty: And that one Act
of Parliament, made in the One and twentieth year of the Reign of the late King
James (Entitled, An Act against profane Swearing and Cursing) be and is, from
and after the said First day of August, hereby Repealed. And it is lastly
Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That this Act be forthwith printed; and that
all and every Sheriff and Sheriffs of every county and city within England and
Wales, do Proclaim, or cause this Act to be Proclaimed in all Cities, Towns,
Boroughs, and other public and usual places within their respective
Liberties, upon the Market Day next after the receipt thereof, and cause the
same to be set up, and affixed in the public places accustomed.

Die Veneris, 28 Junii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.


