Anno XII. Car. Regis II. AN ACT FOR THE NECESSARY Maintenance of the WORK of
DREINING the Great LEVEL OF THE FENNS.
BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice and with the
consent of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament: That for Maintenance
and Preservation of the Great Level of the Fens, Extending it self into the
Counties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridge and Huntington,
and the Isle of Ely or some of them; and for laying and levying of Taxes, and
securing the said Level from drowning only, That all Taxes already made and
Asseassed, or to be made or Asseassed only upon the 95000. Acres given by one
pretended Act of Parliament of the 29th. day of May 1649. unto William Earl of
Bedford, Edward Russell' Esquire, Robert Henley Esquire deceased, and Robert
Castle Esquire; and their Heirs and Assigns in Trust for the said Earl, his
Participants and Adventurers for dreining of the said Great Level before the
29th day of May next coming, by color of or according to the intent of the
said pretended Act shall stand in force, and shall and may be collected and
gathered; so as the said Taxes to be hereafter set upon the said 95000. Acres
exceed not 3. s. the Acre: And that all Arrears of Rents already incurred upon
or out of any part of the said 95000. Acres, or that shall incur and grow due
before the said 29th. day of May next coming, upon any Contract or Lease of the
Premises, or any part or pacell thereof; shall be received and recovered, as if
the said pretended Act had been a good and Effectual Act, And the Possession of
the 95000. Acres is settled and quieted, as the same now is, until the said
29th. day of May next, any thing to the contrary thereof, Notwithstanding.
Provided always, And it is further Enacted and Declared, that this Act nor any
thing therein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend to preclude the
Kings Majesty, or any other Person or Persons from and after the said 29th. day
of May 1661. From any Right, Title, Claim or Interest, which His Majesty, or
any other Person or Persons had, has or may have, or pretend to have to any
part of the said 95000. Acres mentioned in the said pretended Act. But that all
such Right and Title shall be preserved to His Majesty, and to all such other
Persons after the expiration of this Act, as fully as if this Act had not been
made, or according to such determination as shall be thereof made by the
Parliament before the said 29th. day of May 1661. Provided also that this Act
shall not be Construed or made use of to Countenance or Confirm any Sales,
Forfeiture or other Dispositions, Conveyances or Estates of Land made for not
payment of Taxes and Assessements or otherwise, or to make good any Act or
Thing whatsoever, that has been or shall be done in pursuance or color of the
said pretended Act, after the said 29th. day of May 1661. But that all Persons
concerned, and all Things and Estates shall be, and remain in the same State
and Condition from and after the said 29th. of May, as if this Act had never
been made. Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all such differences as now are or shall arise between the former Adventurers
and the said Earl of Bedford and his Participants; And all things in difference
and dispute between the said Earl and Participants, and the Countries within or
Bordering upon the said Level, are not at all Concluded or overruled by this
Actor any thing therein contained: But all the said differences are left to be
determined according to Law and Equity. Provided always, And be it Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That if by occasion of the Adventurers Works, the
Waters shall be raised higher on the ancient Country Banks then formerly, to
the damage of the Country: That then the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the
Judges of the one Bench and other, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any two of
them, or the Judges of the Assizes in the Respective Counties, are hereby
empowered upon hearing of parties and Judgment of the Cause or Causes, to
award damages, open Sluices, and to apply such remedies as shall be just.
Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
Arthur Anntsley Esquire, Sir William Playters, Sir Jo. Hewett Barronets,
Richard Fienes, Samuel Sandys, To: Phillips, William Terringham, William Dodson
and Anthony St. John Esquires, Claiming a fourth part of the said 95000. Acres,
be and are hereby constituted Commissioners to join with the Earl of Bedford
and his Participants for the more orderly support and carrying on the work of
the said Level, during the continuance of this Act.


