THE Present Interest OF ENGLAND IN Matters of Religion, Stated.

Wherein is clearly demonstrated that the Protestant Religion may be fully
secured from Popery, though the Penal Laws be taken away.

By W. D. a Lover of Liberty for Conscience sake.

Rev. 2.7. He that has an ear to hear let him hear. With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by T.S. and sold by most Booksellers. 1688.

The Present Interest of England in matters of Religion, stated, etc.
BOoks are now written to instruct the present Age, and to inform the future;
that this may know what ought to be done, and that may see what has been done;
and in this lies the great skill and wisdom of good men, to know and understand
the work of God in their day, that they may be laborers together with God, and
workers together with him, 1 Cor. 3.9.
and serve their generation by the will of God. 2 Cor. 6.1.
Sometimes men do not know, nor understand the work of God in their day. Jacob
staid so long in Canaan till he wanted bread; God sent a Famine upon that Land,
that Jacob and his Family might go down to Egypt, and to eat bread to the full.
God remembered him in his low estate, but he remembered not the mighty works of
God that he had seen, nor that experience he had of his love and grace, his
mercies and goodness that had followed him all along; he looked upon the
providence of God, and they seemed to run cross to the promises; he looked
upon the work of God, and that seemed to be so dark, that he could see no
beauty nor glory in it: He looked upon the things that then befell him, and they
seemed to work together for his hurt: And Jacob said, All these things are
against me. Gen 42.36.
He looked upon Simeon that was left behind in Egypt, to be a dead man, Joseph
is not, and Simeon is not, and the going down of Benjamin with the rest of his
Brethren, to be nothing but a trick and a design of the Egyptians to get all
his Sons into their hands, that they might be Bondmen and Slaves at the least:
And he said, Me have ye bereaved of my Children. When Jacob saw the glory of
God's work appear, then he rejoiced; but the way to that glory he did not
understand. Now that which God intended and designed by all this, was the
fulfilling of his word, the glory of his holy name, the increase of his Church,
that he might make of them a great Nation, as he had promised. And the Lord
said unto Abraham, Know of a surety, that thy Seed shall be a stranger in a
Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four
hundred years, and also that Nation whom they shall serve, will I judge, and
afterward shall they come out with great substance, Genesis 15.13, 14. When men
do not understand the work of God in their day, then they censure, and arraign,
and condemn that wisdom and power, that love and grace, that goodness and
mercy, that is moving toward them, and breaking in upon them. God can do
whatsoever he pleases, and he will do whatsoever he has promised.

Sometimes men leave the work of God, and forsake it, and turn their backs upon
it, after they have been engaged in it. Numb. 13.26.
So did the Children of Israel when they were in the Wilderness of Paran. God
had taken them out of the Iron Furnace, and had brought them up from the House
of Bondage, and saved them from the Swords of the Egyptians, and sealed his
truth to them by Miracles and Wonders in the Wilderness as they past along. And
now they being come near Canaan, the Lord commanded them by Moses, to go in and
possess that good Land, Ezekiel. 20.6.
a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, the glorious Land, and the glory of
all Lands. And this was the work of God in that day, but they rebelled against
the Lord, and would not hearken unto his voice. And all the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses, and against Aaron: and the whole Congregation said unto
them, Would God that we had died in the Land of Egypt, or would God we had died
in this Wilderness; and wherefore has the Lord brought us unto this Land, to
fall by the Sword, that our Wives and our Children should be a prey? Were it
not better for us to return into Egypt? And they said one to another, Let us
make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt, Numb. 14.2, 3, 4. You see here
they were for Egypt, and not Canaan: For a new Captain to lead them, and not
Moses: For Bondage and Slavery, and not Liberty and Freedom: And God Almighty
took them at their word. As truly as I live says the Lord, as ye have spoken
in mine Ears, so will I do to you. Your Carcases shall fall in this Wilderness,
and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole number from twenty
years old and upward which have murmured against me, verse 28, 29. Their Egypt
was the Wilderness, their Captain was their punishment, and forty years was the
time of their misery. But with many of them God was not well-pleased, for they
were overthrown in the Wilderness. 1 Cor. 10.5.
They that will not hear the word of God that is spoken to them, shall feel the
wrath of God that is spoken of them. There is a way of flying to God, but there
is no way of flying from God.

Sometimes men despise the work of God, and look upon it as a very small thing,
not worthy of their acceptance; this did the Jews that were in Captivity, which
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from the land of Judea to Babylon. And after
they had been there threescore and ten years, 2 Chronicles. 36.21.
the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, that he made a
Proclamation thoughout all his Kingdom, and put it also in Writing, saying* Who
is there among you of all his people? His God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem which is in Judah, and Build the House of the Lord God of Israel, he
is the God which is in Jerusalem. And whosoever remains in any place where he
sojourneth let the men of his place help him with Silver, and with Gold, and
with Goods, and with Beasts, besides the Free Will Offering for the House of
God that is in Jerusalem, Ezra 1.1, 3, 4.

Now what did these Jews do after they had seen the Kings Proclamation, which
was so full of Love and Goodness? Did they go up to Jerusalem, and Build the
House of God? Their Yokes were now broken, their Bands were loosed, their heavy
Burdens were removed, Liberty was proclaimed, a Door was opened of Mercy and
Grace, the Call of God was clear, the Work of God was great and glorious. Ezra
7.7. Ezra 1.5^.
Some of them did go up. They were only them whose spirits God had raised to go
up; but the most of them did not, as appeared afterward by Haman's Plot,
Esther 3.8, 9. And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, there is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people, in all the Provinces of thy
Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the
Kings Laws; therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. If it
please the King let it be written that they may be destroyed, and I will pay
ten Thousand Talents of Silver to the hands of those that have the charge of
the business. How sad is it then not to follow the call of God? These Jews
looked upon the Way up to Jerusalem to be long, the Journey dangerous, the
Success doubtful, the King a Heathen, the Enemy there before, and therefore
they despised the work of God, and preferred their ease before glory, and
bondage before freedom, and their little concerns before the great and glorious
work of God. They chose rather to dwell amongst the Heathens, and to see their
abominable Idolatry, than to go up with their Brethren to Jerusalem to worship
the Lord. When men take their measures from their fears, and jealousies, and
not from the word of God, and his providence: When men consult with Flesh and
Blood, and not the duty of their places, and the work of God that lies before
them: When men lean to their own understandings, and reject the counsel of God:
When men rely upon an Arm of Flesh, and not upon the mighty God of Jacob; then
they do despise the work of God in their day, and cry it down, and endeavor to
bring an evil report upon it, saying, Ah, this is not the time, this is not the
way, these are not fit instruments to be employed. O vain man, know and
consider, that Gods power is irresistible, his wisdom unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out. Sin at the first was the cause of all ignorance, but now
ignorance is the cause of all sin. Our work below is then the best done, when
our work above is the first done.

Sometimes men resist the work of God, and oppose it in their day, and seek to
overthrow it* This the persecuting Jews did in the days of our Savior, and in
the days of the Apostles. For this man does many Miracles; Acts 5.39.
if we let this man alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall
come and take away both our place and nation, John 11.47, 48. These words were
spoken in Counsel, and the design of them was to overthrow the work of God, to
persecute Christ Jesus to death, and his faithful Witnesses. Then from that day
forth they took Counsel together for to put him to death, verse 53. he came and
preached peace to them, but they proclaimed War against him. He came to his
own, but they received him not. He came to heal them, but they wounded him. He
came to save them, but they killed him. He was full of love, grace, and truth,
but they were filled with rage, malice, prejudice, and unbelief. They clipped
the wings of his mercy, and clogged the wheels of his love and kindness. They
shut up the treasures of his grace against themselves, and held the hand of his
power by their unbelief. And he did not many mighty works there because of
their unbelief, Matthew. 13.58. That which the unbelieving Jews said then, the
unbelieving Gentiles say now. We will not have this man to reign over us. Sin
and Satan shall reign, the Law and the Letter shall reign: But he that is Lord
of life, and gives life, shall not reign over us. The ways and methods that the
Jews took to keep the Romans out, brought the Romans in upon them. For they
persecuted Gods Faithful Servants, and commanded them not to preach the Gospel,
not to speak in his name, and that brought the wrath of God upon them.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always: For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians.
2.16. When men take evil ways to save themselves from the evil they fear, that
may come and may not come, it is the ready way to bring that evil upon them
they fear. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof,
Matthew. 6.34. When we make God our refuge, and strength, then he makes Heaven
our inheritance, and the Earth our passage to that glorious inheritance.

I have in the first place showed you what was done heretofore by the Jews, and
what that work of God was in their days; For whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. And now in the second place I
shall show you, what that work of God is in our day, that you that know may
know more, and do the things that are Just, and best for your selves, and
others. This then is a twofold work.

1. A Salvation Work. 2. A Generation Work.
1. First a Salvation Work. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2.12. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the
night comes wherein no man can work, John 9.4. Death is a work, but wants to
be done. the doing of it well then, will require now our utmost endeavors, our
greatest diligence, our always abounding in the work of the Lord, a considering
of our ways, a right ordering of our conversations, a running the race that is
set before us, a striving to enter in at the strait gate, a giving all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, a growing in grace, and a
laying up a good foundation against the time to come, and a laboring for that
bread that perishes not. O consider this, that Heaven, and Hell, will divide
between them all the people that are now living upon the earth in a little
time; every man must shoot the Gulf of Eternity at Death, and then another Gulf
will be fixed. And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot, neither can
they pass to us that would come from thence, Luke 16.26. They that dye in their
sins, God will never return to them to show mercy, and they shall never return
to him to receive mercy. O work therefore while it is called to day, the day of
mercy is yet continued, and the day of grace is not yet ended: he that will dye
but once, must dye daily: he that will be delivered from the second Death, must
have a part in the first Resurrection: He that will be equal with Saints in
Glory, must be eminent with Saints in Grace. No Souls can live with God in
Heaven, but such in whom the Spirit of God lived whiles they were on Earth.
They that neglect the work of their Salvation, cannot escape the punishment of
their Damnation. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb.
2.3. This is the work that every man should most pursue, and that early, and
not to refer it, and put it off to a dying hour. O how unfit a time is that for
so great a work? Oftentimes Men's Speech is taken from them, they would speak,
but cannot; sometimes their reason is taken from them, they are lightheaded,
and speak they know not what; surely that is not a proper season for men to
make their peace with God. Can any man think that God Almighty will be so soon
reconciled to him, that has lived a sinful wicked life all his days, when he
lies on his death bed, under the weight of all his sins when wrath is in his
bosom, and vengeance at his back? I was told lately of a rich man, that spoke
these words on his bed, a little before he dyed; I have left thousands for this
Child, and thousands for that Child, but I have no treasures laid up for my
self in Heaven. To make them Rich, I have made my self Poor: to make them
great, I have made my self miserable; and now my poor Soul is left to shift for
it self, what will become of it I know not. O is not this the sad state and
condition of many a Rich Man when he comes to dye? A great man may enjoy much,
and yet he wants more than he enjoys; he wants the favor of God, an interest
in Jesus Christ, and that joy of the holy Ghost which is unspeakable, and full
of glory, and that love of God, which is better than life, and that grace which
is sufficient, and assurance of that glory which God has promised, and Christ
has purchased. O work while it is day, for the night comes when no man can
work. When once the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord
open unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you
are. Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Luke 13.25, 26, 27. O be therefore
traders for heaven, that God may be your portion, Christ your gain, Heaven your
home, and Glory your reward. This then is the work of your Salvation to
continue in well-doing, seeking for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Romans
2.7.
and Eternal Life: But Glory, Honor and Peace to every one, that works good.
ver. 10, 11.
For there is no respect of persons with God.

Secondly, A Generation Work. And you will say, What is that? Have you not
known, have you not heard, has it not been told you? God Almighty has spoken
to these Nations from Heaven, by his mighty works which we have all seen: and
the Trumpet of his providence has sounded this truth aloud in our ears: To
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke, Isaiah 58.6.

Who is there amongst us, that has not heard this voice? The King that sits
upon the Throne has spoken to us, by his late gracious Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience. Gamaliel by one argument silenced a whole assembly of
persecutors, that had agreed to slay the Holy Apostles. And they took Counsel
together to slay them, Acts 5.33. Gamaliels argument was this: Now I say unto
you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel, or this
work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow
it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God, verse 38, 39. Now the
King by his gracious Declaration has done much more, for he has silenced all
the persecutors in three Kingdoms, and tied up their hands, that they cannot
smite with the fist of wickedness: Many Thousands of Gods people in these
Kingdoms have spoken also to you, by the many humble addresses they presented
to the King, blessing God, and thanking the King for this Liberty of Conscience
which they now enjoy. Persecution is a thing so ill in its nature, so black in
its name, so bad in its effects and consequences, so displeasing to God, so
hurtful to a Kingdom, and so destructive to trade, that modesty it self might
restrain men from that hellish and devilish work, though they had nothing of
Christianity in them: and this will appear farther, because, Blessed are they,
which are persecuted for Righteousness sake for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. Now if they be blessed, that are persecuted, then they
that persecute are cursed. If Heaven be the reward of faithful sufferers for
Conscience sake toward God, then Hell will be the portion of persecutors. 2
These. 1.6.
If persecution be a thing so evil and bad, let us consider then what these
Penal Laws and Tests are; and what they have done, or has been done by them.

1. First then, These Penal Laws have armed your Enemies, and put Weapons into
their Hands to destroy you that are Dissenters. When you were in the hands of
your persecutors, they neither pitied you, nor spared you; but broke open your
Doors, and entered into your Houses, taking away your Money and Goods, and at
some places not leaving the Poor People a Bed to lie on, nor a Stool to sit on:
forcing you to attend from Sessions to Sessions, and from Assize to Assize,
still keeping them bound over, and putting many into Prison, and there keeping
them long, and some so long till they died. And at that time they told you,
that it was not they that spoiled you of your goods, but the Laws: it was not
they that shut you up in Prison, but the Laws: it was not they that punished
and destroyed you for your Consciences toward God, but the Laws. This was that
persecutors said then, and this is that they say now, it was the Laws that
destroyed you, and not them. The King by his Declaration has put Violence out
of their Hands, that they cannot hurt you; and do you pray to God that he might
put Violence out of their Hearts, that they may not hate you; and take hold of
this opportunity that God has put into your Hands, by all Just and Lawful
means, that those Laws may be destroyed, that have destroyed so many people.
This makes men bold to commit the greatest wickedness, when they have Laws to
encourage them, and bear them out. This said the Jews that Murdered our Lord
and Savior, John 19.7.
We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye. Dan. 6.15.
And this was the thing that cast Daniel into the Den of Lions, namely the Law
of the Medes and Persians. And this was that encouraged Haman to contrive the
destruction and ruin of so many thousand Jews at once; Esther 3.8.
The Law being on his side, and against them. And this is that the Prophet
Micah complained of, That the Statutes of Omri were kept up, and all the works
of the house of Ahab, Micah 6.16. Now if the Penal Laws be so hurtful, who then
can plead for their continuance?

2. Secondly these Penal Laws have given great encouragement to the Informers:
Good men will not labor for nothing, and bad men will stick at nothing: All is
Fish that comes to their Net, and they will Fi^h though they catch the Devil,
and their own damnation together: These Laws allowing the Informer a third part
of the money that is got from the people, Matthew. 26.14, 15.
that go to quiet and peaceable Meetings, there to worship the Lord in spirit
and in truth. Judas for the love of thirty pieces of silver sold his Lord and
Master into the hands of Betrayers and Murderers. Esth. 3.9, 13.
Ahasuerus to gain ten thousand Talents of silver consented, and commanded that
the best people in all his Kingdom should be destroyed by cruel and bloody
hands. Achan to purchase a Wedge of Gold, and some silver, brought upon himself
and Family destruction; and troubled, and disquieted all Israel. By this you
may see what men will do, when there is money in the case: These Penal Laws did
set a great many hands at work, but none were so industrious as the Informers,
for that sort of Vermin crawled up and down every where, and were a plague to
all people wherever they came; hunting and searching up and down to find out
Meetings, that they might prey upon the people, and get what money they could
from them: And this was their Trade to set up a workhouse for Hell. Now when
the Penal Statutes are taken away, this Trade will be for ever destroyed. Who
will plead for these Penal Laws that they may be kept up? surely none, but they
that had a hand in robbing and spoiling their poor Neighbors. 1. Joh. 5.15.
In the sense of the Apostle John, Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer;
and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. You may see by
this Text who are the Murderers: And if men shall be sent away with a Curse
into Everlasting Fire for not relieving and comforting the People of God, when
they were in distress, and sought unto them that were full, and rich, but they
had no bowels of compassion in them: What do you think will become of them at
that day, that have robbed and spoiled the People of God in this day? Oh that
such men would give glory to God by Repentance, and satisfaction to their poor
Neighbors by an acknowledgment to them of the wrong they have done them.

3. The third Reason why these Penal Laws ought to be taken away, is this;
because they have destroyed Religion, and opened a door to let in Debauchery
and Profaneness upon the People of these Lands; the sad effects of which we
see at this day. Religion is the glory of a People, the interest of a Kingdom,
and that which exalts a Nation. Prove. 14.34.
Now that which destroys religious men, destroys Religion: but that these Penal
Laws have destroyed great numbers of religious People since they were made, is
evident and plain to all that know any thing: These Penal Statutes have been
the Fiery Serpents that have slung and bit the People of God as they past on
their way through this Wilderness to the heavenly Canaan. Numb. 21.6.
These have been the Thorns in their sides, that have pricked and scratched
many: These have been a Yoke, which neither us, nor our Forefathers were able
to bear. Because that Amalek fell upon God's Israel, as they past along in the
way, God commanded Moses to write this for a memorial in a Book, and rehearse
it in the ears of Joshua; for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek
from under Heaven, Exodus 17.14. King Saul had a commission from God to do this
work; Go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare
them not, but slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel
and Ass: But Saul did not do this work so fully, as God had commanded him, and
therefore he lost two Kingdoms, an earthly Kingdom, and an heavenly Kingdom;
first his Life, and then his Soul, 1 Samuel 15.3, 23, 26, 28. Persecutors are but
one people in all Ages; they rise up in the Spirit of Cain, and allow of the
deeds of their Forefathers; and are the Children of them which have killed the
Prophets, and are guilty of all the righteous bloodshed upon the Earth, from
the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of the last murdered Saint. This
blood has cried long, and loud for vengeance on Persecutors, and God Almighty
will give a full, and speedy answer to it; this will be but a bad plea for Men,
when they shall appear before Almighty God, nor but little comfort to them in
this world, when they are on a sick Bed, that they had Laws for what they did.
For if a Law be sinful, and bad, as these Penal Laws are, this will not bear a
man out. The Jews were under Righteous Laws, and yet wicked: But these men have
destroyed the Righteous by Wicked Laws: Destroyed them in their Estates,
destroyed them in their Liberties, destroyed them in their Relations, and
destroyed many in their Lives: By this you may see what these Penal Laws are. O
let all good Men say of these Penal Laws, as Samuel said to Agag; And Samuel
said, As thy Sword has made Women childless, so shall thy Mother be childless
among Women, 1 Samuel 15.33.

4. Fourthly, These Laws which are called Penal Laws, have destroyed Liberty,
and Property: that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, concerning the
Caterpillars, and Locusts, and Palmer-Worms, and Canker-Worms, the same may be
said of these Penal Laws: That which the Palmer-Worm has left, has the Locust
eaten, and that which the Locust has left, has the Canker-Worm eaten, and
that which the Canker-Worm has left, has the Caterpiller eaten, Joel 1.4. Now
this was a Judgment that was upon the Land, and a Plague upon the People of
Israel: all this may be truly applied to the case in hand; for what one Law
left, the other took, and amongst them swept away all that the people had; that
of twenty pound a month took away their Property, and for not coming to the
Sacrament they lost their Liberty by another Law, and a third shut them up in
Prison during Life, and a fourth if they would not abjure, and leave the Land,
then they were to be hanged up as Felons. These were your Penal Statutes, that
were then put in force and execution against you; are these Statutes fit to be
kept up now, think you? Where is the man that would be impo'd upon himself, and
forced, and compelled? where is the man that would be persecuted, and
oppressed, and robbed of his Liberty, and Property? Every man values that at a
high rate, and all partys are for Liberty; every man is for Liberty for
himself, and his own party, though he will not allow it to others: now if all
men would but walk by this rule, do as they would be done by, do as they would
have others do unto them, mete that measure to others as they would have others
to mete unto them, and to love their Neighbors as themselves; for upon this
hangs the Law, and the Prophets, it is a fulfilling the Law: For the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
Gal. 5.14. If men did but duly observe, and keep this, then they would not be
so fond, and desirous to keep up compelling, and persecuting Laws.

But I proceed to the fifth, and that is this:

5. That these Penal Laws have destroyed Love and Charity among Men; a thing
much to be desired, and highly to be valued. When these Laws lay asleep, and
were not put in force, how peaceably and quietly did one Neighbor live by
another, how sweetly and friendly did one man converse with each other? But no
sooner did that Brat of Hell, and of the Devil (Persecution) come amongst us,
but it put the whole Nation in a flame, like Sampson's Foxes that did set all
on fire they came near; Judge. 15.4, 5.
then it was nothing but Whig and Tory, Trimmer and Papist in Masquerade: And
in this firmentation was the Nation in, till the King's Gracious Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, came forth flying amongst us: That quenched, and put
out these fires, that the Penal Laws had kindled: It brought peace to them that
were in trouble, ease to them that were weary, and relief to them that were in
distress: It loosed the bands of them that were bound over, and opened the
Prison doors to them that were shut up, and sent Laborers into the Lord's
Vineyard that stood still; it put violence out of the hands of them that
destroyed, and it filled the hearts of many with joy, and their mouths with
praises and thanksgiving: First to God Almighty, and then to the King, for his
great Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Goodness and Kindness toward his poor Subjects.
The good effects of this all good men see, and rejoice in. Now if these Penal
Laws were the great Makebate amongst the People, then the taking of them away
will slay that enmity, and bury all these reproachful names, and terms, that
men have cast upon one another.

6. In the sixth place, Persecution is that which discourageth Trade, and
greatly destroys it: It was that which brought the Trade into England, and it
is that which will carry the Trade out of England. The Persecution that was
heretofore in other Lands, made the Trading-people fly over into these Lands,
who showed the people here, the way of making these Manufactures, that are now
made in such abundance, and have proved so profitable and beneficial to these
Kingdoms: This is so well known, that it cannot be denied. Now the same way
that brought the Trade to us, will certainly carry it from us. When these Penal
Laws were put in force, did not many Tradesmen leave the Land, and Merchants,
and others in several Cities in this Kingdom did leave their habitations, and
were forced to remove to other places, because of the Persecution that was
then? This is well known to most men. Now as Righteousness exalts a Nation, so
Trade enricheth a Nation. A proof of this you may see, if you look over into
Holland, they granting Liberty of Conscience to all Persuasions; this brought
them a Trade, and that Trade has made them so great, and rich, that as it were
from a small Worm, they are become a great Mountain, and from being Poor
Distressed States, they now call themselves the High and Mighty; from begging,
and craving help of others to support them, their Trade has so supported them,
and increased their wealth and strength, that they strive to grasp the Trade of
Nations into their own hands? Now all these blessings they sucked from the
Breast of Liberty of Conscience. Trade is a great part of the glory of a
Nation: It fills the King's Coffers with Treasure (the Custom being one of the
Jewels of his Crown:) It increases Merchants, and makes them great: It
enricheth the Shopkeepers, and makes them wealthy: It encourages Shipping, and
Navigation, that carries out the Manufactures of England, and returns with rich
Commodities, and with Gold, and Silver: It sets thousands of hands at work, and
imploys the poor of the Land; it encourages Strangers, and Foreigners to come
and dwell amongst us, to show us their art and skill: It advances the price of
Land, that the Nobles, and Gentry have so great a part of. This shows the great
advantage of Trade, that extends its benefits to every man. Now they that are
for the keeping up of the Penal Statutes, are not the Friends of the
Commonwealth, but Enemies to Trade, because they are for Persecution. Now he
that runs may read, and he that reads may see the evil of these Penal Laws.

I shall now come to the Objections that are usually made against the taking
away of these Laws, and answer them. The first Objection is this: Do you think
that this Liberty and Toleration which you now enjoy, is granted and given to
you in love and kindness; is it not to serve a turn, and to bring about another
thing? Now my answer to this Objection is this; If this work be of God, then it
is in love and kindness to the Dissenters: But this work is of God, as will
appear to all men, that do but consider well these three things, that is, the
time, the way, and the effects. First then of the time; when this King came to
the Crown, what were men's thoughts then? The Sufferers they thought, that their
condition would have been worse; the Persecutors they thought that their Trade
would have been better: The Sufferers they did not expect to have enjoyed that
which they now enjoy; it was above their Faith, and beyond their hopes. The
Persecutors they did not believe, nor fear, that they should have seen, and
beheld the things they now see. This great disappointment has filled the one
with joy and gladness, and the other with rage and madness. God has overtaken
his People with preventing mercies, and has reproved his enemies in the way;
he has opened the mouths of this people to bless God, and the King for this
Liberty granted to them, and has tied up the hands of Persecutors, and this
makes them blaspheme. O let men praise the Lord for his wondrous works, and let
them know that the most High God does whatsoever he pleases in the Kingdoms of
men, Psalm. 135.6.


2. Of the way; other Kings have given Liberty of Conscience to their Subjects,
because they were of their persuasions; but this King gives Liberty of
Conscience to all his Protestant Subjects, though himself be of another
persuasion; and in this he out-shines in glory all the Crowned Heads that were
before him. The King thinks that our persuasion is the wrong, and we believe
that his is not the right, nevertheless this does not lessen his Power, and
Authority over us, nor diminish our Duty and Obedience to him. God has put
this into the Heart of the King, that all the Yokes, and Bonds, and Burdens,
that have been laid upon Conscience, or on men for their Conscience sake
toward God, in the former Reigns to be broken, and for ever removed. Is not
this a wonderful work of God, to have all this done at once, which could never
be done before, and we have reason to think that it would never have been done
by any Prince but this? O let no man say, that there is a new King risen up
that knew not Joseph, or that there is a Joseph in the Land, that will not know
Pharaoh. O let this Liberty be thankfully received, and wisely improved, that
Gods glory may be advanced, that the Justice, wisdom, kindness, and goodness of
the King, may be acknowledged, as the great instrument in the hand of God, in a
work so great and good as this is toward his People.

3. Of the effects, no man can say now in this our Israel, that the Gates of
Liberty are shut up against him: The Righteous Nation that keeps the truth may
now enter in. Isa. 26.2.
No man can say now in these Kingdoms, That the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence. Mat. 23.13.
Every Man may now enter into it that will. No Man can say now in City, or
Country, that the evil Angels hold the Winds, that they cannot blow, that is,
Persecutors: Every Man may now sit under the breathings of Gods Spirit in the
Ministry of the Word, Rev. 7.1.
and serve him without fear. Many hundreds have been let out of Prison, that
were before shut up: many thousands that were before troubled and prosecuted,
are now quiet, and in peace: many hundreds are now Laboring in the Lords
Vineyard, preaching the Word of God up and down every where, and there be many
thousands of Souls, that do attend and hear the Word of God preached to them.
Have not many thousands of the People in these Nations owned, and acknowledged
this to be the Work of God in their Addresses to the King? Now by all this you
may see, that it is the work of God, then it is in love and kindness to the
Dissenters; let this then serve for an Answer to this Objection.

The second Objection is: If these Penal Laws should be taken away, then Popery
will come in upon us. By this Objection then I perceive the thing that you
fear, is the coming in of Popery, and the way that you will take to keep it
out, is to continue the Penal Laws: Now this being an evil way, may bring that
evil upon you which you fear: Numb. 13.28. to 33.
This evil way the Israelites of old did take when they were afraid of the
Canaanites: And they said one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let us
return into Egypt. Number. 14 4. Verse 29. 1 Cor. 10.
Now this being an evil way, brought that evil upon them which they feared;
Your carcasses shall fall in this wilderness. This evil way did King Saul take
when he was afraid of the Philistines: Then said Saul unto his servants, 1 Samuel
28.5, 8, 9. Verse 7.
Seek me a woman that has a familiar Spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire
of her; and his servants said unto him, Behold there is a woman that has a
familiar Spirit at Endor. Now this being an evil way, brought that evil upon
him and his Sons which he feared. So Saul died, and his three Sons, and his
Armor-bearer, and all his Men that same day together, 1 Samuel 31.4, 5, 6. This
was the evil way that King Zedekiah did take, when he was afraid of the
Chaldaeans, Jer. 38.19.20.
he would not hearken to the word of the Lord by Jeremiah the Prophet; But he
fled, and went forth out of the City by night, by the way of the King's
Gardens, by the Gate betwixt two walls, and he went out the way of the Plain,
Jer. 39.4. This being an evil way, did bring upon him and his house all that
evil which he feared. Then the King of Babylon slew the Sons of Zedekiah before
his eyes in Riblah, and he slew all the Nobles of Judah, and he put out
Zedekiahs eyes, and bound him in Chains, to carry him to Babylon, Jer. 39.6.7.
This evil way did the Jews take in the days of our Savior, and in the days of
the Apostles, when they were afaid of the Romans. John 11.48.
The Romans shall come, and take away both our Place and Nation. To save
themselves from the Romans, they kept up Persecution, and did slay Gods
faithful Witnesses, Mat. 23 35. Acts 7.32.
and were betrayers and murderers, and did endeavor to overthrow the work of
God, and the faith of the Gospel. Luke 21 6, 26.
Now this being an evil way also, brought all that evil upon them which they
feared. And are you still for the keeping up of compelling and persecuting
Laws, because you are afraid of Popery? Is this the way to keep it out? Never
yet did any people take an evil way to save themselves from the evil they
feared, but it brought it upon them. I have here showed you this at large, and
I have also showed you the evil of these Penal Laws: Take heed therefore lest
you bring upon your selves that evil which has befaln others; you must not
keep up that which is bad for fear of worse, you must not do evil that good may
come of it, you must not commit sin to keep out Popery, you must not keep men's
Consciences in Chains for ever, that is the work of the next World, and not
this; the Gospel will not allow that any man should suffer in his Body, or in
his Estate, by persecuting Laws, for the errors of his mind, nor that any man
should forfeit his Freehold for being of a wrong persuasion. He that spoke as
never man spoke, said, Let the Wheat and the Tares grow both together until the
Harvest, Mat. 13.30. Mat. 15 13. John 16.8. 2 Cor. 5.11.
It is Gods work to pull up, the Spirits work to convince, it is man's work to
persuade by sound arguments, and to allure by a good Conversation men from a
bad Religion to a better, and from a wrong Religion to the right. A man does
not believe as others believe, and cannot believe as others would have him
believe, but he believes as he sees cause to believe. The question then is not
so much what has been done, nor what some men would have to be done, but what
is best to be done to keep out Popery, for that is your fear. If I should give
you counsel will you hearken to it, and if I give you advice will you take it?

First then if you will keep out Popery, do you amend your ways and your
doings, Jer. 7.3.
and turn unto the Lord by a true and sincere repentance. You have heard of the
Judgments of God which have been abroad in other Lands, and you have been told
of the Judgments of God at home in this Land; but these past Judgments have not
humbled you, nor your present Mercies have not drawn you, nor led you to the
God of your Mercies. Do you look like a people brought forth in a day of light?
do you look like a people that have lived in a Land of knowledge? do you look
like a people that have sat under the preaching of the Gospel, and have enjoyed
the means of grace so long? Were ever men's mouths so full of Cursing and
Swearing, and Blaspheming as now? were ever men's hearts so full of Wrath and
Rage, Enmity and Hatred against God, and against his holy ways as now? were
ever men's lives so full of Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, and all Wickedness
whatsoever, as they are now? Did ever Pride so reign in England, and
Drunkenness so abound, Murders so frequent, and Whoring as it were a Staple
Trade? were ever people so Debauched and Profane as they are now? What do you
think will become of such a people? Let no man deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. O let the cry of your Prayers outcry the cry of your
sins, that your tears may quench that fire which your sins have kindled: And be
not outdone by Heathens; Remember what Nineveh did: If my people which are
called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways, then I will hear from Heaven, and will forgive their
sin, and will heal their Land, 2 Chronicles, 7.14. When the Jews had so provoked the
Lord God by their sins and wickedness, their Ark then could not save them, nor
their Temple could not then preserve them, but swift destruction came upon
them. O break off your sins by repentance, and your iniquities by bringing
forth fruits of righteousness, that every man may live in Piety toward God, in
Loyalty toward his Prince, and in Love and Charity one toward another. The
exercising so many cruelties upon Dissenters heretofore, and of late years, by
pernicious Laws has opened a door to let in Debauchery upon the people of this
Land.

2. Secondly if you will keep out Popery, then let the Clergy of this Land keep
out Laziness and Idleness, Drunkenness and Pride, Covetousness and Ambition,
and Superstition out of their Tribe, that they may be shining and burning
lights amongst the people, and not like the idle Shepherds of old, nor like the
greedy and covetous Priests that looked for their gain from their quarter, Joh.
10.12.
Isa. 56.11. Nor like the Hireling that flies from the Sheep when the Wolf
comes, but to be valiant for the truth, laboring in Word and Doctrine, taking
all opportunities to Preach the Word of God in Season, and out of Season, to
the people, with all Authority, with all Sincerity, with all Affection, with
all Humility and Plainness; rightly dividing the Word of Truth, and wisely
applying it to the Consciences of their Hearers; convincing men by sound
Arguments drawn from the Scriptures of Truth, and alluring men by their good
Examples and heavenly Conversations, that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ,
Praying without ceasing, Fasting often, Watching diligently over their Flocks,
that they may save themselves and them that hear them.

1. First, Let them consider the End of Preaching, which is to enlighten men in
the truth, and to build them up in the most holy Faith, Acts 26.18.
That they may be turned from darkness to light and from the power of Satan
unto God, that the bad may be made good, and that the good may be made better,
and they that are without, may be brought in, and they that are within may be
built up, and increase in grace. 2. Secondly, Let them consider the message
they are to declare to the People, which was from the beginning, That God is
light, 1 John 1.5.
and love, and in him is no darkness at all. Behold what manner of love the
father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Sons of God, John 3.1.
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. John 3.16. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood. Rev. 1.5. The Message then is love, the love of God to
men on earth, Peace and good Will; this love is shed abroad in the Heart, this
love draws men to God, and keeps them with him, and carrys them to him. Romans
8.35.
O what a blessed subject is the love of God for Men to dwell upon! 3. Thirdly,
Let them consider the Charge that is committed to their care, to oversee the
Souls of so many thousands of Men and Women, that do hear them, and will hear
none but them in this Kingdom. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I
am pure from the blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you
all the counsel of God, See Ezekiel. 3.20.
take heed therefore unto your selves, and unto all the flock, over which the
holy Ghost has made you overseers. Acts 20.26, 27, 28. 4. Fourthly, Let them
consider of that Account they must give to God almighty hereafter; Who shall
give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. 1 Peter 4.5.
So then every one of us shall give Account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. But I
keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I
have Preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. 1 Cor. 9.27. O let
these things be well considered of by the Clergymen, if they have been in the
wrong heretofore, that they may be in the right now. In some things we offend
in all, in all things we offend in some; if this be not regarded, by them, it
will be a witness against them; the less of the wisdom of man that is seen in
it, the more of the power of God may appear by it.
Thirdly, If you will keep out Popery when it shall please the King to call a
Parliament, that you do then choose such men for your Representatives, that may
perfect this good work the King has begun, for Liberty of Conscience, choose
men that have a good affection for the Kings gracious Declaration, Men of
Wisdom and Understanding, Men of good Lives and Conversations, Men that have a
high value for Religion, and a true love for their Country, Men that have
lived peaceably, and quietly amongst their Neighbors, that are not of a
Persecuting Spirit. The King has been graciously pleased to offer that to his
People, that is so great, and the way of doing it so Just, that no Prince can
offer better, and no People can desire more. The thing the King offers is
Liberty, Liberty of Conscience, the free exercise of every man's Conscience
toward God; a thing that has been so much desired, a thing that is so highly
valued, a thing so well pleasing to God, and so acceptable with Men, a thing
that has made Nations great and happy, that this Liberty of Conscience which
we all enjoy may be so secured to all by such a Law, that it may not be in the
power of any that shall come after to alter that settlement, nor destroy that
security. Now the way the King offers this is in your own way, in a
Parliamentary way, and can there be any thing more Just than this, that by them
these Penal Laws and Tests may be taken away, and that by them such a Law may
be made, as may secure Liberty of Conscience to every Man, that it may not be
in the power of any one party to hurt the rest for the exercising of their
Consciences toward God in his worship. Did ever Liberty of Conscience hurt any
Nation? or did ever Liberty of Conscience destroy Religion? Have not the
benefits and blessings been ever great that have flowed from it, as I have
fully proved before? Notwithstanding all this, some oppose this good work,
others do discourage it, and some do not understand it: under these many
difficulties does Liberty of Conscience struggle at this day, and wants
strength to be brought forth. The King has put his Royal Hand to this good
work, and he expects that his Subjects should put their Hands to it also; that
when a Parliament shall be called, and come together, they may complete it, and
perfect it. John 3.9.
If any shall say, as Nicodemus, How can these things be? I answer, that which
has been done may be done, now this has been done by Heathens themselves. Now
O King establish the decree and sign the writing, that it may not be changed
according to the Law of the Medes and Persians which alters not. Dan. 6.8.
Then they came near, and spoke before the King concerning the Kings Decree,
Have thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a petition of any
God or Man within Thirty days save of thee, O King, shall be cast into the Den
of Lions? The King answered and said, the thing is true according to the Law of
the Medes and Persians which alters not, verse 12. Then the King when he
heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his Heart on
Daniel to deliver him: and he labored till the going down of the Sun to
deliver him. verse 14. Here was a Law made that could not be changed, nor
altered, they that made it would not do it, and the King that signed it could
not do it, though he labored till the going down of the Sun. This was done by
Heathens, surely Christians can do much more.

And was there not a Law made in England heretofore, that you call Magna
Charta, and notwithstanding the many Changes, and Alterations, that have been
in this Kingdom since that, is that Law changed or altered? The People of this
Kingdom heretofore, have been in great confusions, and in great distraction
under many Calamities, and Judgments; in War, and Blood, in Flames, and
Persecutions, yet Magna Charta has remained, and does still; why then may
there not be a Magna Charta for Liberty, as well as there is for Property?

Fourthly, If you will keep out Popery, then you must keep out slavish fear,
and groundless Jealousys and unbelief out of your hearts, and minds. Fear God
and keep his commandments, trust in the Lord for ever, For in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting strength: Isaiah 26.4. The Lord God is a Wall of Fire, round
about his People, and the glory in the midst of them, Zachary, chap. 2. v. 5.
And if there were as many Enemies as there be Sands in the Sea, they could not
break through this Wall to hurt you. What shall one then answer the Messengers
of the Nation? That the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his People
shall trust in it, Isa. 14.32. God has builded his church upon a Rock, Mat.
16.18.
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Can men measure the
Flames, can men bundle up the Air, can men turn the earth into a lump of Gold?
They may as soon do this, as prevail against Gods Church. Look into the Days of
the Apostles, the Church of God in that day had no Emperors nor Kings to
protect it, nor humane Laws to support it, nor Carnal Weapons to defend it,
they had no Armies to guard them, nor to fight their Battles, but both Jews,
and Gentiles were against them. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the
Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the Brethren, and there
was an assault made both of the Gentiles and also of the Jews, with their
Rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them. Acts 7.52.
Acts. 14.2, 5. yet in all this, they were more than Conquerours. Acts 19.28.
The great Diana of the Gentiles fell down before them, and the Temple worship
of the Jews came to naught. By the Shield of Faith they subdued Kingdoms, Heb.
11.33.
and by the Sword of the Spirit they conquered Nations. For the Weapons of our
Warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. I need not tell you what men have
done, I cannot tell you what men will do; but I can tell you what men cannot
do: Behold I have set before thee an open door and no man can shut it, Rev.
3.8. No man can shut the door of Faith, the door of hope, the door of Gospel
grace, Acts 5.39.
that God has set open, no man can overthrow that work, which God has begun,
and has been carrying on in these Nations. The Pharisees therefore said among
themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, the World is gone after
him, Acts 12.19. No man can bring any evil upon you, that God cannot prevent,
nor hinder that good from you, that God has promised to you. No man can take
from you that Joy that God gives to you, Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; and
your Joy no man takes from you, John 16.22. No man can hinder the fulfilling
of Gods word, the accomplishment of the prophecies, and the finishing of the
mystery of God, as he has declared to his Servants the Prophets, Rev. 10.7. No
man can hinder the working of Providence, which God does exercise in the
Government of the World, for the good of his People. No man can hinder the
increase of grace here, nor the reward of glory hereafter. I have here showed
you what that work of God was in the days of old, and I have showed you, what
that work of God is in our day; I have also showed you the evil of these Penal
Laws, and have answered the Objections; that are usually made against their
being taken away, I have also showed you, how Popery may be kept out of this
Kingdom, and it may be love may say I have said too little, and envy may say I
have said too much; and who can please all? My design in all this, is the glory
of God, the honor of the King and the good of all his subjects; Love the
brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King, 1 Peter 2.17.

Postscript.
IT is often alleged, That if the Test should be taken away, then the Papists
will come and sit in Parliament.

But how can the Papists sit in the House of Commons, unless the Protestants
choose them? How can they enter within them Walls, unless the Protestants open
the Door, being in number more than two hundred to one Papist, throughout the
whole Land. Is it not very unlikely at this time, that Protestants will choose
Papists for their Representatives in Parliament? Will they not rather choose Men
of their own Persuasions, that are most agreeable to their own Sentiments, from
whom they may expect to reap the greatest benefits, especially in a matter so
great and weighty as this is? You therefore that are for the continuing the
Penal Laws and Tests, let me then ask you these following Questions.

I. Whether the many Tests that have been made in this Kingdom, these many
years past, did ever support, and preserve the Makers of them? II. Whether
these Tests be not Penal Laws? III. Whether the present Tests be not against
Religion and Liberty, which are so dear to all Men? IV. How was Religion
preserved, and kept up in this Kingdom, before these two late Tests were made?
V. Whether the Penal Laws and Tests have preserved Religion in this Nation,
since they were made, or destroyed it? VI. Whether the Penal Laws and Tests, be
then the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion against Popery? VII. Whether you
can find any Men, that have been Persecutors, and Spoilers of others, for their
Consciences toward God, that are for the taking away Penal Laws and Tests?
VIII. Whether that be a True Church, that supports her self by Persecuting
Laws, and enricheth her self by the Ruin of others? IX. Whether Liberty of
Conscience be not the Interest of this Nation? X. Whether a Parliament may not
be capable of finding out a better way, and a better security for our Liberty,
and Religion, than these Tests are? XI. Whether the Church of God has not a
better Refuge, and a stronger Tower to fly unto at all times, than Humane
Laws, or an Arm of Flesh? The Lord also will be a Refuge for the oppressed; a
Refuge in time of trouble, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord is my strength, and my shield;
my heart trusted in him, and I am helped, Psalm. 28.7. Our Soul waits for the
Lord, he is our help, and our shield, Psalm. 33.20. For thou have been a shelter
for me, and a strong Tower from the Enemy, Psalm. 61.3. In God is my salvation,
and my glory: The Rock of my strength, and my Refuge is in God, Psalm. 62.7. My
Goodness, and my Fortress, my high Tower, and my Deliverer, my Shield, and he
in whom I trust; who subdueth my People under me, Psalm. 144.2. Ye that fear the
Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their Help, and their Shield, Psalm. 115.11. For
the Lord God is a Sun and Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory: No good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4.
FINIS.

