A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF John Melford, Esquire Of Nymet Episcopi, in
the Diocese of Exeter.

Who dyed (aged eighteen years) the 21st day of June, through the sad occasion
of a fall from a Horse; and was buried at Southmolton the 27th day of the same
month, 1692.

By Tho. Easton, A.M. Vicar of Nymet Episcopi.

St. Luke 13. 2, 3, 4, 5. The Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their
Sacrifices; and those eighteen that were slain at Siloam were not sinners above
all others. Therefore Doctrinally, Strange Judgments don't always infallibly
denote the sufferers to be extraordinary guilty.

Non Laudem quaeras; potius sed sustine famam. Immeritam famam despice: Disce
pati. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul' s
Churchyard, 1692.

The PREFACE.
THe following Sermon was preached at the Funeral of a young Gentleman whom I
dearly loved: and it was never antecedently intended to be made more public
than at the time of its delivery at the interment: But the misinterpretations
that have been put upon it by some, and the various reports that have sprang
from thence by others, have necessitated me to do what I never thought: And I
am rather willing to submit the whole to a Public censure, than that I should
lie under the suspicion of abusing the credit of the deceased Gentleman, or be
guilty of that unpardonable Rudeness, of designedly blaming the Conduct and
Guidance of his surviving Friends, which the uncertain Reports that I have met
withal since the Funeral, do so plainly intimate. For I reckon now the noise is
spread so far, that those who know nothing of this discourse, but only by bare
report, and that too not begun or propagated upon substantial grounds, but as
Mistake or Humor gave them first rise and vent, they would have presumed me
guilty of all that I am accused, if I should decline this honest and safest way
of a Justification.

I confess it is no great wonder if Offen^es happen; but yet it behooves all men
to see, that they be not causeless: In this particular, I have sufficient
reason to say, that it is not through my fault, if any are offended; it is to be
attributed to some other original than the following Discourse.

St. Paul complained, and thought it a very hard case, that he should be
accounted an Enemy to the Galatians for telling them the Truth, Gal. 4. 16 (i.
e.) 'twas very unjust, that they should be wroth with the Apostle for speaking
Truth tho it were harsh, and they fell under the inevitable Lash of a severe
Conviction. -- But MINE is a WORSE case, ( i. e.) the cause of my being
accounted an Enemy (if I am so accounted) is not equally manifest with that of
the Apostles; for be had taxed them of transgression in particular Duties, and
made the application of his reproof to particular persons, and for this the
offenders against the Rules of Christianity were offended with the Apostle,
that preached it to them. -- Had I done so, I confess, it might have been a
cause in some measure plausible to justify some severe demonstrations of Anger,
and an evil Resentment. But even by Confession nothing is positive, only what
is here mentioned is liable to misconstructions; and Those that don't know the
circumstances of the sad mischance of this Gentleman's Death will be apt to
ascribe it to a then present Intemperance. -- But if that could have silenced
this Controversy, or allayed this Heat, I then did, and now do declare, I was
personally with him (within one hour) and neither his Relations, or myself, or
other Friends could in the least suspect it.

But if other inferences may be drawn from so plain a Discourse, whatever their
tendency may be, or allowing them to indifferent suppositions, and so by
consequence may afford some ungrateful Conclusions; I hope no good man, nor no
wise man will say, that I am chargeable with all that Jarrago of Inferences,
that either Wit or Malice, Ignorance or Curiosity may gather thence. My aim was
not (God is Judge and Witness) to make scandalous reflections upon past
actions, for I declare I know nothing whereof to accuse; but I thought,
considering my method of discourse, what I said was fairly deduceable from the
words; and if I have been particular in the directions, I am sure I was
designedly general in the reproof.

And that all those that shall please to condescend so far, as to give this
little piece an indifferent reading, and afterward what censure they please,
may know fully and plainly the reason why 'twas published, and judge from
thence, whether there were any need of Jealousy or Discontent, which has
occasioned so wide and common reports; I have offered it to your view exactly
in the same Method and Language that 'twas first written, without so much as
altering a sentence, scarce a single word; (excepting only that in the
repetition of some remarkable Sentences, there might possibly be some
accidental Transposition.) And if the publication of it, may, upon second
thoughts with deliberate perusal, satisfy those who are particularly concerned
in the sad occasion of the Funeral, (that here are no particular Reprehensions)
if it may have a favorable approbation from men unprejudiced; if it may any
way tend to the Reformation of any Person, that so God may have the Glory, when
these, or any of them happen, with the glory of God attending them, I have my
only aim, and beyond those I wish no more.

PSALM CIII. 15, 16. As for man his days are as grass; as a flower of the field
so he flourishes;

For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know
it no more.


AMong all the troubles to which we are subjected as we are men, and which we
have drawn upon our selves as we are sinners, none is so dreadful as death: the
thoughts of being removed from this present place of abode to another state,
have deep impressions upon our Spirits, and they also very melancholy and
distracting; and especially the more afflicting, when we find the events of
such considerations to affect our selves, (i. e.) if we lose a Friend, we are
grieved: But if we apprehend Death calling for us in particular, it chills our
Blood, and casts a Damp upon our Courage. Mirth and Jollity are neglected as
insignificant and unsatisfactory; and infinitely various surmises do mutually
disturb our incomposed Senses; so much that under the fears of approaching
Death, we lose the very advantages of Life.

And this natural aversion that all men have to dying, or a final dissolution,
is mightily augmented by collateral causes, v. gr.

1. Some are extremely fond of this World. They are here (as they think) well
at ease, they have all that they can need, and that makes them suppose, and
believe, it is all that they ought to wish for; and therefore, here they resolve
to fix their Tabernacles; and in this Region of reputed Felicity, they would
willingly continue a long time, (at least) and for ever if 'twere possible.

Hence therefore some are unwilling to dye, because they must by that be
deprived of all those delightful Objects, and stripped of all those conveniences,
in which they at present find so much Comfort.

2. Some are afraid to dye (or unwilling at least) and they are such, as have
not the advantages of the former, but yet have some tolerable conveniences, and
enough to counterbalance all their Troubles or Miseries in the worst sense, and
many pleasant intervals of Comfort; And they never considered enough of a
future state, to think whether there might be any thing better in another
world, and therefore they would not leave this for an Uncertainty.

If they have the mishap to meet with troubles, yet they are not lasting, and a
new Enjoyment wears off the memory of a late bad accident -- But now, if they
should be displaced from such a state, whose circumstances they have so long
reviewed, examined and approved, and immediately be lodged in another Region,
with which they are utterly unacquainted, this would be such an astonishing
thought, as the most rigid Stoic with all his Philosophy, could not easily
mitigate, and the Venom of it would work so powerfully, that in a little time
it would draw on that very evil which their fear was intend to prevent.

3. Others are afraid to dye, from the remembrance of an ill spent Life; they
are men who have lived in an open Rebellion against that sacred Majesty which
governs the Universe, but especially inhabiteth Eternity; but yet have not
lived so long, or sinned so much, as to wear out all Sense of a Deity, or erase
the natural Apprehensions of good and evil. But their memory is tenacious
enough to mind them of what they did; and their Conscience tells them what
'twas, when done; and when upon a review of their past actions, they can only
draw a sad Catalogue of Error and Folly, or wilful Transgression, and repeated
disobedience, and yet at the same time their own hearts tell them, that those
faults must be accounted for to a Sovereign Judge, who is infinitely just, and
will neither be biased or persuaded to pass any sentence upon any Person,
otherwise than the Merits of his Actions shall require: When by looking
backward, he shall see little or nothing that he dares own, and yet looking
forward, he can have no prospect of anything that he would willingly suffer; in
a word, where there is no remaining hope of any thing, but a fearful looking
for of Judgment, it is in this case no wonder if men be unwilling to dye; for to
such men death is only an inlet to damnation; which is the most amazing
consideration that can be, next to the being in actual torment.

But yet I say, if there were none of these accidental reasons to bring men out
of love with death, yet even that principle of self-preservation, which is
connatural with our being, would engage us to use all possible lawful means for
our continuance here in this state and condition.

It Is true, an active faith, a firm hope, and an ardent love, will supersede
all natural or accidental objections: and the zeal of a sound Religion will
prompt a man to hazard his life unto the Death, as Act. 21. 13. says St. Paul,
What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart, I am ready not only to be bound,
but to Dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus? -- And the vast number of Martyrs,
that have so willingly submitted to the Tyranny of Persecutors, does fully
convince us, that many in the World did not think life the most valuable
blessing.

But yet ordinarily speaking, this willingness to lay down our lives, tho for
Religions sake, is a sort of Violence to our natural temper and constitution:
and it is what no one can, and would do, if he were not first perfectly
transformed, and altered from what he was; Nay, in short, this natural aversion
that is lodged in the very original of our frame is abundantly manifest in that
petition of our Savior himself, Jo. 12. 27. Father save me from this hour, but
for this cause came I unto this hour: (i. e.) the terrible apprehensions of his
approaching passion, did so dismay him, that tho he came into the World on
purpose to suffer, yet he desired, that if possible it might be passed by: Mat.
26. 39. Let this cup pass from me, or at least that the time might be deferred*
-- for we are so partial to our selves, and so fond of our Ease, that an Evil
which we fear, is as pungent as that which we really feel. And we have been
told of some who have made their lives extremely miserable, only by antedating
their misery, and suspecting that in time they might be so.

I don't mean that this respected our Savior, for he soreknew all
consequences, and he knew that he should rise again, and be glorified at the
right hand of God: But this respects men, who can see no further than to what
is before them.

But yet what Notions soever men may have of things, what projects soever may
divert them, what thoughts to distract them, or what care soever they use for
their Preservation, certain it is, that no man can continue long in this World:
Our fears in this life don't set the other life at a greater distance; nor do
our enjoyments here give us a surer Inheritance in this Life; but whatever our
worldly circumstances are, our time here is but, and can but be short, for as
for man his days are as grass, etc. p. 1.

To collect and repeat to you the various Epithets and Emblems, by which the
Writers of all ages have represented the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Life,
is not so very material: The Egyptians had their Hieroglyphics, and the other
Heathen their Maxims, and the Scriptures have their Allusions and Parables,
their Representations and Similitudes; but I will go no further than the Text,
which is very suitable to the sad occasion of our present meeting.

Man's Life is as grass.] The Season of the year tells us, how soon it is
withered, that which is green and prosperous in the morning, and but lately
refreshed by a gentle Dew from the kind Heavens, is e're noon, cut down, and by
Night utterly altered from what it was; the Verdure of it is gone, and no Art
can recover it again. So the Flowers of the field are beauteous and gay, more
gorgeous than Solomon in all his Glory, Mat. 6. 29. and yet as soon as they are
plucked from their Stalk, they begin to fade, and in a very little time
degenerate into a loathsome Rottenness. -- Nay, which is seemingly a less cause
for any considerable alteration, the very Temperature of the Heavens, if but a
little unseasonable, robs both Grass and Flowers of their Beauty; a rough wind,
or a great rain makes both to fade; and after Once such an accident happens, it
is for ever irremediable, and the Place thereof shall know it no more] (i. e.)
they never grow in the same place, nor recover their lost Excellency.

And such are the days of man; as for man his days are as Grass.] Man is weak
and helpless, born to trouble as the Sparks fly upward, Job. 5. 7 (i. e.) by a
natural and unavoidable Tendency. And yet not so continually vexed by cross
misfortunes, but there is enough in life to deserve Commendation, and to cause
a moderate content: As we rejoice to see a flourishing Meadow, though within
few days, we resolve to strip it of its pleasant Verdure; or as we admire a
pretty Flower, though within a short time that we have handled it, we are
sensible that its Fragrancy will decay insensibly. -- So in our Life there are
many things which are pleasant and delectable, but their continuance is
uncertain; ten thousand accidents may spoil a great Fortune; or a sudden and
unthought of mischance may nip our blooming hopes, and in such a time as all
things promise fair, there may happen (unawares) a sudden change, which shall
alter the Scene, as much as cutting a Meadow, or plucking a Flower, causes an
alteration in those refreshing Objects.

But then the parallel is not altogether alike in all points; but with respect
to man there is something of a transcendency. Man's days and all worldly
advantages, are here but of a short date, and uncertain continuance, so far
therefore like grass or a flower. But further unlike to either, for they as
soon as they are corrupted, return again to their first nothing, but man can
never suffer an Annihilation; The place of a man shall know him no more, (i.
e.) a man can never live a second time in this world; but there is an
everlasting duration reserved for all men in the next: And how fading soever
temporal advantages may appear, certain it is, the subsequent state can admit
of no alteration: the latter is a matter of faith, the former is the subject of
frequent experience. Man's life, or his days are as grass.

It was long since said Psalm. 90. 10. the age of man is threescore years and
ten, which comparatively to what men lived before the stood, may very properly
be said to be but as an hand breadth, Psalm. 39. 5. But yet even this short
period is but rarely attained, where one is permitted to conflict with the
troubles and inconveniences of old age, t^n are cut off, or taken away in the
midst of their days, Psalm. 102. 24. Or yet, if all could be supposed to come to
the utmost desirable period of an old age, with the concurrent advantages of
ease, peace and honor, yet even still their days would be like the grass; For
we know by Experience, that the Grass which we reserve for Winter, is mightily
defaced by a blustering North-East wind, and what remains uneaten by Cattle, is
trodden under foot, and by the return of the following Spring is all rotten.
And so -- the oldest age will come to a bound which it shall not pass over; for
one day must be the last to every body. And our residence here below, being
only among such objects as are various and mutable, we do by a sympathy partake
of their Nature, so far, as to be necessarily subject to the same
Inconveniences.

It Is true there are different distances of time when these things happen, but
that is but as it is in all mutable things; some Flowers are very forward, but
those as soon decay, others are later, e're they show their Splendour, and they
accordingly continue longer.

But then it is not only a natural decay or fading, which will one time or other
infallibly attend them, which shows their mutability, but there is sometimes a
force, and violence committed, and a rough storm, or but an unwary touch, may
cause them to sink into nothing, sooner than else they would: in such a case
nature is injured, and precipitated into an irreversible ruin. And in this
case too, man's days are as grass: It Is terrible to think, (and I am sorry it is
the present case) how many have been crushed into their Graves by surprising
accidents.

How (seemingly) inconsiderable evils have produced dismal, and yet lasting
effects; how many children have been left Orphans, and how many women Widows,
and how many parents have been deprived of hopeful and beloved Children, even
by such sad casu^lties, as it lay not in man's power to foresee or prevent. Our
own personal knowledge too fully assures us of this truth, and yet reports
bring multiplied instances of such woeful mishaps.

Those that have been well in the morning, and as promising as a Flower, have
like a Flower (e're night) been utterly disrobed of all their Beauty; when all
our hopes and expectations, all our future comforts, and present satisfaction,
have in one instant been supplanted, and all possibility of looking for the
same has for ever been taken from us. The days of man are but as grass, he
flourishes like a Flower of the Field. I am sorry I must, (and I crave leave
and the allowance of those who are most intimately concerned in our present
loss, that I may; and I pray that it may not add new supplies to that sorrow
which is already as great as so sad an occasion can deserve, only let it not be
more excessive than Nature can support, or Religion justify) I am sorry that I
must say, that this present Text has now a very full and parallel, tho a very
fatal completion.

This Gentleman was like a flower of the field (i. e.) he wanted nothing that
might render him amiable, he had multiplied advantages both natural and
accidental; v. gr. a good apprehension with a judgment equal to his years: and
was very promising of being very serviceable in his Country, for which he was
well capacitated by a plentiful Estate. And to procure him a public respect in
the world, he had the Honor and Happiness to be descended from two very Worthy
Families, of a truly gentile extraction, as well as an ancient descent; (tho I
would not insist much upon that, lest I should be thought to flatter those that
are alive, and yet I ought not wholly to omit it.)

The Honor of Parents does easily procure a general reputation to their
Posterity: and where there is an Estate proportionable to maintain that
Character, such men are both loved and feared; which are two advantages,
whereby a good rich Gentleman may do abundance of good: and such a man's
example would effectually commend Religion, to the general approbation and
choice of his Neighbors, who in spite of Precepts live by Example.

He had also the constant and uninterrupted assurances of Love and Kindness
from a tender Mother, and affectionate Sisters; as well as the general respects
of all those who had the Happiness to be at all acquainted with him. In a word,
he had that double happiness the Poet wished for, (i. e.) a sound mind in a
sound body. Thus was he like a Flower, and indeed of as fair a figure as most
of these adjacent parts.

But alas! What did all these signify? He is cut down like a flower, and his
days were but as the grass: One storm, one little accident has rendered all
these advantages useless.

His Estate is lest behind him; his Ancestors are no more to be accounted to
him, now that he is laid with them in the Dust: and of all his Friends (tho
they all lament his Death, yet) none can relieve him.

All our most pious respects to our dearest Friends are superfluous, as soon as
the Soul is parted from the body; and tho Nature, and Civility, and Religion
allow and command, that we perform the charitable Office of a Burial; Yet
Reason, and Sense, and Prudence, and Religion tell us, that the passionate
demonstrations of kindness, which the tenderness of the Female Sex does easily
afford, as well as the nearness of the Relation does so readily prompt, are
neither justifiable nor commendable.

I will lament my Friend, as I am a man, but yet not so, as thereby to give the
world any temptation to suspect that I am no Christian. I may be sorry for the
loss of my Friend; but I must take care that I be not sorry as if I had no
Hope. Nature forces me to grieve: but Religion shall give it its just Limits,
that my grief may not be inordinate.

And since the all-wise God has been pleased at this strange rate, to cut off
this young Gentleman, just as we do the tender grass, since he who was a flower
for his many desirable qualifications, is also like a flower withered; I
advise, that all that hear of this dreadful accident, do think upon it for
their improvement in Holiness.

Many men are so fond, as, at any extraordinary accident to attempt to measure
Providence; and cast about them, to see, where should be the cause of the great
thing that God has done. The Disciples themselves were not free of this fault.
Jo. 9. 2. Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?
But this is a fallible, and withal a presumptious way to judge of the methods
of Gods Providence: Certain we are (or we are Atheists) that God has a
determinate end, in all things that happen in this lower world; but it is not
proper for us, that we should be able to square his Providence with the various
chances of the world: It rather obliges us to adore his goodness, in preserving
us, and his mercy in sparing us; and that we who are as much grass (i. e.) as
srail, and equally mortal as this young Gentleman, should yet be continued
alive, when he is denied the further Privilege.

And therefore to make this Text, and this particular instance of Providence
serviceable to us, I shall infer these four things.

1. That we do not value our selves too much, upon what we have. 2. That we do
not too much addict our selves to this world. 3. That we make a seasonable
preparation for a removal hence. 4. That we moderate our sorrow for the loss of
any Friend, how near or hopeful soever.
These are all naturally contained in the premises, and these may be beneficial
to the rectifying our mistakes, concerning the odds betwixt this and the other
world; for it is too often seen, that those who have most of this world, are too
regardless of the next, and don't dream of a change that may ensue.

First, Inf. 1.
We should not too much value our selves upon what we have. All the valuable
blessings or conveniences of this life, are subject to change and casualties:
nothing here below is permanent and lasting. All animae beings are useless and
contemptible, as soon as their breath is gone; and the most solid inanimate
bodies, do by degrees decay, and grow unfashionable: Marble is defaced by
weather, and Silver and Gold will rust: but if this were not so yet we should
not value them much, because they cannot long be serviceable to us, for we cannot
live long to enjoy them.

In Infancy we are careless of those things, that we esteem most precious in
common estimate (in older age.) A new born Babe has no comfort from a large
inheritance, nor does the care and labor of busy ancestors, who heaped up
wealth like the sand, to leave their posterity a luxuriant fortune, at all
affect them: But all that they need is a careful Nurse and good attendance; and
if they are so happy as to enjoy these, they never project any thing future for
twelve or fourteen years next to come: And after that age, it may be, the
flattery and information of some indigent or spungy dependents, shall swell a
wealthy young heir with mountainous thoughts of incredible Riches, which are
his undoubted right, and of which he cannot be deprived; and from thence (it may
be) he is hurried on to all those extravagancies, which are laid as temptations
to pleasure by vassal confidents; till by easy degrees he becomes
ungovernable, and mostly licentious too: and many times those malevolent
insinuations have caused Minors to turn Bankrupt, and even forfeit their
Estates, before they had lived long enough to enjoy them. And hence it has
happened, that those who had enough to live creditably with good management,
and to convey to their Children a sufficient fortune, have themselves castrated
their own Fortunes, and lived long enough to lament the direful inconveniences
of their own too hasty Folly. So that in this sense (at least) our advantages,
or expectations are but like grass or a flower; for those who spend madly in
hopes of what they shall enjoy plentifully, dye Beggars commonly.

But say this be not the case. (For tho in this degenerate age, there are too
many instances to prove the ruin of fair Fortunes, even by this means, yet
it is not always so, nor indeed is it mostly so; yet) suppose then a Family as
well fixed, as they can be wished for by their Friends, or themselves desire:
say their circumstances are such, as puts them beyond the frowns of Fortune,
and the worst of mischances shall not bring them to Necessity: Suppose them
abounding with all conveniences and delights too, that they live in Wealth and
Reputation, honored and loved, in Health and Peace; that they have a numerous
Progeny, which stand daily round their Tables like Olive plants, so that all
that know them shall be forced to say; Lo! Here is one that is truly blessed,
Yet alas how really inconsiderable are these things. N. B. If a Parent have but
one fit of sickness, these things are scarce regarded. A Dropsy, or the Gout,
or a violent Headache makes all these seeming ornaments appear invaluable; and
the relish which those things afforded in health, becomes in a single minute
insipid and contemptible.

But if this do not happen, or if a man don't perceive their vanity by some
inhabiliments of body, or some sudden discomposure of thoughts, and anxieties
of mind during life; yet in death all these fair enjoyments, are in the
twinkling of an Eye rendered useless; -- And yet he that has at this present
all that he can wish for, shall in a little time as surely be deprived of it,
as he now enjoys it.

But suppose this don't first happen neither, (i. e.) suppose a Parent live a
long time to enjoy what he has (I mean, free from any personal troubles) yet
if an accident (amidst his Prosperity) happen to any of those things which he
calls his own, even that sowers the rest of his Enjoyments: But a sickness in a
Family, fills the rest that are yet well with doubts and fears; but Death
drives men to those degrees of Impatience, which they would blame in others,
and yet think they may justify in themselves; or at least lawfully permit. And
yet after all Disquietudes and Torments, the fate that has befallen them is
irreversible; and the remembrance of what they had, gives them a sad conviction
that 'twas not lasting; and the consideration that they shall no more enjoy it,
might instruct them too, that 'twas at best but like a flower: That, that
should not be too much prized, of which they might so many ways be deprived;
That no wise man should glory in that, of which so many casualties might rob
him; nor think himself much the better for that which he is sure he cannot keep
long.

Secondly, Inf. 2.
We should not too much addict our selves to this world. I allow and affirm
it is every man's duty to manage that Fortune, with which God has blessed him, and
to convey it as entire to his posterity, as he received it from his
predecessors. And he that does not make suitable provisions for his Family,
according to his Quality, is worse than a Beast in any sense, and in a
religious one, worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Which is somewhat to be
considered by those, who frolic away, not only their incomes, but their very
patrimony; who revel to perpetual excess; who drown their own sorrows in Wine
abroad, when at the same time, their Wives and Families are forced to feed upon
their own tears at home; such there are, shame on them, who can so easily and
incredibly cancel all the Obligations of Nature, and prove so unaccountably
cruel to their own bowels, and yet put it off with a Jest; who squander away
their estates, by Rioting and Drunkenness, by Folly and Madness; nay, who
mortage their Reputation, and damn their Souls, only to please one single
sense. And yet tell some of those Fellows, how imprudent they act, or how
unreasonable it is, that one man should so impoverish a Family to future
generations; especially that it is wonderfully unnatural to starve his children
at home, which could subsist with comfort, upon his superfluous expenses, all
these persuasions are slighted, and in a contemptible sort of way, some have
answered, Let that God who feeds the Ravens, provide for the Rooks. This is
stupid wickedness, inferior to that of brute beasts, and it is a sordid temper,
this therefore be sure is not contained in the caution; It Is not Care that we
condemn, but it is too much. N. B. The necessary parts of our duty, are through a
mistake stretched too far, and by that means perverted from their original
intent.

Because every man must improve his Talent, which he has received, therefore
some think, that they must not allow any relaxation; But they labor hard, and
fare hard; tire their bodies, and rack brains, how to increase their wealth,
and yet as their riches increase, so do their desires too: And by how much the
more they have, by so much the more are they covetous and greedy.

But this is to be too much addicted to the world, and this is that which by
consequence we condemn. N.B.

The reason why we should take some care in the world, even for the things of
the world, is, because we do not know but we may need them; and God never
allowed any body to be only an idle Spectator: and no body pretends to
challenge to himself an immunity from all employments.

But if a man have naught to do, he is exceedingly more uneasy than when
surrounded with business; and it has often puzzled many men's brains, how to
dispose of some of those that they called idle hours: But now the reason, why
we should not spend too much time upon the things of this world, is, because we
cannot tell how long we shall enjoy them.

I really believe, no man would much perplex himself about fine houses, or new
purchases, that was assured he should dye within few months that he had
obtained them; and yet this may be any man's fate; for the days of every man are
but as grass: and therefore methinks it is not only needless, but madness, to be
very sollicitous in getting that, of which we have no assurance that we shall
keep it, but innumerable arguments to convince us, that we must (or at least
may) be deprived thereof in a small time.

Now this caution of not being too much addicted to this world, is supposed to
contain a twofold prohibition.

First, With respect to those things, that we are apt generally to account
necessary: such as are a subsistence for our selves, and a competency for
posterity. Even those, I say, we must be careful not to extend beyond their
proper limits; but we ought to moderate our desires, by the rules of Christian
contentedness: as knowing that every thing beyond convenience, is absolutely
superfluous. And those who have the greatest estates, can only have but food
and raiment; that the rest is consumed by Servants, or reserved for Strangers,
and it yields no other fruit than trouble or sorrow; trouble to keep it, and
sorrow if it be lost. But especially he that is a great admirer of the World,
is always unwilling to leave it; and yet so fading is his nature, that he cannot
long enjoy it; and therefore -- from the uncertainty of our retaining the
things of the world, we ought in prudence to regulate our longing after them;
and because we cannot long enjoy them, we should not much perplex ourselves in
their pursuit, or weary ourselves in their acquisition.

Secondly, But there is a worse case yet, many devote themselves to the world,
upon no pretense of necessity, or convenience, but they rather become its
slaves, and spend their whole time utterly in the pleasures which it affords,
and in pursuance of its airy vanities; But this the premises do highly condemn:
For if the uncertainty of our Life be a good argument, to prevent too much care
in lawful things, much more is it an argument to restrain us from those
practices, which are not only unlawful, but of pernicious consequence. He that
is born a man, and endowed with a rational Soul, should consider, that he has
something else to do, than to live merely to the flesh: that it is a very
irrational method of spending his time, to consume the whole of it upon his
worser part; The remembrance of what little satisfaction, he has had in his
former frolicks, might induce a man to think, that there is somewhat more
suitable to his excellent nature.

The best of all worldly enjoyments, if they exceed the Limit of Prudence and
Sobriety, may be pleasing for a time ('it is true) as long as men are bereaved of
their senses, through the height of Excess; (which is just as distracted
persons reckon Fetters and Chains, an Ornament) But alas! as soon as they
return to themselves, they find nothing but shame or sickness; an aching Head,
or a weak Stomach, or rotten Bones.

The transporting Pleasures of a Frolic all vanish in a night; and all that
remains is a fear, that others will remember the indecencies of which they were
lately guilty and have themselves forgotten.

Therefore I say, considering those things are so truly vanity; that they are
all transitory, which perish in the using; that they are but imaginary
Apparitions, and at best no further grateful than they are fancied to be so, it
will follow, that they should not be too eagerly courted, nor should we spend
too much time in their purchase.

Thirdly, Inf. 3.
Since our time here is so short, and withal so uncertain, we ought to make
timely preparation for our removal hence. Man's days are but as Grass, consume
in a moment; our days are swifter than a Post; our time is but like a writing
upon a sand; and of this every one must needs be sensible, that ever looks
abroad in the world; and yet there are not many that lay this to heart as they
ought, nor do they consider their own frailty, when they see others drop into
their Graves. -- It may be on a Funeral day, or on the news of such a terrible
mischance and fatal accident as this was; men may have some natural suggestion
that mortality is certain, and death amazing; But the next merriment wears off
the sense of it, and men follow their accustomed sports or business with as
much eagerness, as if they should never dye; and lay Scenes for strange
projects, as if they were immortal: and till they find themselves arrested by
the Messenger of Death [a grievous sickness] they fancy it will always stand at
a vast distance from them. But this should not be so; -- we know we must remove
off from this stage, and for ought we know the time is nearer than we are aware.

This Gentleman was as likely to live, as any person here now present; and yet
within one hour that I saw him lively and well, I heard the sad news of that
accident which drew on death irresistably, against all our good wishes, to the
ruin of our hopes, and the grief of all Spectators. Nay the change was so
sudden, and withal so violent, that Art and Medicines were useless, and the
ready offices of all his Friends, were utterly unserviceable; but in a word, he
was stupid in a moment, and continued so till he died, which was shortly
afterward. And methinks this single instance is enough to add weight to the
Argument, and enforce the inference, (viz.) that all men should provide in
season for a removal hence.

For who can tell, but the same or a like misfortune may befall either of us;
(tho yet, I say, considering the circumstances, they appear so amazing, that I
heartily do, and every one may, pray, from such a death good Lord deliver us.)
But yet allowing only that a sudden death is but barely possible; yet who in
his wits would run the hazard of a following Eternity, merely for the Love of
a fading, perishing, transitory, uncertain world.

We must subsist, after our souls and bodies are separated; and therefore we
ought so to spend our time in the body, that it may turn to some account for
our souls, after our bodies are turned to dust; which I express, by making a
timely preparation for our removal.

There is no one thing in which men are so contentedly cheated, as in the
notions of living and dying; nay worse, those who will not allow others to
impose upon them, tho but to the damage of a penny, will yet impose upon
themselves, in this case, which is a matter of infinite importance: and many
times hug their error so long, that it proves irrecoverably damnable, (i. e.)
men drop into Hell, while they caress themselves with the fond hopes of a
following Heaven.

And this is a madness which possesses the generality of all mankind; they put
death and the other world at a great distance, and then think themselves safe
in all their extravagancies; there they revel their senses; indulge to Luxury;
make provision for the Flesh; court the world; and make but a sport of
damnation.

And yet all this while, are confident, that they shall have time enough to
reverse all this; and meet Death long enough e're it call for them: -- And that
after a life of sin and vanity, they shall dye very devout Saints, and partake
of their Blessedness.

Unaccountable stupidity! What is this that so bewitcheth men! What Circaean
Cup should have power sufficient so to intoxicate them! And so utterly to
divest them of their Sense and Reason! Nay what Amulet is that, which can so
powerfully resist the Force and Charms of the principles of Religion! and make
them so regardless of another world! to which yet they may be transported, for
ought they know, in the space of one hour.

There are many who have served this World with the same zeal; coveted wealth
with as much greediness; indulged themselves with as much liberty; carried
themselves upon their appendant ornaments with as much state; in a world, that
sinned as boldly, and yet with the comfort of the same security, in former
days, that men do now: -- And yet many of us can tell how short they fell in
their expectations; that they died in the habit of sin, where there have been
no appearances of any color of repentance; and some in the very act, where
Charity it self can hardly suppose it; at least, I Am sure Reason will not allow
it.

In a word, we have known some that have died in such a condition, as
considering the circumstances, and with reference to the next world, I Am sure
no man present would be content to dye in the same condition for ten thousand
worlds.

Well: Allow this; but consider, if we use such practices, why may not we fear
the some end: In such a case fear is beneficial; and foresight is greatly
advantageous; and therefore we should prepare in season for our removal hence.

It Is a fatal delusion to reserve the practice of piety to the latter part of
our lives: It Is an affront to God, that we should sin away our Youth, our
Strength, and our Vigor, and at last bring him the lame offering of a decrepit
old age, which is rendered useless to our selves, through the frequent debaucheries
of Youth, which no arguments could prevent: Briefly; Nothing can be said to
justify those, who believe a future state, and yet all the time which they live
here, make no provision for it. (For I reckon future resolutions to be nothing
but a trick to silence their consciences in this world; though even those will
render all resolving penitents inexcusable in the next, at the day of Judgment.)

Now when I say, we must make a timely preparation for our removal hence, I
mean two things.

1. Parents must take care to educate their Children well; (expressed in the
order of celebrating the Marriage in our Church, by) bringing them up in the
fear, and nurture of the Lord; And Solomon, Prove. 22. 6. calls it, training up
a Child in the way that he should go. There is nothing so much conduces to the
making a timely preparation for our removal hence, as does a virtuous education.

When Children in their tender age, are accustomed to have an horror of any
thing that is evil, that grows (with their age) into a perfect antipathy. And
when they are only timely warned that lying, swearing, etc. will carry them to
Hell, when they dye, this will imprint such terrible apprehensions of damnation
upon their memories, as no Device of the Devil or his instruments, can ever
deface; -- men so seasoned with arguments from terror, are proof against
charms; and they will be afraid to do wickedly, because they know the end will
be Damnation.

Oh! Methink this should no more be a scandal; than it would be an affront to
wish all men Saints.
How happy would it be, if all Parents would but take this care!

But alas! Where is this almost to be met with? those who are extremely nice of
every thing that relates to the bodily health, and welfare temporal of their
Children, insomuch that (as we say) a Fly must not pitch on them, and think
them extremely injured by any body, that offers but to contradict them, in
every little impertinent humor, -- Yet those very persons can be content to
hear those very beloved Children, swear as soon almost as they can speak, and
lie accustomedly, and mis-call and curse their Play-mates, and yet at all this
to be unconcerned: And in all this the Child must be humoured (forsooth) or his
Spirits will be broken, though God be dishonored, and his Laws trampled under
foot.

But alas! Whatever those fond Parents may think, I know that this comes up
full to Ely's sin, 1 Samuel 2. 29. who honored his Sons above God. For so those,
out of a damnable Folly ruin their Children, only out of a fear, that they
should ruin them, by restraining them.

I will never persuade Parents to be hard hearted, or unnatural; But I say, if
a Child do any thing that is evil, correct him how young soever; but do it with
that Prudence, that the violence do not exceed his strength; Lest you prove a
Murderer instead of a Reformer. It Is said by a wise man, Prove. 23, 13, 14.
Withold not correction from the Child: N. B. for if thou beatest him with a
rod, he shall not dye: Thou shall beat him with a rod, and shall deliver his
Soul from Hell. N.B. For those little punishments in tender years, and before
custom has superinduced an habit, will create an absolute aversness to all
iniquity.

And therefore, I say, that those who have the care of Children committed to
them, if they do not restrain them from sin as often as they find them guilty,
either by Correction or Reproof, do what in them lies, to betray them over to
Hell: And though the Indiscretion and invincible Ignorance of those Minors may
in some measure excuse them from the formality of the guilt, provided they dye
in their tender age ( i. e.) before they are come to weigh things according to
their nature, or make a difference between good and evil; yet sure, this
Indulgence of Parents, Masters or Guardians, can never be excused, nor will God
let it pass unpunished.

But then, if Children be allowed to swear, etc. when young, and afterward grow
up to age, and set abroad in the world, and meet with such variety of
temptations, it is then no wonder to hear that such are incredibly debaucht. For
when those who had no restraints in their Infancy, nor no Curb in their Youth,
meet with old Practitioners in Wickedness, they don't come like Tinder to a
Spark of Fire, but rather they themselves are all on a Flame, and want nothing
but the mode of the times to be completely wicked; which in the more modern
Language is (tho damnable yet) gentile.

Now, whatever you may think of this, I assure you it is a fatal truth: And I
have heard of, and know those, whose Parents have allowed them (when Children)
to practice constantly those several wickednesses, which men of Age ought to be
ashamed of. -- that when a Boy of ten or twelve years old, has been able to
swear briskly; lie fluently, or talk to his elders saucily, with a little
mixture of Railery; and to the Female sex a story of bawdy obscenity: In a
word, if he have been able to play the Buffoon wittily, and act a Merry-Andrew
with an air, he has been as much admired, and commended, as if he understood
all the depths of Learning, whether natural or Theological.

And then pray, what hopes that such an one should ever restrain himself when
abroad? Parents (naturally) have some awful influence upon their Children; and
it must be a Rape and violence to their natures, to erase the apprehensions of
it on either side. But sin is of a levelling nature: and the greatest
contrarieties agree, and the most distant contradictions are reconciled, to
make a Conspiracy in wickedness.

But I say, those who thus set up in the world (as I may say) Licentiates in
Iniquity, they generally grow from sin to sin, and never dream of a Judgment to
come. -- And no wonder, for they never heard of such a thing. For we cannot
suppose that ever such Gallants should go to a Church, or look in a Bible, or
read a good Book, or hear a Sermon: Alas! No: That Is none of their Employment,
they have no president for so doing, their Fathers never did so before them,
and therefore they scorn to begin.

Miserable condition that these men are in! they never had any acquaintance
with Religion, and which is the worst, of their case, their Consciences were
stupefied, before they knew the voice of their admonitions!

And thus must they perish eternally, except a Miracle of mercy interpose for
their rescue; and that too, such a miracle as must come unaskt, for such men
(as I am mentioning) know no other use of the name of God, than to profane it
by an horrid Oath, or intersert it with some impertinent or causeless curse.

And how far, such as these are from Destruction, let all men consider: and yet
through whose occasion let the world judge.

But now in short, positively: Parents should provide for their Children, in
this respect, sensonably, by giving them good instructions, enlivened by their
own Examples. N.B.

They must reprove them for little faults, and correct them for great ones;
they must keep them to the strict observance of the rules of good Morality; and
the exactions which Parents, etc. should demand from their Children in point of
practice, must be severe (i. e.) admit of no diminutions: There must be no
Commutation in the exercise of tender virtue; for that will by degrees tempt
Children to believe that it is only indifferent.

But now when Parents keep a severe hand, and a watchful Eye over their
Children, and will allow no abatements of their duty: but encourage and reward
them for doing well; and render Virtue amiable from the consideration of that
credit that attends it; and Lastly, when they recommend Religion to their
choice from the consideration.

1. That Gods Honor is concerned in it 2. That their own eternal Happiness
depends on it; then Parents have done their duty for their Children.
Secondly, And then there is no doubt, that those who have begun thus well,
will ever fall back; those who are so forward in their way to Heaven, cannot
fail of arriving thither with ease and comfort, as well as be received with joy
and glory. He that has been accustomed to do well, will not admit of any
temptation to biass him: but his whole conversation will be heavenly: his
discourse always grave, as if seasoned with Salt, ministering Grace to the
Hearers: his thoughts always limited; his desires bounded; and his actions will
be so innocent, and withal his temper so obliging, and his society so
acceptable, and withal so beneficial, that all that know him must commend him.

And which is a comfort to himself, he is always in readiness for the coming of
the Bridegroom.

Preparation for death includes more than a Death-bed-repentance; or a faint
Lord have mercy upon me. He properly, and he only prepares for death aright,
who lives every day with that care and watchfulness, as if he were to dye ere
the night (i. e.) not to fall wilfully into any notorious sin, nor to allow
little ones: but every night confesses the Errors and Miscarriages of the day
past, and endeavors what he can to avoid the same in after times: In a word:
It Is an Early beginning to live well, that can be truly accounted a timely
preparation for our removal hence. N. B.

Fourthly, Inf. 4.
We should moderate our sorrow for the loss of any Friend, how near or hopeful
soever. The days of man are but as grass, says the text. All Flesh is grass,
says the Prophet, I say 40. 6. and all the glory of it but like a Flower: well
then -- Are you discontented that your grass withers? Or are you perplexed
that a flower fades? No.

This does not disturb you, for you know it is natural* Be it so; man's days are
no more; but his removal hence is necessary; and will you, will you, it lies
not in your power to prevent that sat, for that is a war in which there is no
discharge. And therefore to be angry that our Friends dye, is to blame the
wisdom of God, who made them mortal: or to be discontented that we can keep
them no longer, is to pretend to tell God, what season is proper for him to do
what we would have done, which is to put our selves above him: In a word, we
have no more solid reason to be grieved that our Friends dye (I mean grief to
excess) than that a Stone descends; or Water is moist; or the Sun gives light,
or Fire burns; for all are alike natural.

But it may be said, if ever grief be allowed, when our Friends dye, as Nature
prompts it, and there are not many who can conquer their passion so as to
suppress it; then in extraordinary cases, it will follow that there should be
extraordinary grief allowed? (will it not? may be a Question)

I answer, no: or I ask to what purpose? will your Friend be the more easy
after he is dead, if you tear your Hair, or rent your Cloths, or break your
Rest, or forbear your Meat, and pine your self into a Consumption? If you you
can think so; spare no Labor, but rather take incentives to heighten a
disconsolate passion to any degree, this side your own expiration. -- But if
you cannot suppose that the deceased Person, for whom you so lament, and whom
you so passionately bewail, is at all benefited thereby, pray then to what
purpose is it? Or why make ye this ado. -- I am sure, it can be no comfort or
ease to indulge those phlegmatic passions: reason does not require them, nor
religion tolerate them: -- Or if no other argument can convince men, how
unserviceable excessive grief is. in such a case, I say, that others shall
shortly lament us, as we now do our late dear Friend.

In a word, therefore in all the circumstances of Life, let our grief be
moderate; Sum. and Appl.
in all our concerns of Eternity, let us be very vigilant: Let it be our care
to have Oil always in our Lamps. We are but as Flowers; we know not how soon we
may be gathered hence; let us be careful that we be not found unprovided.

If God should think fit to call us off suddenly, are we now provided? -- I
know many don't care to put this question much to themselves: but they would
rather enquire after others that died in this manner: but that is not any man's
duty, for any one to mind more than himself, for himself. But this I know, and
forwarn, and testify, (viz.) that where God continues the means of grace, and
makes all men a free offer of glory, if they will but labor after it; If men
will prefer a Lust to Eternal Life: Value Vanity beyond a Crown of Glory, prize
a Bubble before an Inheritance which fades not away; if they slight the
Threatenings of God; and contemn his Judgments, and despise his Mercies, he will
speedily execute Vengeance on those that so affront him. And tho their time in
general be but short, yet God will cut off such in the midst of their days,
hasten their Destruction, and send them quick into Hell; and then they shall
too late perceive their Folly, which now they would not suspect.

On the other hand. If from the consideration of the uncertainty of our
continuance here, we provide our selves for a removal; and make it our business
to look out that City, which has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 11. 10. If from the thoughts of a speedy death, wear persuaded to mortify
sin in our members presently; if from the remembrance of leaving this world, we
are induced to fix our thoughts upon Heaven; If the thoughts of leaving behind
us all our Friends, engage us to make Friends with the Mammon of
Unrighteousness; If the leaving our wealth, prevails upon us to lay up a
treasure In Heaven.

Then have we lived long enough, how little while soever we have lived; then
death shall never be sudden, how unexpected soever it may seize us. Lastly,
then our bounty, our honor and splendour, which are so many Flowers on us in
Life, of which death deprives us, shall be all abundantly recompensed by a
Crown of Righteousness; which shall be a lasting ornament to our head, to a
never ending Eternity.

FINIS

