THE HISTORY OF THE INQUISITION, As it is Exercised at GOA. Written in French,
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five years under those
severities. With an Account of his Deliverance.

Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Queens-Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

To the Reader.
THE Reason of offering this Preface to the Reader, is only to satisfy the
World that these Papers came not abroad with any design of insinuating to the
People a probability of the Inquisition, being about to be introduced into
England. It is at present in use but in three places in the World, Italy,
Spain, and Portugal, and the Countries subject to them. The Gallican Church is
so far from admitting it, that His present Majesty thought fit to give a
License for the publishing this Relation, and consequently, by thus encouraging
the publication of the proceedings made use of in the Inquisition, showed his
Aversion to them. In England there is yet less probability of its being ever
Established, the Laws of the Land, by which His Majesty has so often promised
to govern, being a sufficient guard against it; and if we should yet require
any greater assurances, His Majesty's repeated Declarations for Liberty of
Conscience, have already offered them. All that remains therefore, is to desire
the Reader, that he would not upon perusing these Papers, suffer any such fears
and jealousies to grow upon him, but ^arely to look them over in order to the
satisfying his Curiosity, and the informing himself in the Nature and
Constitution of this Tribunal, to whose Customs and manner of proceedings he
was before altogether a Stranger.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THIS Translation was made from the French Copy, Printed by the direction of
the Author at Paris, by Daniel Horthemels 1688, Octavo, with the permission of
the King. The Author had intermixed a description of several Islands and Towns
in the East Indies, and other places of his Travels; which, because they
contained nothing curious or extraordinary in them, and did not in the least
relate to the Story of the Inquisition, I have wholly omitted; which might
easily be done without any disorder of the History, or Mutilation of the Sense,
since the Author had comprised all his Geographical digressions in distinct
Chapters, and thereby given a fair opportunity of omitting them. I have no more
to acquaint the Reader, but only that the Author of this Relation was Monsieur
Dellon, a person well known to the World by his ingenious Writings,
particularly by his Relation of his Travels into the East Indies, Printed at
Paris* 2 Vol. in Octavo.

TO Mademoiselle Du Cambout De Coslin.
Madam,
I Should be unjust to complain of the Rigours of the Inquisition, and the ill
usage which I received from her Officers, since they have administered to me the
subject matter of this Work, and thereby afforded me the advantage of
Dedicating it to you. I should desire, Madam, to make a just use of so
favorable an occasion, to have an Eloquence proportionable to my Zeal. I would
employ it in speaking of so many excellent Qualities, wherewith Heaven has so
liberally endued you, which render you one of the most aimable Persons of the
World, and cause you to be already admired by all those who know you. In truth
there is observed in you a Goodness and Sweetness which Charm, a vivacity and
penetration of Spirit which surprise, a Prudence and Discernment, which are not
ordinary to Persons of your Age But this, Madam, deserves our astonishment,
that you are so accomplished; that to create a just Idea of you, and make your
Elogy in few words, it does not suffice to say that you are the worthy Daughter
of two Persons, no less Eminent and Illustrious for their Piety, than for their
Birth and Quality.

May Heaven grant, Madam, that your Merit may be fellowed by an uninterrupted
Happiness; that your Prosperity may surpass even the measure of your Desires;
and that this Book, which I present to you, may be scattered into the most
remote Provinces; not so much to instruct People in what passes in the
Tribunals of the Holy Office, as to preserve the memory of your Illustrious
name; and serve for an Eternel Proof of that profound respect, wherewith I am,

Madam, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, D***.

The PREFACE
IT is but too ordinary to find Books, whose pompous Titles promise much, and
which deceiving the expectation of the Reader, contain nothing less, that what
is hoped to be found in them. In this Book a quite opposite method is observed;
and those who shall give themselves the trouble to read it, will grant that the
Title does but imperfectly express the matter of the Book.

I have contented my self to describe faithfully what I observed in the
Inquisition, without insisting to make large Reflections on it, and have chose
rather to leave to the Readers the liberty of doing that. Those who have
already any light knowledge of the Holy Office, will make no difficulty to
believe all which is here related; the whole is so far from receiving any
exaggeration; and how extraordinary soever the Proceedings and Formalities of
the Inquisition may appear, the Reader may be assured that there is nothing
here related, which is not exactly true. I do not in the least hereby pretend
to blame the Inquisition it self: I am willing to believe that the Institution
of it is good; and it is certain that in those places where it first began, it
is not exercised with so great Severity, as in Spain, Portugal, and the
Countries which depend upon these two Crowns, where it is received; but as all
human Institutions, how excellent soever they be, are subject to Relaxation and
Abuse, it is not to be admired, if Abuses have crept into the Tribunals of the
Holy Office.

It is of these Abuses therefore only that I design to complain; however the
Inquisitors, who affect so great Secrecy in whatsoever relates to their
Tribunals, will perhaps be displeased, that I have taken the liberty to expose
to the Public, things, which it seemed so much their concern to keep
concealed. But besides, that this discovery may, if they will make a right use
of it, be serviceable to them also, I thought it my Duty no longer to deprive
the Public of a knowledge, which could not but be very useful to it. In
effect, it very much concerns those Persons, whose Curiosity, or Business shall
oblige them to live in those places, where the Holy Office exercises its
Jurisdiction, that they be informed of what they ought to avoid or do, that
they may not fall into the hands of those Officers, and thereby undergo a
Misfortune like to that, which makes the subject of this Relation.

An Extract of the Privilege of the King.
BY the Grant and Privilege of the King, given at Versailles the 21st day of
August 1687. Signed, by the King in his Council, Poullain, it is permitted to
the Sieur D*** to cause a Book to be imprinted, Entitled, A Relation of the
Inquisition of Goa, during the time and space of 8 years, to be accounted from
the day, when the first Impression shall be finished. And it is forbidden to
all Printers, Booksellers, and others, to Print, Sell, or Divulge the said
Book, upon pain of the Penalties mentioned in the said Grant.

The said Sieur D*** has yielded and transferred his Right in the present
Privilege to Daniel Horthemels, to enjoy it according to the Agreement made
between them.

A RELATION OF THE Inquisition of Goa.
CHAP. 1.
Motives which induced me to publish this Relation.

ALL the World knows in general what the Inquisition is, and that it is
Established in certain places, as Italy, Spain, and Portugal, and most of the
Countries which depend upon them, and that the Judges which possess it, exercise
with much severity upon the people subject to them, a Judicature unheard of to
other Tribunals. It is moreover known, that this Rigor is not every where
equal, for the Inquisition of Spain is more severe than that of Italy, and less
severe than that of Portugal, and the States depending on it.

The Maxims of this unheard of Judicature may be found in printed books, the
examination of those Maxims, and the effects of them in diverse occasions; but
I know none who has given himself the Liberty to tell us what passes in the
recesses of this Tribunal. The Officers of this Judicature are too much
interessed in its conservation for to discover the secrets of it, and as for
those who have had to do with these* Magistrates, and their inferior Officers,
are informed of what is there* practiced, and have had some reason to complain
of it. The fear of those terrible punishments, that are carefully inflicted
upon those, who shall be convinced not to have kept their Oath of Secrecy
(which is extorted from them before they are set at Liberty) renders the
Mysteries of the Inquisition of impenetrable, that it is almost impossible ever
to learn the truth, unless to him who has the unhappiness to be carried into
her Prison, and make the experience of them in his own Person: Or to yield
under so great an Adversity. Moreover, it is necessary that he who has been
shut up in the horrible Solitudes of the Holy Office, should have taken care,
during his imprisonment, diligently to observe what passed; and after his
enlargement, has the courage to relate without any fear, what himself has
learned and experienced.

These are the reasons that very few persons truly know what passes in that
terrible Tribunal; and as after the obligation of rendering to God what we owe
to him, there is no duty more pressing than that of serving our Neighbor, and
especially the public. I thought my self obliged to relate what I have
suffered, and what I observed in the Prisons of the Inquisition at Goa; adding
to it what I learned from cerdible persons, whom I knew familiarly during the
time of my imprisonment, and after my enlargement.

I doubted a long time whether I ought to publish this Relation, for it is more
than eight years since I returned into France, and it is more than four since
this Relation was writ. I feared to scandalize the Holy Office, and violate my
Oath, and this fear was confirmed in me by Pious, but timorous Persons, who
were of the same Opinion as my self; but other persons no less Pious, and who
seemed to me more Rational, at last convinced me, that it concerned the Public
upon many accounts to know this Tribunal well; that this Relation might be
useful even to the Ministers of the Holy Office, if they knew how to profit by
it; and much more to those who have a right to regulate the proceedings, and
limit the jurisdiction of it. And as for the Oath of Secrecy, so unjustly
extorted, as that is which the Inquisition extorteth under pain of burning; the
public good sufficiently dispenses with it, for to set at liberty the
Conscience of him who took it, and consequently puts him into a kind of
obligation to relate what he knows.

See the Reasons which hindered me from publishing this Relation before, and
those which now engage me to publish it at present; if the delay of it has
deprived the Public of an useful knowledge; at least it will serve to assure
me that I have precipiated nothing, and that the resentment of those ill
treatments which I suffered, had no share in this account. In fine, what I here
say of the Inquisition of Goa, is to be understood of those also of Portugal
and Spain; for although this last be less cruel than the other two, upon this
account, that those public Executions, which they call Acts of Faith, are here
less frequent; and that there is a greater ignorance in the Indies than in
Portugal, we see nevertheless by the Relation which the Gazette of France
gives the 12th of August, 1680. that the same Spirit, the same Rules, and the
same Rigor, reign in all the Executions of the Inquisition in all these
Countries; forasmuch as there is even in the relation of the Gazette,
circumstances much more terrible than those of the Act of Faith, which I
underwent.

CHAP. II.
The Apparent causes of my Imprisonment.

I Had stayed at Daman, a Town of the East Indies possessed by Portugueze, for to
refresh my self a little from the fatigues which I had suffered in my Voyages,
and that I might put my self into a condition of continuing my Travels: But in
the same place where I had hoped to have found rest, I found the beginning of
much greater troubles, than all those which I had hitherto experienced. The
true cause of all the Persecutions which the Ministers of the Inquisition made
me endure, was an ill-grounded jealousy of the Governor of Daman. It is not
hard to judge that this reason was never alleged in my process: Yet for to
satisfy the passion of this Governor they made use of diverse pretexts; and
they found at last the the means of seizing me, and removing me from the
Indies, where perhaps otherwise I had passed the rest of my days.

It must be acknowledged, that although these pretexts, of which they made use,
were very weak for persons instructed in the Faith, or in Law; they were
nevertheless too sufficient for such persons as the Portugeze are, in respect
of their prejudices and maxims. Insomuch as upon this account I thought them my
self so plausible, that I discovered not the true reasons of my detainment, but
in the sequel of the affair.

The first occasion which I gave to my Enemies, to make use of the Inquisition
to destroy me, was a discourse which I had with an Indian Monk, a Divine, of
the Order of St. Dominick. But before I proceed any farther, I must premise,
that although my manners have not always been conformable to the Holiness of that
Religion wherein I was Baptized, I have yet been always strongly addicted to
the Religion of my Forefathers, I mean to that of the Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman Church; and that God has given to me more affections to the instructions
which are received in it, than the greatest part of Christians ordinarily have.
Consequently I have always taken pleasure both to hear and read: And I never
read any thing with so much diligence, as the Holy Scriptures, as well of the
Old, as of the New Testament, which I commonly carry about with me. I had also
taken care not to be ignorant of the School Divinity, because in long Travels
there is a necessity of continual conversation with all sorts of People; among
whom may be found some of all Religions and Sects: And I freely disputed with
Heretics and Schismatics, whom I found in my way. I carried with me Books fit
for this purpose, and among others, an Abridgment of Divinity, writ by Father
Don Peter de St. Joseph Feuillant; and I was sufficiently instructed by
discourse, and reading, during my great leisure at Sea, and stay which I made
in diverse places of the Indies. I thought my self then in a condition of
conversing, or even disputing with professed Divines, and I fell very innocently
into the Snare in talking with this Monk.

I lodged with the Dominicans because of those earnest desires which they had
made to me; and I lived with them with much kindness and familiarity. I had
served them also upon diverse occasions in acknowledgment of the honor which
they did me in desiring my company, and in return of the friendship which they
testified to me. We were ofttimes in dispute, and that which I had with the
aforesaid Monk, was concerning the effects of Baptism: We both agreed in the
three species of Baptism, which the Catholic Church acknowledges, and it was
only in way of discourse, not for that I doubted of it, that I would deny the
effect of that Baptism, which they call Flaminis; and for to maintain my
opinion, I alleged that passage, Whosoever is not born again of Water and of
the Holy Ghost, etc. Nevertheless I had scarce ended my discourse but the good
Father retired himself without answering one word, as if he had some pressing
business, and went, according to all appearance, to inform against me to the
Commissary of the Holy Office. I afterward discoursed several times with this
same Monk, and as he testified no coldness toward me, I was far from believing
he had done to me so bad an Office.

I was oftentimes present in the Assemblies, where they carry about little
Trunks, upon which is painted the Image of the Blessed Virgin, or that of some
other Saint. The Portugueze are wont to kiss the Image which is upon this
Trunk; and those who have Devotion to these Confraternities, put their Alms
into these Boxes. Here it is free to give any thing or not; but none can omit
kissing the Image without giving scandal to the company. I was not then above
24 years old, and I had not all the Prudence requisite to a person who lives
among Strangers, to whose Customs it is fit to conform as much as may be; and
as I was not then used to these sorts of Ceremonies, I refused ofttimes to take
and kiss these Boxes; from whence they rashly inferred, that I contemned the
Images, and consequently that I was an Heretic.

I was with a Portugueze Gentleman, on a time when he was about to let his sick
Son blood: I saw that this young man had in his Bed the Image of the H. Virgin
made of Ivory; as he loved this Image extremely, he kissed it often, and
addressed his speech to it. This way of honoring Images is very ordinary among
the Portugueze; and it created ^ome reluctance in me, because in effect the
Heretics interpreting it ill, this hinders them as much as any thing from
returning to the Church. I said then to this young man, that if he did not take
heed, his Blood would fly upon the Image; and he answered me, That he could not
find in his heart to lay it by; I represented to him that this would hinder the
Operation: Then he reproached me that the French were Heretics, and that they
adored not Images: To which I answered, That I believed we ought to honor
them, and that if it were permitted to use the word Adore, Yet this ought only
to be in respect of our Lord Jesus Christ: in which case also it were
necessary, that this Adoration should be referred to Jesus Christ represented
by these Images: and for this I cited the Council of Trent, Session 25. It
happened about the same time that one of my Neighbors coming to visit me, and
seeing a Crucifix upon my Pillow, said to me, Monsieur, remember to cover this
Image, if by chance you take any Woman into Bed to you, and to take heed of it.
How is it, said I, that you imagine by this mean to hide your self from the
eyes of God? Are you of the mind of those debauched Women which are among you,
who after they have shut their Chaplets and Boxes of Relics, believe they may
without any crime abandon themselves to all excess: Go Monsieur, have more
noble thoughts of the Deity; and think not that a little Linen can hide our
sins from the eyes of God, who sees even the secrets of our heart. In fine,
what is this Crucifix, but a piece of Ivory? We stopped there, and my Neighbor
having withdrawn, acquitted himself very well of his pretended duty in going to
accuse me to the Commissary of the Inquisition. For it is to be known, that all
persons living in Countries subject to the jurisdiction of the Holy Office, are
obliged under pain of the greater Excommunication, reserved to the Grand
Inquisitor, to declare within the space of thirty days, all which they have
seen to be done, or heard to be spoke, touching the cases of which that
Tribunal takes Cognizance. And because many people might slight this
punishment, or doubt whether they have actually incurred it* for to oblige
people to obey this Order punctually, the Inquisitors will, that those who fail
in making this Declaration within the time limited by their Constitutions,
shall be esteemed Guilty, and consequently punished, as if themselves had
committed the Crimes which they did not reveal; which causes that in the
matter of the Inquisition, Friends betray Friends, Fathers their Children, and
that Children, by an indiscreet Zeal, forget all the respect which God and
Nature oblige them to bear to those who gave them life.

The obstinacy which I showed in refusing to wear a Chaplet about my Neck,
contributed no less to make them believe I was an Heretic, than my refusal to
kiss the Images; but that which served above all the rest as a motive to my
imprisonment, and my condemnation, was, that being pressed in company, where a
discourse was raised concerning the justice of men, I said that it much less
deserved that name, than the name of injustice; that men judging not but
according to appearances, which are too often deceitful, were subject to make
very unequitable judgments; and that God alone knowing things as they are,
there is none but God who can truly be called just. One of those before whom I
spoke, took me up, and told me, that generally speaking what I advance was
true, that nevertheless there was this distinction to be made, that if true
Justice were not to be found in France, they had this advantage above us, That
among them might be found a Tribunal whose decrees were no less just, and no
less infallible, than those of Jesus Christ. I then understanding very well
that he meant the Inquisition, answered, Think you that the Inquisitors are
less men, and less subject to their passions than other Judges. Speak not to me
so, answered this zealous defender of the Holy Office; if the Inquisitors
sitting upon the Tribunal are Infallible, it is because the Holy Ghost presides
over their decisions. I could no longer bear a discourse, which appeared so
unreasonable to me, and to prove to him by an example, that the Inquisitors
were nothing less than what he pretended, I related to him the Adventure of
Father Ephraim de Nevers, Capuchin and Apostolic Missionary into the Indies,
who as Monsieur de la Boulay le Gou, relates in the History of his Travels,
was arrested by the Inquisition purely out of envy, about seventeen years
before, where they had kept him, and very ill treated him for a long time; and
I concluded, in telling him, that I made no doubt that this Monk was more
Virtuous and Learned than those who had kept him thus in Prison, without so
much as permitting him to read his Breviary. I added, that I esteemed France
happy in refusing ever to admit this severe Tribunal, and I thought my self so,
in not being subject to its Jurisdiction. This discourse failed not to be
exactly related to the Father Commissary; and this added, to what I have
already said, served afterward to make my Process.

CHAP. III.
Of the Visit which I made to the Commissary of the Inquisition to Accuse my
self, and ask Advice of him.

NOtwithstanding the inviolable secrecy which the Inquisition exacteth, by Oath
of all those who approach her Tribunals, I failed not to have some notice of
the depositions which were made against me. The apprehension of falling into
the hands of the Holy Office made me go to find out the Commissary, from whom I
hoped for Counsel and Protection, because I had been recommended to him by
Persons, who deserved that consideration should be had of them; and for that
all the time I had been at Daman, he had always affected to be accounted one of
my friends. I therefore fairly related to him how things had passed; and
praying him to instruct me in what manner I should behave my self for the
future, assuring him that as I had never any ill design, so I was ready to
amend my self, and even to recant, if he should judge that I had advanced any
thing which was not convenient. This Father assured me, that my proceeding had
given scandal to many People, that he was satisfied that my intention had not
beenill, and that there was nothing in all which I had said absolutely
Criminal, that nevertheless he advised me to accommodate my self a little to
the fashion of the people, and not to speak so freely of these sorts of
matters, and above all, of Images, which I had often said ought not to be
adored, which I had endeavored to prove by Citations out of the Scriptures and
the Fathers. That the people were in truth in some light Errors, which passed
for a true Devotion, but that it was not for me to undertake to correct and
reform them.

I thanked the Commissary for the good advice which he had given me, and
returned very well satisfied: Forasmuch as I knew that having accused my self
before I was arrested, I could not according to the Laws of the Inquisition be
any more accused. I was besides very well satisfied of the justice and
integrity of this Commissary, because that having not found me guilty, he had
given me all necessary advice for my future conduct with so much prudence;
insomuch as I could not any longer entertain the least shadow of suspicion
against my self.

CHAP. IV.
Containing the true causes of my Imprisonment, and how they Arrested me.

ALthough all which I have laid down in the foregoing Chapters, was more than
sufficient for to destroy me, according to the Maxims of the Inquisition, and
the Custom of the Country; yet things had not gone on so far, or so hastily, if
the Governor of Daman, called Manu^ Hurtado de Mendoza had not been incited
with that jealousy which I before mentiooed; which he dissembled so well, that
he seemed to be one of my best friends, yet underhand he vigorously solicited
the Commissary of the Holy Office to write to Goa to the Inquisitors for to
inform them of the discourse which I had held, resolving not to lose the
occasion which I had unadvisedly given him, of making sure of me, and removing
me from Daman for ever. The reason of the jealousy of this Governor, was the
frequent, but innocent Visits which I paid to a Lady whom he loved, and of whom
he was but too much enamoured, that which I then was ignorant of; and as he
judged upon feeble appearances, he apprehended that I was more loved by her
than himself.

A certain Black Friar, Secretary of the H. Office, lodged over against this
Lady, he had for her no less strong a passion than the Governor, and had
solicited her to satisfy his infamous desires, even in the Tribunals of
Penance, as the Lady her self assured me. This Priest observing me, became as
jealous as the Governor, and although till then he had been one of my friends,
and that I had also done him very important services, he ceased not to join
himself to Manuel Hurtado to oppress me.

These two Rivals thus united, pressed the Commissary so vigorously, that upon
the advice which he sent at their solicitation to Goa, he received order from
the Inquisition to arrest me, which was performed the evening of the 24th of
August, 1673. as I was returning from visiting a Lady of great worth, called
Senora dona Francisca Pereira, Wife of one of the chief Gentlemen of the Town,
called Manuel Peixote de Gama. This Lady was about 60 years old, she thought
her self obliged to me for the life of her eldest Daughter, and of her
Granddaughter. And in truth, I had been so happy as not to be unserviceable to
her. The eldest had fallen sick in the absence of her Mother, and the impudence
of an Indian Physician had reduced her to the last extremity. When I was
called, I took in hand this sick Person and cured her; the Mother being
returned, and ravished with joy for the cure of her beloved Daughter: her
Granddaughter, who was yet more dear to her, fell also sick, and that more
dangerously than her Aunt; nevertheless, I was not called at first for to see
this young Patient, nor had they any recourse to me till her life was in a
desperate condition. I found her in a very violent Fever, and although she was
at the point of falling into a Phrenzy, the Indian Physician, far from thinking
of letting her Blood, had covered her head with Pepper, which I caused first to
be taken off, and undertaking the Cure, succeeded very well, insomuch as my
Patient recovered in a few days a perfect health. From that time this Lady
seeking occasions of demonstrating her gratitude, loaded me with Presents, and
desiring that I would lodge nearer her; she had given me an House over against
her own. This was the same day which I before mentioned, wherein she had given
me this House, and I departed from this so generous a Lady to return in the
evening to my own Lodgings, when the Criminal Judge of the Town, called in
Portugueze, Ouvidor de Crime, came upon me, and commanded me to follow him into
Prison; whither I was carried without being able to obtain of him by what order
he did this, till I was shut up in Prison.

How great soever my suprize was, when the Judge arrested me, yet as I was
conscious of my own innocence, but above all because I imagined that I was
seized upon some slight occasion; I hoped, with sufficient probability, that
Manual Hurtado, who had always professed much friendship toward me, would not
permit that I should stay so much as one night in Prison. But when he who
carried me thither told me, that it was by order of the Inquisition, my
astonishment was so great, that I remained for some time immovable; at last,
having a little recollected my self, I desired to speak with the Commissary,
but to heighten my misfortune, they told me, that he had parted that very day
for Goa; so that there remained to me no other comfort, that the hope which
every one gave me that I should be very shortly set at liberty; because the
justice of the H. Office was not only equitable, but inclined very much to
mercy, especially toward those who acknowledged their fault betimes, without
being a long while solicited to do it.

All these fine words hindered not my unhappiness from becoming very sensible to
me; and the sight of my friends, who failed not to come and comfort me, far
from comforting, served only more extremely to afflict me, by the comparison
which I made of their condition to my own. As I had no Enemies but hidden one,
they easily mixed themselves among my best friends: The Governor and the Black
Friar* who desired nothing so much as my removal, knew admirably well how to
dissemble their hatred and their jealousy; the first in sending to me the
Officer of his house, to assure me of the sorrow which he conceived from my
misfortune, and to offer all possible assistance to me; the other in coming to
the Grate, to shed some false tears, which joy, rather than compassion, drew
from him.

CHAP. V.
Description of the Prison. I writ to the Inquisitors, who returned me no
answer. Extreme misery of the Prisoners.

THe Prison of Daman is lower than the River, which is near to it, which makes
it moist and unhealthy; and it wanted but little that it was not overflowed
some years since, by a hole which the Prisoners had made under the Wall, for to
escape thereby. The Walls are very thick. The Prison consists in two large low
Rooms, and one upperone. The Men are in the lower, the Women in the upper Room.
Of the two lower Rooms, the greater is about 40 foot long, and 15 broad, and
the other two thirds of this extension. We were in this space of ground about
40 Prisoners, and there was no other place to satisfy the ordinary necessities
of nature but that. We made water in the middle of this Room, where the
collection of these waters made a kind of Sea: and the Women had no better
conveinience in their stage, there being this only difference between them and
us, that their waters ran from their high room through the Planks into ours,
where all those different waters mixed together. For the other excrements, our
only convenience was a large Basket; which was scarce emptied above once a
week; whereby an innumerable swarm of Worms were bred, which covered the
pavement, and came even upon our Beds. While I staid in this Prison, the care
which I took to have it cleansed, rendered it a little less horrible; but although
I often caused even 50 Pitchers of Urine to be cast out in one day, yet the
stink ceased not to be very great.

Scarce was I shut up in this sad dwelling, but making a serious reflection upon
my unhappiness, I easily discovered the cause, and resolved to forget nothing
which might contribute to my enlargement. My friends continually told me, That
my best and readiest way to recover my liberty, was to confess voluntarily, and
at large, what I thought had procured my ruin. Being willing then to make use
of their advice, I writ to Goa to the Grand Inquisitor, who is called in
Portugueze, Inquisidor mor: I ingeniously declared to him in my Letter, all
which I believed I could have been accused of; and desired him to consider,
that if I had failed, it was rather through levity and imprudence, than malice.
My Letter was delivered faithfully, but against my hope and the desire of my
friends, they returned no answer to me, but suffered me to languish in this
stinking and obscure Prison, in the company of diverse Negroes; who, as well as
I, were arrested by Order of the H. Office.

The charitable care which Dona Francisca took of me all the time that I stayed
Prisoner at Daman, rendered my Captivity a little more supportable. This
generous Lady contented not her self to send me what was necessary, but I
received every day from her wherewith to nourish abundantly and delicately four
persons. She her self took the trouble of dressing my meat, and always sent
along with the Slave, who brought the meat, some of her Grandchildren, who
might see me receive it; fearing le^t any one should suborn her Domestics or
the Jailer to poison me. And although she could not come in person to comfort me
in the Prison, she took care that her Husband, her Children* and her
Sons-in-Law should come every day.

It was not so with the other Prisoners; there is no regulated subsistence for
them at Daman: the Magistrates leave them to the Charity of whosoever have a
mind to relieve them: And as there were in the whole Town but two persons, who
sent them Meat duly twice a Week; the greatest part of the Prisoners receiving
nothing upon other days, were reduced to so deplorable a misery, that this
contributed not a little to imagine mine the greater. I gave all that I could
spare from my own subs^^tance, yet there were some of those unhappy persons,
who were separated from us but by a Wall, who were forced by hunger to live
upon their own Excrements. Upon this occasion I learned that some years before
about Fifty Malabar Pirates being taken and shut up in this Room, the horrible
Famine which they suffered, cast more than forty of them into such a despair
that they strangled themselves with the Linen of their^ Turbants. The
extremity which those poor people endured that were with me, created much
compassion in me, which induced me to writ to the Governor, and to the Chief
Men of the Town, who after that were so charitable as to send maintenance to
these miserable Victims of the H. Office.

CHAP. VI.
The return of the Father Commissary. They remove me to Goa.

THE Commissary had not found me a Criminal in that Confession, which I went to
make to him of my own accord, as I before said; and although he had found me a
Criminal, yet ought I do remain free according to the Laws of the Inquisition.
But as this was not the intention of the Governor and the Black Friar, this
Father violating all these Laws, had accused me as Dogmatizing Heretic; he
might have sent me to the Inquisition of Goa immediately after my imprisonment
and if he had done so, I might have come out of Prison three months after, at
the Act of Faith, which was performed in the December following. But this was
not the intent of my Rivals, that I should be so soon at liberty, this is the
reason why the Commissary, far from removing me immediately from Daman,
departed himself that he might not receive my desires and complaints, and went
to Goa as soon as he caused me to be arrested, from whence he returned not till
after the Act of Faith, that is to say, till the end of December; and I know
not whether he employed the four months which he made me pass in the P^ison of
Daman, an commending me to the Inquisitor, as a Man very criminal, and very
dangerous, whom it were necessary to remove from the Indies; rather I have
reason to suspect it, by the rigor which they affected to use in my
condemnation, which appeared so extraordinary even in Portugal. The Commissary
returned then the 20th of December, with the little Fleet which goes
ordinarily in this Season from Goa to Cambaia, for to serve as a Convoy to the
Merchant Ships. This Father who had order to cause all the Prisoners of the
Inquisition to be embarked upon, the Galliots, warned me to be ready to
depart, when the Fleet should return from Cambaia.

Monsieur l' Able carre returning in the mean time from St. Thome, where was
Monsieur de la Hay, and passing by Daman, having with much difficulty obtained
leave to see me, was so kind as to visit me in the Prison upon the Eve and the
day of Christmas, which was that of his departure to Surrat. I writ to the
Commissary, and desired him by diverse persons, that he would speak with me;
but neither my Letters, nor the solicitations of those who interessed
themselves for me could prevail with him; so much did he fear the just
reproaches which I should have made to him upon account of his insincerity.

About the same time, a Portugueze, named Manual Vas, whom I had known very
particularly* being accused of having a Wife of Portugal, was arrested by order
of the H. Office, and carried into the Prison where I was, for having married a
second (...) a month since at Daman.

My generous Protectress understanding that I was to be removed to Goa, failed
not to prepare provisions for me, which might have suffered for a much longer
Voyage than what I was to perform. At last, part of the Fleet being returned
from Cambaia, the Commissary sent Irons and Chains for to put upon the feet of
all those who were to be carried to Goa. The Negroes were chained two and two,
except some which were so wasted with famine endured in the Prisons, that they
were forced in embarquing them, to leave them the liberty of their Feet, which
yet they were not in any condition to make use of. As for the Portugueze and
me, they did us the honor for to afford us separate Irons. The Commissary had
also the Civility to tell me, that he left me the choice of two Chains, which
were destined for his fellow Countryman and my self, and to make use of his
Civility, I chose the most convenient, although the heavier Chain. I went out
of Prison with the rest, on the last of December, and was carried in a
Pelangvin with the Irons on my feet, to the bank of the River, where I found
diverse of my friends met together, whom I had the liberty to embrace, and bid
farewell to them. The Governor who was present, omitted nothing whereby he
might persuade me of the sorrow which he took in my misfortune; and made a
thousand counterfeit Prayers for my speedy deliverance and happy return. The
sight of my friends and their tears, served only to augment my grief; but
nothing was more grievous to me than the denial of taking leave of my
Benefactress, whom I would have thanked for all her charitable care which she
had taken of me; at last, aften many melancholy complements, they put me into
a Boat, and I was carried into one of the Galliots of this little Fleet, which
expected only the Orders of their General for to weigh her Anchors.

CHAP. VII.
Departure from Daman. We pass to Bacaim, and stay there. Our Arrival at Goa.

ALthough one great part of the Galliots and Barques were not yet arrival from
Diu and Combaia, the General, Lewis de Mello, ceased not to give the signal of
departure to those which were then at Daman. From whence we parted the first
day of the year 1674. with a design to go to Bacaim, to wait there till the
rest of the Fleet should join us, as the wind was favorable, and that we had
not above 20 Leagues to Sail, we arrived there on the m^^^ow, and had no sooner
let down our Anchors, but all the Prisoners were immediately Landed, and
carried into the Prisons of that Town, to be kept there all the while the Ships
should remain in the Haven. I was carried thither with the rest. One of my
friends, who had been settled a while since at Bacaim, having in vain
endeavored to obtain leave to see me, assured me by a Letter that he had also
much difficulty to let me know the part which he took in my misfor^^ne.

The Prison of Bacaim is less rafty, and larger than that of Daman, we found
there a good number of Companions in misery, whom the Father Commissary of the
Inquisition in that Town had detained Prisoners a long time, waiting for a fit
occasion to send them to Goa. They were all Chained as we were. They put us
aboard the 7th of the same Month, and all the Fleet being met together, and
sufficiently provided with all things necessary, we weighed Anchors, and made
Sail the next day.

There happened nothing remarkable to us during the rest of the Voyage. We
sailed always in sight of Land, and the Wind being pretty favorable to us, we
arrived on the fourteenth at the Bar of Goa. Our Captain having immediately
given advice to the Inquisitors, we landed the next day, and were carried to
the Inquisition. But because there was no audience on that day, one of the
Officers of the House caused us to be carried into the ordinary Prison; that
is, into the Prison of the Archbishop of Goa. This Prison is called in
Portugueze, al Iouvar. I entered one of the first, and saw all our un^ortunate
Companions arrive by degrees, and meet together, after their dispersion during
the Voyage.

This Prison is the most rafty, the most dark, and the most horrible of all
which I ever saw; and I doubt whither a more nasty and horrible Prison can any
where be found. It is a kind of Cave, wherein there is no day seen but by a
very little passage; the most subtle rays of the Sun cannot enter into it, and
there is never any true light in it. The stink of it is extreme, for there is
no other place for the necessities of the Prisoners, than a dry Pit upon the
^^oor, in the middle of the Cave, which a man dare scarce approach, insomuch as
part of the ordure remained upon the side of the Pit, and the greatest part of
the Prisoners went not so far, but eased themselves round about it. When night
came, I durst not venture to lay my self down, as fearing the Vermin, whereof
the Prison was full, and the ord^res, wherewith it was sc^ttered all over, but
was forced to pass away the night, le^oing ag^^nst a Wall. Nevertheless, as
horrible as this dwelling was, I should have preferred it to the private and
lightsome Chambers of the Holy ^nquisition; because there was company and
conversation to be (...) in the al Iouvar, whereas I was informed there was
none in the Prisons of the Holy Office.

CHAP. VIII.
How I was conducted to the Inquisition, and what is done to them who are shut
up in Prison.

I Began to flatter my self that they would suffer me to remain in the al^
Iouvar, till my affair should be ended, because they had left us there all the
day and the night following. But I saw all my hopes to vanish, when on the 16th
day of January, an Officer came at Eight of the Clock in the morning with order
to carry us to the Holy House. Which was immediately put into Execution. It was
not without great trouble that I got to the place whither they conducted me,
because of the Irons I had upon my Legs. Yet were we in this lamentable
equipage forced to walk the whole way from the al Iouvar to the Inquisition.
Being helped to ascend the stairs, I entered with my Companions into the great
Hall, where we found Smiths, who took our Irons off; after which I was first
called to audience.

After I had crossed the Hall, I passed in an Antichamber, and from thence to
the place where my Judge was. This place, which is called by the Portugueze,
Mela do Santo Officio, that is, the Table of the Holy Office, was spread with
diverse pieces of Taffeta, some Blue, others Orange-colour. At one of the ends
was placed a great Crucifix in Relievo, which reached almost to the Plancher.
There is in the middle of the Chamber a great Scaffold, upon which is placed a
Table about 15 foot long and 4 broad, and round about Rails, even upon the
Scaffold. At one of the ends of this Table, and upon the side of the Crucifix,
was the Secretary sitting upon a folding Stool. I was placed at the other end,
over against the Secretary: Just by me, and on my Right hand, was within a Rail
the Grand Inquisitor of the Indies, called Francisco Del Gudo e Mates, a
Secular Priest, about 40 years old; because of the two Inquisitors which are
ordinarily at Goa, the Second, which is always a Religious of the Order of St.
Dominick, was gone a little before into Portugal, and that none had been yet
named to supply his place.

As soon as I was entered into the Chamber of Audience, I cast my self at the
feet of my Judge, imagining to mollify him by this humble posture: But he
would not suffer me to continue in that posture, commanding me to arise. Then
having asked my Name, and my Profession, he enquired whether I knew for what
reason I had been arrested, and advised me to declare it at large* since this
was the only means to recover my liberty speedily. After I had satisfied his
two first questions, I told him I believed I knew the reason of my detention;
and that if he would have the goodness to hear me, I would accuse my self upon
the spot. I mixed my tears with my prayers, and once more prostrated my self at
his feet: But my Judge, without being moved, told me it signified nothing; that
he had then more important business to handle than mine was; and that he would
cause me to be advertised when he should resume me ^ffair: and so immediately
ringing a little Bell of Silver which was before him, he made use of it to call
the Alcaide, or Jailer, of the Holy Office, who entered into the Chamber, from
whence he led me, and carried me into a long Gallery not far off, whither the
Secretary followed us: Thither I saw my Trunk-brought, which was opened in my
presence; they searched my also narrowly, and took from me all which I had
about me, to my very Buttons, and a Ring which I had upon my finger, without
leaving me any thing except my Chaplet and my Handkerchief, and some pieces of
Gold which I had sowed up in one of my Garters, which they forgot to search. Of
all the rest they immediately made a pretty exact Inventory, which afterward
was wholly unuseful to me; for all that was valuable was never restored to me,
although at that time the Secretary had assured me, that at my enlargement all
should be faithfully returned into my hands: and the Inquisitor himself had
after that ofttimes reiterated the same promise.

This I^ventory being finished, the Alcaide took me by the hand, and led me
bare-headed into a little Cell of ten foot square, where I was shut up all
alone, without sight of any one, till the evening when they brought me my
Supper. As I had eaten nothing either this or the foregoing day, I received
very gladly what they gave to me; and this contributed to give me a little rest
the following night. When they came the next day to give me wherewith to break
my fast, I asked for my Books and my Combs; but I soon understood that they
gave the first to no body, not even the Breviary to Priests; and that the
second were no longer necessary to me, my hair being immediately cut off; which
is done to all the Prisoners of what condition or sex soever, the first day
that they enter into these Holy Prisons, or on the morrow at the latest.

I must here for some time interrupt the account of what particularly respects
my self, to describe succinctly this House, with the Orders and Formalities
that are observed in it.

CHAP. IX.
Description of the Inquisition of Goa.

THE House of the Inquisition, which the Portugueze called Santa Casa, that is,
the Holy House, is situated on one side of the great space which is before the
Cathedral Church Dedicated to St. Catherine. This House is great and
magnificent, having in its front 3 Gates, that in the middle is larger than the
other, and it is by this that they ascend into the great Staircase which
leads into the Hall before mentioned. The Gates on the sides lead to the
apartments of the Inquisitors, of which every one is large enough to lodge a
reasonable train. There is within it diverse other apartments for the Officers
of the House; and in passing farther, may be seen a large Building divided into
diverse Lodgings, in two Stories, separated the one from the other by
Back-courts. There is in every Stage a Gallery, one ten foot square; and the
number of these Chambers may be in all two hundred.

The little Cells of one of these Dor^^tories are dark, without any Window,
lower and lesser than the others; and they showed me them one day, when I
complained that I was treated with too much rigor, to let me know that I might
have been worse provided than I was. The others are square, vaulted, whited,
private, and enlightened my means of a little grate Window, which shuts not;
and to which the tallest man cannot reach. The Walls are throughout 5 foot
thick; every Chamber is shut with two doors, the one on the inside, and the
other on the outside of the Wall; that within consists of two folding leaves,
is strong, well bolted, and opened from the lower part like a grate. It has in
the upper part a little Window, by which the Prisoners receive their Meat,
their Linen, and other things whereof they have need, and which can pass
through it. This Window has a little shutter to it, which is shut with two
strong bolts. The door which is on the outside of the Wall, is not so strong
nor so thick as the other, but is whole, and without any Window; they leave
that ordinarily open from six in the morning to eleven, that the Wind may enter
in by the Clefts of the other door, and so the air of the Chamber may be
purified.

CHAP. X.
In what manner the Prisoners of the Inquisition are treated.

THey give to every one of those, whom their unhapiness leads into these Holy
Prisons, an Earthen Pot full of Water to wash themselves; another more
convenient of those which are called Gurguleta, also full of Water to drink,
with a Pucaro or Cup made of kind of fine earth, which is commonly found in the
Indies, and which cools the Water admirably well, after it has stood in it
for some while. They give them also a Broom to keep their Chamber clean; a Matt
to spread upon the floor where they lie; a great Basin which is changed every
four days, and a pot to cover it; which serves also to put the filth in which
is swept up. The Prisoners are there pretty well treated, they have three
Meeals in a day, that is, Breakfast at six a Clock of the morning, Dinner at
ten, and Supper at four a Clock in the evening. The breakfast of the Negroes is
ordinarily Cange, which is Water thickened with Rice. For their o^^er Meals they
always make use of Rice and Fish. The Whites or Europeans are better treated.
They carry to them in the morning a little soft bread, weighing about 3 Ounces,
with fried Fish, Fruits, and a Sausage, it it be Sunday, and sometimes also
upon Thursday. They gave them also flesh to dinner on these two days, with a
little bread as in the morning; a Plate of Rice with some Ragout, and much
swace, to mingle with the Rice which is boiled only with Water and Salt. On all
other days they have nothing to Dinner but Fish, for Supper they bring to them
in like manner Bread, fried Fish, a Plate of Rice and a Ragout of Fish or of
Eggs, whose swace my by eaten with the Rice. As for flesh they never make use
of it to Supper, not even upon Easterday. I think that this way of life is not
observed so much out of sparingness; fish being a very good commodity in the
Indies, as for to mortify the more those who have incurred the greater
Excommunication, and to preserve them, at the same time, from that cruel
disease which the Indies call Mordechi, which is nothing else but indigestion,
a disease very frequent and dangerous in these Climates; and above all, in a
place where no exercise is performed.

They take care to give the sick Persons all things necessary for them. The
Physicians and Chirurgions fail not to visit them al all requisite times; and
if the sickness grows dangerous, they assign Confessors to them* But they
administer to none within this Holy House, either the Eucharist, or Extreme
Unction. As also they never hear Mass there.

Those who die within these Prisons, are buried in the house without any
ceremony. And if they are judged worthy of death according to the maxims of
this Tribunal, they are dug up, and their bones are kept to be burnt at the
next Act of Faith. I will relate in another place the particularities of this
Ceremony.

As it is always very hot in the Indies, and in the Inquisition no Books are
allowed to any person, the Prisoners never see any fire, nor other light than
that of the day. There is in every Cell two Couches to lie upon, because when
necessity requires it, they shut up two persons together. Besides the Matt
which is given to every one, the White Men have moreover a Coverlet, which
serves instead of a Matt, there being no need of it to cover themselves,
unless it be to avoid the persecution of those Flies, which are called Cousins,
and are there in very great numbers, and which cause one of the greatest
inconveniences, that is to be found in this melancholy retirement.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein is treated of the Officers of the Inquisition.

THere is at Goa two Inquisitors. The first whom they call Inquisidor mor, or
the great Inquisitor, is always a Secular Priest, and the second a Religious,
of the Order of St. Dominick. The Holy Office has also Officers, whom they
call Deputies of the Holy Office; these are in greater number. There is of all
Religious orders: They assist at the Trial of the accused persons, at their
examination and forming of their Process; but they never come into the Tribunal
without being sent for by the Inquisitor.

There are others, whom they call Calficadores of the Holy Office; to whom they
assign the care of examining in Books, the propositions which they suspect to
be contrary to the purity of Faith. And these assist not at the Trials, nor
come to the Tribunals, but only their report concerning the things which are
committed to their charge.

There is moreover a Promotor, a Procurator, and Advocates for the Prisoners
who desire them, who serve not so much to defend them, as to pump out their
most secret thoughts, and to betray them: And even although there should be no
reason to doubt of their fidelity, their protection would yet be wholly
unuseful to the accused persons, since those Advocates never speak to them but
in the presence of the Judges, or of persons whom they send to give an account
of these Conferences. The Inquisition has other Officers, whom they call
Familiars of the Holy Office, who are properly the Sergeants of this Tribunal.
Persons of all conditions are ambitious to be admitted into this noble
function, although they be Dukes or Princes. They employ them to go and arrest
accused persons; and they are wont ordinarily to send a Familiar or Quality for
him whom they would apprehend. These Officers have no wages, and they esteem it
sufficient recompense to have the honor to serve so holy a Tribunal. They
carrry always as a mark of Honor, a Medal of Gold, upon which are engraved the
Arms of the Holy Office. They go alone when they intend to arrest any one; and
as soon as they have declared to any person that they are called by the
Inquisitors, every one is obliged to follow them without replying; for if any
should in the least resist, the whole multitude of people would not fail to
lend their assistance for the execution of the Orders of the Holy Office.
Besides all these Officers, there are also Secretaries, true Sergeants, whom
they call Meirinhos, an Alcaide or Jailer, and guards to watch over the
Prisoners, and bring them their meat, with other things eecessary.

CHAP. XII.
In what manner the Officers of Inquisition behave themselves toward the
Prisoners.

AS All the Prisoners are separated, and that it seldom happens that two are
put together, four persons are more than sufficient to guard two hundred. They
cause a perpetual silence to be in the Inquisition; and those who would lament
themselves, weep, or even pray to God too loud, put themselves in danger of
receiving blows, with a Switch, from the Guards; who at the least noise which
they hear, run to the place whence it comes to give them notice to be silent;
and if Obedience be wanting to the second command, they open the Doors, and
beat the Prisoners without mercy; which serves not only to correct those which
they chastize in this manner, but also to terrify the rest, who all hear the
cries and the blows, by reason of the profound silence which is observed every
where. The Alcaide and the Guards are continually in the Galleries, and they
lie there all night.

The Inquisitor, accompanied with a Secretary and an Interpreter, visits all
the Prisoners from two to two months, or thereabouts, for to ask them if they
want any thing; whether their Meat be brought to them at the prescribed hours,
and whether they have not any complaints to make against the Officers which are
about them. As soon as answer is made upon these 3 Articles they immediately
shut the door. In truth these Visits are made only to set forth that Justice
and Goodness whereof they make Oftentation in this Tribunal, but produce not
the least profit or assistance to the Prisoners who make their Complaints,
since they are not at all the more kindly treated. Those among the Prisoners
who possess any proper Goods, are no whit better treated than those who have
none; and they furnish to the last necessaries from what is confiscated from
the others. For the Holy Office very seldom fails to confiscate all the Goods,
moveable and immovable, of those who have the misfortune to fall into their
hands.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Formalities which are observed in the Inquisition.

WHen any person is brought before the Inquisition, they first of all ask him
his Name, his Profession, or his Quality; then they exhort him to give an exact
account of all his Goods; and to induce him the more easily to it, they
signify to him on the part of Jesus Christ, that if he be innocent, all which
he shall have declared to be his, shall be faithfully restored to him; and that
on the contrary, even although his innocence should be clearly proved, all
which could be afterward discovered to belong to him, which he had not
acknowledged, should remain confiscated, and be lost to him. And because almost
all persons are prepossessed with an Opinion of the Holiness and Integrity of
this Tribunal; a person to whom his own Conscience reproacheth not any Crime,
not doubting but that his innocence will be demonstrated, and that consequently
his liberty will be restored to him, makes no scruple to reveal to these
Inquisitors whatsoever is most secret, and of greatest importance, within his
Affairs and whole Family.

It is not without some apparent reason that the Public is prepossessed in
favor of this Tribunal; for to consider only the external part of it, there is
no Judicature in the World wherein Justice is exercised with greater Sweetness
and Charity. Those who accuse themselves of their own accord, and who testify
their Repentance before they are apprehended, remain free, and are not liable
to be Imprisoned; it is ture, that they there look upon such as Criminals, who
accuse not themselves before their Imprisonment, and that they condemn them as
such: But they never punish any person with any temporal punishment which
proceeds to Death, except those who are manifestly Convicted. They are not
contented there with two or three Witnesses, as in other Laick Judicatures, for
to look upon an accused person as a Convicted Criminal; and although two
Witnesses suffice to decree the apprehension of any man, it is required that
there be, at least, seven to condemn him. How enormous soever the Crime be,
whereof the accused person is a reputed Convict, the Holy Office contents it
self with the Ecclesiastical punishment of Excommunication, and the
Confiscation of his Goods. And in ^respect of Temporal and Corporal
punishments, for which the Criminals owing to the Laick Justice, if he
acknowledges his Crime, he is quitted for that time: The Holy Office
intercedes for him, suspends the Secular Arm, and obtains pardon for the
Criminal. Neither are there any exhortations, or instances, which they will not
make to produce this acknowledgment; it is true, that if he relapseth into his
Crime, the Inquisition cannot any longer save him, but she abandons him
unwillingly, and delivers him not to the Secular Arm, till after she has
obtained of the Lay Judges, that if they persist in their resolutions of
punishing the relapsed Criminal with Death, it shall be, at least, without
effusion of blood: What gentleness is this?

But after having said all which can be alleged in favor of the Holy Office,
we must add some Circumstances, which will manifest what is to be expected from
this apparent goodness and charity. The Witnesses are never confronted. They
receive for Witnesses all sorts of persons, even those who are interessed in
the life and condemnation of the accused person. They never admit any objection
to be made by the accused, against Witnesses the most notoriously unworthy of
being heard, and most incapable of deposing against him. The number of these
Witnesses is ofttimes reduced to five; they comprehend in the number of these
Witnesses the pretended Accomplices, who depose only in time of torture, and who
can save their lives no otherwise than by confessing that which they never did.
And in this number of seven, the pretended guilty person is comprehended, who
confessing in torture the Crime which he never committed, is reputed a Witness
against himself. Oftentimes, also, this number of seven is reduced to none,
because it is composed only of pretended Accomplices, who are truly innocent of
the Crime which they impose upon them; and whom the Inquisition renders truly
Criminal, in forcing them either by threats of fire, or by torture, to accuse
the innocent, to save their own lives. For to understand well this Mystery, we
are to know, that among the ruins which the Inquisition has right to take
cognizance of, there are some which may be committed in that manner, that one
alone is guilty, as Blasphemy, Impiety, etc. There are others which cannot be
committed without having at least one Complice, as Sodomy. And lastly, there
are others which cannot be committed without having diverse Accomplices; as to
have assisted at the Jewish Sabbath, or to have partaken in those Superstitious
Assemblies, which the Converted Idolaters have so much difficulty to quit, and
which they treat as Magic and Sorcery; because they are held to discover
secret things, or for to know future Events, by methods which do not naturally
lead to such knowledge.

It is particularly in respect, and upon occasion of these Crimes, which cannot
be committed but with one or more Accomplices, that the proceedings of the Holy
Office are more strange, and more extraordinary. The Jews having been driven
out of Spain, by Ferdinand King of Arragon* and Isabelle Queen of Castile, his
Wife, they fled into Portugal, where they were received upon condition of
embracing Christianity, which they did, at least in appearance. But as the name
of Jew is odious throughout the whole World, they always distinguished the
Christian Families from the Families of the converted Jews; and they at this
day call those who are descended from them, in any degree whatsoever, Christams
novos, that is to say, New Christians. And because in process of time, some
have contracted alliance with the Ancient Christians, they upbraid it
continually to their Successors, that they are partly New Christians, which the
Portugueze express, by saying, tem part de Christam novo. Insomuch, that
although their Grandfathers, or Great Grandfathers were Christians, these
unhappy persons shall never be able to obtain admission into the number of
Christams Velhos, or Ancient Christians. And as the Families, which are
descended thus directly, or in part from these Jews, are distinctly known in
Portugal, where they make the object of the hatred and horror of others; they
are forced to unite themselves more strictly together, to render to each other
that mutual assistance which they cannot hope for from others. And it is this
very union which augmenteth the contempt and hatred of them; and which is the
ordinary cause of their misfortunes.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Iujustice which is committed by the Inquisition, in respect of Persons
accused of Judaism.

FOR to illustrate this matter well, I will suppose that a new Christian, but
who nevertheless is very sincerely and truly a Christian des^ended from these
unfortunate, Families, is arrested by order of the Holy Office; and that he is
accused not only by seven Witnesses, but by fifty, if you will. This man who is
assured of his own innocence, which he hops will be undoubtedly acknowledged,
makes no scruple to give to his Judge an exact declaration of all his Goods,
which he believes will be faithfully restored to him. Nevertheless these
Gentlemen no sooner get them into their Hands, but they sell them publicly, as
being well assured that they shall never restore any thing.

Some months being passed, this Man is called to Audience, for to ask him, if
he knows why he is put in Prison; to which he fails not to answer, that he
knows no reason: He is then exhorted to consider seriously, and to tell them;
since this is the only means speedily to recover his Liberty; after which he is
remitted to his Lodgings. He is again brought to Audience some time after, and
is asked diverse times in the same manner, without drawing any other answer
from him. But at last the time of the Lauto Dafe approaching, the Promotor
presents himself, and declares to him, that he is accused by a good number of
unexceptionable Witnesses to have Judaized; which consists in observing the
Ceremonies of the Mosaic Law, as not to eat Swines Flesh, an Hare, or Fish
without Scales; to have assembled with others, and solemnized the Sabbath day:
to have eaten the Paschal Lamb, and so in the rest. He is then conjured by the
Bowels of the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, (for these are the proper terms
which they affect to use in this Holy House) voluntarily to confess his Crimes,
since this is the only means which remain for him to save his Life^ and that
the Holy Office seeks all possible means not to suffer him to destroy
himself. This innocent Man perfi^teth in denying what is charged on him, and
hereupon he is condemned as a Negative Convicted Person, (that is to say, one
who is convicted but will not confess his Crime) to be delivered up to the
Secular Arm, to be punished according to the Laws, that is, for to be burnt.

Yet they never discontinue to exhort him to accuse himself, and provided that
he do it before the Eve of his being led forth to Execution, he may yet avoid
death. But if he persist to protest his innocence, maugre all Exhortations.
Solicitations, and even Torture it self, which are used to oblige him to
accuse himself; at last they signify to him the Decree of his Execution on the
Friday, which immediately precedeth the Sunday of his being carried forth. This
signification is made in presence of a Sergeant of the Secular Justice, who
casts a Cord upon the Hands of the pretended Guilty Person, in token that he
takes possession of him, after that the Ecclesiastical Justice has abandoned
him; after that a Confessor is brought in, who never leaves the condemned
Person either Night or Day: who never cease to press him particularly, and
exhort him to confess that whereof he is accused, that he may thereby save his
Life. An innocent Man must needs then find himself in a great perplexity. If he
continues to deny till Sunday, he is cruelly put to death the same day; and if
he accuses himself, he becomes infamous and miserable for his whole Life.
Nevertheless, if the Exhortations of his Confessor, and the fear of the
punishment, induce him to confess Crimes which he never committed, he must
desire to be carried to Audience, which fails not to be immediately granted.
Being there in presence of his Judges, he must first declare himself Guilty,
and then ask pardon as well for his Crimes, as his Obstinacy, in refusing so
long to confess them. And as they always imagine, they have reason to believe
they accuse themselves sincerely, they oblige him to relate all his faults and
errors particularly: And so this innocent man, to whom they have already
signified the depositions of his enemies, not being able to perform what is
required of him, is forced to repeat that, which he had before heard told to
him. This man may then, perhaps, imagine that he shall be wholly quitted; but
there remain things to be done by him incomparably more difficult than all
which he has hitherto done; for the Inquisitors fail not to speak to him very
near, in this manner. If you have been at the Assemblies upon the Sabbath day,
as you say; and that your accusers have been there present, as is very
probable; for to convince us of the sincerity of your repentance, it is
necessary that you name not only those who have accused you, but moreover all
those who have been with you at these Assemblies.

It is not easy to discover the reason which induced Messieurs of the Holy
Office, to oblige these pretended Jews to guess the Witnesses which have
accused them; unless it be that the Witnesses of assembling in the Sabbath are
accomplices of the fact. But how shall this poor innocent be able to guess? And
if he should be guilty, for what end is it that he must name them to the Holy
Office, which already knows them, since she has received their deposition, and
that it is only upon account of this deposition that she thus treats the
accused person as guilty? In all other cases they permit not that the Criminals
shall know their Witnesses, against whom they would have objections to allege;
here they force them to guess who they are. They are Accomplices, I grant it* but
the Inquisition will not a bit the better know them after the accused person
shall have named them. If they accuse themselves voluntarily, the Inquisition
has no more to say to them. If they have been forced to confess their crimes
in the Prisons of the Inquisition, they are there still where they were before;
and it concerns not the Holy Office to make the accused person guess their
names; himself will not become thereby the more innocent, nor they the less
guilty. The accused person and the witnesses are equally in the power of the
Inquisition; what in then the Design and Interest of these Judges? Unless it be
to cause that this man should accuse all his Accomplices in seeking to guess out
his Witnesses. This may serve for somewhat if he be truly guilty, but if he be
not, this necessity of guessing cannot but involve the Innocents; and so it
happens, for this poor new Christian being forced to name people whom he knows
not, to the Inquisition, who knows them (since without that, the confession of
a crime, whereof he is innocent, would nothing avail him, to save him from the
fire.) Reasons very near thus. It must necessarily be, that those who have
accused me, should be of my kindred, of my friends, of my neighbors; and
lastly, some of the new Christians, whose company I have wont to frequent: For
the ancient Christians are never almost accused or suspected of Judaism. And it
may be that these persons have been reduced to the same condition wherein I am
at present; it is necessary therefore that I accuse all round about me: and as
it is not impossible that he should guess punctually, and in order, those who
have deposed against him, to find out the six or seven persons who have accused
him, he is necessarily obliged to name a great number of innocent persons who
had never thought of him; against whom, nevertheless, himself becomes a Witness
by his declaration, which is ofttimes sufficient to cause them to be arrested,
and keep them in the Prisons of the Holy Office, till with time they can get
seven Witnesses against them, as against him, whom I have already supposed:
which will be sufficient to cause them to be condemned to the fire.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein is farther treated of the Formalities which are observed in the
Inquisition.

IT is easy to know by what has been already said in the precedent Chapter,
that these miserable Victims of the Inquisition mutually accuse one another;
and that a man may by this means be very innocent, although he has fifty
Witnesses against him, and yet this man as innocent as he is, for want of
accusing himself, or of guessing well, is delivered to the Executioners as
sufficiently convicted; which would never happen, or at least very seldom, if
they took care to confront the accu^ers, witnesses, and accused persons.

All which is practiced against persons suspected, of Judaism, and all which
has been hitherto said, is to be understood also of persons become suspected
of Sorcery; because they are supposed to have been present at those
superstitious assemblies which I before mentioned. And here the difficulty of
naming their pretended accomplices and accuses is much greater, because they are
not as the New Christians, to seek their witnesses, and their accomplices, in a
certain species of men. But it is necessary that they find thrm at a venture,
and indifferently, among their whole acquaitance, friends, kindred, enemies,
neuters of all professions, which takes in many more innocents into these
fortuitous and forced accusations; because they must name a greater number, so
to meet in this multitude of innocents with the witnesses, concerning whom they
are asked.

The Goods both of those who are punished with Death, and of those who avoid it
by their confession, are equally confiscated; because they are reputed guilty.
And as the Inquisitors desire not so much their Lives as their Goods, and that
according to the Laws of the Tribunal, they deliver none over to the Secular
Arm but relapsed persons, and those who will not subscribe to their
Accusations; these Judges use all possible Arts to induce the Prisoners to
confess, not forgetting to rack them, to force them to it. They are also so
merciful as to Rack these accused persons in a most violent manner, for to save
their Lives in forcing them to confess the Crimes whereof they are accused; but
the true reason which makes them so passionately desire that one should accuse
himself, is that a man having confessed himself guilty, the World has no
longer any reason to doubt that his Goods were justly confiscated. And because
remitting the punishment of Death to these pretended Criminals, they dazzle the
eyes of the Simple with an apparent Goodness and Justice, which contributes,
not a little, to preserve the Idea commonly entertained of the holiness and
gentleness of this Tribunal; without which Artifice, it could not any long time
subsist. It will not be amiss here to let the Reader know, that those who have
thus escaped the fire by their forced Confession, when they are out of the
Prison of the Holy Office, are strictly obliged to publish that they were
treated with much goodness and clemency, since their life was preserved to
them, which they had justly forfeited. For if a man who having confessed
himself guilty, should afterward presume to justify himself after his
enlargement, he would be immediately accused, arrested, and burnt at the first
Act of Faith, without any hope of pardon.

CHAP. XVI.
Other kinds of Injustice which are ordinarily committed in the Inquisition.

IF Christians are often put to death falsely accused, and slenderly convicted
of having Judaized; as the Judges of the Holy Office would themselves soon
acknowledge, if they would take the pains to examine the matter without
prejudice, and consider, that among an hundred Persons condemned to the Fire,
as Jews, there are scarce found four who profess this Law at their death, the
rest crying out and protesting to their last breath, that they are Christians,
that they have been so all their Lives, that they adore Jesus Christ as their
only and true God, and that it is wholly upon his Mercies and the Merits of his
adorable Blood that they found all their hopes. But the cries and declarations
of these unhappy Persons, if we may so call them, who suffer for not
acknowledging a Lie, cannot in the least move these Gentlemen, who imagine that
this authentic Confession of their Faith, which so great a number of People
make in dying, deserves not to obtain the least reflection; and who believe
that a certain number of Witnesses, whom the sole fear of Fire has induced to
accuse very innocent Persons, will be a reason strong enough to defend them
from the just vengeance of God. If I say, so many Christians passing for Jews
are unjustly delivered up to Execution in all the Inquisitions, there are no
less, nor fewer acts of Injustice performed in the Indies, against those who
are accused of Magic and Sorcery, and as such condemned to the Fire. For to
illustrate this, we are to observe that the Gentiles, who in Paganism observed
a very great number of ridiculous Superstitions; to know, for example, the
success of an Affair, or of a disease, whether one is loved by a certain
Person, who stole away any thing which is lost, and for other reasons of this
nature: that these Gentiles, I say, cannot so well, nor so readily forget all
these things, but that they put them often in practice after they are Baptized;
which will be thought less strange if we consider that in France, where the
Christian Religion has been established for so many Ages, there may be yet
found so many Persons who will give belief to, and use their impertinent
Ceremonies, which so long a time has not caused to be forgotten. Farther, that
those Gentiles newly Converted to the Faith, have passed the greater part of
their Life in Paganism, and that those who live in the States of the King of
Portugal in the Indies, are Subjects or Slaves, who ordinarily change not their
Religion, but in hope of being better treated by their Lords and Masters;
nevertheless these sort of faults which in gross and ignorant Persons, ^would
methinks deserve rather the Whip than the Fire, cease not to be expiated by
this cruel punishment in all those who are convicted, according to the Maxims
of this Tribunal the second time, if they confessed the first time; or the
first time, if they persisted to deny the Fact. And the Inquisition punishes
not only Christians, who fall, or who are accused to have fallen into the
cases, whereof it has night to judge, but also Mahometans, Gentiles, and other
strangers of whatsoever Religion they be, who have committed any of these
Crimes, or who have performed any exercise of their Religion in the Countries
subject to the King of Portugal. For although the Prince grants Liberty of
Conscience, the Holy Office having the Interpretation of this Commission,
consents indeed that Strangers should live in their Religion, but punishes
those as guilty who perform any exercise of it. And as in the Lands of the
Portugueze Dominion in the Indies, there are many more Mahometans and Gentiles
than Christians, and that the Inquisition which punishes the relapsed
Christians with death, never inflicteth Capital Punishment upon those who never
received Baptism, although they should relapse an hundred times into the same
Fault; and that at the most they are quitted for Banishment, the Whip, or the
Galleys; this fear of living condemned to the Fire hinders many from embracing
Christianity. And the Holy Office far from being useful in these Countries to
the Propagation of the Faith, serves for nothing else but to drive People from
the Church, and create in them an abhor^ence of it.

The perpetual Succession of Accusations, which necessarily follow, all which I
have hitherto related, and the liberty which every one takes, of freely
accusing those who are his enemies, causes that the Prison of the Inquisition
are never long time empty, and tho the Acts of Faith are made at the latest
from two to two, or from three to three years, there fail not nevertheless to
appear in every one about two hundred Prisoners, and sometimes more.

CHAP. XVII.
Some Particulars concerning the Officers of the Inquisition.

IN all the Countries of the Portugueze Dominions, there are four Inquisitions,
to wit, in Portugal those of Lisbon, Conimbra, and Devo^a, and in the East
Indies that of Goa. These Tribunals are all Supreme, and judge without Appeal
all those matters which happen within the extent of their bounds. That of Goa
extends its Jurisdiction over all the Countries possessed by the King of
Portugal, beyond the Cape of Good Hope. Beside these four Tribunals, there is
also the Great Council of the Inquisition, wherein presideth the Inquisitor
General. This Tribunal is the chief of all others, and is informed of all which
is done by the others. Beside the Honor, the excessive Authority, and the
Pensions annexed to the Charges of all the Inquisitors, they draw thence also a
considerable profit two ways. The first, then when they cause the effects of
the Prisoners to be publicly sold; by which means, if there be found any thing
rare and precious, they need only send some of their Domestics to cheapen it;
and it is certain that no body will dare to be so bold as to bid above him.
Whence it happens often that things are adjudged to him at ha^f of their just
value.

The second mean, by which they may yet more considerably gain, is, that the
price of the confiscated Goods being brought into the Royal Exchequer, they
have power to send orders when they will, and for what sums they please, to
supply the expenses, and secret necessities of the Holy Office, which is paid
to them ready down, without that any person dare enquire wherein these secret
necessities consist, insomuch as almost all which comes from these
confiscations return to them one way or other.

All the Inquisitors are named by the King, and confirmed by the Pope, from
whom they receive their Bulls. There is no man at Goa, but the Grand
Inquisitor, who has or claims the right of being carried in a Chair. Much
greater respect is given to him than either to the Archbishop or Viceroy; and
the Governors when the Viceroy is dead. His Authority extends over all sorts
of persons, Laick and Ecclesiastic, except the Archbishop, his Grand Vicar,
who is always a Bishop; the Viceroy, and the Governors, when the Viceroy is
dead; although he can cause even them to be arrested, after he has given
advice of his intention to the Court of Portugal, and has received secret
Orders of the supreme Council of the Inquisition at Lisbon, called Couselho
Supremo. This Tribunal assembleth not but from fifteen to fifteen days, unless
somewhat extraordinary intervenes, which may oblige them to meet more
frequently; whereas the ordinary Councils are regularly assembled twice a day,
in the morning from eight of the Clock to eleven, and in the afternoon from two
to four, and sometimes later, especially when the times of the Acts of Faith
dray near, for then the Audiences are ofttimes prolonged till ten at night.

When they judge Causes, besides the Deputies which assist, the Archbishops or
Bishops of the places where the Inquisition is established, have a right to be
present at the Tribunal, and to preside therein all the judgments which are
made. But it is time to return to what particularly relates to my self

CHAP. XVIII.
In what manner I was led the first time to Audience, and what they said to me.

THey had given me notice when I was first shut up in the Prisons of the Holy
Office, that whenever I should have need of any thing, I need only knock
softly at the door to call the Guards, or desire it of them at the hours of
meals; and that when I would go to Audience, I must address my self to the
Alcaide, who, as well as the Guards, never spoke to the Prisoners without a
witness. They had also given to me hopes, as I before said, that my Liberty
should immediately follow my Confession. For this reason I ceased not to
importune the Officers that I might be carried before my Judges: But with all
these tears and entreaties, I could not obtain this favor till the last of
January 1674.

The Alcaide accompanied with one of the Guards, came to me upon this account,
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon. I habited my self according to his
Directions, and went out of my Cell, my Head, Legs, and Feet being naked. The
Alcaide went before me and the Guard followed me: We marched in this order to
the very door of the Chamber of Audience, where the Alcaide having advanced a
little and made a profound reverence, stepped back to let me enter alone. I found
there, as before, the Inquisitor and the Secretary. I fell down at first upon
my knees; but having received order to arise and sit down, I seated myself upon
a Bench which was at the end of the Table, on the same side with my Judge. Near
me, upon the end of the Table, laid a Missal; upon which, before we proceed any
farther, they made me lay my hand, and promise to keep secrecy, and speak and
Truth: which two Oaths are exacted of all those who approach this Tribunal,
whether it be for to depose or to receive any Order. They then asked me if I
knew the cause of my imprisonment, and whether I were resolved to cofess it. To
which having answered that I desired nothing more, I recited exactly all which
I before related in the beginning of this Narrative, touching Baptism, and
Images, without saying any thing of what I had advanced concerning the
Inquisition, because I did not then remember it. My Judge having farther asked
me whether I had nothing else to say, and being told that this was all which I
remembered, far from restoring my Liberty to me, as I had hoped, finished this
Audience with these very words,

That I had done very wisely in accusing my self so willingly, and that he
exhorted me on the part of our Lord Jesus Christ, fully to confess the rest of
my Accusations, to the end that I might make proof of the Goodness and Mercy
which are used in this Tribunal, toward those who show a true repentance of
their Crimes, by a sincere and unforced confession.

My Confession and his Exhortation being finished and written down, they read
it to me, and I signed it; after which the Inquisitor rung the Bell to call the
Alcaide, who carried me out, and brought me back into my Chamber in the same
order, in which I had gone.

CHAP. XIX.
My second and third Audience.

I Was carried the second time before my Judges without desiring it, the 15th
of February, which made me believe that they had some design to free me: As
soon as I came in they asked me anew, whether I had nothing more to say, and
exhorted me to disguise nothing, but on the contrary sincerely to confess all
my Faults. I answered, that how great care soever I had taken to examine my
self, I could not call to mind any other thing than what I had already
confessed. At last they asked me my Name, that of my Father, Mother, Brother,
Grandfathers and Grand-mothers, Godfathers, and Godmothers; whether I were a
Christam de oito dias, that is to say, a Christian of eight days, because in
Portugal they baptize not Children till the eighth day after their Birth; as
also Women in Childbed go not out, nor go to Church, till forty days after
their delivery, how happy soever that may have been* My Judge seemed to be
surprised, when I told him that this Custom of deferring the Baptism of
Children till the eighth day was not observed in France, where they Baptized
them as soon as could be: and it sufficiently appears from the observance of
these Legal Ceremonies, that notwithstanding the Aversion which the Portugueze
testify against the Jews, they are nevertheless no very refined Christians.
But this is not the greatest evil which resulteth from the observation of these
Ceremonies. For first, it happens but too often that Children dye without being
regenerated by the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, and are thereby deprived of
Heaven for ever; and not to violate the Custom of Purification, which ought no
longer to be continued after the publication of the Gospel, the Portugueze
Women make no scruple to contemn the commands of the Church, which oblige all
Christians to be present at Sunday, and on the Feasts of the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass, if they be not prevented by lawful impediments.

They also asked me the Name of the Curate who had Baptized me? in what
Diocese? what Town? what Parish? and lastly, whether I ever were Confirmed? and
by what Bishop? Having satisfied all these Questions, they commanded me to
kneel down, to make the sign of the Cross, to repeat the Lord's Prayer, the
Ave-Mary, the Creed, the Commandments of God, and of the Church, and the Salve
Regina; lastly, he finished as at the first time, by exhorting me through the
Bowels of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to confess without delay; which
being read in my presence, and signed by me, I was remitted to my Chamber.

From the first moment that I had been in this Prison, I had been always
melancholy, and never ceased to shed tears; but at my return from this second
Audience, I entirely abandoned my self to all grief, seeing that they exacted
of me the things which appeared impossible to me, since my memory suggested to
me nothing of that which they desired I should confess. I endeavored then to
end my life by Hunger, I received indeed the meat which they brought to me,
because I could not refuse it, without exposing my self to receive Bastinadoes
from the Guards, who take great care to observe, when the Plates are returned
to them, whether the Prisoners have eaten enough to sustain Nature: But my
despair suggested to me means of eluding their diligence: I passed whole days
without eating any thing; and that they might not perceive it, I cast into the
Basin part of what they gave me. This course of diet was the cause that I was
entirely deprived of sleep, and my whole employment consisted in mortifying my
Body, and shedding tears. However, I omitted not in this time of my Affliction,
to reflect upon the errors of my past life, and to acknowledge that it was by
a just Judgment of God, that I had fallen into that depth of misery and
unhappiness. I proceeded also so far as to believe that he intended perhaps to
make use of this mean to call me to himself, and convert me. Having a little
fortified my self by such meditations, I Implored with my whole heart, the
assistance of the Blessed Virgin, who is no less the consolation of the
afflicted, than the Asylum and refuge of Sinners; and from whom I have so
visibly experienced protection, as well during my imprisonment, as upon other
occasions of my life, that I could not omit to render this public testimony of
it.

At last, after I had made a more exact, or a more happy examination of all
which I had said or done, during my stay at Daman, I called to mi^d what I had
advanced concerning the Inquisition, and its Integrity; I immediately desired
Audience, which yet was not granted to me till the sixteenth of March
following. I doubted not, but in appearing before my Judge, to terminate all my
Affair; and that upon my Confession, which I intended to make, they would
immediately restore me to perfect Liberty; but then when I thought my hopes at
the point of being completed, I saw my self at once deprived of all these
sweet hopes; because having confessed all which I had to say touching the
Inquisition, they told me that this was not that which they expected of me; and
I having nothing else to say, was immediately remitted, without so much as
their vouchsa^ing to write down my Confession.

CHAP. XX.
How Despair induced me to attempt my Life.

I Am now come to the most unhappy time of my Captivity; for how severe soever
it had hitherto been, I had, at least, the comfort of having suffered with some
patience, and even of having endeavored to make a good use of my Sufferings;
for the Faith obliges us to believe that the greatest Evils are so many
Advantages, to those who make good use of them. I ought not therefore to look
upon this as an unhappy time any more than that wherein I committed faults,
which I cannot but consider as very great, and which I pretend not to justify,
or even to excuse, by the cruelty of those who required of me impossible
things, on pain of burning, since they carry not along with them so great
extremity as may justify despair, which is the greatest and worst of all.
Evils.

I was once resolved not to speak of, in this place, the despair which seized
me, nor the endeavors of destroying my own life, to which I was induced by it;
but it was believed it would be important to give this account, since it cannot
be denied that the unjust severities of the Inquisition give at least occasion
to many to fall into the same condition: And that it concerns the Public to
make known not only the evil of the unjust actions considered in themselves,
but also the horrible evils which are the too ordinary consequences of them.
For if persons who have Learning and Education, who are instructed in their
duties, and who never forsake the considerations of Faith, fall into such
Extremities; what may not be feared from so many ignorant persons without
Education, the greatest part of them new Converts from Paganism, where they
have almost all their life looked on Despair as an Act of Generosity? I
confess, that the ill success of my last Audience, which I had believed would
be so favorable for me, was an insupportable blow to me, and that thenceforth
accounting Liberty to be an happiness to which I could no longer pretend, I
abandoned my self so far to Melancholy and Despair, that I wanted but little of
entirely losing my Reason.

I had not forgot that it is forbidden to a man to destroy himself, and I had
no design to destroy my self eternally, but I desired to live no longer; and
the extreme desire which I had to dye, troubled me so far, that I invented a
mean, in the midst of my Despair, which might effectually procure my Death, and
a natural Death, since I could not resolve to lay violent hands upon my self;
and I imagined that God would pardon me if I procured it slowly, and by the
means of others. I feigned then to be sick, and to have a Fever; they
immediately brought to me a Pandite, or a Gentile Physician, who made no
scruple to be convinced from the motion of my Blood within my Pulse, which he
took for a true Fever, and ordered me to be let Blood, which was reiterated for
five days together; and as my intentention in using this Remedy was very
different from that of my Physician, who labored to recover my health, while I
thought of nothing but ending this miserable and unhappy life. As soon as every
one was retired, and my door was shut, I untied the Fillet, and suffered so
much blood to run out as might fill a Cup containing at least 18 Ounces. I
reiterated these cruel evacuations as often as I was blooded, and withal,
eating almost no food, it is not hard to judge that I was reduced to extreme
weakness.

The Alcaide, who obs^rved so considerable a change in my Body, could not
sufficiently wonder at the ill condition wherein I was, which admitted scarce
any hope of recovery. The Pandite was in the same astonishment, which obliged
them to advertise the Inquisitor, who proposed to me to be Confessed. As I did
not believe my self to be in a condition of escaping Death, I began to resent
what I had done, and being unwilling to destroy Soul and Body both together, I
confented to receive a Confessor. They brought to me a good Religious of the
Order of St. Francis, to whom having given an entire knowledge of my
proceeding, I received much consolation from him: His good Advices made me take
a resolution of contributing as much as I could to the recovery of my Health; I
gave him leave to inform the Inquisitor secretly of all which had happened: And
from that day, which was Holy Friday, they gave to me, with all care, all
things necessary for the speedy recovery of my strengh, which I had lost with
my Blood; and for to sweeten my Melancholy a little, wherewith I was
overwhelmed, they shut up with me another Negro Prisoner, who was accused of
Magic, and who kept me company for five months. I enjoyed, during all this
while, more command of my reason, and was less melancholy; but as soon as they
imagined me to be well recovered, they withdrew my Companion, and the loss of
this comfort made me relapse into the same condition, to which I had been at
first reduced.

CHAP. XXI.
New excesses to which my Despair carried me.

I Became more furious than ever by the absence of my Companion; I beat my
Breast and my Face with my Fist; and not contented with that, sought means to
take away my life, which I could not lose by my former attempt. I believed well
that I should not succeed in Counterfeiting Sickness a second time; and even if
I should really be believed, if they opened me a Vein, they would take all
possible precaution to hinder me from losing my Blood a second time. This is
the reason why being animated with my Despair, I remembered that notwithstanding
the diligent search which had been made upon me, when I was shut up, I had
saved some pieces of Gold which had been sown in a Ribband tied about the Calf
of my Leg, in form of a Garter. I took then one of those pieces, which I broke
in two, and sharpened one part so well, and so long against an Earthen Pot, that
I gave it a point, and made it cut on both sides. This I made use of as a
Launcet, with design to open the Arteries of my Arm. I took for this end all
necessary precautions; I thrust it into my Arm as far as was possible; but
notwithstanding all my cares, I could not effect what I intended; and instead
of the Arteries, I opened only the Veins that are above them.

Being resolved no longer to keep any measure, I contented not my self with
drawing out my Blood by degrees. I let both my Arms bleed, till growing faint I
laid my self down in my Blood, wherewith the Chamber was filled. And it is
certain that if God by a particular mercy had not directed, that at that very
time the door should be opened to bring me somewhat necessary, in a time when
it was not ordinary for the Guards to come, I had miserably lost both my Life
and my Soul. I leave you to imagine the surprise of the Guards when they saw me
in this condition. They immediaely called the Alcaide, and altogether came in.
They bound up my Arms, and used such Skill, that I soon returned out of that
swoon, wherein so considerable an evacuation of Blood had reduced me. They
first carried this news to the Inquisitor, who ordered they should lead me to
Audience, whether I was carried at four a Clock.

Lying at length upon the Ground, my extreme weakness not permitting me either
to stand or sit, the Inquisitor, after many reproaches, commanded them to carry
me away, and put Manacles upon me, to hinder me from pulling off the bands
wherewith my Arms were bound up; this was immediately put in execution, and I
had not only my hands chained, but also a Collar of Iron that was joined to the
Manacles, and was shut with a Padlock, insomuch as I could not any longer move
my Arms.

But this proceeding served only to inrage me the more; I threw my self upon
the ground; I ran my Head against the Walls and Pavement. If they had suffered
me to continue never so little while in this condition, my Arms would
infallibly have been unbound, and I could not have avoided death: But as they
kept a strict eye upon me, they perceived very well by my actions, that
severity was not seasonable, and that it were better to try ways of sweetness;
they took off my Irons therefore, and endeavored to comfort me with deceitful
hopes. They changed my Chamber, and once more gave me a Companion, who had
order to answer for me; nevertheless God who had always preserved me from so
great an unhappiness, dissipated by his Grace, the despair wherein I was
plunged. More happy herein than many others, who often Murder themselves in the
Prisons of the Holy Office, where these unhappy persons are debarred all sorts
of humane comforts. My new Companion stayed with me, about two months, and as
soon as they perceived me to be more peaceable, he was taken away, although my
weakness was then so great, that I could scarce rise from my Bed to receive my
Meat at the door, which was set not above two paces from it. At last, after I
had passed a year in this manner, by suffering much, I even contracted a habit
of suffering; and God, after that, gave me patience enough not to make any more
attempts upon my life.

CHAP. XXII.
My fourth Audience, in which the Promotor forms against me Conclusions of
suffering Death.

I Had been now almost eighteen months in the Inquisition, when my Judges
understanding that I was in condition to answer, caused me to be brought the
fourth time to Audience, where they asked me whether I were, at last, resolved
to confess what they had so long expected from me; to which I answering, That I
could remember nothing else than what I had already confessed; the Promotor of
the Holy Office presented himself with a Libel, to signify to me the
Informations made against me.

In all my other Examinations I had been accused, and they had contented
themselves to hear my Deposition without entering into any discourse with me;
and were immediately wont to send me back as soon as I had ended the Accusation
of my self, but in this fourth Examination I was accused, and time was given me
to defend my self; and they read to me in the Informations made against me, the
things whereof I had accused my self. The Facts were three, I had acknowledged
them of my own proper motion. There was then nothing to oppose concerning the
Facts themselves, but I thought it my duty to demonstrate to my Judges, that
they were not so Criminal as they imagined; I said then upon the account of
what I had disputed concerning Baptism, my intention was not in the least to
oppose the Doctrine of the Church: But that the passage, Unless a man be born
again of Water and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven (John 3. 5.) appearing to me very express, I had desired the explication
of it. The Grand Inquisitor seemed surprised at this passage, which all the
World knows by heart, and I was no less surprised at his surprise. He asked me
where I had that Passage? from the Gospel of St. John, said I, the third
Chapter, and the fifth Verse. He caused a new Testament to be brought, looked
for the Passage, but explained it not to me; it had been, nevertheless, easy
to tell me that Tradition explained it sufficiently, since they always
accounted to be Baptized, not only those who had suffered Death for our Lord
Jesus Christ, without receiving the ordinary Ceremonies of Baptism, but also
those who had been surprised by Death in the desire of being Baptized, and in
Repentance of their sins.

Concerning the adoration of Images, I told him that I had advanced nothing
which I had not taken from the Holy council of Trent, and cited to him the
passage of the 25th Session, concerning the Invocation of Saints, and Holy
Images. The Images of Christ, of the Mother of Goa, Imagines Christi, Deipara
Virginis and aliorum Sanctoum retinendas, iisque debium honorem and veneratioem
impertiendam, ita ut per imagines eorum quibus pro^umbimus, Christum adoreus,
and Sanctos quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. Sess. 25.
and of other Saints, are to be retained; and due Houour and Reverence is to be
paid to them, so that through their Images to which we fall down prostrate, we
may adore Christ, and venerate the Saints, whose likeness they bear. My Judge
seemed much more surprised at this than at the former Citation, and having
searched it in the Council of Trent, he shut the Book without explaining the
Passage to me.

There is somewhat incomprehensible in this degree of Ignorance, in the persons
who undertake to judge others in Matters of Faith; and I confess that I should
have hardly believed these Facts my self although I saw them, and very well
remember them, if I had not learnt by the printed Relations of Mr. Tavernier,
That how reserved soever Father Ephraim de Nevers were, upon what respects
the Inquisition, which had made him suffer so much, he could not forbear to
say, that nothing had been more unsupportable to him than the ignorance of its
Ministers.

The Promotor in reading the Information, had said, that besides all this which
I had acknowledged, I was moreover accused, and sufficiently convicted of
having spoken with contempt of the Inquisition, and its Ministers, and of
having held disrespectful discourses concerning the Pope, and against his
Authority; and concluded, that the obstinacy which I had hitherto manifested in
contemning so many delays and charitable admonitions, which had been given to
me, was a convincing proof that I had very pernicious designs, and that my
intention was to teach and foment Heresy; that consequently, I had incurred
the punishment of greater Excommunication, that my Goods ought to be
confiscated to the Kings Exchequer, and my self to be delivered to the Secular
Power, to be punished for my Crime* according to the Laws, that is, for to be
burnt.

I leave the Reader here to imagine what effect these cruel concl^sions of the
Promotor of the Holy Office produced in my Soul. Yet I can assure you, that how
terrible soever these words were, the death wherewith I was then threatened,
appeared to me much less formidable than the continuation of my Slavery; so
that notwithstanding the trouble and grief which seized me, upon these
conclusions pronounced against me, I failed not to answer to the new
Accusations which were even now signified to me, that in respect of my
Intentions, they had never been bad, that I had always been a zealous
Catholic, that all those with whom I had conversed in the Indies could
testify the same, particularly Father Ambroise, and Father Yues, both French
Capuchins, who had diverse times heard me in Confession: And I understood after
my departure, that Father Yues was actually at Goa at the same time when I
alleged him as a Witness of my innocence; that I had gone sixteen Leagues to
satisfy the duties of Easter; that if I had nourished any Heresy in my Heart,
it had been very easy for me to propagate it in those Parts of the Indies,
where any one may live and speak with perfect freedom, and that I would not
then have chosen my Habitation in the Dominions of the King of Portugal; that I
was so far from Dogmatically opposing Religion, that I had on the contrary
entered diverse times into dispute with the Heretics for to defend it; that
indeed I remembered my self to have spoken with too much Liberty of that
Tribunal, before which I then pleaded, and of the Persons which possessed it;
but that I was surprised they should make that a Crime, which had been treated
as a trifle, when I would have confessed it almost a year and a half since;
that for what concerned the Pope, I remembered not to have spoken of him in that
manner which my Accusations insinuated, that nevertheless if they would tell me
the particulars of it, I would sincerely confess the truth.

The Inquisitor taking me up, told me, that time should be given me, to
consider of what respected the Pope, but that he could not sufficiently admire
my Impudence, in that I pretended to have confessed what related to the
Inquisition, when it was most certain that I had not opened my mouth about it,
and that if I had made any Confession upon this Article, in that time when I
pretended to have made it, I had not continued so long time in Prison. I
remembered so perfectly what had been said, and what had been answered to me,
and I was moreover so transported with anger to see my self so abused, that if
they had not immediately commanded me to be taken away, as soon as I had signed
my Deposition, I should not perhaps have contained my self from reproaching my
Judge; and if I had enjoyed as much force and liberty as my Passion gave me
Courage, it may be he should not have escaped with reproachful words.

CHAP. XXIII.
They carry me yet several times to Audience: Diverse Observations upon the
Proceedings of the Inquisition.

I Was yet called to Audience three or four times in less than a Month, and
they urged me to confess that whereof I had been accused concerning the Pope.
They also signified to me a new proof, which the Promoter pretended he had
drawn against me upon that subject, but which contained nothing di^^erent from
what he had already urged against me; but what clearly demonstrates this
Accusation to have been only a fal^ity invented on purpose to make me confess,
is that they would not tell me the particulars of what they pretended I had
spoken; but at last perceiving it impossible to draw any thing of that nature
from me, they cease to mention it to me; and that this Article was not inserted
in my Process, when it was publicly read in the Act of Faith. They endeavored
also in their last Audience to make me acknowledge that in the Facts whereof I
had been accused, my intention was to defend Heresy; but to this I would never
condes^end, there being nothing more contrary to truth.

During the Months of November and December* I heard every morning the cries of
those who were put upon the Rack; which is so cruel a torture, that I saw
diverse persons both of the one and the other Sex, who were distorted and
maimed by it, and among others the first Companion they had assigned to me in
the Prison. In this Holy Tribunal no respect is made of Quality, Age, or Sex,
and all are indifferently submitted to the torture, when the Interest of the
Inquisition so requires it.

I remembered to have heard it said, before I entered into the Prisons of the
Holy Office, that the Auto da^e, or Act of Faith was ordinarily performed the
first Sunday in Advent, because on that day is read in the Church that part of
the Gospel, wherein mention is made of the last Judgment, and that the
Inquis^tors pretend, by this Ceremony, to make a Lively and Natural
representation of it. I was moreover persuaded that there were then a great
number of Prisoners in the Inquisition. The profound silence which is every
where observed in this House, had given me opportunity to count very near how
many Doors were opened at the hours of repast, I had also obtained a pretty
certain knowledge that there was arrived an Archbishop at Goa, in the Month of
October, after that See had been vacant near 30 years; because they had
extraordinarily rung the Bells at the Cathedral for nine days together, which
neither the universal Church, nor that of Goa in particular Celebrates any
remarkable Festival; and because I knew this Prelate was expected even before
my Imprisonment. All these Reasons made me hope that I should be set at liberty
in the beginning of December, but when I saw the first and second Sundays of
Advent passed, I doubted not but that either my Liberty or my Punishment were
at least deferred for another entire year.

CHAP. XXIV.
How I perceived that the Auto dafe was to be performed on the morrow, and what
Habits were given to us to appear in this Ceremony.

AS I persuaded my self that the Auto dafe was never performed but in the month
of December, when I ^aw the whole month spent without observing any preparation
to that terrible Ceremony, I determined to suffer yet one year longer;
nevertheless when I expected it least, I found my self to be in the eve of my
enlargement from that long Captivity, wherein I languished two years.

I observed that on Saturday the ^1th of January, 1676, being about to give my
Linen after Dinner to the Officers to be washed, after the usual Custom, they
would not receive it, but put me off till the next day; I failed not to make a
great many reflections upon the cause of this extraordinary refusal; and not
finding any which satisfied me, I conclued that the Act of Faith was probably
to be performed the next day; but I confirmed my self much more in my Opinion,
or rather I held it for most certain, when after I had heard it ring to Vespers
at the Cathedral, it immediately rung to Martins; which was never before done
while I was Prisoner, except upon the eve of Corpus Christi day, which is
celebrated in the Indies upon the Thursday, which immediately follows quasi
mod^ Sunday, because, of the continual Rains which fall there at that time when
it is celebrated in Europe.

They brought me my Supper which ^ refused, and which contrary to their
ordinary custom, they pressed me not very much to receive. As soon as the doors
were shut upon me, I entirely abandoned my self to those mela^cholly thoughts
which possed me; and at last, after many tears and sighs, overwhelmed wi^h
sorrow and imaginations of death, I ^ell asleep, a little after Eleven a Clock
at Night.

I had not been long asleep, when my sleep was interrupted on the sudden by the
noise which the Guards made in opening my door. I was surprised to see persons
enter into my Cell with Light, being not before accus^omed to it, and the time
of the n^ght contributed to redouble my apprehe^sion. The Alcaide gave me an
habit, which he ordered me to put on, and to be ready to go out when he should
come to call me, and so withdrew, leaving in my Chamber a Lamp burning.

I had not upon this occasion either strength to rise, or to make any answer to
him; and from the instant that these men quitted me, I was seized with an
universal and so violent a trembling, that for more than an hour it was not
possible for me so much as to look upon the habit which they had brought me. At
last I arose, and prostrating my selupon the ground before a Cross which I
painted upon the Wall, I recommended my self to God, and abandoned my fortune
to his protection. Then I put on the habit, which confisted of a Vest whose
sleeves came down to the wrist, and a pair of Drawers which reached to the very
heels; the whole made of black stuff, striped with white.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Preparations to the Act of Faith, and the diverse Ornaments which are
distributed to the Criminals, according to the diversity of their Crimes.

I Had not long time to wait after I had taken the habit which was left for me.
These Gentlemen, who had come the first time a little before Midnight, returned
at ^o of the Clock in the morning into my Chamber* out of which they led me
into a long Gallery, where I found a good number of my Companions in Misery,
ranged round about against the Wall; I put my self into my place, and there
came yet diverse after me.

Although there were near 200 Men in this Gallery, as all observed a most
profound silence, that in this great number there were not above 12 Europeans,
who could hardly be distinguished among the others, and that all were as my
self, clothed with black stuff. One might have easily taken all these Persons
for so many Statutes set against the Wall, if the motion of their eyes, the use
of which alone was permitted to them, had not testified them to be living
Creatures. The place wherein we were thus assembled was enlightened only by a
little number of Lamps, whose light was so obscure, that this joined to so many
black, melancholy, and afflicted objects, seemed to be uo other than a
preparation for the Celebration of some Funeral.

The Women who were Vested with the same stuff with us, were in the next
Gallery, where we could not see them; but I observed that in a Dormitory a
little remote from ours, there were also other Prisoners, and persons Vested in
Black, and some in a long habit, who walked up and down. I knew not then what
this meant, but I learned after a ^ew hours, that those who were to be burned
were there, and that the persons who walked about were their Confessors.

As I knew not then the formalities of the Holy Office, whatsoever desire I had
in time past to die, I then fea^ed to be of the number of those who were
destined to the Flames; yet I recovered courage in a little time, when I
considered that I had nothing in my habit which distinguished me from others;
and that there was no likelihood that so great a number of persons, who were
apparelled like my self, should be put to death together.

After we were all ranged against the Walls of this Gallery, they gave to every
one of us a Taper of yellow Wax: They then brought to us other Habits to put
over the former, made like Declinaticks, or great Scapularies; they were of
yellow stuff, with St. Andrew's Crosses painted on them in red, before and
behind. They are wont to give th^se sort of marks to those who have committed,
or who are esteemed to have committed Crimes against the Faith of Jesus Christ,
whether they be Jews, Mahometans, Sorcerers, or Heretics, who were before
Catholics; they call these Grand Scapularies with these Crosses of St. Andrew
Sambenito's. Those who are accounted Convicted, and who persist to deny the
Facts whereof they are accused, or who are relap^ed, bear another kind of
Scapulary, called Samarra, whose ground is gray; the Picture of the Prisoner is
represented to the ^^fe upon it, both before and behind, placed upon burning
Torches, with Flames ri^ing up, and Devils round about; their Names and their
Crimes are written at the bottom of the Picture, but those who accuse
themselves after Sentence is pronounced upon them, and before they are carried
out of their Chamber, being no relap^ed persons, bear upon their Samarra's
flames Inverted, which they call fogo Revolto, that is, fire inverted.

Sambenito's were distributed to twenty of the Blacks who were accused of
Magic, and to one Portugueze, attainted of the same Crime, who moreover was a
New Christian.

As they would Revenge themselves upon me by halfs, and that they were resolved
to insult over me to the end, they forced me to pu^ on a like Habit to that of
the Sorcerers and Heretics, although I had always made Professon of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Faith, that which my Judges might easily have
known from an infinite number o^ Persons, as well Strangers, as of mine own
Nation, with whom I had lived in diverse parts of the Indies.

My fears redoubled when I saw my self thus habited, because it seemed to me
that these being among so great a number of Prisoners, no more than 22 persons
to whom these shameful S^mbemto's were given, it might very well happen that
these should be the persons to whom no mercy was to be extended.

After this distribution five Bonnets of Paper were brought in, rising up in a
point like a Sugar Loaf, all covered with Devils and flames of fire, with a
writing round about expressing this word, Feiticero, that is, Sorcerer, they
call these Bonnets Carochas; they set them upon the heads of so many persons
the most guilty of all the rest among those as were accused of Magic, and as
those persons stood very near me, I then believed they would not fail to
present one to me also, which yet did not happen. I did then make no doubt
almost but these miserable men were those persons designed to be burnt; and as
themselves were no better instructed at that time in the formalities of the
Holy Office, I was assure^ by them afterward, that at that moment they
believed their destruction to be Inevitable.

Every one being thus adorned according to the quality of his Crimes, we were
permitted to sit down on the ground in expecting new Orders; at four of the
Clock in the morning the Servants of the House came following the Guards, for
to distribute Bread and Figs to those who would accept them; but although I had
not supp^d the night before, I found in my self so small an appetite for
eating, that I had taken nothing, if one of the Guards coming near me had not
said, Take your Bread, and if you cannot eat it now, put it into your Pocket,
for you will be certainly hungry before you return. The words of this man
brought great comfort to me, and dissipated all my fears, by the hopes which he
gave of my return, which obliged me to follow his advice.

At last after he had waited a long while, the day appeared at five a Clock;
and I might then observe upon the faces of every one present, the diverse
motions of shame, of grief, and of fear, wherewith they were then tormented:
For although they felt no small joy in seeing themselves upon the point of being
delivered from so cruel and insupportable a Captivity, yet this joy was very
much diminished, by the fear wherein every one was of what would become of
himself.

CHAP. XXVI.
How we went in Procession to go to the Act of Faith: The Order of this
Ceremony.

THE great Cell of the Cathedral Church was rung a little before the rising of
the Sun, which was as the Signat to advertize the people to run together to see
the August Ceremony of the Auto dafe, or Act of Faith; and first, they made us
go out one by one. I observed in passing from the Gallery into the great Hall,
that the Inquisitor sat at the door, having a Secretary by him; that the Hall
was ^illed with Inhabitants of Goa, whose names were written in a List, which
he held in his hands; and that at the same time any Prisoner was brought forth,
they called one of these Gentlemen who were in the Hall, who immediately came
up to the Criminal for to accompany him, and serve him as a Godfather in the
Act of Faith.

These Godfathers receive the persons in charge whom they accompany, are
obliged to answer for them, and to produce them when the Festival is ended; and
Messieurs the I^quisitors, pretend to do them great honor when they choose
them for this Office. I had for Godfather the General of the Portugueze Ships
in the Indies; I went out of the Hall with him, and as soon as I was in the
Street, I saw that the Procession began by the Order of the Domini^ans, who
have this noble privilege, because St. Dominick their Founder, was also of the
Inquisition. They were preceeded by the Banner of the Holy Office, wherein the
Image of the Founder is represented in very rich Embroidery, holds a Sword in
one hand, and in the other a branch of Olive, with this Inscription, ^^^itia
and Misericordia. These Monks are followed by the Prisoners, who march on after
the other, having every one his Godfather at his side, and a Taper in his hand.
Those who are less guilty go first; and as I passed not for one of (...)
innocent, there were more than a hundred preceeded me. I had as all the rest,
my head and feet naked, and I was very much troubled during all this March,
which continued for an hour almost, because of the little ^^int stones
wherewith the streets of Goa are scattered, which made my feet bleed
abundantly. They made us walk through all the greater streets, and we were
gazed on by an innumerable crowd of People, who had run together from all parts
of the Indies, and who lined all the streets through which we were to pass; for
they took care to give notice to the Parish Priests in the Parishes of more
remote places, a long time before the Act of Faith was performed. At last,
covered with shame and confusion, and very weary of the march, we arrived at
the Church of St. Francis, which for this time was destined and prepared for
the Act of Faith. The great Altar was spread with black; and there were upon it
six Silver Candlesticks, with so many Tapers of white Wax burning. There were
raised on the sides of the Altar two kind of Thrones, the one on the right hand
for Monsieur the Inquisitor and his Counselors, the other on the left for the
Viceroy and his Court.

At some distance, and over against the great Altar, inclining a little toward
the door, was placed another, whereon were laid two Mis^als open. From thence
to the door of the Church was made a Gallery about three foot broad, with a
Balister on each side, and both on one side, and the other were placed Benches
for the Criminals and their Godfathers to sit on, who accordingly seated
themselves in order as they entered into the Church, insomuch as those who came
in first, sat very near the Altar.

As soon as I was entered and placed in my Rank, I applied my self to consider
the order, which they made those observe who came after me. I saw that those,
to whom those horrible Carochas of which I spoke, were given, marched last in
our whole Troop; that immediately after them a great Crucifix was carried,
whose Face respected those who marched before; and which was followed by two
living Persons, and four Statues of the height of a Man, represented very
naturally, fixed every one to the end of a long Pole, and accompanied with so
many little Chests, born each by a Man, and filled with the bones of those whom
these Statues represented. The Face of the Crucifix turned toward those who
went before it, signifies the mercy which is used in respect of them, in
delivering them from death, although they had justly deserved it: and the same
Crucifix turning the back upon them that followed it, signifies that those
unfortunate Persons have no more favor to hope for. For so it is that all is
mysterious in the Holy Office.

The Habits wherewith these miserable Persons were vested, were no le^s capable
of striking horror and pity into the Beholders; as well the living Persons as
Statues bore a Samarra of Gray Stuff, all painted over with Devils, Flames, and
burning Fire brands, upon which the Head of the Prisoner was represented to the
Life before and behind, with his Sentance written below, bearing an Abridgment,
an in great Characters his Name* that of his Country, and ^^e Crime for which
he was condemned. Beside, this terrible Habit they had also upon their Heads
those dreadful Carochas covered, as their Vestments, with Flames and Devils.
The little Coffers, wherein were enclosed the Bones of those who were dead, and
against whom Process had been made, either before or after their decease,
during or before their Imprisonment, that so occasion might be given to the
Confiscation of their Goods, were painted with black, and covered also with
Devils and Flames.

It must be here observed, that the Inquisition terminates not its Jurisdiction
upon living Persons, or upon those who died in her Prison; but that she
sometimes forms a Process against Persons, who died many years before they
were accused, then when after their decease they are charged with any great
Crime, that in this case, if they be convinced, they are dug up, their Bones
are bu^ned at the Act of Faith, and all their Goods are Confiscated, whereof
those are carefully despoiled who have inher^ted them: And I advance nothing
which I have not seen practiced; since among the Statues, which were seen when
I came out of the Inquisit^on, there was one which represented a Man dead a
long time before, whose Process they had fo^med, whose B^dy they had dug up,
and whose Goods were Confiscated, and his Bones burnt, or it may be those of
some other who had been buried in the same place.

CHAP. XXVII.
Containing what was observed in the place wherein the Act of Faith was
Celebrated.

THese unhappy Persons being entered into that dreadful Equipage, which I have
already described, and being seated in their places, which were appointed for
them near the door of the Church, the Inquisitor followed with his Officers,
entered and went to place himself upon the Tribunal which was erected for him
upon the right side of the Altar, while the Viceroy and his Court seated
themselves upon the left. The Crucifix was placed upon the Altar between the
six Candlesticks. Every one being thus settled in his Post, and the Church
filled with as many People as it could contain, the Provincial of the
August^ians ascended the Pulpit, and Preached for half an hour. Notwithstanding
the anxiety of mind wherein I then was, I sailed not to observe the comparison
which he then made of the Inquisition, with the Ark of Noah, between which yet
he found this difference, that the Animals which entered into the Ark, went out
again after the Deluge, invested with the same Nature which they had when they
entered in: But that the Inquisitor had the admirable property to charge in
such sort those who are shut up in it, that in coming out we see those to be as
Lambs, who when they entered in, had the cruelty of Wolves, and the fierceness
of Lions. The Sermon being finished, two Readers went up one after another into
the same Pulpit, to read there publicly the Process of all the Criminals, and
to signify to them the punishments to which they were condemned. He whose
Process was read, was during that time led by the Alcaide into the middle of
the Gallery, where he stood upright, holding a Taper lighted in his hand, till
his Sentence was pronounced. And as it was supposed that all the Criminals had
incurred the punishment of greater Excommunication, they led us to the foot of
the Altar whereon laid the Missals; where being placed on our knees, they made
us lay our hands upon one of these Books, and remain in that posture, till
there was as many persons as Missals. Then the Reader discontinued reading of
the Process, to pronounce with a loud voice a Confession of Faith, after he had
briefly exhorted the Criminals to repeat it with heart and mouth at the same
time with him; which being done, every one returned to his place, and the
reading of the Process was began anew.

I was called in my order, and understood that all my affair ran upon these
three heads. The first, for having maintained the invalidity of the Baptism,
called Flaminis. The second, for having said that Images ought not to be
adored, and having blasphemed against the Image of the Crucifix, in saying of a
Crucifix of Ivory, that it was a piece of Ivory. And lastly, for having spoken
contemptuously of the Inquisition, and its Ministers; but above all, for the
ill intention which I had in speaking all these things. For which Crimes I was
declared Excommunicate; and for reparation thereof my Goods were confiscated to
the Kings account, and my self banished from the Indies, and condemned to serve
in the Galleys of Portugal five years; and moreover, to perform other Penances
which should be enjoined to me in particular by the Inquisitors.

Of all these punishments, the most insupportable to me, was to see my self in
an indispensable necessity of quitting the Indies, where I had resolved to
Travel a yet much longer time. This sorrow, nevertheless, was not so great, but
that it was much allayed by the hope of seeing my self shortly out of the hands
of the Holy Office. My Confession of Faith being made, I returned to my place,
and received advantage from the advice which my Guard had given me of not
refusing my Bread, for the Ceremony continuing all the day, there was no person
who did not that day Dine in the Church.

CHAP. XXVIII.
They Absolve us from Excommunication, and deliver those to the Secular Power
who were to be burned: What was observed upon this Occasion.

AFter they had ended to read the Process of all those to whom they extended
their Mercy in saving their lives, the Inquisitor left his seat to put on his
albe and stole; and being accompanied with about 20 Priests, who had every one
a Wand in his Hand, he came into the middle of the Church, where after he had
made diverse Prayers, we were Absolved from the Excommunication, which they
pretended we had incurred, by means of a blow which the Priest gave to every
one of us upon his Habit. I cannot forbear to relate here a thing, which will
show to what degree the Portugueze Superstition proceeds in all things which
have any relation to the Inquisition; which is, that during the Procession, and
the whole time of our stay in the Church, he who served me as a Godfather would
never answer to me, although I had spoken to him diverse times, and that he
even refused to give a little Powder of Tobacco which I had desired of him; so
much did he fear to be involved in the Censure wherewith he supposed me bound.
But as soon as I was Absolved, he embraced me, gave me Tobacco, and told me
that he then acknowledged me for his Brother, since the Church had Absolved me.

This Ceremony being ended, and the Inquisitor returned to his place, they
brought out one after the other those unhappy Victims who were to be Sacrificed
by the Holy Inquisition. There were a man, a Woman, and the representation of
four dead men, with the little Chests wherein their Bones were enclosed. The
Man and Woman were Indian Blacks and Christians, accused of Magic, and
condemned as relapsed. Of the four Statues, two represented also two men, held
for convicted of Magic, and the two others two men who had been New
Christians, and were accused to have Judaized; of which the one had died in
Prison, the other in his own House, and had been buried long since in his
Parish; but being accused of Judaism after his Death, as he had left very
considerable Riches, they took care to pluck him out of his Grave, and take
away his Bones to burn them at the Act of Faith, after they had formed a
Process again him. We may see hereby, that the Holy Office is not contented to
attribute to it self the Infallibility of Jesus Christ, but that they would
also, as well as he, exercise their authority upon the Living and the Dead.

The several Processes of these unfortunate Persons were read, which were all
ended with these words, That the Inquisition could not show any mercy to them
because of their relapse and their impenitence, and that finding themselves
indispensably obliged to punish them according to the rigor of the Laws, they
delivered them to the Secular Arm and Justice, whom they earnestly desired to
use Clemency and Mercy toward these miserable wretches; and that if they would
impose upon them the punishment of Death, it might be at least without effusion
of blood. At the last words of the Inpuisitors, a Sergeant of the Secular
Justice approached, and took possession of those unfortunate persons; after
they had received a light blow upon the breast from the hand of the Alcaide of
the Holy Office, in token that they were abandoned by him. See the great
kindness of the Inquisition to interceed thus for guilty persons! The extreme
condescendance of the Magistrates, to choose rather in complaisance to the
Inquisition, to content himself to burn these Criminals to the very marrow of
their Bones, than to use the power which he has of shedding their blood.

Thus was ended, in respect of us, the famous Ceremony of the Auto dafe, or Act
of Faith; and while these miserable wretches were led along the bank of the
River, where the Viceroy and his Court were assembled, and where the Piles,
upon which they were to be Sacrificed, were prepared the day before, we were
led back to the Inquisition by our Godfathers, without observing any oder.
Although I was not present at the Execution of these persons thus abandoned by
the Holy Office, nevertheless as I was fully instructed by persons who have
ofttimes seen the like Executions, I will here relate, in few words, the
Ceremony which was there observed.

As soon as the condemned persons are arrived at the place where the Secular
Judges are assembled, they ask them in what Religion they will dye, without
informing themselves, in the least, of their Processes, which they suppose to
have been perfectly well managed, and the persons most justly condemned; since
no doubt is to be made of the Infallibility of the Inquisition: As soon as they
have answered to this one Question, the Executioner seizes them, and tieth
them to Posts upon the Pile, where they are first strangled if they dye
Christians, and burnt alive if they persist in Judaism or Heresy; which
happens so seldom, that scarce one example is to be seen in four Acts of Faith,
although there are very few in which are not burned a good number of Persons.

The day after the execution, the Images of those who are put to death are
brought into the Churches of the Dominicans; their Head only is presented to
the Life, placed upon kindled Firebrarnds; at the bottom is put their name,
that of their Father and their Country, the quality of their Crimes for which
they were condemned, with the years, the month, and the day of the Execution.

If the Person who was to be burnt had twice relapsed into the same Crime, they
put these words at the bottom of the Portraict; Morreo quimodo por herese
relapso, which signifies that he was burned for a relapsed Heretic. If having
been accused but once, he persevereth in his error, they put Por herese
contumas, for an obstinate Heretic; but as this case is very rare, so there
are very few of these Portraicts. Lastly, if having been thus accused but once
by a sufficient number of Witnesses, he persisteth to profess himself innocent,
and at the same time professes Christianity to the very death; they put at the
bottom of the Table Morreo queimado por herese convitto negativo, which is to
say, That he was burnt as a convicted Heretic, but who confessed not. And of
this last kind a great number of Portraicts may be seen. We may hold it for
certain that of an hundred Negatives, there are at least 99 who are not only
innocent of the Crimes which they deny, but who have beside that innocence, the
merit of choosing rather to die, than to tell a lie in confessing themselves
guilty of a Crime, of which they are really innocent. For it is not possible
that a man assured to save his Life, if he confesses, would persist to deny,
and choose rather to be burnt than acknowledge a truth, the confession of which
will save his Life. These terrible representations are placed in the Nave of
the Church, and over the highest door of the Church, as so many illustrious
Trophies consecrated to the Glory of the Holy Office; and when this part of the
Church is all over hung, they place them in the side Isles near the door. Those
who have been at L^sbon, and have seen the great Church of the Dominicans,
which is not far from the Holy House of the Inquisition, may have observed many
hundreds of these sad Pictures.

CHAP. XXIX.
My enlargement from the Inquisition. They bring us into a House in the Town,
to cause us to be there some time instructed.

I Was so weary and so sore at my return from the Act of Faith, that I had
almost no less desire to re-enter into my Lodging to rest my self, than I had
some days before to go out of it. My Godfather accompanied me into the Hall;
and the Alcaide having conducted me into the Gallery, I went and shut up my
self, while they brought in the rest. I first cast my self upon my Bed
expecting Supper, which was nothing else but Bread and Figs, the trouble of the
day having hindered them from preparing any thing in the Kitchen. I slept much
better this night than I had done of a long time, but when the day appeared, I
expected impatiently what they would do with me; when the Alcaide came at six a
clock to demand the Habit which I had wore at the Procession, of me, I would
have given him the Samnelito, but he would not receive it, because I was to be
vested with it on all Festivals and Sundays, till I had entirely performed my
Sentence. At seven a clock they brought my Breakfast, and a little after I was
warned to pack up all my Goods, and be ready to go when called. I obeyed this
order with all possible diligence; and at nine a clock a guard having opened my
door, I laid my bundle upon my Shoulders, and followed them into the great
Hall, where the greatest part of the Prisoners were already. After I had been
there some time, I saw about twenty enter, who had been the day before
condemned to be whipped, and who then received it from the hand of the Hangman
through all the Streets of the Town. Being thus all assembled, the Inquisitor
appeared, before whom we fell upon our knees to receive his blessing, after we
had kissed the ground near his Feet. Then they commanded the Blacks, who had
little or no Luggage, to take up and carry that of the Whites. Those among the
Prisoners who were not Christians, were sent immediately to the places
appointed by their Sentence, some into Banishment, others to the Galleys, or
into the house where they make Powder, called Casa da polvera; and those who
were Christians, as well Whites as Blacks, were led into a House which was
hired on purpose in the Town, to be there instructed for some time.

The Halls and the Galleries of the Lodgings, were appointed for the Blacks to
lie in, and we Whites were put into a separate Chamber, where they shut us up
at night, leaving us in the day time the liberty of walking about the House,
and speaking with those who were there, or who came from other places to see
us. Every day two Catechisings were held, one for the Blacks, and the other for
the Whites. Mass was celebrated every day, at which we were all present, as
well at morning as at evening.

While I stayed in this House I was visited by a Dominican Friar, one of my
Friends, whom I had known at Daman, where he had been Prior of his Order. This
good Father, loaded with diseases and years, no sooner knew that I was
enlarged, but he put himself into a Pelanquin to come and see me; he wept at my
disaster, and embraced me tenderly, assuring me he had been in great fears for
my fake, that he had often inquired concerning my health and my affairs, of
Father Procurator of the Prisoners, who was his friend, and of the same Order
with himself; that nevertheless for a long while he could obtain no answer from
him; and that at last, after many solicitations, he could draw no more from
him than this, That I was still alive. I received great comfort from the sight
of this good Monk, and the necessity which was imposed on me of quitting the
Indies, created equal sorrow to us both; he had farther the goodness to visit
me several times, invited me to return to the Indies as soon as I should be at
liberty, and sent me diverse Provisions for the Voyage I was to make, which the
condition and ncessity wherein I then was, permitted me not to hope for from
other hands.

CHAP. XXX.
They bring me again to the Inquisition, to receive the Penances which were
imposed on me.

AFter we had stayed in this House till the 23 of January, we were conducted
once more into the Hall of the Inquisition, and from thence called every one in
his turn to the Table of the Holy Office, to receive there from the hands of
the Inquisitor, a Paper containing the Penances to which it had pleased him to
condemn us: I went in my order, and was made to kneel down, after I had before
laid my hands on the Gospel, and promised in this posture, to keep inviolable
secrecy of all things which had happened, and which I had seen and observed
during my imprisonment.

I received after that, from the hand of my Judge, a Writing signed by himself,
containing the things which were to be performed by me; and as this Memoire is
not very long, I thought it convenient to put it here word for word in French,
as it was in Portugueze.

A List of the Penances which N. N. ought to perform.
I. For the Three next years he shall confess himself, and communicate; the
first year every month, and the two following years on the Feasts of Easter,
Whitsunday, and the Assumption of our Lady. II. He shall hear Mass and Sermon
upon Sundays and Holidays, if he has convenience. III. He shall repeat during
the said three years, five times every day the Pater Noster and Ave Maria, in
honor of the five wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ. IV. He shall never enter
into friendship, nor have any particular commerce with Heretics, or persons
whose Faith is suspected, who may prejudice his Salvation. V. And lastly, He
shall keep exactly the se^ret of all which he has seen, heard, or said, or
which has been acted concerning him, either at the Table, or at any places of
the Holy Office.
Signed Francisco Delgado ematos.


Having received this Writing I kissed the ground, and returned into the Hall,
to wait there till the like Writing should be given to all the rest: In going
out they separated us, and I know not what became of the greatest part of our
company, or whither they were sent. We remained together not above twelve, who
were led into the al Iouvar, which is that Prison of the Office, wherein I was
put the first day that I came to Goa, before I entered into the Inquisition. I
stayed there till the 25th, when an Officer of the Holy Office clapping Irons
upon my feet, carried me into a Ship which was in the Road, ready to set sail
for Portugal.

CHAP. XXXI.
Containing some Observations upon all that has been hitherto said.

BEfore I continue the account of my adventures, I believe it will not be
unreasonable to make some reflections upon all which has been said. I will
begin then by the consideration of the principal Acts of Injustice committed in
the Inquisition; of which the first is the Treason of the Commissary of Daman;
who, after I had confessed to him what I had said, and what relates to the
Holy Office, gave me so insincere advice, that he ceased not to arrest me to
satisfy the passion of the Governor, although the Inquisition is not wont to
apprehend those who voluntarily accuse themselves, before they are put in
Prison. I am not ignorant of what this Father said to defend himself from this
imputation, that I had not accused my self in due form; but any one may easily
perceive that this is a new trick, for he ought to have taught me the form: I
was young, and a stranger, and should immediately have satisfied him, but it
was necessary for him to make use of this miserable pretext to satisfy the
Governor.

The second thing of which I think my self to have reason to complain, in
respect of the same Commissary, is, That he maliciously kept me at Daman till
the month of January; instead of which, if he had sent me to Goa, immediately
after my imprisonment, my case might have been examined and ended before the
end of November; and I should have been enlarged at the Act of Faith, which was
performed that very year, in the beginning of December; whereas not sending me
to Goa, till the Act of Faith was ended, I was forced to stay in the Prisons of
the Holy Office two years longer than I should have done; because scarce any
enlargement of the Prisoners is ever made, but at that terrible Ceremony,
called the Act of Faith; and as that is performed but from two to two, or from
three to three years, it is a double unhappiness for those that are shut up in
these Holy Prisons, to be carried thither immediately after this Jail-delivery,
because they are obliged to wait there till there be a sufficient number of
Persons to render the Act of Faith more illustrious.

The refusal which the Inquisitor made at my third Audience to receive my
confession, touching what I had said concerning the Inquisition; and his
injustice, in daring to maintain that I had not confessed this Fact, which he
made my Crime so long time after, was one of those things which most afflicted
me, during my imprisonment, and is none of the least grievances which I have to
complain of against the^ Messieurs.

I might also justly complain of this, that the Inquisition desiring to lay a
new snare for me, when I accused my self of what I had said concerning the Holy
Office, and what had happened a long time before to Father Ephraim Nevers;
asked me if I would defend the errors of that Monk; but although I knew very
well that the innocence of this Father had been fully manifested, and that he
had been arrested merely upon Envy; I answered that I pretended not to defend
any person, being sufficiently troubled to defend my self.

I had moreover methinks all reason to believe, that they had an intention to
please the Viceroy, and Governor of Daman his Cousin, in sending me into
Portugal, since of more than 200 Persons who went with me out of the
Inquisition, I alone was obliged to leave the Indies and go for Europe.

The cruelty of the Guards, who often used very rude words to me, and forced me
unwillingly to eat my Meat, and take remedies when I was sick, deserves also in
my mind some consideration; for although the Guards have reason to force the
accused Persons to eat their Meat and take Remedies, they might use in respect
of them the same method which is used in respect of other sick Persons, who are
not wont to receive the Stirrup Leather, or Bastinadoes, to make them take the
Pre^criptions of their Physicians.

I will add, that although the Inquisition grants something of safe Conducts
to those, who being in a place of Security, will come and accuse themselves;
yet it is best not to trust them too much, since they make no great scruple in
this Holy Tribunal, to violate the promise which they have made, and when they
have a mind to it they will find pretexts enough not to keep it, which I will
prove by an example.

I knew at Surrat a Religious Person of the Order of St. Dominick, called
Father Hyacinthe, who for many years had quitted his Convent and his Habit,
living in a very dissolute and scandalous manner. It happened afterward that a
Woman with whom he had lived a long time, and by whom he had diverse Children,
dyed; this loss touched him, and produced in him a resolution of changing his
Life. He resolved then to return into his Convent at Bacaim, but because all
the Portugueze, and above all, the Priests and Religious Persons, who have
passed any considerable time among the Infidels, are obliged in returning into
the Portugueze Dominions, to present themselves to the Inquisition, and make
there an exact declaration of the manner of their past life, if they would
prevent their being compelled to it by force. This Religious, whose conscience
perhaps was touched with something relating to the Holy Office, before he left
Surrat, wrote to the Inquisitor at Goa for a safe conduct, that so he might
come to present and accuse himself, which was granted him; with this poor
assurance he departed and came to Bacaim, where he was not suffered to resume
the Religious Habit, without having first cleared himself before the
Inquisitors, upon which he went to Goa, presented himself at the Table of the
Holy Office, whither he was several times called, and at last having been
sufficiently examined, he was absolved and sent back to the Vicar General of
his Order, who restored him the Habit, and again authorized him to discharge
the Functions of a Preacher and Confessor. He thinking all was over, prepared
for his departure to Bacaim, where was his first Convent, when being just ready
to imbark in a Galliot, he was hurried away to the Prisons of the Holy Office,
whose Ministers had not so easily granted him Absolution, were it not the
easier to perform their design, that it might not be said they had violated
their word, and the safe conduct they had given him; at the same time they
spread about a report, that since his Absolution, discovery had been made of
Crimes of which he had not accused himself.

This Religious, who was clapped up a few days after me, remained there after I
got out, as appears by his not being mentioned in the Act of Faith, and his
Process not being read, which would certainly have been done, had he died in
Prison, so that in all probability he must continue there till the next Act of
Faith; I had this relation from a Religious Person of the same Order, who
visited me after my delivery. And this example ought to teach those who travel,
or live in those Countries where the Inquisition is Established, not only to be
circumspect in their words and actions, but also never to rely too much on
assurances, of safe conducts, granted them by the Inquisitors, or their
Commissaries how little soever occasion of mistrust they may seem to have.

CHAP. XXXII.
History of Joseph Pereira de Montes.

AS Nothing instructs better than examples, I will here succinctly relate
what happened to one of the most considerable Gentlemen of Goa, named Joseph
Pereira de Montes; who having been Captain General of the Naval Armies of the
King of Portugal, was commanded by the Governor of the Indies, (the Office of
Viceroy being then vacant) to go with his Ships to the relief of the Town of
Diu, then besieged by the Arabians. He departed, and arriving at Bacaim, was
constrained to stay there a longer time than he had intended, because the Winds
were contrary; insomuch as the Arabians came down to Diu, sacked it, and
returned laden with pillage, before the arrival of the relief. The General, who
was come too late, having given his Orders returned to Goa; where he was scarce
arrived, but the Governor, who was then Antonio de Mello de Castro, a sworn
enemy of Joseph Pereira, caused him to be apprehended, formed his Process; and
because neither the Governor, nor even the Viceroy, have power to put
Gentlemen to Death, without receiving express Order from the Court of Portugal,
Antonio de Mello not being able to take away the life of his Enemy, pronounced
against him a sentence, the Execution of which was more cruel than Death it
self, condemning him to be led through the great Streets of the City by the
hand of the Hangman, with an Halter about his Neck, a Quonoville at his side,
and an Herald walking before, and Proclaiming, that this Justice was performed
by order of the King, on the person of this Criminal, attainted and convicted
of Cowardice and Treason.

This cruel Sentence was Executed, notwithstanding the solicitations of the
friends of the Prisoner; who after he was led about in this infamous posture,
was carried back into Prison, whither he was scarce returned, when a Familiar
of the Holy Office came to apprehend him, and carry him to the Inquisition.

This new accident surprised the whole City, as knowing that Pereira could not
be accused of Judaism, being no New Christian, and that he had always lived in
good esteem; they expected therefore with impatience the next Act of Faith, to
see the end of this business. But this Ceremony being performed after a year,
he was not seen to appear, nor was his Process heard to be read, which
increased the astonishment of all. We are to know, that Joseph Pereira had a
long time since had a quarrel with a Gentleman of his acquaintance, with whom
he had been afterward reconciled. This false friend who had not lost his
design of revenging himself, suborned with money 5 Domestic Servants of
Pereira, to accuse him to the Inquisition as guilty of Sodomy, and produced
these 5 Witnesses, who deposed they had seen him commit this Crime with one of
his Pages; whereupon the two accused persons were apprehended. The Page who had
less constancy than his Master, whom he knew to be as well as himself in the
Prisons of the Holy Office, and not doubting but that he was accused of the
same Crime, whereof the Promotor pretended himself to be guilty, terrified by
the threats of the Inquisitors, and fearing to be burnt, as he would in truth
have been, if he had persisted to deny the fact, and seeing no other means to
save his life, but in confessing himself guilty, accused himself of a crime
which he never committed, and so became a seventh Witness against his Master,
the Informer being accounted one, according to the Maxims of the Inquisition.
His confession saved his life, and being freed at the first Act of Faith, he
was condemned to be banished to Mozambique.

Nevertheless as Pereira persisted to maintain his innocence, they condemned
him to the fire; and he had been carried to be burnt at the same Act of Faith
wherein his Page appeared, if the continual protestations which he made of his
innocence, had not induced his Judges to defer the Execution of his Sentence,
to try whether in time they could oblige him to confess; or if they could not
obtain more light in his case, they then reserved him to another Act of Faith,
which was performed a year after, the Prisons being then sooner than ordinarily
filled. During this year, the accuser and his Witnesses were examined diverse
times, and one of the Judges resolving to examine the Witnesses separately,
whether that night wherein they pretended to have seen their Master commit this
detestable Crime, the Moon shone or not; the Witnesses agreeing not in the
answer which they made to this Question, were put to the Rack, where they
disowned all which they had testified against their Master. His innocence being
thus clearly manifested, the accusers were apprehended; Pereira came out
innocent at the first Act of Faith, and the Witnesses two years after, at the
same time with my self; when the first were condemned to the Gallys for 5
years, and that Gentleman banished for 9 years into the Coasts of Africa.

It is easy to judge that the confronting of Witnesses might have freed the
Inquisitors from this trouble, and the accused person from the danger of being
sacrificed by the hands of the Holy Office, to the fury and malice of his
Enemy; who in my opinion ought, together with his Accomplices, to have been
punished with the same kind of death, which they intended to have in^licted on
an innocent Person. And we cannot doubt, but that this clemency of the Holy
Office, exercised so openly toward such gross offenders, often gives
encouragement to the like Attempts.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of what happened to some other Persons, who together with me were enlarged at
the Act of Faith.

TWo Young Gentlemen married about Bacaim, who served the King of Portugal in
his Navy, took care of a young Portugueze Soldier, who waited on them. These
Messieurs being at Goa at the end of the Campagin, and desiring to go and pass
at their Houses the Rainy season, which is called Winter in the Indies, left
this young Soldier at Goa, where he pretended to have some business, and
therefore would follow them some days after. This young Man immediately after
the departure of these Gentlemen married in Goa, from whence he departed two
days after his Marriage, and arrived at Bacaim four days after his Masters, to
whom he gave no account of what he had done in their absence. A little while
after a Match being offered to him, which seemed advantageous to him, he
resolved to make use of the occasion in marrying himself a second time. To this
end his Masters were desired to certify to the Curate that he was a single
Person, which they did, not knowing that he was already married: Not long after
this second marriage he had a desire to see his first Wife at Goa; whither the
Brother of the second Wife being resolved to follow him, he found out his first
Marriage, and accused him to the Inquisition, who caused him to be apprehended,
and knowing who they were that had certified him to be a single man, sent order
to the Commissary of Bacaim to seize them, So these two Gentlemen, more unhappy
than guilty, were sent to Goa with Irons on their Feet, and shut up in the
Prison of the Holy Office. Having remained there 18 Months, they were at last
produced in the Act of Faith, and were condemned to a triennial Banishment into
the Coasts of Africa; and he who had been married twice, was banished into the
same quarter for seven years, after which he was to return to and live with his
first Wife.

One of these Gentleman was of the race of New Christians; and as these unhappy
persons are always suspected to be bad Christians, the Inquisitors examined him
at the Audience, to know if he were not a Jew; and if he had not had some
knowledge of the Law of Moses? This poor Man stupi^ied with these questions,
and fearing that the unhappiness of his Birth would draw upon him, in this
occasion, some misfortune; and besides not very well instructed in the
Christian Religion, imagining himself to say one of the finest things in the
World, and most proper to justify himself, blasphemed against Moses, and said
that he had nothing to do with him, and that he knew him not; which his Judges
laughed at very pleasantly.

Among those who were enlarged at the Act of Faith, I observed one who had a
Gag in his Mouth, fastened to his Ears with Packthread. I learned from the
reading of his Process, that this punishment was inflicted on him for having
used diverse Blasphemies in play. This Blasphemer, besides the shame of
appearing in this Equipage, was moreover condemned to a banishment of five
years.

CHAP. XXXIV.
My departure from Goa, my arrival first at Brasil, and then at Lisbon.

I Was led with Irons on my Feet into a Ship, which was then in the Road, ready
to set sail for Portugal. They put me into the hands of the Master of the Ship,
who was charged to deliver me to the Inquisition of Lisbon. And the Captain
having received his last dispatches, we weighed Anchor the 27th of January
1676. and the same day my Irons was taken off. Our Voyage was prosperous as far
as Brasil, where we arrived in May. As soon as they had cast Anchor in the Bay
of All Saints, the Master under whose Guard I was, caused me to land with him,
and brought me to the Palace of the Governor, and from thence to the common
Prison, where he delivered me into the hands of the Jailer.

I was detained in this Prison all the while the Ship stayed in the Haven; but
by the favor of some Friends, whom I gained in this Country, I obtained,
during my stay, the liberty of going out of Prison in the day time, and being
shut up only in the night. The Prison of this Town is the most proper of all
those which I had hitherto seen, except those of the Holy Office. Beside the
low Rooms, which are tolerably clean and lightsome, there are above Stairs
diverse Rooms for Persons less guilty, more rich, or better recommended. There
is also a Chapel wherein Mass is celebrated upon Sundays and Holidays. And
there are in this Town so good a number of charitable Persons, that the
Prisoners suffer no want. We re-imbarqued in the beginning of September to go
for Lisbon; but this last passage was not so favorable, as was that from the
Indies to Brasil.

There happened to me an accident, during this Voyage, which deserves to be
here mentioned. Approaching one day to the Holy Table, to receive the adoreable
Body of Jesus Christ, he from whose hands I received it, who was a Cordelier of
the observant Friars, observed that I shut my Eyes, while he pronounced those
words, Domine non sub dignus; and although I had no other intention in this
action, than of humbling my self in the presence of my God; this good Father,
who had already entertained a bad opinion of me, because I had been in the
Inquisition, so ill interpreted this mark of my Devotion, that he could not
forbear from reproaching me many days after, and telling me that he had no
reason to doubt but that I was still an Heretic, since I vouchsafed not so
much as to look upon our Lord, when he was presented to me in the Communion, I
leave you to think whether the judgment, which this Religious Person made then
of me, was not of the number of those which are called rash? However, I
endeavored to defend my self, and declare my intention to him; he always
assured me, that after an action of that nature, he could not any longer retain
a favorable opinion of me.

CHAP. XXXV.
They bring me to the Gallere. A description of that place.

AS soon as Anchor was cast in the Haven of Lisbon, the Master, under whose
guard I then was, gave notice of my arrival to the Inquisition, whither I was
carried the next day, and from thence, by order of the Inquisitors, who
vouchsafed not to see me, I was led to the Prison called the Gallere, which
bears this name, because there being no Galleys in Portugal; those whom the
Holy Office, or Lay Judges condemn to that punishment, are sent thither. They
clapped a Chain upon my Foot, to which was chained a Portugueze, who had escaped
the Fire, by confessing the evening before he was to be burnt by order of the
Holy Office.

In this Gallere all Criminals are chained two and two together by one Foot,
only with a Chain about a foot long. The Prisoners have at their waste a hook
of Iron, whereunto hang their Chain, and there remains yet about 3 foot of
Chain between them. These couples are sent every day to labor at the
Workhouse where they build the Ships; they carry Wood to the Carpenters,
unload the Ships, pick out stones and sand for Ballast, carry Water and
Victuals aboard for the Voyages, serve to make Ropes, and all other uses,
wherein they can be employed for the service of the Prince, or of the Officers
who command them, how vile and rude soever they be.

There are found among these Gally-slaves persons condemned by the Inquisition,
others by the Lay Judges, fugitive and incorrigible slaves, whom their Masters
put into this place to chastize them, and reduce them into order, Turks who
have been taken Prisoners in the Pirate Ships of Barbary. All these persons, of
whatsoever quality they be, are indifferently employed in vile and painful
Labors; unless they have money to give to the Officers who conduct them, and
who exercise an unheard of ^ruelty upon those who cannot mollify them somewhat
from time to time.

This Land Gally is built upon the bank of the River, it has two great Halls,
the one above, the other below, both are filled, and the coupled Prisoners laid
upon Couches with Matts; all their Heads and Beards are shaved once a month,
they wear a Coat made close to their bodies, and Caps of blue Cloth. They also
allow to them an Hood of course gray Serge, which serves them as well for a
Mantle in the day, as for a Coverlet in the night; and these are all the
Garments which are given to them from six to six months, together with shifts
of course Cloth.

They give to every one a pound and an half of very hard and black Biscate to
eat every day, six pounds of salt flesh every month, with a dish full of Pease,
Lentils, or Beans; this allowance they may order as they please. Those who
receive any supply from otherwhere, sell this fare to buy somewhat better,
according to their ability. No Wine is allowed to them, and those who drink it,
buy it at their own cost; every day betimes in the morning, except on some very
few Festivals, they are led to the Workhouse, which is a good half League from
the Galley, where they labor without any intermission, on whatsoever they are
emploved till Eleven of Clock; they then cease working till One a Clock, and
during this interval they may either eat or rest themselves; at One a Clock
they return to their labor, continuing it till night, when they are sent back
to the Gally.

There is in this Prison a Chapel, wherein Mass is said on Sundays and
Festivals. There are at Lisbon charitable Clergymen, who come often to make
Catechisms and Exhortations to the Galley-Slaves. Beside the Victuals which the
Prince gives them, they receive very often Alms, insomuch as no want is there
suffered; when there are any sick persons the Physicians and Surgeons come
to visit them, and if the disease grow dangerous, all the Sacraments are
administered to them. Those who commit any fault are whipped in a most cruel
manner. They stretch them out at length with their Bellies upon the ground; and
while two men hold them, a third strikes violently with a great knotted rope
upon their Buttocks, which oftimes teareth of the skin, and large pieces of
flesh with it. I have seen more than once, how that after such whipping they
have been forced to make deep incisions, which degenerating into Ulcers, render
these unhappy wretches incapable of working for a long time.

When one of the coupled Slaves has business in the Town, they permit him to
go thither, even without his Companion, if he desires it, paying a Guard, who
may follow him every where. In that case he is forced to carry his Chain alone,
and as it is very long he lays it over his Shoulder, letting it hang down
before or behind, as himself shall find most convenient.

CHAP. XXXVI.
I presented diverse Petitions to the Inquisition to obtain my Liberty, which
is at last granted to me.

THE day after my arrival into the Galley, I was shaved, clothed, and employed
in labor as the other slaves; but how laborious soever this manner of life was
to me, the liberty of seeing and speaking to the whole world, rendered it much
less troublesome to me than the horrible Solitudes of the Inquisition.
According to the terms of my Sentence, I was to pass 5 years in this rude
slavery, and there was no great appearance that any favor would be showed to a
man who had spoken against the Integrity and Infallibility of the Holy Office.
Nevertheless the desire which all unhappy persons naturally have to see their
misery ended, made me think of some means to recover my Liberty much sooner
than I was otherwise probably to expect it; I first enquired whether there were
any French at Lisbon, who might serve me in the design which I had. And having
learned that Mr. -- first Physician to the Queen of Portugal, was not only
favored by that Princess, but also by all the Grandees of the Court, I
addressed my self to him, and begged of him that he would grant me his
Protection; this he did in the most obliging manner in the World, offering not
only his interest in all things which lay in his power, but also his Purse and
his Table, where he did me the honor to give me a place, enchained as I was,
whenever liberty of going to him was granted me; so that the Habit of a
Gally-slave rendered me not more contemptible in his esteem. He had also the
goodness to visit me in Prison, and administer comfort to me, whenever his
affairs permitted him.

I writ in the next place into France, to my kindred, to give them an account
of the deplorable condition whereinto I had been for a long time reduced, that
they might solicit, either by themselves, or by others, those persons whom
they might imagine to have any interest with the Queen of Portugal, who I hoped
would interpose in my behalf. I must not here omit, that the Liberty which was
afterward granted to me, was no other than the effect of the powerful
Protection of Mr. -- In effect Mr. -- who was naturally generous and
beneficent, knowing that he had the goodness to interess himself in obtaining
my Liberty, redoubled his diligence, to cause it to be obtained the sooner. I
presented, by his advice, an ample Petition to the Inquisitors, wherein I
briefly declared the causes of my Imprisonment, and requested them to moderate
the excessive severity which I pretended to have been exercised against me in
the Indies.

No answer was returned to this Petition, no more than to three or four others,
which followed it in less than two months; and the reason of this silence was,
That the Office of the Inquisitor General was then vacant, and Monsieur Don
Verissimo de Lencastea, Archbishop of Braga, afterward Archbishop of Lisbon,
and at present Cardinal, having been but lately promoted, had not yet taken
possession.

This Prelate, for whose coming I made continual Vows, as knowing that he alone
could determine my business, arrived at last at Lisbon, toward the Holy Week:
But since in that time the Tribunals are not open, I was yet forced to have
patience till after Quasimodo Sunday. As soon as the Inquisitor General had
entered upon the Functions of his Office, I presented a new Petition to him,
which was carried to the Supreme Council; but all which it produced, was, that
Don Verissimo said, That he could not believe that what I related was true,
there being no appearance that they would have condemned a man to serve 5 years
in the Galleys for matters of so little consequence.

This answer, of which an account was given to me, produced so much the more
joy in me, because every one assured me, that the Prelate with whom I had to
do, was equally noble, learned and generous; all this induced me to cause a new
Petition to be presented to him, to entreat him to give himself the trouble to
read my Process, that so he might by that means, perceive that I had offered
nothing to him but what was most true; this proposition met with great
difficulties in the Council, none of them being willing to consent to this
review of my Process, which I desired, because all the Tribunals of the
Inquisition being supreme, and (...) appeal lying from one to the other, this
would be to entrench upon the Authority of the Inquisition of Goa, and to go
about to reform its Decrees; this was so great an obstacle, that I had never
obtained my desires, if the Inquisitor General had not strongly solicited in
favor of me.

At last, after many earnest addresses to him, he suffered himself to be
overswayed by the follicitations of diverse Persons of Quality, and chiefly of
his Niece, the Countess of Figveirol, who had a very particular esteem for the
first Physician of the Queen. He carried then my Process to be read at length
in his presence, and being convinced that I had proposed nothing false to him,
and withal, perceiving the injustice and ignorance of my Judges, who had
condemned me upon pretense of my ill intention, he ordered that I should be
restored to perfect liberty, writing with his own hand these words, at the
bottom of my last Petition, Seia solto como pede, e se vapor a France, that is,
Let him be set at Liberty as he desires, and let him return to France.

CHAP. XXXVII.
My departure from Lisbon, and arrival in France.

MY Request being thus answered by the Inquisitor General, in the supreme
Council, which is assembled from eight to eight, or from fifteen to fifteen
days, was remitted to the Table of the Holy Office, where audience is held
twice every day; these Messieurs immediately sent a Familiar to advertize me,
that liberty was granted to me, that I should seek for a Vessel to go into
France, and give notice of it to the Inquisition, who would not fail to imbark
me therein.

I received this News the first of June, with a joy which persons who have not
suffered Captivity will scarce be able to conceive; but afterward reflecting
upon the difficulty of finding a Vessel, and bargaining for my Passage, while I
had not the liberty of acting, I represented to the Inquisitors by a Memoire
which I caused to be presented to them, that it would be impossible for me to
receive any benefit from the favor they had showed to me, while I remained
Chained, there being no possibility in so great a Town as Lisbon, to know what
Ships come in, or go out of the Haven, unless a Man waits there himself, or
has some friend who may inform himself with diligence.

The Officers of the ordinary Council, who had maliciously and rigorously
interpreted the words, which the Inquisitor generally made use of to grant me
liberty, in saying I should be set at liberty as I desired, and go into France,
explained these latter words, which were indeed added as a surplusage of favor
to me, as an absolute obligation of immediately embarquing my self; and so made
answer for my Memoire, That they would grant me my desire, on condition, I
would give caution, and procure Sureties, that I would stay no longer at Lisbon
than was necessary to obtain an opportunity of being gone. This answer was
signified to me the 28th of June; I went immediately to give an account to Mr.
-- and entreated him to finish that matter which he had so kindly begun. Some
urgent affairs hindered him from going the same day to the Inquisition, but
going thither the 30th of the same month in the morning, and giving caution for
me, that in default of my being gone at the first opportunity, he would pay
four hundred Crowns; they sent in the Afternoon of the same day, being the last
of June 1677, a Familiar to the Galley, who cansed my Irons to be taken off,
and carried me to the Holy Office; where being called in the presence of the
Inquisitors, they asked whether I knew the Queens Physician, They told me he
had given caution for me, that themselves extended their favor to me, and that
from that moment I might go whether I pleased. Then commanding me to withdraw,
I answered only with a profound reverence, and was immediately freed from the
Tyrannical Power of the Holy Office, under the rigor of which I had groaned
almost four years, continuing from the day of my Imprisonment, August the 24th
1673. to the last of June 1677.

As soon as I had set foot out of this terrible House, I went into the next
Church, to render thanks to God and the Holy Virgin, for the liberty I had just
now obtained. I went in the next place to Mr. -- who wept for joy, embracing
me. I then took a turn to the Galley, to give my last adieu to those poor
afflicted Persons, who had been the Companions of my Misfortune, and to take
away that little Luggage which remained to me. I enquired with all possible
diligence* when any Ship would part for France, having much greater desire to
be gone, that so I might get out of the Jurisdiction of the Inquisitors, than
they could have for my departure. I found one in a short time, upon which I
embarked my self; and after having passed through some light Fatiques, I had
the happiness to arrive in my Country in perfect Health.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The History of a Gentleman, which will serve to show the Spirit of the Holy
Office.

I Will finish this Discourse of the Inquisition with the Relation of what I
know to have happened to two Persons, whom I saw in the Galley at Lisbon, who
were there before me, and remained there when I came out, and with whom I had
particular Discourses, upon the account of my own, and their Cases.

The first of these unfortunate Gentlemen bore the Office of Major of a
Regiment, when he was apprehended, he was of the race of new Christians, and
was accused to have Judaized, by persons who in all probability had no other
means to save their lives than by confessing themselves guilty of the same
Crime, and naming many Innocents, endeavoring to find out the Witnesses whom
they were obliged to guess at by the Inquisition; this poor Officer thus
accused, was seized, and shut up in the Prisons of the Holy Office, he was
examined diverse times to learn from his own mouth the cause of his
imprisonment, but he not being able to tell it, since he knew it not himself,
after he had been kept more than two years, they let him know that he was
legally accused and convicted of being an Apostate Jew, which he always stoutly
denied, protesting that he had never ceased to be a Christian, and submitted to
none of all those accusations wherewith he was charged; nothing was omitted to
oblige him to confess, not only Life, but also the restitution of his Goods
were promised to him; he was afterward terrified with threatening of a cruel
Death, but none of all these things could shake his constancy. And he boldly
declared to his Judges, that he would choose rather to dye innocent, than to
preserve his life by an act of Cowardice, which would for ever overwhelm him
with Infamy. The Duke of De Aveira, who was then Inquisitor General, and
passionately desired to save the life of this Prisoner, vehemently exhorted him
to make use of those means which were offered to him, of preserving himself
from execution. And because the accused person had testified a constant
resolution of never yielding to render himself infamous, by a base confession
of those Crimes which he had never committed, the Inquisitor General offended
with his seeming obstinacy, was transported so far, as to say to him Cuides que
aves de ganbar? That is, What do you then pretend to? Do you think that we have
belied you? And so withdrew, leaving to the Prisoner to think at leisure what
he had to do. The words of this Judge include a very strange sense, and may
justly give occasion to reflections, which are neither advantageous to himself
nor to the Holy Office, for this was very near as if he should say, We will
rather cause you to be burnt as guilty, than let the World believe that we have
Imprisoned you innocent.

At last, the Act of Faith approaching, after more than three years
Imprisonment, our Major heard the Sentence of Death pronounced against him; and
a Confessor was given to him to dispose him for it. This Gentleman, who had
hitherto appeared so resolute, was terrified by the approaches and preperation
of his execution: insomuch as hearing the Evening before the ceremony,
acknowledged all which was desired of him against himself, however false; he
appeared at the procession vested with one of those Samarras covered with fire,
whose flames tend downward, which is called in Portugueze fogo revolto; to show
that by his confession, however late, he had avoided death, after he had been
justly Condemned to it; and by sentance of the Inquisition beside the
confiscation of his goods he was condemned to the Galleys for five years.

He had then served there more than two years when I arrived at Lisbon; and it
was in that place, and from his own mouth, that I learned what I have now
related.

CHAP. XXXIX.
A Gentleman, one of the greatest Quality in Portugal, who was a New Christian,
and very Rich, named Lewis Pecoadessa, having intermeddled in diverse Criminal
Causes, but in the Laick Judicature, had thereby contracted the hatred of many
persons. These finding no better means to Revenge themselves of him, accused
him to the Holy Office, as making secret Profession of Judaism, together with
his Family; so that in the same day, his Wife, his two Children, his Daughter,
and some others of his who dwell with him in his House, were Arrested, and shut
up in the Prison of the Inquisition of C^^imbra.

Le^is Pecoa was first examined, to draw from him a particular account of his
Goods, of which the Immovable alone yielded thirty thousand Livers Rent; and
all this, as well as the Movables, was buried in the Treasures of the Holy
Office. They urged him in the next place, to declare the cause of his
Imprisonment, which he could not do, knowing nothing of it. All ways were
attempted which the Inquisition is wont to make use of, to oblige accused
persons to confess their Crimes; but all this shook not the Constancy of Lewis
Pecoa. At last, almost three years being elapsed, the Promotor signified to him
the Crimes whereof he was accused, and the Senten^e of Death which would be
past upon him, if he resolved not ot confess. He endeavored to justify
himself, protested all the Facts whereof he was accused were so many falsities,
desired he might know his Witnesses who had deposed against him, whom he
undertook easily to convince of Perjury; and offered many Arguments to his
Judges, whereby they might have clearly perceived his Innocence, if they would
have made use of them. But the Inquisitors without having any respect to what
he alleged in his own defense, seeing him to perfist in denying the
Ac^usation, condemned him to the Fire, and acquainted him with his formal
Sentence 15 days before the Execution.

The Duke of Cadaval, who loved Lewis Pecoa, to whom he had been Godfather, and
who was an intimate friend of the Duke d' Aveira, informed himself from time to
time of all particulars concerning the condition of the Prisoners Case; and
knowing from the Inquisitor General, that the Prisoner Confessing nothing, and
being otherwise sufficiently Convicted, according to the Maxims of the Holy
Office, could not escape the Fire, if he accused not himself before his being
carried forth to Execution, was infinitely concerned for him. He desired leave
to speak or write to this unfortunate Gentleman, to persuade him to save his
life at any price whatsoever; but this was not possible. At last he bethought
himself of an Invention, which is so singular, that it never happened to any
other in Portugal; which was to gain a promise from the Inquisitor General,
that if he could persuade Lewis Pecoa to confess even after his being carried
forth to Execution at the Act of faith, he should not be put to Death; although
this was directly contrary to the Laws of the Holy Office; this being promised
to him, and he knowing the day wherein the Act of Faith was to be Celebrated at
Coimbra, he sent from Lisbon some of his own friends, and others of Lewis
Pecoa, who post themselves at the Door of the Inquisition, when the Procession
began, that they might approach to their unhappy Friend as soon as they should
see him appear.

As he was condemned, so the pile of Wood was made ready for him. He bore a
Carocha and a Samarra covered with flames and Devils, his Picture was drawn to
the Life before and behind, placed upon burning firebrarnds. His Sentence was
written at the bottom, and his Confessor walked by his side; his friends had no
sooner spied him, but breaking out into tears, they cast themselves upon his
Neck, and begged of him in the name of the Duke of Cadavalle, and by all that
was most dear to him, to think of saving his life. They acquainted him with the
assurance which they had received; that he should not be Executed if he would
confess; and remonstrated to him, that the loss of his Estate ought not to
create any difficulty in him, since the Duke, who had sent them to him, had
charged them to assure him in his Name, that he would bestow upon him more than
was taken from him. All these Reasons, together with the tears and
solicitations of his generous friends, could not move Lewis Pecoa; who
continued to protest with a loud voice, that he had always been a Christian,
that he would dye such; and that all whereof he had been accused, were so many
falsities invented by his enemies to take Revenge upon him, and made use of the
Holy Office to reap the spoil of his Estate.

The Procession being arrived at the appointed place, the Sermon was preached;
the Process of those whose lives were saved was Read, and the evening being
come, they began to read the Processes of those who were to be burned: The
Deputies of the Duke then redouble their entreaties, and at last made their
friend consent to demand audience. He rose up, and said, Let us go then and
acknowledge these falsities, to satisfy the desire of our friends. Audience
was granted to him, and he was led back into Prison. But the Act of Faith being
finished when they called him to the Table to confess, he had much more
difficulty to resolve himself; and was diverse times upon the point of
suffering his Sentence to be confi^med, without any hope of merry: Yet at last
he confessed what they would, and signed his Confession.

Two years more being elapsed from the time of his being carried forth to
execution, he was sent to Evora; where he appeared in the Act of Faith, wearing
a Samarra with the fire inverted: And after he had stayed five years in the
Prison of the Holy Office, he was farther condemned to the Galleys for five
years, and was sent thither the morrow after: And there it was that I knew him,
and learned from him the particulars of that which I have here related.

This unfortunate Gentleman, who appeared to be a very honest and tolerable
good Christian, learnt after his enlargement, that his Wife and Daughter died
in Prison, a little while after they had been shut up; and that his two Sons,
less constant than himself, having accused themselves in time, had been
enlarged some time before, and condemned to a Banishment for ten years into the
Algarves. As for himself, he expected only the moment to be freed; as I was,
and his design was to quit Portugal as soon as possible, and go spend the rest
of his life in some Country where the Inquisition should have no place.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. 1. Motives which induced me to publish this Relation. Chapter 2. The
Apparent causes of my Imprisonment. Chapter 3. Of the Visit which I made to the
Commissary of the Inquisition to Accuse myself, and ask Advice of him. Chapter 4.
Contai^ing the true causes of my Imprisonment, and how they arrested me. Chapter 5.
Description of the Prison. I writ to the Inquisitors, who returned me no
answer. Extreme misery of the Prisoners. Chapter 6. The return of the Father
Commissary. They remove me to Goa. Chapter 7. Departure from Daman. We pass to
Bacaim, and stay there. Our Arrival at Goa. Chapter 8. How I was conducted to the
Inquisition, and what is done to them who are shut up in Prison. Chapter 9.
Description of the Inquisition of Goa. Chapter 10. In what manner the Prisoners of
the Inquisition are treated. Chapter 11. Wherein is treated of the Officers of the
Inquisition. Chapter 12. In what manner the Officers of the Inquisition behave
themselves toward the Prisoners. Chapter 13. Of the Formalities which are observed
in the Inquisition. Chapter 14. Of the Injustice which is committed by the
Inquisition, in respect of Persons accused of Judaism. Chapter 15. Wherein is
farther treated of the Formalities, which are obseeved in the Inquisition. Chapter
16. Other kinds of Injustice which are ordinarily committed in the Inquisition.
Chapter 17. Some particulars concerning the Officers of the Inquisition. Chapter 18. In
what manner I was led the first time to Audience, and what they said to me: Chapter
19. My second and third Audience. Chapter 20. How Despair induced me to attempt my
life. Chapter 21. New excesses to which my despair carried me. Chapter 22. My fourth
Audience, in which the Promoter forms against me Conclusions of suffering
Death. Chapter 23. They carry me yet several times to Audience: Diverse
observations upon the Proceedings of the Inquisition. Chapter 24. How I perceived
that the Auto dafe was to be performed on the morrow, and what Habits were
given to us to appear in this Cer^mony. Chapter 25. Of the Preperations to the Act
of Faith, and the diverse Ornaments which are distributed to the Criminals,
according to the diversity of their Crimes. Chapter 26. How we went in Procession
to go to the Act of Faith. The Order of this Ceremony. Chapter 27. Containing what
was observed in the place wherein the Act of Faith was celebrated. Chapter 28. They
Absolve us from Excommunication, and deliver those to the Secula^ Power who
were to be burned: What was observed upon this occasion. Chapter 29. My last
enlargement from the Inquisition. They bring us into a House in the Town, to
cause us to be there some time instructed. Chapter 30. They bring me again to the
Inquisition, to receive the Pennances which were imposed upon me. Chapter 31.
Containing some Observations upon all that has been hitherto said. Chapter 32.
History of Joseph Pereira de Montes. Chapter 33. Of what happened to some other
Persons, who together with me were enlarged at the Act of Faith. Chapter 34. My
departure from Goa, my arrival first at Brasil, and then at Lisbon. Chapter 35.
They bring me to the Gallere. A description of that place. Chapter 36. I presented
diverse Petitions to the Inquisition to obtain my Liberty, which is at last
grante^ to me. Chapter 37. My departure from Lisbon, and arrival in France. Chapter 38.
The History of a Gentleman, which will serve to show the Spirit of the Holy
Office.
FINIS.

