BYLAWS, Constitutions, Orders and Rules, for the Good Government of the
Corporation of the United Company of Merchants of England, Trading to the
East Indies, and for the better carrying on, and managing the Trade of the said
Company.
1st By-Law.
IT is Ordained, That the Common Seal of this Corporation, shall be kept under
Three Locks, by such Three of the Directors, as the Court of Directors shall
from time to time appoint; and that the said Seal shall not be set to any
Writing, or Instrument, but by an Order of the Court of Directors first had,
and that in the Presence of the said Three Directors, or any Two of them: And
that the Directors, who have the Custody of the Seal, do cause a particular
Register of all Bonds for Money borrowed at Interest, and another Register for
all other Bonds and Instruments of what kind soever, that shall pass under the
Companies Seal, to be Entered and kept; And that they cause the said two
Register Books to be laid before the said Court of Directors every Week. To the
end the Court of Directors may inform themselves of all things, that the Seal
has been Affixed to for the Week preceding.

2d By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That upon all Transfers to be made of any Interest in
the Stock, or Fund, of this Corporation, Five Shillings, and no more, shall be
Paid for each Transfer, by the Person Transferring, for the Use of this
Corporation.

3d By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That a Court of Directors shall be Summoned and Held,
once in every Week at the least.

4th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That an Account of the Money Received, and Paid, for the
Annuity, be kept distinct from the Trade; And that the said Annuity be Paid
Quarterly, to the Persons Interested, at the Four most usual Feasts, or so soon
after as the same shall come in.

5th By-Law.
Item, It is hereby further Ordained, That in all Cases whatsoever, where any
Director, or any other Officer of this Company, shall have any Dealing, or
Business, with this Company, upon their own Account separately, or in
conjunction with any other, for or in respect of Buying for, or Selling to,
this Company any Bullion, or other Goods whatsoever, or in the making any other
Bargain or Contract whatsoever, by, to, or with this Corporation, That then, in
such case, such Director or Officer, so having any Business with this
Corporation, as aforesaid, shall at the time of his or their Negotiating the
same, or being present at such Negotiation, declare and publish to the Court of
Directors, whether he is directly, or indirectly, concerned in the Goods
proposed to be Sold, or other Matters then Negotiating, or in any other Matter
wherein he shall be directly, or indirectly, Interested or Concerned. And if
any Debate shall thereupon arise, the Person concerned having first been heard,
shall afterward withdraw during such Debate, and when the Question is put:
Provided that nothing in this By-Law shall be understood to oblige any Director
to declare, whether he is concerned in Goods bought by himself, or others for
him, at any Public Sale by the Companies Candle. And it is also hereby
Ordained, That no Director shall give his Vote, for any Lot of Goods bought at
the Companies Candle, or for making any Allowance for any Goods so bought,
wherein he is directly or indirectly concerned. And if any such Director, or
other Officer whatsoever, shall at any time wittingly or willingly offend,
contrary to this By-Law, Such Person or Persons so offending, and being
declared guilty thereof by a General Court, shall immediately become, and be
deemed and reputed incapable, of Holding or Enjoying, or being Chosen again
into the Office of Director, or any other Office of, or belonging to, the said
Company.

6th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That no Director shall take any Fee, Present, or Reward,
directly or indirectly, upon any Account whatsoever, relating to the Business
and Affairs of the Company.

7th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That no Officer or Servant employed by this Company,
shall directly or indirectly, take any Fee, Reward or Present, other than such
as shall be Allowed and Established by the Court of Directors, and contained in
a Table or Tables of Fees, to be provided by them for that Purpose, and exposed
to Public View: And that no Officer or Servant, being or taking upon him the
Office of a Broker, shall be capable of continuing in the Service of this
Company.

8th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That the Court of Directors shall not invest any of the
Companies Money, or Effects whatsoever, in Shipping, (Except such small Ships
as they may have Occation to employ in the East Indies) or in the Purchasing
any Part or Share, in the Capital or Additional Fund. or Stock of this Company,
without the Consent of the General Court first had.

9th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, (...) and after Michaelmas, which shall be in the Year
of our Lord, 1709. No Ship or Vessel shall be Hired or Freighted by the Court
of Directors, wherein any Director is, directly or Indirectly concerned, or
Interessed, as an Owner, or a Part-Owner: And all Ships to be Hired by this
Company, shall be Taken up, and their respective Voyages Agreed in a Court of
Directors, by the Ballot, and not otherwise: And the Court of Directors shall
not a^cept the Tender of any Ship, but what shall be first made by the
Commander and Two of the Owners in Writing, wherein shall be expressed the
Names of all the Owners.

10th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That all Goods and Merchandises whatsoever, that shall
hereafter be Licensed to be sent in any the Company's Ships to the East Indies,
by the Court of Directors for the time being, or by any Committee empowered by
them, shall be brought to a Warehouse, to be appointed for that Purpose, at the
East-India-House, and be there Viewed by the Committee of Shipping, in order to
the Tonnaging and Registring of such Goods.

That all Bullion which shall be so Licensed, shall be brought to the
Treasury-Office, and there Viewed, Weighed, and Packed up.

That before any Warrant, or Order, shall be given for Shipping such Goods,
Merchandises, or Bullion, The Freight, and other Duties chargeable thereon,
shall be first Paid to the Companies Treasurer, or Cashier, for the time being;
for which he shall give a Receipt, therein mentioning the Sum, and for what
Paid; Which Receipt shall be produced to the Committee, or Officers, who Sign
the said Warrant, or Order.

That the Companies Mark shall be put upon all such Goods, Merchandises and
Bullion, either by burning or deep cutting in, if the Package will bear it, or
else by stamping, before the same are removed out of the Warehouse, or
Treasury, aforesaid, with such further additional Marks or Numbers, as the
Parties concerned, and the Committee of Shipping, or of the Treasury, shall
direct.

That a due Register shall be kept, in Books for that Purpose, of all the
Goods, Merchandises and Bullion, to be Licensed as aforesaid, together with the
Quantity and Tonnage of the same; And that the Husband at the Waterside, or his
Assistant, do, from time to time, within Fourteen Days, after any Ship or Ships
belonging to this Company are Sailed from the Downs, transmit to the Court of
Directors, an Account of all Goods and Merchandises, Shipped on such Ship or
Ships respectively, together with the Marks, and Numbers, and Quantity of the
Tonnage of the same.

That all Goods, Merchandises and Bullion, which shall be found on Board any
the Companies Outward-bound Ships, not Licensed and Marked, or Stamped with the
Companies Mark, shall be Forfeited, according to the Directions of the Act of
Parliament; Except only in such Cases, where the Court of Directors, for the
time being, shall think fit, on the Necessity of the Case, to dispense with the
Examining and Marking of such Goods, and declare the same, under the Hands of
Thirteen or more of them.

That Notice in Writing be given to the Commanders of all Ships, to be employed
in the Companies Service of this By-Law, at the time of Entertaining their
Ships, To the end, They may forbid any Goods being taken on Board their
respective Ships, that are not Licensed and Marked, or have not a particular
Order under the Hands of Thirteen or more of the Court of Directors, for the
time being, for their being Shipped as aforesaid.

11th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That in all Charter-Parties for the future, There be
incerted a Clause, whereby the Commander and Owners shall Lose and Forfeit to
the Use of the Company, all their Goods brought Home in Private Trade, which
shall not be duly Registered in India, at the Factory where such Goods shall be
taken on Board; And in case any of their Goods shall be taken on Board, where
the Company have no Factors, then to be Registered in the Supra Cargo's Book;
And where there is no Supra Cargo, then to be Registered in the Commander's
Book, and Wit^^ssed by the next Superior Officer Aboard: And that there be a
proper Instrument prepared for the same Purpose, for the Officers and Ship's
Company to Sign to, at the time of Receiving their Imprest-Money: And that a
return of all such Registers be constantly made by the Factors, Supra Cargo's
or Commander on each Ship, under their Hands respectively, and Duplicates
thereof transmitted to the Company by some other Ship.

And that all Goods in Private-Trade (Prohibited Goods excepted) be
immediately, after Landing, brought up from the Waterside, and Lodged in a
particular Warehouse, to be provided by the Court of Directors for that
Purpose, and not Housed in any Warehouse at the Waterside, on any Pretense
whatsoever, unless otherwise Ordered by the Court of Directors.

12th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That when any Director goes to reside beyond Sea, it
shall make a Vacancy of his Directorship; And that whenever there shall be a
Vacancy of the Place of a Director by Death, Resignation, Incapacity, or
otherwise, another shall be Chosen in his Room, within One Month after every
such Vacancy; And that Ten Days Public Notice shall be given, of the Day upon
which such Choice shall be made.

13th By-Law.
Item, It is hereby Ordained, That no Commander, Owner, or Part-Owner, of any
Ship Freighted by the Court of Directors, shall sell any Office of Mate,
Purser, Gunner, Boatswain, or any Inferior Office, or take any Fee or Reward
whatsoever, directly or indirectly, for any of the said Offices or Employments,
on board any Ship so Freighted: And that upon proof made thereof to the Court
of Directors, such Commander, Mate, Purser, Gunner, Boatswain or other inferior
Officer, shall be discharged the Service of this Company: And that any Owner,
or Part-Owner, or Commander of any Ship, Freighted as aforesaid, who shall sell
any such Office as aforesaid, Upon proof made thereof to the said Court of
Directors, shall forfeit to this Company, for every such Offense, double the
Sum for which any such Office shall be sold, To be deducted out of the Freight
and Demorage to grow due for the said Ship; And that a proper Clause be
inserted in all Charter-Parties for this purpose.

That no Commander, Mate, or other Officer of any Ship, Freighted by the Court
of Directors, shall be allowed to take up or borrow, or become bound for any
Money upon Bottomree, on the Goods on board, or the bottom of any Ship
outward-bound to the East Indies, or other Parts within the Limits of the
Companies Charter, more than their respective Proportions of the Indulgence
granted by the Company to the Commander, Officers, and Ship's Company; Which
said Money, so allowed, shall be taken up of the Company, at such Rates and
Values, and on such Security, as the Court of Directors shall think fit: And
that the said Captains and Officers shall give Bond accordingly. And upon proof
made to the Court of Directors of the Breach of this By-Law, by any Commander
or other Officer of any Ship, Freighted as aforesaid, Such Commander or Officer
shall be forthwith Discharged from the Service of this Company, and be rendered
incapable, for ever after, of any Employment on Board any Ship in the Service
of this Company.

14th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That it shall and may be Lawful for the Court of
Directors, to make such Allowance for Prompt Payment of Money called in for
Trade, as they shall think fit; So as at least Ten days Public Notice be
given, What, and When any such Allowance is to be made.

15th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That the Books of this Company in England, shall be
Balanced to Midsummer-day, which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Ten, and so Yearly to every Midsummer-day following, and the
Balance drawn out within Thirty days after every Midsummer-day: And likewise,
the Books of this Companies Affairs in India, shall once every Year, be
balanced, in every of the said Companies Factories, And Transcripts or Copies
thereof Signed by the Chief and Council of each Factory, sent to England by the
first Convenience following, Under the Penalty of the Persons being dismissed
from the Service of the Company, who shall refuse or neglect so to do.

16th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That all Receipts and Payments, Ordered by the Court of
Directors, shall be made in course, without any undue Preference; And every
Officer acting otherwise, shall be dismissed the Service of the Company.

17th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That upon every Annual Election of Directors, at least
Fourteen days Public Notice shall be given thereof; And that a Printed List of
the Names of the Members, Qualified to Vote, be ready to be delivered, at least
Seven days, before the Day of Election.

18th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That no Note drawn by any Director, for the time being,
or under his Hand, shall be taken in any Payment whatsoever to the Company.

19th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That every Person that is a Member of this Company, and
shall, directly or indirectly, under any color or Pretense whatsoever, Trade
within the Limits of the Companies Charter, Otherwise than in the Joint Stock
of the said Company, shall Forfeit and Lose to the Use of the said Company, the
Value of such Money, Goods and Merchandises, so Traded for, Over and above all
other Penalties and Forfeitures appointed by Act of Parliament; And the Person
offending herein, shall be incapable of serving this Company, in any Office or
Place whatsoever.

20th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That no Orders shall be sent by the Directors to, or
obeyed by any of the Agents or Factors of this Company in India, or any other
Parts, at or beyond the Cape of Good Hope, or at St. Helena, but such as shall
be Signed by Thirteen or more of the Directors for the time being.

21th By-Law.
Item, In order to avoid Mistakes or Confusions in Elections, It is Ordained,

First, If it shall happen upon making the Scrutiny for Directors, any Two or
more Persons Qualified, shall have an equal number of Votes. The Election, in
such Case, shall be determined in the General Court, in which such Scrutiny
shall be Reported.

Secondly, And if on taking the Scrutiny, Two or more Persons, Qualified for
the same Office, have the same Christian and Sirnames, and are not
distinguished by their Additions, Or that a wrong Christian Name, in any List,
is placed to a Surname, when but One Person of that Surname is Qualified, Or
that Literal Mistakes be made in Christian or Sirnames; In every of the said
Cases, Such undistinguished, wrong or mistaken Name or Names, shall be kept and
not rejected, but the rest of the List shall be allowed; And the Persons
appointed to take the Scrutiny, may determine the Person or Persons intended by
such undistinguished, wrong or mistaken Name, or Names; Provided the major part
of them, then present, shall agree in ascertaining the Person or Persons so
intended; But in default thereof, the same shall be determined by the General
Court, in which such Scrutiny shall be Reported.

Thirdly, And that no List shall be received for any Election, after the Glass
is finally Sealed up, according to the Time prefixed, but such List shall be
Rejected.

Fourthly, And if any Member shall use, or procure to be used, any indirect
Means, by Menaces, Promises, or collusive Transfer or Transfers of Stock, or
otherwise, to obtain any Vote for Election of himself, or any other, to be a
Director, And be thereof declared guilty at a General Court, to be called for
that Purpose, Such Person shall for ever be incapable of being Elected into any
such Office.

Fifthly, And that in all Elections of Committees, to be made by a General
Court, the same Method (or so near as the case will admit) be observed, under
such Penalties, as are before pres^^^^'d, concerning ^he Election of Directors.

Sixthly, And that the Third and Fourth Clauses of this By-Law, shall be
incerted at the end of every Printed List, that shall be given out, at or
before the Annual Election, To the End, The Members of this Corporation, may be
directed in giving their Votes.

22th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That the Cash of this Corporation, consisting in Ready
Money, Exchequer Bills, or Goldsmiths Notes, shall, from time to time, be kept
under Three several Locks, by such Three of the Court of Directors, as the said
Court shall from time to time appoint* Except such Sums, as the said Court
shall think necessary to trust with their Cashier: And that the Cash of this
Corporation in the Bank of England, shall be kept in such Method as the Court
of Directors shall appoint: And that no Money, re^ating to the Trade, or
Affairs of the said Company, shall be disposed of, without an Order of the said
C^urt of Directors: And that the Interest, and all (...) Advantages, arising
and growing upon the Ca^^ (...) ^he said Company, be brought to the Account of
the said Company. And the said Three Directors, who shall be thereunto
appointed, are hereby required, once a Month, or oftener, to Examine the
Particulars of the Cash of the Company; And that the Book, containing the State
of the Cash, be laid before the Court of Directors every Court day, by the
Cashier; And that the said Three Directors, who shall be thereunto appointed,
as aforesaid, or any Two of them, do at the next Court of Directors, after such
their Examination, as aforesaid, certify upon the said Book, under their Hands,
how they find the same.

23d By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That the Court of Directors, shall not permit any Person
or Persons to Export or Import, any Money, Goods or Merchandises, in any Ship
belonging to, or Freighted by this Company, Other than such as shall be first
Licensed by the said Court of Directors, or such as shall be by them empowered
to grant such License.

24th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That all Questions (except for Adjournment) that shall
be Proposed in a General Court, shall, if required, be first stated in Writing
by the Chairman, before the same shall be put; And that the Chairman, in a
General Court, shall not Adjourn or Dissolve the Court, without a Question.

25th By-Law.
Item, It is hereby Ordained, That at the next Annual Election of Directors,
which is to be between the 25th Day of March, and the 25th Day of April, 1701,
Six at least of those that have been, or shall, during this Year, be Chosen
into, and have Served the Office of a Director, shall be excluded from the
Directorship for one Year; And to that End, Every List that shall contain the
Names of more than Eighteen of this Years Court of Directors, shall be deemed
as no Vote, And the said List, and all the Names therein, shall be totally
Rejected.

Secondly, And that at the following Annual Election of Directors, which will
be in the Year 1702, Six at least, of those who shall have been Members of the
Court of Directors the Two preceding Years, shall be excluded as above; And
every List that shall contain the Names of more than Twelve Persons, that have
served the Office of a Director Two Years succesively, shall be deemed as no
Vote; And the said List, and all the Names therein, shall be totally Rejected.

Thirdly, And that at the next succeeding Annual Election, which shall be in
the Year 1703, Six at least, of those who shall have been Members of the Court
of Directors the Three preceding Years, shall be excluded as above; And every
List that shall contain the Names, of more than Six Persons, that have served
the Office of a Director Three Years successively, shall be deemed as no Vote;
And the said List, and all the Names therein, shall be totally Rejected

Fourthly, And that at the succeeding Annual Election, which will be in the
Year 1704, and thence forward, at every Annual Election for ever, Every Person
who has served the Office of a Director, the Four preceding Years
successively, shall be excluded as above; And every List that shall contain the
Name (...) any such Person, shall be deemed as no Vote (...) the said List, and
all the Names therein, (...) be totally Rejected.

Fifthly, And (...) case, at any of the ^nnual General Courts of Elections, in
all Times to come, (notwithstanding the Rejecting of the Lists, as above
prescribed) It shall so happen, That any greater Number of those who have
served the Office of a Director, than what is agreeable to the true Intent and
Meaning of this By-Law, shall have a Majority of Votes, Then such
Supernumeraries of the Directors, as have the least Votes shall be laid aside,
And the next Persons who, next to them, have the Majority of Votes, shall be,
by the Scrutineers, declared to be Elected Directors for that Year, and shall
be Admitted and Sworn accordingly.

Sixthly, And that after the 25th of March, 1701, in the Printed Lists to be
delivered out before every Annual Election, the No 1, 2, 3, or 4, be incerted
to the Name of each Director, according to the Years he has served, That the
Members may be thereby directed, in conforming their Lists to this By-Law.

26th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That at the General Court to be held Yearly in the Month
of June, a Committee of Seven shall be Chosen, whereof Four to be a Quorum, Who
shall be, and they are hereby, Authorized and Empowered to Inspect the Bylaws,
and to make Enquiry into the Observance and Execution of them, and to consider
what Alterations and Additions may be proper to be made, and to Report their
Opinion, from time to time, to the General Court.

27th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That One Hundred and Fifty Pounds a Year, be allowed
each Director, for his Attendance upon the Business of this Company.

28th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That none of the present Bylaws, Or any other that
shall hereafter be made, shall be Repealed or Suspended, without the Consent
and Approbation of Two General Courts, to be called for that Purpose.

29th By-Law.
Item, It is hereby Ordained, That if at any General Court of this Company, any
Nine of the Members present, shall Demand a Ballot for determining any Question
Proposed, Such Question shall be put by the Ballot, and not otherwise.

30th By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That whoever shall be in the Service of this Company,
and shall be wittingly guilty of the Breach of any of the Bylaws of this
Corporation, and shall be so adjudged by a General Court, he shall be incapable
of any Employment in this Company.

31st By-Law.
Item, It is Ordained, That these Bylaws shall be Read in the first Court of
Directors, and first General Court, after every Annual Election.


