The Jury-man charged; OR, A LETTER To a CITIZEN of London.

Wherein is showed the true meaning of the Statute, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles. As also, the false Glosses and
Interpretations detected. And it is evinced by Undeniable Reasons that the
Quakers and others that are ordinarily committed to Prison, by Justices of the
Peace and Chief Magistrates of Corporations, upon that Statute, are not guilty
of the breach of it; and yet in reason it is impossible to convict any man
among us of being present at a Meeting, under pretense and color of any
exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgy or Practice
of the Church of England, except those that in then Meetings are manifestly
Seditious or otherwise notoriously wicked. And that that Juryman that finds any
other person guilty, is himself guilty of Perjury, and liable to the Vengeance
of God upon his Family and Trade, Body and Soul, in this world and that to come.

Hales of Schism. For indeed all Pious Assemblies in times of Persecution and
Corruptions, howsoever practiced, are indeed, or rather alone, the Lawful
Congregations and Public Assemblies; though according to form of Law, are
indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be stained with
Corruption and Superstition.

London, Printed in Year, 1664.

The JURY-MAN Charged: OR, A LETTER to a Citizen of LONDON, etc.
Dear SIR,
AS it is the nature of true Love and Friendship, both to wish and endeavor
the Good and Weal of those we have registered in our hearts for Friends; so it
cannot be but that the happiness of the one will redound to the other, and
there will need nothing to the making your Friend partner in your Joys but the
knowledge of them. But among all Goods that can beautify a F^nd, none is
comparable to that of a mind habituated to Holiness, (...) delighting to do the
Will of God. And because God speaks to us by our Consciences, it must needs be
our necessary duty to walk according to the Light we find in that Divine
Closet. And inasmuch as the Light and Knowledge, at least a great part of it,
comes from without, through the windows of our senses, we ought by all means to
keep those Mediums pure and untinctured; for otherwise the Light in our Souls
will not be clear and orient. How can I then but greatly rejoice in you, whom I
find not only willing to obey, but diligent to know your Heavenly Masters Will?
the former of these Divine Qualities separates you from the multitude of the
world that lies in wickedness and disobedience, the latter distinguishes you
from ignorant Zealots and blindly obedient. Not but that I confidently believe
that God that gave his Son for us when we were Enemies, will much more pardon
and save us, being weak, and in some things ignorant Friends: but many and
lamentable are the sad Consequences even of pardonable Ignorance, much more of
the damnable Ignorance of those that in killing and casting out the Servants of
God, think they do God good Service. And I have no slender grounds of fear lest
this may be the case of many of those that are forward in executing penal
Statutes upon Religious persons for matters relating properly to their Religion
and Conscience. And lest you may in the least offend, through ignorance of any
sort, you are pleased to ask my advice what you should do, if it should be your
lot to be called forth on a Grand Inquest or other Jury, for the putting in
execution the late Act entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles. I could wish you had made use of some other in this Question,
that had been well-skilled in the Laws of England, rather than of me that am
wholly ignorant in that study; but however, being assured you will pardon what
you know flows from a sincere intention, I shall not be afraid to give you my
private judgment as a Christian (whatever it is) in a case that may be my own
as well as yours, though likely to be yours first. We have seen the Title of
the Act already, it proceeds thus: -- For providing therefore of further and
more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of Seditious
Sectaries and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender Consciences,
do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late experience has showed: Be
it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Common in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person of
the age of sixteen years or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time
after the first day of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1664, shall
be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or pretense of
any exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgy or
Practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which Conventicle, Meeting
or Assembly there shall be five persons or more assembled together, over and
above those of the same household; Then it shall and may be lawful to and for
any two Justices of the Peace, of the County, Limit, Division, or Liberty
wherein the Offense aforesaid shall be committed, or for the Chief Magistrate
of the place where such Offense aforesaid shall be committed (if it be within a
Corporation where there are not two Justices of the Peace) And they are hereby
required and enjoined, upon proof to them or him, respectively, made of such
Offense, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath of Witness, or notorious
Evidence of the Fact (which Oath the said Justices of the Peace and Chief
Magistrate respectively are hereby empowered and required to administer) to make
Record of every such Offense and Offenses under their Hands and Seals
respectively; which Record so made at aforesaid, shall to all intents and
purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of
every such Offender for such Offense: And thereupon the said Justices and Chief
Magistrate respectively, shall commit every such Offender so convicted as
aforesaid, to the Goal or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or
Main prize for any time not exceeding the space of three months, Unless such,
etc.

Now Sir, give me leave to tell you, that there are some that except against
the whole Act as null and void in it self, as all Statutes are that are made
against Piety, as this seems to them to be: but then they that thus judge, take
it for granted that it forbids some exercise of Religion which God commands or
allows, and in that case all Lawyers will readily confess it to be of no more
force than King Darius his Decree, Dan. 6. against asking any Petition of God
or man for thirty days save of himself, and which Decree Daniel was by a
miracle defended in disobeying.

Another Exception which they conceive destroys the whole Act is, its
contrariety to the Fundamental Laws of the Land in respect of its proceedings;
for it seems contrary to the best Clause in all that so much magnified Magna
Charta, viz. chap. 29. Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut
disseisietur de libero Tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis
consuitudinibus suis, aut ut legetur, aut exubetur aut aliquo modo destruatur,
ver super eum ibimus nec super eum mittemus, nisi per legale Judicium parium
suorum, vel per legem terra. Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus aut differemus
justitiam vel rectum. No Free Man may be taken, or imprisoned, or disseised of
his free Tenement, or his Liberties or free Customs, or Outlawed or Banished,
or any way Destroyed: Neither will we go upon him, or send upon him, but by
lawful Judgment of his Equals, or by the Law of the Land. We will sell to none,
we will deny to none, or defer Justice or Right. It is to be observed that that
great Lawyer Sir Edward Cook, 2d Part Inst. p. 49. observes upon the Exposition
of Per Legale Judicium, that the manner of Trial by Juries was by Law before
this Statute it self, and so is more ancient than Magna Charta. And upon these
words, p. 50. Nisi per Legem terra, But by the Law of the Land, he says it is,
without due Process of Law; and that is by Indictment or Presentment of good
and lawful men where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by Writ original of
the Common Law. Against this Ancient and Fundamental Law, I find (says he) an
Act of Parliament made, that as well Justices of Assizes, as Justices of the
Peace (without any finding or presentment by the Verdict of 12. men) upon a
bare Information for the King before them made, should have full Power and
Authority by their discretions to hear and determine all Offenses and Contempts
committed or done by any person or persons against the Form, Ordinance, and
Effect of any Statute made and not repealed, etc. By color of which Act
shaking this Fundamental Law, it is not credible what horrible Oppressions, and
Exactions, to the undoing of infinite numbers of People, were committed by Sir
Richard Empson Knight. and Edmund Dudley, being Justices of the Peace, throughout
England: And upon this unjust and injurious Act (as commonly in like cases it
falls out) a new Office was erected, and they made Masters of the Kings
Forfeitures.

But at the Parliament holden in the first year of Henry the 8th, this Act of
the 11th of Henry the 7th, is receited, made void, and repealed; and the Reason
thereof is yielded, for that by force of the said Act, it was manifestly known,
that many sinister, crafty, feigned, and forged Informations had been pursued
against diverse of the Kings Subjects, to their great damage and wrongful
vexation. And the ill success hereof, and the fearful end of these two
Oppressors, should deter others from committing the like; and should admonish
Parliaments, That instead of this ordinary, and precious Trial, Per Legem
Terra, they being not in absolute and partial Trials by discretion. Thus far
Cook.

Now Sir, Inasmuch as this Act allows two Justices of Peace, or the chief
Magistrate of the place, not only to be Witnesses, but to pass Sentence of
Imprisonment or Fine, and make Record of the Offense, without any Finding or
Presentment by the Judgment of twelve men; it being contrary, both to the
Custom of England, Magna Charta, and the Statute of Henry the 8th, they judge
it absolutely null and of no effect: So that those that carry on the execution
of it are liable to the same miserable end with Empson and Dudley aforesaid.
Besides, That this Judgment and Record of one or two Justices of the Peace, is
full two parts of the proceedings, whereby 5000. of his poor Neighbors may be
Banished from their native Country, their dear Wives, sweet Babes, loving
Friends, and all other accommodations, into another world, for seven years;
yea, and if they return before that time expired, to be hanged as Felons: And
all this for nothing but worshipping God according to what they are fully
persuaded to be his will. Is this according to the so much Celebrated Laws of
England? Judge, O ye Turks and Pagans!

But suppose we that this Act were as just in every respect as Justice it self,
and most neccessary to the Weal of the Nation, so that at least, a third part
of the People would be destroyed without it be duly executed (as they are
likely to be by the execution of it) yet it must by no means be executed upon
those that are not proved to be guilty of the breach of it: Let us see then,
what is neccessary to be proved against every man or woman that is justly
convicted of Breach of this Act. First, This Prisoner must be sixteen years of
age. 2ly, He must be a Subject of this Realm. 3dly. Ae must be present at an
Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting. 4thly. Such Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting
must be held under color or pretense of some exercise of Religion. 5thly. He
must be present at such Assembly or Meeting under such color or pretense of
some exercise of Religion. 6thly. That exercise of Religion must be in another
manner then is allowed by the Lyturgie, or Practice of the Church of England.
7thly. There must be present at this Assembly five persons over and above those
of the same household. If the Witnesses fail in any one of these Particulars,
the Indictment is void. Now Sir, I beseech you, Where shall we find Witnesses
competent for such Evidence? Take, for example, a Meeting of Quakers, for they
are most free and open in their Worship; who will be so daring as to venture
his soul upon it, That they meet together under pretense or color of any
exercise of Religion in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice
of the Church of England? or if any should be so bold and mad, as to make no
Conscience of Swearing any thing that the Judges should bid him Swear, Shall
you, or I, be so mad as to believe him, or be satisfied in our consciences that
it is so? For, let us consider, what knowledge is requisite in such a Witness,
and then try the Hackney-Witnesses whether they be so qualified. First, It is
necessary, that he know every single person against whom he bears Testimony,
was there present under color or pretense of Religion: But how should he know
this, except every such person should tell him so? But they do constantly aver,
That they come not together under any pretense or color (As pretense and
color is opposed to intention and reality) and therefore are not guilty. I
beseech you, mark, the Act does not say, Whosoever shall be present at any
exercise of Religion, but, shall be present [ under pretense of any exercise of
Religion; which words of pretense and color are to no purpose, and might have
been spared, if to be [ present] at a Religious Meeting be sufficient to make a
man guilty. So that really, according to the best understanding I have, they do
wickedly abuse the King and Parliament that adjudge men guilty upon any other
score. Again, It is usual both for Quakers and others, to visit one another,
and being together, they take occasion to do some Act of Religion, and perhaps,
are found therein, and apprehended; What, did they therefore come together
under color of Religion, because they are Religious? Are both those that
profess to meet for Religion, and those that profess it not, but somewhat else,
equally guilty? Such a Witness must be of wonderful discerning.

But suppose we, that our Judges will persuade the silly Witnesses, that, if
they were found Praying, or Exhorting one another, that then the pretense of
Religion is evident, (for I will not imagine so much wickedness in any of our
Judges as in Br. to adjudge men guilty, that say, nor do any thing) But 2dly.
our Witness must know, that this exercise of Religion was in other manner then
is allowed by the Lyturgy or practice of the Church of England; and how shall
he know that? Can any man tell what the Lyturgie allows, except he has read it
all, and every part, or heard it read? and truly, there is little less than the
whole Bible contained in the Litturgy, if you consider the Epistles, Gospels
and Chapters that are there appointed to be read. So that the result will be,
Whether this exercise of Religion be allowed in the Bible, or Lyturgy or
Practice of the Church of England, and then it will be necessary that our
Deponent have read or known, understood, and remembered all, and every part of
the holy Scriptures; all, and every part of the Litturgy; all, and every part
of the Practice of the Church of England concerning Religion, whether it be
written, or not written. He must also be able to compare this exercise of
Religion in the accused Assembly, with the Scriptures, Litturgy, and Practice
of the Church of England. He must also be able to determine all Controversies
in Religion, to know on which side the Truth lies between the party accused and
the Exercise of Religion allowed by the Scriptures, Lyturgy, or Practice of the
Church of England, and if perhaps the Lyturgy and Practice of the Church of
England do thwart and contradict the Scriptures, or one another, or themselves
concerning this point of Religion in question, so that they do in some places
allow it, and in other places disallow it: our Witness must be able to
determine certainly upon his Oath, That this exercise of Religion is not
allowed by the Lyturgy or Practice of the Church of England; and then, eris
mihi magnus Apollo?

But you will say, perhaps, That it is determined by the Church of England
already what only exercise of Religion is allowed, and by consequence all other
are disallowed: So that, the Witness needs only to tell, In what manner they
exercised Religion, and the Judges will tell the Jury, That the Lyturgy and
Practice of the Church of England does allow it, and then it will be clear
between the Witness and the Judges to the Jury-man's conscience, that the
Prisoner is guilty according to the Indictment. But will this satisfy you Sir?
Can you take a passionate and teasty Judge's word as your infallible Director
in so many most difficult Controversies as must in this case be decided? Will
you pin your Faith upon the Judges sleeve in matters of Religion, (of which
perhaps he knows no more then he can find in the Statute-Book,) when you have
rejected the Church of Rome, with all her pretenses of Infallibility, from
being Determiness in this matter? where I pray has the Church of England
determined all Acts of Religion that are to be performed by five or more
persons? Does she not tell us, the Scriptures are the Word of God? Does she not
commend it as a perfect Rule of Faith, and Manners? Does she not translate it
into our Mother Tongue, and charge us to read it diligiently? And must we not
obey what we judge we find there? The Papists are in far better case than we,
that are not permitted to read the Scriptures, if when we have read them we
must be punished for understanding and obeying them the best we can. O wittily
done, Robbin Everard, that did choose rather to go to Rome, than return to
the Church of England! perhaps thou thought she was hastening thither, and
thou would go before to get a good quarter, as fearing thou should scarce
get any entertainment when so great an Army came. But to return, Does the
Church of England allow only one manner of exercise of Religion, that is,
reading the Lyturgy? Why then do ye Preachers usually make Prayers before and
after your Sermons, that are not in the Lyturgy? Does not the Church of England
allow what the Scriptures command? but the divine Author to the Hebrews
commands Christians, Heb. 10.24, 25. To consider one another, to provoke one
another to Love, and to Good Works, and not to forsake the assembling
themselves together, as the manner of some is: For how should they provoke one
another to Love and Good-Works, if they should not Assemble? but you will say,
They must assemble among their Neighbors at Church; but there is only one
permitted to exhort the rest, if any other should speak there to exhort one
another, he should presently be haled to prison, and perhaps lose his life
among the Rabble. The same Author commands us to exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. What, will not the Church of England allow us to endeavor to prevent the
deceitfulness of sin, and hadness of heart? Surely the Lyturgy (in the Letany)
has one clause against hardness of heart; must we pray against it, and not
labor against it? How absurd is that? Or what? does not the Church of England
allow a man to read the Scriptures or the Lyturgy in his own Family, if there
be five persons besides his Family? And is not reading the Scriptures an
exercise of Religion? Does not the Church of England allow five persons besides
the Family to meet together, to consult of relieving a poor Widow or
Fatherless, and to exhort and stir up one another to this work by mutual
Conference or continued Speeches, and Orations out of the Scriptures, and to
pray for one another, that they may keep themselves unspotted from the
Adulteries, Fornications, Profane Swearings, Oppressions, Cruelties, Malice,
Envy, Revenge, Covenant Breaking, Persecution of Good men, and all manner of
Debaucherys of the times? But the Apostle James says, Pure Religion, and
undefiled is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted from the world. Who will dare to take his Oath, the
Church of England does not this allow? Again, I would fain know whether a man
may not invite six poor People to his House, and there feed their hungry
bodies, and instruct their ignorant souls in the knowledge of the Gospel,
without incurring the penalty of this Law? Is not this an Act of Religion? Can
any man be saved without Charity? Does the Church of England not allow us to go
in the way to Heaven, except it banish us to Barbados or Jamaico? It shall be
lawful there to obey God and be Merciful, but not in England.

The holy Apostle Paul bids us, Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and
mourn with them that mourn; and the Apostle James bids us Confess our faults
one to another, and pray one for another, (Jam. 5. 16.) that we may be healed;
What, must we not do it, five or six together, without Banishment? Does not the
Church of England allow it? Have we not just cause to say to these, as our Lord
said to the Scribes and Pharisees, Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of
none effect by your Tradition, Statute.

Nay, besides the Contradiction to our Savior's Commands, Does not such an
Interpretation of this Law, (forbidding all Religion of six persons, but what
is performed at Church by hearing a Parson, read the Lyturgy, as the
never-to-be-forgotten Judge Bridgman expounded it to the ever-to-be-remarked
Hartford Juryes) Does it not I say, make us inhumane beasts, as well as
irreligious men and women? for how can a man in prudence suffer his wife to go
to her neighbors labor when she cries out for her help, lest perhaps there
should be four more, and they all be taken for Conventiclers, for certainly in
such extremities, it is usual for the Laboring woman to cry to God for help,
which is a plain Act of Religion; nay, I hear it is common to the good Women
after they have finished their work, for the Midwife or some other to give
thanks, and pray solemnly in other manner than is any where to be found in the
Lyturgy. Let it therefore be considered, that the Travelling-woman, or any
other for her, be henceforth prohibited to pray unto God in such cases, lest
she bring upon her Neighbors for their good will and humanity, the penalty of
three or six months imprisonment, or Banishment for seven years. Or for better
security, let the Parson always be sent for as soon as the Midwife, to act his
part among the good women till their work be finished.

Again, how will it be safe for a man to go to his deceased Neighbors funeral,
lest some body should salute the surviving Relative with a I pray God comfort
you, or I pray God give you Joy after your Sorrow, and so make the whole
company liable to a penalty? The like may be said, for praying Joy to a new
married Couple, or saying God be with you to our friend, taking a Journey by
Land, or a Voyage by Sea, or much more for five persons going to their
neighbors to dinner, except the Priest be there to say Grace.

But lastly, I know not how any persons meeting together upon any Occasion
whatsoever can escape, taking Judge Bridgman's Sentence for Law, that is, says
he, You must not expect a plain punctual Evidence against them for any thing
they said or did at their Meeting, for they may speak to one another, though
not with or by auriculer sound, but by a cast of the eye, or a motion of the
head or foot, or gesture of the body, etc. if you find or believe in your
hearts that they were in the Meeting under color of Religion in their way,
though they sat still only, and looked upon each other, seeing they cannot say
what they did there, it was an Unlawful Meeting, etc. If they are sworn to give
Verdict according to Evidence, may proceed to condemn men without Evidence
according to what they believe in their heart; and if they may without hearing
or seeing what they did, judge them according to what may be in their hearts or
gestures; then may the Judge have his skin pulled over his ears for false
Judgment, for it may be he knows in his own conscience it was so. But says he,
their use and practice was not according to the Lyturgie of the Church of
England, for it allows and commands when people meet together in the Church,
that Divine Service should be read, etc. Is it not rarely well argued? the
Lyturgy commands that when people meet together in the Church, Divine Service
shall be read, therefore it does not allow that when people are met together in
a private house, Divine Exhortations should be given, or that people should sit
together without saying or doing any thing. This is not Lawyers Latin, but
Lawyers Logic, and the great and dreadful God of Heaven and Earth will try it,
whether it be made in any true mode or figure of Justice. I have proved to you
that in many cases, and might in many more, that if the Lyturgy be not contrary
to the Scriptures and it self, it allows of Meetings and Acts of Religion, the
manner whereof is not determined by the Lyturgy of the Church of England. The
Judge might as well have argued thus; The Lyturgy allows men to eat and drink
Bread and Wine given by the hand of a Priest at Church; Therefore men may not
eat and drink Bread and Wine with thanksgiving at their own Tables. If a
Sophister in the Schools should use such a Fallacy, he might be hissed at for a
Dunce, and there is an end on it; but to delude God and Jury-mens Consciences,
and to banish harmless and meek men from their Native Country, Husbands from
their dear Wives, Parents from their tender Babes, Kinsfolk from Kinsfolk, and
loving Neighbors and Friends from the sweet society of their Neighbors and
Friends; this is intolerable, and a Judgment that God will judge! and I
persuade my self you will ever keep your self from partaking in such gross
Iniquity. And this leads me to the consideration the Equitableness of the
punishment, and the proportion that is between that and the Offense; for in all
just Laws the penalty is not greater than the nature of the Fault requires. Now
supposing the Fault to be such as the Interpreters would make us believe, that
is, that men and women from an erroneous persuasion do meet together to worship
God in other manner than is allowed by the Church of England, can it be
imagined the Parliament would punish such an Error as this with horrid
Banishment for seven years? far be it from us to think so unworthily of an
English Parliament. No, the Intention of the Parliament is manifest from the
Title and Preface of the Act: the Title, An Act to prevent and suppress
seditious Conventicles: but what Sedition in worshipping God erroneously? The
Preface, For remedy against Seditious Sectaries and other disloyal persons, who
under pretense of Tender Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections, etc. and therefore the matter of Fact is, persons meeting under
color and pretense of Religion; whereby it plainly appears they intended not
to punish those that have no other Intention in their religious Exercises but
what appears; but such as only pretend Religion for Seditious ends: To such
indeed, where that Seditious mind is discovered and manifest, the punishment
may be proportionate; but for persons that have no other intention in Meeting,
or at least in whom no other intention can any way be made manifest, but to
please God and satisfy their own Consciences, for them to be punished in this
manner, is like as if a Parent should banish one of his Children out of his
presence, and from his table, into Jamaica or Barbados to be educated among his
Cow-herds and Hog-herds for seven years, because he has a weak stomach and
cannot eat the wholesome food of the other Children. Therefore it is wholly to
be held that either this is not the punishment, or that is not the offense; for
there is no proportion between them.

Again, how can it be imagined the Parliament would forbid all religious
Meetings, save at the Parish Church, because thirty men once came out of such a
Meeting to make a Sedition and Tumult? Can any man suppose that Insurrections
are contrived in a Meeting of eighty or an hundred People of all sorts, Men,
Women and Children? Surely no State or Kingdom need fear such Plots; Are not
Insurrections rather contrived in secret chambers, where questionless there are
not above five besides those of the household? why should it not therefore be
prohibited for men to come together upon any occasion whatsoever in any number?
You will say this cannot be, for it will destroy Trading and Society? But what
I pray, is not trading for Heaven and religious Society, as necessary as civil
commerce and wordly Commodities? But you will say, They may meet at the Parish
Church for Religious Society: But I have showed before, that many things are to
be done in Religion which cannot be done there, neither is it permitted if it
could. And besides Sedition has been moved and acted at the public Church,
witness Scotland in the beginning of the late Wars; and Dr. Duck at Magnes: A
common thing to preach Sedition in the Pulpit. Must we therefore be prohibited
from meeting at Church, and commanded to worship God at home, every Family by
it self? if some persons abuse of a thing could have made it unlawful, we
should by this time have had nothing lawful. The preaching of the Gospel was in
the purest times, done by some out of envy, and yet that did not hinder others
from doing it out of good will. The Grace of God was by some turned into
Lasciviousness, yet it taught others to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
etc. Those that met Seditiously, were therein as offensive to those that meet
now peaceably, and religiously, as they were to the King and Parliament.

Now Sir, upon the whole matter, that I may draw to a conclusion; Can you
believe in your conscience that the Quakers and others that come before you for
religious Meetings, have seditious Intentions and Contrivances under the
pretense of Religion? Do you think it possible for any Witness or Judge on
Earth to satisfy your sworn conscience, that the Exercise of Religion among
the Quakers or any other profession among us is not allowed by the Scriptures,
Lyturgy or Practice of the Church of England? Mistake me not, I say not that
you cannot be satisfied in conscience that some professions do err in some
matters of Doctrine or Practice, so as that you can neither consent with them,
nor do as they do: But can you take your Oath that they err maliciously? Can
you venture your Eternal Salvation on it, that their exercise of Religion is a
sin that deserves to be punished with seven years Banishment?

Suppose the Witness say, they were met together at a private house, and prayed
together, and exhorted one another, but did not read either their Prayers or
Exhortations out of a Book called the Lyturgy, and the Judge tell you that this
is sufficient as to matter of fact; can you hereupon pawn your Soul and all
your earthly comforts, that they are guilty according to the Indictment? They
shall be banished out of their Country for seven years; Will you freely be
banished out of Heaven evermore, if they be not sufficiently proved guilty?
They shall be sent to Jamaico or Barbados; Will you be sent to Hell if they be
not sufficiently proved guilty? They shall be separated from their Wives,
Children, Parents, Kinsfolk, Friends and Neighbors for seven years; will you
willingly be separated from the presence of the Lord and his holy Angels and
Saints for ever, if they be not sufficiently proved guilty? They shall be
damnified in their Trades, and in the comfortable enjoyment of their Families
and Friends; are you willing to be cursed by God in your Trades, Families,
Friends, and in whatsoever is dear to you, if they be not sufficiently proved
guilty? They shall be hanged up as Felons if they return without License in
seven years space; can you appeal to God with a good conscience, and say before
the great and dreadful Judge of Heaven and Earth; Lord, let me suffer Death and
Damnation as a Murderer, if these persons be not sufficiently proved guilty?
Whoever understands the nature of an Oath and Verdict, this is the Case between
the Jury-man and the Prisoner.

But you will say, Perhaps the Judge will be angry, and threaten, and say, My
Masters, will you make a nose of wax of the Law, and suffer the Law to be
baffled? those that think to deceive the Law, the Law will deceive them: and
perhaps I shall be sent for to the Court and imprisoned in the Gatehouse, and
so be undone by great Charges and loss of my Trade. But such a thing as that
would be such Injustice as never was heard of; and it cannot be imagined, that
his Majesty would suffer it: It is altogether improbable that any man should
suffer in this kind: I only suppose the worst that can be supposed; and if the
worst is to be endured; how much more when it shall be only a chiding? I ask
thee again, Whether thou had rather incur the displeasure of God or of man?
Whether thou had rather suffer from men in thy Trade, Family and Liberty, or
be cursed by God in them all? Whether the Gatehouse or Hell be worse? Whether
it be not better to trust God, with a good conscience, than to trust the Devil
with a bad one? If thou do believe that God rules the world, that he
favors and blesses the Righteous, and punishes the Wicked, both in this
world, and that which is to come, then keep thy conscience clean, do
righteously though thou suffer by it: Fear not them that kill the body, and
have no more that they can do; But rather fear him, which is able to destroy
both body and soul in Hell.

But why do I use such severe expostulations with you, of whose tenderness of
conscience I have so great and clear evidence? I know you can sooner dye upon
the place, then bring in any such peaceable person, Guilty; as well knowing
that there is a heavy Woe pronounced against him that shall offend the least of
Christ's little ones; it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about
his neck, and he cast into the depth of the Sea. I know you do approve of that
most prudent counsel of that most Famous Doctor of Law amongst the Jews,
Gamaliel; Act. 5.38, 39. Refrain from these men, and let them alone, (for if
this Counselor this Work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it) lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. I
cannot but much wonder, with what conscience two Justices of Peace, or one
Chief Magistrate, can play the parts of Judge, Jury, and Witness, against these
poor men, and condemn them for Meetting Seditiously, because they meet simply
to exercise Religion according to their conscience. I appeal to you, whether
this Oppression does not call for the Judgments of God upon the whole Nation.

The Lord give them that are guilty in this kind, Repentance and Remission of
Sins; and deliver you from partaking with them, either in their Sin or
Punishment.

I am Your affectionate Christian Friend H. E.

THE END.

