^n Answer of the Committee of Seventeen, Representing the ^AST-INDIA Company
of the NEATHERLANDS, given into the States ^eneral of the United Provinces; In
Answer to Two Memorials, the one given by Mr. ^hudley, Envoy of His Majesty of
Great Britain, and the other given in by Mr. Char^yn, touching the Affairs of
BANTHAM.
To the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces.
High and Mighty Lords,
THE Committee of Seventeen, Representing the General Dutch East India Company,
in Obedience to a Letter from your Lordships, dated the 8th. of June, We have
met in the Hague, and haveseen, read, and Examined two Propositions, the one by
Mr. Cha^^ley, Extraordinary Envoy from His Majesty of Great-Brittain, which was
first given by him by Word of mouth, and then in Writing, on the 25th. of last
May: The (...) desivered to the Deputies of your Lordships, first by word of
mouth, and then in Writing, on the (...) of June last, by Mr. Chardyn, which
agreed with the aforesaid Proposition of Mr. Chudley, in which Complains, That
the Servants of this Company at Bavaria, have Outragiously and with force, ^ven
the English Factors and others of that Nation, from Bantam; to which there are
also other (...): And that they desire your Lordships to withdraw your Garrison
out of Bantum; As also, to (...) Reparation of what Damages the Subjects of the
aforesaid King have sustained in that Attack: (...) Propositions of Chardin;
Knight. contain a Relation of several Attacks and particular Crimes (...) by our
Nation there: Upon which, your Lordships, by your Letters on the aforesaid 2d.
(...) June, command Inspection into that Affair by this Committee, with due
Respects we acquaint your ^^rdships, That as we came to compare these
Complaints, with Letters and other Evidences, that (...) Company has received
out of the Indies, it appears by Essential and Notable Evidences, That the
^^mplaint of the English Company is Frivilous, and that instead of Complaints,
they ought to own ^^emselves obliged in the highest to our Company, for the
many Friendships, good Offices, and Assistance ^^at they have given and shown
in this Juncture of Affairs to them, as it is well known to the English Com^^^y
in the Indies, and they have not failed to acknowledge it: And if pretenses of
Damages be made, this ^ompany has also somewhat to say on their part; as also
no small Pretenses to make, and to lay all ^ain naked to view, and to show the
groundlessness of the aforesaid Complaints and Demands arising ^ence, it is
necessary therefore to be brief; Be it known, it is not the first time this
Company ha^ had ^uarrels, nay, open War with Bantam. The Sultan, (...) of this
present King, possessed with an ^mbitious Spirit, has not only at diverse times
injured others of his Neighbors, but also has used se^eral Outrageous
Violences, and made open War upon our Subjects of Bavaria at several times,
parti^^larly in the Years 1657, 58, 59, the which War was ended in 1659, by a
Treaty of Peace, etc. A^ongst which Articles was inserted, a Rule to be
observed by those two Nations, by the aforesaid ^eace, was in a short time
broke by the aforesaid Prince; first by Debauching, carrying away, and
de^^ining of our Slaves, to a great number: after which, they went directly
against Treaty, by detain^^g Free Inhabitants, nay Servants of the Company; and
further, fell in a Hostile manner on our ^illages, Burning them anda Plundering
them, and carried away Men and Cattle; they also ^ell upon them by Water, both
by Sea and on the Shore; they set upon our Sloops and Boats, and threw the
people overboard into the Sea, so Murdering them: They also fell upon the
^ompt^ir of the Company at Andrigry, upon the Sumatra, by Night, and did
likewise Murder ^ur Factors, among which, was the head Officer; they went so
far, that the Prince aforesaid, the more ^o stir up his Subjects to Murder and
Pillage, he set a Premium of 20 pieces of Eight for every Head of ^
Netherlander, and 10 pieces of Eight for the Head of each other Inhabitant of
Bavaria, and notwithstanding our continual Complaint, he deferred to Right us,
but at last insolently told us, If we protected our Neighbors, which we were
highly oblieg'd to do, he would declare War against us; and although our
General and Counsel thought and wrote in Letters to us expressed, that they
thought they ought to pay those of Bantam in the same Coin, which demonstrating
the impossibility of bearing any longer the Injuries, Damages, and Offenses,
and keep Peace, where Ungodly Neighbors sought a War, yea, sufficiently did
exercise it; so that they were forced to put themselves to as great a Charge to
put themselves into a posture of Defense, but they were still dehorted from it,
not so much out of fear that they could not succed in it against them, as so
long as there was any hope of an Accommodation, the Company could not get any
advantage, although they got the better: As also, that the European Nations,
especially the English, might not be damaged and disturbed; which Order was
punctually observed by our General and Counsel there; nay, after the War in the
Territories of Mattaram, in which the Company had brought the Sousouhounany
Triumphantly off against his Rebels, which were assisted by the Bantamers, and
by that means were in a good state to Revenge themselves as they would desire.
The Case standing thus, and the old King searing he should be requited for his
Outrages, it fell unexpectedly out, that on the of May, 80. two Ambassadors
came from Bantam to Bavaria with a Train of 300 Persons and Credentials, from
the young King, in which only his own Name was inserted; whereupon some
Reflections being made, the Ambassadors declared, That 7 days before the old
Sultan Resigned up his whole Empire to his Eldest Son, the aforesaid young
King, and that according to Custom in those Countries (at the change of
Governors) they were come to renew their old Alliance and to Treat of Peace;
and although the Resident of the Company at Bantam, came with them to Confirm
it; yet all Scruples arising from such an unexpected Providence, not being
taken away, one (...) the aforesaid Ambassadors returned to Bantam, from whence
he brought more Satisfactory Evidences* Upon which, the Treaty began, although
all old Contracts had been violated and broken, and all manner of Hostillities
both by Water and Land, were acted against us, for which we demanded
Satisfact^on in very moderate Terms, that it might appear we sought nothing but
a continuation of the (...) Friendship: Upon which demands, the Ambassadors
owned they were Convinced of the Injury do^us; but declared, they had no Orders
to Treat about them, as being things done in the Reign of the Old King, saying,
They were come only to Renew the Old League, and if there were any other
Demands the must Address themselves to the King their Master at Bantam: Our
Envoys were thereupon sent to Ba^tam to demand Satisfaction as aforesaid, but
Excuses were made to decline the same, and 'twas proposed notwithstanding to
continue a good undertaking and Neighborhood; in Conformity to which the
aforesaid King forbid his Subjects (by Drum beat) not to do any Injury to our
Subjects (upon great Penalty) either by Water or by Land; further promising us,
to restore all our ^ugitives, either Free men or Slaves: Further showing us,
That it would be acceptable to him if we Complemented the former King his
Father, which they did, and he recommended it to them to hold a good Alliance
an^ Neighborhood with his Son: And it appears clearly, that the young King has
since, only in (...) own Name, exercised Regal Authority, by his sending
Ambassadors to England in 1681. and als^ by the old Kings withdrawing from
Bantam the Regal City; And further, by the Addresses made b^ other Nations to
the young King, as alone in Regal Authority: And it is well known, the Father
wa^ only a private prince, and had reserved no part of the Sovereign Regallity
of Bantam: (...) to what was Negotiated with the BANTAM Ambassadors in ENGLAND,
we ca^ say nothing positively, but the World knows they were at their
Departure, furnished with a great quantity of Canon, and other Warlike
Ammunitions, which the English East India Company presented; and that it is an
old and substantial Complaint of our people at Bavaria, That the Old King o^
Bantam, has been several times furnished in the like manner from England, and
he has been more an^ more animated thereby against us. After the settleing of
the aforesaid Alliance with Bantam, ther^ happened in that Kingdom, great
Factions and Divisions, as also great Jealousies arose between the Young and
Old King; the Son complaining of the Actions of the Father, and the Father of
the Sons insomuch that it seems the Father Repented his resigning up of the
Kingdom to his Son. Now being in a private Capacity, began to Cabal against the
Son, and to make a Party, insomuch that they strengthened themselves against
each other; The Son at Bantam makes a Fortification, and the Father builds
(...) Stone Work at his Residence at Turtiassa, as also one on the River
Tanara; which Fire, after a while lying smothering, at last broke out into a
light flame, and came to an open War, so that the Father Marches against the
Son with the Forces he had gathered: and in the first place he took in Bantam
and wasted and burnt it, and proceeded to (...) himself Master of the whole
Shore, and the Forts upon it, as also of all the Passes, designing to force his
Son in the aforesaid Fortress, and set a younger Son on the Throne.

The present King being brought to the outmost Extremity, by reason there was
no access to him, but by those wel^ skilled in the ways, and that by stealth,
he applied himself to those of Bavaria, with earnest entreaty for assistance
from the Companies, and to be taken into their Protection; declaring, without
it he was not able to defend the Neatherland Lodge against his Rebels; which
Application being made on the 10th. of February, 1682. was not Precipitately
granted by the General, and Council; but after long Deliberations it was
resolved, to send a Friendly Mediation both to Father and Son; and two Letters
were sent to Father and Son, by Major Stephen Martin, on the 16th. of March, to
Bantam, but the Father would not receive them till the 17th. and then sent for
them by English, French, and Danes, but vouchsafed no Answer holding. The
aforesaid King in the mean time in the aforesaid Castle closer and c^oser
besieged, so that Major Stephen Martin was obliged by many Letters from the
Young King, to endeavor to Land, as being the only means to free him, but was
opposed and hindered that day by the Rebels, whose Canons were most Traversed by
English Canonneirs, and did much Damage both to the Ships and Men, of the Dutch
Company; upon which the aforesaid Stephen Martin being reinforced with more Men
and Ships, as also Orders to attempt again to Land, and relieve the King, that
was in the outmost Extremity; and at last, on the 7th. of April, they b^at off
the Rebels for all the great resistance they made, and releived the King, and
took in the Passes, with no small loss upon the of Bavaria; the Enemy showed
themselves in Acts of Hostiltiy, but they had such Reception, as made them
March off in disorder, with the loss of which Actions under the Command of the
aforesaid King, lasted till November last, according ^o our last Advice, which
has been very chargeable to our Company. But at last the Old King and his
Adherents were driven into Turtiassa, and the Hills Adjacent. Few days after
the relief of the Young King, the English Company residing at Bantha^, sent
Letters by some of their Company, Addressed to the General, and Council at
Bavaria; and after Congratulation of our success, destred them to lend them a
Ship of 500 Tun, to fetch off, and Transport their E^^ects from Bantam, for
which they offered to pay the Freight. They also desired Liberty to hire a
House in Batavia, to put their Goods in; and further, That they would give
Orders the Servants of the Company, to Comport themselves according to the
usual Love and Friendship of the Dutch, toward them. Upon which the Generals
and Council, to show their readiness and kindness, immediately lent them the
Europe, a Ship of 1200 Tuns, and also allowed their Retreat to Batavia;
thereupon they fearing to stay in Bantam any longer, with all secrecy Shiped
themselves on Board the Return, without taking leave of the King, and retired
to Bavaria, on the 18th. of April, leaving the gross of their Effects in
Bantam; to-fetch which, there were three other Ships sent, viz. The new
Midlburg, the Went, and the great Fly-Boat, Delphs-Haven; all which, with some
of the English Company that were necessary to Ship the Goods, and enter them,
returned to Bavaria, full Laden with Peper, etc. As also the Household stuff of
the aforesaid Company, to Bavaria; all which they could not have done, unless
the Dutch Company had not interceeded with the King, and helped them: for that
King and People were so set against them, that they could not get a Boat, nor a
Porter to help Ship their Goods, but all was ^lone by help of the Dutch; the
King being greatly Incensed at the Conduct of the English, as to himself, and
was greatly wondered that the Dutch Companies should speak in their favor, or
be helpful to them, by reason 'twas apparent, they by their Ar^ in Traverseing
Guns, did most hurt to our Ships, as well as the Bostil. The Dutch Company also
sustained great loss for want of four Ships so long; and although the English
were obliged to give us our Ships sooner, especially when they had other Ships
of their own from several Quarters, besides two English Ships belonging to
particular persons, that were earnestly desired by the Dutch Company, to Ship
the aforesaid Goods: But the English employed their Ships in other Expeditions,
and let our Ships lie Laden with their Effects and Lumber, before Bavaria.

The matter of fact being laid down in the aforesaid Relation, we refer it to
the Wisdom of your High and Mighty Lordships, to consider, whether or no there
be any Foundation for such severe Complaints, and Demands of satisfaction for
Damages and injuries sustained; as also to withdraw our Troops from thence.

Amsterdam, Printed by Paul Matthowson, by Order of the Governors of the Dutch
East India Company, and Reprinted by Langely Curtis, at the Sign of Sir
Edmund-bury Gadfrey's Head, near Fleet-Bridge:


