AN ACT FOR THE SETTLING OF THE POSTAGE OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th Day of September, Anno Domini
1656.

seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector. 1657.

AN ACT FOR THE SETTLING OF THE POSTAGE OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
WHereas it has been found by experience, That the Erecting and Settling of one
General Post Office, for the speedy Conveying, Carrying, and Re-carrying of
Letters by Post, to, and from all Places within England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and into several parts beyond the Seas, has been, and is the best means, not
only to maintain a certain and constant Intercourse of Trade and Commerce
betwixt all the said Places, to the great benefit of the People of these
Nations, but also to Convey the Public Dispatches, and to discover and
prevent many dangerous and wicked Designs, which have been, and are daily
contrived against the Peace and welfare of this Commonwealth, the Intelligence
whereof cannot well be Communicated, but by Letter of Escript.

Be it Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament, And it is
Enacted and Ordained by Authority thereof, That from henceforth there be one
General Office, to be called, and known by the name of the Post Office of
England: And one Officer from time to time to be nominated and appointed by His
Highness the Lord Protector, and His Successors, and to be constituted by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, under the Name and Style of
Postmaster General of England, and Comptroller of the Post Office; which said
Officer, and his Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently Authorized, and no
other, shall have the Receiving, Taking up, Ordering, Sending forward, and
Delivering of all Letters and Pacquets, which shall from time to time come and
go to and from all Parts and Places of England, Scotland and Ireland, where he
shall settle Posts, and from all the said Parts and Places of England, Scotland
and Ireland, unto any the Parts and Places beyond the Seas, (excepting such
Letters as shall be sent by common known Carriers, and by them Conveyed along
with their Carts, Wagons, and Pack-horses, and Letters of Advice of Merchants,
which shall be sent by Masters of any Ship, Barque, or other Vessel of
Merchandise, or any of their Company or Passengers therein, immediately from
any Post-town of England, Scotland and Ireland, by them to be Conveyed along
with such Ship, Barque, or other Vessel to any other Port-town within any of
the same, or into the Parts beyond the Seas, or from the Parts beyond the Seas
to any Port-town of England, Scotland and Ireland, or members thereof, and no
further.

And excepting a Letter or more sent by a Messenger on purpose for his or their
own Affairs, who is, or are the Sender or Senders thereof, or by any Friend to
any Place or Places within the said Nations of England, Scotland or Ireland.
And also that the said Post-master-General of England, and Comptroller of the
Post Office, and his said Deputies only, and no other shall have the Horsing
of all through-Posts, and persons Riding in Post by Commission or without, to
and from all Places, upon any of the Post-Roads within England, Scotland and
Ireland.

And be it further Ordained by Authority aforesaid, That the said Officer, by
himself, or his Deputy or Deputies, by him thereunto sufficiently Authorized,
shall, or may Demand, Have, Receive, and take for the Portage and Conveyance of
all or any Letters, which he shall so Convey, Carry, and Recarry as aforesaid,
or for the Horsing of any Thorow-Post, or person Riding in Post as aforesaid,
the several Rates of Portage hereafter mentioned, and no other, viz. For every
Letter to or from any Place within Fourscore Miles distance front London, if a
single Letter, two Pence, and if a double Letter, four Pence, and so
proportionably for every Packet of Letters, and for every Packet of a greater
Bulk, Eight pence the Ounce; And for every Letter at a farther distance then
fourscore Miles, if a single Letter, Three pence, and if a double Letter, Six
pence, and so proportionably; And for every Packet of a greater Bulk, One
shilling the Ounce: And for every Letter to or from Scotland, if a single
Letter, Four pence, if a double Letter, Eight pence, and so proportionably; and
if a Packet of a greater Bulk, One shilling six pence the Ounce: And to or
from Ireland, for every single Letter, Six pence, for every double Letter, One
shilling, and so proportionably, and for every Packet of greater Bulk, Two
shillings the Ounce: And for such Letters or Pacquets as shall be Conveyed or
Carried within Ireland, the Rates thereof to be as follows, viz. For every
Letter to or front any Place within forty Miles distance from Dublin, if a
single Letter, Two pence, if a double Letter, Four pence, and so
proportionably, and if a Packet of greater Bulk, Eight pence the Ounce: And
for every Letter at a farther distance then forty Miles, if a single Letter,
Four pence, if a double Letter, Eight pence, and so proportionably, and if a
Packet of greater Bulk, One shilling the Ounce. For every Letter that shall be
directed to Legorne, Genoa, Florence, Lions, Marseilles, Smyrna, Aleppo, and
Constantinople, One shilling the single Letter, Two shillings the double
Letter, and Three shillings Nine pence the Ounce weight: For every Letter to
Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nantes, Byonne, Cadize and Madrid, Nine pence the single
Letter, One shilling six pence the double, and Two shillings the Ounce weight:
For every Letter to Saint Mallo, Morlaix, and Newhaven, Six pence the single
Letter, One shilling the double, and One shilling six pence the Ounce weight:
For every Letter to Hambrough, Frankfort, and Colloyne, Eight pence the single
Letter, One shilling four pence the double, and Two shillings the Ounce weight:
And for every Letter to Dantzicke, Lipswich, Lubecke, Stockholme, Copenhaven,
Elsnore, and Queenesbrough, Twelve pence the single Letter, Two shillings the
double, and Four shillings the Ounce weight: And of every through-Post, or
Persons Riding in Post as aforesaid, Two pence half penny the Mile for each
Horse, besides the Guide Groat for every Stage.

And whereas upon the Arrival of Ships from parts beyond the Seas, to the
Out-ports here, Letters directed to several Merchants in London, have been
heretofore frequently delivered by the bringers thereof to loose and uncertain
hands, to be Conveyed forwards, whereby great Prejudice has accrued to their
Affairs, as well by the miscarrying of many of the said Letters, as often times
by the opening of the same, to the discovery of the Correspondence and secrets
of the said Merchants.

Be it further Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all Letters
and Pacquets, that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company,
or any Passengers therein, shall be brought to any Port-town of England, or
Members thereof, and there delivered to be sent forwards to the City of London,
or any other place in any of the Post-Roads from thence toward the said City,
(other then such Letters as are before excepted, and may be sent by common
known Carriers as aforesaid, or by a friend as aforesaid) shall by such Master,
Passenger, or other person be delivered to the Deputy, or Deputies only of the
said Officer above Ordained, by him appointed for the said Port-towns, and to
none other, by him to be sent forward according to the Direction hereof.

And that no person or persons whatsoever, other then such Officer as shall be
so nominated and appointed by His Highness the Lord Prorector or His
Successors, and constituted by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England
as aforesaid, and his Deputies shall presume to set up, or employ any
Foot-Posts, Hors-Posts, or Pacquet-Boates for the common Conveying, Carrying,
and Recarrying of any Letters or Pacquets by Land within England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or from, or to any the Ports of the same by Sea, or for the Horsing of
any Thorow-Post, or persons Riding in Post as aforesaid, upon pain of
forfeiting the sum of One thousand pounds for every Month that he or they
shall so employ and continue the same, or any of them, the said Forfeiture to
be sued for, and recovered by Action of Debt, Plaint, or Information in any of
His Highnesses Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Privilege, Protection, or
wager of Law to be admitted, and the said Forfeiture so recovered, to be the
one Moity thereof to His Highness the Lord Protector and His Successors, and
the other Moity to such person or persons who shall or will inform and sue for
the same.

And for the better Management of the said Office, and that the people of these
Nations may have their intercourse of Commerce and Trade the better maintained,
and their Letters and Advisoes Conveyed, Carried, and Recarried with the
greatest Speed, Security, and Convenience that may be,

Be it further Enacted and Ordained by Authority aforesaid, That the said
Postmaster General of England, and Comptroller of the Post Office so
Nominated, Appointed, and Constituted as aforesaid, and his Deputies shall from
time to time observe and follow such further Order, Rules, Directions, and
Instructions, for and concerning the Settlement of convenient Posts and Stages
upon the several Roades in England, Scotland and Ireland, and the providing and
keeping of a sufficient number of Horses, and Pacquet-Boats, as well for the
Carrying and Conveying of the said Letters and Pacquets, as for the Horsing of
all thorow-Posts, and persons Riding in Post, by Warrant or otherwise, as
aforesaid, as His said Highness the Lord Protector; and His Successors shall
from time to time in that behalf Make and Ordain.

And that His said Highness the Lord Protector and His Successors, may grant
the said Office, together with the several Rates of Portage above mentioned,
and all Profits, Privileges, Fees, Perquisites, and Emoluments thereunto
belonging, or to belong, either for life, or for any term of years, not
exceeding Eleven years, to such person or persons, and under such Covenants,
Conditions, and yearly Rent to his said Highness and his Successors Reserved,
as his said Highness and his Successors, with Advice of the Council, shall from
time to time think fit, for the best Advantage and benefit of the Commonwealth.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
shall have Power to take, use, or seize any Horses for the Service mentioned in
this Act, without the consent of the Owners, any usage or pretense, or any
thing in this Act contained to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.


