AN ACT Touching MARRIAGES And the Registring thereof; And also touching Births
and Burials.

Wednesday the 24th of August, 1653.

seal of the Commonwealth

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.

seal of the Commonwealth
AN ACT Touching MARRIAGES And the Registring thereof; And also touching Births
and Burials.
BE it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That whosoever
shall agree to be married within the Commonwealth of England, after the Nine
and twentieth day of September, in the year One thousand six hundred fifty
three, shall (one and twenty days at least before such intended Marriage)
deliver in writing, or cause to be so delivered unto the Register (hereafter
appointed by this Act) for the respective Parish where each party to be married
lives, the Names, Sirnames, Additions, and place of abode of the parties so to
be married, and of their Parents, Guardians or Overseers; All which the said
Register shall publish or cause to be published, three several Lords days then
next following, at the close of the Morning Exercise, in the Public Meeting
place commonly called The Church or Chapel; or (if the parties so to be
married shall desire it) in the Marketplace next to the said Church or
Chapel, on three Market days in three several weeks next following, between
the hours of eleven and two; which being so performed, the Register shall (upon
request of the parties concerned) make a true Certificate of the due
performance thereof, without which Certificate, the persons herein after
Authorized shall not proceed in such Marriage: And if any Exception shall be
made against the said intended Marriage, the Register shall also insert the
same, with the name of the person making such Exception, and their place of
abode, in the said Certificate of Publication.

And it is further Enacted, That all such persons so intending to be married,
shall come before some Justice of Peace within and of the same County, City or
Town Corporate where Publication shall be made as aforesaid; and shall bring a
Certificate of the said Publication, and shall make sufficient proof of the
consent of their Parents or Guardians, if either of the said parties shall be
under the Age of One and twenty years: And the said Justice shall examine by
Witnesses upon Oath, or otherways (as he shall see cause) concerning the Truth
of the Certificate, and due performance of all the premises; and also of any
Exception made or arising: And (if there appear no reasonable cause to the
contrary) the Marriage shall proceed in this manner:

The Man to be married, taking the Woman to be married by the hand, shall
plainly and distinctly pronounce these words: I A. B. do here in the presence
of God the Searcher of all Hearts, take thee C. D. for my wedded Wife; and do
also in the presence of God, and before these witnesses, promise to be unto
thee a loving and faithful Husband.

And then the Woman, taking the Man by the hand, shall plainly and distinctly
pronounce these words: I C. D. do here in the presence of God the Searcher of
all Hearts, take thee A. B. for my wedded Husband; and do also in the presence
of God, and before these witnesses, promise to be unto thee a loving, faithful
and obedient Wife.

And it is further Enacted, That the Man and Woman having made sufficient proof
of the Consent of their Parents or Guardians as aforesaid, and expressed their
consent unto Marriage, in the manner and by the words aforesaid, before such
Justice of Peace in the presence of two or more credible witnesses; The said
Justice of Peace may and shall declare the said Man and Woman to be from
thenceforth Husband and Wife; and from and after such Consent so expressed, and
such Declaration made, the same (as to the form of Marriage) shall be good and
effectual in Law; And no other Marriage whatsoever within the Commonwealth of
England, after the Twenty ninth day of September, in the year One thousand six
hundred fifty three, shall be held or accounted a Marriage according to the
Laws of England: But the Justice of Peace (before whom a Marriage is
solemnized) in case of dumb persons, may dispense with pronouncing the words
aforesaid; and with joining hands in case of persons that have not hands.

And that a true and just Account may be always kept, as well of Publications,
as of all such Marriages, and also of the Births of Children, and Deaths of all
sorts of persons within this Commonwealth; Be it further Enacted, That a Book
of good Vellum or Parchment shall be provided by every Parish, for the
Registring of all such Marriages, and of all Births of Children, and Burials of
all sorts of people within every parish; for the safe keeping of which Book,
the Inhabitants and Householders of every parish chargeable to the relief of the
Poor, or the greater part of them present, shall on or before the Two and
twentieth day of September, in the year One thousand six hundred fifty three,
make choice of some able and honest person (such as shall be sworn and approved
by one Justice of the Peace in that parish, Division or County, and so
signified under his hand in the said Register-Book) to have the keeping of the
said Book, who shall therein fairly enter in writing all such Publications,
Marriages, Births of Children, and Burials of all sorts of persons, and the
Names of every of them, and the Days of the month and year of Publications,
Marriages, Births and Burials, and the Parents, Guardians or Overseers names:
And the Register in such parish shall attend the said Justice of Peace to
subscribe the Entry of every such Marriage: And the person so elected, approved
and sworn, shall be called The Parish-Register, and shall continue three years
in the said place of Register and longer, until some other be chosen, unless
such Justice of the Peace, or the said Parish with consent of such Justice,
shall think fit to remove him sooner: And for such Publications and Certificate
thereof, Twelve pence and no more may be taken; and for the Entry of every
Marriage, Twelve pence and no more; and for every Birth of Child, Four pence
and no more; and for every Death, Four pence and no more: And for Publications,
Marriages, Births or Burials of poor people who live upon Alms, no^^ing shall
be taken. And the said Justice of Peace (if it be desired) shall give unto the
parties so married, a Certificate in Parchment under his hand and seal, of such
Marriage, and of the day of the Solemnization thereof, and of two or more of
the witnesses then present; and the Justices Clerk for this Certificate may
receive Twelve pence and no more: And if such Certificate shall be produced to
the Clerk of the Peace for that County, and request made to him to make an
Entry thereof, Then the said Clerk of the Peace is hereby required to enter the
same in a Book of Parchment to be provided for that purpose, and kept amongst
the Records of the said Sessions, and to restore the said Certificate; for
which Entry, the Clerk of the Peace may receive Four pence and no more.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person by violence or fraud shall steal
and take away, or cause to be stolen or taken away, any person whatsoeve, under
the age of One and twenty years, with intent to marry the said person in this
Commonwealth, or in any other place; such person and persons so stealing and
taking away, or causing to be stolen and taken away, shall forfeit his and
their whole Estate real and personal, one half thereof to the Commonwealth, and
the other half to the use of the party so taken away, to be recovered by any
Suit on behalf of the Commonwealth; or by any Action in a Court of Record,
brought by their Parent, Guardian or Overseer, and shall farther suffer strict
and close Imprisonment, and be kept to hard labor in some House of Correction
or other public Working house during life; and every person that shall be
convicted upon Indictment, Presentment, or by any due course of Law, for aiding
or abetting any such violence or fraud, shall be Imprisoned, and kept at hard
labor (as aforesaid) during the space of seven whole years next after such
conviction; and any pretended Marriage, that at any time hereafter shall be
obtained by any such violence or fraud, is hereby declared null and void.

And it is further Enacted, That where any Guardian or Overseer shall betray any
Trust touching any child, by seducing, selling or otherways wilfully putting
such Child into the hands or power of any person who shall marry such Child,
without his or her free consent, such Guardian or Overseer shall forf^iet
double the portion which of right did belong to such Child, one moiety thereof
to go to the Commonwealth, and the other to the Child so married as aforesaid,
to be recovered by any Action, Bill, Plaint or Suit, in any Court of Record, by
the party wronged, or any other person on his or her behalf.

And it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That from and after the Nine and
twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred fifty and three, the Age
for a Man to consent unto Marriage shall be Sixteen years, and the age of a
Woman Fourteen years, and not before; and any Contract or Marriage had or made
before the respective Ages aforesaid, shall be void and of none effect.

And it is further Enacted, That the hearing and determining of all Matters and
Controversies touching Contracts and Marriages, and the lawfulness and
unlawfulness thereof; and all exceptions against Contracts and Marriages, and
the distribution of Forfeitures within this Act, shall be in the power, and
referred to the determination of the Justices of Peace in each County, City or
Town Corporate, at the General Quarter Sessions; or of such other persons to
hear and determine the same, as the Parliament shall hereafter appoint.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every Offense and Offenses at any time
or times hereafter committed or done upon or beyond the Sea, contrary to the
Tenor and true intent and meaning of this Act, shall and may be tried in any
City, Town Corporate, or County where the person or persons so offending shall
be apprehended or attached for the Offense or Offenses aforesaid.

And it is also Enacted, That where there are small Parishes, or places not
within any parish, or no usual Morning-Exercise on the Lords day in the
aforesaid Meeting Place, the Justices of Peace at their General-Sessions, or
any three or more of them, may unite two or more such parishes, or such places
to other parishes (at their Discretions) which shall be accounted one Parish,
as to the matters only within this Act; And one Register to serve for such
parishes and places so united.

And be it Enacted. That all and every the persons in this Act mentioned, may
and shall, in their several places by virtue hereof, put in execution all and
every the Powers and Authorities respectively to them limited by this Act, Any
Law, Statute, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding. And all
Register-Books for Marriages, Births and Burials already past, shall be
delivered ^n to the Hands of the respective Registers appointed by this Act, to
be kept as Records.

And it is lastly Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority
thereof, That this present Act shall be in force in Ireland, from and after the
First day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred fifty and three.

Wednesday the 24th of August, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.


