Die Veneris, 28 Maii, 1647.
BE it Ordained, and it is Ordained by the Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament, That the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Army, appointed by
Ordinance of the eight and twentieth of March, 1645, shall have Power and
Authority, and are hereby authorized and enabled, by such ways and means as
they or any five of them shall think fit, To cause the Accounts of all the
Officers and Soldiers of the Army, now or late under the Command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, as well due to them upon public Faith, as for their present pay, to
be audited and cast up during their service in the said Army: and to allow and
determine of such accounts, and to give out Debenters accordingly unto the said
Officers and Soldiers. And it is further ordained, That for such Debenters as
shall be thereupon given out and signed by the said Committee, or any five of
them, the State shall be liable to the payment thereof, and shall be paid and
satisfied respectively by Warrant from the said Committee or any five of them
out of such Moneys as the Parliament has ordained by Ordinance to be paid out
of the Grand Excise in course, and out of Delinquents Estates, for the payment
of the said Officers and Soldiers of the said army, and out of the remainder
of the moneys formerly assigned upon Goldsmiths Hall for the army. And it is
further ordained, That the said Committee shall have power to call to their
assistance any person or persons whatsoever as they shall think fit, for their
information touching the said accounts, and of free quarter, or money for free
quarter, and moneys otherwise levied, and to make up the accounts according to
the late instructions for the accounts of the Soldiery of the Kingdom, that
defalcation may be made upon the said account. And it is lastly ordained, that
the Treasurers at Wars and Commissioners appointed by Parliament to reside in
the army shall be aiding and assisting to the said Committee in this Service.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the House of Commons. 8 Junii 1647.


