[illegible figure at head of title] An Act touching the Moneys and Coyns of
England.
Whereas the ordering of Moneys and Coyns, and setting the same at such
valuations and prizes as shall be thought convenient and necessary, is
appropriate and of right belonging to the Sovereign and Supreme Authority of
this Commonwealth; And the Parliament having Resolved to change and alter the
former Stamps, Arms, Pictures, with the Motto's, Words, Styles and
Inscriptions in and about the same, and to cause new Coyns of Gold and Silver
to be made of several Stamps, Weights and Values, but of one uniform Standard
and Allay, to be current within this State and Commonwealth of England; (that
is to say) One piece of Gold of the value of Twenty shillings Sterlin, to be
called, The Twenty shillings piece, stamped on the one side with the Cross, and
a Palm and Laurel, with these words, The Commonwealth of England; and on the
other side with the Cross and Harp, with these words, God with us: One other
piece of Gold money of Ten shillings, to be called, The Ten shillings piece;
and one other piece of Gold money of Five shillings, to be called, The Five
shillings piece, with the same Words, Inscriptions, Pictures and Arms on each
side, as the former: And for Silver moneys, pieces of Five shillings, and
pieces of Two shillings and six pence, and pieces of Twelve pence, and pieces
of Six pence, having the same Words, Inscriptions, Pictures and Arms on each
side as the former; Also pieces of Two pence, and One penny, having the same
pictures and Arms as the former, without any Words or Inscriptions; and the
Half penny having on the one side a Cross, and on the other side a Harp: All
which several Coyns of Gold and Silver, The Parliament does hereby Enact,
Declare, publish and authorize to be amongst others heretofore used, the Moneys
current for this State and Commonwealth of England, to be used and received by
all the people of this Nation, in all Receipts and payments, and in all manner
of Traffiquing, Bargaining and Dealing between man and man, at the several
rates and values contained in the Schedule or Table hereunto annexed,
expressing their true Values and Weights, according to the Account of the Mint
within the Tower of London.

Pieces of Gold. Penny weights Grains Mites Droits Perits Blanks s. 05 20 10 00
00 00 s. 02 22 05 00 00 00 s. 01 11 02 12 00 00 Pieces of Silver. s. 19 08 10
08 00 00 s.d. 09 16 05 04 00 00 d. 03 20 18 01 10 00 d. 01 22 09 00 15 d. 00 15
09 16 05 d. 00 07 14 20 02 12 ob. 00 03 17 10 01 06

Memorandum,
Twelve Ounces makes a pound Weight Troy; Twenty penny weight makes an Ounce;
Twenty four Grains makes a penny weight; Twenty Mites makes a Grain; Twenty four
Droits makes a Mite; Twenty Perits makes a Droit; Twenty four Blanks makes a
Perit.


Die Martis, 17 Julii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1649.


