A VINDICATION, OR Further confirmation of some other Scriptures, produced to
prove the Divinity of Jesus Christ, distorted and miserably wrested and abused
by Mr. John Knowles:

Together with a probation or demonstration of the destructiveness and
damnableness of the contrary Doctrine maintained by the aforesaid Mr Knowles.

Also, the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, and of reconciliation on Gods part
to the creature, cleared up from Scripture, which of late has been much
impugned.

And a Discourse concerning the springing and spreading of error, and of the
means of cure, and of the preservatives against it.

By Samuel Eaton Teacher of the Church of Jesus Christ, commonly styled the
Church at Duckenfield.

London, printed for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at
their Shop in Popes. head-Alley, 1651.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Have in a former Treatise Vindicated certain Scriptures, which I produced
against Mr. Knowles his absurd and destructive opinion against the Divinity of
Christ, from such corrupt glosses which he did put upon them, in a Printed
paper of his, Entitled, A friendly debate on a weighty subject, etc. And in my
clearing of Ioh. 8. 58. (which he had extremely darkened and falsified, by the
interpretation which he put upon it) I encountered with the many arguments and
abusive senses of Scripture which he had made use of, and in which he had
placed the whole strength he had, for the upholding of that his heterodox and
dangerous doctrine, which he vented in Chester, with too great success, to the
disturbing of the faith of many: And whether I have not razed his whole
building to the very ground, (which in three positions he set up and fortified)
and whether I have not dug up the very foundation of it, and taken away
every supporter of it; I leave it to the judicious, unprejudiced, and
dis-ingaged Readers to determine betwixt us.

Truth (after a little time of patient expectance) will prevail against, and
triumph over error, because it has the God of truth to engage for it, who can
strengthen any weak contemptible instrument (whom he pleases to employ) to
become mighty in the defense of it.

My hope is, that enough has already been represented to satisfy all
ingenuous dubious persons concerning the truth of Christ's Godhead, and
therefore it is not absolutely needful to undertake the setting forth of
another Treatise: But lest there should be any occasion of glorying administered
to him, or others, Because I replied only to some part of his writing or
Printed paper, and not to the whole; and lest he should comfort himself with
conceits of the unanswerableness of that which is behind of it, and is
unreplyed to: and lest the truth should suffer in such Scriptures which remain
unexamined by me, by his wresting of them from their genuine sense, and my not
freeing of them from such abuse; I have undertaken to carry on my reply unto
the remainder of his Book, that nothing that is material therein may be
objected against me, as pretermitted by me.

And because I did well understand that some would lie at advantages, and would
give it out that Mr. Knowles his book was never answered; if any part be
unanswered, and would object against me, that I was not able to defend all the
Scriptures and arguments produced by my self, and impugned by him, but did
shamefully desert them, and not rescue them from the force of his battery which
he made against them: And because in the vindicating of my arguments, I foresaw
that I should be necessitated to discuss and discover the weightiness of the
point in controversy, and that it is not so light and trivial as some would
make it, but that it is of highest concernment, and that all oppugners of the
Godhead of Christ do oppugn men's salvation, and that such an opinion that
gainsayeth Christ's Diety, is no less then damnable; therefore I engaged in my
former Treatise to complete my reply, and therein to attempt the giving
satisfaction in that point (which only to mention was greatly offensive to many
precious Christians) viz. that Faith in Christ considered as a mere creature,
and nothing more, is a false Faith, and cannot save; it therefore now concerned
me (in point of Truth) to finish the work which I began; if God shall be
pleased to shine upon my Endeavors, so far as to cast in any light to dark
souls thereby, that they may be able (not only to discern the falsehood of such
a Doctrine, but) to see into the horridness thereof, I have my reward; however
I lie down at Gods foot, waiting upon him, to accomplish his own glory in what
way he pleases, assuring my self that his wisdom and goodness is such, that he
will both find out time, and means to undeceive poor souls that belong to him,
and will deliver them out of the snare of Satan, who captivates them for a
little space (while his pleasure is) for their humbling; and leaving this work
in Gods hand, and thy self also,

I remain thine to serve thee in the Lord, Sa. Eaton.

A Vindication, or further confirmation of some other Scriptures, produced to
prove the Divinity of Jesus Christ, distorted and miserably wrested and abused
by Mr John Knowles. etc.
THe next Scripture that I produced for the confirmation of the Diety of Jesus
Christ, (after Joh. 8. 58.) was Rev. 1. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come,
the Almighty.

But he encounters with this Text, and would evade the force of it, in these
words: How can you demonstrate (says he) that these are the words of Christ,
and do relate to him?

Repl. 1. I do demonstrate it from that agreement which these words in the 8.
verse have with the words of the 11. and of the 17. verses, which words of both
places do refer to Christ, by his own confession, and without the contradiction
of any, as the 13. and 17. verses do evidence to the Reader, in which it
appears to be Christ that assumed the Titles of Alpha and Omega to himself.

2. I do collect it, because Christ is one of the speakers which we usually
meet with in this Prophecy, but the Father is rarely or never found to be a
speaker through this whole Book.

3. Because the things that are in this Book represented, are given by the
Father unto Christ, but are showed and signified by Christ unto his servants;
now this is one thing that Christ showed, which respected himself what he was,
I am (says he) Alpha and Omega.

4. Because there are no more speakers in this Chapter, but Christ and John,
who can be made evidently to appear; therefore all that is spoken in it, must
be referred to one of the two; but the 8. verse cannot be referred to John,
therefore to Christ.

5. Because it concludes the prooeme, and gives a period to the Preface, (as
Pareus shows upon the place,) John had represented him coming in the clouds,
in the 7. verse, and then in the words of the 8. verse, sets him before men,
(for the consolation of the righteous, and terror of the wicked) as present,
calling to them, I am Alpha and Omega, etc. who will make doubt of my coming?
who can intercept it? I am Alpha and Omega, etc. But he imagines other
Arguments will be made use of, to prove this place to refer to Christ, and
disputes against them, his words are these:

You will peradventure say, that the thing is evident, in that he is called
Lord, or you will bring the Testimony of learned Authors, who have interpreted
the words as spoken by Christ: And he confutes both these reasons, and says,
God, or the Father, distinct from Christ, is called Lord, Act. 3. 19. 20. etc.
And Beza (says he) conceived that these words are spoken of God, absolutely
taken. And Pareus confesses certain Orthodox Interpreters do attribute the
words to God absolutely considered.

Repl. The Title Lord, because it is rarely attributed to the Father in the New
Testament, and when it is attributed to him, it is done with such clearness,
that it is easily discerned, and because it is first commonly attributed to
Christ, therefore it may be a ground of a probable Argument, that Christ is
meant by it; but a necessary Argument cannot be deducted from it; therefore I
wave it; and it had been wisdom if he had done so also, till he had discerned
that I had made use of it as an Argument. As for learned Interpreters, though I
honor them much, yet it has not been my custom to bottom the sense that I put
upon Scriptures upon them; but to prove it from the Scripture, either the Text
it self or context, or some other parallel place; therefore he might have
spared his labor in citing Authors, unless I had provoked him thereto.

But if he will produce Authors, why will he offer wrong to the Authors whom he
produces? and make them speak that which they speak not? that has been the
way to uphold a rotten tenent, and he treads in that way. I cannot find the
words he cites in Beza, and he mentions not the place; and if he can show them
in Beza, I can show that Beza contradicts himself. If Beza have so expressed
himself, probably he would do it when he came to give the sense of the place,
but there his words are these: Christus hic loquitur ut aeternus Deus, acsi
diceret, ego is sum ante quem nihil est, immo per quem factum est quicquid
factum est, quicque ut omnia intereant, superstes illis omnibus maneam, etc.
That is, Christ here speaks as the eternal God, as if he should say, I am he
before whom there is nothing, yea and by whom every thing is made that is made,
and am one who do abide, and am surviving when all other things perish. As for
Pareus, I confess he cites his words aright, and yet abuses him egregiously;
for though he grants that some Orthodox Writers do apply these words to God,
absolutely considered, yet he does not grant that they are Orthodox in their
Interpretation of that Text, but disputes against them, and renders reasons why
the words must be applied to Christ. And in the very place from whence he
fetches those words of Pareus, which he mentions in his Margin, these words
immediately follow, causas tamen evidentes sententiae huic obstare, prius
ostendi, that is, though some Orthodox Interpreters do apply these words to God
absolutely taken, or to the Trinity, yet I have before showed manifest reasons
which do cross this Opinion of theirs. Now he mentions the former words of this
Author, and silenceth these latter words, and so deals unkindly and uncandidly
with him.

But he says, We must betake our selves to reason, whereby the Spirit may
convince us, of whom the Text in controversies is to be understood.

Repl. This is new Doctrine that is here taught us, viz. that reason is the
Spirits organ or instrument in its convictions that it sets upon men; and it is
dangerous desperate Doctrine, which has been exploded by all humble sober
Christians; if a man must be believe no further then he can see, the whole
Gospel must be rejected; for it is an high mystery which reason cannot look
into, and the love of the Father and of Christ has an height and depth, etc.
which passes knowledge: must not persons believe it? I have heard it, and do
believe it, that the Spirit is sent to convince according to the revealation of
Scripture, whether we can reach it with our reason, or cannot reach it; but
reason is now advanced as the only medium to Faith, which was formerly cried
down as the great Enemy of Faith.

But let his reasons be considered of.

1. This Text (says he) declares the principal Author of those things which
John the Divine was to communicate to the seven Churches; for these words begin
a new matter, and are no part of the salutation: They speak of God even the
Father, who is of highest authority, and from whom originally this Revelation
was. Christ he is spoken of ver. 11. and is to be considered as the principal
instrument, in conveying this Revelation to the Churches; for God gave it to
him, to show to his servants those things which were shortly to come to pass.
verse. 1.

Rep. 1. This reason asserts several things, and proves nothing, and so leaves
the Reader altogether unsatisfied, unless bare words must pass for current.

2. There is no truth in any thing that he asserts in relation to this text in
controversy; for though there might be some color for such a collection, that
God the Father is the principal Author of this Revelation, and Christ the
principal Instrument of conveying this Revelation to the Churches, (which is
only in a sense true, not of whole Christ, but of one part of him, to be
understood) in relation to the first verse; because there it is said that God
gave it to Christ; yet in relation to verse 8. of which the dispute is, there
is not the least shadow of ground for any one to conceive, much less to utter
such things: For if Alpha signify the first, or the beginning, yet it must not
be restrained to this Revelation, but must be extended to all things; and
whether the Father or Christ be meant, yet a person that is from everlasting to
everlasting, and that is the root and fountain of all things, and that
comprehends all things, is meant, as all the letters in the Greek Alphabet are
comprehended betwixt Alpha and Omega.

3. It is unreasonable for him, or any one, to apply the letter Alpha to the
Father in verse 8. and thence to deduce this conclusion, the Father is of
highest authority, and from him originally this Revelation was, and then to
apply the same letter Alpha in verse 11. to Christ, and thence to deduce a
diverse, if not contrary, yea contradictory conclusion, viz. Christ is the
principal instrument in conveying this Revelation to the Churches: For if
Christ be but the principal instrument in conveying it, then he is not of
highest authority, nor from him originally was the (...). Now it is senseless
and noto^iously (...), to imagine that contrary conclusions (...) proceed from
the same premises; (...) to the Father, he argues thus from verse 8, The Father
is Alpha, therefore he is of highest authority, and the original of this
Revelation: But in reference to Christ he argues thus from verse 11. Christ is
Alpha, therefore he is not of highest authority, nor the original of this
Revelation, but the principal instrument only in conveying this Revelation to
the Churches. Would one think that rational persons should be taken with such
kind of sottish and repugnant arguing which crosses it self?

4. In reference to verse 1. which is the text that seems most to countenance
his assertions, there is much unsoundness in his collections; for either it
must be thus understood, that though God the Father gave this Revelation to
Christ, yet God the Father gave it not to Christ as an instrument simply
considered; but unto Christ who was his fellow; for it is said of Christ, That
he showed it to his servants, and signified it by his Angel to his servant
John, so that Christ is set forth here in his dominion and Lordship, equal
with the Father over the creatures; for more could not have been said of the
Father in reference to the creatures, then his servants, his Angel, his servant
John; or else if Christ be an Instrument, and that God gave this Revelation to
him as an Instrument, yet this God is God the Father, Son and Spirit that gave
it to him; for the word God must be taken essentially, not personally; and if
Father had been named, as it is not, for it is said God gave unto him, yet not
of the Father exclusively and dividedly from the Son and Spirit must it be
understood, that he gave this Revelation to Christ: Nor of whole Christ is it
to be understood neither, but of Christ according to his humane nature
considered, and so God, viz. Father, Son and Spirit gave this Revelation to
Christ, viz. to the Man Christ, or Christ considered in his Manhood; and so
Christ though in one respect he be an Instrument, yet in another respect he is
the principal Author, and original cause with the Father.

5. Neither is there any new matter begun in this 8. verse, as he affirms; for
if it be begun in it, it is also ended in it; for in the 9. verse there is a
change of the person speaking; but it is the conclusion of the Exordium, or
Preface; Christ was described to come in the clouds, and what an one he is that
shall come in the clouds, Christ himself giving witness to what John asserted,
declares who he is; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, says the
Lord Christ, who will come in the clouds; for either this 8. verse must have
relation to verse 7. or else it is independent, and has relation to nothing.

But let the second Reason be looked into and proved, whether there be any more
strength in it.

2. Because (says he) those titles are no where in the Scripture attributed to
Jesus Christ; he is indeed called Alpha and Omega, the first and the last,
verse 11. but not Alpha and Omega as signifying the beginning and the end.

Rep. There is a great deal of untruth in this assertion, and much weakness,
unworthy of one that pretends to instruct others, and to be a guide unto them
in a way which they have not known.

1. There is untruth, for these titles are attributed in Scripture to Jesus
Christ, he is not only called Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; but he
is called Alpha and Omega, as signifying the beginning and the ending, in
Revel. 22. 13. the words are these, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, the first and the last. Where we may observe, 1. The person speaking,
which is Christ, as may appear from verse 12. compared with verse 28. In verse
12. we have these words, behold I come quickly; and there is no change of the
person in ver. 13. but the same (I) says, I am Alpha and Omega; but what
person is it? the Father or Christ? he in his third Reason says it is the
Father: But first, the Scripture speaks not of the Fathers coming, (unless in
the Son, in Christ) to give rewards, but of Christ's coming only; in 1 These. 1.
9. 10. They turned from Idols to serve the living God, and to wait for his Son
from heaven, and Acts 3. 20. he shall send Jesus, viz. the Father shall send
him; but of the Fathers coming Scripture speaks nothing. 2. The Apostle John
himself ends the controversy betwixt us, verse 20. where first we have the
same words spoken, viz. surely I come quickly. 2. We have the sense of them in
reference to the person speaking them, in the Apostle John's wish, and desire,
Amen, (says he) come Lord Jesus; he understood the person that spoke those
words to be Christ, and not the Father. 3. Christ himself clears it, that it
was he that spoke those words, I am Alpha and Omega, verse 16. I Jesus (says
Christ) have sent mine Angel: weigh the verses together, from verse 13. to
verse 16. and see whether there be any change of person, but the same person,
that said I am Alpha and Omega, said, I Jesus have sent my Angel: so that it is
manifest that with a great deal of boldness he falsifies the truth, in saying
that Alpha and Omega, as signifying the beginning and the end, is no where in
Scripture attributed to Christ.

2. There is weakness in this Assertion of his, unworthy of a Teacher in
Israel. (1.) Because Alpha and Omega as signifying first and last, are
equivalent to Alpha and Omega as signifying beginning and end; for that whis is
first is of it self, and has no cause, and is eternal, and without beginning,
and is the beginning of other things; and this the very Heathens from the light
of Reason within them will confess: and that which is last must needs be the
end. (2.) Because first and last (which he grants to be attributed to Christ)
are Attributes of the most high God, as he is distinguished from the creature;
See Isai. 41. 4. and 48. 12. but especially 44. 6. The words are, I am the
first and the last, and besides me there is no God. Here the most high God (his
design being to declare himself to be the most high God) does assume this title
first and last, as proper to him who is God alone, and there is none besides
him. (3.) Because the true English of Alpha and Omega (being Greek letters) is
first and last, beginning and end, for Alpha is the first, and the beginning of
the letters, and Omega is the last, and the end of the letters; and these two
letters do equally signify beginning and end, as first and last; therefore we
find these letters sometimes interpreted beginning and end, Rev. 1. 8. which is
the Text in controversy: sometimes first and last as ver. 11. sometimes
beginning and end, and first and last, Rev. 22. 13. therefore his attempting to
make a difference betwixt Alpha and Omega, as signifying beginning and end, and
as signifying first and last, is very frivolous and senseless.

I shall now examine his third Reason, and see whether that will speed any
better.

3. Because (says he) the terms in the Text are elsewhere apparently and
professedly given to God the Father, distinct from the Son; he is called Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end Rev. 21. 5. 6. And he that sat upon the
Throne said, I am Alpha and Omega: The Angel uses the same phrase, Rev. 22.
13. and doubtless in the same manner.

Repl. Suppose it should be granted, that these terms Alpha and Omega be given
to God the Father dinstinct from the Son, Rev. 21. 6. yet they are not
attributed to the Father, Rev. 22. 13. but to the Son, as has been evidently
proved already; and it is not his (doubtless the same phrase Rev. 22. 13. is
used in the same manner) that will carry it against such uncontrollable reasons
that have been brought for it, viz. that Christ distinct from the Father, is
called Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

And hence I would draw an Argument.

If these terms, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, be professedly
given to the Father distinct from the Son Rev. 21. 5. 6. and the same terms be
given to the Son, distinct from the Father, Rev. 22. 13. then the Father and
the Son are one and the same God, and distinct only in their personality; for
he confesses himself that these terms, Alpha and Omega, as signifying
beginning and end, areproper to the most high God, and denies that they are
given to Christ: if then they be given to both the Father and to Christ, then
it will follow that the Father and Christ are this high God, and this is the
consequence of his own premises. Oh that he might once come to see the sadness
of his state, to be left to such blindness and darkness, as not to be able to
see, or else to such pertinacie and obstinacy of spirit, that he will not see
when such clear palpable (not one but many) texts are before him, which have
the truth of the coeternity, coessentially and coequality of Christ, with the
Father written and engraven upon them, which every ingenuous Reader must and
will acknowledge. Truly, if there were no more Texts, nor Arguments for Christ's
Diety, but these which do denominate Christ to be Alpha and Omega, the first
and the last, the beginning and the end: And the Arguments which may be drawn
from these, they may be able, being thoroughly weighed, to convince any person
that is rational, and acknowledges the Scriptures, that Christ is the most
high God, unless God have shut him up under that curse of Isaiah, viz. Seeing
they shall see and not understand, and hearing they shall hear and not
perceive, etc.

That which he speaks of these words, viz. He that is, he which was, and he
which is to come, as referring to the Father in verse. 4. of this first Chapter
is true, but impugneth not our Position, viz. That the same words in verse. 8.
of the same Chapter are referred to Christ, who is elsewhere called Jehovah
frequently; the proper signification of which word is, He which is, he which
was, and he which is to come.

Having vindicated this Scripture of Rev. 1. 8. The next which follows is to be
considered of, which is, Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.

That which he clouds the simplicity of this Text (which gives such full
witness to Christ's eternal Diety) with, is another Translation, or Reading
which he frames, and puts upon the Text, which is this,

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with the God, and the Word was
a God; And he puts this sense upon them, In the beginning (in the first part of
time) was the Word, (Jesus Christ) according to the Spirit of holiness (and he
means the soul of Christ did exist) And the Word was with the God (this Jesus
Christ was a delight to the most high God, and did converse with him;) And the
Word was a God, (this Jesus Christ had power committed to him, whereby he might
represent the most high God. This Translarion he fetches from the omission of
the Article (...), Christ is called God without the Article (...) put thereto,
but the Article is annexed to God, referring to the Father; and then he puts
his Gloss upon it, in a strange exposition of the words.

Rep. I grant his Observation to be true, that in this place of John, where
(God) refers to the Father, there is an Article affixed; but where God refers
to Christ, there the Article is not affixed. But is this a ground of such a
Translation or Version which he has framed? is (...), God, with an Article to
be taken evermore for the most high God? and is (...), God, without an Article
to be taken evermore for one that represents the most high God, but is not the
most high God? If this be so, then Christ is the most high God, for he is
called (...), God, with an article in Heb. 1. 7. which is fetched from Psa. 45.
6. which he has so much disputed against, endeavoring to prove Christ in that
place to be but a creature God, in the former part of his answer, which I in my
former Treatise of Reply have vindicated against him. And the Father, (whom he
has stood for, to the derogation of the other two persons, endeavoring to
prove him to be the only high God) is not the high God at all; for in Heb. 1.
6. he is spoken of as God without an Article, Let all the Angels of God worship
him, that is Christ, it is (...); and not (...), it is without an Article: Do
but observe how God leaves him to confound himself, because though he have
parts, yet he abuses them, and God takes the wise in their own craftiness.

And it is to be observed, that Christ is called God with an Article annexed to
it, in the same verse where the Father is spoken of as his God, and with an
Article also, Heb. 1. 9, which (according to his collection) makes both the
Father and Christ to be the God. that is, the most high God, and so to be
coessential, because there cannot be the most high God, but one most high God.
Thus Christ is justified in his Diety by himself against his will.

Quest. But the Question may be moved, Why is the Article affixed to God when
the Father is spoken of, and not affixed to God when Christ is spoken of?

Answ. There is great reason for it in this place of John; for if it were not
so, the persons of the Father and of Christ would be confounded; for the words
run thus; (...), And the Word was with God, and the Word was God; had there
been an Article prefixed to (...), God, had it been (...), it must have been
translated, and God was the Word, and not the Word was God, and then God and
the Word would have been confounded, viz. God the Father of whom it is spoken
that Chirst was with him, would have been confounded with Christ, for God, with
the Article affixed would have been (in right translation) the subject, and the
Word would have been the predicate, and then it must have been rendered, God was
the Word, and not the Word was God, as it now runs, according to the intention
of the Holy Ghost, whose design is by omission of the Article to manifest forth
the distinction of the persons of the Father and Son in unity of Essence; both
are God, yet the one is not the other.

The like omission of the Article we may observe in Joh. 4. 24. The words in
Greek are (...), and it is translated, and truly (because the article (...) is
left out before (...)) God is a Spirit; whereas had the Article been affixed,
it had altered the Translation, and it must have been thus rendered, the Spirit
is God, or a Spirit is God, and so the sense would be changed; other instances
there might be were they needful. And this he might have observed from Beza,
had he been willing to have had his eyes opened.

As for the Gloss that he makes upon the words, I confuted it formerly in part,
and have showed in my other Treatise, that by beginning the first part of time
is meant, and that the Verb or Particle (was) shows a preexistence before the
beginning, or before time was, and not that Christ had his first existence then
when the beginning was; for the heavens and the earth had their existence then
when time first was in the beginning of it, and subsisted together with it, as
Moses records it; but the Word was before it, and so was eternal, for nothing
was before the beginning but eternity. And whereas he makes this to be the
sense of these words, The Word was with God; This Jesus Christ was a delight to
the most high God, and did converse with him; restraining high God to the
Father, and excluding Christ, it is but the venting of his own conceit in stead
of Truth; for God there is taken personally, and not essentially, as I have
showed before oftentimes; and the meaning is, the person of the Son was with
the person of the Father from all eternity, and was a delight before the world
was founded, as from Pro. 8. appears, He was as one brought up with the Father
from everlasting, and was daily his delight. But the sense that he puts upon
the last words (viz. and the Word was a God) is the most gross of all, and
palpably corrupt, viz. This Jesus Christ had power committed to him, whereby he
might represent the most High God: And the reason which he renders does not
make it more tolerable, viz. the name God is common to God and creatures: for
I have showed, that never any single person was called God absolutely without
limitation and restriction. And in this place it is said, that Christ was God
from the first, that he was, and he was when the beginning was; and it is not
said that he began to be when the beginning was, therefore he was before, and
consequently he was God before; and it will follow that he was God from
eternity, and not in regard of any power committed to him, whereby he might
represent the most high God; for there was neither heaven nor earth when he was
God, over whom to exercise any power, nor any creature to whom to represent
God. And I have showed that power which he had, was power in himself (as life
was in himself) and was not, neither could be power committed to him, power in
him being such as no creature was capable of, by which he at first created, and
does yet uphold the world, Heb. 1. 3.

And whereas he gives reasons from this text, why Christ should not be the most
high God, viz. Because he is distinguished from God, and God cannot be
distinguished from himself, he himself answers it by the mention which he makes
of personality, Christ is distinguished from God taken personally, viz. for the
Father, from the person of the Father is Christ distinguished, but not from God
essentially taken, nor from the essence of the Father, for so he and his Father
are one. But he takes not upon him to answer us in this distinction, and to
overthrow it, though he knows that our great strength lies in it, but instead
of answering, charge us to say that which we say not, viz. that we call the
Father God by way of eminency, and disputes against this, as inconsistent to
that coequality which we hold, and shelters himself under it. But he wrongs us,
for we say the Son is called God as distinct from the Father, but not by way of
eminency, they cannot both be eminent one above the other, and yet coequal.
That which follows of The God and A God which he flies to, as a reason why
Christ is not the most high God, I have answered before, and need say no more
of it.

After John 1. 1. Mat. 28. 20. was produced by me to prove the God head of
Christ, are these, Lo I am with you always unto the end of the world, to which
text he answers thus.

The meaning of the phrase, I am with you, etc. is no more then this, I will do
you good, whilst ye remain employed in my work: And he brings Jacob as the
author of the interpretation; Old Jacob (says he) no bad interpreter, is my
Author, Genesis 31. 3. compared with Chap. 32. 9. in the one place God promises
to be with him, in the other place Jacob expounds it to be Gods dealing well
with him.

Rep. This metaphorical presence, in actions of grace and favors, (which he
would have to be the sole meaning of the words, I will be with thee) does not
exclude the essential presence, but does rather include it; for how is Christ
able to do all good to his Apostles and Disciples in all places of the world,
and in all conditions and necessities, in which they might be, and at all
times, and yet not be essentially present with them? If he can declare it, let
him declare it; In the mean time that parallel place, (which he cites from Genesis
31. 3. compared with chap. 32. 9.) is against him, for God is enabled to do
good to all, (and so to Jacob) by his essential presence with all, and in all,
and so with Jacob, and in Jacob. And though God have all the Angels to wait
upon him, and all the creatures at his command to go for him, and to do for him
what he appoints, yet if he were not essentially present himself with all, and
in all, he could not supply all with all good that they want; for he could not
see all and know all, if he were not present in all, if he did not fill all,
and if all did not live and move and had not being in him. Therefore the Lord
argues in Jer. 23. 24. from his filling all, to his knowing all, the words are
these, Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him? do not
I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? and if this be so of God, that he
works all by his presence with all, then it is so of Christ also; and the words
I will be with you, though they may extend to actions of love and kindness, and
may comprise well dealing and doing good within them, yet they do properly hold
out the way and means in which Christ will be helpful to them, he is with them
always to take notice of their condition, and to apply himself thereto, and
Christ does assure them, that though he shall be bodily absent from them, and
in heaven, yet in the eternal Spirit, in the divine nature, he is always
present with them: In which sense (he says) that he the Son of man (though
upon earth in his flesh) was yet according to his diety in heaven, John 3. 13.
and chap. 17. 24.

But he goes on, and says, Jesus Christ is present with his Messengers, and
deals well with them, when he does instruct, comfort, strengthen and protect
them; and all these he does in his absence by his Spirit, whom the Father has
sent in his name. John 14. 26. And he instanceth in instruction, and says,
Christ instructed his Apostles, but not immediately; for the Spirit (says he)
that came in Christ's name, and received of his, was the instrument by which
Jesus Christ did work: And he cites John 16. 13, 14, 15. for it.

Rep. I have showed already that these operations of grace do not hinder the
essential presence of Christ, according to his Godhead, with the Apostles, but
do rather imply it; but he excludes it, and says he does all these things in
his absence by his Spirit. Now though there be a truth in it, that Christ being
in heaven in flesh, and absent from earth, so far as respects the flesh, does
effect all things by the Spirit, yet it is not only false, but foolish in the
sense that he intends it, and in the words that he expresses it in.

1. I shall readily grant it in a sense, that Christ works all by the Spirit,
and that there is an order of working among the persons in the Godhead; and in
this order the Father works by the Son, and by the Spirit; and the Son works
from the Father and by the Spirit; and the Spirit works from the Father and
from the Son, by himself; and the Father is the person sending both the Son and
the Spirit; and the Son is the person sent from the Father, and sending the
Spirit with the Father; and the Spirit is the person sent both from the Father
and from the Son; but it will not follow that therefore Christ (though bodily
absent) is personally absent from his Messengers, and instructs them not
immediately by himself, but only by the Spirit: For as it is said in John 5.
17. by Christ of the Father, My Father works hitherto and I work: The Father
works all things by the Son; he made the world by the Son; and he judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; that is, by the Son he
judges and manageth all things, and not without him; yet he works, that
cannot be denied, though by the Son; yea the very works that the Son works,
and all of them and none other but them, the Father works; the Father is in
the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and the Father and the Son are one in
essence, though two in personality, and the Father and the Son work one thing;
the Father by the Son, and the Son from the Father, and the Son can do nothing
of himself apart from the Father, nor the Father any thing apart from the Son,
but by him, as I have showed at large in my former Treatise; so it may be said
of the Son and of the holy Ghost, that the Son works hitherto, and the holy
Ghost works; that is, they work the same work, the Son by the holy Ghost, and
the holy Ghost from the Son; and the holy Ghost shall not speak of himself, nor
act of himself (as says the Scripture which he cites) that is, he shall not
speak or work any thing apart from the Son, but what he shall hear and see,
that shall he speak and do; and the Son does speak and act by him the same
things, and nothing else; for the Son is in the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost
in the Son, and they are one in essence, and therefore cannot be divided in
operation, but work the same things in such an order of working, and to this
the Scripture gives witness in 2 Cor. 3* 17. The Lord is called the Spirit, and
the Spirit is called the Spirit of the Lord Christ; how can this be?
Essentially the Lord Christ is the Spirit, they are one: Personally considered,
the Spirit is the Spirit of the Lord Christ, and the Lord Christ is not the
Spirit: And Rev. 2. 1. to 6. compared with verse 7. In verse 1. to 6. Christ is
the person that speaks to the Church, and so to all the Churches, and commands
John to write; but in verse 7. it is said, he that has an ear to hear let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; so that Christ speaks, and yet the
Spirit speaks, and Christ and the Spirit are one in essence, though two in
persons; and Christ spoke to the Churches by the Spirit, and the Spirit spoke
from Christ. But they act and work together the same things, and none other; as
the Father and the Son do, so do the Son and Spirit, and indeed Father and Son
and Spirit are one in essence, and one in operation, the order of working only
excepted, 1 John 5. 7. so that Christ's instructing by the Spirit, obstructs not
Christ's personal presence with the Disciples here upon earth, though his body
be in heaven. And the sending of the Spirit both by the Father and by the Son,
are acts of counsel among the persons in the Godhead, as has been fully
declared in reference to Christ, who was sent of the Father, and yet gave
himself. And the Spirit though sent, when he comes acts not merely as one
sent, according to the will of another, but as himself wills, 1 Cor. 12. 11.
so that his sending was by counsel with his own consent.

2. In the sense that he asserts it, that Christ in Heaven acts by his Spirit,
I shall utterly deny it, as that which both wants truth in it, and is absurd;
as that which is neither consistent with Scripture nor reason, nor congruous to
his own Opinion: for he takes away Christ's immensity, and ubiquity, and puts it
upon the Spirit, to prevent Christ's being in Heaven and on Earth at once, and
his filling of Heaven and Earth with his presence, that he might not thereby be
acknowledged God, and yet he makes the Spirit to be universally present, and so
makes him more then a creature, wherein he contradicts himself, for his words
are these, Christ does all these works in his absence by his Spirit; therefore
the Spirit is present, for he supplies the defect of Christ's presence, and yet
withal he says, The spirit which received of Christ's was Christ's instrument
by which Jesus Christ did the work: Therefore he is not God, for God cannot be
an instrument, therefore he is but a creature; wherein he crosses himself. So
then what must not be yielded to in Christ, least he should be God, he yields
to the Spirit whom he makes not God, but a creature. And in this he not only
sets Christ below the Father, whom he acknowledges to be God, but he sets him
below the Spirit, whom he acknowledges but a creature, and now Christ is
neither God, nor yet the first and chief of the creatures, for the Spirit is
more excellent then he, for the Spirit can be present with all the Apostles in
all the parts and Climats of the World at one time, to instruct them, comfort
them, etc. and Christ is shut up in Heaven and cannot. And this is
contradictory to himself, for he makes Christ the first of the creatures, and
the Maker of the rest, and the Lord of them, and he makes him a Spirit in his
first existence, and yet the Spirit that was made by him can be with all the
Apostles, and Disciples, and Saints also, and abide with them for ever, and
administer to them all good, but Christ who is his Lord and Maker cannot. O
monstrous and senseless Opinion, wherein God leaves him to be confounded!

But how contradictory to reason is this, that the Spirit should be the
instrument of Christ, and so a creature inferior to Christ, and yet be present
in all places in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and every where, for where ever
Saints be, there the Spirit is, and Saints are in all these places, The Spirit
is one that bears witness in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7. Therefore there he is, and he
bears witness on Earth in the hearts of Believers, in Romans 8. 16. and therefore
there he is. And the whole Spirit dwells in every Saint, for we do not read of
any parts of the Spirit, into which he is divided, and if Saints be every
where, the whole Spirit is every where, and such a boundless Essence is not
competent to any creature; it is that which God himself arrogates as proper to
him, do not I fill Heaven and Earth? Jer. 23. 24. whole God fills every place,
and the whole Spirit fills every Saint. As bodies have their loca, their places;
so Spirits, all created ones, have their ubi, their some where, out of which
and beyond which they are not; they are confined, if they be not circumscribed;
but of the Spirit it is said, whither shall I go from thy Spirit, the Spirit is
everywhere.

It is also extremely repugnant to Scripture, that the Spirit should be Christ's
instrument, and consequently a creature, and it is as gross as the denying of
the Diety of Christ, and his Heresy is multiplied in this Assertion.

1. An Instrument acts and works after the will of the principal efficient, but
the Spirit after his own will as himself pleases, and therefore no instrument.

2. The person by whom Christ wrought Miracles, was no instrument, but Christ
according to his humane nature wrought Miracles by the virtue and power of the
Spirit, therefore he was no instrument, Mat. 12. 28. Acts 10. 38.

3. He that was the uncture, with which Christ was anointed and became more
excellent and glorious then all his fellows; he that was the enrichment of
Christ as man, as a creature, above all creatures, that exalted him in eminency
above all Angels, etc. was not any instrument inferior to Christ, but
superior to him as a creature, but the Spirit was the uncture wherewith Christ
was anointed, Act. 10. 38. and he received not the Spirit by measure as others
did, but beyond all measure, Joh. 3. 34. whence he came to excel all his
fellows, Heb. 1. 9.

4. He that is the Spirit of God, and is to God as the spirit of a man is to
man, he that alone knows the deep things of God and searches them; that is,
has deep full perfect knowledge of them, he cannot be an instrument to Christ,
to take what Christ a creature, (as he makes Christ to be) shows him, and no
more, and to show them to men, but the Spirit is the Spirit of God, and stands
to God as the Spirit of a man stands to man; and searches the deep things of
God, therefore cannot be an instrument to take from Christ, and bring and show
to men. And it is contrary to Scripture to make the Spirit a creature, as if he
be a creatures instrument (as he would make him) he must needs be.

1. He is called God by the Apostles of Christ, therefore he is God, Act. 5. 3,
4. compared together, prove it: in the 3. ver. Peter says to Ananias, Thou
have lied to the holy Ghost; in the 4. verse. he says, Thou have lied to God:
He makes the holy Ghost to be God, for he shows the person against whom the sin
was committed, it was not man, it was not any creature; it did rise higher, it
was the holy Ghost, he was God. So that the holy Ghost and God are one and the
same thing. And 1 Cor. 3. 16. Paul makes him God, in these words, Know ye not
that you are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
This latter is the proof of the former, because the Spirit of God dwells in you,
therefore says the Apostle, you are the temple of God; here is no mention of
Gods dwelling in them, but of the Spirits dwelling in them; if therefore the
Spirit were not God, the Argument of the Apostle were naught. And by the
Evangelist Luke in Act. 10. 3. 19, 20. compared together, he is called God: in
verse. 3. it is said, The Angel of God came in to Cornelius, and commanded him
to send men for Peter, in verse. 19. 20. it is said, That the Spirit told Peter
that he had sent those men to him, and therefore he must go with them. The men
were sent upon the command of the Spirit, therefore the Spirit was that God
that sent the Angel, and to be the Angel of the Spirit, and the Angel of God is
all one.

2. He is called the God of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3. compared together do
confirm it: in verse. 2. it is said, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his
word was in my mouth; in verse 3. it is said, The God of Israel said, the Rock
of Israel spoke to me; he that in verse. 2. is called the Spirit of the Lord; in
verse. 3. is called the God of Israel; for one and the same person spoke to
David, not two persons spoke to him, but one. And in Luke 1. 68. 70. compared
together, and both of them compared with 2 Pet. 1. 21. in verse. 63. Zachary
blessed the Lord God of Israel who visited and redeemed his people, etc. in
verse. 70. Zachary makes this Lord God of Israel to be the person that spoke by
the mouth of the Prophets, but who is he that spoke by the mouth of the
Prophets? the Spirit is he; Peter tells us so much, (and in many other places we
read so much,) 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost. Therefore if he inspired the Prophets, and spoke in them and by them, he
is the Lord God of Israel.

3. He is called the most High, Luke 1. 35. The Angel speaks thus to Mary, The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over shadow
thee; This latter is but an enlargement of the former, the same person is
spoken of in both propositions, with this difference only; the name of the
person spoken of, is put upon him in the former proposition, viz the holy
Ghost; the Title of the person is given to him in the latter; the Highest with
his power shall over-shadow thee, so that the holy Ghost is the highest. But
some may object against this, and say, that the holy Ghost is not called the
highest, but he is called the power of the Highest, or the virtue of the
Highest, because the Highest by the virtue of the holy Ghost would form Christ
in the womb of the Virgin, or would cause her to conceive, and so the holy
Ghost and power are one thing, but not the holy Ghost and the Highest: If this
were true, yet seeing a person is spoken of and not a thing, and this person is
called the virtue or power of the Highest in so miraculous a work, he cannot be
inferior to the Highest; for he by whose force, and power, and virtue the
highest shows himself to be the Highest, works as the Highest, must needs be as
high as he, and if the Father should be the Highest in this place, yet the holy
Ghost is made equal to him, which shows the Father and the holy Ghost to be one
in Essence, though two in personality, because there can be but one Highest.

But it appears to be otherwise, that Spirit and power are not confounded, but
distinguished, and there distinguished where God is mentioned in Romans 15. 18,
19. God made the Gentiles obedient to the Gospel, through mighty signs and
wonders done by the power of the Spirit of God; here is power, and Spirit, and
God, and all distinguished from other; by God, the Father is meant; by Spirit,
the holy Ghost is meant; and by power, the virtue, might, and efficacy of the
holy Ghost is meant; and it appears (which alone is sufficient to prove holy
Ghost to be God) that mighty signs and wonders were done by the proper power of
the holy Ghost; it is not said that they were done by the power of God, viz.
the Father, but by the power of the Spirit of God, by the Spirits own proper
power.

4. He is called God most high, and Almighty, all these titles are put upon the
Spirit in Numb. 24. 2. 16. compared together: In verse 2. it is said of Balaam,
that the Spirit of God came upon him; in verse 16. Balaam describes himself to
be one that heard the words of God; that knew the knowledge of the most high,
and saw the visions of the Almighty, and all this was but the Spirit of God,
which came upon him.

I might speak of the attributes of the Spirit, which are proper to the most
high God, and prove him to be such, as of Omnipotency, Omnisciency,
Omnipresence, etc. But he himself has held forth these in his Letter, when he
lived about Gloucester, which in my former Treatise is printed to the view of
the World, at which time his eyes were open, and he saw these attributes in the
Spirit, and acknowledged the holy Ghost to be God upon the sight thereof,
though his Faith had been suspended before; but now he denies what he confessed
then, and is left to blindness and darkness, and speaks opprobriously of the
Spirit of Grace, when he calls him the instrument of an instrument; for he makes
Christ himself no more but the Fathers instrument and a creature; and the
Spirit is no more but Christ's instrument, and a creature of a creature. I shall
now conclude with an Answer to what he closes his Answers to this Text of
Math. 28, with. He says, this kind of presence by the Spirit, Beza and others
understand to be intended in Mat. 28. 20.

Reply. 1. Neither Beza nor any else save Arians and Socinians do hold such a
kind of presence of the Spirit, as he has held forth, viz. of the Spirit as
an instrument by which Jesus Christ did work, but only of the Spirit as God,
and as the third person in the Trinity, equal with the Father and with the Son,
by whom the Father and Son do work, not as by an instrument, but as by an
associate, not as imparting any superiority in them, or inferiority in the
Spirit, but Order only, that they which are one in Essence but distinct in
personality, might not be confounded (as they cannot be divided from one
another) in operation; therefore as they are in one another, so they work from
and by one another.

2. The words which he mentions in the Margent, as Bezaes upon the place,
though I have diligently perused Beza, I cannot find neither in Matthew the
Text that is controverted betwixt us; nor yet in any of those Texts in John
which speak of the Spirit which he cites: neither would they be any whit
advantageous to him, were they found in Beza; for they speak of Christ as
absent in body, which none denies; but that whole Christ is absent is not
asserted, in the words; but the contrary seems to be employed; for the absence
of Christ is limited to his body, Caeterum corpore abest, are the words, so
that Christ may be present in that spirit of holiness, which is his divine
Nature, of which Paul speaks in Romans 1. 4. without any contradiction to Beza,
if any such words may be found in him.

3. The words of Beza upon the place do differ greatly from the words he
presents as his, and do not favor his exposition at all, but may well be
interpreted so as to cohere with the use I make of that Text, Cum autem idem
ipse dominus paulo ante dixerit, etc. says Beza; that is, When as the
self-same Lord Jesus had said a little before, Me you shall not have always,
and was to ascend a little after; it is apparent that there must be a
distinction, respecting the manner and way of Christ's presence and absence; in
body he is absent, but in virtue he is wholly most present; in which virtue he
does communicate himself, and all his things really in a spiritual way by faith
unto us. Here is not one Word of the Spirit of God, but of the virtue and power
of Christ in which he is present, which cannot be the virtue of his body, or of
his Humane Nature in which he was so far absent; for none of that could extend
so far unless conveyed by that which was present, viz. the divine Nature, which
is present everywhere, and conveyes virtue from whole Christ to believers.

The next Scripture which he invades, and labors to overthrow, is Rev. 2. 2. I
know thy works; whence I infer Christ's Godhead, because otherwise at such
distance he could not know all their works. But he answers with Intergatories
of admiration, because of the absurdity which he pretends to apprehend in it:
His words are these.

What could he not? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Could the Prophet
Elisha know at a very great distance what the King of Syria said in his
Bedchamber, and yet cannot Christ know at a distance? He has the Spirit, viz.
Wisdom, and power, etc. given him without measure. Joh. 3 34. and therefore can
know beyond what we can conceive.

Rep. When our Lord Jesus Christ tells the Churches that he knows their works,
his scope is not to discover to them what knowledge he had by revelation from
the Father, but it was to make them sensible what quick sharp piercing
eyesight he himself had, and what a vaste incomprehensible understanding and
knowledge he had, for the comfort of all true Saints, and for the terror of all
Hypocrites in all the Churches; and this is maniffest from 23. ver. of the same
Chapter; and had he but read the Chapter over, he would not have admired at me,
viz. at my collection, but at his own Answers; I will kill her children (says
Christ) with death, and all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches
the reins and hearts, etc. In these words we may observe; first, what a
knowledge it is that Christ has of the works and ways of the Church, and what
it is he knows; it is an inward penetrating knowledge, it is of the most
unsearchable parts, it is of the most hidden works, it is of the works of the
hearts and reins of men. Secondly, how Christ came by this knowledge; not by
any discovery that any other made to him, but by and from himself he has this
knowledge; it is a knowledge which he has in himself it is his own knowledge,
I search the hearts and the reins. Thirdly, for what end Christ declares this
his exquisite and perfect knowledge of all things in man, which he has in
himself, that all the Churches may know who he was, what an one he was, more
observant of all secret wickedness then they were aware of, that they might
fear and tremble more in reference to the eye of Christ, then they did before.
Fourthly, what this science or knowledge of Christ does denotate and
demonstrate Christ to be, no less then the most high God; for the most high God
does assume power and perfection of searching and trying hearts and reins to
himself, as his own proper prerogative, which none is enabled to challenge; in
Jer. 179 10. The heart is deceitful, and desperately wicked, who can know it?
as if he should have said, None can know it? But then he excepts himself, I the
Lord search the heart and try the reins; that is, I alone do it; and yet
Christ attributes this high Divine transcendent knowledge to himself, and with
such suitable words, as if Christ were the person speaking in Jeremie, or as if
the person speaking in Jeremie spoke also in the Revelation, as if one and the
same person spoke in both places for they challenge one and the same thing; and
the close of the speech in both places is the same, and it shows that one and
the same God speaks in both places, if not one and the same person. And now if
Mr. Knowles have any ingenuity in him, he will open his eyes, and lie under the
conviction of this Text, unless he have sold himself to be deluded, and to
seduce others.

It appears by what has been presented, that he cannot evade the strength of
this Text of Rev. 2. 2. and the collection made therefrom, with his instance
of Elisha, who knew what the King of Syria spoke in his Bedchamber, which was
done, not by any wisdom that was in him, but by the revelation of God; but
Christ's knowledge was not such, was not from an other but from and in himself:
But he rests not in that, but flies to the Spirit, which (he says) was given
unto him beyond all measure, Joh. 3. 34. But what is this Spirit which was
given to him, which made him thus wise, that he could know all the works of the
Churches? This Spirit is in his opinion but a creature; he called him but very
lately Christ's instrument; and his whole scope in his Book is to show that the
Father alone is God, the most high God; therefore according to him the Spirit
is but a creature: And shall Christ have all this help from a creature, to know
all the works of the Churches? Does the Spirit himself know all the hidden
workings of the hearts of all Churches? and of all Saints? There are works of
the hearts and reins; does the Spirit know them, if he be but a creature? The
Scripture tells us that none can know them but God, Psalm. 26. 2. and 139. 23.
and Jer. 11. 20. and Chap. 20. 12. But he says the Spirit is not God,
therefore cannot know such things; therefore by the gift of him Christ cannot
come to know such things. And how comes the Spirit being but a creature to know
more then Christ, and to be Christ's instructor, when Christ is the chief of all
the creatures, and a God in wisdom and strength in comparison of them according
to his opinion? is not here an inconsistency which does always attend falsehood?
Nor can the Spirit without measure be given to Christ, if the Spirit (as he
asserts) be but a creature; for then himself is measured, being finite, and not
infinite, and must be given in measure; therefore by the gift of him Christ
cannot know all things. Yea, further it may be said, though the Spirit were
infinite, as indeed he is infinite, and is good (whatever he weakly and
sinfully asserts to the contrary) yet Christ being but a creature (as he
desperately argues) he cannot be given without measure; for things are received
according to the capacity of that which does receive, and not above it; and so
Christ being finite (as he holds) and measurable, does stint and limit, and
bring to a bound, and to a measure all that he receives; and indeed his humane
nature that did receive the Spirit, being finite, was not capable of the Spirit
without measure, though the Spirit himself be without measure; but it is an
hyperbolical expression, and the meaning is, Christ had abundance of the
Spirit, as he was man, beyond all men, and all creatures; but no finite
proportion of the Spirit will enable Christ as man to know by his own wisdom
that resides in him, all the works of all the Churches; for none but the
searcher of all hearts can do that, because there are may hidden works of the
heart: Now this Searcher of hearts is God only, therefore Christ is God.

But he goes on and says, Though Christ has such a knowledge, yet he is not
the most high God, for his knowledge is of another, Joh. 5. 30. I can of mine
own self do nothing, as I hear I judge, etc.

Repl. I have already answered some parallel Scriptures to this in my former
Treatise, page 145. to which I refer the Reader. I shall add something out of
Beza and Chemnitius, and so pass over it. I can do nothing of my self, that is
says he, meo unius arbitratu, and potentia, vel voluntate a patre separata,
cum una and eadem sit patris and mea tum potentia, tum voluntas, ut and
essentia; that is, by my own single proper power or will, separate and apart
from the Fathers, I can do nothing, when as my Fathers will and power, and mine
are one and the same, even as the Essence is one. [As I hear.] The Fathers
showing (says he) and the Sons hearing do relate to one another; that is
nothing but the Fathers giving community of virtue, and power, and of the very
Essence it self by generation from Eternity to the Son; and the Sons hearing is
nothing but the reception of it. Or, says he, it may respect the humane nature
of Christ. Christ as man acts nothing, does nothing apart from the will of his
own Diety; for though the Divine will and the humane be two wills in number, yet
they be not two but one in consent and agreement, and so one with the Fathers
will. And Christ as man, as he hears, that is, as the Father suggests to him,
so he judges, which is true of the Divine will in Christ suggesting to the
humane. And Chemnitius in his Harmony, interprets the Sons not doing any thing
of himself, to arise not out of the imbecility of the Son, but from the
absolute and perfect identity of the Father and the Son in Essence, and all
essential properties and acts; and the Sons hearing, he expounds to be the Sons
knowing together with the Father all things decreed in the secret Counsel of
the Divinty, or Divine Essence. And without doubt, the undivided operations of
the Father and Son are pointed out. As I hear I judge, says Christ, and in
Joh. 8. 15. I judge no man, and ver. 50. the Father seeks and judges, and
yet in Joh. 5. 22 The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son; These Scriptures cannot be reconciled better then to say, they
judge in one another, the Father in the Son, the Son in the Father, they act
undividedly; the Father is in Christ in all Christ's operations, and the Son
sees and hears, and knows the Father, and the things of the Father in himself.

He concludes his answer to this text of Rev. 2. 2. thus, Though he always
knew all things necessary for the perfect discharge of his offices, yet there
was a time when he was excluded from the knowledge of the hour and day of
judgment, Mark 13. 32. But of that day and hour no one knows, neither the
Angels that are in heaven, nor the Son, unless the Father: Therefore his
knowledge was not formally of himself, nor always perfect.

Rep. This text of Mark is to be interpreted of Christ according to the humane
nature, as he is the Son of man; for in that sense he is also called the Son
without any addition, 1 Cor. 15. 28. compared with 23. for Christ's manhood is
there spoken of; for it is said, Christ should first rise, which as man he
only does; and then ver. 28. he is called the Son, which must refer to the
same consideration of Christ as man.

And if it were otherwise, that Son were always taken for Son of God, yet
sometimes a thing is spoken of in one nature, and must be understood in
another. Acts 20. 28. it is called the blood of God, but it is meant of the
humane nature, because considered as God, Christ has not any blood. And as the
Son of man, is higher then the Angels, and knows more then the Angels, having
a more excellent anointment then they; therefore the gradation is consistent,
and suitable enough, neither the Angels nor the Son according to flesh, which
you will think more strange, because he is wiser then the Angels.

And whereas he seems to limit it to the Father only, it must not be
understood exclusively, as shutting out Christ as he is the Son of God from
eternity, or as shutting out the Spirit; for (first) if the words (...),
interpreted by him unless, and translated (but) be always exclusive of all
but the person mentioned, then the Father would be excluded from knowing
himself; for Mat. 11. 27. the words run thus, No one knows the Father unless
the Son, and so it is asserted of the Son, no one knows the Son, but the
Father, or unless the Father; and so the Son is excluded from the knowledge of
himself, if the particle unless, be always exclusive, which would be
monstrous to be granted. 2. It is manifest that the holy Ghost, or Spirit of
God knows the day and hour of judgment; for it is said of him, that he
searches the deep things of God, and this must be granted to be one of them, 1
Cor. 2. 10, 11. In which text it is to be observed that the exceptive particle
(...) unless, is to be found by which both Father and Son are excluded from
knowing the things of God, if we may believe him, that this particle limits it
only to him that is mentioned; for the Spirit is only mentioned. 3. It is
inconsistent to what is asserted of Christ's knowledge, Colos. 2. 3. it is said
that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in him; how then should
he be ignorant of the day of judgment as he was the Son of God? And John 5.
20. the Father shows the Son all things that himself does, that is, in
himself the Father shows all things; now this is one thing that the Father
does, he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world; and this is
showed in Christ's very essence, which is the same with his Fathers, and in
Christ's very will, which is the same with his Fathers, and Christ may read all
the decrees of the Father in himself, in his own wisdom and will: And he is
called the wisdom of the Father, and the admirable counselor, 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Esaias 9. 6. And the Disciples attributed to him the knowing of all things, John
16. 30. and John 21. 17. 4. It is inconsistent to the place which he cites,
that Christ should be absolutely ignorant of the day and hour of judgment; to
the context on every hand; for Christ had told all the forerunners of it, the
things that should precede, and something that should follow, the temper of men
of that age when it should be, the security that should be in the world at that
time; he himself was to be the person that must come as Judge, and he was to
depart, and then to come, and he was to appoint every one his work till he
come, till the very day and hour of his coming, (the parable declares so much)
and could he then be ignorant of the day and hour? it is against sense and
reason. Christ then had knowledge of the very precise time of judgment, and
yet he had not knowledge, (he says so himself) how is it to be understood? as
he was the Son of man according to the manhood he had not the knowledge
thereof, but as he was the Son of God he had the knowledge thereof. Col. 1. 15.
was next produced by me, to prove the eternal generation of Christ by it; But
he had perverted the true sense of it before he came to it, and made use of it
to serve his own purpose by it, while he was pleading for that unchrist-like
doctrine which he had received, and was engaged to maintain it. And in this
place he only tells me he had spoken to it, and with a scornful jeere prays me
to consider it again, and by my next to let him hear what part thereof it is in
which Christ's eternal generation may be seen.

Rep. In this text of Col. 1. 15. Christ is called the first born of every
creature, and his eternal generation was meant by it, which I have proved
already in my other Treatise, and shall yet again manifest it. 1. Firstborn is
not the same with first created; 1. because it cannot be proved by Scripture
that Christ was created at all, therefore not that he was first created. 2. In
the beginning he was, but no mention of any beginning that he had. 3. There is
express mention that heaven and earth were first created; for in the beginning
they were created, and before the beginning nothing was created. 4. Christ was
born according to the flesh, but he was not the firstborn, but in fullness of
time was born; therefore in reference to his humanity, and as he was the seed
of the woman, he is not called firstborn. 5. First born and first-begotten are
terms equivalent, and point at one and the same thing, viz. or some person
that did perform such an act as begetting of Christ. 6. Firstborn,
first-begotten and only-begotten are alike congruous; and may equally, so far
as concerns the truth of the thing, be attributed to Christ; so that whatever
is the meaning of such titles or names, there is a peculiarity therein to
Christ, and Christ has therein no fellows; and so it can neither be applied to
creation, nor to ordinary and temporary generation; for it cannot be said that
Christ was only created, nor only generated, and begotten, nor only born;
for there were numerous creatures created, and innumerable generated in the
ordinary way: But Christ was alone so begotten, and so born of God as none else
were. 7. Christ speaks of himself that which none other can speak but he, God
possessed me in the beginning of his way before his works of old: possessed
me, how? As Eve possessed Cain; for the word is one in the original, and it is
rendered gotten, and indeed he must be begotten; so the Lord possessed Christ,
got Christ, begot Christ, in the beginning of his way; and when was that
beginning? in the beginning of the world? no: it was before his works of old,
or ever the earth was; and the earth was the first, together with the heavens,
in the beginning; yet Christ was before; not in the beginning of the creation,
but in the begininng of Gods way; now Gods way was from everlasting; therefore
Christ's going forth has been from of old, from everlasting, Mich. 5. 2. his
decrees were from everlasting, and God was ever working; therefore it is
explicated, verse 23. I was set up from everlasting, in the beginning; the one
interprets the other, the beginning of Gods way is from everlasting. Thus I
have found eternal generation in these words, first born; and in his next let
him evade it if he can.

I shall now come to the consideration of Col. 1. 16. By him were all things
created, etc. and John 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was
made nothing that was made: In answer to which he thinks he has acted his part
gallantly; but let us hear what it is that he says.

He puts the Scriptures into an argument, after this sort, He by whom all
things were made, is the most high God; but all things were made by Jesus
Christ; therefore Jesus Christ is the most high God.

He grants the major in reference to the principal agent, but denies it in
reference to an instrumental agent: And says he asserts Jesus Christ to be
only an instrumental agent in the creation of the world.

Rep. I have already in many places of my other Treatise (because he often
harps upon Christ's instrumentalnesse to the Father, in creating all things)
confuted this assertion; yet if he have any thing to say in the defense of it,
I am willing to discuss it with him. And he produces four reasons for the
confirming of his position. I shall try the strength of them.

1. The book of the creatures speaks only of one first cause, and principal
agent of all things; of a Trinity of persons, in unity of essence, as principal
agents in the work of creation, the whole creation is silent.

Rep. 1. If the book of the creatures were wholly silent: yet if the book of
the Scriptures be not silent, we are to attend the book of the Scriptures; if
the book of the creatures would have taught us all things that we ought to
believe concerning God, what need had there been of the book of the Scriptures?

2 The book of the creatures does teach many things which we understand not
from them; the defect is in us, not in it: we are dull in apprehending, and slow
of heart in believing what the book of the Scriptures does teach us, therefore
may not conceive aright what the book of the Creatures does teach us.

3 The heathen Philosophers from the principles of Reason have acknowledged a
Trinity of Persons in the unity of Essence; as Morneus a French Lord, in that
exquisite piece of his, called The trueness of Christian Religion, largely and
satisfactorily shows, if the Reader will be at the pains to peruse him.

4 The inanimate creatures have some kind of impression of the Trinity upon
them; and one God in three Persons has in a kind left his image and his
resemblance upon them: The Sun begets beams and rays, and from both these
proceeds light; and yet neither is the Sun before the beams, nor the beams
before the light that proceeds from them, but in order only and relation, so
far as the beams are begotten, and the light proceeds; but not in time: which
does adumbrate the coeternity of the Three Persons. So also there is the
Fountain, and there is the water that bubbles up, which is (as it were)
begotten of the Fountain; and there is the stream that proceeds from both; and
these are at once in time: for in the first moment that there is a fountain,
there is the bubling of water, or the rising up, or boiling of it; and no
sooner is the bubling, but there is an issuing or proceeding of water, the
water runs from it, if there be passage: and yet in order the fountain is
first, the bubling is next, and the proceeding of water is last, but they are
together in time; And may it not be said that the impression of the Trinity is
here? but the character in which the Trinity is written in the book of the
creatures, is smaller and darker then that every one can read; when yet things
of the Godhead, some of them may more easily be spelled forth.

5. Though we affirm that the Father creates, and the Son creates, and the Holy
Ghost creates, and that these three are three persons, yet we do not hold that
these three are three real distinct Agents, but one Agent. For they are all of
them but one thing, and but one God; and so really but one Agent; but this one
Agent subsists diverse ways in three persons, as one God subsists diverse ways in
three persons, and these persons are not another thing from that one God, and
so not another thing from that one Agent. So that he goes upon a mistake, while
he disputes against three principal Agents. As suppose there were one soul in
three bodies, moving them alike in all operations, and acting by them; these
three bodies would not be three Agents, but one Agent, though all the bodies
perform the work. And if there be one God in three persons, (or which is all
one) subsisting three manner of ways, yet the three manner of ways of
subsisting, does not make three Gods, nor three Agents. But there is no
similitude that will rightly and exactly, and fully in all things hold forth
the working of God in trinity of persons; only some little crevice of light may
be opened, to give a little insight into this truth.

6. Our Divines when they have confessed that God is known by the Creation, but
have denied that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are known thereby; they
have meant it of a demonstrative knowledge which of God men may arrive at; but
of the Trinity they cannot; yet there may be some things that may shadow it
out, though very darkly.

7. It is certain, that that which is clearly seen of God in the Creation,
belongs to his Essence. For the Apostle tells us so much, Romans 1. 20. his
Godhead is seen, things belonging to his Essence, viz. his power, his wisdom,
the liberty of his will, his goodness, holiness; and many more properties
belonging to his Essence, which are common to all the persons; but those
subsistantiall, personal properties, they are not by any visible characters to
be discerned.

But he objects against our Divines, for saying, God is known from the
Creation, but not Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and he objects against the
reason that they render, viz. That the efficient force and virtue by which the
world was created, belongs to the Essence of God, and not to the personal
subsistence; his words are these,

Yet by their leave, God is a Person, all actions being proper unto persons,
therefore by their grant, the work of creation holds forth but one Agent: for
it is not imaginable, that if there were more then one principal Agent, they
should not all be equally discovered by the work.

Repl. I have answered unto this, Gods being a Person, and have declared that
God rather imports essentiality, then personality; yet withal, I have showed
that essence is never separated from person, but subsists in it; and if God be
properly spoken of, there the essence is meant, as it subsists in three
persons, in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Yet when it respects acting things
without them, these three persons act in that which is common to them all, and
wherein they are in one, and not wherein they are distinguished, and are three;
they act by the same essential property, as power, wisdom, etc. and these are
one and the same in them all, and so it is Gods work in Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; and not the Fathers work alone and apart, nor God the Sons work alone
and apart, nor God the Holy Ghost's work alone and apart, nor yet the work of
all these wherein they differ, and are three distinct from each other, but the
work of all as they are one. And the Father is no more discovered then the Son,
nor any one more then other, but God in all is discovered. So that he is upon a
mistake when he speaks of three principal Agents, that must be discovered in
the work of creation. For these persons that are, work but one thing, one
being, one God, one real Agent; for the very thing that the Father acts, the
Son acts, and the Holy Ghost acts, and the power is one, and the wisdom is
one, and the act is one.

Or suppose it were granted, that there are three principal Agents, yet there
are not three Agents essentially distinct, but personally only; and so it comes
all to one, whether one say that there are three Agents, that may be called
principal; or whether one say, there is one principal Agent: for the one
Agent is in three persons, and acts with some personal diversity, and the
three Agents are but one in essence, and but one thing, and act one thing, and
by one power; therefore it is not material how it is expressed.

Agent, as it relates. to God, may admit of the same distinction as is made
when we speak of God: Agent is considered either essentially, or
subsistentially: Essentially, and then there is but one, as there is but one
God. Subsistentially, and then there are three, as there are three Persons: But
they do not differ really and essentially one from another, as the Persons do
not; but only in the manner of acting.

And Agent taken personally, though they should be three, yet need not be
discovered each of them in the work, because as they are essentially one, so
they work one individual work by one individual power, and force, and
efficacy, which is numerically the same, and therefore cannot leave a distinct
impression in any work.

His second Argument by which he would prove Christ to be but an instrumental
Agent in creating the world, is fetched from Reason: his words are these.

The second reason proceeds from the verdict of pure Reason: If Reason may
obtain credit, she will tell us, that there could be in the work of Creation
but one principal agent, because there is by nature but one God; for if there
were two principal agents, there must be two Gods, the terms being
convertible.

Repl. 1. There is neither pure Reason nor clear Reason to be found among men;
and while he pleads so earnestly for Reason, he loses himself and the Truth in
corrupted and darkened Reason, which he too much follows; and being in pursuit
after Reason what it will present, he turns aside from Scripture, and attains
not the knowledge of the Truth, which he would seem to contend for.

Rep. 2. He argues from plurality of Agents in the Creation, to plurality of
Gods: which would have force and strength in it, if we held plurality of Agents
really and essentially distinct from one another: but if the Agent be one in
essence, and personally only more then one, (which is the doctrine we hold) no
such absurd consequence will follow, that there should be two or more Gods,
because there are two or more Agents personally (but not essentially) differing
from one another.

3. His third Reason issues from the nature of Christ's being. Christ is the
image of the invisible God, and so is distinguished from God, because the image
and the thing whereof it is an image is not the same, in that nothing can be
the image of it self. Col. 1. 15.

Repl. Where it is said, that Christ is the image of God, God is there taken
Synechdochically, or personally for the Father, as will appear, if you compare
it with Heb. 1. 3. where he is called the express image of his Fathers person.
Now Christ may be the image of the Father, and yet not the image of himself;
for though God, taken essentially, do not differ from himself, and therefore
he cannot in that sense be the image of God, and be God himself, because he
should then be the image of himself; yet God taken personally for the Father,
may differ from himself, taken personally for the Son; that is, one person may,
does differ from another, and one may be the image of another, the Son of the
Father; and may in that sense be the image of God, and yet not of himself,
though he be God.

But he renders a reason why Christ is called the image of God. Because (says
he) God did manifest his divine glory and dominion over the creature through
him chiefly, for which reason also man is called the image and glory of God, 1
Cor. 11. 7.

Repl. Christ according to his manhood may be called the image of God, because
of that glory and dominion that he was lifted up to, for he was made head of
all principality and power; but he was the image of God in an higher way also:
viz. as he was a Son, Heb. 1. 2. 3. which Sonship was before this collated
Lordship, which he had; for he was a Son before there was any creature to rule
over, as himself has confessed; and if a Son, then the image of his Father:
but this was discussed in my former Treat^se* therefore I might have passed it
over in silence.

He says further, that Christ is called the firstborn of every creature.

Repl. The urging and the answering of this is but to weary the Reader with
frivolous repetitions; therefore I refer him to what has been represented
already, both in the former, and in this present Treatise, concerning this
Title, Firstborn of every creature.

To conclude, The force of this argument lies in this; whole Christ is a
creature, and therefore but an instrumental Agent, and to prove the Antecedent,
he produces, Col. 1. 15. produced before. He might have cited and rehearsed
all those Arguments, and Scriptures of his which he brought before, and
wherewith he filled many pages as aptly and fitly as he has mentioned these,
but with little profit or delight to the Reader.

I shall conclude my answer to this argument, that when ever he shall be able
to prove Christ to be a creature, I will yield him to be an isntrumental
Agent. But then it must be done with repetitions.

I now come to answer his fourth reason, which (he says) does spring from the
manner of Christ's working, says he, though Christ had an hand in the Creation
of the world, yet was it not originally of him. 1 Cor. 8. 6. All things are of
the Father, but not of, but by Jesus Christ; the Father is made the first
cause, and original of all things, and Christ the instrument of the Father, 2.
In that it is said in Scripture, that God acted by him in the work of creation,
Ephesians. 3. 9. where it is said, that God created all things by Jesus Christ, so
in Heb. 1. 2.

Repl. I find no new strength of argument here, but what I have met with
before, and have largely answered before, in that former Treatise of mine; to
which I refer the Reader; for I am ashamed to follow him in his causlesse
iterations and repetitions, yet I shall add something to what I have
represented, seeing he gives me an occasion.

As there is a distinct order of subsisting, so there is a distinct order of
working. And the divine essence subsisting in three persons, these persons work
in three distinct manners; the Son being begotten of the Father, works from
the Father, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do,
John 5. 19. And the Father begetting the Son, works by the Son, Col. 1. 16.
20. and in very many more places. So the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father,
and from the Son, works from them both, in John 16. 13. He shall not speak of
himself, but as he hears so shall he speak, and he shall take of mine, and
show unto you; yet neither the Son, nor the Holy Ghost do work as instruments.

The Son does not, for that is the subject in hand to be discussed, nor does
the Greek particle (...), (which is here translated by) show so much; for it is
prefixed to the works of the Father, as well as to the works of the Son, Gal.
1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father. Here we may observe three things, 1. That these particles, or
prepositions are not always distinguishing particles, putting difference
betwixt thing and thing, to which they are applied; but they many times are
promiscuously used, and are confounded; for [of and by] applied to men, do
import the same thing. 2. The particle by, does not declare the person to whom
it is applied to be an instrument; for it is applied to the Father equally as
to Jesus Christ. But he will not assert the Father to be an instrument. 3. That
whereas the Father and the Son are mentioned together, they are made equal in
manner of working, and they are either both instruments, or both principal
Agents, and Efficients; for Paul was an Apostle by Jesus Christ, and by God the
Father, and Jesus Christ has the leading place. In Romans 11. 36. For of him,
and by him, and to him are all things. Here the particle (...), which is
translated by, or through, is attributed to God, and he will say, that the
Father is meant, and only the Father; and we may observe two things. 1.
According to the truth of the thing, the particles of and by are all one; and
that by does not import any instrumentalness; for God in no sense can be an
instrument. 2. According to the sense that he puts upon the particle by, God is
both the principal Agent, because of him are all things: and he is also the
Instrument of all things, for by him are all things. Also in Heb. 2. 10. where
the Creation is spoken of and attributed to the Father, and not to the Son, it
is not attributed to him as something (...), but as something (...), not as of
him, but as by him: The words are these, It behoved him for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, to make the Prince and Captain, etc. Yet he
will not say that the Father is an Instrument. I shall not multiply places,
these Texts are sufficient to show the absurdity and falseness of the gloss
that he puts upon the prepositions [of] and [by].

That which he asserts of the Fathers, that they frequently call him Gods
instrument, and servant, is true of Christ as the son of man, according to his
humane nature; and they call him no other then the Prophet, Isa. 42. 1. which
must he so understood.

In the next place, after his Arguments, where he placed his own strength for
the proving of Christ's instrumentalness in Creation, he comes to consider my
Argument against it, which was this:

God could not make use of an instrument in the work of creating of the world.

To this he answers, 1. This Assertion derogates from Gods al-sufficiency: Is
any thing impossible with God? is any thing too hard for the Lord?

Rep. This Assertion, as it is laid down, with a reason to explain it, is so
far from derogating from Gods al-sufficiency, that it is the magnifying of Gods
al-sufficiency: there is such an infinity of perfection in Gods al-sufficiency,
that it is incommunicable to the creature: God cannot make another as
sufficient as himself; that is, It is so transcendently excellent, that no
creature is capable of it. And whereas he demands, Is any thing too hard for
God? Is any thing impossible to the Lord? he may receive this answer, Whatever
may be done by power, God can do it, because he has sufficiency of power in
himself to do it: But that which cannot be done in the nature of the thing,
which implies a contradiction if it were supposed to be done, that is
impossible with God, or in it self rather: as, It is impossible for the most
high God to make a God most high, because God most high has his being of
himself, and is uncreated and eternal, and gives being to other things.
Therefore a created most high God carries a contradiction with it, therefore is
a thing not to be done, and God cannot do it; yet it argues not any weakness in
God because he cannot do it.

2. He says I contradict my own testimony, and he minds me of the time.

I remember (says he) that in a Conference (where I exercised both silence and
patience, to the glory of God) since I received your paper, you did affirm (in
the hearing of not a few) that God might have made an Angel, or some other
creature at the first, and by it have made all things.

Repl. I do remember that time he speaks of, and so do some scores of persons
as well as I, and will remember it while they live, wherein he exercised not
silence altogether, for he spoke at the last in the close of the conference,
and it had been better he had been silent, then to speak as he did, for he
asserted an untruth in those few words he did speak: he uttered words to this
purpose, That it was strange to him, that he should be brought upon the stage
in so public a way, for holding such an opinion, when he had not declared
himself in a positive way at any time about it: Which caused me to mind him of
his first Sermon in which he broached his opinion in a positive way, in this
assertion, That Christ is not the ultimate and last rest of Saints, but the
Father; and that Christ was but the way to it. Which, if Christ be coessentiall
with the Father, is false; therefore his assertion did deny by an undeniable
consequence the coessentiality of Christ with the Father. And at another time
he publicly in his preaching speaking his opinion on John 3. 13. No man has
ascended up into heaven but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man
which is in heaven, said, that he could not conceive how Christ being at that
time on earth, could be in heaven, unless it were in respect of that knowledge
which he had of the Father, and the things of heaven: or words to this effect.
In which he denied the omnipresence of Christ, and consequently the Godhead of
Christ: And yet in that short speech of his he would make fair weather of it,
and put a face upon it, as if he were not the man he was taken for.

Concerning his patience, not I alone, but many others did judge it stupidity
rather then patience; for scarce any one that had had the spirit of a man,
could have been dumb, and not open his mouth, when he was so palpably called
forth to appear in the cause. It did certainly strike amazement in very many,
that knew he was there, and yet could not hear him speak one word, having so
many strong invitations thereto; Or if it were not stupidity, it was cunning
craftiness; for he knew how to make advantage by being here and keeping
silence, and he could reserve himself in point of speaking to a more hopeful
time, and fairer opportunity; in which he might by speaking propagate his
opinion; there was little hope of advantaging his cause at that time, when
there were so many to contradict him. And yet he might feel men's pulses by
being there, and discern who were his friends, and who his enemies, and who
might probably be wrought upon, and who not.

But (he says) it was to the glory of God, that he exercised silence and
patience. But it was every to way the dishonor of God, for if truth were in his
tenent, then he shamefully deserted it, when he should have committed himself
to God in the maintaining of it, who ever opposed it. And if Error and Heresy
were in his tenent, then he carried it craftily to do the more mischief, for
he thought it wisdom to forbear when it might be much opposed, and to take
time to speak, when it might be more prevalent, that he might draw away the
more Disciples after him.

But he tells me of a contradiction. Where lies it? In these words, God could
make use of no Instrument in the work of creation; and God might have made use
of an Angel, or some other creature, and by it have made all things. Here is a
contradiction indeed, if these assertions be taken separately, from other
expresions that expounded them. And here lies the injury that he does me, which
an uningaged person, and stander by betwixt us, upon his first reading of this
charge which he makes against me, of contradiction, (who was present at the
conference) soon discovered, and expressed himself to this purpose, That he
should think the worse of Mr. Knowles while he knew him, for the wrong he did
me in this matter. He leaves out those words which cleared it from
contradiction; When I said, God could use no instrument in the work of
creation, I spoke of such an Instrument by whose force, and virtue, and power
such a work might be affected, as my after words clearly show; because
creation is the making of things out of nothing, and required an infinite
power, which no creature is capable of, for it would make him a God. These
words do demonstrate that I spoke of an Instrument that might be co-operative
with God in virtue and efficacy in so great a work. But when I spoke of an
Angel as an Instrument, which God might have made use of in the creation of
the world, if he would, I both meant it, and expressed it of such a kind of
Instrument which contributes no virtue nor efficacy to the work, but is a
means without which God will not do such a work, rather then a means by which
he will do it; such as the blowing with rams horns was for the bringing down
of the walls of Jericho, in which there was no virtue for the effecting of such
a work, and so God might have made an Angel, and might have said to it, Go,
say, Let there be Heavens and earth, and at the Angels speaking, it might have
been; not because there was any virtue in the Angels speaking for the
production of such things; but the virtue is wholly Gods. But it is otherwise
with Christ in his making of the World, the virtue is his own, Christ is said
to support al things by the word of his own power, and so by consequence to
create all things by the word of his own power. Now such an Instrument Christ
could not be, nor any creature, nor could any creature be capable of any such
power: and thus I expressed it upon that day of conference, as there are many
witnesses. And yet thus he abuses me, and then gloryes over me in a large
manner, and triumphs excessively. His words are these:

How to reconcile one with another is unfeasible, you must confess you are not
always infalible, you sometimes differ from your self, and then no wonder if
you disagree with others. What shall I take for your judgment, etc?

And thus he goes on in a vapouring way, with a deal of stuff such as this, and
his glorying over me in this, (seeing I am innocent wherein he accuses me) is
not my shame, but his.

Afterward, when he had testified his high estimation of reason in some
hyperbolicall, or rather fantastical expressions, as prostrating himself to
the shadow of it, rather then to any man's testimony, (if he had spoken so much
of Scripture, I should have liked it better) he examines my reason, why God
could make use of no Instrument in creation of the world.

My reason was this, Creation is a making all things out of nothing, and
requires an infinite power, which God cannot derive to any creature; and
therefore he cannot make use of any Instrument in creating.

His first answer that he gives is this, That Gods infinite power was
manifested in the work of creation, yet was not the infinity of his power
manifested fully in that, or any other work; for he has more power then ever
yet he had need to use, or then could in any work be fully declared

Repl. In this answer there seems to be 1. absurdity, 2. Impertinency, 3.
Evasion. The absurdity is in this, there is a distinction put without a
difference appearing: he would make infinite power manifested, and infinity of
power manifested, to be two things, and yet they are the same thing; for
infinite power and infinity of power are both one thing, and infinite power
manifested, and infinity of power manifested must consequently be one thing
also. The impertinence lies in this; My Argument runs of one thing, his answer
is to another thing; I speak of infinite power derived to the creature, and
say the creature is not capable of it; he tells me of infinite power manifested,
and so speaks not to the purpose. The evasion appears in this, he says that
the infinity of Gods power was not manifested fully in that work of creation,
or in any other; but what of this? If it was not fully manifested, yet was it
not truly manifested? so as that the rational creature might be able to say,
the power that was put forth in making such creatures of nothing, is infinite,
no less then the power of the most high God? as sometimes the Magicians of
Egypt said, this is the finger of God, the power of God, which transcends the
power that any creature is capable of. And if infinite power was truly
manifested, how is the Argument enervated, or wherein invalidated? And if
infinity of power be not fully manifested, what is the reason of it? Does it
not imply a contradiction in the sense in which he intends it? For to assert
that infinity of power is in such sort manifested in any work, as that he
cannot further manifest it, but has wrought to the utmost of his power, and
can proceed no further, neither has any more to use, is to deny infinity of
power to be in God; and there is a contradiction in it in adjecto, a
contradiction implied; and such a manifestation would rather be an exhaustion
of power, which is impossible where infinite power is.

His expressions of more power in those words of his, he has more power then
ever yet he had need to use, have truth in them in a sense, but in an other
sense have fraud and falsehood in them; if he mean by more power, more of the
same kind then ever yet he had need to use, it will be granted to him, without
any advantage to him; for if God could spend his store, he could not be said to
be infinite in power. It is certain, that God has an inexhaustable treasure of
power, and the more he manifests of it, he has not the less to manifest, but
can declare it millions of ways in which he has not yet declared it; and
there may be yet more glorious effects of it if he shall please, then any that
have been wrought. But this concession hurts not my assertion, viz that an
infinite power is required in creation; and he has not denied the truth and
clearness of the manifestation of it therein, though he say there may by a
fuller manifestation of it, which by the multiplication of mighty works which
God can effect, must needs be; because every work will bear witness thereof in
reference to it self. But if he should mean by more power a greater power, or
more in measure, and degree then yet he has used and manifested in the
creation, and in the works which he has wrought, it must not be yielded to
him; for though there might be a greater work, yet not a greater power, for the
same power is manifested in the one as in the other, viz. an infinite power,
and there are no degrees in that which is infinite; though one work may more
fully speak to us that infinity of power which is put forth therein then an
other does.

The work of creation is that work that God glories in in the Scripture, and he
does appropriate it to himself, and does give witness therein to the world,
that he is the most high God, Jer. 10. 10, 11, 12. And the invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that the very
heathen are left without excuse, Romans 1. 20.

And a greater work then creation is, from which an ampler testimony of the
infinity of Gods power may be fetched for the conviction of the creature, in
some sense there can be none; for there is an infinite distance betwixt
something and nothing, and only an infinite power can get over it: for that
which cannot be measured is infinite, but the distance betwixt something and
nothing is such as cannot be measured; and creation is a bringing of something
out of nothing, therefore the power that effects it must be infinite: therefore
infinite power or infinity of power is manifested in great fullness and
clearenesse in creation.

His 2d. answer that he gives is this,

2. Your assertion plainly denies the man Christ Jesus to be God Almighty, or
infinite in power; for you say, that God could not give or derive an infinite
power to any creature, and that a creature cannot be God Almighty, etc. The man
Christ Jesus was a creature, How then can that person be God?

Repl. This reasoning is unworthy a man of parts; a very child that has
learned the first principles, might answer him. The man Christ Jesus is a
creature; that is, the son of Mary, the seed of Abraham is a creature; and I do
deny this seed of Abraham, as the seed of Abraham, to be God, or Almighty, or
capable of an infinite power, and therefore God could not derive it, nor was
Christ Almighty as man, as the son of man; But this man Christ Jesus was God,
as well as man, that is, this person Christ Jesus, was both God and man; not
that the manhood was turned into the Godhead, and so became God, but that the
eternal Son of God, who is by nature God, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
assumed manhood, took the nature of man, the seed of Abraham, and became one
person with it, and this person was Almighty, as he was the Son of God, not as
man; and this almightinesse was not by derivation from the Father, but was an
essential attribute in him.

His third Argument is this,

The Ground (says he) of your Argument is straw and stubble; for infinite
power may be manifested by them to whom it is not communicated. And he gives
instances many.

Repl. Because I soresaw he might give such an answer, therefore on that day of
the conference, which he spoke of, I mentioned such an instrument which he now
speaks of, which is not the subject of the power, but a means without which
God will not exercise the power which he himself is the subject of: and I
granted, God might have made use of such an instrument, but Christ in creation
(as also in preservation) is the subject of the power, and I spoke of such an
instrument which is the subject of power, and showed it was impossible that
there should be such an instrument, and therefore Christ having such power in
himself could not be an isntrumental, but the principal Agent.

He comes in the last place to consider of the Minor of the Argument, which he
had cast the Scriptures I produced into, fetched from Christ's creating, which
is this: All things were made by Christ Jesus.

His answer is.

It is true, Christ being excepted, of whose creaturall being I have already
spoken.

But against this answer he frames an obction.

Obj. You will say (says he) that in Joh. 1. 3. it is said, that without him
was nothing made that was made. And he answers it,

Sol. The words are to be restrained to all those things which by the use of an
instrument were made; in the first verse the creation of Jesus Christ is
included, and in this 3 verse he is spoken of as the instrument of God in
creating all things; therefore he is there to be excepted. And he gives some
instances, which I omit the mention of, because I shall have no need to return
answer to them.

Repl. If indeed the creation of Jesus Christ be included in ver. 1. then I
shall grant that Jesus Christ is excepted in ver. 3. but if not, then ver. 3.
is strong against him. The words in ver 1. In the beginning was the word, and
that is granted by both sides, that then he was; but that then he began is not
asserted by the Apostle and is denied by us: if he will have it to be so, let
him show in his next how he will fetch out creation from these words, In the
beginning was the word. God the Father was in the beginning; was God the Father
therefore created in the beginning?

The next Scripture produced by me to prove Christ's Deity by, was Heb. 7. 3.
Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life, made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest
continually. Christ is here resembled to Melchisedech, in reference to
eternity. But what answer makes he to this text! Truly it is an impotent, lame,
and poor answer.

Was Melchisedech (says he) eternal? if so, then he was God, but he was
neither the Father, nor the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; I hope you will not allow
a quaternity of persons in unity of essence; and therefore will allow the words
to be taken in a figurative sense; Melchisedech was without beginning of days,
and end of life, in that there is no mention made either of his birth or death
in the History of Moses, or especially in reference to his Priesthood; the time
of it is beginning or ending, being not certainly known. So our High Priest
Jesus Christ is without beginning of days, or end of life

Repl. This answer is too light and frothy in a subject so serious; It was not
mine intent or design, (and he knows it very well) to make Melchisedech God,
nor any of the persons of the Godhead, nor yet to make a quaternity of persons,
but to make Christ God, to whom that in truth belongs, which in type only, and
in a figure, mystically is attributed to Melchisedech. Moses and David speak of
Melchisedech, as if he had been one who had glided down out of heaven, and come
from above, and had again soon after conveyed himself thither; for there is not
any mention at all made of his birth, or death, of his father, or mother, or
kindred, or when he became Priest, nor when he laid down his Priesthood. And
the Apostle saw the mystery in it, and that it behoved him so to be described,
and set out, that he might be a Type of Christ, both of his Person, and
Priesthood. And therefore when he makes use of him as a Type to set out Christ
by, he describes him to be without father, and so was Christ as he was man; and
without mother, and so was Christ as he was God, having no beginning of days,
nor end of life; nor had Christ (according to his divine Nature considered)
either beginning, or end of days; but acording to his humane, he had both, and
both of them described, and well known by all that are versed in
Scripture-story; and the Apostle knowing these things, in express words makes
Melchisedech the Type of him, discerning, that the Holy Ghost (in concealing
these things of him) had made him so, and intended him to be so, as these words
import, Made like unto the Son of God, for he is described (says Beza) as if
he had neither been mortal man, nor had been born of a mortal woman; which
because it could by no means agree with any mere man born of men; therefore the
Apostle says, that he is peculiarly the figure of that one only begotten Son
of God, and that it was so intended by the Holy Ghost.

Now then the strength of the Argument fetched from this Scripture, lies here,
First, Melchisedech is a Type of Christ; that is without controversy.
Secondly, He is a Type in these things mentioned of him, Without father,
without mother, without beginning of days, and end of time. Otherwise in vain
does the Apostle mention these things of Melchisedech, but as a type; for in
truth, it was not so of Melchisedech. And it appears by the scope of the
Apostle, which was to interpret the words of David, A Priest after the order of
Melchisedech; therefore it was necessary for him to set forth what Melchisedech
was in his person, and in his office; and in his person he was (...), etc.
Without father, without mother, not in truth; but they are not mentioned, and
so it is, as if it had been so, and that in type he might be so, and therein
resemble the Son of God, that in truth was so. Thirdly, Melchisedech (being
only a type in these things of Christ) it was not necessary that he should be
such in truth, but only in a figure, mystically, as indeed he was not; but it
was necessary, that Christ should be so in truth, being the Antitype, that is,
being the substance of that which Melchisedech was but a shadow of; therefore
in John 1. 17. it is said, that the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ. That is, there were many shadows in the law of Moses, but
Christ came and fulfilled them, and was the truth of them. We read of David,
that he said of himself, They pierced my hands and my feet, they gave me
vinegar and gall to drink; which really were not done to David, but mystically,
and in a figure, as David was the type of Christ; but these things were really
done to Christ, and in truth were fulfilled in Christ. So the blood of bulls and
calves and of such beasts which were sacrificed, and offered, they took away
sin, cleansed away the guilt, and brought pardon, and purged the conscience,
and brought peace; but none of these did so in truth, but mystically, in type
only, as they shadowed out, and pointed at the sacrifice of Christ, and at his
blood: but the blood of Christ really and in truth did take away sin, did
cleanse the conscience, did bring remission and peace, Heb. 9. 9, 12, 13, 14.
More instances might be given, but indeed there is evidence enough in the very
nature of a type, and antitype. There is a mystery in the type, and there is
the impletion or fulfilling of the mystery in the Antitype, or the thing of the
mystery, is to be seen in the Antitype. But enough of this, unless he had said
more to impugn it.

I now come to consider of his answer to Pro. 8. 22. The Lord possessed me in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old; I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.

To this he thus answers, And gives this sense.

The Lord, who is Possessour of heaven and earth, obtained or created me, when
he began to work, before his ancient works: And I was set up, or anointed to
have the dominion of all things, and that from everlasting, that is, from the
beginning, before the earth was.

Repl. The word indeed signifies, to obtain, or to possess, which is sometimes
done by creation, and so when heaven and earth were created they were possessed
by God; or as he says, God was Possessour of them. But in this place, it is an
obtaining or possessing as is done by generation; I gave an instance in Eve in
reference to Cain. I have gotten a man: it was by a begetting or generating
there, and in this place it is so also; Christ is called the only begotten of
the Father: and here in ver. 24. Christ the wisdom of God, declares, how he
was possessed, viz. as a Son that is brought forth by a woman traveling; in
which Christ is said to be born, and is called the firstborn, to exclude
creation, and that it might be by generation; and the act of the Father in
communicating the divine essence to the Son, is called (after the manner of
men, that it may be better conceived of) a begetting, or generating, suitable
to which is the Hebrew word Amun, v. 30. which signifies a child nursed,
nourished, brought up with a father, and such was Christ; which is thus
expressed, to hold forth his generation, and not creation; for when God created
Adam he created him a man; but Christ is represented as a child, to show how he
was begotten: and it is added, that Christ was his Fathers delight, and a sport
before him, (for so it is in the Hebrew) and this is humanitus dictum, is is
spoken after the manner of Fathers, who take dear delight in the child that
comes out of their own bowels; and when it is little, it is very pleasant, and
makes the Father sport; and by it is signified to us, what an one Christ was,
what a son he was, that he was his own proper son, not created but generated;
having his very essence from the Father, by an act of eternal generation, and
in whom God takes delight, after the manner of parents in a child that comes
out of their bowels, and is a part of themselves, that is, the highest and
dearest delight, and the most natural and intimate delight, beyond which there
neither is or can be any delight. It is manifest therefore that he confounds
things that must not be confounded, he would have possessing or obtaining to be
one with creating in this place, but it is a gross mistake in him.

But when was it that God did thus possess or beget Christ? He would have it to
be when God began to work; then God created Christ (says he) before his works
of old. But it is manifest, that the very words, that set forth Gods eternity
are used here. See two of the words, Megnolam which signifies from everlasting,
and Meas which signifies a tunc, from then, or from of old, as it is
translated; and both are used in Psalm. 39. 2. and applied to the most high God.
Thy throne is established of old, thou art from everlasting; and kedem is in
many places applied to God, for such antiquity which is eternity, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
the eternal God is my refuge; so that Christ's eternity is set forth in this
place of the Proverbs, He was brought forth or possessed from eternity. And
though it be said, in the beginning of his way, yet this makes nothing against
Christ's eternity, because it is added, that it was before his works; so that
this [was] points at eternity: for who will assert that creation was the
beginning of Gods way? did God act nothing before he created? it is undoubtedly
false. So that again he is to blame to confound beginning (as he understands
beginning) and everlasting, as if they were one, when as they differ as much as
eternity and time do differ.

But he presents us with the Septuagint version; but it is not at hand, and I
dare not take his word without viewing it, he has so often deceived me in his
quotations. Then he gives in Montanus his version; but that is not against my
assertion, nor does it favor his doctrine. Lastly, he alleges ver. 30. as
speaking of Christ's being, before Gods works of old; but he says it is a
created being: but he is mistaken in the mention of the verse, for it speaks of
no such thing, and I have made use of it against him.

Zech. 13. 7. has the next place in my paper, and in his answer. The words
are, Awake, oh sword, against my shepherd, against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hoasts.

His answer is, When you inferred coequality from this place, you hearkened
rather to the sound then to the sense of our English word fellow, which does
not always note equality, as from Psalm. 45. 7. Heb. ^. 19. you may be informed
where the Saints are called the fellows of Christ, and yet are not equal.

Repl. To evade the strength of this allegation from Zecharie, he flies from
the sound, to the sense of the English word fellow, and says it signifies not
always equality, and yet he declares not in what other sense it is taken,
neither can I imagine what sense he can devise or frame, other then equality;
for I appeal to all rational English men, whether fellow be not equal, in
our English acception of the word: not but that I grant that the person that is
a fellow, and so an equal in some respect, may be a superior or in inferior in
other respects, as a school-fellow, a play-fellow, a chamber-fellow, they are
fellows not in a general latitude in all things; but in a particular respect,
so far as concerns such a business, there is an equality, they are equally
invested into the privileges of the School, and carry on that work of learning
with equality together; and so in play, there is no respect of persons in it,
but a parity and equality therein; be they great or mean, they are all fellows,
that is, equals in that. And so it may be said of Christ in reference to
Saints, though Christ have a superiority (even as he is the son of man, much
more as he is the Son of God) over all them, and over Angels also, and all
creatures; yet Christ is fellow to the Saints, and they fellows to him in some
respects; he calls them brethren, Psalm. 40. I will declare thy name unto my
brethren: He makes himself herein a fellow to them, and makes them fellows with
him. John 20. 17. Go to my brethren and say, Pascend to my Father and to your
Father, to my God and your God. In bearing the cross, he became like to them,
yea, he set himself below them: in taking their nature upon himself, and
infirmities, etc. he became like to them, and was as they, and became their
fellow: and in condescension, in coming to minister, rather then to be
ministered to, he was their fellow at the least, if not below their fellow.
Persons of the same nature and essence may be fellows, equals: Kings and
peasants were alike from Adam, do alike partake of flesh and blood, and were
formed alike in the womb. But God and the creature can be equal in nothing; for
finite cannot in any thing equal infinite.

2 He betakes himself to the Hebrew word and tells me, If I had consulted with
it, I would have been a stranger to so strange an inference, and then tells me
of diverse acceptions of the word, as Citizen, Neighbor, Second, Lieutenent,
Vicar, friend; and alleges the Septuagint, which he says translate it
citizen, and Tremelius, which translates it Proximum, Neighbor, or next; And
Tremelius and Junius in their Marginall notes, a near friend, one that stands
over against another, and is at hand to all friendly offices: and makes it the
same as to be in the bosom of the Father.

Repl. That the word in the Original signifies, either Citizen, Lieutenent,
Vicar, representative, is barely asserted; and if he have so strictly surveyed
the original, as that he dare challenge me for not surveying it, he might have
done well to have directed me, or the Reader, to the places where the word
admits of such acceptions; but this he has not done, therefore I shall
conclude, that either he has presented his own imagination instead of the
true sense of the word, or more probably has relied upon some who have
deceived him. I have viewed the original, and do find, that the word Gnamith,
which is rendered Socius, proximus, proceeds from the the radix Gnammath, which
signifies secundum, juxta, and sometimes, e regione, ex adverso, and is as much
as Ca-asher, which is rendered prout, all which do hold forth equality. To begin
with this last, prout is rightly translated, even as, the son Christ is even as
the Father. I suppose it cannot be spoken of any creature so, the words e
regione, ex adverso, are rendered over against, right against, which is spoken
of a thing or person that matcheth an other, set this against that to fellow
it, or match it. But what creature is there that may be set up e regione Dei
patris, opposite to God, to match him? And so, secundum, juxta, which signify
according, hard by, beside or nigh another thing, or person; and it is rendered
equal, juxta a jugo, says the Etymologist. Now fellows are joined in the yoke,
such a nighnesse, as that the son fellows the Father; And if the words do any
of them, sometimes in their use, import an afternesse, or a seconding, and
following, it may be granted; and yet to the other sense that they carry of
equality, hold notwithstanding: for in order of subsisting and working (though
in nature and essence not so) the Son is after, and second, and yet is God the
Fathers fellow.

I grant that the word is rendered a neighbor, in Levit. 6. 2. and proximus is
Englished a neighbor, and therefore I accord with Tremelius, who says, the
Hebrew word does sound as much as proximus, a neighbor; and we know who is
man's neighbor, one of the same kind, a man like himself, and in that respect
his fellow, his equal. But who is this Lord of Hoasts neighbor? any mere man
consisting only of soul and body? Then God and man have one and the same
neighbor: but it is little less then blasphemy to say, that any creature is
Gods neighbor; no, it is a person of the same nature and essence that is his
neighbor, the eternal Son of God is the Fathers neighbor, was nigh him and
by him from Eternity. And to be in the bosom of the Father, and at his right
hand, is not a place fit for any mere creature, but fit for one equal.

But he makes two collections from the signification of the word,

1. Says he, Christ is the principal object of Gods dearest love: The man my
fellow whom I most love, says Grotius.

Repl. This will be readily granted, and the other viz. coequallity not
impedited nor gainsaid by it, for the Father loves his coequall better then all
others; and because he is of the same nature, and therein coequall, therefore he
loves him best.

2. Says he, Christ is Gods principal servant in his high transactions, one
that is Gods representative.

Repl. That Christ according to his humane nature is Gods servant, is granted;
but that it may be collected from this place of Zachery that he is Gods
servant, or that the Hebrew word translated fellow, does import so much, or
that whole Christ is Gods servant, is denied, and is not proved by him; but is
his naked assertion.

He concludes thus:

I might now collect from the words something to oppose the doctrine you
assert, they being spoken of a man, and in reference to the Lord of Hosts, who
cannot possibly have an equal, unless it were possible to have two Gods.

Repl. This man that is spoken of in the words which have been now discussed,
is that Lord of Hoasts spoken of in Zech. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. And if so, I hope
one Lord of Hoasts is fellow, equal to an other Lord of Hoasts and yet it will
not follow that there are two Gods, but only two persons in the Godhead, which
do fellow one another, and are equal.

The next Scripture in my paper, that I presented him with for the confirming
of the undoubted truth of Christ's Godhead, was John 3. 13. No man has
ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man,
which is in heaven.

To this Text he gives this answer, by which he would evade the omnipresence of
Christ, and so not confess him to be God.

The words (says he) may be thus understood, No man has ascended up into
heaven, that is, no man has known those divine things, etc. but he that came
down from heaven, that is, the Son being excepted, who was in heaven, and
descended thence for some works that he was to do on earth. Who is in heaven,
that is, in the bosom of the Father, knowing secrets and divine things, as
they are in themselves.

Repl. This interpretation is neither concordant to it self, nor to the truth.
1. To it self it agrees not, because ascending, and descending, and existing
in relating all to heaven, are all to be taken either literally, according as
the words sound, or else they are all to be taken metaphorically, and
spiritually; but he expounds some of them in a mystical figurative sense, and
others in a plain literal sense. To ascend up to heaven, is not to be
understood (as he gives the exposition) of a personal ascension, but of a
mental contemplation. And to be in heaven, is only in a spiritual sense, in
speculation, in beholding with the eyes of the soul, divine things, and the
Fathers secrets. But to descend from heaven, that must have no metaphorical
sense, as the rest had, but a literal sense put upon it, and the descension
must be personal. Now here is a discordancie in these things, and he gives no
reason of this varying, in his interpreting. Ascending and descending are also
opposites, and if so, then they must be taken in an opposite sense; if
ascending then be taken for deep knowledge, and science of divine things; then
descending is departing from deep knowledge, and science of divine things;
which will be very absurd in his own conceptions. 2. This exposition agrees not
with the truth; for ascending in Scripture, is taken when it refers to Christ,
as well as when it refers to others. In another sense, viz. in the plain
literal external sense, John 6. 62. What if you shall see the Son of man
ascend up where he was before. And chap. 20. 17. I ascend unto my Father and
unto your Father, etc. And touch me not, I am not yet ascended. And Ephesians. 4.
8, 9, 10. And I do not remember any one place, where ascending into heaven, is
taken in his sense, but in the literal sense. And it seems to be discrepant
and disagreeing to the phrase and manner of Scripture expression. For when
divine knowledge and wisdom is spoken of, or other such gifts, they are said
to come down from heaven, from above unto men; and men are not said to ascend
up to heaven, though there may be a truth in it, that a man ascends up to
heaven, not in his knowing so much, as in the use of his knowledge, in his
beholding and viewing of spiritual things.

And if a spiritual sense is not proper unto ascending into heaven, then is
not Christ's being in heaven to be interpreted in a spiritual or mystical
sense; but look in what sense he ascended and descended, in that sense it may
be said he is in heaven, that is, in a literal sense; nor is this spiritual
sense of these words (is in heaven) agreeable to the acception of the like
words, and phrase of speaking used elsewhere in John 17. 24. Father, I will
that those whom thou have given me, be where I am, that they may behold my
glory. Christ here speaks of heaven, and of his glory in heaven, and of the
disciples coming thither, and beholding his glory there; and he speaks not in a
mystical sense, of his own knowledge of divine things, nor of the disciples
knowing of such things, as he knew; but in a literal sense he speaks all, and
he says, I am there, and yet he was on earth, according to his manhood: but he
was in heaven also, Where I am, says he, that was heaven, Christ was there.
How was that possible, if Christ was not God? and if the words be taken
literally there, in Joh. 17. 24 then they are literally to be taken here, in
John 3. 13. The place discussed betwixt us, the comparing of these two places
together, clears the sense of both, and is repugnant to his interpretation.

And though he gives a literal sense to these words, (But he that came down
from heaven) viz. the Son being excepted, who was in heaven, and descended
thence; yet it is a corrupt, and false, and very dangerous sense that he gives,
which I met with in my former Treatise. For he represents Christ in his
descension as leaving heaven, departing from thence, and coming upon earth; but
this is contrary to the next expressions, the sense of which I have cleared up,
where it is said, that Christ was in heaven still, notwithstanding that he
descended, so that it is a real true descention, or a true coming and
appearing upon earth, but not local, such as is appliable to the creature, for
that is not proper to Christ. The creature in descending moves from the place
it was in, and leaves it: but it is not so to be conceived of Christ. But thus,
Christ is said to descend in reference to his incarnation, he being the Son of
God assumed flesh of the Virgin, by the divine inspiration of the Spirit of
God, and so was made the Son of man, and so the Son of God, appeared in the Son
of man, and this is called descending. This is made manifest to us from John 1.
14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, even the word dwelt among us
in flesh, and we beheld his glory in flesh, the glory as of the begotten Son of
God. This glory was in heaven, now in the Sons assuming flesh, it is seen on
earth, in the seed of the woman: this is the descending of Christ, and after
this manner the most high God is said to descend in Scripture, God came into
the temple after this manner, not by moving from place to place, which is not
congruous to God, but by a work, declaring God to be there, where he was not
seen before; And so God descended to see the tower that was built in a work,
and no other way, and it is called descending after the manner of men, and it
is Gods descending, all that is competent to God. And this kind of descending
of Christ, must of necessity be yielded unto, because the local is excluded by
Christ in the very place, where his descending is mentioned.

Having showed the inconsistency of the exposition which he framed, and gave of
this Text of John, and having fortified the sense in which I made use of it,
and for which I produced it, I shall now answer unto that which by way of
objection may be urged against the sense that I have put upon it.

Object.

It may be thus argued; A local corporeal ascension cannot be understood in
reference to Christ, because it is expressed in the preterperfect-Tense, as a
thing done; but that was (in a literal local acception taken) inconsistent to
Christ, because he was then upon earth, and as he says afterward, was not
ascended to the Father.

Sol. The preterperfect-tense (has ascended) refers to no man, and not to
Christ; and there is an Elipsis in the words, or a defectiveness in the
expressions in reference to Christ, and therein of necessity that the words
supplied should run in the preterperfect-tense: but they may run in the future
tense, thus, But he that descended, shall ascend. viz. the Son of man which is
in heaven.

Or if the words should be supplied in the preterperfect-tense, yet a change of
tense (which notes out the assurance of the thing: it is spoken of as done,
because assuredly it is to be done) cannot overturn the genuine sense of the
place.

Obj.

2. It may be farther objected, that the son of man is the subject who is said
to be in heaven, but the son of man is Christ under the consideration of his
manhood, and under that consideration it was impossible for him to be at that
time in heaven, for it is contradictory to the truth of his humanity to be at
two places so greatly distant at the same time.

Sol. Here is in these expressions, viz. the son of man which is in heaven,
that which they call Idiomatum communicationem: that which is spoken in the
concrete of Christ, according to one nature, transferred to another nature, is
as he himself must confess in other cases, according to his Tenent, to be often
found in the Sripture; in these words, they would never have crucified the Lord
of glory, it is to be observed, Christ was crucified according to the flesh,
but he was not the Lord of glory according to the flesh, but spirit of
holiness, yet it is said, the Lord of glory was crucified: so it is said, the
son of man was in heaven, but it is meant of the son of God; and the meaning
is, the person that is called the son of man, was in heaven, though not as the
son of man, but according to the other nature as the Son of God.

But let us try the strength of his reasons, which he brings for the
countenancing of this exposition of his.

1. Says he, this sense and meaning wherewithal I have clothed those words,
is no ways opposite to the analogy of faith; There is nothing (as I suppose)
in it, which the doctrine of the Gospel will pick a quarrel with.

Repl. The nakedness of this reason is discovered in what I have already
presented, I have showed that Christ's ascending up to heaven, is not any where
taken in that sense which he puts upon it. And that Christ's being in heaven in
the sense that he clothes it with, is repugnant to a parallel place in Joh. 17.
24. so that he makes Scripture quarrel with it self, and such an exposition
which he has given of Christ's descending, stands at defiance against all those
pregnant places which do proclaim Christ to be coessential with the Father:
therefore both Old Testament and New will rise up against it, and condemn it.

2. He says, That the sense that he would have this Text to own, is elsewhere
challenged by the like phrases to themselves, as their due. And he mentions
Prove. 30. 4. Who has ascended up into heaven, and descended? etc.

Repl. Some conceive that Agur speaks of God in the persons of the Father and
the Son, whom he describes to ascend up into heaven, and descend, to give
signs of his presence in both places, and be every where; and who gathers the
winds in his fist, and binds the waters in a garment; and that he proposes
this as an hard question to his two friends Ithiel and Vcal. Others conceive
that Agur does speak of man, and that his interrogation is in the force and
virtue of it a negation, Who has ascended? etc. that is, no man can do such
things as he mentions; and that if his friends do know any that can effect such
things, let them declare what his name is, and what his sons name is. But they
all understand it of ascending to the very place of heaven; and not any (that I
have seen) in the sense that he drives at: nor does either the text or context
necessitate, that this ascending should be a discovering of Gods hidden
secrets, for what then is descending? As for Piscator, I have never seen him
upon the Proverbs, and can say nothing to it.

He mentions Paul's rapture into the third heaven to be only a discovery of the
things of God. It Is somewhat presumptuous for him to determine, when the
Apostle himself durst not: for, whether he was in the body, or out of the body,
he could not tell. But if his rapture were not real, it was in vision; and to
the third heaven and paradise he went either really or in vision; to the place
he went, that he might understand the thing.

But he quotes Grotius, and Musculus, and Bucer, as Writers who understand
ascending in a spiritual sense for penetrating the secrets of heaven.

I confess some good Expositors do so interpret the word ascend; but how it
will quadrare, and what adequateness there will be betwixt the sense they give
to the word ascend, and the sense they put upon the word descend, I cannot
understand. However it be, the concurrence of Expositors in the interpretation
of ascending, will avail him nothing in reference to the controversy betwixt
him and me; for it lies not in that word, but in these words, is in heaven,
whether they be literally to be understood, or in respect of knowledge only:
and Expositors do not at all countenance his Metaphorical sense he gives of
those words, but they fall upon the distinction of Natures, and say, Christ was
in heaven according to the Deity, but not in heaven according to the Humanity.

3. He says, his sense is fitly conjoined with the context. Christ (says he)
reproves Nichodemus his unbeleef, aggravating it from the certainty of the
things spoken, We speak what we know. And then from the perspicuity in
speaking, If I have told you of earthly things; that is, either things that may
or are necessary to be known in the earth; Or else the words respect the manner
of Christ's holding them forth, And ye believe not; how can ye believe if I
should tell you of heavenly things? In this 13. verse you have a exclusion of
all men (Christ excepted) from the knowledge of heavenly things.

Repl. All may be granted that he says, till he come to the 13. ver. which is
more probably an explication of the 11. ver. We speak what we know, and
testify what we have seen, says Christ. Nichodemus and others might object
against the certainty of those things that Christ asserted, and might say, The
judgments and ways of the Lord are unsearchable, who has known the mind of
the Lord? Who shall ascend into heaven for us, to relate the mind of the Lord
to us? Unto this Christ answers, No man has ascended, nor can ascend up to
heaven to make discovery of the will of God, of the deep things of God, but the
only begotten Son; he came from God, and he ascends thither again, and he has
seen and known, and what he has seen he declares, and testifies; and if you be
not satisfied with that which the Son has brought you from heaven, who also
ascends thither again, it is an aggravation of your unbelief. And unto this
coherence, there is a concurrence of Expositors in their witness.

The last Scripture is now to be discussed (which he has excepted against, and
labored to disable, that it might not speak that which I brought it to give
witness to; which was to justify the deity of Christ) and it is Joh. 17. 5.
And now, o Father, glorify me with thine own self, with the glory I had with
thee before the World was.

He gives his gloss to these words, after this manner.

O thou Father, who do abound in kindness, and art the Fountain of goodness,
the time being come of finishing my course in earth, and returning to thy
self, glorify me in Heaven, (who have emptied my self, taking to me a
natural and mortal body, and walking among men in form of a servant, and now
being ready to humble my self to the death of the Cross in obedience to thee,)
with that glory which I had in Heaven before the world was, being then with
thee as heir of all things, clothed with Majesty and glory, answerable to that
high station wherein thy pleasure was to set me, and to that great domminion
wherewithal thou wast pleased to invest me. And then he concludes, that all
lies in darkness which I can fetch to countenance my opinion.

Repl. He knows what is written in Rev. 22. 18, 19. in terror to those that
add to the word of God; I wonder therefore how he dare interpose words in this
prayer of Christ according to his own fancy, and not fear and tremble.

1. He inserts these words into the preface of Christ's prayer, Thou, O Father,
who art the fountain of goodness. And this he does unnescessarily, for in this
prayer-of Christ there is no preface at all, and why should be frame one? this
is not to interpret Scripture, but it is plainly to add to it, and it is done
with a design, which makes it the worse; for he would bring Christ in,
acknowledging the Father the sole fountain of goodness, excluding himself, as
Son of the Father, and excluding the Holy Ghost, which is a false thing, and
full of injury to Christ; who was so far from making such an acknowledgment,
that he thought it not robbery to be equal with God, his assuming of equality
with the Father, was not counted robbery by himself.

2. He inserts these words in the close of Christ's prayer, speaking of the
glory Christ had with God, he adds these words, answerable to that high state
wherein thy pleasure was to set me, and to that great dominion wherewithal
thou wast pleased to invest me. These words, wherein thy good pleasure was to
set me, and wherewithal thou wast pleased to invest me, are not in the text,
nor is there any thing that looks that way, that might give him occasion to
extract them, and present them, as if there they might be found, or something
like them, which will bear them; nor does he bring any other text to make it
appear, that such words are agreeable to the Analogy of faith. But by this
addition he makes Christ a mere creature, a creature before he took flesh,
before the World was, while he was with God. And he makes the glory which he
had to be a derived glory, and given to Christ of mere grace, and good
pleasure. Now this is most notoriously false, as I have largely and amply
proved in my former Treatise. But this is the doctrine that fills his head, and
fills his heart, and there is so much of this within him, that he thinks every
Scripture that he looks upon contains it, and therefore it is that he brings
this Scripture, speaking that which it speaks not.

But setting aside these additions, for which he must give an account. Be it
that Christ's prayer had this meaning, I shall show you what an inconsistency
there is in these words to his opinion, in two or three particulars.

1. Supposing Christ (before he took the Seed of Ahraham upon him) to be a
created soul, made by and abiding with God, be fore the rest of the creatures
were made (for this is his opinion) how can Christ speak to God these words?
Who have emptied my self, taking to me a natural, and mortal body.

If Christ were but a created soul, could it be an act of his will, and of his
power, to take to him a body? did ever God leave any creature at liberty to do
what he will? to choose or refuse at his pleasure? that he should leave Christ
(this created soul as he makes him) at liberty, to take a body, or not to take
it? and if not, but that God commanded him to take it, why does he plead it
with God for reward, as if it had been done of courtesy? Have any of the
Angels, when they have waited upon men (a work below them) had liberty to
plead with God after this manner? And how could it be an act of his power to
take to him a body, he being but a created soul? can a created soul build a
body of nothing (if by creation it be?) or build it out of a woman without the
help of man (if by generation it be (as indeed it was?) and if not, how comes
Christ to plead it as some meritorious act, I have emptied my self in taking
to me a natural mortal body? If God prepared him a body, why does he say, I
emptied my self and took it? So that here is absurdity enough in this, if
there were no more in reference to his opinion, in these very words.

2. If Christ were a created soul, where was the Emptying to take a natural
and mortal body? is there not an habitude and natural propensenesse in the
soul to be in the body? is it not the souls perfection? is not the soul
imperfect without it? is it any more then a part of the whole, and with the
body makes a perfect man? and is this the condescension (to be presented as an
high piece of self denial) to be in a perfect state? And does the soul take
the body, any more then the body take the soul? or does not God take both and
unite them? here is neither Divinity nor Philosophy in this.

But it may be, this emptying was in this, that Christ a glorious soul, took a
natural mortal body, not a body glorified, but vile by reason of a natural
corruptibility; But 1. God prepared this body for him; where was then this
excellent piece of self denial, to take and accept of what God prepares,
though it were an abasing to him? Saints tread in such steps of self denial
every day, and it is but their duty. 2. Men are and ought to be thankful to God
for such natural and mortal bodies, and for every member thereof, and Christ,
if but a created soul, might well submit, yea be thankful that his soul was
not as his body; for it was of free grace (as he says, and I join with him in
it, if he were a created soul) that he was so glorious a soul. 3. Lazarus was
called (so far as concerned a natural mortal body, and further also) to the
like piece of self-denial: for his soul was in heaven, and with God, and made
perfect with God, and glorified with him; and it must leave God, and leave
heaven, and leave glory, and come into a natural mortal body again, that must
dye a second time; yea, into a sinful tabernacle again; and this must be done
at the Command of Christ, according to the will of God. What self-denial was
this then, if Christ's was so great, when yet Christ was but only a glorified
soul; And Lazarus which was such, yet might not Lazarus plead it? This is
another absurdity which follows from his own words, upon his opinion: Christ
being but a created soul at the first with God.

2. He makes Christ to ask of God the glory only which he had in heaven before
the world was; and indeed Christ asked no other but it. Now this is not
consistent with Christ's being a created soul, and a creature; for it is
manifest from the Scripture, yea, it is confessed by himself in many places of
his printed paper, That Christ as a creature had greater glory by donation,
after his sufferings, after his deep humiliation, then ever he had as a
creature before; for that Heirship of all things, and dominion, and
principality, and height above all principality, and that name above every
name, was the reward which God bestowed upon him in reference to the cross
which he bore; and it was his highest glory as a creature; therefore it is
expressed in these words, is made both Lord and Christ; not restored to what he
had, but made: and what a rewarding is that, only to restore him to what he had
at first? Therefore seeing that Christ prays here in John for the glory that
he had with God before the world was, and asked no more; and seeing it is as
evident, that as a creature his greatest glory was not before his sufferings,
but after, and was the reward of his sufferings; it will necessarily follow,
that he prays for divine glory to be restored, and that as a creature he was
not with God before the world was, nor had glory as a creature.

3. He says, and the Text says, that the glory that Christ asked of his
Father, was the glory before the world was, but the glory which Christ had as a
creature, could not be the glory before the world was; for he himself
confesses, that that glory which he had as a creature, consisted in heirship
and dominion over the world; but this heirship and dominion over the world, was
not, nor could be before the world was: it will therefore follow, that either
Christ was created without glory, and had no glory till the world was created,
which is directly contradictory to the Text; or if he had a glory, it was not
any created glory, for that consisted in dominion, which was not til the world
was; and then what glory could it be, but that which we contend for, divine
uncreated glory, which holds forth him to be an uncreated and eternal being;
and by consequence to be the most high God?

But he brings reasons for his own tenent, that whole Christ is a creature,
from this Text of John, and attempts the overthrow of my assertion of Christ's
Deity, which I contend for from this Text.

1. Says he, If Christ were equal with the Father, why does Christ direct his
prayer to his Father? There had been no need, nor can cause be showed, why he
should supplicate to his Father, and not act relyance on the Godhead.

Repl. I have rendered reasons for it in my former Treatise, in my reply to his
fifth argument, which was this, He that acts with dependence on another, is a
creature, but whole Christ acts with dependence. To which I refer the
reader, because it is largely discussed there; and it is a tedious unpleasing
thing to multiply repetitions, though he delights himself too much therein:
yet lest that Treatise should not be at hand, I shall satisfy the Reader thus
far. It behooved the Godhead in the person of the Son to be veyled, for this
was the Sons emptying of himself; but not so the Godhead in the person of the
Father; therefore the Son acts not dependence upon the Godhead that dwelt in
himself in the person of the Son; or as it was in himself, but as it was in the
Father.

2. He says, We do not use to pray, but praise for things we have, if we know
that we have them. Now Christ could not want the highest glory in any sense, if
he were a person in the Trinity, coequall with the Father, especially not be
without it, with the Father, nor in heaven in any sense whatsoever, as by the
clouding, darkning, or obscuring of it; therefore the glory which he had with
the Father, was not the highest glory, but a glory proceeding from the highest;
and by consequence, Christ was but a creature.

Repl. It is true, that the highest glory (he being a person in the Trinity
coequall with the Father) could not be separated from him, for it follows the
divine essence, and cannot be divided from it; but it might be, and indeedwas
obscured, and clouded, not to the Father, nor to the Son himself; for the
Father saw it, and gave witness to it, and so did the Son, and comprehended it
fully: but to the creature it was darkened and obscured, and but some small
beams and rays of it appeared; the Son was incarnate, or in flesh, but the
glory of the Son appeared not in flesh in fullness of luster, like the glory of
the Son; but the form of God in the Son was veyled and hidden in the form of a
servant; Now Christ prays that that essential divine glory might be
manifested in flesh, that he the Son in flesh might appear in glory, when he
should come to heaven, as he did before he took flesh; that as the Godhead was
hidden in the manhood, so the manhood might be glorified with the Godhead, that
the flesh might be taken up into the fellowship of the glory of the Divinity,
by the shining forth and breaking out of the glory of the Divinity in the flesh.

3. It appears (says he) that the glory which he had with the Father was not
divine, or the highest glory, because it was to be communicated. Glorify me, O
Father, with that glory, etc. Now the highest glory being infinite, could not
be given or communicated to the humane nature, which was finite, and so
incapable of it, etc.

Repl. Though the divine glory cannot be communicated to humane nature, so as
that it should be inherent in the humane nature; yet it may gloriously shine
forth upon it, and appear in it, which it did not before: yea by reason of the
hypostaticall union betwixt the divine nature and the humane nature, the glory
of the divine nature becomes the glory of the whole person, so as that when the
glory of the Son shines forth in its greatest strength in the flesh, it may be
predicated and asserted of the man Christ, that he is glorified with the glory
which the Son had with the Father before the world was; Because the man Christ
is the same person with the eternal Son of God.

Thus all the Scriptures which I drew witness to, that Jesus Christ is the true
God, and the most high God, notwithstanding all his endeavors to suffocate
their testimony, and his attempts by violence to silence them, that they should
not speak what they would speak, yet they have with open mouth, with one
consent, given glory unto Christ, by witnessing to his Godhead, and to his
coessentialness, and to his coequality with the Father.

I shall conclude my Vindication of them with these words, Let God be true in
what he has testified of his Son in Scripture, and every man that opposes let
him be a liar.

My next undertaking must be the defense of the Arguments which I produced, and
drew up from Scripture, by which I attempted to prove the destructivenesse of
the Doctrine which he holds (making whole Christ a creature) to the true
Gospel, and oppositeness of it to the Scripture in many main points and truths
of it.

My Assertion was, That the doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature, brings
in (as it were) another Gospel, and destroys the true Gospel in many parts
thereof; and brings in another Scripture in many main points.

He calls this a reason against his doctrine of Christ a mere creature; and so
it is, not only to show the falsenesse of such doctrine, but also to discover
the horridness and hideousness of the doctrine, that all might be warned of
it, and with fear and trembling may decline it.

But he wishes him to be Anathema that holds any such doctrine, that destroys
the Gospel or the Scripture, and falls upon the examination of the instances or
Arguments which I produced to confirm that general reason.

Therefore because he is so confident, that his doctrine will not prove such;
and because he has possessed the people, that though there should be a mistake
in it on his part, yet it is not so dangerous as I would make it; and that the
salvation of men's souls is not so nearly concerned in it, as I would have men
to conceive; and that Christ is never a whit less a sufficient Savior, though
but a creature; and that it is enough to believe unto Salvation that Christ is
Lord, viz. made Lord; and that God raised him from the dead; by which means
persons have become less solicitous what doctrine they entertain, they see it
has a specious show, and conceive it will not prove destructive, though it
should prove false; therefore I think it expedient to fortify my position,
which respects the oppositenesse of this doctrine of his, both to the Gospel,
and the testimony of other Scriptures, with some further proofs, not purposing
at all to desert my former grounds, (which I confide in as much as ever) but
intending in my following discourse to free them from his evasions, by which he
would elude the strength of them.

And thus I argue:

Arg. 1. That doctrine that denies and destroys that one only true God, and
brings in a strange and a false God, that Doctrine destroys the true Gospel
and Scriptures, and brings in another Gospel and Scriptures: But this Doctrine
of his, that makes whole Christ a creature, does so: Therefore, etc.

The Major admits of no doubt, because the Scripture is clear, that there is
but one only true God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 6.

The Minor must have proof, and thus I confirm it: If the one only true God be
both three and one, three in Persons, and one in Essence; be Father, Son, and
Spirit, which are called three, and yet are but one; then that Doctrine which
makes God to be but one and one, viz. one in person, and one in essence, and
makes the Father only to be God, excluding the Son and Spirit, denies and
destroys the true God, and sets up a false God.

My proof for the Minor again (for the Major is unquestionable) is 1 John 5. 7,
9. There are three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, and these three are one.

What will he answer to this Scripture?

He will not deny, but that the three that are here spoken of, the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit are three persons, (for he has granted it all along in
his discourse, that they are three distinct persons) but the oneness of these
three in essence, is that which he denies; that they are one God, is not
yielded by him; because the words (...) are not found in one copy of the Greek;
But this answer may be given, that in all other copies these words are found,
which renders that copy, where they are wanting, suspicious, and the 9. verse
makes it manifest that it is so; for the three witnesses in the 7. ver. are
called the witness of one God in ver. 9. if we receive the witness of man, the
witness of God is greater; what witness of God is this? it is the witness of
the three that was spoken of in ver. 7. which are said to be but one God. And
it is observable, that the three witnesses on earth, are said to agree in one,
ver. 8. but those in heaven to be one: it is (...) in ver. 7. and (...) in ver.
8. in all the most approved copies, which the concurrence of ver. 9. with ver.
7. justifies, as was said before.

However it be, there is strength enough in this argument to them that grant
the Godhead of Christ; they must confess whether they will or no, that the
true God is denied, and a false God brought in: for if the Father be God, and
the Son be God, and the Son be not the Father, nor the Father the Son: and yet
there be not two Gods, but one God; then this one God is the Father and Son, (I
do not exclude the Spirit, but I speak to those who acknowledge Father and Son
both of them to be God) they must confess that they are both of them but one
and the same God; and then it comes to this, that the true God is one in two,
and it is two in one, according to their tenent, that is, one God in essence,
and two in persons, or two persons in one essence: the consequence of which is
this, they must conclude, that whoever makes the essence to be one, and the
person to be but one, the Father to be God, and he alone to be God, and the Son
not to be God, much less the holy Ghost, such an one brings in a strange God,
and unscripturall God, destroys the true God which is Father and Son, as
themselves acknowledge, yea and Spirit also, as they will not deny. And how then
can any such person make the denying of Christ to be God a trivial error, not
greatly consequential, nor of such moment, as to be so greatly contended for?
not fundamental nor damnable, though persisted in? when as yet it is the
denying of the only God, which is not Father alone, but Father, Son and Spirit.

But why should I contest with friends, which confess the Diety of Christ? I
am sorry there should be any occasion, I will turn again upon the adversary.

Either Father and Son (I exclude not the Spirit, but I am pleading the Sons
Godhead, and not the Spirits, and showing the heinousness of the error of
denying it) I say either the Father and the Son are the only God, or else
there is no God at all, for the Scripture says Joh. 10. 30 that the Father and
Christ are one in power, which is an essential attribute, and then they are
one in essence, and so one God; and yet they are two distinct persons. Joh. 8.
17. 18. It is written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true, I am
one that bear witness of my self, and my Father hears witness of me. If the
Father and the Son be two distinct witnesses, then they two are distinct
persons; for none can be witnesses but persons; and two manifestations of the
same person cannot be said to be two distinct witnesses; nor would the proof
which is fetched from the law (where the witnesses were distinct persons) be
suitable. But he will confess this, that the Father and Son are distinct
persons, and distinct witnesses also: and if so, he cannot with any face deny
the other, that they are one, as well as two, because Christ says so in the
above named place; one, viz. in power, in essence, in Godhead. And indeed, the
very context (where they are called two witnesses) will witness that they are
but one God. the Jews reject his witness of himself, such as they took him to
be, which was a mere man (for the law allowed it not that any man should be
admitted to bear witness of himself;) but he notwithstanding bears himself out
by the law, to be an adequate witness of himself; but herein he has recourse
to that of himself, which they saw not, which they knew not, as ver. 14.
shows, I know whence I came, ye cannot tell whence I came. He could not mean
it of his soul, for they could not look upon him without a soul, and soul and
body made but one man; and notwithstanding both, he would be an unadequate
witness of himself: But he means another thing, distinct both from soul and
body, and from his manhood; which might be a witness of him as man, and this
could be nothing but his Godhead and he joins himself (according to this) with
the Father, as a distinct witness, but the same God. The result is then, that
the one true God, though but one in essence, yet is not one single person, but
subsists in a plurality of persons. Therefore he that makes his subsistence to
be single, and such as his essence is, denies and destroys this one only God.
Which I prove further.

The Father is said to be the only true God, John 17. 3. and the Son is called
the true God, 1 John 5. 20. This Adjective [onely] refers not to the subject
person Father, but refers to the predicate or thing that the Father is said to
be, viz. the true God, which is but only one, which is clear from a parallel
place in Jer. 22. 30. where the word only is used in like manner, the children
of Israel and Judah have only done evil, have only provoked me, The word
only is not to be applied to the subject persons spoken of, as if they only,
and no other people had done evil, and provoked God; but it is to be applied
to the thing that is spoken of them, they have only done evil, and only
provoked; that is, they have done nothing else but evil, nothing else but
provoke; so in John, the Father is said to be the one only true God, but not he
only to be the true God; for the Son is called the true God as well as he, in
the place before named in 1 John 5. 20. Whence I argue, that the one only true
God is Father and Son, (as for the holy Ghost, I always include him though I
have not occasion to speak of him here:) and there is no God, no true God, but
that God that is Father and Son; and he that denis either of these, denies this
one only true God. He then that acknowlegeth the person of the Father to be
God, but acknowledges not the person of the Son to be God, brings in a strange
God, an unscripturall God, and a false God. For there is no such God as
subsists in the person of the Father only; and hence it is that the Apostle
John says, 1 John 2. 22, 23. he is an Antichrist that denies the Father and
the Son: And he that denies the Son, denies the Father also; that is, such an
one acknowledges not the true God at all, whatever men may think of him.

Yet further, the Father is called the only God, Joh. 17. 3. and Christ is called
the only God, Jud. 4, 24, 25. But some think otherwise, that the Father, and
not Christ is called the only God, and that Jude speaks in ver. 4. of Jesus
Christ afterward, as distinct from the only God: but that it is otherwise I
prove first from the right translation of the Greek; (...). that is, denying
the only God and Master, the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not said the only God
and the Master (with an article) the Lord Jesus Christ; for then he had spoken
of two persons that they denied, viz. the only God, (that is one) and the
Master, the Lord Jesus Christ (that is another:) but it is said, the only God
and Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, as speaking of one person, only which is
Christ. 2. From the concordance betwixt this Scripture, and that in 2 Pet. 2.
1. They are parallel in three particulars, 1. In the title that is put upon
Christ in both places, he is called (...), which in both places is translated
in our Bibles, Lord; but is rather to be turned Master. 2. The crime and fault
that is charged upon them is the same, it is denying their Lord, or their
Master. 3. The persons seem to be the same in both places, for they are in all
things described alike, false Teachers in one place, filthy dreamers in the
other place: they privily come in and act and work in the one place, they
creep in at unawares in the other place. They walk after the flesh, and
despise government in one place, They defile the flesh, despise dominion in the
other place. Their judgment of long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not, in one place; and they were before of old ordained to
condemnation in the other place. Their ruin is set forth by the punnishment
which God inflicted upon the Angels that fell, and upon the old world, and
upon Sodom and Gomorrah in one place; and in the other place by the Children of
Israel that fell in the Wilderness by unbelief, and by the Apostate Angels,
and by Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities about them. So that it seems to be one
and the same Prophecy wherewith both Peter and Jude were inspired, and which
they have left upon record for the benefit of the Church: Therefore the one
must help to expound the other: the crime then of denying (which both the
Apostles speak of) has the same object, viz. Jesus Christ, and not the
Father: it is clear that Christ alone is the object of that wicked act of those
spoken of in Peter; therefore Christ alone and not the Father, is the object of
the same wicked act spoken of in Jude. And indeed there were never any
Christian Teachers, (and of such both the Apostles speak) that did deny the
Father to be God, but the Son Jesus Christ was denied by many. And if we make a
serious inspection into verse 25. of Jude, and compare it with the precedent
verse, we shall find that Christ is spoken of, and not the Father; and if so,
then Christ is called the only wise God; for it is the same person that
presents saints faultless before the presence of his glory, who is called the
only wise God. But who is that? The Apostle Paul declares who he is in Ephesians. 5.
27. it is Christ, who is described to give himself for the Chuch, and to have
washed it with his own blood, that he may present it a glorious Church to
himself.

Whence I thus Argue, If the Father be the only God, and if the Son be also the
only God, and yet there are not two only Gods, but one only God, then this one
only God is both Father and Son; that is, this one only God, though but one
in essence, yet is two at least in persons (but indeed is three, but that is
somewhat beside my undertaking;) and then it will follow, that that God where
an unity only is granted, both in essence and personality, is not the only
God, which the Gospel and other Scriptures hold out, and consequently is a
false God: for I would ask this question, suppose a person should acknowledge
Christ to be the only God, and should deny the Father to be God, could this man
be said to acknowledge the one only true God which the Scriptures speak of? I
suppose none will be so absurd as to assert it, therefore if Christ be the
only God as the Father is, he that acknowledges the Father without him,
acknowledges not the only true God; and so is guilty of destroying the
Scriptures, and bringing in another Scripture in a maine fundamental point of
it.

Ar. 2. But for further satisfaction, I shall propound a 2d Argument, which is
this; That doctrine which denies and destroys that one only true Christ, and
brings in a strange and a false Christ, that doctrine destroys the true
Gospel and Scriptures, and brings in another Gospel and Scripture in a main
point of it. But this doctrine of his which makes Christ a creature does thus:
therefore this doctrine brings in another Gospel and Scripture in a main point
of it.

The Major is so void of controversy, that it will not be stuck at; but the
Minor will be denied, and therefore must be confirmed.

That doctrine that denies Christ to be the proper Son of God, and makes Christ
to be only the Son of man, that doctrine denies and destroys that one only
true Christ, and brings in a strange and a false Christ; but this doctrine of
his does thus; therefore this doctrine of his denies and destroys that only
true Christ, and brings in a false Christ, and strange to Scripture.

The Major will again pass without exception, but proof will be required for
the Minor; And I confirm it thus.

That doctrine which takes Christ's Godhead from him, that doctrine denies
Christ to be the proper Son of God, and makes him to be merely the son of man:
But this doctrine of his which makes Christ to be a mere creature, and nothing
more, takes Christ's Godhead from him. Therefore this doctrine of his denies
him to be the proper Son of God, and makes him to be merely and only the son
of man.

The Major will now only be in question; for the Minor is (without question)
true, if Godhead be taken in a proper sense, as I have taken it in my arguing
with him all along.

For the proof then of the Major proposition, I shall present and make out two
things, 1. that these two things God, and Son of God are all one in reference
to Christ; therefore whoever teaches any doctrine against the one, viz. that
Christ is not God, teaches doctrine against the other, viz. that Christ is not
the Son of God. 2. Christ cannot be God any other way; or under any other
consideration, but as he is the Son of God.

1. God and Son of God are all one thing in reference to Christ: my meaning is
not that the terms are confounded, for the word (God) respects the essence,
more properly and subsisting in a person; and the words (Son of God) respect
the second person in the Trinity, as distinguished from the Father, and the
holy Ghost subsisting in the Godhead. But my meaning is, that where ever the
one is expressed, the other is employed, and that a divine person subsisting in
the Godhead is meant evermore; and in the order of existing and working, the
second person; for proof of this, consider these following particulars.

1. Christ himself confounds these two, God, and Son of God, by using them
promiscuously, John 10. 33. 36. In ver. 33. the Jews said they stoned him
because he blasphemed, and said he was God; Christ repeats their words, and
blames them for charging him with blasphemy, because he said he was the Son of
God, ver. 36. those were not their expressions, but Christ makes them their
expressions, therefore in a sense they were one and the same thing, and Son of
God, was as much as God, else Christ had both extenuated their fault, and
spoken untruly of them. But in truth and deed Christ said of himself neither
the one nor the other in express words, but said, he and his Father were one,
ver. 30. and if the Son of God did not import as much as God, their collection
in their own words that he made himself God, in making himself one with the
Father, was more natural in reference to Christ's words, then as Christ
repeated them. For the Father is God, and not the Son of God, and when Christ
said, he and his Father were one, they might rather conclude that Christ made
himself God, then that he made himself the Son of God, unless the Son of God
were also God, and so Christ might be the Son of God, and yet one in Godhead
with the Father.

2. The Apostle John, 1 John 5. 20. makes the Son of God and the true God to be
all one in reference to Christ, You are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ: and this true one, this Son Jesus Christ, this very person, is
the true God. As if the Apostle should have said, when I speak of the Son of
God, I would have you to know whom I mean by him, I do not mean a man, a mere
creature, and nothing else, but I mean a person that is the true God.

3. The Apostles in their professions of faith, if they do agree therein, (and
I suppose none will say that they do disagree therein) do make these two to be
one and the same thing. The Apostle Peter professes his faith in these words,
I believe that thou art Christ the Son of the living God. But the Apostle
Thomas in these words, My Lord, and my God. Peter believed him to be the Son of
God, Thomas believed him to be very God, and very Lord, yea his God and his
Lord in an applicative way; and Christ does not look upon one as two low for
him, nor upon the other as too high for him; but upon both as professions of
their true faith in him; he tells Peter, that upon the rock of such a
profession he would build his Church; and he puts a blessing upon all those
that shall believe as Thomas believed, his slowness only to believe (depending
upon sight) excepted.

4. The grounds whereupon the followers of Christ have some of them styled him
the Son of God, and others of them have styled him God, are alike, and high
enough (all of them) to cause them to entitle him God. Nathaneel sees his
omnipresence and omniscience, when Christ told him, before Philip called thee,
I saw thee under the fig tree, and he glorifies him with the title of Son of
God, Thou art the Son of God. Thomas discerns his omnipotence in raising
himself from the dead, according as he had foretold, destroy this temple, and I
will raise it up in three days: and he attributes the name of God to him, My
Lord, and my God. Had Thomas apprehended Christ to have been passive in the
resurrection, and raised merely by the power of the Father, and not his own,
why should he denominate him God upon this occasion? and not rather put that
crown upon the Father, that raised him, if the Father only and not the Son,
wrought in it?

5. The high Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees thought it to be blasphemy
alike in Christ when he made himself the Son of God, and made God his natural
Father, as when he made himself God; as they truly collected from those words
of his, I and my Father are one. Compare Joh. 5. 18. with Joh. 10. 31, 33. and
the truth of this will appear. And they made account when he styled himself the
Son of God, that he therein assumed to himself equality with God, Joh. 5. 18.
and in that they counted it blasphemy that he called himself the Son of God,
and judged him worthy to die for it, they discovered their apprehensions of
that title, that it was too high for any creature, and proper to the most high
God alone.

6. Satan also in tempting of him, requires a proof of his sonship unto God,
equal and equivalent to what he could demand for the manifestation of the very
Godhead it self: and he must declare himself to be the Son of God, by doing
that which none but God could do.

These grounds I conceive are sufficient to bottom the first conclusion upon,
viz. that these two expressions or titles, Son of God, and God are in Scripture
account equivalent to each other, and do import when they are applied to Christ
a divine person, and the second in the order of the Trinity. The consequence of
which is, that who ever denies the one, denies the other also; and then if the
Godhead of Christ be denied, the Sonship of Christ will be denied also.

I shall now lay down the 2d position, and confirm it.

2 Christ cannot be God any other way or under any other consideration, but as
he is the Son of God.

1 He himself, in his sense, acknowledges the truth of this assertion; for,
he grants a Godhead of Christ, and makes him a representative God, and says,
his Godhead consists in sovereignty, and dominion over all the creatures: and
he founds it upon Sonship, and says, the title Son of God holds forth
superiority over all things, and so he is God in that he is the Son of God; but
all amounts to no more but a creature God, and a creature Son of God, according
to him. Yet he concurrs with me in this proposition, though in a different
sense, Christ cannot be God any other way then as he is the Son of God.

2. Scripture gives testimony to it. 1. The Apostle Paul declares to us that
God was manifested in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3. 16. that is, God assumed the flesh
of the Virgin; God took the seed of Abraham; God united our Nature with the
Divine Nature; God took it into fellowship and oneness with himself, so as that
God and man became one and the same person. And this the Apostle calls a great
mystery, and founds all godliness upon it, that is upon knowing it, and
believing it. And so Christ comes to be God, has the Names, Titles, Attributes
of God put upon him; and the great works of God are called his works; and the
homage, worship, service, faith, fear, and obedience that is due to God,
belongs to him. Otherwise it could not have been, that he that appeared in the
form of a servant, and was in fashion as a man, and dwelt among us, and whose
mother was known who she was, and was in all things like unto us, sin excepted,
should be the God that made us, and he in whom our life and breath, and all our
ways are: but so it was, that the great God emptied himself, so far, as to
unite himself to us, or us rather to himself, and to dwell in our nature, and
made our nature to dwell in him; and so he became one with us, and made us,
that is, our Nature, one with him: And so the Son of Mary is very God, the most
high God, because God descended, and was made flesh of a woman.

2. There is a concurrence of witnesses in the sacred Scriptures, that God took
flesh; but not God in the person of the Father, nor God in the person of the
Spirit, but God in the person of the Son: Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us; and this Word is neither the Father, nor the holy Ghost,
but is distinguished from both, 1 John 5. 7. There are three that bear witness
in heaven; the Father, the Word and the Spirit; and these three are one; that
is, one God. But this one God, in the person of the Word, and not in any other
person, took flesh upon him. The Father did not take Flesh, but sent the Son to
assume it: Gal. 4. 4. God, that is, the Father, sent forth his Son made of a
woman. Joh. 3. 16. God, that is, the Father, so loved the world that he gave
his own Son, his only begotten Son, etc. And all along in the new Testament,
the Son is said to be sent, sometimes from God, sometimes from the Father
sometimes from heaven: And of the Son it is said in Heb. 2. 14, that he took
part of flesh and blood: and verse. 6. He took on him the seed of Abraham: and
of the Son it is said, that he was in the form of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, that is, with the Father; but he humbled himself,
and took upon him the form of a servant; that is, he took upon him our vile,
weak, mortal, dying nature, and came in low state among us. And indeed, in
this there is no difference betwixt us: But who this Son of God is, is the
controversy.

The inference then must needs be this, that Christ is not God any other way,
nor in any other sense, but this: The Son of God, or (which is all one) God in
the person of the Son assumed Humane nature unto him, became Man, by taking the
flesh of the Virgin. And this Son of God, or God in the person of the Son made
flesh, is the Christ, the Messiah, that was promised to the fathers: And
Christ, he is this flesh this seed of the woman, assumed, and this Son of God,
or God in the person of the Son, united together into one person. So that
whoever denies Christ to be God, denies that God in the person of the Son; or
(which is the same) that the Son of God took flesh came in our Nature; and that
God sent his Son into the world, to take the seed of Abraham upon him, and to
come in flesh; and so denies Christ to be God in the person of the Son, or
Christ to be the Son of God. And so by an undeniable consequence, such a person
who denies the Godhead, denies the Sonship, and so destroys the true Christ,
and brings in a strange and a false Christ, and another Gospel, and another
Scripture. And this is the doctrine that the Apostle John speaks of, 2 John 7.
which seducers preached, who confessed not that Jesus Christ was come in the
flesh: the meaning is they confessed not that the Son of God or God in the
person of the Son, was come in the flesh: for otherwise they knew that Jesus
Christ the son of Mary was in the flesh, and died, and rose again: But to
confess that Jesus was the Son of God, or God in the person of the Son, was
that which the Apostle pressed; and withstood the contrary, as Antichristian, 1 John 4. 14, 15.

And now give me leave to express my self to be one who stand amazed at the
ignorance or inconsiderateness (or I know not what to call it) of those persons
who profess to be very sound in the doctrine of Christ's Godhead, but conceive
of it as a very tolerable error, in such who do deny it, and make slight of
it. Is it a small thing to deny Christ to be the Son of God? Those that deny
Christ's Godhead, do deny God in the person of the Son, to have taken the nature
of man upon him: or, they do deny the Son of God to be incarnate, and by
consequence they do deny Christ to be Gods Son. For do they not know, (I speak
of those that have not denied the Faith) if Christ be God, he can be God no
other way, but because God in the person of the Son, or the Son of God, took
flesh upon him: if Christ be Gods Son, he can be Gods Son no other way, but
because God in the person of the Son has come in the flesh; and if this be
denied, it is denied that Christ is Gods Son. And is this a trivial matter?
Christ consists of two Natures; of Humanity, and so he is the Son of man; of
the Deity, and so he is the Son of God, as I have showed. Can Christ be a true
Christ, if either of these be wanting? A Man consists of soul and body: if
either of these be wanting, can he be a true man? If the soul be wanting,
(which is the principal part) is he any more then a stinking carcass?) If
Christ be not the Son of God, (as, if he be not God, he is not) is he any other
but a carcase-Christ? Can a thing have its truth of being, without its
constitutive parts by which it is? So that Christ is destroyed, unlels the Son
of God, and the Son of Man, united together in one person, be maintained.

I now come to present and drive on a third Argument, which is this:

Arg. 3. That Doctrine which destroys the true Faith of Christians, and brings
in another Faith, a strange and false Faith; that Doctrine destroys the true
Gospel and Scripture, and brings in another Gospel and Scripture, in a main
Point.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes Christ a creature, does so:

Therefore, this Doctrine of his destroys the true Gospel and Scripture, and
brings in another and a false Gospel and Scripture.

The Major is indubitable; the Minor may be thus proved:

That Doctrine which takes away the principal object of a Christians Faith,
does destroy the true Faith of a Christian.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes Christ a mere creature, does take away
the principal object of the Faith of a Christian:

Therefore, this Doctrine of his does destroy the Faith of a Christian.

The Major cannot reasonably be denied, because Faith is true and saving from
the object that it is conversant about; as suppose it should be Baal in stead
of the true God; suppose it should be Mahomet in stead of Christ; or suppose it
should be a false or counterfeit Christ, in stead of the true Christ: that
faith that is carried out to such an object, could neither be true nor saving.

The Minor may be thus confirmed:

That Doctrine that denies Christ to be the Son of God takes away the principal
object of the faith of Christians. But this Doctrine of his, which makes whole
Christ a creature does deny Christ to be the Son of God: Therefore, this
Doctrine takes away the principal object of the faith of Christians.
The Major has an infallible truth in it: for the Scripture makes Christ to be
principally the object of a Christians faith, as he is the Son of God. 1. It
has its denomination from this object; it is called the faith of the Son of
God Gal. 2. 20. 2. Christ proposes himself, as he is the Son of God, to be
believed on: so to the blind man (whose eyes he had opened) Do thou believe
the Son of God, said Christ? Joh. 9. 35. Under that consideration, as such a
person he presented himself as an adequate object of his faith for salvation.
3. The primitive Saints mentioned in Scripture, in their Confessions of Faith,
do point their Faith, and terminate it upon Christ, the Son of God. In Joh. 11.
27, Martha said, Lord, I believe that thou art Christ the Son of God. The
Eunuch also being put upon the declaration of his faith, did pitch it upon, and
carried it out to this object, Acts 8. 37. I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God. It should seem that Philip had held him forth in the excellency and
glory of his person as the Son of God, and had preached him under that relation
as the object of saving faith, and that thereupon the Eunuch received him as
such, and believed. But before these, the Apostles themselves, that were bred
up under Christ, and were instructed by Christ, they grounded their faith upon
Christ as he was the Son of the living God, in Joh. 6. 69. We believe and are
sure that thou art Christ the Son of the living God. 4. Christ makes himself,
as he is the Son of God, the foundation of Christians, upon which their faith
must bottom; and this Article of Faith, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, he makes the Rock upon which he will build his Church; and the gates of
hell shall never prevail against it, Matthew. 16. 16. And he places true
blessedness in it. I could wish that all persons that are right in their
opinion of Christ's Godhead, and yet plead against the fundamentalness of the
error of denying the Godhead, would but ponder what is here presented, and
take it up in its full weight and strength. They that hold Christ to be God,
must needs do it upon this account, because God in the person of the Son, or
the Son of God, which is the second person in the Trinity, took flesh upon him,
and became man; and that hence it is that this man, and this second person in
the Godhead, or this Son of God, make up one Christ, and that Christ is
hereupon justly styled the Son of God, or the second person in the Godhead. And
if it be also clear from Scripture, that faith in Christ is only sound and
saving, as it has Christ considered as he is the Son of God, or the second
person in the Godhead, for the object of it; then what can that Doctrine be
less then destructively dangerous, and subverting the very foundation of
Christianity, that denies that there is any such God in the person of the Son,
or any such second person in the Godhead called the Son, or that there is any
such Son of God, who is God; such persons consequently cannot have their Faith
carried out after any such Son of God, who is God, but after a Creature-son of
God, which is totally another thing from that Son of God which Scripture
presents to us: And what can be thought of those that hold such Doctrine, but
that they have left the Rock, the Foundation upon which Believers are built
unto the salvation of their souls; and that they build upon the sand, and that
their state threatens certain ruin?

But the Minor will be that Proposition which he will deny; viz. That this
Doctrine of his which makes whole Christ a creature, does deny Christ to be the
Son of God.

I have proved this Proposition in my prosecution of the former Argument; to
which I might refer the Reader: but for further satisfaction I shall make
choice of another medium, and by it prove that this his Doctrine denies Christ
to be the Son of God.

That Doctrine that makes Christ a creature-son of God, denies Christ to be the
true Son of God.

But this Doctrine of his makes Christ to be only a creature-son of God:

Therefore this Doctrine of his denies Christ to be the true Son of God.

The Major Proposition is that which will only be denied by him; therefore I
shall prove out of Scripture, that Christ cannot be a creature-son of God.

1. The eternal Son of God cannot be a creature-son of God, because no creature
is eternal. Or thus:

That Son of God that has neither beginning of days, nor end of life, cannot
be a creature-son of God, because it is the most high God's property to be
without beginning or ending.

But Christ is such a Son of God, which is without beginning of days, and has
no end of life; which is evident from Heb. 7. 3. Melchizedek is described to
have neither beginning of days, nor end of life; and therein (as a type only)
to be like the Son of God, or like Ghrist as he is the Son of God: by which it
appears, that Christ is such a Son of God as is truly eternal, without
beginning or ending. For it behooves that which is the Antitype, or the thing
typified, to be that in truth, which the Type is in shadow. Melchizedek was in
figure and in mystery without beginning of days and end of life; Christ must
therefore really and truly be without beginning and end, because he, as the
Son of God* was the person whom Melchizek typified herein.

Therefore, he is no creature-son of God.

2. The Almighty Son of God cannot be a creature-son of God, because
Almightiness is one of the most high God's incommunicable attributes.

But Christ is such a Son of God as is Almighty:

Therefore, no creature-son of God.

That Christ is such a Son of God as is God Almighty, will be proved from
Scripture. In Mat. 14. 32. 33, considered with the context, the winds were
boisterous and tempestous: by the virtue and power of Christ, (which was
inherent in him, and which he was the subject of) they ceased. Hereupon, the
disciples all of them worshipped him, and confessed that he was the Son of God,
that is, one Almighty, whom the winds and the sea obeyed; and this they made
to be the Son of God: for they apprehended the Son of God to be such an one who
was clothed with such power. So in Joh. 1. 33, 34, John knew not Christ who he
was; but the Father told him that he on whom the holy Ghost should descend,
should baptize with the holy Ghost. Hence John collected, that he was the Son
of God; and the text says, he bare record of it. God had not told him so, but
only that he should baptize with the holy Ghost; but he thence collected so
much. But how could that be, seeing the disciples baptized with the holy Ghost;
and yet it could not be collected that they were each of them the Son of God in
the sense that John bare record of Christ, that he was the Son-of God? It must
be conceived then, that John looked upon Christ as one in whom the power was
inheto baptize with the holy Ghost, and that he argued after this manner. He in
whom the virtue, is to baptize with the holy Ghost; that is, he who has the
power of enabling men to speak with strange tongues, and to prophecy, and to
work miraculously, he must needs be the Son of God. But Christ is such an one:
Therefore, he is the Son of God. The Son of God which John speaks of, is
therefore an Almighty Son of God, and no creature, because he can do such a
thing, that requires an Almighty power. In like manner we may read in Joh. 5.
25. Christ says, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
that they that hear it shall live. This Son of God then can be no creature,
because the dead in any sense cannot hear the voice of a creature. It is not to
be denied, but that men have raised the dead, in what sense soever it may be
taken, who are but creatures: but it was not the outward voice which raised
them, and which they heard, which external voice is the creatures voice; but it
was the power that they felt, which was God's, which is called the voice
behind them, or within them, and is nothing but the power of God in working
upon them, Isa. 30. 21. But the voice by the force of which these dead which
Christ speaks of were to be raised, was the voice of the Son of God; it was
Christ's own voice, Christ's own power, by which they were to be raised; else
Christ declared neither any new thing, nor strange thing, to cause them to
believe on him, because many others as instruments might utter such a voice.
And the following verse clears it, that by the voice of the Son of God, the
power of the Son of God is meant: As the Father (says Christ) has life in
himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. The meaning is,
that as the Father is the living God, and has life in himself essentially, and
is the root of life, to quicken the dead that are without life: so the Son has
life in himself essentially, and is the principle of life to others that are
dead, and want it. And if this were not so, there could not be the strength of
a Reason to confirm the foregoing verse. Christ had said, They that hear the
voice of the Son of God, shall live. How does he prove it? Thus: As the Father
has life in himself; that is, As the Father is all life, essentially life, and
the principle of life, to quicken whom he will by his mighty power: so the Son
has life in himself, (though it be communicated with his essence by eternal
generation, which is suitable to a Son) and is essentially life, all life, and
nothing else; and is the principle of life, quickening, by that life in himself,
whom he will. I shall present one Scripture more, in 1 John 3. 8. For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
devil. This phrase, the Son of God was manifested, is a parallel-phrase with
that in 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the flesh. This God was God in the
person of the Son, who was manifested in the flesh, that is, took the flesh of
a Virgin upon him, and became man. For what end? The Apostle shows, that he
might destroy (that is, in man's nature might do it) the works of the devil.
The Son of God destroyed; but by whose power destroyed he the works of the
devil? By his own power: he is called one that is stronger then the devil, Luke
11. 12. And if it had not been done by his own power, there was no necessity
that the Son of God should have been manifested in the flesh for that purpose:
for the Son of man might have done it as an Instrument, as the Disciples cast
out devils; (which was one of the works of Satan that was destroyed; his work
was to possess bodies, as well as souls; and he was cast out; which was the
destruction of that work:) but the virtue by which they cast out, was none of
theirs, but Christ's; but Christ's virtue was his own: for, as one stronger, he
spoiled Satan of all he had, and destroyed all his works; wherein the
Almightiness of Christ is manifest. And so it appears that Christ is such a Son
of God that is Almighty, and so consequently no creature-son.

3. That Son of God that is omniscient, or all-knowing, cannot be a
creature-son of God. But Christ is such a Son of God that is omniscient and all
knowing: Therefore, he is not a creature-son of God.
The Major is clear, because Omnisciencie is like Omnipotency; it is
incommunicable to the creature, being one of Gods attributes.

The Minor may be proved from Revel. 2. 18, 23. The words are: Thus says the
Son of God, who has his eyes like a flame of fire, that is, to give light to
him in all the world, by which he may see all things. Therefore it is added.
And all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the heart, and
tries the reins, and gives to every one according to his works. Christ
speaks of himself, as the Son of God, and shows what a Son he is; such a Son
that is equal to his Father, who can search as deep, and inward, and hidden
things as the Father can: he has his Fathers eyes, his Fathers knowledge,
wisdom, and understanding. It is the one only God's privilege and
prerogative, to search the heart, as I have proved from Jer. 17. 9, 10.
already; and yet Christ as the Son of God, does it: Therefore he is no
creature-son, but such a Son as is the one only God also.

The fourth Argument, that carries on the same design, viz. tends to prove
this Doctrine of his against the Godhead of Christ to be destructive to the
Gospel in some main point of it, is this:

Arg. 4. The Doctrine that subverts and destroys true Baptism, and brings in a
false and unscriptural Baptism, that Doctrine destroys the true Gospel and
Scripture, and brings in another Gospel and Scripture in a main point of it.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes whole Christ a creature, subverts and
destroys true Baptism:

Therefore, this Doctrine of his destroys the true Gospel, etc.

The Major cannot be gainsaid, because Baptism is numbered among the highest
Fundamentals of the Scripture, to be believed; the denying of which, will
destroy, if any thing will destroy: Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism; one God and Father of all. And it is called a principle, Heb. 6. 1, 2.
And because the fruit of Christ's death, which stands in remission of sins, is
the mystical and spiritual part of Baptism, Acts 22. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

The Minor Proposition may be thus corroborated and confirmed.

That Doctrine that brings in a Baptism which is into the Name of a mere
creature, subverts and destroys true Scriptural Baptism, and brings in a false
unscriptural Baptism.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes whole Christ a creature, does bring in
or set up a Baptism which is into the Name of a mere creature.

Therefore, this Doctrine of his subverts and destroys true Scriptural Baptism.

I shall strengthen both Propositions, because perhaps he will deny both; and
will begin with the proof of the Major, viz. that to baptize into the Name of a
mere creature, destroys true Baptism, and sets up a false.

1. Because the true Scriptural Baptism is the Seal of a Covenant, betwixt that
one true God, and the believer that partakes of it; in which the believer
consecrates and gives up himself to believe on, and be servant to the true God:
God and the believer are the confederates. The believer is not confederate with
any creature: As he gives not himself up to the creature, so neither can any
creature accomplish for him those great blessings of the Covenant; but he
depends upon God alone for them. The Covenant which is sealed, is the Covenant
of Grace, by which we are saved.

2. Because true Gospel-Baptism is the confirmation of Adoption, which respects
the true God alone: for in Baptism, the Name of God is named upon the believer,
and the believer carries God's Name upon him. And this the Apostle Paul does
point at, when he reproves the Corinthians for calling themselves by the name
of Paul, saying, I am of Paul. The Argument that he makes use of against them,
is this: Were you baptized into the name of Paul? As if he should have said;
His Name ye bear, and his children ye are, into whose Name ye were baptized:
but were ye baptized into the name of Paul, that you will carry his name? No,
ye were not; but into the Name of God, to note out your adoption to God. To be
adopted, and to be the sons and daughters of the Almighty, is all one, 2 Cor.
6. 18. And we are not adopted into sonship to any creature: that is
unscriptural doctrine, and not to be received.

3. Because true Gospel-Baptism is the acknowledgement of the believers
subjection unto Divine Sovereignty, or the authority of the most high God: for
by Name, Authority is frequently understood: to do a thing in the Name of any
Prince, or Monarch, or State, is to do in the Virtue, Power, and Authority of
them; and to baptize in the Name, is to baptize in the Authority of God, whose
Ordinance it is, and from whom the blessing must come.

And for suchlike reasons as these, it was, that the Apostle shunned and
declined baptizing into his own name: he looked upon it as sacrilegious to God,
and an usurping upon God, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15. I thank God (says he) I baptized
none of you, save Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say that I baptized into
mine own name. Thus jealous was Paul, lest he should assume and arrogate to
himself that which is the prerogative of, and is proper to God.

The Minor Proposition, viz. That this Doctrine of his, which makes whole
Christ a creature, does bring in, and set up, a Baptism which is into the name
of a mere creature, carries evidence in it self, because Baptism is an
Ordinance that (without contradiction) is into the Name of Christ, and
consequently into the name of a mere creature, if whole Christ be a creature.

Object.

All that (I can foresee) can be alleged by him against this, is, That
Baptism is principally into the Name of the Father; and that it is through
Christ, as an instrument through whom the Father does bestow the blessings of
Baptism.

Sol. But, 1. How does Scripture justify this? where does it give witness to
it? If not, it is not derogatory to Christ to imagine it. 2. Why does Christ
join himself and the Spirit with the Father, as three associates, without any
shadow of difference or disparity; whose Persons are three, but whose Name is
but one? It is not said, Names, but Name: for as their Essence is one, so their
Name is one; as they are one Lord, so their Name is one. 3. Baptism has been
into the Name of the Lord Jesus alone, without the mention of the Father at
all, Acts 19. 5. When they heard this, they were baptized into the Name of the
Lord Jesus. Baptism did run in such a form, as that sometimes the Name of
Christ was only used, and the Father and the holy Ghost were wholly silenced,
but never excluded. And can it be conceived, that if the Name of the Father be
the Name of that person which is principal, and the Name of the Son be the Name
of a person that is only instrumental, that in the form of Baptism, or words
of institution, the Name of the principal person should be pretermitted, and
and the name of the Name of the instrument mentioned? There is neither Sense,
nor Reason, nor Pattern, nor Example for it.

Object.

But it may be objected, That Moses was but an instrument in that Baptism of
the cloud* and of the sea, that is spoken of in 1 Cor. 10. 2. and yet it is
said, that they were all baptized into Moses, in the cloud, and in the sea.

Sol. Moses is not to be considered as an Instrument, but as a Type of Christ,
who was present with the children of Israel in the pillar of the cloud, and in
the pillar of fire: and they were baptized into Moses mystically, and
figuratively, as into the Type; but really and truly they were baptized into
Christ, who was the Antitype, and in whom that which was in shadow in reference
to Moses, was in substance, and was fulfilled, in reference unto Christ, as
has been demonstrated before.

For further conviction, because I discern that some are slow of heart to
believe the desperateness and damnableness of this Doctrine, I shall propound
another Argument to prove the destructiveness of this his Tenent to the Gospel,
and Scriptures, in some main points of them.

Arg. 5. That Doctrine which denies and destroys the sufficiency of Christ as
a Savior, denies and destroys the true Gospel and Scripture; and not only in
a main point, but in the main scope of them.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes whole Christ a creature, does deny and
destroy the sufficiency of Christ as a Savior:

Therefore, this Doctrine of his does deny and destroy the Gospel, and whole
Scripture, not only in a main point, but in the main scope of them.

The Major Proposition will be readily confessed by him, and denied by none;
therefore needs no proof.

The Minor Proposition must be fortified, else it will be challenged as
slanderous.

I therefore prove it by a double medium.

1. That Doctrine that denies Christ to be the author of salvation, and makes
him an instrument only in the hand of him that is the author; that Doctrine
denies Christ to be a sufficient Savior.

But this Doctrine of his, which makes whole Christ a creature, does deny
Christ to be the author of salvation, and makes him only an instrument in the
hand of the Father, who is the author:

Therefore, this Doctrine of his denies Christ to be a sufficient Savior.

He may perhaps deny the Major, and distinguish of sufficiency, and say there
is an absolute and independent sufficiency, which is proper to that which is
the author of a thing; and there is a limited and restrained sufficiency*
depending upon that absolute sufficiency of the author, which is suitable and
proper to an instrument; and this later Christ has, and so is sufficient
through God, through the Father, for the work of salvation, though he be but a
creature.

But such an Answer must be judged weak, for two Reasons. 1. The sufficiency
of Christ to save, is an absolute sufficiency, and such as is proper to the
author of salvation, according to the testimony of the Scripture, Heb. 5. 9.
And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation to them that
obey him. Now I hope he will not confound the Author and the Instrument, and
make them one person. An instrumental sufficiency the Scripture knows nothing
of, in reference to Christ, nor does attribute any such to him. 2. An
instrumental sufficiency is no other then insufficiency: for an instrument is
not able to save to the utmost, and so is of himself insufficient to save; but
Christ is able of himself to save to the utmost, Heb. 7. 25.

But he perhaps will endeavor to evade the strength of this Assertion, by
saying, that if Christ be able, through God the Father, to save to the utmost,
it is sufficient for the verifying of Scripture.

But neither has this Answer strength in it, nor is Scripture verified by it:
for Scripture speaks of Christ's ability, as ability in himself; Heb. 1. 3,
Christ is described to be one that upholds all things by the word of his own
power, and to purge sin away by himself: and Christ never needed to say of the
Father, as Paul said of Christ, I am able to do all things through Christ that
strengthens me; so Christ, I am able to do all things through the Father that
strengthens me: and though he might be strengthened, as the Son of man, yet not
as the Son of God; but drew on the people to believe a Divine power in himself:
for his words are without any limitation. Do thou believe that I am able to
do this for thee? says he to one that came to be cured of him, without
interposing any words which should show his dependence on another. And this
ability was Divine ability, because it lay in this, viz. to heal without the
efficacy of means which might conduce to such a purpose. And Christ is called
the power of the Father, because the Father's power is in him. And it is said
that God laid help upon one that is mighty; which, though spoken of David, yet
of him but as the Type; and is meant of Christ, who is the Antitype, and who is
truly mighty. This ability of Christ within himself to save to the utmost, is
that which the Apostle disputed for, in many places of that Epistle, and
especially in the Context of that Scripture, Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to
the utmost: for he does detect the insufficiency of the High Priest to save,
by showing their mortality, and other infirmities; and then presents Christ's
sufficiency. And if it were so that God could have saved by an instrument
which derives his virtue from him, and is dependent upon him, a Savior needed
not to have come from heaven; for God might have done it by any earthly
creature, or by any creature-instrument, without any respect had to power or
ability as inherent in it at all, but by his own power manifested by it; and so
might have saved by an Apostle, equally as by a Christ.

But I shall prove what I design, by another medium.

2. That Doctrine which renders Christ insufficient to the work of saving,
renders him an insufficient Savior, or destroys his sufficiency as a Savior.

But this Doctrine of his renders Christ insufficient to perform the work of
saving, etc.

Which I prove thus:

If Christ be a mere creature, he is insufficient to execute those three
Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet, to perform the work which those Offices
do call for, for the saving of men.

I shall begin with his Prophetical Office, unto the execution of which it is
necessary, not only to open the Scriptures to men, that they may conceive of
them, but to open the understandings of men to understand them; and to give
them eye salve, that they may see: which, because it belongs to his Office as a
Prophet, he must be able to do from virtue and ability within himself. But no
creature can effect this by any power of its own, nor is capable to receive
such power from another, because it is not competent to the creature; and
consequently, Christ being only a creature (as he holds him) is disabled in
the principal work of that Office.

And, as a Priest, he was to offer up himself to God through the eternal
Spirit, that he might purge away sin, and that his Blood might be of greater
efficacy then the blood of bulls and goats; and that he might purchase eternal
redemption for believers: which as a creature he could not do, Heb. 9. 12. So
that he disables him in the works of his Priestly Office, in holding him only
to be a creature.

And, as a King, he must conquer Death, by raising himself up from the dead,
which he was to suffer as a Priest, to take away sin. And he must also destroy
sin in its regnancie by Kingly power, in his members, as he was to condemn it
in its guilt by his death: which work is above the power of any mere creature.
So that by this opinion of his, he is made weak to perform all his Offices,
which yet he came into the world to accomplish; and that he is made an
insufficient Savior; which overturns the Gospel, in the principal scope of it.
But of this more hereafter.

The last Argument which I shall now produce to prove another Gospel and
Scripture to be brought in, and the true Gospel and Scripture to be destroyed,
is this:

Arg. 6. That Doctrine which tends to overturn and destroy the mystery of
godliness, tends also to overturn and destroy the Gospel and Scripture.

But this Doctrine of his serves to overturn and destroy the mystery of
godliness:

Therefore, it destroys the Gospel and Scripture.

The Major Proposition he will not have the boldness to make question of.

The Minor Proposition I prove from 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

Thus the words run in all the Original Copies, unless one, in which the word
God is left out (as is conceived) expunged by the Arrians; but the sense of all
comes to be subverted by it.

I shall give the sense of the words, and then deduct the consequence from it:
and shall begin with the subject that is spoken of, and then speak of the
predicate of that which is asserted.

God manifest in the flesh] The Son of God, or God in the person of the Son
appearing in flesh, by assuming flesh, and uniting it to his own person.

Justified in the Spirit] Justified by the Godhead to be God; that is, by the
rays and beams that sparkled out* and shined forth in the flesh, suitable to the
expressions of the Apostle, Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us; and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten Son of
God* etc.

Seen of angels] Attended by Angels in his incarnation* ministry, sufferings,
rising, ascending, as the story of the Gospel shows, which gave witness to this
mystery of God in flesh.

Preached to the Gentiles] Preached in this mystery of the incarnation to be
God over all, blessed for ever.

Believed on in the world] Received as God in our nature, as the Immanuel, as
very God, as the most high God, by faith; as Thomas did receive him, so all
Saints ought: My Lord (says he) and my God.

Received up into glory] Taken up to heaven to receive the glory; not that
which was of new given to him as a reward of his sufferings, but the glory
which he had before the world was; which Divine glory was made more apparent in
flesh, which was obscured before very much, and veiled in it.

That which is predicated or declared of this subject, is that it is a mystery
of godliness.

Great is the mystery] It is one of the great depths of God; it is the depth of
depths, the head and height of all mysteries; which eye has not seen, and ear
has not heard, and which has not entered into the heart of man to conceive;
which flesh and blood has not revealed, but the Father that is in heaven by
the Spirit; viz. that God in the person of the Son, was sent by the Father, and
by consent with the Father, gave himself to a state of debasement, humbled
himself, and appeared in the fashion of a man by taking flesh of the Virgin,
and becoming together with it one person, viz. (...), God-man; God in the
person of the Son, and the Son of man, making one Christ.

This truth was witnessed by the Spirit, viz. by the Divinity of the second
person made flesh, by some glory of the Godhead of the Son, which in flesh
appeared, and declared him to be what he was; and testified by the attendance
of Angels, and preached, and believed by all sorts of men whom God has
ordained to life and sealed to the satisfaction of all that might doubt, by his
assumption into glory; Jehovah the Father therein speaking to Jehovah the Son,
Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool. Some such
enemies were those which contradicted him, and called it blasphemy, when he
said that he was the Son of God, or God in the person of the Son; which is all
one. This (says the Apostle) is the great mystery which is transcendent above
all reason in the sons of men.

Of godliness] This is that truth, in the acknowledgement of which, and in the
assent to which, all godliness is founded and bottomed: For it is the Gospel in
the grand mystery of it, the Son in flesh, that being preached to the world,
and received by faith, becomes the seed of all piety and godliness, by which we
are begotten to God, and are made partakers of the Divine nature. This mystery
of Christ revealed, forms Christ in the hearts of those to whom it is revealed.
This Doctrine known and believed, changes men into the same image; that as the
eternal Son of God in flesh is become man-like, so they (after they have
acknowledged it by faith) are made God-like: for therein is the rich grace and
glorious mercy of the Lord revealed. The love of the Father is transcendent in
glory, in giving such a Son, who is the express image of himself, and the same
God essentially with himself: And the love of the Son is superlative, and above
all the conceptions of the sons of men, in giving himself, when it is rightly
understood that this Self whom he gives is God blessed for ever.

This truth believed, works astonishment, and the soul is ravished with the
thoughts of it. But the other, viz. God's giving a Creature for us, and a
Creature's giving it self for us, is a low business, in comparison of this:
nor can the heart be so confirmed, in apprehension of the love of God, nor can
it be so inflamed with love to God; but this mystery (as the Apostle lays it
down) quickens faith and love, and heightens them; which graces are the
chariots to carry the soul out to all godliness and honesty.

The consequence of which is, Whoever denies this mystery, denies and destroys
godliness, and, in so doing, denies and destroys the Gospel, which is called by
the Apostle, doctrine which is after godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1.

And this is of weighty consideration to all those that acknowledge Christ to
be God, and yet hold it not very dreadful in those that do gainsay it, but
account them Saints and godly persons: which they cannot groundedly do, while
the evidence of this text is against them, which says. Great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifest in the flesh. And if they acknowledge the truth of this
text, then this text will stare them in the face, while they cry up the
godliness of such who do oppose it. Where is their godliness, if this mystery
(which they acknowledge not) be the mystery of godliness? If godliness be the
fruit of this doctrine, rightly understood and received; if it grow upon the
tree of this truth, and they hew down this tree, destroy this truth in the
opinion which they hold; does not the fruit fall with it? Godliness is cut down
with the tree out of which it grows; it is plucked up with the root that bears
it. What can be said against this? Me thinks every tongue should be silent
hence-forward, that subscribes to this text, Great is the mystery of goliness,
God manifest in the flesh, etc.

But enough has been spoken of this, to convince any one that loves the Truth,
and will open his eyes to receive it.

I shall now undertake the maintaining of such Arguments or Instances (as he
calls them) which I produced to show the repugnancie of his Doctrine to the
Gospel, and to the Scripture, and discover the weakness and unsoundness of the
Answers that he gives.

The first Argument or Instance, was:

Instance 1. If Christ be but a mere creature, and not God, then the giving of
Divine worship, and honor, and service to a mere creature, is lawful, and
warrantable; which yet is everywhere forbidden, in reference to any creature,
but is practiced unto Christ, Rev. 5. 12, 13, 14. and would be idolatry, if
Christ were not God.

He puts this Instance into form.

To give Divine worship, honor and service to a mere creature, is contrary to
the Scripture.

To give Divine worship, honor, and service to Christ, is not contrary to, but
by the warrant of Scripture:

Therefore, Christ is not a mere creature.

He answers to the Major Proposition, and distinguishes of Divine worship,
honor, and service. First, (he says) All worship and honor which of right
belongs to any creature, is in some sense divine, God being the principal
author, and ultimate center thereof, Romans 13. and Ephesians. 6. 7.

Rep. But he might as truly say, Every warrantable action that a man performs,
is divine, because it has God for the principal Author, and ultimate Center;
that is, it has God's command for the beginning of it, and God's glory for the
end of of it. But by such distinguishing, he confounds what ought to be
distinguished; he makes Divine worship and Civil worship to be the same thing,
because God is the principal Author and ultimate Center of them both: but these
two have ever been distinguished by our Writers, and made opposite species of
Worship. Therefore it was very frivolous for him to look upon Divine Worship in
that sense.

2. He says, But if you mean, in the strictest sense, that worship, honor and
service which is peculiar to the most high God; then I shall say with you that
it is Idolatry; and contrary to the Scriptures, to give it to any creature
whatsoever.

Rep. The controversy betwixt us and the Papists, is, what Worship is peculiar
to God, and what is not peculiar but may be given to a creature. And we assert
against them, that all Divine worship and honor is peculiar to God, and none of
it communicable to any mere creature. But he tells us of some Divine worship
which is peculiar, and of some that is not peculiar. For the better
understanding of this Truth, let it be looked into what Divine Worship is, and
what the grounds thereof are.

Divine Worship is that Observance in which we are carried directly and
immediately to God, in doing those things that directly bring honor to him,
and glorify him, in Romans 1. 21. When they knew God they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, etc. 2 Cor. 8. 5. They first gave themselves up
unto the Lord, and then to us, according to the will of God.

The ground of this Worship or Observance, is, that excellency of God, which
in his sufficiency and efficiencie shines forth. It is not one attribute or
perfection in God, that is the formal and adequate cause and reason of Divine
Worship; but it is the concurrence of all infinite perfections and
excellencies, Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and full of truth etc. Therefore it is that sometimes one
attribute in God is said to engender homage and worship, Psalm. 130. 4. But
there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared* And sometimes
another, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God with
reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire. And Divine worship
is the acknowledgement of the infinite Majesty, Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, Glory
of the blessed God.

Divine Worship has been wont to be divided into Natural worship, and
Instituted worship.

Natural worship flows from the very knowledge of God, if it be right and true,
though there were no Law to impose any such thing upon men; and it conststs in
faith, and love, and fear, and hope, and thankfulness, and in praying unto God,
and hearing what God the Lord will say to them: for of these, such who have a
right knowledge of God, will soon be convinced: Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy
Name, will trust in thee. And hereto also does belong some natural external
acts and postures of the body, which do hold forth the reverence and homage of
the mind; as the bowing of the knees, and prostrating of the body before God.

Instituted worship is certain mediums or means, ordained by the will of God,
for the putting forth and exercising of natural worship, viz. faith, love,
hope, fear, etc. which are inward acts of the mind, and graces whereby we
gratify God, and honor him; and belong to Natural worship.

This Instituted worship consists in Ordinances and Services of God's own
appointment, in which the Natural worship of faith, hope, fear, etc. are acted,
and by which they are promoved.

Having showed what Divine Worship is, and the grounds and kinds of it, it
remains that I declare that all Divine Worship, (and not some alone, as he
asserts) is peculiar to God, and not to be given to any creature, that is no
more then a creature.

1. That which is limited and restrained by Go to God alone, in the first and
second Commandment, and inhibited and forbidden to be given to any other, that
must needs be peculiar to God alone. But all divine worship, both natural and
instituted, together with the postures that do attend them, as applied to
divine worship, are limited and restrained by God to God only, and prohibited
to be given to any other: Therefore it must needs be proper and peculiar to God.

For what else is the sense of those two Commandments; Thou shall have no other
Gods but me: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. but an
injunction of the having and exercising such divine Graces and Affections upon
and toward God above, and a submitting to divine directions and instructions
from God, in reference to the means of worship, and to him alone? All that has
been written and preached by the most approved, looks this way. They say
natural worship is forbidden in the one, and ordained worship in the other;
and he that gives the natural to any but the true God, sets up and makes to
himself another God beside him; and he that sets up, or submits to any forms
of worship, without the dictate or warrant of the true God, commits Idolatry
against the true God.

2. That which Christ does appropriate to God, that must needs be peculiar to
him.

But Christ does appropriate divine worship to God alone, Mat. 4. 10. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Therefore divine worship is peculiar to God, and may not be given to any other.

That which the Devil required of Christ, was prostration, or bowing his body
to the ground before him, in a Religious way; as for his heart, and the faith
of it, and love or it, and fear of it, and affections of it, in any kind or the
intention of those affections, he mentions them not, requires them not, nor
could he know whether they were given to him, or no, nor in what degree and
measure; but the outward homage only, in the inclination of the body to the
earth, in a religious way; and Christ yields not to it, but repels him with the
Scripture, which he fetches from Deuteronomy. 6. 13. or from Chap. 10. 20. or from
Chap. 26. 10. for I find no other that Christ can allude to, and Expositors do
direct to the two former; but in none of them is it said. Him only shall thou
serve; nor is it applied to external adoration: but our Savior, an infallible
expositor, does extend it to religious postures, and outward homage in a
spiritual way, and does restrain it to God alone.

3. That which the Apostle condemned in the Galatians, while they were heathen,
that cannot be allowable in Christians.

But the doing of Religious service, or giving religious or divine worship to
them, which by nature are not Gods, is the thing that the Apostle condemns in
the Galatians, while they were Heathens, Gal. 4. 8.

Therefore it is not allowable in Christians.

The Heathens when they worshipped stocks and stones, and works of the hands of
the Workman, they did it relative, not terminative; that is, they worshipped
the highest being in these, and did not terminate and end their worship in
these, but used these as helps in that worship which they directed to the most
High God, whom they knew not, and carried their worship through these to him;
as from Acts 17. 23. compared with 25. 29. will appear. They worshipped Idols
of silver and gold and graven stone, yet they knew that those Idols made by
men's hands were not God, but there was an unknown God, whom they worshipped in
such Images: Yet this worship was accounted by the Apostle a doing service to
them which by nature are not Gods, and was condemned: And this intermediate
service which was not terminated in the thing served, will not be allowed, as
belonging to any other but to him, who is essentially God, and by nature God.

4. That which neither the Angels, nor the most eminent Saints on earth, durst
accept, though tendered to them, because they were but creatures, but directed
it to God as proper only to him, that ought not to be given to any creature,
but is peculiar to God. But divine Religious worship manifested in the outward
prostration of the body, was a thing that the Angels, and the most eminent
Saints, durst not accept of, because they were but creatures; but directed it
to God, as proper to him alone: Therefore divine Religious Worship ought not to
be given to any mere creature, but is peculiar to God.

There are many Scriptures which serve to confirm that which can in reason
only be questioned in this Argument, viz. Whether all divine Religious
worship, though intermediate, and in the lowest degree, was rejected by Angels
and Saints, as undue to them, and as proper to God: for this purpose, see Act.
10. 26. where may be found, that Adoration with the body, which did proceed
from the estimation of the mind, though Cornelius that tendered it, knew Peter,
to whom he tendered it, neither to be God nor Christ; nor had he that esteem of
him, nor did he terminate that worship which he gave him, upon him; for he was
better instructed; but through him looked at God: yet the thing was evil that
he did, and undue to Peter, or to any mere man whatever, and was therefore
rejected by Peter upon that ground and account; Stand up (said he) for I my
self am also a man: as if he should have said, I am not God, but a man, a mere
man, and nothing more; therefore it is not proper to adore me thus.

So also in Rev. 19. 10. and chap. 22. 9. John fell at the Angel to worship
him, knowing him to be but an Angel, and looking upon him only as one through
whom he had found favor to have such things showed him, and as one superior to
him, because an Angel, as Rev. 32. 8. shows, I fell down at the feet of the
Angel that had showed me these things; it was upon this account that he fell
down, He was an Angel, and had showed such things to him; he was not God, nor
Christ, nor did John look upon him so: and it was but an outward prostrating of
his body before him, arising from that reverent esteem that he had of him; yet
it was not accepted by the Angel, but repelled and with this Argument repelled,
I am thy fellow servants, (as indeed the highest creatures are) and of thy
Brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus; see therefore thou do it not;
worship God. Whence it is apparent, that the lowest degree of Religious divine
Worship, is too high for any creature.

5. That wherein Gods glory lies, and which he is so dear of that he will not
give it to any other, and which when it has been given to another, by his
people, has stirred up his jealousy, that must needs be proper and peculiar
to God, and is not to be given to any other below God. But all divine religious
worship is such a thing wherein Gods glory lies, and of which God is so dear,
that he will not give it to any other, but proves jealous presently if it be
given: Therefore all divine Religious worship is so proper and peculiar to God,
that it is not to be given to another.

The Scriptures that prove the Minor proposition, which alone may be
questioned, are Isa. 42. 8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my glory will I
not give to another, nor my praise to a graven Image. This Glory which God will
not give to any other, is such worship which was wont to be given to a graven
Image, and which the children of Israel gave to the Calf in Horeb, which was
intermediate worship, and was not terminated in the Calf, but in God; and yet
God would not give that from him. And when God gives the second Commandment, in
which he forbids to be worshipped through an Image, (and by Image, any thing
that may be thought of to represent him, is meant, as all confess that have
been accounted Orthodox) he mentions his jealousy which will arise in his
best, if such worship be tendered him; he will count it as if the Image, the
creature the representative, whatever it be, were worshipped, and not he; and
he will visit that sin upon the Fathers unto their children to many Generations.

By this time I hope it will be evident unto the Reader, That all divine
Religious worship is peculiar to God alone. I shall now proceed to consider of
the residue of his Answer.

He undertakes to show difference betwixt the worship that is peculiar to God,
and all other worship. His words are these:

That worship, honor, service, which is peculiar to God, differs from that
which may be yielded to a creature, partly in the matter, but wholly in the
manner of it. We must pray to God for all things we want, and may pray to men
for what they can give; we must obey God, and we must obey men who are set over
us by God: but we may not worship, honor, and serve men in the like manner as
we do the most high God, who is the principal and ultimate object of all
worship, honor and service; his right thereto being only of himself, and he
himself being the sole end thereof. According to this sense, is that command
which our Savior mentions. Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve.

Rep. In these Lines, he has multiplied words, but has not increased
knowledge; he has told us of a difference, but has not showed us what it is,
he has instanced in matter and manner, but not declared wherein, in what
particulars, in either; he showed reasons of a difference, why it must be so;
God is first and last, therefore none must be worshipped as he: but the
difference is yet in the dark; I would entreat any one to fetch it out of his
words, if he can. And if there be any light in his expressions, that light is
darkness, yea blackness of darkness: he has said that God is the principal and
ultimate object of all worship, and so he leaves it, and therein he opens a
door to all Popish Idolatry; a man may worship a stock, or a stone, or any
thing, provided that God be the first and the last, the principal and ultimate
object in that worship that he gives thereto. What would any Papist desire more
at his hands? A graven Image may be an object of his worship, if it be not the
principal object, nor the ultimate, but that he pass through it to God.

As for the difference in matter, he mentioned it, and then deserted it,
without giving the least hint what it is. It had been needful that he should
have pitched upon some act or acts of worship of which it might have been said.
This act is so proper and peculiar to God (materially considered) as that the
like material act may not be performed to any that is not God: But he foresaw
that the giving of an instance herein, would have lost the cause he pleads for:
for though he might have given instances many, which might have held in
reference to all other creatures, yet not any that would hold in reference to
Christ, whom he makes but a creature; therefore he is silent. And though he
gives instances of acts materially the same, which are performed to God and
men; as praying, obeying; and says the difference is in the manner of
performing these acts, yet he gives no satisfaction in reference to this
diversity of manner. And he mentions not the grounds of worship, and honor,
and service, wherein the root of the difference lies; for, the grounds are such
upon which we worship God, that because we meet not with them in any creature
we have to do with, therefore we neither dare give the same worship for matter,
or manner, that we give to God, to any creature.

But as if he had given light enough, he concludes, that Mat. 4. 10. must be
understood according to that sense. What sense means he? He would have God to
be the principal and ultimate object in all worship; and that is enough,
according to him; and being observed, Christ might have worshipped the the
devil, for any other caveat that he enters against it.

I do not wrong him one whit; for his words are, That the command which Christ
mentions in repelling Satan that tempted him to worship him, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, must be restrained to God, as
he is the principal and ultimate object only: and then if Christ had so
understood it, as he does, and reserved to God his own place of worship, had
made him his principal and ultimate object in worship, he might as the less
principal and intermediate object, have worshipped the devil, if he had
pleased. And this Text which he alleges, of Mat. 4. (if there had been none
other) would not have been of any force in this sense against it. So that
either Christ mistook the Scripture, and alleged a Text that had not strength
against worshipping of Satan, or else he has grossly mistaken the sense of the
Scripture which Christ has alleged, in giving liberty for intermediate
worship to be given to him that is not God, notwithstanding any thing contained
in this Text.

But because he keeps to generals, and by that means resolves no scruple that
may lie in the breasts of men about worship. I shall descend to some
particulars.

And first, I shall speak of worship proper to God in the matter of it, wherein
he is wholly silent; and then of worship proper in the manner of the
performance.

1. To believe or receive any report of spiritual things and matters of Faith
which respect the soul, proposed and presented as a truth to be rested in upon
the mere credit and fidelity of the Testator, or him that witnesses it, is a
worship and an honor proper to God alone, because God is he alone that cannot
lie, Tit. 1. 2. and it was the honor that Sarah by this Faith gave to God, she
judged him faithful that had promised, Heb. 11. 11.

2. A Religious resting and depending for spiritual supply and help in
spiritual works and streights, is a worship and honor peculiar to God alone:
the reason is* because there is no sufficiency of this kind in any creature,
but it is only and wholly in God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Therefore the Prophet directs
him that is in darkness, and has no light, (it is spoken of the souls darkness
and distress) to trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God Isa. 5.
10.

3. An acquiescence in the will of another, whether it appear to be with us, or
whether it appear to be against us, is an homage and an honor which is proper
and peculiar to God alone, 1 Samuel 3. 18 It is the Lord (said Eli) let him do
what seems good in his eyes: he submits quickly, to that which was terrible
to be thought of, upon this account or ground, It is the Lord, to whom such
subjection is due. And Jesus Christ himself as man does acquiesce, and rest
satisfied with the will of God, which was bitter as death: Not my will, but
thine be done.

And the obeying of the will of another, for this sole reason, because it is
the will of that other, when there is no other impulsive cause but that, is
honor peculiar and proper to God alone, because his will, and his alone, is
Essentially holy and just, and good. I consulted not with flesh and blood
(says Paul) when the will of God was revealed that he should teach him, Gal.
1. 15, 16. and Romans 12. 2.

4. Praying, as it is an act of Religion, and then especially, when it is for
spiritual blessings, is a worship which is proper to God alone; because such a
service simply considered in its nature, does imply a sufficiency of wisdom,
power and goodness, in the person to whom we direct it: in reference to which,
praying to any creature is accounted as praying to a god that cannot save; and
it is Idolatry in Scripture-reckoning, Isa. 45. 20. Jer. 1. 27.

5. Giving of praise, and glory, and thanks (as it is an act of Religion) is
worship and honor due to God alone, and not to be communicated to any
creature; because he is the root and fountain of all good to the creature, the
God of all Grace and mercy, the God of blessing. Therefore in Rev. 4. 9, 10.
11, The four beasts, and the four and twenty Elders, they worship him that sat
upon the Throne by giving praise to him, and cast down their Crowns at his
feet, and say he is worthy to receive honor and glory, because he had created
all things. And as in the time of the old Testament, to offer Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving to any but to the true God, had been Idolatry (which caused Paul
and Barnabas to run in with have to stop them in the attempt of Sacrificing to
them, by telling them that they were but men like themselves) so to offer the
Calves of the Lips, to offer praise, to give Thanks, in a Religious way, is
worship peculiar to God.

6. To Swear or to appeal Solemnly in a religious way for Testimony, in
reference to any thing asserted, for the truth of it, is worship or honor that
is proper to God, and not to be given to any creature, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall
fear the Lord, and serve him, and swear by his Name. And it is reproved that
some did swear by the Lord and by Malchom, that is, for joining God and Idols
together, in the worship of an Oath; and under that, all other worship is
comprehended.

7. The use of a Lot, in which persons that are at some controversy, or are
doubtful what to determine of a thing, do give up themselves to receive the
determination of it, as the Lot being cast shall decide it, it is a worship and
an honor proper to God. Prove. 16. 33, The Lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposition thereof is from the Lord. Therefore it was used with
invocation, or prayer to God, wherein men do profess to receive the doom, or
sentence, or judgment, or decision from the Lord, Act. 1. 24.

8. A receiving of, and submitting unto, prescribed forms and rules, as
mediums, in and by which that natural worship of the heart, which consists in
faith, and hope, and love, is exercised and declared, is worship and honor
proper and peculiar to God alone, and forbidden in reference to any creature,
in the second Commandment: for under the names of graven image, invented forms
and mediums of worship, excogitated and minted in men's own brain, or of any
others prescribing, that is not God, are meant: and indeed, who knows what is
pleasing to God, and delightsome to him, but himself? therefore the progative
is his to prescribe; and it is peculiar honor for men, to submit to what he
does prescribe. The subjecting of the Conscience to Laws, and Ordinances, and
Institutions, and Directions, is an honor not communicable to any creature, but
wherein God is alone, not having any to share with him; for the Conscience is
overawed by none but God, gives account to none but God: Romans 2. 15, the
Apostle proves the love of God to be written in the excusing and accusing which
work manifestly declares a Law of God within, because the Conscience is
accountable to nothing but such a Law: for there lies the strength of his
Argument, that there is such a Law within them,

10. In external postures, in Religious duties, the prostration of the body
toward the earth, and kneeling upon the knees toward the ground, is homage,
and honor, and worship peculiar to God: O come let us fall down and kneel
before the Lord our Maker, says the Prophet, in Psalm. 95. 6. And its that
which neither Angel nor men durst assume, no nor admit of, but repelled it, and
rejected it as undue, and directed it to God.

Many more particulars there are, respecting the matter of worship, where God
has a peculiarity in point of right to worship and honor, above the creature:
but some light is let in to such (which might be groping in the dark) by these.

I shall take in that light which Christ affords, (while I speak of the manner
of worship) and satisfy my self with that. He sums up all the Commandments
that respect God, in these words; Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and serve
him with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength and might. So
that that which is peculiar in the manner of worship, is the measure of
performance such a measure ought not to be given to any creature as to God: a
person may be easily peccant in the excess in reference to the creature: if he
give all to the creature, he gives too much; but less then all, is too little
for God; the utmost created height is due to God, and peculiarly due to him,
and to none other.

1. An absolute Faith, and affiance, and trust, is due to God alone, whatever
the Subject Matter of it be, because there is an absolute and an independent
sufficiency in God alone* to effect every thing; therefore it is that which the
Lord pronounces a blessed thing, Jer. 17. 7. Blessed is the man that trusts
in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: And the contrary the Lord pronounces
a cursed thing, ver. 5. Cursed be he that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm. A like place we have in Psalm. 146. 3, 5.

2. An absolute and unbounded love is due to God alone, because he is infinite
in goodness; and not to be given to any creature, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the
world, nor the things of the world, etc. Not the simple love, but the
mordinateness of the love of the world, is forbidden; but God himself is to be
loved with all the strength of the heart, Mat. 22. 37.

3. An absolute and unlimited fear is proper to God alone because he is the
Sovereign Lord, and to him it belongs to kill, or to keep alive; yea, he can
kill and cast into hell, Luke 12. 51. They are first taken off from fearing the
creature, and are afterward put on to fear God.

Much more might be added, if need did require: At present, let it satisfy the
Reader, that I have thus far opened the difference in the matter and in the
manner, betwixt the worship due to God, and that which may be given to the
creature, which he left olded up in his Discourse about it. I must now proceed
to follow him in his Answer.

He concludes his Answer to the Mayor, with admiration: his words are;

I wonder at the adjection (Mere) which you add to creature, as if a creature
in essence could be more then a mere creature; or, as if some creature might
have, as its right and due, that honor, worship, and service which the
Scripture does appropriate to the most High God. And then he determines, Sure I
am (says he) creatures, as creatures, are excluded from sharing with God.

Rep. I wonder that he should make a wonder of that which himself is able to
resolve, according to the common Tenent which himself so lately held; and if he
cannot, a child well bred, of 8 or 10 years old, can render a reason for it.
Christ is a creature, and* yet not a mere creature: according to the flesh, or
as he is the son of Abraham, he is a creature; but according to the Spirit of
Holiness, or as he is the Son of God, he is not a creature: Christ is (...),
God-man, or God manifested in the flesh; a creature, and yet created according
to the diverse natures that are in him. Consider him in one of his natures, as
born of the Virgin, as the son of Mary, so he is a creature in essence, and in
that respect he is no more then a creature, and is excluded from sharing with
God in divine honor, worship, and service; but consider him in both his
natures, consider the whole of him, and then he is not a mere creature, but he
is more then a creature; he is such a creature, as that he is (...), the great
Creator of all things, and so he shares with the Father in divine honor, but
not as a creature, though he be a creature; for this person Christ, is both God
and a Creature.

After he had spoken to the Major, he comes to consider of the Minor
proposition, viz. That divine worship, and honor, and service, is by
Scripture-warrant given to Christ Jesus.

His Answer is, Sir, it is granted that Jesus Christ is the intermediate object
of divine worship, honor and service, being Gods Viceroy, and acting among
them in his Fathers Name, which the Scripture you bring confirms; But where the
Scripture allows worship, honor, and service to be given to him, as the
principal and ultimate object thereof, is not yet made to appear.

Rep. 1. This distinction of intermediate object in reference to any mere
creature, and principal and ultimate Object, is unscriptural, he cannot bottom
it upon any Text in reference to divine and Religious prescribed worship.

2. It is repugnant to Scripture-Testimony in reference to the whole of Christ
whom the Father will have to be honored, as himself is honored, Joh. 5. 23.
That all may honor the Son as they honor the Father: The Father will have no
honor which the Son has not; will have nothing in honor that is peculiar,
that may be accounted proper to him: the Father will have no preeminence in
worship above the Son; but look in what manner he requires men to honor him he
requires them to honor his Son; and unless they do it, he accounts not himself
honored. If then the Father be worped as the principal and ultimate object the
Son must be worshipped as the principal and ultimate object, else he is not
honored as the Father is honored: The honoring of the Father is made the
pattern and the example of honoring the Son. And if Christ should be but a
creature, if this be not Gods giving his glory to another, when the like glory
is given to him that is not God, as to him that is God; the like to the Son as,
to the Father, and that according to the Fathers own design and counsel; Let
him that has understanding judge: however, it overthrows his distinction.

The place also that I alleged in Rev. 5. 12, 13, 14. which he says confirms
his distinction, is fully against it; for all creatures in heaven, earth, under
the earth, are represented by John in the service of blessing, praising,
honoring, glorifying the Father and the Son, in like manner, without any
distinction: they are not heard worshipping the Father through the Son, but
worshipping and honoring both Father and Son, in like manner as two equals, or
as two coessential persons in the Godhead. Yea, lest it should be imagined,
that he that sits upon the Throne, is the principal object of the worship,
and that the Lamb is the less principal, subordinate, and intermediate object
of it, because he is mentioned first, and the Lamb is mentioned after him;
therefore verse. 14. the four and twenty Elders are brought in, in this vision,
worshipping him alone who lives for ever and ever, without the mention of any
other, though other persons are not excluded. And who is this person that
lives for ever and ever? It is Christ, who gives himself this Title, though it
be his Fathers Title also, Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I live for ever and ever: So it is in the Greek, and it concurs in words
with this Text of Rev. 5. 14.

3. This distinction, as he brings it and means it, opens a door to the
worshipping of men or Angels, any that may be called God's representatives, and
which act among men in Gods Name: for if that be the formal reason of worship
given to Christ, He is Gods Viceroy or Representative (which are not
Scriptural Titles, but names of his own or others devising) and he is one that
acts in Gods Name, then worship may be given to Moses, Joshua, the Prophets;
for Moses was in Gods stead to Aaron and to the people: I have made thee a God
to Aaron, sairh the Lord to him, Exodus 4. 16. And the Prophets came in Gods
Name; may they therefore be worshipped? According to his Argument they may;
yea, any person or thing that is a means by whom or by which God dispenses
himself to men, in a Religious or spiritual way, or by whom or which we come to
God in worship, may be an intermediate object of Religious worship, and so we
may worship our Ministers which go to God for us, and from God come to us; and
we may worship the Scriptures and the Ordinances, by which we have communion
with God; for these are intermediate things betwixt God and us in worship, may
they therefore be intermediate objects of worship? Seeing he makes Christ such
a god as other creatures are, (but more eminent then they) such a god as Moses
was, as Magistrates and Judges were which carried Gods authority in the Offices
upon them, a god of the same kind with them; What reason can be rendered, if
Christ be worshipped upon that account, why they also (being suchlike gods as
he, and coming with God's authority betwixt God and us) should not be
worshipped as intermediate objects, upon the same account? But this is very
gross, and makes his assertion concerning worshipping Christ as an intermediate
object betwixt God and us, very gross also.

4. It is apparent that Christ both assumed, and Saints and Angels have given
to him, that very worship, and honor, and service which is peculiar to the
high God alone, both for matter, and for manner.

1. Doctrines, Institutions, and Ordinances, have been received, submitted to,
upon the testimony and authority of Christ alone, Mat. 5. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 11.
23, 24.

2. The Ordinances, Institutions, Laws, and Rites of Moses, were altered,
changed, abrogated, abolished, by the Power and Lordship of Christ alone, Acts
15. 28. 1 Cor. 12. 5. Heb. 3. 5, 6.

3. Believers have rested, trusted, and depended upon Christ, for spiritual
help and supply of grace, according to their needs, Phil. 4. 13. and 2 Cor. 12.
8, 9. a place worthy consideration, and very convincing, if rightly understood,
and duly weighed.

4. Saints have acquiesced, and quietly submitted, and rested satisfied with
the will of Christ, and have given up themselves wholly to him to be disposed
of, according to his pleasure, whether to do or to suffer, Act. 9. 10. to 17.
and 2 Cor. 8. 5.

5. Religious praying or prayer for spiritual blessings, as it is an act of
Religion, is a service and worship that has been given to Christ. Luke 17. 5,
the Disciples pray to Christ to increase their faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17, the
Apostle Paul prayed to him: and Hos. 12. 4, Jacob of old time wept and made
supplication to him.

6. Praise also, as it is an act of Religion, has been offered up to him, 2
Pet. 2. 18. Jud. v. 24, 25. Rev. 1. 6.

7. Swearing has been by his Name. Romans 9. 1, Paul attests Christ, flees to
him as a witness, and to his conscience: let the place be weighed, and it will
^ppear to be an Oath; and that the words in Christ, ^^ as much as by Christ;
Isa. 45. 23. compared with Romans 14. 11. Philip. 2. 10, 11. And Rev. 10. 5, 6,
the Angel swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven and
the things therein, and the earth and the things that are therein, and the sea
and the things that are therein. And who is this? It is Christ to whom the
Creation is attributed; and to live for ever and ever, is assumed by himself;
and he makes himself known by this attribute, as I have showed before, from
Rev. 1. 18.

8. In casting of the lot, Christ was invocated for the disposing of it, Acts
1. 24. That it was Christ whom they prayed to, appears from hence: 1. They call
him Lord whom they pray to; which is Christ's usual name in the New Testament,
by which he was distinguished from the Father. 2. To choose an Apostle, was
Christ's proper work: he chose the twelve Apostles, and therefore must choose
him who must come in room and place of Judas, who was one of the twelve, and
who fell from his Apostleship by transgression: therefore they use it as an
argument in their prayer, Show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he
may take part o^ this ministry, from which Judas by transgression fell. 3.
Christ is the great Lord of the Church; an^ he ascended up on high, that he
might give these gifts to his Church, Apostles, Evangelists, etc. Ephesians. 4. 10
11. And he is the great Lord of all his Churches* and administers all such
things that respect the good of his Churches, 1 Cor. 12. 5.

9. The conscience is subjected to Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 9. Masters
and servants are enjoined in this place by the Apostle, to do their duties to
each other with an eye to Christ, and as the servants of Christ, and as to the
Lord, and not to men, and as having a Master in heaven, with whom there is no
respect of persons. The Apostle would engage their consciences in the thing*
and therefore speaks so much of Christ; and he could have laid no greater bond
upon them, if he had mentioned the Father. See Col. 3. 22, 23, 24, where the
same bond is laid upon them, with some change of words: he presses obedience
upon servants with singleness of heart; and urges them first with the fear of
God, in stead of mentioning Christ; and afterward, he fetches arguments from
Christ, as he had done in his other Epistle.

10. Religious adoration was given to Christ with the body, and never
reprehended, but accepted of by him, Mark 5. 22. Luke 17. 16. Joh. 11. 32. Mark
3. 11. Rev. 5. 8. Acts 7. 59 60.

And if we have an eye to the manner of worship, we shall find that Christ
required it, and believers give it to him, in such sort as the most high God
can only challenge it.

1. An absolute and universal trust and confidence is put in Christ, such as,
that he, who is confessed to be the most high God, can challenge no more; and
this both in the matters of the soul, in reference to which he is called the
hope of Israel, Act. 28. 20. and the person in whom the Gentiles trust, Romans
15. 12. and also in matters of common providence, Phil. 2. 19. I trust in the
Lord Jesus, to send Timotheus unto you shortly: that is, I trust that Christ
will so mercifully order it, that I shall send him, and that all impediments
will be taken away. And if the providence of Christ does extend to all things,
and that the homage of dependence be given upon this account; what more can be
said of the most high God?

2. An absolute and full love is both required and given to Christ; so that
God, even the Father, can require no more: Matthew. 10. 37, He that loves
father, or mother, or son or daughter, more then me, (says Christ) is not
worthy of me. But Luke expresses it more fully, Luke 14. 36. He that does not
hate father and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea and his
own life, for Christ's sake, from that dear respect he bears to Christ, is not
worthy of him. And Christ would draw Peter up to a love above his necessary
food: Love thou me (said Christ) more then these? The meat that was before
him was meant, the fishes that they were to feed on. And the Spouse was sick of
love, Cant. 5. 8. And what greater proportion can the Father himself require,
then what Christ asked, and what the Saints gave to him?

The Inference then must needs be this: Christ is worshipped, and honored, and
served, with the worship, and honor, and service, not of an Intermediate
object, but of the Principal and Ultimate object: and all such texts which give
the same worship to the Son as to the Father, do prove it. And if it were not
so, men had need to look to their affiance and affection to Christ, lest it
should exceed; and that they neither put their whole trust in Christ, nor set
their whole hearts upon him, which would be due to him alone who is the high
God, and the principal and ultimate object of these motions of the soul. So
that this Doctrine of his does call off the soul from being too much set upon
Christ, as if it were possible to mind him too much, and affect him too
dearly: which should make all the true lovers of Christ to abhor it the more.

Object.

There is one knot yet to be untied, before I pass off from this point of
Worship. It may be said, Christ is to be worshipped as Mediator: the Scripture
is clear and manifest for it; Phil. 2. 10, At the Name of Jesus every knee
shall how: here is worship due to Christ, as exalted by the Father: Now he was
exalted as he was Mediator, in reference to an Office that he had executed: and
being Mediator, he is an intermediate object of worship: for a Mediator is one
betwixt God and men, by which men come to God; and as such an one, Christ is
worshipped.

Sol. As Christ is Mediator, he has a Lordship given to him; in which respect
he said to be made Lord, as he is made Mediator; and so there is worship
belonging to him: But it must be thus understood, That as his Official,
Oeconomical, and Mediatorly Lordship was founded in his Natural, Essential
Lordship, as he was the Son of God, and the most high God, coessential with the
Father, as has been proved before: so the Worship which he receives as
Mediator, as King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, is founded not simply in
or upon the Office, but upon the Excellency of the person that manageth the
Office; and if at all upon the Office, it is because such an Office cannot be
executed but by such a person who is the Son of God, and very God: For if it
were possible to conceive how such a Mediatorly function could be performed by
one that is not God, Divine religious worship would not be due unto him upon
that account. It is the dignity of the Person that founds the Worship; and the
Work does but quicken to it; or becomes a motive the rather to perform such
homage and worship to him to whom it is due upon another account, upon another
ground, if that Work had never been. Worship, and honor, and glory belonged to
him, as the second Person in the blessed Trinity, as the Eternal Son of God and
God: and if over and above this glorious (and ever to be honored and adored)
person, become Mediator, it is the more readily and forwardly to be exhibited
and given. As every mercy received from the Father of mercy, becomes a
further engagement to worship and serve this Father of mercies; but the
primitive ground is, This Father of mercies is God; otherwise, all mercy,
without consideration of the excellency of the person from whom it proceeds,
is not a right bottom to found worship upon.

Moses was a Mediator betwixt God and men, and a Type of this our glorious
Mediator, Christ: but Moses was but a Servant, not a Son; but a Creature, not
God: and there was no religious worship nor honor that belonged to him, in
reference to that work because a mere creature performed it. And if it be
otherwise in reference to Christ, that Christ as Mediator deserves to be
worshipped; the reason is, because such a Mediatorship as Christ performed,
could not have been performed, unless Christ had been God; because, to execute
that Function, requires the infinite power and wisdom of the Godhead: And
therefore Moses was the Type of that, which Christ really and effectually, and
powerfully was: Moses was internuncius, one that went betwixt God and the
people; but Christ made the atonement and the peace, being greater then Moses;
he being only typically God, but Christ really and truly God.

And though Christ be intermediate, being Mediator, yet he would not could not
thence become an intermediate object of Worship, unless because the same person
(though not according to both Natures) is also the principal and ultimate
object of of it: which shows thus much, That this Worship which Christ the
Mediator had, was due upon another account then his Mediatorship; otherwise it
would have been limited and restrained, that that worship which is due to God,
who is the ultimate object of worship, might have been discerned from it; and
the preeminence the Father has above Christ in Worship, would have been
declared in Scripture.

And hence it follows, that though Christ be an intermediate object of Worship,
yet he is the principal and ultimate object also: The same person who is Man
and Mediator, is the Son of God, and the most high God, and Mediator in that
nature also: And if Religious Divine worship be given unto him as Mediator, it
is given unto him for the sake of the Divine Nature and because he is the Son
of God, and God; according to which nature, apart considered from the Humane,
he is the ultimate object of worship; but as considered with the Humane, as
Mediator, he is the intermediate object of worship. And though the Humane
Nature be taken up into the fellowship (as of the Godhead, so) of this honor
and worship; yet this worship is not due, nor does properly appertain to the
Humane Nature: And though the person be honored with this Divine honor,
because of the Union; yet it is for the sake of the Divine Nature, and not for
the sake of the Humane, which, beause it is not the principal and ultimate
object of, worship; therefore that very worship, and no less, nor any other, is
given to Christ, being thus intermediate, or Mediator, which is proper and
peculiar to God alone, who is the principal and ultimate object worship, cannot
(separately and apart considered from the Divine Nature) be any object at all,
no not an intermediate object of Religious Divine worship: for then every
creature that is a medium, or a means, by or through which God communicates
himself to men, and so is intermediate betwixt God and man, should be an
intermediate object of Divine worship; which is directly repugnant to the
Scripture, and is greatly derogatory to God. that the Manhood of Christ, or the
Humane Nature, a part considered, has but the respect of an instrument, in so
glorious a work, which was wrought by the efficiencie and infinite power and
wisdom of God.

I have been the larger in discussing this point of Worship, because the right
understanding of it will facilitate the discussing of the two next which
follow, which respect Faith in Christ. He considers them together; though I
conceive they may well be distinguished from each other, as different things.
But I shall follow him in his method.

Instance 2. If Christ be a mere creature, then it is lawful and warrantable to
believe in a mere creature; which is against the tenor of the whole Scripture:
but it is commanded in reference unto Christ, Joh. 14. 1. and salvation is
annexed to it, Joh. 3. 36.

Instance 3. If Christ be a mere creature, then faith in a mere creature can
save man; which is absurd and gross, and contrary to the Scriptures: for,
Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness, Romans 4. 3.
and so was saving.

Unto these he opposes two Propositions, which the Scripture (as he says)
will warrant, and will suffice for an Answer.

1. That that faith which is needful to salvation, has a double object; God,
and the man Christ Jesus, Joh. 14. 1. which (he says) the Scripture that I
have quoted bears witness to, as a truth.

2. That that faith which is needful to salvation, acts in a diverse manner on
God, and on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Reply. 1. Neither the Scripture that I have quoted, nor any other, bears
witness to this, That the man Jesus Christ, as man, is the object of faith* The
Person of Christ that is man, is the object of faith; but not as man. And the
place that he cites in Joh. 3. 14, 15, proves it. The Son of man shall be
lifted up, that whoever believes on him, etc. But there is in these words that
which is called Idiomatum communicatio; viz. that which is spoken in the
concrete of Christ according to one Nature, is transferred to another Natrue:
And the verse that immediately precedes, viz. verse 13. declares thus much: It
is said that the Son of man is in heaven; which at that time when Christ spoke
those words, was impossible, as Christ is the Son of man, because Ubiquity, or
being everywhere at the same time, is not compatible to any man, as man: but it
was meant of the Person of Christ, who is called the Son of man, because he was
truly man; but according to the other nature that was in him, viz. the
Godhead, according to which he was in heaven and on earth together, because he
fills both, as God. And Christ, that did put that denomination [Son of man]
upon himself, in verse 13. continues it, and under that title makes himself the
object of faith: but there is a translation of that which is proper to one
nature, to another nature to which it is not proper: And indeed, Christ as
Mediator is an object of faith; but it is not as he is man that he is the
object, but as he is God: which is very clear, for these Reasons:

1. It is Christ, as he is JEHOVAH, that is the object of faith, as it
justifies and saves: Isa. 45. 24. compared with Romans 14. 10, 11. proves it:
Believers are brought in professing their faith in JEHOVAH, which is Christ:
Surely, shall one say, in JEHOVAH have I righteousness and strength. 1 Timothy 3.
10. God manifested in flesh, is believed on in the world: not Christ according
to his Manhood.

2. It is Christ as he is all-sufficient, and able to save to the utmost, that
is the object of faith, Heb. 7. 25. 2 Timothy 1. 12. But Christ, as he is man, is
not all-sufficient, and able to save to the utmost, but as he is the Son of
God, and God, Joh. 4. 25.

3. The man that trusts in man, is accursed by God's own sentence, Jer. 17.
5. Therefore faith is not in Christ as he is man.

4. God has testified that all life is in his Son, Joh. 5. 11. and faith must
be where life is, and nowhere else; and therefore not in Christ as man: for the
Son of God is not man, but God, as has been abundantly proved before. And it
is also said, verse 12, He that has the Son, that is, has received him by
faith, Joh. 1. 12. has life; and he that has him not, has not life. And they
are pressed to believe in the Son of God, v. 13. that they may have eternal
life.

5. Christ himself says, Upon this rock, viz. this profession of faith, that
Christ is the Son of God, he will build his Church, Matthew. 16. 16, 18.
Therefore Christ is the object of faith as he is the Son of God, and not as he
is man.

6. If Christ, as mere man, and nothing more, be the object of faith; then any
other man or creature whom God sends, and by whom God speaks or acts, may be
the object of divine faith; and so Moses and the Prophets may be the object of
faith; which is gross.

2. Though God, viz. the Father, and Jesus Christ, be two objects of divine
Faith, yet it is not true in the sense that he represents it in, viz. that they
are two objects really distinct from one another; for the Father that sent the
Son Jesus Christ, and the Son Jesus Christ that was sent, are not two distinct
Gods, but one God; they are not two distinct Essences, though they be two
distinct subststences, or persons; so the object essentially and really is but
one: To this agrees the place which he quotes, Joh. 12. 44. He that believes
on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me. An Expositor of note puts
this sense upon it: Not on me, that is, such whom you take me to be, a man, and
no more; but on me the Eternal God, and then same in Essence with him that sent
me. He puts another sense upon it, saying, He that believes one, believes both,
because God appears merciful in the face of Christ, and Christ appears
instrumental in the hand of God, Romans 4. 24. and 10. 9. And so he makes Christ
an instrument (who could not (as he says) raise himself from the dead) the
object of faith, concerning our Resurrection and Salvation, which is gross; for
Christ is the object of our faith, as he is able to save, not himself only,
but us, to the utmost. And though Christ be the Son considered as sent, and as
having taken flesh, and as Mediator, and so is the object of faith; yet he is
the same person as before he took Flesh, and was Mediator, though under another
consideration; yet the taking of Flesh has not made him another person, much
less another being; and still he remains the same God with his Father.

And though as he is considered in Flesh, and as Mediator, he be an
intermediate object of faith, yet he is also the principal and ultimate object
of faith, as he is the Eternal Son, and second person in the Trinity; for the
same person may be both the intermediate and the ultimate object of Faith,
under a diverse consideration: this was one part of his emptying of himself; the
Son became Mediator in Flesh, and so the intermediate object of faith, who yet
was, with the Father, the ultimate Object of it.

And Christ, though he had been Mediator, yet if he had not been God, he could
not have been the intermediate Object of Faith, no more then Moses was, who was
Mediator; he was not the Object of Faith, nor could be, because he was but a
creature. Moses was one by whom they believed on God, and so were the Prophets,
and also the Apostles: Paul says of himself and of Apollo, that they were
Ministers by whom the Corinthians believed, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Mediums or means by
whom they were brought to faith in Christ and God; but Objects they were not,
no not intermediate objects of their Faith; so Christ could have been but a
means of faith in God, if he had been no more but a man, and had not been God.

The brazen Serpent, which was a Type of Christ, to which the promise was made,
That whoever looked up to it, should be healed, (and it was really so; they
were healed, as God in the promise said, Numb. 21. 8, 9.) was only a means by
which they believed in God, being but a creature, and not an intermediate
Object of Faith; they did not believe on it at all, but through it, on God; and
so it must have been said of Christ, had he been but a mere creature, had he
been but only the man Jesus Christ.

And though it cannot be denied, but that whole Christ, as consisting of two
natures, being God and man, is Mediator, and materially considered is the
intermediate Object of Faith; yet not the whole of Christ is the formal cause
of faith in Christ, but the Divinity or Godhead of Christ alone, is the formal
cause, and reason, and ground of the faith of Christians in Christ; for that is
the Rock upon which the souls of Saints are built, and a firm, unshaken,
unmovable Rock it is, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against
Believers, whose faith does bottom them upon this Rock.

But he says, It is from Gods commandment, that faith in Christ is needful,
Joh. 3. 23. And it is from Gods appointment, that faith in Christ is saving,
Joh. 6. 40.

Rep. All faith that justifies and saves, as well that which has God, viz. the
Father for its Object, as that which has Christ for its Object, is by Gods
commandment and appointment justifying and saving: for the first Covenant was
of Works; which men brake, and were under death by breaking it; and then came
both the commandment of faith, and the promise of life, that was made to faith,
Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through
faith, etc. God freely made choice of faith, to save men by it, as well of that
which respects himself, as that which respects Christ. I hope he will confess
that it was by institution that faith in him that sent Christ, viz. the Father,
is needful and is saving.

But if his meaning be, that no faith was due to Christ naturally, save what is
due by virtue of appointment and commandment; It is utterly untrue, if
extendeded to whole Christ; for Christ is the natural Essential Son of God; and
look what faith was due to the Father, the same faith is due to Christ, as the
Eternal Co-effential Son of God.

Or if this sense be given to the words, that there was nothing but a
Commandment, that could move or draw to faith in Christ, that is false also;
for Nathanael was drawn to believe without any commandment, that came to him to
that purpose, from those beams of his Deity, which sparkled upon him in those
words of his. Before Philip called thee, when thou wast under the Fig Tree, I
saw thee; And many others believed on him when they saw his Miracles; So that
not the commandment only, but his own Almightiness and Infinite Excellency,
brought credit and gained faith to him.

The conclusion is this: Though it should be granted, that Faith in the Father
and faith in Christ do act in a diverse manner (as indeed it must, Christ being
considered as Mediator) yet it will not follow, that either in one manner or
another Faith does act upon a creature, but that still the person is God that
it acts upon.

And it is to be observed, that he has not invalidated that Scripture in Joh.
14. 1. but it stands in full force still; for though he would have i^ to be man
Christ that is there spoken of, yet it cannot be for Christ's Argument would not
be good in that sense; Ye believe in God, therefore believe in me a man: there
is no good consequence in it: But the Argument is good, Ye believe in God the
Father, believe in me the Son also; for the Father and I are one, ver. 10.
Beleevest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, and that
we are one God? Therefore seeing ye believed in the Father, believe in me also.

The fourth instance comes now next to be considered of, which is this:

Instance 4. If Christ be but a mere creature, then a mere creature is the
Savior of men, saving them with a mighty and eternal salvation, as the
Scripture speaks: but this is against the whole current of the Gospel, which
speaks of God our Savior, Tit. 2. 10, 13. And in many other places.

In answer to this, he says,

Against this your instance, I shall level this assertion, which will be
sufficient to discover its weakness, and confute it; That to affirm Jesus
Christ to be the Savior of men, without God, or equal with God, is contrary to
the current of the whole Scripture, which does distinguish God from Christ in
the work of Salvation, calling him a Savior as distinct from Christ, 1 Timothy 1.
1. where God is said to be our Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ to be our
hope, and in the Text you allege, and elsewhere frequently.

Rep. To level one assertion against another, is to level Arguments by way of
opposition, not to answer Arguments by way of satisfaction: Yea, it is to evade
answering by objecting. And it is a sly and crafty way of answering, when
there is a knot which is difficult, and perhaps impossible to be untyed, in any
Scripture or Argument, to pass it over with silence, and only propose somewhat
which may trouble and perplex the truth in it, or the mind rather of him that
reads it. Thus he did in his Answer to the two last Instances, and now again he
runs to these fig leaves to cover the nakedness of his Tenent from that shame
which this Argument or Instance, enforced with so uncontrollable a Scripture,
would cast upon it. But I shall enforce the Scripture alleged by me,
conceiving it will carry conviction along with it to the hearts of such who
shall duly perpend and consider it; and afterward show the weakness of his
assertion.

In this Scripture of Tit. 2. 10, 11, 13. the Apostle speaks of Christ all
along: in v. 10. he calls the doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine of our
Savior God. So it is in the Original, (...). That they may adorn the Gospel of
our Savior God: in v. 11. he speaks of the same God Christ: for by the grace
of God, he means the Gospel of grace, or the Doctrine of Grace, which he had in
the former verse called the Doctrine of our Savior God. This Doctrine or
Gospel has appeared unto all men: in ver. 13, he styles Christ the blessed
hope, which is elsewhere made the title of God, Romans 15. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 21. And
he puts the denomination of the great God and our Savior upon Christ. It is
not a great God, without an article, as he alleged to evade the strength of
Joh. 1. 1. But it is the great God, with an Article. This Text I presented
among the Scriptures which I produced, and it was the third in order; but he
passed over it then, promising to speak to it when he should give in his answer
to another Paper; and here he takes no notice of it neither: What may be the
reason? but because he is not able to present any thing which can clould and
darken the bright evidence of it; for it witnesses two things with great
clearness, 1. That Christ is God, great God, the great God, or that one great
God. 2. That Christ, though he be man as well as God, yet he is Savior chiefly
and especially as he is God, and not as he is man; For, considered as God, he
is able to save to the utmost. As he is man, there are actions done by him, and
sufferings born, by which men are saved; but the virtue, force, efficacy, and
valor of both the one and other, are as he is God.

And he saves with the Father as the principal efficient, Isa. 45. 21. I am a
just God and a Savior, and there is none beside me. This is the person that
took flesh, that thus speaks. It is clear from Rev. 14. 10, 11, that it is
Christ; but the Father is not excluded; and the meaning is, there is none other
God that saves, but what Christ is: Because the Father, and Christ, and the
Spirit, are one principal efficient that saves.

It is further confirmed, Hos. 1. 7. I will save them by Jehovah their God: it
is the speech of Jehovah the Father, concerning Jehovah the Son, whom he calls
their God; and promises them to save by him. And it must not be understood
that this salvation is instrumentally effected, because it is said, I will save
them by, etc. For, the titles given to the person by whom the Father will save,
do show that he is not an instrument. Is Jehovah their God but an instrument in
saving? Is one Jehovah instrumental to another? or is it only the order of
working betwixt the Father and the Son? Are there two Jehovahs, and both of
them our God? Moses tells Israel, Jehovah our God is our Jehovah; for Essence
one, though two in persons, Deuteronomy. 60. 4. The order then betwixt the persons is
only to be observed and acknowledged, not any superiority or inferiority in
working.

But let me consider his assertion.

To affirm Jesus Christ to be the Savior of men without God, or equal with
God, is contrary to the current of Scripture. Thus he.

But against what expressions of mine is this assertion levelled? I have
affirmed that whoever saves, must be God; therefore Christ, because he saves,
must be God. But where have I said that Christ saves without God? To save as
God, and to save without God, are these two one thing? Or are they not rather
repugnant and contrary to one another? But suppose (as it must needs be) that
by God he means the Father, I have not asserted that Christ saves without the
Father, by way of efficiency, but the Father saves by the Son, Christ Jesus,
and the Son saves from the Father: But I assert them to be equals in saving,
notwithstanding this order betwixt them: for it is but one God that saves,
though in diversity of persons; and this one God cannot be superior and
inferior to himself. And all the confirmation that he himself gives of his own
Position, is this, That God in Scripture is distinguished from Christ, in the
work of Salvation; and he quotes, 1 Timothy 1. 1. where God is said to be our
Savior, and the Lord Jesus is only said to be our hope: But this has no
strength in it; for in Tit. 1. 4. God has not the title of Savior given unto
him, when he is mentioned with Christ, but has the relative title of Father
only given him; but Christ is called Savior, and is distinguished from God by
that name. Is therefore God, viz. the Father, less a Savior, or an unequal
Savior to Christ, because Christ, and not he* is called a Savior? And is not
Christ called both the blessed hope, and the great God our Savior? Are not
both titles put upon him, as due to him? And though they are used by the
Apostle to distinguish the persons of Father and Son from each other when they
are spoken of together, yet both these are applied to both persons, and are
proper to him alone, that is the most high God.

But he says,

Scripture does prefer God in the work of salvation before our Lord Jesus
Christ, making him to be the principal Agent therein, when it declares that the
work of Christ in saving, was from the purpose of God, who appointed him for
it; from the precept of God, who enjoined him to it; and from the presence of
God, who assisted him in it.

Reply. But where does Scripture witness this of God the Father, in reference
to the whole of Christ? He says, Scripture does abundantly set forth all
these; but he does not quote any one place for proof of them, but would have us
receive it upon his word. That God purposed to save by Christ, considered as
David's and Mary's son, considered according to his Manhood; that God enjoined
him as such, that God assisted him as such (God being taken essentially and
properly, for Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and not improperly and personally,
for the Father) will be granted; and it will be plentifully made out by
Scripture: but that the Father purposed without the Son and holy Ghost, and
commanded and enjoined without the Son and holy Ghost, and assisted without the
Son and holy Ghost; this is denied. For as the Father without the Son and holy
Ghost made not man, but the Trinity sat in Council; Let us make man: so it was
in the work of Salvation; it was an act of Council: The Father gave the Son,
and the Son gave himself, emptied himself: every Person concurred and wrought
in the work, so far as concerns efficiencie: All decreed it, all acted in it,
as one principal Agent; and only the Humanity of Christ was Instrumental.

And if we consider the Material and Meritorious cause of men's salvation, God
the Father, or God in the person of the Father, is far from being the Principal
cause thereof; for he is no cause at all: for the Father took not flesh upon
him, nor was Mediator either of Satisfaction or Intercession; he made not the
Atonement; but this was the Son's sole work, he did all in it; he was the
person that was made of a Virgin, and was made under the Law; he was the person
that was made flesh, and manifested in flesh; and has a peculiar right, in
this respect, to the denomination of Savior. And though all was acted and
endured in and by the flesh that he assumed: for he bare our sins on his body
on the tree; yea, and in his soul also, when he cried out, My God, my God, etc.
in such manner; yet if that flesh had not been supported by the Godhead of the
Son, which assumed it, it would have been crumbled to dust and powder by that
weight of wrath that lay upon it: So that it was by the virtue and power of the
Godhead, that such actings and such sufferings were; and all was accounted as
done and suffered by the Son, though the Son, as the Son, was not capable of
it, but by assuming flesh into the unity of his person; and so it came to be
reckoned as his work; and it was in account as if the Lord of glory had been
crucified, and as if the blood of God had been spilt, and the merit was from
the excellency of the person of the Son, that did and suffered all.

But he further says,

That the Scripture reveals the Lord Christ to be in the work of salvation
but an instrumental Savior. For this, (says he) see Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. which
puts it past all question. But after that the kindness and love of God and our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy, he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Reply.

Here is in these words of his,

First, A bold assertion, viz. That Scripture reveals Christ to be but an
instrumental Savior.

Secondly, A peremptory Conclusion, that Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. puts it out of
question.

Thirdly, A defective and insufficient probation, or confirmation; he alleges
the words of the Text as if they did carry with them conviction of what he
asserts in the very letter of them, when as there is no such matter.

1. Scripture is so far from revealing such a thing of Christ's
instrumentalness, that it reveals the contrary to it: in Heb. 1. 3. it is said,
That Christ by himself purged away our sins; but of any instruments can it be
said that by himself he does any thing? Does an instrument act by himself, that
is, by his own virtue and sufficiency? and by himself, that is, without the
power of the principal efficient? Is an Instrument any thing out of the hand of
the chief Agent? Also in Heb. 7. 25. it is said, That Christ is able to save to
the utmost; But is any Instrument able to save to the utmost? Has he the
ability within himself? So that it may be said of him, that he is able? What
greater thing can be predicated of the principal efficient, or chief Agent,
then that he is able to save to the utmost? This is too high an expression for
an Instrument. And in Psalm. 89. 19, it is said of Christ (whom David typified)
that God had laid help upon one that was mighty. If Christ be only but an
Instrument, what needs he to be mighty in himself? for every Instrument if it
be mighty through the might of another (as the Rams horns were) it is
sufficient. What needed the choice of a mighty one, if the Savior be only
instrumental? The weaker the Instrument, the more honor will the Principal
Efficient have. The excellency of Power is known to be of God, when the
instrumental means is Weakness and Foolishness. Why also could not the blood of
Goats have cleansed the Conscience, but the Blood of JESUS CHRIST, God's Son,
was necessary, if an Instrument may be a Savior? Doubtless, a word of
Institution would have made the one as effectual as the other.

But indeed, there is no might that any creature-Instrument is capable to be
recipient or the subject of, that can save to the utmost, because it requires
an infinite power to conquer Sin and Satan, Death and Hell; to abolish these,
and to bring Life and Immortality to light; to effect a first and second
Resurrection for men who were to be saved.

Secondly, The Scripture that he alleges out of Titus 3. 3, 4, ^, has no
such thing engraven upon it, as he produces it for; such that he that runs may
read it written there, or he that reads may understand without questioning,
that whole Christ is but an Instrument.

For all that is asserted by the Apostle, is, that God the Father our Savior,
saved through Christ our Savior, by the holy Ghost. And what does this hold
out, but the Order among the Persons in their working? And when JEHOVAH saves
by JEHOVAH their God, does this particle [by] import instrumentalness? I have
showed the contrary.

Indeed, the Manhood of Christ is made instrumental to the Godhead of Christ,
and to the whole Trinity, in this great design of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, to save men; but it cannot in this place be applied to the Manhood,
because the Spirit is shed or given from the Father, through Christ, not as
Man, but as God, as I have showed in the other Treatise.

Instance 5. The 5. Instance he forms up into an Argument, thus, That Doctrine
which makes the Mediator betwixt God and man, to be a mere creature, brings in
(as it were) another Gospel, destroys the true Gospel in many of the parts of
it, etc. in that it is against reason, that the Mediator should be a creature,
because a mere creature is no way meet to be a Daysman for God* and because a
Mediator must either partake of both God and man, or of neither, else he will
be rather a party, then a Mediator, etc. and in that it opposes these
Scriptures, Mat. 1. 23. 1. Tim. 3. 16. Joh. 1. 14. But that Doctrine which
denies Jesus Christ to be the most high God, makes the Mediator betwixt God and
man to be a mere creature. Therefore I shall pass by all those lines in which
he only trifles, and speaks not to the Argumnet or instance, and mention only
that which is material, in way of answer.

To the Major, and the first reason of it, viz. A mere creature is no way meet
to be a Daysman for God, He answers thus;

This reason wants a reason to support it, what should hinder (says he) but
the mere creature may be a Daysman or Mediator? Is there any one work that
belongs to his office, that is impossible for a creature to perform,
notwithstanding divine assistance with him? I dare, says he, assert the
contrary, and am able to prove in whatsoever work you can instance in,
belonging to Christ's Mediatorship, that of himself he was not able to perform
it, unless by the assistance of another, which he enjoyed, and so is a
complete Mediator:

Rep. There are many things that may hinder, that a mere creature cannot be a
Daysman, or Mediator for God: 1. The disproportion that is betwixt God and a
mere creature hinders, which disproportion is infinite. It is against Gods
honor and glory, that God should admit of a mere ceature-Daysman or Mediator:
It is as if a worm should be a Daysman or Mediator for a man; or as if a beggar
should be a Daysman or Mediator for a King. Nay there is not any thing to
resemble it by among all the creatures; and there would be too much honor put
upon a mere creature, if he should be Mediator or Daysman, because a mere
creature is infinitely below God; but a Daysman should hold some kind of
equality with the person for whom he is a Daysman: For 1. The matter is
committed to him that is a Daysman or Mediator. 2. The person that commits the
matter to the Daysman, commits himself with it to him also. 3. A Daysman is one
that must judge betwixt: now this is too low for God to admit of, and too high
for man, or for any mere creature, that it should be set ^n such a place. 2.
The impotency and infirmiiy of the creature hinders that it cannot be a ^meet
Daysman for God: For 1. No mere creature can attain unto a perfect knowledge of
the trespass and offense that is committed against God, because it is
infinite, therefore no finite creature can search into it, the person against
whom it is committed being infinite, makes it infinite; and one of a finite
knowledge cannot reach it: it may be truly said, that neither man nor Angel,
nor the Son of man himself, as man, knows the greatness of man's sin: for
unless the greatness of God can be measured, against whom it was committed,
the greatness of the sin cannot be known. Now if it cannot be known by any
mere creature, then no mere creature can be a Daysman* to consider of it. 2.
No mere creature can be sufficiently sensible of the great dishonor that was
offered unto God, and the great indignity and injury that was done against God,
when man sinned again him; for what is all creature-sense, to that infinite
perception which God has of the ^ffront done unto him; and unless you could
make the creature as God, a creature cannot have the feeling of God; and
unless a creature had the infinite holiness of God, a creature cannot know
how distasteful sin is unto God; therefore a mere creature cannot be a Mediator
or Daysman for God; for he cannot sensibly enough consider of the transgression
against God. 3. No mere creature can make Proposalls that are proportionable,
in reference to Gods honor, that was impaired by the sin of man, that God
might be no loser, nor might receive any detriment by Mediation; because no
creature knows how much the honor of God is impaired, and if he did, yet it
would be beyond his power to offer honorable terms to God in reference thereto,
for a creature will act and move like a creature, and all its Proposalls will
be low and little, and defective and short, yea infinitely low and short, and
like it self, therefore a mere creature cannot be a meet Daysman for God,
because he will be sure to wrong him. 4. The Mediator betwixt God and man, is
not of intercession only, but of satisfaction; now no mere creature can give
satisfaction for men's offenses, because offenses are greater then can be
conceived of, and the satisfaction must be like them, that is, must be greater
then can be imagined by any creature, therefore greater then can be given by
any creature. The Mediator is an undertaker to satisfy for what is past by
paying the utmost farthing, and to render man a new creature, inclied and
devoted to God, who was before an enemy. Now no mere creature can be such an
undertaker, because he cannot give a price sufficient nor work any such
transformation in man, but it belongs to him who made heaven and earth to do
this.

These things are impediments why a mere creature cannot be a Daysman betwixt
God and men, there are things to be known and done which creatures, as
creatures, are not capable of. His daring therefore to assert the contrary,
shows rather his presumption then his wisdom or ability.

And whereas he says, that he is able to prove that Christ of himself was not
able to perform any work belonging to his Mediatorship* unless by the
assistance of another, which he enjoyed, and so was a complete Mediator.

It is utterly untrue and repugnant to the Scripture, for by himself he purged
away our sins, Heb. 1. 3. and herein he debaseth Christ not a little, he makes
him as weak as one of us, and he concurres with those enemies of Christ in
their reproaches which they cast upon him when he was upon the Cross, he
brings in the same verdict with them, yea, he has meaner thoughts in some
kind, then they, he saved others (said they) but himself he cannot save, that
is, by his own power, he cannot, for otherwise they knew God could save him;
the Apostle had not so high thoughts of him, but he has as low thoughts, I am
able, said the Apostle, to do all things through Christ strengthening me, but
he faith, Christ himself is able to do nothing, without the Fathers
strengthening of him. If this be true which he asserts, that Christ is able to
petform norhing of himself without assistance of another: God might then have
saved by Peter or Paul, or James or John, or any man else, whom he would have
looked upon in reference to that work, as by Christ. Is such a Mediator as he
deciphers Christ to be (so poor, so empty as he makes him to be, not able to
do any thing in discharge of that office he is designed to of himself without
assistance) a meet object of the faith, and hope of the Saints?

If he had asserted this of the humane nature of Christ, that it was able to do
nothing by way of satisfaction in the function of Mediatorship of it self,
without the assistance of the Divinity, or Godhead of Christ, it had been an
undeniable truth, but to assert this of whole Christ, in whom the sullnesse of
the Godhead dwelt bodily, or substantially, and essentially, and in whom are
hid all the treasures, all the mines of wisdom* and knowledge, and all
excellency, and in whom are all unsearchable riches, this is such a vilifying
of him, that it is a second crucifying of him, and it is not his boasting of
being able to prove it that makes the evil the less, but it is the more
horrid by how much he is confident, This Doctrine must needs weaken faith, and
hope, and affiance in Christ, and indeed if it were so (as he says) that we
had such a Mediator, so impotent and so weak, of all creatures we were most
miserable.

But he proceeds, and attempts to break the strength of the second reason which
I produced to prove, that a mere creature-Christ could not be Mediator betwixt
God and men, which was this.

Because a Mediator must either partake of both God and man, or of neither,
else he will rather be a party then a Mediator.

To this he answers thus,

Was not Moses a Mediator betwixt God and men, but was Moses God and man? Gal.
3. 19.

Rep. Moses was a typical Mediator, and was that mystically, and figuratively,
which Christ was really and truly: Moses was not God and man, but man only
essentially and substantially, yet he was as God to Aaron, and to the people,
Exodus 4. 16. God reputatively he was, and representatively; and this was
sufficient for him that was not that true Mediator, but the shadow of him: but
he that was shadowed out, and is no shadow, but Mediator indeed and in truth,
he must be God indeed, and in truth: And this Argument of his fetched from
Moses, is strong against him, it is like that of Melchisedech, produced to
prove the eternity of Christ, upon which I have insisted more largely, the
sinews of which no humane strength can cut asunder.

But he says, When I brought this reason, I knew not what I did, for it gives
witness against me. And he argues against me by the help of the reason which I
have produced. I said, if Christ were not God as well as man, he would rather
be a party then a Mediator, and he thence disputes against me thus.

If Christ the Mediator were God he was a party, but Christ the Mediator was
not a party, therefore Christ the Mediator was not God.

Rep. The Major Proposition how clear soever it is to him, is notstithstanding,
unsound, and untrue in it self, for there is a twofold Mediator, there is
Mediator participationis, and Mediator negationis; a Mediator of participation,
and a Mediator of negation, that is, a Mediator, that partakes of both, and a
Mediator that partakes of neither. If there be a breach betwixt the father and
the mother, and a child comes betwixt and mediates, the child stands related
alike to both of them, and partakes equally of both of them, and is a Mediator
of participation: If there be a breach betwixt two neighbors, and a third
neighbor comes in and Mediates, he stands in relation to neither of them, nor
partakes of either of them, he is a Mediator of negation, neither the one nor
the other is any thing to him; neither of these Mediators are parties: the
latter is not by his own confession, and it is as clear that the former is not,
for he is not properly a party that partakes of both, but he that partakes not
of both, or at least, not of both alike, but partakes of the one, and not of
the other, or partakes more of the one, then of the other; for disparity of
relation in the Mediator to the persons betwixt whom he mediates, makes the
Mediator a party, and not parity and equality. If there should be a difference
betwixt two brethren, and a third brother come in betwixt them to mediate and
make peace, he is not a party, or if he be, he is a party to both, and a party
to both, is in proper manner of speaking a party to neither; but if there be a
controversy between two half brothers, and another comes in to mediate who is
a whole brother to one of them, he is rather a party then a Mediator, because
he stands not in so near a relation to the one, as to the other.

The application is easy, Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and man, not of
negation but of participation, for a man he is (without all controversy
betwixt him and me) and in all things like to us, sin only excepted, and if
he be a man, then he partakes of man; and partaking of man, he calls men his
brethren, Heb. 2. 11, and if he should not partake of God equally, as he does
of man, and stand in like relation to God, as he does to man, he would be a
party rather than a Mediator, but being God as well as man, he is no party, but
a Mediator, or a middle person in a proper acception, not negatively, but
relatively, standing in equality of relation without any disparity; and in this
sense, it would be true, (as he says) that if Christ were God, he would be a
party, if he were not man also as well as God, for then then there would be a
disparity, and inequality of relation in Christ the Mediator, in reference to
the one of the persons betwixt whom he mediates; he would be more nearly allied
to the one, then to the other, more to God then to man: but as he frames the
Argument, if Christ the Mediator be God, then he is a party, when as it is
manifest that he is man also, and no nearer related to God, though he be God,
then he is to man because he is man: the Major is palpably false, and must be
denied: by that time he has seriously considered of this, which I have here
presented, I hope he will be forced to confess, that I knew* what I did when I
brought that reason, that Christ, if a mere creature, would be a party rather
then a Mediator. But he gives an instance.

In reconciliation (says he) by a Mediator, we are to suppose three: One
offended, another offending, and a third mediating for peace betwixt them. God
was offended, men were offenders, and Christ was the Mediator. Now if Christ
had been a sinful man, he had been of the party offending; and and if he had
been God, he was the party offended; but Christ was not a Party: From the
Proposition which I have thus confirmed, and the Assumption which you have
acknowledged, I will draw up this Conclusion, That Christ the Mediator is not
God.

Rep. In this Instance, and in the application of it, there are some things
that are justly liable to exception, and other things manifestly false: 1. That
there be three in reconciliation will be granted, but that the third must be so
distinct as he holds it forth, as not to partake of the other two, is denied:
For, a son that mediates betwixt father and mother (which may sometimes be the
case) is of the flesh of both, and yet notwithstanding is distinct from both
but not so distinct as not to partake of both. So in the reconciliation made by
Christ betwixt God and man, there are three that are distinct: 1. There is God
offended: 2. There is man, viz. mankind, offending: 3. There is Christ
mediating, who is neither merely and only God, nor yet merely and only man; but
is both God and man, yet distinct from both God and man: Distinct from God
because he is man, and distinct from man, because he is God. Yea there is yet a
further distinction; for, Christ though he be man, viz. of that kind, for
nature and essence, which was the offending party, yet not one of those persons
in that kind, that did offend, but without sin himself; and though he be God,
and so for essence and nature one with that party which was offended, and was
offended in his own person, yet distinct in personality, or (which is all one)
a distinct person from the Father and the Holy Ghost, who more visibly do
manage the offense against man. For the Son, though he was offended, together
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, yet he appears not prosecuting the
offense, but therein he is veiled, and appears only appeasing the Father that
was offended: in both these respects there are three in this business of
reconliation.

But he makes mention of three in reconciliation, which in titles and names are
the same with the three which I have already spoken of; viz. God, men, and
Christ: But when he comes to open and unfold these three, he makes the third,
which mediates betwixt the other two, to be so distinct from both of them, as
to partake of neither of them: And under this lies couched the poison and
malignancy of his doctrine; For, as he lays it down, he not only denies the
Godhead of Christ (which is the doctrine in dispute betwixt us) but he
destroys the Manhood also, and overturnes that satisfaction, which in the
nature of man he gave for man; for his words are these, If Christ had been a
sinful man, he had been of the party offending: His design is to show, that
he was a distinct person, and partaked of neither Party betwixt whom he
mediated; He was not of the Party offending, for he was not a sinful man; He
was not the Party offended for he could not be God, because he could not be a
Party: Let it be considered seriously what he says, and it will be found to be
false and dangerous, and reaches not his own design.

1. False, for was Christ therefore not of that Party, because he was without
sin? Was he not a true man in all things like other men, sin only excepted?
Had he not a true Body and Soul? Was not soul and body subject to the same
infirmities and weaknesses (sin excepted) as other men's souls and bodies were?
Was he not the Seed of the Woman which was promised? Was he not conceived in
the womb of the Virgin, and was flesh of her flesh? Was he not Abraham's seed,
and David's seed? Was not Satan to be broken and destroyed in all his strength
by one that must be of the Woman, that must spring out of her, and be her seed?
And should all this be, and yet Christ not this Party? He was no offender
indeed, but yet he was of that Party which did offend, he had the same nature
for essence: Abraham was of that Party which offended, and so was David, and
were offenders themselves, and he was their seed, and was of them and from
them; therefore it is a great untruth and gross mistake to say that he was not
of that Party; for he was flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, but
kept by the Holy Ghost from that natural pollution and stain which defiled
them.

2. Dangerous; for if Christ were not of that party that offended, he could not
satisfy for that party which offended; for in the same nature in which the
offense was committed, must the satisfaction be given; for both the justice and
truth of God required this. It was threatened that the soul, that is the person
that sins, shall die, and if another suffer that penalty, yet it must be one in
that nature; therefore it is said, he bore our sins on his own body on the
tree: It was necessary it should be so, else the truth of God would not be
fulfilled, nor justice satisfied. And if Christ be not of the off^nding party,
if he be another from them, not partaking of them, but be of another nature,
and not of theirs, then he might as well have been no man at all, for any fruit
or bene^it that accrues to sinful man thereby: And Christ might as well have
taken the nature of Angels, and as much to the benefit of lost men, as have
assumed flesh, if it be not the flesh and nature of men, that did offend, if he
be not of their party, though not spotted with their sin.

3. It reaches not his own design, which is to make Christ a third and
distinct person or party, from those he mediates betwixt, partaking of neither;
for he knows, that if it be confessed, that Christ partakes of the nature of
one of the parties whom he is to make peace betwixt, and not of the other, then
he will undeniably be a party instead of a Mediator: to avoid therefore this,
he holds that he partakes of neither; and yet he makes Christ a man
notwithstanding, but not a man of the offending party. But this distinction
will not help him, for if he be a man, for substance and essence like othem, he
is nearer related to them as such, then he is to God, if he be not God; and
then he will be a party still, rather then a Mediator. For a party is one that
partakes more of the one then of the other.

Lastly, Suppose that to be (which he disputes against) as a thing very absurd,
viz. that Christ were of the party offended, and were also of the party
offending, as in truth and deed Christ is, though not in the sense that he
understands it, yet the consequence is naught, that he must therefore be a
party; for a party to both makes him a pa^ty to neither above other, and so not
a party at all, but an unbyassed Mediator betwixt both; by all which, his much
weakness, accompanied with much confidence, is manifest to the intelligent.

In the next place he considers of the Scriptures which I produced, to prove
the Mediator to be more then a mere creature, viz. the high God: and first,

I made use of the title that is given to Christ, He is called Immanuel, which
is God with us, or God in our nature, Mat. 1. 23. His Answer is;

Immanuel was not the name of Christ, but a signification of his name Jesus,
which (says he) is manifest if we compare the 21, 22, and 23. verses together.
Now the name Jesus signifies not the nature, but the office of Christ, as the
Angel expounds ver. 21. thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins; and so Immanuel notes out that certain aid that God
would afford by Jesus Christ to his Church.

Rep. Immanuel and Jesus are not one and the same name, nor have they one and
the same interpretation? nor does the name Immanuel interpret the name Jesus,
nor does Mat. 1. 21. 22, 23. show any such thing: all that can be collected is
this, 1. That both the names do belong to Christ, he that is Immanuel is also
Jesus. 2. That these two names do so necessarily imply one the other, that they
cannot be separated, therefore the Prophet (speaking of his birth) says, his
name shall be called Immanuel, and the Angel, speaking of his birth, says, his
name shall be called Jesus, alluding therein to the Prophet, because Christ is
first Immanuel, and afterward Jesus, and he was Immanuel, that he might be
Jesus, and he could not be Jesus, unless he were Immanuel; this is the cause,
and that is the effect, and he that denies him to be Immanuel, denies him to be
Jesus: therefore the Angel styles him by the name, that is, the effect, and
then sends us to consider of the name, which is the cause, which the Prophet
gives him.

Now whereas he says, the name Jesus signifies not the nature, but the office
of Christ, as the Angel expounds it, verse. 21. This shows, that the name
Immanuel is not the signification of the name Jesus, for Immanuel does import
not office, but nature, or natures in Christ, viz. the divine and humane nature
united into one person, which other Scriptures make manifest, which I have
already quoted, in John 1. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16. and others may be added, Phil. 2.
6. 7. he being in the form of God emptied himself and came in the form of a
servant, and Heb. 2. 16. he took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, and Col. 3. 9. In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily, such Scriptures as these serve to interpret the name Immanuel, and do
declare that it does denotate two natures in Christ, viz. the divine and
humane. For if it should only import divine help, and aid reached out unto us,
then every believer might carry that name as well as Christ, because God does
reach out grace and favor, and assistance to each Saint: But without doubt
because there was a breach betwixt God and us through sin, and we were driven
from God, and God became a stranger to us, Col. 1. 31. therefore the Lord would
give a sing, as it is expressed in Isa. 7. 14. in Christ whom he would send, of
a reunition and conjunction betwixt himself and ^s; we shall behold God and man
united together a^ain in Christ, that we may not be faithless but believe, we
shall know that he will dwell with us; For he shall visibly dwell in Christ to
our conviction. So that there are two reasons why Christ is called Jmmanuel. 1.
Because he is both God and man in one person. 2. Because he is the bond of that
conjunction, that is to be betwixt God and us; but withal it does import that
reconciliation which he effects as Mediator betwixt God and us, giving himself
a ransom that our sins might be remitted, and we might be accepted again into
favor; and if this be the certain aid that he speaks of, which comes by Christ
to the Church, he is so far right, but yet reaches not the root of the matter;
for this aid is from the mightiness of his person. If God had not united with
our nature, our nature could never have united with God: but God came down to
us, and in the person of Christ gave evidence to us that he was God with us.

The next Scripture which he undertakes to answer, is 1 Timothy 3. 16. without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh.

His answer is, Ancient Interpreters (says a learned man) as the Latin, the
Syriack, the Arabic, Ambrose and Augustine make this reading to be suspected,
for they read not as we do, for thus they read the words, And without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness, which mystery was manifested
in the flesh.

Rep. It is true, that such a reading is found, but says Beza upon the place,
repugnant perpetuo consensu omnes Graeci codices, that is, all the Greek copies
are with one consent against it: And a little before he says, vix alius locus
est in quo omnia redemptionis nostrae mysteria, vel magnificent us vel planius
explicentur, ut non mirum sit foede fuisse a diabolo depravatum, that is, There
is hardly such an other place to be found, in which all the mysteries of our
redemption are unfolded either so magnificently or plainly as in this, so that
it is no wonder if this text have been foully corrupted and depraved by the
devil.

But if the word (...) God, be left out, and the article (...) be put in
instead of it, and so the words run thus, Great is the mystery of godliness,
which is manifest, is the flesh, why does he not improve this reading to his
own purpose, and interpret what is meant by the mystery which is manifest in
the flesh, and make the rest of the words to concur with it, that he may gain
credit to such a reading? Alas he knows very well the following words will not
quadrare, they will not correspond nor suit with such a reading.

By the word mystery there are (who follow this reading) that understand the
Gospel, which is called a mystery, but was the Gospel manifested in the
flesh, etc. and received up into glory? certainly it must be meant of some
person, that was in flesh, and was received up to glory; therefore if it be the
mystery that was manifested in the flesh, and received up into glory, it was
not the Gospel, for the Gospel is the glad tidings of good things in Christ;
and was the glad tidings of good things in Christ manifest in the flesh, and
were glad tidings received up into glory? it is absurd to be asserted.

If he understand any thing else by Mystery, which was manifested in the flesh
then the Gospel, it must be the soul of Christ, which he says was created
before the rest of the creatures, and which in time took flesh, and was
manifested in the flesh; but was it so great a Mystery for the soul to come
into the body after the body is formed in the womb? is it not that which is
done every hour in the formation of man? does not the soul unite with the body
in the generation of all that are born in the world.

And indeed though he grant our reading, yet he brings all to this, for his
words are,

It is not denied but that Christ was a God, and the Text says but this, a God
was manifested in the flesh, that is (says he) appeared visible amongst men,
when he took unto him a body.

Rep. If Christ was a God before he took flesh, then he was ever a God from the
first that he was, and that was (by his own concession) before there was any
creature created, and consequently before any actual Sovereignty was bestowed
upon him; for that could not be before the world had an actual existence, over
which he was to have his actual Sovereignty, and then it will follow that he
was God by nature from all eternity with the Father and the Holy Ghost, but
this I have discussed before; that which I shall add is this, look what a God
Christ was, such a God he was in flesh, but Jehovah he was, the mighty God he
was, the great God he was, the true God he was, the everlasting God he was, God
over all blessed for ever he was, subsisting in the form or nature of God he
was, and equal with God, such a God he was as is abundantly testified in
Scripture, therefore such a God he was manifested in flesh.

As for Hincmarus his conceit, that this word God was put into the Text by the
Nestorians, I have him not by me, and I much heed it not, because the very Text
it self gives witness to it self, that the word is not added by man's device or
fraud, for if it be left out, the rest of the words are made nonsense thereby.

The third and last Scripture that I made use of to prove Christ as Mediator,
not to be a mere creature, and nothing else, was this.

It is said in Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made Flesh.

His Answer is, The creature that was immediately made by God, took unto it a
body. I find no place (says he) where the flesh of Christ signifies any thing
more then his body, according to which he died, and is no where taken for the
humane nature.

Rep. This conceit of a creature immediately made by God, which took unto it a
body, has been at large spoken to, and confuted in my former Treatise: It has
also been the word, that the word Flesh is taken Synechdochically for humane
nature, a part being put for the whole. I find no cause to add any thing either
to the one or other, but shall consider of the Reasons which he leaves me to
pause upon, by which he would prove Christ the Mediator to be a mere creature.

Let me oppose (says he) your Proposition with two or three Reasons.

Rea. 1. Because whole Christ is a creature, if so, then either a mere creature
is Mediator, or Christ is not a Mediator.

Rep. The greater part of my former Treatise is spent in the confuting of this
assertion, I therefore think it needless to spend more time or strength about
it, especially seeing he refe^res to what he said before, and brings no new
strength to it.

Rea. 2. Because a Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3. 20. Now if Christ be God,
then he is a Mediator of one; for he cannot be a Mediator to himself, and there
is but one God.

Rep. It is true (as the Apostle says) that a Mediator is not of one, that is,
not of one Party, for a Mediators work is to make peace; now it is to be
always supposed, that no one is at variance with himself, therefore a Mediator
is not of one, but of two Parties that dissent the one from the other, which
Parties are God and Man.

But his deduction which he fetches from this saying is faulty, which is this,
If Christ be God, then is he a Mediator of one, for he cannot be a Mediator to
himself, and God is but one: if this were a sound consequence, Christ would be
Mediator to none at all, and the reason is this, There are but two Parties
disagreeing, God and man: Now all the Elect in all the world they are reckoned
in this account but as one man; Now if Christ be man, took their seed, then he
is of this Party, then he is Mediator to himself, and the words may be
retorted, A Mediator is not of one; but if Christ be man, then he is a Mediator
of one, for he cannot be Mediator to himself, for all men are but as one, come
under one consideration, and he is among them; if he be a man being of their
nature, and true man of their seed.

Therefore there must be a distinction made concerning Christ; Christ may be
considered (...) or (...), either in his nature and person, as he is the second
in the Trinity, and the essential Son of God, or in reference to his Office,
as he is God in flesh, and King, Priest, and Prophet to the Church, and
appointed Daysman; and if this latter acception, he is not Mediator to himself,
though he be God, for he is God-man, and so differs from himself, considered
nude, as God, or the second person in the Divine Trinity; that which was
asserted before concerning this man also considered.

Rea. 3. His third reason is the same for substance with the second, Because
(says he) Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Now if he
were God, he could not be a Mediator betwixt God and men, for he could not be a
Mediator to himself.

This has been considered in the former reason, only there is thus much new in
it which deserves consideration: Timothy (says he) calls the Mediator betwixt
God and man, the man Christ.

Let the whole text in that place of Tim. be considered and duly weighed,
together with the Apostles scope and design, and with the observation of a
learned man upon it, and it will prove Christ to be both God and man, and
Mendiator betwixt God and man, for the words in the Greek run thus, (...):
which may be thus rendered, For the man Christ Jesus is one God, and one
Mediator betwixt God and man. There may be these reasons for such a version or
translation of the words; 1. Because the subject person that is spoken of is
but one, and that is the man Jesus Christ, and of him it is predicated and
asserted, that he is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, all is
spoken of him; for if there were two diverse subjects spoken of, viz. God the
Father, and the Mediator Jesus Christ, as is generally conceived, and must be
granted according to the ordinary translation of the words, then the Articles
would not have been omitted, as those that understand the Greek Tongue
understand very well. If God had been the subject spoken of, and if it had been
asserted or predicated that he had been one, the words would have been, (...);
and if the word Mediator had been the subject, and that it had been predicated
and asserted of him, that he had been one, the words would then have been (...),
both of them would have been with the Article (...), but this Article is not
prefixed to either of them, therefore neither of them are the subject spoken
of, but rather they are things that are spoken of an other, which other is the
man Jesus Christ, he is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man; and if
it be otherwise then I have held forth, it is quite against the manner of the
Greeks, and there will be hardly any place to be found that will parallel
this, where there is such an Omission.

Now, if it should be objected that there is no Article prefixed before the man
Christ Jesus, which yet I say is the subject of whom these things are spoken, I
answer that there needs not any Article there, because of the proper names
Jesus Christ, before which the Article is usually pretermitted.

If we also consider the scope of the Apostle, it is more congruous thereto,
the words being translated as I have presented; for his degsin is to prove,
that now the Church of God was not to be kept within the narrow bounds and
limits of Judea as heretofore, but to consist both of Jews and Gentiles, as the
verse before shows, and many other, God will have all to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth: But how does the Apostle prove that? by this
fifth ver. he proves it, for, says he, the man Jesus Christ is one God, and
one Mediator betwixt God and men, if the words did run as they are translated,
For there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man; there would be no
such good consequence, for there was ever one God, and ever one Mediator
betwixt God and men, and yet the Church did not extend beyond the bounds of
Judea; therefore the Apostle speaks of God under a new consideration, which was
not before, till the Apostles times, and that is of the man Jesus Christ, who
is God blessed for ever more, and whose work is to unite both Jews and Gentiles
into one, as in Gal. 3. 28. Ephesians. 2. 11, And when he calls this man Jesus
Christ one God, it must be taken of Deus uniens, God making one in a practical
way, as in Zach. 14. 9. The Lord shall be King in all the earth, and in that
day the Lord shall be one, and his Name one. This Lord is Christ's, for of his
Kingdom is this spoken, which shall be set up in all the earth, and in that
day (viz. the day of his regnancy over all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, for
it is a prophecy of such a time) the Lord shall be one, and his Name one; it is
not meant of the oneness of essence, for the Lord was always one in that
sense, but of operation effective, he shall be one, he shall work alike, and in
one manner in all Nations, and shall make them all one in him, they shall all
serve him with one shoulder, with one consent. So in this of Timothy, God would
have all to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; for Jesus
Christ is one God and one Mediator, that is, God uniting all in one, and
reconciling all in one; The man Christ is God, and Mediator effecting this.
This was foretold long before, but God is come in flesh now to accomplish it.

But if this exposition should not pass, it is easy to give another, for it
is not denied, but that Christ Jesus was and is a man, nor is it denied but
that as Mediator he was a man, and it will be further confessed, that he could
not have been Mediator unless he had been man; for therefore it was that he
took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, that he might be a
meet Mediator to reconcile us to God. But the point in dispute is, Whether as
Mediator he was not more then a man, or then a mere creature; and I have
already showed, that to mediate for God, and to God, required more sufficiency
and ability then can be found in man or any creature.

The next Instance or Argument that I produced was this.

Instance 6. If Christ be but a mere creature, then the righteousness of
Christ, which is imputed to believers, is not the righteousness of God, but
the righteousness of a mere creature: but this is against the tenure of the
Scripture, Phil. 3. 9.

To this he thus answers.

I suppose from some terms in your Instance, and From the text you allege,
that by righteousness you mean that righteousness whereby believers stand in
the sight of God free and clear from all sin, in reference to the curse of the
Law; thus he is the righteousness of God, through the faith of Jesus Christ,
(that is, that in Jesus Christ which is the object of faith) unto all, and upon
all them that believe, Romans 3. 22. God is the principal Author, Christ the
isntrumental Agent.

Rep. It is evident I can mean no other righteousness then that which he
mentions, whereby believers stand clear from all sin in reference to the stain
and pollution of sin, as well as in reference to the curse of the Law.

Now what is it that he answers to this? He produces a text out of Romans 3. 22.
by the mention of which he would divert the eyes of the Reader from the
consideration of Philip. 3. 9. (which was the Text that I produced for the
confirmation of my Instance, or Argument) and would carry them to the
consideration of another Text which speaks a truth, concerning which there is
no controversy betwixt him and me: He tells me of a righteousness of God by
the Faith of Jesus Christ, and of Gods being the principal Author of this
righteousness, which I grant, though not in his sense, for he means it of the
Father alone, but I understand it of Father, Son, and Spirit, this God is the
efficient a quo, the efficient from whom righteousness is, for it is he that
does account persons that believe righteous, and does acquit them from sin for
the sake of Christ, Romans 8. 33. 34. Ephesians. 4. 32.

But what is this to the purpose? is this any Answer to my Argument, or to the
Scripture I produced? I spoke of a righteousness imputed to believers, which
is the material cause of a believers justification, or of his righteousness
in the sight of God; and the imputation of this righteousness is the formal
cause of Justification, and this righteousness that is imputed, is called the
righteousness of God, Philip. 3. 9. but he tells me of a righteousness of
God, which is from God as the Author or principal Efficient, which is only
true in this sense, as God is he that appointed, decreed and instituted the
righteousness of Christ for the Justification of Believers, and does also
pronounce them just upon that account. But the Apostle Philip. 3. 9. does not
call the righteousness of Christ the righteousness of God in that sense, the
words are these, That I may be found in him, not having on mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through Faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God through Faith. The Apostle in this place
speaks of a righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ materially, as it is
opposite to that righteousness which he calls his own righteousness; and the
one, viz. his own righteousness, he calls the righteousness which is ex Lege,
of the Law: now this must be understood materially, not efficiently; God did
account persons just while the Covenant of works was afoot, in reference to
righteousness, which materially did consist in our obedience of the Law, the
obedience of the Law was the matter of it, therefore it is called the
righteousness which is of the Law. The other, viz. that righteousness which
is through the Faith of Christ that is, which is conveyed to us through Faith
viz. Christ) he calls the righteousness which is of God, not efficiently but
materially, for it is (...), ex Deo, not a Deo, of God, not from God. God now
accounts persons just (this Covenant of Grace being on foot) in reference to
righteousness, not ours of the Law, but that of God, viz. that of the person
who is God, the active and passive obedience of Christ who is God, which Faith
in Christ possesses us of, and makes ours instead of that which was ours, viz.
that of the Law; for the Apostle speaks of righteousness which he would not be
found in, and of righteousness which he would be found in; the former is Lis
own of the Law, the latter is of God by Faith; that is, of Christ, who is God,
through faith in Christ. The Apostle speaks not here of an Act of Grace in God,
that imputes the righteousness of an other unto Believers, as theirs, and so
accepts of it, but he speaks of that which is imputed, and is become a covering
in which he would be found; and this he calls the righteousness, not of the
Law, but of God, viz. the obedience of that person who is Godman, viz. Christ.

Suitable to this is that which we read in 2 Cor. 5. 21. He made him to be sin
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Here Christ is
spoken of as a sinner, but it is in the abstract, to show what a great sinner
he was, and the causes hereof are mentioned; 1. God himself, viz. the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, this God made Christ (considered as Mediator and surety of
the Elect) a sinner, that is, he accounted him so: here is the Efficient a quo,
from whom this was, this was God. 2. Here is the material cause, which is our
sins put on him, and made his, for he had none of his own, it was for us. 3.
Here is also the formal cause, which is in the imputation of our sins to him;
it was for us that he was made, that is, by laying of our iniquities upon him
instead of us, Isay 53. 6. 4. Here is the final cause that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him, in which there is, 1. The efficient cause,
that we might be made (that is) by God, accounted, reckoned by God. 2. There is
the material cause, which is the righteousness of God, viz. of Christ, who is
called in this place God, which is put on us, for we have no righteousness of
our own, as Christ had no sins of his own. 3. There is the formal cause,
which is Imputation; we are made, that is, by this righteousness of God put on
us; therefore it is said, through him; that is, through the Imputation of this
righteousness of his, which is called the righteousness of God, or else
through him, may be through faith in him.

He also makes Christ from this text of Romans 3. 22. to be but an isntrumental
Agent, in this righteousness of a believer; I suppose he draws it from these
words [by the faith of Jesus Christ] for he will have this particle [by] to
refer to the instrumentalnesse of the thing to which it does belong: And if it
were granted him in this, it would but make faith isntrumental, and not
Christ; for it refers to faith, and not to Christ; It is not said, By Jesus
Christ, but by the faith of Jesus Christ* and Christ is mentioned as the object
of this faith, which the Apostle speaks of as the instrument. There is the
righteousness of Christ, which is called the righteousness of God, which God
looks upon, and has respect to, and for the sake of which God accounts persons
just and righteous: and this righteousness is therefore reputed the
meritorious cause of our justification; and faith lays hold of this, and is
the instrument to convey it to us, and to make it ours: So that this text
serves not his purpose, nor does it at all help him in that assertion of his,
viz. of Christ's instrumentalnesse in agencie in reference to this
righteousness. In the mean time he has wholly passed over in silence the
text that I alleged to prove my Argument by, without speaking one word in
answer, according to the manner in which he has dealt with me formerly.

But he undertakes to show what that is in Christ which is imputed to us for
righteousness.

It is (says he) his obedience which was both active and passive: The opinion
now adays (says he) is that the active obedience of Christ, whereby he did
perfectly fulfill the Law, and his passive obedience, whereby he did perfectly
suffer the curse of the Law, are imputed to us for righteousness. Now he could
not (says he) obey the Law as he was God, nor could he suffer the curse of the
Law but as he was man; and so that righteousness of Christ which was imputed
to us was a creature-righteousnesse.

Rep. It is granted that it is the obedience of Christ, both active and
passive, that is imputed to us for righteousness: But why he expresses
himself in such language [the opinion now-adayes is such] as if it were but an
opinion, and not the truth of God; as if it were others opinion, not his own
opinion: as if it were now-adayes the opinion, not the opinion of former times;
and as if only he made use of it against me, and to promote his own assertion
of a mere creature-righteousnesse imputed to us, and not that he did believe it
(for so may any one judge that reads his expression) I cannot conceive why he
should speak thus if he be sound in that point.

What ever his meaning may be in such words, yet sure I am his inference which
he makes therefrom (notwithstanding the reason wherewith he seems to enforce
it) ^s not right. He could not obey the Law as God, he could not suffer the
curse of the Law but as he was man, therefore his obedience which is imputed
for righteousness, was as he was a creature. There is a non sequitur in it, ^f
it be put into the form of an Argument it will appear. If Christ could neither
obey nor suffer but as a creature, then the obedience of Christ which is
imputed for righteousness, is the obedience of a mere creature, for in that
sense he takes it: but the former is true, therefore the later. The consequence
in the major Proposition is unsound, the reason is, because though obedience be
imputed for righteousness, yet not simply and merely because it was obedience,
and answered the Law, but because it was the obedience of such a person who was
so great and glorious, as that he was not less then God, but very God, yet as
God he performed it not, but as he was man; but the Godhead enabled the Manhood
thereto, and did put the value, and worth, and rate, and price, upon that
service of the Manhood.

Nor do I understand how Christ (if he had been a mere creature) could have
performed a righteousness that could have been reckoned to another, in as much
as it would have been all due, wholely due to God, as from himself being a
creature, because of that absolute Sovereignty in God over every creature; Nor
do I know how a mere creature-obedience can be imputed for righteousness to
many millions of creatures, when yet any one of those creatures to whom it is
imputed must have done as much, and must have suffered as much in reference to
his own transgression, as that doing and suffering of Christ which is imputed
to him amounts to, if Christ be but a mere creature.

And whereas he says, He could not have obeyed the Law as he was God; I say,
he could not (being but one) have obeyed the Law for so many, if he had not
been God. He also says, He could not have suffered the curse of the Law but as
he was man. But I say and shall prove it (I hope) before I finish this work,
that if the had been no more but man, he could not have suffered the curse of
the Law for so many men.

The conclusion is this, that though a creature obeyed the Law, and a creature
suffered the curse of it, yet the person that did both the one and other was
not a mere creature, but more then a creature; therefore the righteousness of
this person was more then a mere creature righteousness.

But he says, He made haste to the seventh Instance; and it appears he made
more haste then good speed, when he left the maine work behind him undone, when
he did outrun the Scripture, wherein the strength of the Instance and Argument
lay; yet as hasty as he is, though I take a little more leisure, I doubt not
but to overtake him at last.

Instance 7. If Christ were a mere creature, then to pardon sin belongs not
to him, because the Scripture testifies that none can forgive sins but God,
because all sin is against God, therefore none can forgive it but God. But it
is evident, that Christ took the Authority of forgiving sin, Son, says
Christ, thy sins are forgiven thee, Luke 7. 48.

His Answer is, because many think that some weight lies in these words, I
shall be a little the more large in my Answer to it.

Rep. No question but the Reader would conceive weight to be in the rest,
because they were consonant to that Doctrine which has been commonly received,
and were looked upon as main points of Faith: But he thinks he has more
advantage against me in this instance, then in the rest, and that Scripture
favors him more in the ^etter of the words, then it did in some of the rest,
however it be; let it be considered what it is he says to disable it.

He frames it into an Argument, but impaires the strength of it, though he said
he would not mar it.

None can forgive sins but God:

But Christ did forgive sin, Luke 7. 48.

Therefore Christ is God:

If he had done me right, the Argument should have run thus.

He that took the authority of forgiving sins, is not a mere creature, but is
God.

But Christ took the authority of forgiving sin:

Therefore Christ is God.

Had the Argument been thus formed, his answer to the major might have been
spared, and so might my Reply: but now I must follow him as he has framed it.

He replies to the Major, viz. none can forgive sins but God.

1. By objecting against the Witness, which he supposes I bring from Mar. 2.
7. which he says is no part of the Standard; for (says he) the dark Scribes,
who were enemies to Christ, did speak it.

Rep. If I had quoted Mar. 2. 7. he might have had some advantage against me,
but seeing I did not, he might well have forborne me: Might not I collect it
from the Testimony of the Scripture in very many places, where it is attributed
to God by Moses, and the Prophets; yea where God himself does assume it to
himself, as his own Royal privilege, Exodus 34. 7. Psalm. 32. 2. Esaias 43. 25.
and Chap. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 34. yea certainly, when I used those words which the
Scripture testifies; I minded such like Scripture as these, yet I will not
deny, but that the saying of the Scribes and Pharisees was in my mind; and if I
had quoted the place where they assert it, as the Prerogative of God to forgive
sins, I need not be ashamed, because as dark as they were in other things,
they are clear enough in this, and asserted nothing but what the Scripture
clearly held out, as I have showed.

2. By objecting against the Doctrine which he says I teach; for (says he)
that none can forgive sins in any sense but God only, may pass for an
error, for it is the duty of all men to forgive sins which others commit
against them, Mat. 6. 14. And it is the privilege of some men to forgive all
sins, in reference to the curse of the Law, John 20. 23.

Rep. He conceives me to be a very Novice in the knowledge of the Scripture,
else he would not have presented such poor objections, or he has a mind to
cavil at expressions, and to contradict if all be not punctually expressed,
though it be never so easy to be understood. Does he think me to be so simple
and ignorant of the truth, as that I should understand that position, None can
forgive sins but God, in the greatest latitude, so as to exclude that act of
love, and charity, and mercy, and compassion, which is due from one man to
another, in reference to such personal trespasses and offenses which are
committed mutually by men that converse with one another, or to exclude
ministerial Acts of remission of sins, which some men (which have received
an office from Christ, and in such office Authority and Commission from him to
remit sins) have power to pass? I should in so doing have robbed poor saint,
weak, and feeble Christians of a great part of that so lace and comfort which
Christ has left them here upon earth: He might therefore have known, that I
understood the Proposition in a limited sense; None has power in himself to
forgive sin but God, none in his own Name can do it, but God: yea, did I not
express my meaning in the words following? It is evident that Christ took
Authority of forgiving sin. I do not say, that Christ had Authority derived to
him, but he took it as that which did properly belong to him: he might
therefore have suffered the major Proposition to have p^ssed, and have fallen
upon the minor, which at last he does;

His words are these.

Now for your Minor, that Christ did forgive sin. It Is true, says he, that
Christ did forgive sin, and that he the Son of Man had on earth power to do it,
as he himself speaks, Mark. 2. 10. But what will this help to bring in the
conclusion that Christ is God? Doubtless no, because mere creatures (as above)
in some sense have power to forgive sin: if it can be proved that Christ is
principal in forgiving, somewhat may be done.

Rep. If it can be proved that Christ is principal in forgiving, is only
something done? is not the whole done? I suppose there needs no more to be
done: I shall therefore attempt the proof of that from the very Scripture he
conceits I alluded to, which he mentions, which is Mar. 2. 10. 1. It is
evident from the contest betwixt Christ and the Scribes, they did not charge
Christ (no not in their hearts) with blasphemy, as conceiving that Christ did
not forgive sins ministerially, by the authority which he derived from another,
for in that sense they would not have said, Who can forgive sins but God? They
would not have made it proper to God to forgive sins, for they knew that the
Priests ministerially did forgive the sins of the people, that brought their
sacrifices, and the Prophets also in the name of God did it, as Nathan did
David's: nay in this sense they could not attribute it to God at al; for God
cannot be the Minister of any, to pardon sin in another name; therefore they
looked upon Christ as forgiving sin in his own name, and by his own proper
power, and therefore (conceiving him only to be a man) they accused him of
blasphemy. Now if Christ had been onley a man, and had forgiven sin
ministerially, in the name, and by the authority of the Father, and not in his
own name, nor by his own power, why does he not declare so much to them, and
tell them that the thing was even so as they apprehended, that no man, nor
creature has has any absolute independent power in himself to forgive sins,
but it is the royal prerogative of God, as they conceived, but their error lay
in this, they were mistaken in him, they conceived of him that he forgave sins
in his own name, and by his own proper power; and he did it not, but it was
done by a derived power, and in a ministerial way; why was not his way of
doing it cleared up to the Scribes by him? when he knew they were right in
their thoughts of the thing, only mistook his acting, conceiving that he acted
what he did not act. But it is apparent that Christ does contest with them upon
another point, and undertook to prove that he the Son of man (though they
looked upon him as a mere man, and nothing more) was yet such an one, that
without blasphemy he might take upon himself, as a thing suitable to him, and
very proper to forgive sins in that very sense, as they called blasphemy, that
is, in his own name, and by his own power, and authority, without any
dependence upon any other, to whom it more properly belonged, as they
conceived, in which contest with them he asserted himself to be the God to whom
it belongs to pardon sin: Therefore Christ charged them with evil thoughts of
him, as it is expressed by Matthew in his relating of the story, Matthew. 9. 4.
not because they imagined that he exercised that power which he did not, viz.
an absolute independent power from himself, when as he only exercised a
delegated power which was derived to him: this was not the cause why Christ
challenged them for thinking evil in their hearts, but because they denied him
to have that power which he had, and said he blasphemed because he assumed it,
and did so appropriate it to God, whom they conceived a spirit in heaven, that
they denied it to him in flesh, as he was the Son of man upon earth in a state
of exinanition, emptied of his glory. Therefore in Mat. 9. 6. and so in Mar. 2.
10. there is a concurrence of the Evangelists, that Christ to convince them of
their error, in restraining and straightning him in his power, which they would
grant to God, but not to him, speaks these words; But that you may know that
the Son of man on earth, has power to forgive sins; I say unto thee, arise,
etc. If that had not been the Scribes and Pharisees errors, that they granted
that to God, which they denied to him, he should rather have used other words
then those words that he did; and have said rather, that you may know, I do not
assume that power which you think I do assume; for such words as these would
have suited the Tenent of my Antagonist better, and the error of the Scribes,
had that been their error: But Christ contests with them about power, and will
make them know that he had a power which they would not grant him, but called
it blasphemy, even the very power of God, though he be also the Son of man on
earth. And therefore he uses these words, That ye may know that the Son of man
has power on earth. This contest of Christ with the Scribes puts it out of
doubt that Christ challenged to be principal and equal with the Father in
pardoning sin, and would not own himself to be ministerial or isntrumental
therein.

2. It appears by this, that Christ is principal in forgiving, because the
Scribes, and Pharisees, had no sooner conceived thoughts of a difference
betwixt God and him, denying him to be God, and charging him with blasphemy
for assuming that power which was peculiar to God: but while such imaginations
were in their hearts, Christ (before they could or did utter them) did discover
them, and reprove them: and therein Christ gave a sign to them, that they had
evil thoughts of him while they looked upon him as less then God, or as below
God; for they might confute themselves in their own false conceits of Christ.
After this manner do we charge this person with blaspemie, because he forgives
sins being but a man, and not God, as we have thought, and yet he knows the
thoughts of our hearts, and discovers that which we had only conceived, and had
not uttered, and who can do such a thing as this, but God? Whether is it easier
to say thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, wherefore think you evil in your
hearts? when we expressed nothing with our lips. Is it not as great a work to
know the heart, as to forgive sins? Does not Solomon speak to God after this
manner, Thou only know the hearts of the children of men, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30.
Certainly, this person (though in flesh) is notwithstanding more then flesh,
none other but God. Christ administered matter of such expostulation to them,
that they might correct their former erring thoughts. But if they were not
instructed thereby, yet we should understand what thence may be collected. The
same person forgave sins as discerned hearts: but Christ not as man, but as
God, discerned hearts; therefore not as man, but as God he forgave sins. Nor
can it be said that Christ knew their thoughts, because God revealed them to
him, or because they gave some signs what imaginations were in them; for Mark
declares that Christ knew what they thought in and from his own Spirit, that
is, by himself, and not from any other; therefore he forgave sins by and from
himself, and not by or from any other, Mark 2. 8.

3. It is manifest from the Miracle that Christ wrought, that Christ was
principal in forgiving, and that by and from himself he did it, and not by
power derived to him, for he wrought the Miracle authoritatively, and by his
own power, he did not work it in his Fathers name, that is, by way of
dependence upon him, and by prayer to his Father, as sometimes he did when he
would show his manhood, that he was the Son of man, as well as the Son of God,
but he wrought it by command, speaking in his own name, I say unto thee arise,
take up thy bed and walk; and this authoritative command cameforth of his
mouth, was effectual before their eyes, for this end, that he might confute
those evil thoughts they had conceived and harbored in their hearts concerning
him, viz. that he had blasphemed; because being but a man, he had arrogated and
assumed that power to himself, which is proper to God. Had this been the
Scribes and Pharisees error, that they thought he took to himself that power
which indeed he did not, viz. an absolute and independent power in remitting
sins, and yet it was but a derived power which he had from another, and that it
was not his own which he exercised then in the working of this miracle, that
they might know that they erred in their conceptions concerning his manner of
working; he should at this time especially, rather then at another time, by
invocation upon his Father have effected it. And the reason is, because Christ's
design was in working this miracle, to teach them somewhat which they
understood not, and to rectify their apprehensions concerning himself, as
these words import, That ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth
to forgive sins. I say unto thee who art sick, etc. arise and walk. Now what
was it that he would teach them? was this it, that he did act dependently upon
his Father, and had no such power of his own to forgive sins, but derived it
from his Father? If so, was this the means or the way to convince them of it,
to command in his own name the impotent man that was sick of so deadly a
disease, to arise and walk, without any looking up to heaven, or groaning in
his spirit, or speaking unto God his Father to effect it in him or by him? Was
it not rather the way to confirm them in their error (if that were their
error) then to bring them to the knowledge of the truth? therefore it is
manifest and clear that he would teach them some other thing wherein indeed
they erred, and stood in need to be rectified; they thought him but a man, and
that he usurped that power which belonged not unto him, but was proper to God,
and that was to forgive sins in his own name, and not ministerially, but by
and from himself; this they called blasphemy. Now he would in this rectify
their erring judgments, by working a miracle in his own name, and by a
commanding word, accompanied with answerable power; and therefore says, That
you may know that the Son of man, even he himself has power in himself, and
not derived from any other; to forgive sins I say, even I speak it as one that
have authority in my self, and need not to seek out to any other, I say, arise
and walk. This absolute and independent way and manner of working this miracle,
is a good demonstration in what way, and after what manner he forgave sins; and
both by the one and by the other, he would convince the Scribes and Pharisees,
that he (though clothed in flesh, and appearing only as a man) was yet God,
equal with his Father, and could work the same works of his Father.

Now, though Christ seems to speak of the act of forgiving sins as an easier
work then if he should say to the sick man, arise and walk, as these words of
his seem to import, Whether is it easier, etc. yet the works are both alike,
though one not easier then the other; nor did Christ look upon the one as
easier then the other, nor did the Scribes and Pharisees look upon one as
easier then the other; for they look upon the act of absolving from sin as
proper to God; and not appertaining to man; But withal they thought that he
deluded the people when he spoke the words, thy sins are forgiven thee, because
the effect was inward, and not to be discerned by the eyes of the body, and so
the people could not discover the fraud and falsehood in working; therefore they
imagined it was far easier for Christ to say thy sins are forgiven thee, in
which he could not be detected, if the effect followed not, then for him to
say, arise and walk, which if he had not had a power answerable to that word of
command, would discover his impostures, and expose him to shame and reproach;
in this sense it was easier for one that would delude, to say thy sins are
forgiven thee, then to say arise and walk; but Christ would show that the one
was as truly wrought and done as the other, and both of them done by the power
of his Godhead.

There are also other Scriptures which may give light, that Christ in forgiving
sins was principal, and not receiving power from another: 1. Christ gave power
to his Disciples, John 20. 23. (the place which he quoted) to remit sins,
effectually, so and as that they should be remitted and to retain sins
effectually, and so as that they should be retained. Now this power of
delegating power to others, does show a power residing in Christ himself, and
does show that Christ is the principal Lord against whom sins are committed,
because he both conveyes a power to the Apostles, and does ratify the exercise
of it. 2. The Apostle forgave sins in the person of Christ in 2 Cor 2. 10. that
is, he did it instrumentally and representatively, and in the name of another
who was chief in it, and that was Christ. It is not said in the person of God,
as it should have been said, if Christ had not been God, and principal in that
power of forgiving.

But he says, It cannot be, because the Scripture cannot oppose it self. And
he presents what Scripture. Tells us, The Scripture (says he) tells us that we
are justified by the man Jesus Christ, Acts 13 38, 39. be it known unto you men
and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins, and by him all that do believe are justified, etc.

Reply. The Scripture tells us, that through the man Christ we are justified,
but the Scripture tells us not that we are justified by Christ as man; It is a
granted thing by us all, that the person that justifies us is man (for we say
he is both God and Man) But that he justifies as man, or remits sins as man,
is denied by us, and the contrary has already been proved; I have showed
before that the Son of man is said to be heaven, which was impossible,
because he was on earth when he spoke these words; the words are therefore thus
to be understood, the person, that is, the Son of man, being also God, was in
heaven at that time, but not as the Son of man, but as God, so in this place
it is to be understood.

There is some difference to be made in Christ's justifying of us. If we speak
of the meritorious cause of Justification, whole Christ, and the whole of
Christ does concur in it, contribute to it, and effect it for God (looking
upon that which was done and suffered, and upon the person, (viz. the
excellency and glory of the person) that did it, and suffered it; in which,
both the Godhead and the manhood acted the one by obeying, the other by
enabling and presenting as his (as indeed it was) (the union betwixt the two
natures considered) pronounced believers just upon that account. Not that the
manhood of Christ merited, but the whole of Christ acted in those things
wher^in the merit was. But if we speak of the efficient cause of justification,
or of pardon of sin, Christ considered in his divine nature as God only is
agent in it, because he alone against whom sin is committed, can from and by
himself acquit and dischare therefrom; and so Christ as God can only do it, and
he did it as God, as I have proved from Mark 22. 10.

I conceive that in this Text Christ is not spoken of as the efficient, from
whom justification and pardon of sins comes, but as Mediator through whom, or
as the means and merit by whom forgiveness of sins comes; in which sense it
is said that Christ was the Lamb of God which took away the sins of the
world. My reason is, because it is said, through this man is preached
forgiveness, and by him all that believe are justified, not efficiently, but
mediatoriously and meritoriously. It is not said he pardoned sin, but through
him pardon was preached; nor is it said he justified, but through him are
justified those that believe; that is, through him as the means; and herein
the manhood is not to be excluded from acting in those works which God accounts
for a believers righteousness, and in reference to which God justifies; but
principally, yea solely to be acknowledged, but so far as concerns the
respect that God gives to such actions, and the acceptance that they find with
God, which is this, viz. God imputes them unto believers as their
righteousness, and for the sake of them does pardon their sins; the manhood is
not at all herein to be mentioned. But nothing that can be answered to this can
reach the instance, because this text was impertinent, and I might have passed
it by, without giving any answer to it, because Christ's pardoning of sin in
way of efficiency, is that which the Instance or Argument which I produced,
intends and proves, and this Scripture disables it not, because it speaks of
another thing, and not of that.

But he goes on, and tells us what Scripture says farther, viz. That Christ
prayed to another (on the Jews befalfe) for the forgiveness of sin, Luke
23. 34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Therefore Christ is not the principal forgiver of sins, according to Scripture.

Reply. Christ prayed to another, viz the Father, for the forgiveness of sin,
and another prayed to him for the pardon of sin, viz. Stephen, and the Jews
were the subjects that were prayed for in both; What must then be said to this?
and what answer is to be given to it? Alas it is not difficult to speak to it.
The Scripture has clearly untyed the knot; If Christ were not a man, he could
not pray to another; and if he were nothing more then a man, another could not
pray to him; and the Scripture declares both, while it shows him to be God and
man. As man therefore he humbles himself, he prays unto him that was God. It
was a time of Humiliation to Christ, and this was an action of humiliation in
Christ, but as God he was prayed to by him that was a man, and with adoration
also, though he was in heaven in reference to his manhood, he veiled his
Godhead when he prayed to God; Stephen unveiled it, when he prayed to him. So
that there is no good consequence in this, that because both the Scripture and
himself do declare him to be man in his praying for the pardon of sins,
therefore Scripture and himself have denied him to be God in his pardoning of
men's sins.

His third Scripture is Acts 5. 30, 31. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him has God exalted with his right hand to
be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness
of sins; Hence he collects that Christ received from another his power of
forgiving sins.

Rep. This Scripture seems to favor his opinion more then any that he has
alleged, and it has the most seeming strength in it for his purpose. But this
answer may be returned unto it. Christ does fall under a double consideration
in Scripture, he may be looked upon absolutely as the Son of God, and second
person in the Trinity, as Jehovah, and as (...) very God; or he may be looked
upon relatively, as (...), God man, as ^mmanuel, God with us, or in our nature,
as God manifest in the flesh, and as sent into the world, and executing the
office of Mediator. If he be considered in the former acception, he is
essentially Lord; and that one Lawgiver in all the creatures are the works of
his giver hands, and subject to him, and every transgression and sin that is
committed, is against him; and it belongs to him with the Father and the holy
Ghost (who are one God with himself) to pardon sin, to acquit from the guilt,
and to deliver from the curse thereof, because he can turn away his wrath, and
has power over all plagues, and can save from them, and so he receives no
power to forgive sins, but it belongs to him and cannot be separated from his
Godhead, but is naturally, essentially and eternally his. But if he be
considered in the latter acception, then many things are derived to him, as the
office of Mediatorship, and a Lordship, and the name Savior is given him upon
that account, which is a name above every name of the Creatures, and Prince and
Captain of our salvation, is a name put upon him, and belonging to him; in
this sense it is given to him to give repentance unto Israel and remission of
sins. Now it must be understood as I have expressed in my former Treatise, that
the giving of these things does not deny any intrinsecall or inward perfection
which Christ has, but rather supposes it; and it must be granted, that
Christ, to whom these things are given, according to his due nature, has all
his perfection without the gift of these, and that these are but declarative,
and serve to manifest that essential riches and glory which he had with the
Father from eternity, and that his natural Dominion and Lordship (which cannot
be separated from his Deity) is that which founds such donations and gifts
which are too high for any creature, and would carry away Divine glory from
him, who is God, if they should be given to any mere creature, and they are to
be exercised by the help of the Godhead of Christ, else they could not be acted
by him, as being too great for any man or mere creature. Indeed the humanity
has fellowship with the Godhead in the glory of the having and executing these
things; and to the manhood it is glory derived, which was not before, but to
the Deity of Christ it is glory manifested and declared only.

More particularly, It is given to Christ as Mediator to dispense pardon of
sin, and it belongs to his Priesthood to do it. The Priests of the Law they
did it, externally and ministerially, figuratively and typically; they
pronounced clean and unclean, so far as concerned the flesh; but Christ did
it, and does it effectually, and spiritually, pronouncing and discharging the
conscience from all sin; and what was the reason of this difference? They did
it as men, therefore in weakness, and could speak, but were not able to effect
what they spoke; but Christ did it as the Son of God, yea as the eternal Son
of God, as the Apostle testifies, Heb. 7. 3. So that the very Priesthood of
Christ, that it might be effectual in the works of it (and this of pardoning
of sin, was one of them) was founded in the eternal Sonship of Christ, and
therein lay this ability and power to perform the works of it, and principally
this work of remitting sins: So that though the way of dispensing pardon be
given to Christ, yet the power of dispensing was not given, but is as ancient
as his Sonship; therefore he erres in his inference which he fetches from
this Text of Acts 5. 31. When he says, that he received from another his power
of forgiving sins: For it was not power that he received, but the way of
exercising of it. It is acted in the flesh as Mediator, even since Christ came
in the flesh, and now the Son of man, forgives sins, that is, the person that
is man and the son of man forgives, but not as he is man or the son of man, but
as he is God and the Son of God. For though it may be said that the Mediator
pardons sin efficiently, as well as Meritoriously, as Priest; yet it cannot
be said that the whole of the Mediator does it, but the divine nature alone
acts in it. It may be said of a man who consists of soul and body, that he
meditateth, but it cannot be said of the whole of man that he meditateth, but
of the mind only. It may also be said of of him that he walks; but it is to
be understood of his body only, and not of his mind, yet because of the union
betwixt body and soul (both of them making but one man) what either does is
attributed to the whole. So it is with Christ our Mediator, he bore our sins
as man only, for the Godhead could not suffer, he purged away our sins as
God-man: for the manhood acted, and the Godhead merited, he pardoned sin as
God only, because he is supreme Lord only as he is God: yet the Mediator does
all these, that is, he that is both God and man does them; but in this
different way he does them. And so it appears that still he is the principal
in this work of forgiving sins, because he does it as God, and that this gift
(which respects not the power it self of dispensing, but the way only of
dispensing does add nothing to the intrinsicall perfection of Christ, but is
manifestive of that inward essential glory, which he had with the Father
before any beginning was, which was veiled by Christ's assuming flesh, and yet
manifested in flesh, by acts which were too high for flesh, of which nature
this of pardoning sin was one.

The conclusion is this, the work of forgiving sin is high and glorious, proper
and peculiar, and suitable to this great and most high God, Jesus Christ; the
Mediatorly the way of dispensing it is below this excellent person Christ, who
is not only the son of the highest, but the highest, and it was the humbling
and debasing and emptying of himself to act such a work in such a way.

The 8th Argument or Instance (as he calls it) is this.

If Christ be a mere creature, then the value of that offering which Christ
offered, when he offered himself to God, is taken away, and the satisfaction
which Christ gave to divine justice, is destroyed; for if the person that dyed
were a mere man, and the blood that was shed was the blood of a mere man, and
not of God as it is called, Acts 20. 28. then how could it satisfy for the
sins of many transgressors? For there is no proportion betwixt one mere man
dying for sin, and many men sinning and deserving death each of them for the
sins they have committed. And how an finite justice offended should be
satisfied with a sacrifice infinite in value, is unconceiveable, and against
the tenor of the Scripture.

He puts it into this form.

That doctrine which takes away the value of Christ's offering, and destroys
the satisfaction which he gave to divine justice, brings in as it were another
Gospel, etc.

But that doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature, does so, therefore

He grants the Major, and answers to the proofs of the Minor proposition,
which are presented in the form of two Queries, the first was,

If Christ was a mere creature, then how could he satisfy for the sins of many
transgressors?

To this he makes this reply.

If it please you to consider, Romans 5. 12* and so forward, you may answer your
own Querie; or see a good reason of this which I shall now propound.

If Adam were a mere creature, how could his sin make many transgressors? If
through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God and the
gift by grace by one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many. Romans 5. 15.
Christ as well as Adam was a common person, and therefore the Lord having laid
on him the iniquity of us all, and he bearing the curse of the Law, his members
are delivered both from the sin and curse.

Reply, There is nothing in the place which he has directed me to, viz. Romans
5. 15. which he has or can fetch out with all his consideration that will
answer my Querie. His asking of an other question will be no answer to mine.
Adams sin might make many transgressors, upon that account, as no man's
righteousness can render them (being transgressors) righteous and just
persons. 1. All persons which afterward sprung from him, were in his loins at
that time when he sinned, and were parts of him, and consequently they sinned
in him, and with him, his sin was their sin, it extended unto them, and
they could not but participate of it, as of Levi it is said, that he paid
tithes in Abraham's loins, Heb. 7. 9, 10.

2. Adams state in which he stood, when the whole world was in him, was a state
of grace and favor with God, from which (if he sinned) himself was to fall and
all his posterity with him; after the manner of some persons that holds an
estate, upon the good will of their Lord, whom if they offend they are cast out
and all their posterity with them, for that is the condition upon which it is
given to be possessed, and the children and offspring are in volved in the
guilt of such persons trespasses, whose favor is on such terms; God is to be
looked upon as sovereign Lord of all creatures, to whom it belongs to show
favor to what creatures he will, and upon what terms he will, and under what
conditions he pleases, and under what penalties (in case of transgression)
likes him; therefore it was that he set Adam over the works of his hands,
entered into a conditional League and Covenant with him, and did both
privilege him, and restrain him, and abridge him therein; and this was done
under penalty of dying, both to him and his, in case of trespass, thou shall
dye the death (says God) to him. And thus it came, that through the offense of
one, many are dead.

3. Sin was propagated and generated to and in Adams posterity, after that
Adam fell, and lost Gods image. It is said of him that begat a son after his
own image, Genesis 5. 3. And so all persons came to be conceived in iniquity, and
to be borne in sin, for out of an unclean thing nothing that is clean can
proceed. And so it comes to pass, that Adams sin made many transgressors;
for by propagation all men have sins of their own (over and above the sin of
Adam,) imputed to them. Thus the passage of sin and death, from one Adam to all
men, appears facile and easy; there is no obstruction in the way, sovereignty
and holiness and justice, and truth furthered it, effected it.

But now in reference to Christ it cannot be thus asserted, that righteousness
passes upon men after this manner. 1. Righteousness is not propagated at all,
but only imputed. 2. It is not by participation, because none are in Christ's
loins by nature: Christ has no natural seed, that are parts of him. 3. If
there be any such relation betwixt Christ and men* as that Christ should be a
father to them, and they children to him, that he should be as a second Adam,
it is not unto all, but to those only that believe and this is also merely
through grace, and so there may be an imputation of righteousness from one to
many, but it is through grace. Therefore it is said, the grace of God has
abounded by one man unto many: Not unto all men, but to all that receive it,
that do believe, verse. 17. 4. being to be imputed through grace, there comes to
be an obstruction to it; justice and truth must be satisfied, before there be
any place for grace; and if grace cannot pass, the gift of grace which is
righteousness and life to men through Christ, cannot pass neither. And so it
appears that the way of sins passing is more ready from one man to many, then
the way of righteousness abounding through one to many. Because of
satisfaction that must interpose, that grace may have a free and open passage
unto many. 5, If it be through satisfaction, that must interpose, before the
grace of God, and the gift by grace can by one abound to many; and if first the
sins of those many, that grace abounds to, through one, must be laid upon that
one, that that one might bear the curse of the Law, that by this means the
grace of deliverance (which consists in righteousness imputed, and in life,)
might pass over, through that one, and abound to those many, (as he himself
(though somewhat darkely) does confess) then this one man (through whom grace
must abound to many) cannot be any one, but such an one who is able to give
satisfaction for many. And concerning this satisfaction the querie is made, how
it could be that any one mere man could satisfy for the sins of many
transgressors; and the disproportion is pleaded: No proportion betwixt one
mere man dying for sin, and many men sinning and deserving death, each of them
for the sins they have committed. But he makes no answer at all unto it, but
sends me to Romans 5. 15. to answer my self, which slight proceedings will
satisfy none but such who are willing to be deluded by him.

The question only will be, what satisfaction is necessary, that grace may
abound to many? Because there be many that conceive that any satisfaction will
serve (to make man capable of grace) which God will accept, and they do not
look at proportion. And there are others that hold that no satisfaction at all
is necessary, in respect of God, because God having loved the Elect, loves them
for ever, and there is no change at all in Gods love, nor is God capable of
changing, but is immutable in his nature; and therefore though man sinned, yet
his love was not broken off thereby; nor was there any breach on his part at
all, nor did Christ dye to satisfy him at all; for he was satisfied always in
his own love, which continued the same after man had sinned as before; for in
his love he gave Christ after man had transgressed; therefore the breach was on
man's part; he had wronged God, and merited nothing but hatred, and wrath, and
all evil, and no love at all; and having an evil and guilty conscience, he was
suspicious of God, and expected no good from him, but feared all evil, and
could not conceive how God could love such a creature, or show any grace or
favor to him, that had sinned in such sort against him; and knew not how God
could do it without satisfaction; Thus unsatisfied was man's conscience (having
sinned) concerning the finding of any mercy from Gods hands; therefore God gave
Christ and delivered him up to death, and laid him under the curse of the Law,
not to satisfy himself thereby, but to satisfy man's conscience, and to give
rest and quiet to it, and that God cared not for a few drops of blood, but
there was a wound in the conscience of those that had sinned, that would not be
healed but by such a manifestation of the Fathers love, as in giving Christ,
and delivering him up for such, appeared. And some say Christ came to reveal
the Fathers counsels, and dyed for the confirmation of them. This opinion
takes hold of many, and spreads and prevails much; my design is not to make a
large discourse in way of answer, because it is beside my present undertaking;
only because I am necessitated (in reply to him) to insist a little on the
point of satisfaction, and because the point is of great concernment, I shall
not oversleightly pass over it, but stay a while in answer to both the
forementioned Tenants, and shall first show that some satisfaction to God is
necessary, and then declare what it is.

Sol. And first I shall premise some things, and afterward lay down some
positions.

That which is to be premised, is: 1. That there are no passions and affections
in God, after the manner of men; there is neither love nor hatred, nor wrath,
nor anger, nor joy, nor grief, nor any such by which the minds and spirits of
men are moved and disturbed; for God had all things before him at first that
should come to pass afterward; and if it were good, it was of his own
operation; and if it were evil, it was of his own permission and ordering
also, and that which he could easily have prevented. So that it is irrational
to conceive that God should be stirred or moved with any thing that comes to
pass, or that he should be in diverse tempers or minds, or that he should be
one thing to day, and an other thing to morrow; this is inconsistent to that
absolute blessedlesse of God; therefore though these things are spoken of God
in Scripture, yet they be humanitus dicta, they be attributed to God after the
manner of men. And those things that are passions and affections in men* are
attributes and decrees, and counsels, and actions and operations in God; and
imply not the least mutation or change in God. As for example, Gods loving of
Jacob before he had done good to deserve such a thing, what was it but Gods
goodness and graciousnesse; which is an attribute in God, noted in decreeing
Jacob to glory, which is called Election; and Gods hatred to Esau before he had
done evil, what was it but his sovereignty and absolute dominion which God
has over the creatures, without being capable to give any account, exercised
i^ app^inting him to perdition and destruction (...) they are not passions and
affections in God, but they are acts of the unchangeable will of God, in which
the above mentioned properties in God are expressed. And Gods wrath and anger
is not a passion in God, but it is an act of Gods righteousness and justice,
by which he repells that which is evil in the creature, and contrary to his
own holiness, in testification of the unsuitablenesse of it to him, and of
that which he justly expects from the creature.

2. There is difference to be put betwixt the decree and purpose of God,
concerning life and glory, in reference to such persons whom he will glorify
goodness toward, and the way and means by which God will effect it and
accomplish it, which is in advancing holiness and righteousness; in order to
which he made the first Adam after his image, gave him an holy and righteous
nature, writ his will in his heart, and then entered into a Covenant of life
and peace, and glory with him upon the observation of his will; and threatened
death, and all evil, and misery, upon the violation thereof; and this Covenant
was in reference to himself, and his posterity that were in his loins. This
latter is called in Scripture the way of peace and life, Romans 3. 16, 17. The
former is hid in God; for who has been of his counsel, or who knows further
then he reveals? and it has its being in God, and no where else. The latter is
declared to the creature and it is the creatures capacity of life, or the
visible state of life into which God did put him, and it has its being in the
creature.

3. There is difference to be put betwixt the love of God to the creature, and
the amity of God with the creature; or betwixt the decree of grace in electing
the creature to life and glory, and the prosecution of the decree in suitable
and proportionable actings of God toward the creature.

If there be a right distinguishing betwixt these things that thus differ,
these following propositions and conclusions will be better understood and more
easily granted.

1. When sin was committed against God, the love of God was not broken off, nor
the council, purpose and thoughts of God, concerning glorifying of such
persons whom he had chosen to life and glory, were not altered, nor changed;
for this foundation stands sure, the Lord knows who are his, nor is God in
this sense like man that he should repent: Those whom he thus loves, he loves
to the end, that is, he cannot cast off whom he has chosen. For these
counsels of grace concerning these persons being without respect either to
good or evil in the persons themselves, Romans 9. 11. The good or evil that
followed them in such persons, could neither confirm them nor overturne them;
because they stand upon this basis, the immutable and unchangable Will of God,
not upon the uncertain and wavering creature; and hence it came to pass, that
when one means of effecting them, viz man's own righteousness proved
ineffectual, God (to show his firmness in his Councels) found out other means
to accomplish them by viz. the righteousness of another, and therefore gave
Christ, John 3. 16.

2. Though sin did not, could not overturn the Decree of life, yet it broke
the Covenant of life, and so overthrew that visible state of life in which the
elect were, whom God had chosen; and so brought them into a dreadful visible
state of death, though not into a final miserable state, because of Gods
election. Sin altered the state of elect persons, though it altered not Gods
thoughts concerning them; so that it might be said, he that was before in the
state of salvation, is now through sin in the state of condemnation; though it
cannot be said that God will (because of sin) now damn that person, whom his
thought and purpose was to have saved, Romans 3. 11. Destruction and misery is in
their paths; and ver. 23. All have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God
and Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so
death passed over all men, because all had sinned.

3. Sin having overthrown the Covenant of life and glory, and brought men into
the state of death, all hope and expectation of life was (together with it)
taken away, and nothing but a fearful expectation of death and condemnation.
It is said of Adam when he had sinned, that he hid himself from God, when God
came into the Garden, as one that expected no good from Cod. We read of the
condition of the elect, before deliverance, that through fear of death they
were all their life subject to bondage. This is to be interpretend in reference
to their consciences, which tormented them with the representations of death;
but this will be granted, that Christ came to satisfy the conscience and
quiet, it, but not to satisfy God.

4. Though the election of God stand sure, and the sove of God could not be
broken off, yet the amity and friendship of God was brought to an end, and
wrath was manifested instead of love, and God instead of prosecuting his Decree
of life, prosecutes the breach of the Covenant of life, which was violated by
sin; and ratifies the threatening, which was this, thou sbalt surely die; and
does unfold the curse in it, and open it in some part of its latitude, which
was shut up under these general words, thou shall die, Genesis 3. 16. to 20. And
Ephesians. 2. 3. Elect person are called Children of wrath, as well as the
reprobate; they are in one state till deliverance come. And 1 These. 1. 10.
Jesus is said to deliver us from wrath to come. Now wrath is not a passion in
God, as I have showed, but it is Gods righteousness conflicting with, and
prosecuting sin, viz. the first sin, in the violation of the Covenant of of
life, and all after sins also; And such which sin, are accursed, Gal. 3. 10.
that being the sentence of the Law, is the sentence of God, whose the Law is,
so that God as a Judge prosecuting sin on the Laws behalf, is represented
unto us.

5. If God must be a righteous and just God, and faithful and true God, he
must be (even he himself) the prosecutor of the Elect, notwithstanding his
Decree of life and glory, in which he had comprehended them, wherein his
goodness freely wrought from all eternity toward them; because God had
threatened, and must not reverse it, least he suffer in his truth, least his
word be falsified, which was, that Adam transgressing his Commandment should
surely die; and the law says, That that soul that sins shall die; His truth
therefore binds him to it; God must be true and every man a liar, that
contradicts him in that which he speaks. And the Apostle Paul speaks of some
persons, That knew the judgment of God, that they that commit such things are
worthy of death; He had mentioned many sins which men committed, and brings in
the knowledge that they had of the demerit of such sins against them, that such
sins were worthy of death; and that it might not be thought that they judged
these sins worthy of death, through the working of their consciences only, the
Apostle shows that they had the knowledge of the judgment of God, and that
thence it was that they judged these sins worthy of death. Now the judgment of
God is according to righteousness; therefore Justice presses God on to a
prosecuting where ever sin is.

6. Though God, because he has chosen some to life, will not suffer them to
perish, but will bring them to life everlasting, and though he love them so
well, that to save them he will give Christ to them and for them, as from John
3. 16. is manifest he does; yet in the giving of Christ he will have such
respect to his justice and to his truth, that neither of them may be violated
or wronged. Hereto the Apostle gives witness, Romans 3. 25, 26. God has, says
he, set forth Christ to declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and
the justifier of them that believe in Jesus. God had regard to both these in
sending and setting forth Christ, that he might justify those that he had
chosen, and had brought to faith; and that he might be just in so doing,
because the sin that such had committed, or participated in, was worthy of
death by Gods own dome; therefore God minds both, that goodness and
righteousness might be exalted together in the same Christ. So in Gal. 3. 10.
13. God had an eye to his truth; when he gave Christ; it was written in the
Law, that he that continued not in all things contained there, was accursed;
and because no man did continue in all things written there, that God in the
Law might be true, Christ (whom Gods electing love gave to the elect) became
accursed for them. Christ therefore died not for any such end as to ratify the
doctrine which he had brought from the Father; for by his miracles he gave
sufficient witness thereto, nor is this made the end of Christ's dying any
where in Scripture; but it was to appease God, and to fulfill righteousness.

7. Gods laying the sins of the Elect upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6. was in order
to satisfaction to God; It was not only done to assure us that in mercy they
are taken away from us, that we might not fear, but might possess our souls
in quietness; but it was done to assure us that in justice and righteousness
they are taken away, and upon such terms, as that God is no loser, therefore
they were laid upon Christ when he was upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. to intimate
to us that it was to that end that they were laid upon him, that he might there
and then satisfy for them; in which regard it is said in Isa. 53. 5. that he
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; The meaning is, he had wounds and
bruises by chastisements, which belonged to us, because of our iniquities, by
reason of which God was wrath with us, that he by enduring and bearing them
might make peace for us.

8. It is asserted in Scripture that Christ suffered for us, died for us, Romans
5. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and in many other places, which must not be understood
finaliter, as if we only were the end of Christ's sufferings, and had only
some profit by them; but for us, is as much as in our stead; as when David said
of Absalom, would God I had died for thee, that is, in thy stead; so it is to
be understood in Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. Scarcely for a righteous man would one die,
that is, scarcely in stead of him, to deliver him from death; and so in
application to Christ for us, is as much as in his room, and place, and stead,
which further appears, because first the very evils which were due to us Christ
endured, as first the wrath of God in his soul, such which the very damned
have in hell, but more intolerable; it is said that his soul was heavy unto
death, and that on a cold winters day, he did through the mere anguish of his
soul, and while he was conflicting with Gods anger, sweat drops of water and
blood, notwithstanding all the support he had, which was his fathers immediate
stroke; for no hand was upon him at this time but Gods; and it was the torment
of the mind that had such an influence upon his body, for his body was put to
no pain. Now this wrath was upon him, because wrath was due to us, we were
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. 2. He endured the curse of the law; and was not
the curse of the law our portion for transgression? Col. 3. 10. 3. He suffered
death; and was not death the wages of our sin? The wages of sin is death,
says the Apostle, Romans 6. 23. Secondly, Christ endured the very evils that
were due to us, to deliver us from enduring them, as 1 These. 1. 10. He
delivers us from wrath to come; it was by his bearing wrath; and from the
curse he saves us, that is by becoming a curse, Gal. 3. 13. And by death it was
that he delivered us from the fear of death, to which we were in bondage, Heb.
2. 15. Now if he suffered in stead of us, then it was in a satisfactory way,
because our sufferings would have been to satisfy the law, and Gods justice
which is in the law; and the damned in hell do suffer for that reason, to pay
that debt to justice, which because they can never completely do, therefore
they do ever suffer.

9. Our salvation which through Christ we partake of, is through redemption,
Romans 3. 24. But redemption in a proper acception, has satisfaction in it; for
it may be thus described, Redemption is a freeing a captive from the hands of
him that detains him, by a price given unto him; as when a person is taken
captive by the Turks, there is a price given to him for the freeing of such a
person. So it is in the redemption effected by Christ, on the behalf of the
Elect; and there are these following particulars in it.

1. The captives that are detained in bondage and misery, these are those that
were appointed unto glory before the world was, but through sin are become
captives, Romans 8. 21, 22, 23. Col. 1. 13. Romans 7. 24, 25.

2. The person that detains them in this bondage, this is God; for it is the
wrath of God that holds them in it; they are the children of wrath, under the
power of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. and they are held under it till they be delivered
from it, 1 These. 1. 10. Romans 5. 9. Now wrath relates to God, as the subject in
whom it is; for it is God that was wronged, therefore he it is that was
offended, and is angry, and whose wrath burns like fire, till satisfaction be
given, and then it is turned away. It is also the justice and judgment of God
that detains them, Romans 1. 31. The conscience of the sinner is brought in by
the Apostle acknowledging the righteous judgment of God, and subscribing unto
this, that they that commit such things are worthy of death. It is also the Law
that detaines them; for the Law works wrath, Romans 4. 15. that is, the wrath
of God is revealed in the Law against all unrighteousness of men, and this
works disquietnesse in the mind; till the Law be satisfied, God is not
satisfied; for the Law is Gods Law, and his righteousness in it; and till both
the Law, and God the Author of it be satisfied, the prisoner the poor captive
must nec^ssarily be detained.

3. The enemies and evils under whom and which these Prisoners and Captives are
detained, These are Satan, death, the infernal pit, sin. Acts 26. 18. 1 Pet. 1.
18. Col. 1. 13. Heb. 2. 45. Luke 1. 74. and unto these was man delivered, viz.
unto the power of these after he had sinned in and by that sentence of God,
viz. in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, Genesis 2. 17. And
God has sovereign power over all these plagues and evils; for though some of
them be Gods grand enemies, as well as ours, yet they are Gods servants as well
as his enemies, and they do but hold men while Gods will is they should, Rev.
16. 9. and chap. 19. 10, 15, 14. And indeed there is no reason but that Gods
proceedings must be with men that have finned, as well as Angels that sinned,
till he have satisfaction, but he spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to hell, and delivered them to chains of darkness to be reserved to
judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Therefore it is he that delivers men to death, and to
him that has the power of death, that is the devil, and to hell also, and
those chains of darkness, there to be reserved, till either satisfaction come,
or the last doom be passed.

4. The person that redeems these captives from Gods just judgment, and from
his wrath, and from these enemies and evils, and this is Christ, Romans 5. 9. 1
These. 1. 10. Gal. 3. 13. and chap. 4. 4, 5. Luke 1. 69, 70, 71.

5. The price that is given by this Redeemer unto God for his satisfaction,
This is the life of Christ. John 10. 15. And the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. Now that this life of Christ was laid down, and this blood of Christ was
shed as a price to ransom the Elect, who were Captives, appears clearly from
Mat. 20. 28. and 1 Timothy 2. 6. where it is said, that Christ laid down his down
his life a ransom for many, ye^ for all the Elect; and the Apostle Peter make^
a comparison betwixt this price of Christ's blood, and a price that is wont to
be given for the ransom of Captives in gold and silver, and such corruptible
things; and he makes this price of Christ's blood far more precious then the
other, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. And that this price was, given to God, is manifest
also from the same place of Peter, where Christ's blood is compared to the blood
of an immaculate Lamb that has no blemish nor spot; now such Lambs were
trespasse-offerings brought to God, who was the person against whom the
trespass was committed; and it was for satisfaction in reference to sin
committed; and it pointed at Christ, who was indeed the Lamb of God that taken
away the sins of all Elect ones in the world, by that satisfaction or price
which he gave in his own blood. Also David in his speech to Saul* in 1 Samuel 26.
19. gives witness to this truth, that offerings were brought to God, and that
blood was the price of redemption for sin, given to God: If God have stirred
thee up against me being offended at me, (for that is the meaning of it, let
him accept an offering, that is, for satisfaction and pacification let him
accept it. But more directly and positively the Author to the Hebrews speaks to
this, Heb. 9. 14. How much more (says he) shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your
consciences, etc. If then the price of redemption was given to God, God is the
person that firstly and principally detains the Elect as Captives in bondage;
for he that receives the price is he that holds us in such evil condition, and
the redemption is from him, that is from that in him that holds us.

10. The reconciliation which Christ effected through his death and blood, was
of God to us, as well as of us to God, which appears from Romans 3, 25. where it
is said that God has set Christ forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood. The sense of the Greek word, (...), is Placamentum, that by which
God is appeased and pacified, who was angry before, and gives answers of peace
to his people, when he meets with them, as in Exodus 25. 17, 21, 22. God caused
a Mercy-seat to be made, it is rendered propitiatorium, and is the same word
with this of the Apostle, and he caused it to be put upon the Ark, and there he
met with the people, and communed with them in a peaceable way and manner; This
was this type of Christ, this appeased God sacramentally, typically,
figuratively; Christ properly, really, truly, by his blood, which speaks better
things in Gods ears, then the blood of Abel, that cried for vengeance; this
cries for pardon, for peace, for reconciliation; therefore the Apostle John
says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father who is a
Propitiation for our sins, who expiates our sins by his blood, and so appeaseth
God and pacifies him. And by Christ it is said that we receive the atonement
that is with God, or we have God attoned to us, Romans 5. 11. for all the
offerings of the Old Testament were for atonement, and the people offered them
to atone him; God did not offer them to atone them or reconcile them; nor did
they offer them to show that they were reconciled to God; for they were offered
immediately after they had sinned, and had the sense of their sin upon their
consciences, and knew they had angered God; that by offering them in a believing
way, looking at Christ the sinne-offering (which they signified) they might
appease him and pacify him, and so might have peace in their own hearts.

But there are many objections that are framed against this great and weighty
truth of Christ's making satisfaction for the offenses of men to God.

Object. 1. It is asserted that there is no such thing read of as satisfaction
unto God.

Sol. Though the word it self be not to be found in Scripture, yet the sense of
the word is found in many places; that which is equivalent, is found in Matthew.
20. 28. and 1 Timothy 2. 6. Christ is said to give his life (...), a ransom for
many, which words do signify the price of redemption, by way of satisfaction,
paid for transgression, and the guilt of it. And the righteousness of Christ
is called in Romans 5. 18. (...), which may signify just satisfaction, in this
place most properly, though in some other places it is taken in other senses;
for there is an opposition betwixt (...), the one is set against the other, the
righteousness or rather righteous satisfaction of Christ against the offense
of Adam, and the offense being but one, there is one satisfaction, or
satisfaction at once set against it; for the words ought to run, as by one
offense judgment came upon all men* so by one just satisfaction the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life.

Obj. 2.

It is asserted that there is no such thing that we read of in Scripture as the
reconciling of God to men, and that it is repugnant to Gods love in giving
Christ, that he should give him for that end to reconcile himself to men; for
he showed himself reconciled to them, in that he gave Christ to them.

Sol. We read of God offended, because of sin; of God threatening man having
sinned; of God expulsing man from the place where himself had a little before
placed him, in his tender love and care over him; and if his setting of
Cherubims, and a flaming sword turning every way, to guard the way to the tree
of life, which argued a great breach betwixt God and man, and that not only on
man's part, but on Gods part; for these were all of them passages of displeasure
and anger on Gods part; and we read of the whole posterity of man abiding under
wrath, having no other portion but wrath, having the marks of Gods wrath upon
them from the womb, Ephesians. 2. 3. and we read of Gods wrath taken away in Christ
by the shedding of his blood; and of the pacification of God toward men
through blood, and of his being attoned to men through Christ; and what is all
this but the reconciling of God to men?

And though love and anger would have been (...), inconsistent together in
God, toward the same subject person or object about which they would be
conversant, if sin had not come betwixt, yet because of sins intervening,
there is no more incongruity to say God loved such a creature, and yet is angry
with such a creature, then to say a father loves such a child, and yet is angry
with such a child, because he has offended him; especially when God is wise
enough, and knows how to declare his goodness and his righteousness together,
and to prosecute his decree of grace in bringing such persons to glory, and to
prosecute their sin with wrath, with a curse, and with death at the same time
without thwarting with himself; nor are love and anger opposite to one another,
considered in a diverse respect; a father loves his child as his child, yet is
angry with him as wanton, as froward, as disobedient; and God loves the elect
as elect, as such whom he freely chose and set his heart upon, and yet is angry
with them as breaking his Law, and doing things derogatory to his glory.

Obj. 3.

It is asserted that redemption is taken in Scripture many times in a
metaphorical sense, when only power is put forth to deliver persons from
enemies, and an evil state, and no price paid at all; so in the deliverance
from Egypt, there was power exercised against Pharaoh and his Realm, by which
Israel was fetched out from bondage, but no price paid to any, yet it is called
redemption in many places, and Moses a Redeemer, Acts 7. 35. And because this
deliverance from Egypt was a type of the spiritual deliverance which comes by
Christ, and Moses a type of Christ in this deliverance, therefore the
deliverance which is effected by Christ, is not redemption by any price paid to
God, but in a metaphorical sense, by power put forth against Satan, death,
hell, all enemies that detained the Elect.

Sol. Though redemption be taken metaphorically in some places of Scriptures,
yet it follows not it should be taken so in all places; and though external
deliverances are many times by power only, and without price, it will not
therefore follow that this great spiritual and eternal deliverance must be a
deliverance of the same kind; And though this temporal deliverance from Egypt
be a type of this spiritual by Christ from sin, and death, and hell: yet it
follows not that therefore there must be a similitude and parity in all things
betwixt them; and though Moses be a type of Christ, yet the type reaches not
the perfection of the thing typified; it is clear in the person of Moses
compared with the person of Christ: and it is as clear in the redemption that
Moses effected from God, which was from outward servitude and bondage, and that
redemption which was wrought by Christ, which was from hell and from the devil.
There are many dissimilitudes betwixt the one redemption and the other; and
this is one, that there is no price paid in the one but power used, but in the
other there was both. And to convince of this the better, consider, the one was
without blood, for there needed none; but the other must be with blood, for
there could be no remission without it, Heb. 9. 22. The one was without the
intervening of the Redeemer, in the place and room of the redeemed; Moses was
not to be in bondage, in the room and and place stead of those that were by him
to be redeemed from bondage; but in this spiritual deliverance it must be so;
the Redeemer must be in the condition that the redeemed were in; Christ must
come* in the room of sinners, and must bear their sins, and suffer their
plagues instead of them, as has been proved. And the reason of this difference
is, because Moses had not in the redemption of Israel, any thing to do with an
offended God, who had a controversy against the people whom Moses was to
redeem, and from whom he would have satisfaction before he would save them; for
then in such a case against the enemy that held them, power would not have been
sufficient for their deliverance, but a price would have been required; but
Christ in his redemption has to do with Gods wrath, and anger, and with Gods
righteousness, which were showed and revealed against the Elect; for the Elect
had sinned, whom he was to redeem; and God had threatened they should die the
death, and they had deserved it, and God must be just and true in what he had
said; therefore Christ must first prevail with God in the deliverance of this
people, before he could exercise any power agalnst the devil, or death, or
hell; and this prevailing must be by a price paid to satisfy for
transgression; for it could not be by power; God might be appeased, but
overcome he could not be, as those enemies must, whom he was to deliver the
Elect from. THis has all been showed already, and this is it that makes the
disparity betwixt the two deliverances which do typifie one the other.

Object. 4.

It is asserted in Scripture that redemption in Scripture is never said to be
from God, as it must needs be, were any price paid to God, or satisfaction
given to God; but redemption is said to be from Satan, Acts 26. 18. from death,
Heb, 2. 14, 15. from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. from our vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. from iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. yea it is so far from
being a redemption from God, that it is a redemption to God, Rev. 14. 4.

Sol. Redemption in Scripture, though it be nowhere said in so many words to be
from God, yet it is said to be from the wrath of God, from the judgment of
God, from the curse of God; the Laws curse is Gods curse, and so in a sense
redemption is from God, as an enemy and an Avenger; it is from God as a Judge,
whose office is to search out iniquity, and to pass sentence according to the
Law, and has his officers to attend upon him, to whom he delivers up the
sinner and offender; from God as such an one the redemption of Christ is, but
not from God in reference to relation, interest, communion, fellowship,
acquaintance, dependence, power, and dispose, etc. for in all these respects
redemption is to God, and not from him.

Though Redemption be from Sin, Satan, the world, death, hell, and all such
enemies and evils, yet it is to be understood, that it is from these only as
the less principal causes of the detention of Gods Elect in bondage; even as
when a person is delivered from the Jail, he is delivered from the Jailer, and
from the daungeon or pit into which he was cast, and from his bolts, and
chains, and from all the noisomenesse, and filthiness, and nastinesse, that
attends that condition; yet these are but the less principal causes of the
evils; he is firstly and principally delivered from his Creditor and the Judge,
that committed him to these; So it is in this case; God is the principal person
that detains, and the rest that are mentioned in Scripture are but his
servants. The devil is as the officer that receives persons that are sentenced
of God into his custody; sin is but as the fetters and cords in which such
persons are held, the world is but as the prison, and death is but as the
torments persons are put to; but properly we are Gods Captives, and are doomed
and sentenced of God to banishment from his presence, as Cain was, and are
delivered up to the power and dispose of the God of this world; For 1. God is
the Sovereign Lord, and supreme Monarch and Judge, and the power primarily
belongs to him to cast body and soul into hell. 2. Men are guilty of that
which they call crimen laesae majestatis, or treason against divine Majesty;
Against thee, thee only I have sinned, said David, therefore worthy to be
rejected.

3. Therefore they are by nature children of wrath, The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven; Upon those that believes not, the wrath of God abides; 4.
We ask to be losed and discharged from our sins, not from Satan, but from God,
and to be losed from the bonds and snares of hell and death; therefore
primarily we are held in bondage to God, and not to Satan or any other. Hereto
agrees the witness of Scripture, God has shut up all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all, Romans 11. 32. The Scripture, that is God in the
Scripture, has shut up all under sin, that the promise of faith through
Jesus Christ might be given unto them that believe, Gal. 3. 22. God gave some
up to vile affections, Romans 1. 26. and verse 28. because they liked not to
retain God in their thoughts, therefore God gave them up to a reprobate mind,
God gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven, Acts 7. 42. The Parable of the
King that was wrath with him that was unmerciful to his fellow servants, is
pertinent to the same purpose, he delivered him to the tormentors, Matthew. 18.
34. And that exhortation of Christ, To agree with our adversary while in the
way, lest the Judge deliver to the officer, etc. Which places do all show that
we through sin are primarily the Captives of God, as a King and Judge offended;
and that only secondarily we are Captives to the devil and other enemies as to
Gods Ministers and Servants, though enemies, to which we are committed; for
without commission and permission we are taught, that the greatest tyrants can
effect nothing against Gods Elect; and the very devils themselves, could not go
into the herd of swine without leave; therefore the price paid to God to
satisfy him is the principal thing in redemption.

It is also to be understood, that these two, To be redeemed from God, and to
be redeemed to God, will consist very well together; for the captivity of the
Elect, is not like the captivation of a person taken in war, and detained by
the enemy, from whom when he is redeemed, he is totally alienated and
separated, and has no more to do with him: nor is it like the captivation of a
person, who is violently and unjustly detained in the hand of a cruel one, who
tyrannizeth over him after the manner of Pharaoh, who laid unjustly heavy
burdens upon the children of Israel, from whom (if he be once freed) he is
totally withdrawn from such an one, and divided, never to come into his hands
or power any more. But the captivity of the Elect is as when a subject for some
offense against his Prince, is delivered into the Sergeants hand, or into some
other officers custody and power, to be imprisoned, or scourged, or punished
with death, according to the nature of the offense, unless satisfaction be
given, and he be released upon that account; such a redemption as this is, viz.
of a subject from the wrath of his Prince, is not the alienation of the subject
from his Prince, but the reconciliation of him to his Prince; and the person
that is redeemed from, is redeemed to man; for these do consist well enough
together, from the wrath and justice of the Prince, to the love and favor of
the Prince he is redeemed. And though God offended, does deliver the Elect to
enemies, and not to subjects; for the devil is an enemy both to God and to the
Elect, and not a subject, yet this makes no difference but that the Elects
captivation may fitly be resembled captivation of a subject to his own Prince,
because God is the Lord of devils, and they as truly subject, (though not as
willingly subject) as any other that are under Gods power.

Object. 5.

It is further asserted, that it is God that gave Christ to redeem men, and if
there be any satisfaction given to God by Christ, God himself is the author of
it, and gave it to himself; if he gave it to himself, he was satisfied before,
and the price moves him nothing, to release the captive, because it is not from
the captive, but from himself, and of his own providing; and nothing is added
to God by it, for it is but Gods satisfying of himself. And what a kind of
satisfaction is this? In the truth of the thing it is as no satisfaction; for
if the satisfaction must come out of himself, he is satisfied in himself,
without any satisfaction from the captive.

Sol. God must be looked upon as one that dearly loves the captivated elect
persons, who had sinned against him, and would not have them perish; and
withal he must be looked upon as one that dearly loved justice and truth, and
cannot suffer either of them to be violated; for they are himself, as dear to
him as himself; therefore he provides that Justice and Truth, and the life and
welfare of such poor captives, may consist together; and because he sees it
impossible by any thing that the electcan do, who had offended, because they
are without strength, and can make no satisfaction for any trespass, therefore
he himself in his wisdom and love to the Elect, and in his love to Justice and
Truth, finds out a way to save them from ruin, and to satisfy these. And
that is by Christ, whom he sends; and this is all his design, and he looks
for no further gain, nor advantage to himself, but that his goodness and
righteousness and truth might be glorified together, in the salvation of the
Elect, that had sinned; for what stands God in need of, and what can be given
to him for satisfaction, which may be added to his store? If his justice and
truth in reference to his law be maintained, and kept on foot, with his love to
those whom he has chosen, this is more to him then all the earth and the
fullness of it; and other satisfaction he looks for none. The declaration of
his justice and truth is satisfaction enough, and a motive strong enough to let
the captive go free, and this he obtained by the intervention of the death and
blood of his Son. What advantage had Zaleucus, who made a law that adulterers
should lose both their eyes, and he to satisfy this law, that he might be
accounted just and impartial therein, when his son (whom he loved had offended
by adultery) caused one of his sons eyes, and another of his own, to be put
out, save only the praise of his justice and truth in his laws? and this is
that which God grieves at. And if the Judge, loving the prisoner that is before
him, and knowing he has nothing to pay, and yet the law recovers payment, will
give his own son to be his surety, and will lay the debt upon him, and is
content that his son shall fetch the price out of his own treasure, yet the law
is satisfied, and the judges righteousness in reference unto it, and his love
to the Prisoner are glorified.

Nor is the satisfaction the less, because God the offended person procures
it, and not man that offended him; for the truth of God stands firm by that
means, and the law takes place, and is not made of none effect, as it would
have been, had no satisfaction been given, which would have redounded to Gods
dishonor; Yea, the righteousness of God and his love to undeserving creatures
shines forth, because the satisfaction is of Gods own procuring.

And though it proceed from God, yet it cannot be said that God satisfies
himself, or that he was satisfied before; for he that provides it, does not act
it, but it is acted in and by an other person. The Father sends the Son, and
the Father in the Son receives satisfaction; and though the Father and Son be
the same God, yet they are not the same person, nor is the satisfaction that
the Son gives (materially considered) given in the divine nature, or Godhead,
but the Son took flesh, and in that flesh by dying and sheding his blood,
gave satisfaction; so that it is from God, but not in God, if we speak of the
next and immediate subject, which is the manhood, if the matter of the
satisfaction be respected.

And though it may be said that God was satisfied before in reference to his
own love to such persons, he did not repent of it in such sort as to cast them
off, nor was his purpose of glorifying them one whit shaken, yet he was not
satisfied after they had sinned, and after he had sentenced them to death, in
point of righteousness and truth, to pass by their transgression without
satisfaction; his Law was not satisfied in a free forgiveness without
satisfaction, and so God was unsatisfied, because the Law was.

Object. 6.

It is likewise asserted, that there is an unsatisfied conscience in men; men
having sinned, cannot discern how Gods heart can be toward them without
satisfaction; therefore the Scripture speaks of propitiation through Christ's
blood, and of atonement by his death, condescending therein to man's infirmity,
which could not otherwise apprehend how God could communicate life and glory to
men after they had sinned, without being first appeased and pacified by Christ's
blood: But if things be rightly considered in themselves, as in truth they are,
Christ dyed not to reconcile us to God, but to heal us of an evil conscience,
and that we might know that God loved us after we had sinned, as well as he did
before, by the gift of Christ, who is the manifestation of the Fathers love
after the fall which the Elect could not be persuaded of, but by a pledge of
it; Therefore it is said that Christ shed his blood to purge our conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. and not to satisfy God.

Sol. It will readily be confessed, that it was an end of Christ's dying, to
reconcile men to God, and that they might have the answer of a good conscience
before God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. But that this was the solitary end, or the principal
end, or that satisfaction to God is no end, but is wholly excluded, is denied,
and has been disproved all along in the discourse upon this subject.

1. What need would there have been that Christ should have dyed at all, if
only satisfaction to men's consciences concerning Gods goodness and love to
fallen creatures had been intended therein. For God could best have done that
by his spirit, and must yet do it by his spirit, if it be ever done in the
hearts of men. Indeed God having given Christ, and delivered him up to death,
the spirit represents it as a great manifestation of the Fathers love, but the
spirit might have abundantly assured the heart of a sinner of the Fathers love
without it, so that there was no necessity of Christ's dying in that regard.

2. The love of God represented unto men in giving Christ, is much lessened to
them in the representation, if Christ were only given to satisfy their hearts
in reference to their fears of God, and not to satisfy Gods justice; if there
were no need of Christ, in reference to any danger they were in, in regard of
God, if God could or would have pardoned sin without him, and his justice and
truth could have remitted it.

3. It is derogatorie to Gods wisdom and love to assert that Christ was
delivered up to be crucified upon the cross, and there to shed his blood
principally for this end, to cure man's panique fears and his groundless,
causeles suspicions of God, and not from any necessity that there was in man's
evil condition, in regard of sin committed by him, and of Gods righteousness
and truth prosecuting it against him. For God might have done this in an easier
way, and have spared his dear Son. God is represented prodigal of his dear
Sons blood, if he must die and bleed out his spirits, to cure some false
conceits that men have entertained of God.

4. What need was there that the Son should come in flesh, and should empty
himself of his glory, and that he that is the Lord of glory should be
crucified, if no satisfaction to divine justice was looked at, but only the
satisfaction of the conscience? the blood of God (as it is called) would not
have been necessary, but the blood of a mere creature Christ, would have served
the turn for such a purpose, had that been all.

5. How came those fears in the heart of man after the fall, after sin
committed? What bred them? was there no ground for them? were they mere
conceits and jealousies that wanted a right bottom? did not the threatening
before sin was committed, cause the horrors and terrors that were in the
soul after sin was committed? and if they had Gods threatening as the ground
of them, viz. in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, were
they not well grounded? and was it possible that these fears should be cured by
the blood of Christ, and the cause not removed by the blood of Christ, the
threatening not taken away, the truth of God and his righteousness not fulfilled
and satisfied, which were in the threatening and which bred the fears?

6. These fears and terrors of the Elect, before Christ's blood be brought to
their hearts to remove them, are they not of the same nature with the horrors
of the reprobate in hell? And if so, are not both the one and the other that
wrath of God which God poures into the soul because of sin which he
prosecutes against men? are they not punishments for sin from God? is not Gods
righteousness therein revealed against sin, and the truth of God in the
threatening fulfilled, which did reach to both Elect and Reprobate? And if so,
how can God remove them from the Elect through Christ, without satisfaction
given by Christ, and yet suffer them to lie upon the Reprobate, without
palpable unrighteousness and untruth, when the threatening, viz. Thou shall dye
the death, extended to all mankind in Adams loins without exception?

7. How may Scripture come to be eluded, and the strength and force of it
infringed in all other cases, if plain pregnant places of it may be evaded
after this manner, as when it is said, God has set forth Christ to be a
propitiation, that is, to be one that appeaseth God, Romans 3. 25. and by Christ
we have received the atonement; Romans 5. 11. that is, we have received God
attoned to us; for all the offerings in the Law were to atone God to men that
had sinned, if such an answer may be taken and may pass: God does in these
expressions condescend to man's infirmity, who thinks God to be angry, and had
need to be appeased and reconciled; how easy would it be to wrest and pervert
all Scripture? By this that has been represented, it appears that some
satisfaction to God is necessary to be given by Christ, and the contrary
doctrine is dangerous and desperate, and overthrows our justification; for if
God be not satisfied for our sins, they are not pardoned, and we are yet in our
sins; and this doctrine that thus oppugnes Christ's satisfaction, does deny
Christ to have bought us; for if he paid not any price to God for us, I am
sure he paid none to the devil, nor to any other enemy; for he conquered them
by force and power and might, and paid not any price to them; therefore it
utterly overthrows Christ's purchase of the Elect; and yet (which is much to be
lamented) this doctrine spreads very much and corrupts very many.

Q. 2. The second thing that I promised to speak to, is this, that seeing some
satisfaction must be given to God, in reference to a trespass committed, and
an offense taken, and a threatening given out upon supposition, and afterward
inflicted upon the perpetration of such an evil, what satisfaction it is that
is necessary: whether any satisfaction will serve, or whether it must be a
proportionable satisfaction.

Sol. 1. It cannot be denied but that God is the sovereign Lord over all, and
has none above him to appoint him, or to enjoyne him, to give rules and laws
to him, how he ought to walk toward the creature; none can limit or restrain
him, or set bounds unto him; but his will (which is always holy and just and
good) is the rule that he acts by; and he does whatsoever pleases him, Ps.
115. 3. and further then he sets bounds to himself, he cannot be bound up to
any thing, or by any one; and further then he restrains and limits himself, he
cannot be restrained and limited by any other. Therefore he might at the first
(if it had pleased him) have pardoned sin without satisfaction; or he might
have accounted that for satisfaction, which himself would accept for
satisfaction, be it more or less; and so the blood of bulls and goats might
have satisfied as well as the blood of a man, and the blood of a mere man (such
as my Antagonist would have Christ to be) as well as the blood of Christ who is
God and man; but this comes not home to the point; for we are to consider what
satisfaction is now necessary, and not what might at first have been accepted
of.

2. Satisfaction that will now be admitted of and accepted, is satisfaction
according to the Law, that holds proportion to it; for the Law is Gods Law,
which flowed from Gods righteousness and holiness, and in which, and to
which, God has limited himself, and bound up himself, so that God must deny
his own Law, and his own Truth, righteousness and holiness that is in it, if
he do in the least kind wave that satisfaction that it requires. Now the law to
Adam (which compriseth all his posterity) was, Thou shall not eat, etc. for if
thou do eat, thou shall surely dye; and that soul that sins, shall dye; and
cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Law, to do
the same. Therefore the satisfaction could not have been less then death, or
less then the curse of the Law, what ever that evil is that is understood by
death, or by the curse.

3. What ever that evil is that reprobated, persons do or shall endure, upon
whom the curse of the law is laid, and the death threatened, lights because
they were in Adams loins, when he fell under the threatening of death, and
because they continued not in all things written in the Law, and so incurred
the curse; I say what ever the anguish, torture and torment is, either in mind
or body, which such persons pass, or must pass, abide, or mustabide under at
present, or hereafter, the like punishment in all degrees, without any
abatement, have the Elect merited and deserved, being in the same state and
condition with the Reprobate, being equally in the loins of Adam with him, and
not abiding any more then he did in all things written in the Law; and if there
be deliverance for the Elect, and the Law in the death and curse of it be not
laid, nor does light upon them, but satisfaction is made in Christ for them,
then it must be a proportionable satisfaction that must be given to God, in
reference to which God does remit such pains of hell, such everlasting
destruction and perdition, and does release the Elect from them; that is,
Christ must suffer the whole, and the full, of that which either any, or all
the Elect have deserved and from which they are acquitted and discharged in
Christ; Christ must satisfy as far as the guilt of all and every of the Elect
extends to, which is as great as the light of the Reprobate, and so Christ's
sufferings in one kind or other, must be equivalent to the eternal damnation of
all the Elect, from which they are discharged by his sufferings, equivalent
unto those exquisite torments which the damned in hell do, or shall suffer,
which the Elect had merited as well as they.

The consequence of this, is, that Christ's sufferings were not the sufferings
of a mere man; for had Christ been but a mere man, his sufferings for all the
Elect could not have been proportionable to their guilt and demerit. For the
righteous God (which without respect of persons, had laid all men under the
same curse and wrath, because of the same sin and guilt, which without
difference, all were under) could not save by Christ without transmitting that
curse and wrath which was due to all and every of the Elect to Christ and if
Christ had been but a mere man, then there would have been need of so many
Christ's to have suffered and endured as there are Elect persons; and every one
of these Christ's must have suffered hell, viz. the torments of hell as well as
death, and then they must have suffered ever also, without any end, and yet
could not have justified the Elect, because while they should be suffering till
that be ended, God could not be satisfied; and if God could not be satisfied,
the Elect could not be justified and discharged, and so to all eternity the
Elect could not be acquitted; and this appears in Christ, if he had suffered
and had never got through his suffering we had never been saved; if he had
dyed, and had never risen, we had never risen to life and glory.

And this is that which I presented, in that Argument or Instance (as he calls
it) of mine, viz. that the satisfaction which Christ gave to Gods justice is
destroyed, if Christ be but a mere man and not God; for how could the blood of
aman satisfy for the sins of many transgressors, whereas there is no
proportion betwixt one mere man dying for sin, and many men sinning and
deserving death, each of them for the sins they have committed?

The righteousness is in Scripture called (...), Romans 5 18. which signifies a
just satisfaction, or satisfaction according to the exactness of justice; and
Gods scope is thereby to declare himself just, that is to magnify his justice
thereby, Romans 3. 26.

By all this that has been presented, it appears how slight and weak he is
in his answer to an Argument of the highest weight, and moment. For what thing
is there of greater consequence for the satisfying of the conscience, then to
know that the satisfaction is full and sufficient, which Christ has given?
which was showed by the Argument that I brought, to be disproportionable upon
his Tenent of Christ's mere creatureship, to which he returns no other answer
but this: As the sin of one mere man was imputed unto, and brought death upon
all men: even so the gift of grace by one man Jesus Christ (whom he makes but a
mere man) abounded unto many unto justification and life; In the next place he
comes to discuss and give answer to my 2d Querie.

How it may be conceivable that an infinite justice offended should be
satisfied by a sacrifice finite in value?

And thus he expresses himself.

What matters it if it be unconceivable? must it therefore be uncredible?
doubtless, in all controversall doctrines you will not hold this for an
orthodox all Tenent: In the doctrine of the Trinity, credit must be given to
things unconceiveable; but the like liberty will not be allowed in Christ's
Mediatorship.

Reply. 1. If no more words had been added by me to these expressions, It is
unconceivable, yet if there be a truth therein, that it is unconceivable, these
bare expressions (without any addition) might have passed with him for an
unanswerable Argument, because he professes himself to be a man so given up to
reason, that he will prostrate himself (to use his own expressions) to the
shadow of it, and his faith will not carry him beyond reason, how shallow
soever his apprehension is; he will not believe further then he can see, which
has caused him to be so unsettled and unstable in the doctrine of the Trinity,
and to question it so long, till at last he has rejected it. 2. That which is
unconceivable, and wants the authority of Scripture so to countenance it, is
not receivable. So did not the doctrine of the Trinity; for though it be an
incomprehensible mystery, yet it is not an unscriptural doctrine, but it is
compassed about with a cloud of witnesses, both of the old and new Testament,
which do declare it with the greatest clearnes; but that such a thing should be
in Christ's Mediatorship, that that which is finite in nature and value, should
yet satisfy for that which is infinite in provocation and offense, has
neither the light of reason, nor the truth of Scripture to draw out consent
unto it, and therefore is worthy to be expunged out of the Saints beliefs. 3.
That which is unconceivable and against the tenor of the Scripture (which words
I added, but he would take no notice thereof) deserves no credit with Christians,
but must be razed from among the articles of their faith; but that a sacrifice
that is finite in value, should satisfy an infinite Justice offended, is both
incomprehensible by reason, and contradictory to Scripture, as appears from
Heb. 9. 9. Gifts and Sacrifices while the first Tabernacle was standing were
offered, which could not make him that did the service perfect: it could not
purge away his sin nor justify him; what was the reason of it? could not God
have taken these gifts and sacrifices for satisfaction? no, he could not; the
Apostle faith it could not be; there was no proportion; an offense against God
must be purged away with better sacrifices then these; T^^ Apostle that was of
Gods counsel, and knew the truth, tells us so, Heb. 9. 23. It was necessary that
the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these, but the
heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices then these: why necessary?
because the justice of God could not be satisfied by these, nor the truth of
God fulfilled; therefore it was necessary there should be better then these:
but if these better be not proportionable to the offense, to purge the guilt
away, in a satisfactory way to justice, wherein is the betternes betwixt them?
there is no difference: in this respect they are alike, without pre-eminence
one to the other. He repeats it again, Heb. 10. 1. as that which is of weighty
consideration, and which he would have the Christian Hebrews to be thoroughly
instructed in. The Law (says he) having a shadow of good things to come, can
never with those sacrifices which they offered, make the comers thereto
perfect; and v. 4. It is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats should
take away sin; It was possible at first; but after God had said, In the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death, it was not possible; after
the law had cursed every one that continues not in all things written therein,
it was not possible; and the Apostle fetches his confirmation from Christ's own
words in Ps. 40. which he mentions and applies to this purpose, v. 5.
Wherefore, he says, when he comes into the world, sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared; in burnt offering and sacrifice
thou delightest not; then said I, lo I come to do thy will O God. Why would
not God have sacrifice, but prepared a body for his Son? the reason is, because
this flesh of Christ is called a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle, by which
being sacrificed and offered up to God, he entered heaven, and opened it for
believers. It is called a greater Tabernacle, because it was not of this
building, not framed of the seed of male and female* as other bodies are, but
of another building, as the Apostle observes, Heb. 9. 11. conceived in the
womb of a Virgin, by the over shadowing of the Holy Ghost; and it was greater
also, because, not the glory of the Lord filled it only, as it did the
Tabernacle made in the wilderness, but because the fulness of the Godhead dwelt
in him bodily, and by this greater Tabernacle he obtained eternal redemption
for us, and entered into heaven to take possession of glory for us. Why did not
God delight in burnt-offering, but Christ must come? the reason is rendered, it
was to do the Will of God. The Will of God was to have his truth satisfied, his
law satisfied, his righteousness satisfied, that upon just, and holy, and
honorable terms he might be reconciled; this was the Will of God. This Will
burnt-offerings and sin offerings could not accomplish; Christ must therefore
come to satisfy it and to fulfill it. Therefore it is said Not by the blood of
Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered once into the holy place, Heb.
9. 12. and in ver. 13, 14. it is said, If the blood of Bulls and Goats do
cleanse the flesh (being types of the blood of Christ) how much rather shall the
blood of Christ cleanse the conscience? If all had depended upon institution,
and that there had been no respect had by God of a full satisfaction: the blood
of bulls and goats, might have been as effectual to have cleansed, not the
outside, but the conscience, equally as the blood of Christ, if the virtue of
clensing had not depended upon the excellency of the person, whose blood it was
that did cleanse: there would have been no difference betwixt the bloods that
did cleanse: therefore the value of the blood in reference to the person whose
it was, falls under the consideration of God in the business of remission. But he
says, The foundation that I build upon, is not a little questionable, and that
not a few errors do lie under my non scriptural language.

You tell us (says he) of an infinite sacrifice; but what you mean by it, and
where Scripture tells us so much, I am yet for to learn; The Scripture tells us
that Christ was made sin (or a sin offering) for us by taking our sins and
bearing the curse; but how this sacrifice was infinite, remains to me
unconceivable. If the suffering of Christ had been infinite, there had been no
end of it; if the curse had been infinite, man could not have born it, being
incapable of any thing infinite in the infinity of it. It is enough for me to
believe that my Lord Jesus suffered for me, what I deserved to suffer, and that
was the curse of the Law, be that what it will.

Rep. The foundation which I build upon, will admit of his utmost questioning,
without being shaken thereby. As for the errors that may lie under my words, he
might have done well to have presented them unto view, yea I believe he has
done it, so far as his fancy has suggested any to him; which whether they will
prove to be errors, when I shall have represented what I am able to say, will
be judged of by the Reader; and whether my language be unscriptural in the
sense of it, or his answer be not impertinent, and no answer to any thing
wherein the strength of my Argument lies, or whether it be not rather a
shuffling and a shifting, then an answering, let any intelligent impartial
person judge.

He has been wont to draw up my Arguments into form when he has apprehended
an advantage by it; but at other times pretermits it; I shall therefore do it
for him at this time; he calls it a Querie, and it runs in that form, but the
strength of this Argument is in it.

If Christ be a mere creature, then a sacrifice finite in value, will be able to
satisfy an infinite justice offended; but a sacrifice finite in value, cannot
satisfy an infinite justice offended; ergo Christ is not a mere creature.

He answers not to either of these propositions, nor indeed can do, without
running into absurdities; for first the consequence is firm and good, which
will be manifest if these five things be made out. 1. That the sacrifice of a
mere creature neither is nor can be any other then finite in value, which none
will doubt of, if they consider that a mere creature is only finite, and can be
nothing more; and if so, then the actings of it are according to the nature of
it finite also, both in their nature, and in their value and worth; for nothing
can act beyond it self; and this I believe he will not deny. 2. That the
justice of god is infinite, which because it is an attribute of God, and is God
(for what ever is in God is God) must needs be granted, because God himself is
infinite; and indeed God cannot be compounded of things that are finite; for an
infinite being is never made up of finite things, so that all in God is
infinite. And that which is finite, is limited; and that which is limited, is
limited by another which is greater then it, and can limit it; but both these
are incompetent to God, who is greater then all, and limits all, but is limited
of none. 3. That this infinite justice was offended, which is manifest, because
1. a just and holy law was broken; 2. a righteous and just penalty proposed to
warn man lest he should transgress, was slighted and despised; 3. man was
immediately upon the transgression judged and sentenced with death, and
expulsed Paradise; 4 because this law was Gods which was transgressed, and the
penalty that was threatened and was despised, was Gods also, therefore the
offense in transgressing and despising was infinite, though not in the nature
of it, yet in relation to such a God who is infinite; which will farther
appear, if this be granted, which in reason cannot be denied, that faults
committed receive their aggravation as from the matter and manner of
committing, and from the end and design, so from the object or person against
whom committed; the greater and more excellent the person is, against whom the
transgression is, the greater is the transgression; therefore if against a
Prince, it is an high aggravation, and it counted treason, and a more grievous
death is inflicted; and if it be an high crime against him, it is endeavored
that his death may be perpetuated; therefore his torments are prolonged, and
this is judged righteousness in the persons that inflict such punishment in
reference to such transgression; and yet the highest of men are persons that
must die, and their breath is in their nostrils; and they are not only finite,
but their life is like bubbles upon the water, and in comparison of God they
are but as Worms and Grasshoppers. What then if the fault be against God, who
is the Prince of all Princes, and before whom the highest is but as the dust of
the balance, who is infinite in his nature and in all his attributes; the
guilt of such a fault will be according to the person, infinite, as the person
is; and hence it is that it cannot be expiated by persons that commit a fault
against God, no not by sufferings; therefore the wicked and ungodly suffer for
ever, because they can never suffer enough, in any time; to give satisfaction
to God for their transgression, therefore they must always suffer, and there
must be infinity in their suffering, so far as they are capable of infinity; we
say that that which has no end, is infinite; but the sufferings of the
Reprobate have no end; This comes from the Justice of the infinite God, which
in punishing the creature that sins against him, considers the infinite
distance that is betwixt him and it, and makes the punishment proportionable,
which made Eli say to his sons, If a man sin against a man, the Judge shall
judge him, but if man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? the
distance is such that there is no mediator that the creature can find out for
him, but he is punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord. 4. That sacrifice is something that was ordained of God to satisfy the
justice of God, which must needs be confessed, if it can be proved that God was
attoned, appeased, pacified by sacrifice, and that transgressions against God,
which carry infinite guilt in them are remitted by them; but this is manifest
from many places of Scripture, Lev. 1. 4. and chap. 4. 26, 31, 34. and diverse
others. 5. The sacrifice that Christ offered to God, when he offered himself to
God, was sufficient to satisfy Gods justice, though infinitely wronged, and
offended by the Elects transgressions, Rom 8. 33, 34. Who can lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies; but how can that be when
so just and so holy a law has been transgressed, and the justice of God
calling upon God for satisfaction? The Apostle answers it in the next words,
Who can condemn? it is Christ that died, or rather that is risen again. This
imports that Christ by dying has given such satisfaction that nothing can
condemn; the Law that was transgressed cannot, Gods justice cannot, Heb. 9.
26. Christ has once in the end of the world appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, and ver. 12. Christ by his own blood entered once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

The minor Proposition or the Assumption is undeniable, and needs no proof,
which is this; A sacrifice finite in value, cannot satisfy an infinite justice
offended; for there must be some proportion betwixt the offense by which
infinite justice is engaged against persons that commit it, and the
satisfaction that is tendered and given to justice so engaged, in reference to
transgression; but what proportion betwixt a finite sacrifice of a finite value
and virtue, and infinite justice moved, stirred, offended, and engaged against
men?

Now unto this Argument there is no answer returned, but some little arguing
there is against an infinite sacrifice, which is rather a denying of the
conclusion, then an answering to any premise of the Argument. Notwithstanding
it is necessary that I consider what he objecteth against the thing which I
drive at, though he comes not near the Argument, which I propounded to arrive
at it.

Repl. How does that appear in my expressions, when I only ask a question how
a Sacrifice finite in value, can satisfy an infinite Justice offended? And in
steed of answering it, there is deep silence, he passes it over as if he had
not observed it.

Yet he says, The Scripture tells us that Christ was made sin, or a
sin-offering for us, by taking our sins, and bearing the Curse: but how this
Sacrifice was infinite, to me is unconceivable.

Repl. And does not the Scripture tell us, that the person that was made this
sin-offering was God? therefore his blood is called the blood of God, Acts 20.
28. was the Lord of glory; therefore it is said, had they known him, they would
never have crucified the Lord of glory: now this is the Title of the most high
God, Psalm. 24. 7. Psalm. 29. 3. Was the great Shepherd of the sheep; yea the
chief Shepherd; which is equivalent to the most high God: for the most high is
familiarly in Scripture called a Shepherd. Psalm. 23. 1, and Psalm. 80. 1. And if
so, then he is chief Shepherd; and if chief Shepherd, then Christ is he,
because there are not two chief Shepherds, but one chief Shepherd; and so the
Father and Christ are one and the same chief Shepherd. Heb. 13. 20. 1 Pet. 5.
4. The great or chief Shepherd is said to be brought again from the dead by the
Father: so that the person that was this sin-offering, was as great, as high,
as excellent, as can be imagined; as high as the highest, infinitely high and
great, as these Scriptures do declare; for such a person according to the flesh
that he assumed, was crucified, did shed his blood, was raised again by the
Father, in some places of Scripture, by himself in other; for the Father and he
work the same works; the Father raises the dead, yea the dead body of Christ;
and the Son raises the dead, and his own dead body also; as has been showed
before.

Yea further, Does not the Scripture tell us, that Christ through the eternal
Spirit offered up himself without spot to God, and that his blood in this
regard is made more effectual for the purging away of sin, than the blood of
Bulls and Goats? Heb. 9. 14. How much more (says the Apostle) shall the blood
of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself to God, purge your
Consciences from dead works to serve the living God? In this Scripture here is
both the Sacrifice and the Priest that offered it. Christ according to his
Humanity is the sacrifice; it was himself according to the Flesh that was
offered up: and Christ according to his Divinity or Deity was the Priest that
offered up him according to the Flesh. It is said that Christ did it through
the Eternal Spirit; What is this Eternal Spirit? It was not the soul of Christ;
for first, The soul of Christ is not properly eternal, no more then he will
grant the sufferings of the creature in hell to be infinite; and yet they never
shall have end: that is properly eternal which neither has beginning nor
ending, and so cannot be measured: and therefore nothing can be said to be
past, and nothing future and to come, in that which is eternal; and eternity is
one of the Attributes of the most high God, and incommunicable to the creature;
though sometimes that which has no end is said (but very improperly) to be
eternal.

2. The soul of Christ may be said to be a part of the sacrifice that Christ
offered up to God by or through the eternal Spirit; for though he suffered in
the flesh, and shed his blood according to the flesh, yet he suffered in the
soul, bore the wrath of God in the soul, and the curse of sin lay upon the soul
as well as upon the body; therefore the soul as well as the body was in a sense
offered up to God; and therefore both of them are distinct from the eternal
spirit that is here spoken of, by which it is said he offered up himself; that
which was offered, and that by which it was offered, are different things from
one another. 3. When Christ speaks of his soul, he calls it Spirit, without
adding the Epithet of Eternal to it. Luke 2^. 46. 4. The souls of men may be
as properly and truly called eternal Spirits, as the soul of Christ be called
an eternal Spirit, being of the same nature both the one and the other: But
where is such an Adjective added to them in Scripture, as Eternal?

Nor can the Spirit of God be meant by this eternal spirit; for Christ in
reference to the eternal spirit, is made the Priest and the Efficient that
offered up to God that which was offered up, viz. the whole Humane Nature of
Christ consisting of soul and body; though Scripture speak most of the body in
which he dyed and shed his blood. For this Pronoun who, points at something in
Christ besides soul and body which was offered to God; which did slay the
sacrifice, and offer it up: and this can be nothing but the eternal spirit in
Christ, the Deity of Christ, by which spirit he went and preached to the
spirits in prison in the days of Noah, before he had either soul or body; and
by which spirit he searches the heart, which the soul of Christ cannot do: and
the spirit of God it was not, because Christ is spoken of in those places, and
not the holy Ghost. Nor can it be said that he offered up himself by another
spirit that was not his, but by his own spirit; as it is said, that he entered
into heaven not by other blood which was not his, but by his own blood, Heb. 9.
12. Besides, this offering up of himself through the eternal spirit, is that
that is mentioned to put the value upon the offering up of himself to God,
above all the legal Sacrifices; for otherwise, the blood of a man is no more to
God than the blood of a beast: but the person in reference to this eternal
spirit, is more excellent and glorious than all other creatures either men or
beasts; in which regard his flesh is called a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, because this eternal spirit dwelt in it, and filled it with glory.
By the blood of this person he entered in the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us.

And this is the formal reason and cause whence it came to pass that the
sufferings of Christ, which both in soul and body were finite and received an
end, for he suffered once, and does not always suffer; yet are able to expiate
sins which carry infinite guilt in them, being against an infinite God; and are
able to free millions of persons from sufferings; which are as it were eternal
and infinite, because they would not have any end, if Christ by suffering had
not discharged from them; for otherwise it would be utterly impossible that by
one sacrifice or offering he should for ever perfect them that are sanctified,
but it would have been as when the high Priest offered up daily the same
sacrifices, because sin could not be taken away by one sacrifice: but it is
this eternal spirit that does put the worth, and value, and merit into this one
sacrifice: therefore it is said that every Priest stands daily ministering and
offering up the same sacrifices, which can never take away sin; But this man
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right
hand of God, expecting from henceforth till his enemies be made his footstool:
Heb. 10. 11, 12, 13. As one that has done a work that has great merit,
desert, and worth in it expects a reward, looks that things should be so and so
done to him; so Christ after he had offered one sacrifice, sat down, expecting
the enemies to be subdued at his feet: which had the offering been of himself a
mere man, he could not have done; for what is man that he should deserve any
thing of God?

Now because the word merit does relish ill in reference to Christ himself with
many, and because all such who are against satisfaction by Christ, or at least
against full satisfaction, are much more against merit, because there is no
such word found in Scripture, therefore I shall clear up the Doctrine of
Christ's merit from the Scripture.

1. Scripture testifies that Christ has made a purchase; Acts 20. 28. Feed the
flock of God which he has purchased with his own blood: this is spoken of
Christ, who is called God; and he is said to purchase the Church with his
blood. The Church is called a purchased possession. Ephesians. 1. 14. The Jews were
called a people peculiar by purchase; so in the Original: 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Salvation is said to be obtained by purchase through our Lord Jesus Christ: 1
These. 5. 9. so it is in the Greek. Now this purchase is not an acquisition of
grace, as some may conceive, who may give this sense of it: Christ has gained
the Church, and gained or obtained salvation; but through grace he obtained and
gained; which in an analogical sense may be called a purchase: but this
purchase is an acquisition of work, as the Greek word signifies that is used by
the holy Ghost, which is (...) and (...), which signifies to acquire, and get
by work; which is used in 1 Timothy 3. 13. They that have used the Office of a
Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree. Now he that purchases any
thing, deserves the thing that he purchases; but Christ has purchased the
Church, has purchased salvation, has performed a work that deserves the
having of the Church, and the having of salvation for the Church; so that if
words might not be formally stood upon too much, it is manifest that we have
the thing in equivalent expressions.

2. Merit and Desert properly have respect to some work which is not due,
neither could be required from such a person; in which sense Christ may be said
to merit, when yet the persons on whose behalf Christ has done such a work,
could not have been said to have merited, if they in their own persons had done
it; the reason is, because if men having sinned against God, had been able to
satisfy the Law to the utmost, in reference to their sin they had committed
against it, and had done it, yet they could have merited nothing from God,
because such satisfaction was due from them who had so offended, and it would
be but the paying of a just debt; but if an innocent one will come in for
another, and this not only out of his respect to the delinquent or offending
person, but also to accomplish the will of the offended person, this is not
debt, this could not be required; there is not any Law that requires an
innocent one to suffer; therefore here is desert and merit. Now this is the
case in reference to Christ's sufferings, they are sufferings of a just one for
unjust ones, as the Scripture testifies, 1 Pet. 3. 18. therefore there is
desert and merit in it.

3. There is a Covenant entered into betwixt God and Christ voluntarily on both
sides, in which something is required and condescended to upon condition; in
which respect it may be said, that Christ having done the works required,
deserves the accomplishment of the condition agreed on; as Jacob having served
for a wife, might say, Give me the wife which I have served for: which yet
cannot be asserted in reference to the Covenant of God with Adam; for though it
was of works, yet those works might have been required without covenant, and
consequently without condition; and so it was of grace that there was either
the one or the other, either covenant or condition; but works might have been
required without any intimation of reward. But Christ is a more excellent
person then Adam; he is the Lord from heaven; a Son, and not a servant, and did
voluntarily empty himself, and humble himself, and come in the form of a
servant; Philip. 2. 7. therefore God highly exalted him in our flesh, and us in
him, and it was compact and covenant, as appears from Tit. 1. 2. God which
cannot ly, promised eternal life before the world was. To whom was this promise
of God made, while as yet the world was not made? To no creature, because there
was no creature; it was made to Christ, it was the Fathers promise to the Son,
it respected a work to be done by Christ, to which work the Father made a
promise; the work was the Redemption of Elect in a way of satisfaction to
justice, because of transgression; and the promise was of eternal life to the
Elect so redeemed. Isa. 42. 6. Chap. 49. 8.

4. There was something performed by Christ for the satisfaction of God, which
was superabundant to the transgression of all the Elect, in reference to the
dignity and excellency of the Person that performed it, which was not a mere
man, as has been abundantly proved, but Godman: for as there is no proportion
betwixt God offended and man satisfying, so there is no proportion betwixt man
sinning, and God satisfying for such sin; and as in some sense a meaner
suffering for sin would have been so far from meriting, that he could not have
satisfied, so in a sense it may be said, that such a person as Christ is
suffering, not only satisfied, but merited in satisfying; for this one
sacrifice of Christ* offering up himself to God in the virtue, efficacy, value,
and force of it, might have extended to have purged away the sins of millions
more transgressors, if God had pleased, and if they had belonged to the
Election of Grace.

5. God had satisfaction which was full and complete, and perfect in Christ,
and which was given at once for the sins of all the Elect, which without Christ
could not have been had no not by the sufferings of the persons that had
sinned, though God should have laid upon them as much punishment as they could
be able to bear; yet because the guilt is infinite, and the creature finite,
the creature might have been ever suffering and never satisfying: Now it is an
advantage to the Creditor to receive full payment, and to have it at once; and
it is a disadvantage to receive it in parcels, and never to receive all. But
transgressors, if the debt ly upon them, will be ever paying, but never all
paid; will be ever suffering, but never satisfying by what is suffered, but
still God is a loser when ever the account is cast up: But in Christ's
undertaking, because he paid God all, therefore God has advantage by Christ's
interposition and suretyship which Christ has undergone, in which respect it
may be said that Christ has merited and deserved.

6. The death of Christ is not only of virtue and of value for the redemption
of transgressors from death and destruction in a way of satisfaction, but it
also obtains an eternal inheritance for such persons who are so redeemed; and
this comes from the super-abundance of worth and value in Christ's death; that
after satisfaction even to God by it, there remains yet something of virtue and
efficacy in it, to deserve some further favor and grace for transgressors, then
barely to free them and deliver them; viz. to procure and obtain for them
eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. and all this comes to pass from the
transcendent glory and majesty of the person who dyed and rose again; Christ
through the eternal Spirit offered himself to God, and so effected not only
eternal Redemption, but eternal Inheritance for us, because his Sacrifice who
thus offered himself, was infinite in value.

But he argues against an infinite sacrifice thus,

If the sufferings of Christ had been infinite, there had been no end of them.

Repl. The sufferings of Christ were not infinite, materially considered,
neither in the quality of them, nor in the duration and continuance of them;
but in reference to the subject person who underwent them, who was God manifest
in flesh; The Word made flesh, who dwelt among us, and was put to death among
us, and in suffering offered a sacrifice in value infinite.

He further says,

If the Curse had been infinite, man could not have born it, being incapable of
any thing infinite in the infinity of it.

Repl. It is true that man cannot bear it, as not being capable to bear any
thing that is infinite, therefore he is ever bearing as he is capable, and yet
must ever bear without an end; because he cannot bear it at once; and so it
comes to pass that he suffers that which is in some sense infinite; not in the
greatness, but in the continuance; that, which though it be not beyond measure,
yet is beyond end. But Christ being not only great in strength, but greater in
worth, suffered that which as from him had infinite worth in it.

He thus concludes,

It is enough for me to believe that my Lord Jesus suffered for me whatever I
deserved to suffer; and was the curse of the Law, be that what it will.

Repl. It is a fearful thing to consider both of the blindness and
presumptuousness of men, that even they which deny Christ, and in some sense
despitefully use him, will yet lay claim to him; but let all such know, that he
that denies the Son, denies the Father also; and such without repentance can
have no mercy.

As for that general knowledge which he comforts himself in, it is a seeing a
far off, and is next to blindness; it is like the light of him that saw men
like trees walking, there is more darkness in it than light. The mystery of
Christ is not seen in it; it warms not, heats not, quickens not the heart in
love, nor by it are persons able to know what it is they stumble at. It is the
knowledge of those that care not what they know; who behold that which appears
above ground, but will not dig for knowledge as for silver: Such who rest
themselves contented with such a knowledge, are never like to know that love of
Christ that passes knowledge. Ephesians. 3. 10.

This is but suitable to some other expressions of his concerning the person of
Christ; to know Christ to be a person sent of God, has been declared to be
sufficient knowledge to save men; and that text also in Romans 10. 9. is made use
of, and this conclusion exserted from it, that to know Christ to be the Lord,
whether created or uncreated, whether the same with the Father, or made by the
Father, is not material; a person may be saved without it.

But such assertions are detrimental to godliness, serve to nourish up
ignorance of God and Christ, and the mystery of the Gospel in carnal persons,
who have been wont to say, what need is there of so much knowledge? to know my
self a sinner, and that Christ dyed for me, is enough; and Christ rebukes it,
and makes the Scribes and Pharisces ashamed of it, when he asks them whose son
Christ was; and when they said David's; he demands how it could be, when David
in spirit called him Lord? but they were confounded and were not able to answer
him. Their general knowledge that Christ was David's son, without a right
perception of his Divinity, in which respect he was David's Lord, was no better
then shameful ignorance, (seeing God had revealed both the one and the other)
both in them and us.

In the close of his answer he deals with a Scripture which I produced to prove
that the satisfaction and merit that was in Christ's blood, was from the subject
person whose blood it was; it is called the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. And
indeed he deals injuriously with it, and evilly entreats it. His words are
these.

I shall offer these few things to consideration.

There may be some mistake in it, God may be put for Christ or Lord, and then
the words must be thus read; to feed the Church of Christ which he has
purchased with his own blood.

And why may there be a mistake? Because (says he) the Churches of the Saints
are called the Churches of Christ, Romans 16. 16. and there is possibility,
probability, and facility to countenance it.

Repl. 1. Logicians have been wont to say, a posse ad esse non valet
consequentia: that the deduction, inference, or consequence that is drawn from
[a may be] to [a being so] is weak, and very invalid. There may be a mistake
(says he) and must there therefore be a mistake say I? What good consequence
can be in this? 2. This Doctrine of mistakes in Scripture, especially in points
of such grand concernment, is dangerous to be broached; it tends greatly to
engender Atheism in the hearts of men, and serves to no better a purpose then
to unsettle men in the Faith; for what will be the consequent of it, if there
be mistakes in some things contained in Scripture, why not in other things? and
then what will remain firm that may be surely built upon? And may not any
Heretic when he is driven out, and forced to forsake all other holds, fly
hither, and shelter himself here, there may be a mistake in the Text or Texts
that are cited? 3. If there were no other place of Scripture wherein Christ
were called God, and if there were no place that holds analogy with this of the
Acts, where the blood of Christ is called the blood of God, there might then be
better plea for a mistake, which yet would be of evil consequence if it were
granted; but there is a cloud of witnesses that come in to evidence Christ's
Godhead, and there are parallel places to this Text that speaks of the blood
of God: 1 Cor. 2. 8. Had they known him, they would never have crucified the
Lord of Glory. Christ was crucified as he was man, and shed his blood as he was
man, and he was not crucified as he was the Lord of Glory, nor did he shed his
blood as he was God; and yet it is said, the Lord of Glory was crucified, and
the blood of God was shed: The meaning is, the Person who was Lord of Glory,
and who was God, was crucified, and shed his blood; but not as he was Lord of
Glory, nor as he was God, but flesh was assumed, the humanity was taken, and in
that nature he was crucified, and shed his blood.

But let it be weighed what he says of the possibility. The Scribe (says he)
through carelessness, or something worse, might here put God for Christ. There
are two places, one in the old Testament, another in the new, which Willet
conceives to have been mistaken by the Scribes negligence, or something worse.

Repl. What Scribe does he here speak of who might be thus negligent, or
something worse? Does he mean such Scribes as the holy men of God, who were
inspired by the holy Ghost, made use of to write what was suggested and
dictated to them by the Spirit? Then those holy Men, Prophets, or Apostles,
whether ever they were, who no question had the supervising and perusing of it
after written, would have discovered it, and corrected it. Does he speak of any
other Scribes who might afterward write out Copies of such things? The
Original writing would have been extant to have detected and confuted such
mistakes, and fraud, and falsehood, and there would have been godly ones enough
in those Ages, to have rectified out of the Original such error or deceit. Can
any Printer now by any craft or cunning bring corruption into any Text of
Scripture but it would soon be discerned? Nor could any Scribe then,

But he gives instances in Psalm. 22. 16. CAARI signifying as a Lion, is put for
CARU, they pierced: and in Romans 12. 11. we have (...), pro (...), time for Lord.

Repl. He that can search out these things, and make use of them to serve his
own turn, whose says soever he stumble thereby, might also have presented such
answers as are given by the Learned unto them, for no question he has read
them, and if he would have dealt heartily, he would as well have produced the
one as the other. I shall only recite something of that which I have read in
Rivet concerning the one Text, who writes upon it, and shall refer the Learned
to satisfy themselves in reading him at large.

This Lection (says he) of CAARI, as a Lion, the latter Jews have snatched at,
lest they should be forced to confess that this Prophecy, [They pierced my
hands and my feet] was fulfilled in none other but in Jesus Christ alone;
because neither David (who compiled this Psalm) nor any other had their hands
and their feet pierced. But Joannes Isaacus has most learnedly showed in his
defense of the Hebrew verity against Lindanus, that nothing is more absurd and
foolish then such a Lection or Reading. 1. Because it is pointed contrary to
the Rules of Grammar if the signification should be [as a Lyon] 2. Because the
expression would be maimed, and defective, and without sense; for what reason
is in these words [as a Lion my hands and my feet? 3. He produces the
Authority both of Massoreth the great, and the less. In Massoreth the less two
CAARI are found, and only two in a diverse signification; the one in Isa. 38.
13. which is right interpreted, [as a Lyon] the other in this Psalm, viz. 22.
which he quotes, which must necessarily have an other interpretation, because
of some peculiarity that is in it. In Massoreth the great he says, that Rabbi
Jacob found written in the Text CARU, and in the margent CAARI. 4. He speaks
his own knowledge, I Johannes Isaac can testify in truth, and with a good
conscience the same thing for I saw a Psalter of my Grandfathers in which in
the Text it was written CARU, and I doubt not but all exemplars had it also.

And Rivet adds this, that in all the Hebrew Copies or Exemplars, there is both
CAARI and CARU, the one in margent, and the other in the Text: Not that CAARI
whether in the margent or in the Text is to be read [as a Lyon] but it is vox
animala, a word beside rule, and is the third person of the preterperfect tense
CARA, by some interposition and change of letters, as is sometimes found in the
Hebrew; And he gives instances of the like.

As for the other Text in Romans 12. 11. I shall refer the Learned to that which
Beza says of it, and only exsert somewhat for the satisfaction of others.

In all the most approved Authors (says he) it is (...), and (...); And he
shows how it is probable the corruption came in, and how (...) was changed into
(...). In that short way of writing (says he) there is (...) put for (...);
and he says he has seen it so written in Pasil, and some that writ out,
declared this particle (...) by the word (...) instead of (...). And this might
easily be done through ignorance of that short hand that was in use.

But it may be observed how ready he is to give advantage to the pertinacious
Jews, in siding with them in the rendering of the word CAARI [as a Lyon] without
any warrantable cause for the upholding of his own opinion. And he also takes
part with the Papists, who from the various lection, do take occasion of
detracting from the truth of the Hebrew and Greek Text, as that which is
corrupted by the Jews and others, and would bring all to the interpretation of
the Church.

But he goes on, and not only makes it possible, but probable that there is
such a mistake; for (says he) Gretius observes many Copies have Lord, and the
Syriack has Christ, not God.

Repl. Some Copies have Lord and God; and Beza makes a conjecture how it came
about; but there is no Copy that has Lord without God: God is not left out in
any Greek Copy, and consequently it makes nothing for his purpose, but remains
as strong against him as before: for if the words be read thus, To feed the
Church of the Lord and God, which he has purchased with his own blood; the
word [which] refers to both of them as Antecedents; and the meaning is, which
Lord, and which God has purchased with his own blood: and Christ is still set
forth as God, and the blood of Christ is still the blood of God: But yet his
fraud appears, for he says, Many Copies have Lord, seperatim and divisim (for
so he would be understood) as if they had had Lord, and not God, or Lord
instead of God, when as in truth they have them conjunctim, both Lord and God,
conjoined as Titles of one and the same person, who shed his blood to purchase
his Church. As for the word Christ instead of God, it is not to be found in any
Greek Copy, in which language the New Testament was written, and if in any
other, it makes nothing to his purpose.

Lastly (he says) It is easy to mistake, taking one for the other, from that
compendious writing which was anciently much in use; where for (...) they wrote
only (...), and for (...).

Repl. The mistake of a letter, though it may be easy, yet it may be gross
enough, and may utterly overthrow the sense of the place; and it is as easily
discovered, when it is surveyed by him that compiled it: Would it not be gross
in our English if Word should be written instead of Lord? If Moon should be
written instead of Noon? and it is but the mistake of a Letter, and it is
easily done, and as easily seen being done, and corrected; therefore this
Argument is without force also.

To make this conceit of his of a mistake to pass the better, he says the
Churches of Saints are called the Churches of Christ, Romans 16. 16.

Repl. And what is this to the purpose? they are called the Churches of God
also, 1 Cor. 11. 16. And they are never a whit the less the Churches of God,
because they be the Churches of Christ; yea because they be the Churches of
Christ, they be therefore the Churches of God; and this Text proves it: For
Christ is the person that is here spoken of, because the person that shed his
blood for the purchase of the Church is spoken of, which is Christ, and he is
called God, and as God, the Church is his; as the words declare, which he has
not yet overthrown.

But he attempts it by an other consideration which he offers to view:

2. If it proves that there is no mistake in the Text (says he) there may be a
defect in the words; for the last clause some Greek Copies have it thus; which
he has purchased with the blood of his Own, and so the Word SON is to be
understood; with the blood of his own Son.

Repl. It is said of some persons who are loath to work, that they live by their
shifts, or by their wits; so this man, who is loath to be convinced of the
Truth, will maintain and keep alive an error (if he can) by his wits, or by
his shifts, which are more than one; and when one fails him, he flies to an
other; yet all that he says is but [may be] which we have been troubled enough
with already: He does not say there is a defect in the words, but it may be
there is, which we know proves nothing. Yet I shall pass over his [may be] in
silence, but say something to that which he bottoms it upon; he says, Some
Greek Copies read it thus, which he has purchased with the blood of his own,
meaning [Son:] but Beza says it is one Copy that the words run so in; whether
shall I believe (for I have not seen all the Greek Copies my self, though I
have examined some) Beza or him? When he comes up to Beza's learning and
integrity, I shall be at a stand whose testimony to take, but not till then.
However this will do him no good; for the blood is the price wherewith the
purchase was made; and it was his blood that made it, for it was not made with
an others blood; but the Text is clear, and he cannot overthrow it, that the
person that purchased it is God; then the blood must needs be the blood of God
also, because therewith he purchased: So that if there be one Copy that says
which he purchased with the blood of his own, yet the defect will be in the
word self that is wanting, and not in the word Son that is wanting; and the
words must run thus; which he purchased with the blood of his own self. And if
it were as he would have it, with the blood of his own Son, yet it is a proper
Son that is spoken of; and the Apostle makes him God in that expression: As the
Jews said of Christ, that he made himself equal with God, because he said, God
was his own proper Father, as the words are in the Original, John 5. 18. and
this amounts to as much as I intended in the quotation of the place; this puts
value and merit enough upon the satisfaction of Christ, that it was the blood
of a person that was God and equal with the Father, that was shed for the
taking away of sin.

But he has a third evasion, and if he be beaten out from the covert of that,
whither will he then fly?

3. If both these be removed, says he, yet the words may have an other meaning
then what you and many others do allot them; Christ's blood may be said to be
Gods own blood in way of eminency, it being more excellent by far then the
blood of the Legal Sacrifices. In the old Testament, tall Trees are called the
Cedars of God; in this sense also Christ is called the Lamb of God, John 1. 36.
because he was far more excellent then either the paschal Lamb, or any other
Lamb which was to be slain in way of Sacrifice: And the Author to the Hebrews
in this sense prefers the blood of Christ far before all other blood shed for
the expiation of sin, Heb. 9. 13, 14.

Repl. If he could but turn the word [may] into the word [must] and could be
able to make it out from the text or context, that the sense that he puts upon
the words must be the true sense of the place, and that none other that any
other allots to it can stand or consist with it, there would be some weight in
his words; but this [may be] has nothing but weakness and uncertainty in it.

2. The sense that he puts upon the text, is without sense, there is not the
least footing for it in the Text; it is a mere invention, without the shadow of
reason in it, for that which it is grounded on, is not to be found in the Text;
there is no mention of the blood of God in the Text, and therefore no reason he
should parallel it with such like phrases as the Trees of God, the Cedars of
God, which are of the same nature with other trees, but are more excellent, and
are therefore called the Trees and Cedars of God. The words in the Greek are
(...), which Beza renders suo illo proprio sanguine, that is, by that his own
proper blood; and it relates to the subject spoken of before, which is God; for
the exhortation is, to seed the Church of God, and it is added, which he, that
is, which God has purchased with his own proper blood; so that it is the blood
of God through the relation it has to a person, that is called God, whose
blood it is, and not by way of eminency, as trees are called the trees of God,
for the excellency they have in them above other trees, which yet stand in no
relation to God, Now if he be able to prove that God is not here spoken of, but
it is another that is not God, though he be called God; then may he prove that
the blood that is said to be his blood, is yet not the blood of the person that
is God, but the blood of anothet that is called God, but is not God; otherwise
it stands in force: the blood of Christ is not the blood of a mere creature,
but the blood of God; whence the merit of it proceeds for the expiating of sin.

Whereas he says that in this sense Christ is called the Lamb of God, because
he was far more excellent then the Paschal Lamb, oa any other Lamb that was
sacrificed. It is granted that he was so called for that reason, and not only
because Christ who was slain was man, and those Lambs were bur bruit creatures,
and so inferior to him, but because the person of this Lamb slain, was more
then a man, was the Son of God, and very God; but not slain like a Lamb as he
was the Son of God, and very God, but according to the humanity which he
assumed; and as the son of man, and very man, so was he slain. It is said the
son of man must be delivered up into the hands of men, and they shall kill him:
yet though he could not suffer as God, he notwithstanding by the eternal
Spirit, viz. by the Divinity or Godhead, offered up himself a sacrifice a Lamb
without spot and blemish to God; which made his blood more effectual to expiate
sin, then the blood of Goats could be; for otherwise there would have been no
difference in point of worth and value, in purging away of sins of men; for the
blood of a man at the most, could but satisfy for the offense of a man, and
not of many men; and to this purpose the blood of a man would have been as
ineffectual as the blood of a beast.

I have been large in the vindication of this instance, because the matter of
it was weighty, it being a great Truth of God, and of high concernment to the
Saints: I shall be the briefer in the next.

The ninth Argument or Instance that I produced, was this.

Inst. 9. If Christ be a mere creature, then the Intercession of Christ is
overthrown; for Christ if a mere man being in heaven, cannot know the state of
the Church in all places upon earth, therefore cannot intercede for it.

He reduces this into the form of an Argument to little purpose but to fill up
paper, after this manner.

That Doctrine which utterly overthrows the Intercession of Christ, brings in
as it were another Gospel;

But the Doctrine that makes Christ a mere creature, utterly overthrows the
Intercession of Christ, Therefore

He grants the Major proposition, but denies the minor, and complains for want
of proof, in these words.

What? Must we again take your word for a proof? I wish a better, for there is
no goodness in that; we have been too long troubled with the word (I say)
instead of proof, etc.

Repl. This answer is much altered, it has fallen under correction since it
was first ptesented to me in the manuscript; there was profane scurrility in
it; wherein he showed the tincture of his spirit: but I complained to one of
his dear friends, who was too highly conceited of him, who gave him an Item of
it, and so the words came to be changed, though there be harshness enough
without any just cause for it. His expressions did run thus.

We have already been troubled enough with the Prophet I say: Wherein he first
breaks his rest upon me. 2. He does it in a profane way, abusing that
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, which abbreviated is written Isay, whose person and
name deserve reverence, because the honor of becoming the Penman of the holy
Ghost was put upon him. Nor was there occasion given him to sport thus with the
Prophets name, for I know not that any such words can be found in my writing,
as [I say] no nor yet the sense of them; for I have not nakedly delivered any
thing but there has been either Scripture or Argument to enforce it; and in
this very instance, viz. If Christ be a mere creature, then the intercession of
Christ is overthrown; there is a reason to enforce it, which was thus; Because
a mere man being in heaven, could not know the state of the Churches in all
places upon earth, and therefore could not intercede according to the condition
and necessity of the Churches: And though this reason was not confirmed with
another, (which it seems he expected it should have bin) yet it was not because
there was no good reason to be rendered, but because I was in great straits of
time when I thought of, and wrote out that paper of Scripture and Arguments,
and had not liberty to enlarge upon any thing, having not three hours to
consider of the thing; and because I intended them to fall under the
consideration of more candid persons; and because I thought what I presented,
might easily be maintained from Scripture, if there should be any contest.

Nor has he invalidated the proof I brought for the strengthening of this
Argument, notwithstanding his complaint of want of proof. Let it be considered
what he says.

What (says he) have you learned to measure the knowledge of him who has
received the spirit without measure? Cannot he as man know in heaven what
things are done on earth? Who told you so?

Repl. These are strange expressions to proceed from one that denies the Deity
of the Spirit equally, as he does the Deity of Christ; and who makes both the
Son, and the holy Ghost finite creatures; and who makes the Son the first and
principal of all the creatures, and the Lord of all the rest, yea God (in some
sense) to them all; and so the spirit himself is servant unto Christ, and
Christ is his Lord, and in a kind his God.

The conradictions in this expostulation of his, What? have you learned to
measure the knowledge of him who has received the spirit without measure? in
reference to the forementioned Tenants of his, are not a few.

His expressions seem to me to carry such a sense; 1. That Christ's knowledge is
so great that it is unmeasurable, and consequently infinite; and yet he himself
but a creature; and consequently finite, which is a contradiction. 2. That this
knowledge of Christ came to be unmeasurable, because the spirit was given to
him without measure, and yet the spirit himself is finite, and consequently
measurable according to him. And if the spirit were infinite, and his wisdom
infinite, (as indeed he is though he deny it) yet if Christ be a mere creature
and wholely finite, as he holds, the maxim is infallible, that, quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; What ever thing is received is
received according to the Capacity of that which does receive it; and
consequently, when Christ who receives the Spirit is finite, he is not capable
to receive any proportion of the spirit but what is finite, and be may
measured; though the spirit were infinite. And so there is a double
contradiction. 3. That this excellent knowledge of Christ, which he says
cannot be measured, was received by his receiving of the spirit; and yet Christ
is greater, and more excellent then this spirit, and the Creator of him, and
Lord and God unto him, which is an other contradiction.

Obj.

But he may plead for himself, and lay, that his words are wrested; and that he
demands of me, whether I have learned to measure the knowledge of him, etc?

Sol. Though I am not able to measure the knowledge of Christ (who received the
Spirit) positively, so as to declare exactly what measure he received, and no
more; yet I am able to measure the knowledge of Christ (which he had by the
donation of the Spirit) negatively; I can say it was not unmeasurable, it was
not infinite.

But he bottoms this interrogation upon a Scripture, viz. John 3. 34. where he
says, that God gives not his Spirit by measure to him; And he interprets it
to be without measure, and by consequence infinitely.

But he is mistaken, for there is a comparison betwixt Christ and John the
Baptist, and other Ministers of the Church, for they received the Spirit, and
are limited and stinted, and receive not all that they are capable of, and
must have, but the Spirit is divided to them as it pleases God; to one man is
given Wisdom, and to an other Knowledge, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 11. and Ephesians. 4. 7. and
Romans 12. 3. but to Christ is given the Spirit, not by measure, that is, not
according to this measure; for Christ has all these, and he has the Spirit in
perfection, and not imperfectly, as men here have; and he has the whole as he
is capable of, as man, but yet the whole is not infinite nor unmeasurable: of
which I have largely before spoken, and therefore shall not enlarge here.

It may be further said by way of negation, that all the knowledge that Christ
has received as man by the donation of the Spirit, does not enable him as man,
and being in heaven, to know the state of all Saints in all places on earth,
unless it be by revelation from God immediately, and a new every moment: The
reason is, because as Christ's body is confined to heaven, so his soul is
confined to his body, and so the whole humane nature of Christ is confined to
one place, and is not, neither can be present with one saint on earth, much
less with all saints on earth; and without this presence, there can be no
knowledge; for Gods infinite knowledge is by his infinite presence; but this
has also been spoken of before. And because none can know the state of saints
but he that can know the heart of saints, but no creature does this but he that
made the heart, and gave to man knowledge, as the Scripture speaks, Psalm. 94.
8, 9, 10. and this is God alone.

But he goes on, and says;

None but the man Christ Jesus can intercede, it being absurd to conceive that
God can intercede, unless it might be conceived that God has a superior: Now
if the man Christ Jesus does intercede for his Church, he knows her state; and
why he may not know it by a communication of power from the Father,
notwithstanding he be not God and man in one person, is a riddle; for the
unfolding whereof I would willingly plow with your heifer:

Repl. The act of Intercession does belong to Jesus Christ as man, and the
reason is strong which he renders; but the ability to intercede, seeing it must
be for all saints, according to their particular conditions and necessities,
does appertain to Christ as God, and the validity of his intercession is
bottomed there also.

And whereas he speaks of a communication of power from the Father, to know the
state of the Church; if he mean by it any inherent power or virtue residing in
Christ, but given by the Father, by which Christ is enabled by himself from
time to time, to know all the hidden things, and deepest secrets, and the most
inward thoughts and ways, and the most retired temptations and spiritual
necessities of the Church it is impossible, for the reasons before mentioned;
and because there is not a greater thing by which the excellency and glory of
that infinite wisdom of God himself can be discovered and made known then this,
to penetrate the hearts, and discern the motions of the spirits of men; and
because the Lord himself by the Prophet Amos, reckons this, viz. the declaring
unto man his thought, among the great, and proper, and peculiar works of God,
which the creature cannot effect, whch require an infinite power, which no
creature can be the subject of; in Amos 4. 13. For lo he that forms the
mountains, and creates the wind, and declares unto man his thought, etc. and
then he concludes, the Lord, the God of host is his Name. And because both God
himself, and the Prophets, and holy men of God have attributed it to God alone,
as has bin proved before, and you may discern from Dan. 2. 11. that it is
imprinted upon the very spirits and minds of the Heathen, to acknowledge a
peculiarity in this thing to appertain to God. And because its possible a like
for the Father to communicate to the creature a power of being every where, as
of knowing all things in all places, yea the most insearchable things of all
persons without any personal presence, where such persons and things are: And
indeed it may as rationally and as truly be asserted, that God may communicate
his own nature and essence, and all his attributes to the creature, as
communicate this attribute of omniscience, or invest man with a power of
knowing of the state of all saints, which is all one; for what is it that God
cannot give a power to know, if he can give power to know the inclinations,
hidden motions, secret workings, and abstruse actings of the soul and spirit?
and if God can make the creature to know as much as himself knows, by
communication, then he can make the creature a God by communication. And if we
look into the way by which God himself comes to know these things, we shall be
able to discern that this knowledge cannot be communicated, because all things
and persons are of God, and from God, and they live, move, and have their being
in him, therefore it is impossible but that he should be acquainted with all
their actings, motions, and ways; but this is communicable which is the cause
of this knowledge of God. God cannot make persons or things to have their
subsistings and motions in the creature, and therefore he cannot communicate
such a power, and make it reside in the creature, by which they may have such a
knowledge. The effect is no more communicable then the cause is communicable.

But if he means by a communication of power from the Father to know the
state of the Church, nothing else but Gods revealing to Christ in heaven from
time to time, the state and condition of the Church, and of all saints, as he
did to Daniel Nebuchadnezars Dream which was gone from him; this will be
granted as possible in reference to the creature, but this is not properly a
communication of power to the creature from the Father; but the manifestation
of Gods Wisdom and Power by the creature, and the creature is not the subject
of it in which this wisdom resides, but God himself. But this is not suitable to
Christ, to say that what knowledge Christ has in heaven of the affairs of the
Church, and state of the saints, is by Gods revelation; for this would make
Christ a Priest of like imperfection which was in the high Priests, for they
were capable of revelation also as well as Christ, if God had pleased to have
manifested himself unto them in the discovery of the Churches wants; but it
behoved Christ to be more excellent, to be a Priest not in weakness, but in
strength, and to be able to save to the utmost, and consequently to have the
ability of interceding in himself. For to be able to save by another strength,
is such an ability as Paul speaks of, when he says, I am able to do all things
through Christ strengthening of me: such ability is inability, it is to be
unable rather then able in and of himself; as a child that is moved by the
strength of the arms of the Mother, or as a sick man that is upheld in his
walking; which makes nothing to the glory of Christ at all, but is a dishonor
to him: and hence it is that it was needful that Christ should be God and man
in one person, that he might be the subject of this power, and that he might by
himself save us. Besides, it is unscriptural to say that the Father reveals the
state of the Church to Christ, and that Christ knows it not till then. Yea, it
is repugnant to the Scripture, for it is said Christ is he that searches the
heart, etc. he knows, because he searches, and not because it is revealed to
him.

But he passes from this ninth Argument, under pretense to visit my tenth, and
yet says never a word to it, but refers me to his answer to Matthew. 28. 20. I
am with you always to the end of the world. But whether this be sollidly or
slightly done, I shall leave to the Reader to judge after I have presented it
to his view.

The tenth Argument or Instance was this;

Inst. 10. If Christ be a mere creature, then how can he protect, and defend*
and save, and direct, and rule, and govern his Church in all the world, in
every condition, and against all enemies, he being at such a distance and
remoteness from the Church? and yet it is said of him, that he is able to save
to the utmost those that come to God by him, Heb. 1. 25. and that he is with
them to the end of the world. And Christ stood by Paul and strengthened him in
suffering, Acts 23. 11. And Christ says Rev. 3. 10. Because thou have kept the
word of my patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of Temptation. So that
it is Christ now in heaven, that keeps the saints on earth, which being a mere
creature he cannot do.

The Reader may easily observe that the force of this Instance lies in two
particulars especially; 1. If he be a mere creature, how will he be able, how
can he have power to perform such acts as those are that are mentioned,
conducing to the safety and welfare of his Church, having such enemies to
conflict with, and such evils to save from? 2. How can he do it at such
distance? How can he do it he being in heaven, and they being on earth? What
virtue is that that is in Christ as mere man, that reaches the Saints in all
places, and is sufficient to preserve, and keep, and rule, and govern them? He
may also cast his eye upon the Scriptures which I quote, of which Matthew. 28.
20. is but one, to which he refers me; and the rest he passes over in silence,
as if they were all of them answered in his answer to Matthew. 28. 20. but let
his answer to that text be surveyed, and it will appear to be otherwise; I
shall re-mind the Reader of the sum of it.

These works of instructing, comforting strengthening, he does in his absence by
his Spirit, whom the Father has sent in his Name, for the Spirit which came in
Christ's name, was the instrument by which Jesus Christ did the work.

Does this answer of his satisfy in reference to that Text in Heb. 7. 2. He is
able to save to the utmost those that come to God by him? Is this the meaning
of it, he is not able by himself to save to the utmost, but by the Spirit, who
is his Instrument he is able? If it be, then Christ alone is not a sufficient
Savior, but Christ and the Spirit together; or rather, Christ is insufficient,
but the Spirit is sufficient, and yet but a creature, and inferior to Christ,
and his Instrument. But the Apostles design is to set out, not the Spirits
sufficiency, but Christ's sufficiency. Much less is satisfaction given by this
answer of his to Acts 23. 11. where it is said, that the Lord stood by Paul,
and said, be of good cheer Paul, for as thou have testified of me at Jerusalem,
so must thou bear witness of me at Rome. Suppose this were done in a Vision,
yet the Vision is of Christ, not of the Spirit, I have not said that the Spirit
stood by the Lord, and it is the presence of Christ himself, and the
consolation of Christ himself that Paul in this Vision is instructed of, though
neither the Father nor the holy Ghost is to be excluded; for Father, Son, and
holy Ghost are all of them present with all saints always, and do all of them
work the same work, the order still observed: So that when it is said that the
Father and the Son do instruct or protect by the Spirit, it must not be
understood that they are causa adjuvantes, causes helping one another; for all
of them are allsufficient, and all of them do effect the whole work in such an
order of working: much less that the Spirit is only operative, and the Father
and Son are inactive in the work, and are only authorative in it, and do
employ the Spirit, as their instrument; as the lord of the house does act
things by his servants, whom he imploys as messengers to effect such things, or
whom he appoints or designs for such undertakings; for so would he have us to
conceive of Christ, that he does nothing himself, but is contained in heaven,
and is neither present, nor acts any thing on earth, but sends the Spirit to
effect all for him, and this Spirit is present, and does all that is done, and
Christ himself does nothing: For this is confuted in this Vision, where the
Lord show, himself present, and he himself gives out the word of good cheer,
and effects it also by his own power.

The next Instance or Argument in order which he gives answer to, I shall pass
over reserving it to the last place, and shall vindicate the Instance that
follows, as is last in the paper from that unkind dealing which it meets with
from him. The Argument is this.

Inst. 11. If Christ be a mere creature, then Prayer to him (being now in
heaven) is altogether vain and frivolous, in as much as persons may cry aloud
long enough before Christ hear them at that distance; but the Saints have bin
wont not only to pray to God in Christ's name, but to pray to Christ directly
and immediately; in Acts 7. 57. Rev. 22. 20. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Come
Lord Jesus.

His answer is,

By the rule of the Gospel we are to pray to God, or the Father, in the name of
Christ Jesus; you have nothing to countenance prayer to Christ but the two
Texts you mention: If Stephen did pray directly to Jesus Christ, his act might
be warranted by the visible appearance of Jesus Christ, as Lot prayed to the
Angel being visible. That in Revelation is no prayer, but an intimation of the
Churches desire after Christ's coming: the like manner of speaking we have Rev.
6. 16. which is no prayer.

Repl. Here is a bundle of conclusions, and monstrous untruths packed up
together. 1. He says, By the rule of the Gospel we are to pray to God, or the
Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, which being taken exclusively (as he must
needs understand it, else he speaks at random, and not to the thing) viz. that
prayer to Christ is against the rule of the Gospel, is very false; and herein
he condems the generation of Gods children, and Stephen more especially, who
prayed to God the Son; for every Text of Scripture that enjoins prayer to God,
enjoins it to the whole Trinity, to Father, Son, and Spirit, and not to the
Father only; because there is no God but he, who is one in Essence, and three
in persons, as has been proved before. And let him show that rule that enjoins
prayer to God, viz. the Father, excluding the Son and the holy Ghost, if he
can; and if he cannot, let him blush for shame because he has asserted it; and
he has offended here against the generation of the saints, who have been wont
to pray to God in the person of the Son, not excluding the Father and the
Spirit. Stephen is an example of such a practice, and many more besides him; in
Act. 7. 59. They stoned Stephen, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. It was the second person, the Son who took flesh, and is God
in flesh, that was called upon, and prayed unto, and must he be made a
Transgressor?

But he says, I have nothing to countenance prayer to Christ but these two
Texts which I mention, this of Stephen, and that other of John. But this is as
gross an untruth as the former, yea more palpable to all men's eyes then the
former, for in 1 Cor. 1. 2. all saints are described to be such who call upon
the name of the Lord Jesus. And the Apostle Paul prayed familiarly to Christ,
in 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. For this I besought the Lord; what Lord was this? It was
the Lord Christ: How may that appear? From the answer that he received, and the
use he made of it; the answer was, My grace is sufficient for thee, My power is
made perfect in weakness: the use that he makes of it is this, most gladly
therefore will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest
upon me. The power that is made perfect in weakness, is the power of Christ.
And in 2 These. 2. 16, 17. Now the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our
Father, comfort your hearts, etc. The Apostle if he pray to the Father, he
prays to the Son also, for he joins them both together, and gives Christ in
this place, herein the pre-eminence, that he mentions Christ before the Father
in this prayer.

But he excepts against these two examples of Stephen and John; first he makes
a question of it, whether Stephen did pray directly to Christ or not; for he
expresses himself with an (if) as if he doubted; but to doubt in plain things
is foolishness, and to stumble where there is no stone to stumble at, is
perverseness. It will be granted (I hope) that he prayed to him to whom he
spoke; but he spoke to Christ; and the words in the Greek make it clear, They
stoned Stephen, calling upon and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; there is
none other mentioned but the Lord Jesus upon whom he called, and to whom he
said, receive my spirit; and he warrants it by Christ's visible appearance, as
Lots prayer unto the Angels being visible; but what visible appearance was
there when Paul prayed to Christ in the forementioned places? or when all the
Saints prayed to Christ, as the Apostle intimates the practice to be in the
primitive times? what sight had they first of Christ before they prayed? did
Christ appear visibly to every one of them first? what a groundless conceit is
this, and how far from truth? besides, what did such a visible sight advantage
him, when he saw him in heaven; for unless it were in a vision that he saw him,
it was in heaven that he saw him; and if so, the distance was as great as if he
had not seen him, therefore it could not be bottomed upon that ground; for
Christ was never a whit the more present because Stephen saw him: And so the
example of Lots praying to the Angel is no whit suitable, because the Angel was
not only visible, but present.

But what does he mean by bringing in such an instance of Lots praying to an
Angel? will he set on foot the doctrine of invocation upon saints and Angels by
it? If he would do it, that instance which he brings of Lot, will not help, him
at all, it was neither of the two Angels that Lot prayed to, that he received
into his house and lodged, but the third Angel before whom Abraham stood, who
was now come to the other two, and this was Jehovah in the person of the Son,
who often appeared as an Angel, which appears from, Genesis 19. ver. 17. When
they had brought them forth abroad, he said escape for thy life; that is when
the two Angels which came first to Lot had brought Lot, and his wife and
daughters out, he said, that is, netiher of the two Angels, for they are
mentioned jointly all along, and neither of them singled out from the other,
but it was the third Angel, or Jehovah (as he is called) that appeared now to
Lot, and this was he to whom he prayed. This appears further from ver. 22. 23,
24. I can do nothing says this Angel to whom Lot prayed, till thou come
thither and afterward it is said, the Lord rained etc. in the Hebrew Jehovah
rained etc. from Jehovah, the Son from the Father: It was he that rained fire
and brimstone that said before to Lot, in answer to his prayer, I have accepted
thee in this thing; haste thee thither, for I can do nothing till thou come
thither: and this is called Jehovah, and it is said he rained from Jehovah. So
that he is grossly mistaken in this also, about Lots praying to a creature
Angel, by which he would prove it warrantable to pray to a creature Christ, but
puts it upon the visibleness of him, when yet this Angel was not only visible,
but present; and Jehovah in the person of a man.

He also excepts against John's prayer, he says it was an intimation of the
Churches desire after Christ's coming, but no prayers, and he quotes Rev. 6. 16.
as a parallel place where such expressions are used, yet no prayer: But there
is a different reason when one speaks, to irrational things, which have no
understanding, nor knowledge, and which are not capeable of a prayer, and when
speech is directed to persons that are capable thereof: had those words been
spoken to God, let the mountains and the hills fall on us, they would have been
an imprecation, which is one kind of prayer. And whereas he says, if is but an
intimation of desire, and no prayer, he shows himself ignorant of the nature
of prayer; for what is prayer, but an intimation of the desire of a person, to
one that is able to answer him in it. And what are those expressions of the
Apostles, in their Epistles to the Churches, but prayers for them and yet they
are intimations of the Apostles desires; Grace be with you, and Peace from God
the Father, and from Jesus Christ our Lord. And the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ; the love of God the Father etc, and Grace be with you, and Peace from
him that is, was, and which is to come, and from Jesus Christ etc. 1 Cor. 1. 3.
2 Cor. 13. 14. 2 John. 2. Rev. 1 4, 5.

But he goes on and tells me,

I cannot (says he) but look on that as vain and frivolous, which you set up
as the walls and bulworkes of your Argument, viz if Christ were but a mere
creature, being in heaven, we might cry loud and long enough before he could
hear us.

I would only ask you this question, whether Christ could not hear as far as
Stephen could see? Stephen could see from earth to heaven, though he was but a
man, what will hinder the man Christ from hearing as far?

Repl. I would also demand of him, and ask a question or two, and if he answer
me, he may answer himself. 1. Whether can any man on earth, and whether could
Adam in his inocency hear as far as he can see? or whether such a thing be
possible in nature? whether the care be not slower in discerning its object,
then the ey is in discerning its object? 2. Whether Stephen saw Christ by the
strength of his own natural ey sight? if so, why did not all the rest see
Christ as well as he? if not, then he was strengthened to see that which he saw,
and so it was no less then wonderful, that he saw Christ; God, by the
greatness of his power made Stephen to see Christ; and so it may be granted
that God by the exceeding greatness of his power, might enable the man Christ,
or Christ according to his manhood to hear Stephen, but then it is a thing
above nature, and so it comes to this, that Christ as man is not able but is
only capable of being made able, and prayer to Christ is not to be bottomed
upon that. 3. Whether it was the voice that Stephen uttered that was the cause
of Christ's hearing Stephen? or whether if there had been no voice, Christ could
not have heard the voice of the heart, the motions of it, the cry of it? if
Christ could notwithstanding have heard, as is apparent from other Scriptures,
then it was not the ear of the body, or the fleshly ear with which Christ
heard Stephen, but it was by that vast boundless knowledge, which Christ had,
as the Son of God, and as God, and by which the disciples told him that he knew
all things: and then the comparison which he makes betwixt Christ and Stephen,
the one's seeing, and the other's hearing, might have been spared, for the
things are not alike in which the comparison was made. And this shows the
absurdity of his imagination, viz. that the knowledge that Christ has, being
in heaven, of the prayers that are made on earth to him, by the hearing of the
ear.

But I shall consider what answers he gives to the last arguemnt, or instance,
which is this.

Inst. 12. If Christ be a mere creature, then a mere creature is the Judge of
the world, which is against the scripture for the Judge of the world is God,
before whom Abraham stood Genesis 18. 25. when he pleaded for Sodom, Romans 1. 5, 6.
the day of Judgments is called the day of revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, so who will render to every one according to his works.

He attemps according to his manner, to put this argument into form, but foully
mistakes himself therein, for it comes misshapen from him, he cannot reduce it
to mood and figure; either he was never Master of that Art, and so attempts
things out of his Element, or else he has greatly forgot himself, for it is no
Syllogism as he has shapen it. I shall first present it to the Reader, and
then show how it ought to have been formed.

That Doctrine which makes a mere creature the Judge of the world, is against
the Scripture, Genesis 18. 15. Romans 2. 5, 6.

But Christ is the Judge of the world, Therefore

That Doctrine that makes Christ a mere creature is against the scripture, Thus
he.

That this argument is beside rule, appears by this; because every regular
Sylogisme has but three terms in it, viz. the Subject, the Predicate, and the
Medium, but this Sylogisme of his, has 4 terms in it.

1. There is the Subject, viz, that Doctrine that makes Christ a mere creature.
2. There is the Predicate, viz. is against the Scripture. 3. There is the
Medium, viz. that Doctrine which makes a mere creature the judge of the world.
4. There is an another term, which is more then regular, viz. Christ is the
Judge of the world.
Therefore it is plain that the Sylogisme is false, and it ought to have been
thus formed,

That Doctrine which makes a mere creature the judge of the world, is against
the Scripture,

But that Doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature, is a Doctrine that makes
a mere creature the judge of the world, Therefore,

That Doctrine that makes Christ a mere creature is against the Scripture.

I thought good to present this error of his to the Readers view, because my
paper being never intended for him, was in a plain facile way penned, that it
might be the better conceived of by such to whom I presented it, who understood
not rules of disputing; but he puts all into a scholastique form, and would
not encounter with me in that plain way of arguing, with this design (as he
pretended) to make my weakness the more obvious, but sure I am whether my
weakness be obvious or not, his over sight (that I say no worse) is obvious in
transgressing the rules of arguing which yet himself chooses, as pretending to
have skill in them.

And whereas he answers to both propositions, his labor might have been
spared, in reference to the Minor proposition, which is undoubtedly true, as
appears from the syllogism rightly framed; for who can deny but that doctrine
which makes Christ a mere creature, makes a mere creature judge of the world?

The Major Proposition can therefore only be denied by him, and indeed he does
deny it. 1. By proposing of examples of creatures who shall judge the world. 2.
By distinguishing betwixt the supreme judge of the worrd, and a delegate Judge;
and grants the proposition to be true, only in reference to the principal or
supreme Judge, but asserts it to be false of the delegate Judge. And this he
does with a great deal of confusion, for I rather represent what he would say,
then what he does say.

First he tells us of the Apostles. That they shall sit upon twelve Thrones,
judging tbe twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19. 28. and then he tells us of the
saints, that they shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. and then tells me,
that doubtless I had not this text of Corinths when I brought this Argument in
my thoughts.

Repl. Whether I had this text of the Corinths in my mind in that very moment
when I penned down this Argument, I am not able to say; but I would not have
him to be conceited as if he had brought some new and strange thing to my
knowledge, which before I understood not, as his words do import, which are
these; What will you say if I shall show you from the Word that the Apostles
shall be Judges at the last day, and that the Saints shall judge the World?
Alas, alas, that man that shall be non-pluss'd with the showing of such a thing
as this, is but poorly learned in Christianity.

It is easily answered, that though the Apostles and Saints shall judge the
world, etc. yet they are no where called the Judges of the World: And their
judging is Catacherstically, and very improperly so called. The Apostles more
especially are said to judge the twelve Tribes, or the World, because as Paul
speaks, all shall be judged according to their Gospel, Romans 2. 16. and both
Apostles and Angels do judge the World, as Assessores, as Peter Martyr says,
Christus Apostolos and Sanctos omnes cooptavit assessores; They sit after the
manner of Justices of the Peace upon the Bench, and hear all, and allow of all,
and approve of all, and allow of all, and consent to all, and are Witnesses of
Christ's righteous proceedings, and in no other sense can they be said to judge;
and what has he gained by this? and what does his new discovery, which he
thought I never thought of, amount to?

His distinction is to better purpose which he brings afterward, of principal
Judge, and Deligate or Deputy Judge; and yet it will not mar my Market, as he
imagines; his words are.

In a sense it is true, no creature can be Judge but God, that is principal in
Government, God being both the Alpha and Omega of it, deriving his power from
none, being the Original of all power.

And afterward he lays down two Propositions.

1. That the most high God, who is the Worlds principal Judge, will not
immediately, but by a Delegate, judge the World, Acts 17. 31. John 5. 22. 1 Cor.
15. 28.

2. That Jesus Christ is subordinate Judge, in reference unto God the supreme
Judge, but superintendent in reference to the Saints, Act. 10. 42. and 3. 20.
Mat. 16. 27. Joh. 5. 27.

Rep. One distinction which has been often given, and is ordinary and familiar
with Christians, of no vast knowledge, will satisfy the Propositions, and
answer all the Scriptures, and reconcile all seeming differences. The most high
God, who as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in each person, is the Worlds
principal Judge, and every person not excluding the other is so. And Christ, as
he is the second Person in the Godhead, as he is the Son, and as he is equal
with the Father, is the Worlds principal Judge, considered a part from the
flesh, which he has now assumed, the Father and the Holy Ghost not excluded.
And this I prove from Scripture, Genesis 18. 26. The Person before whom Abraham
stood was Christ, the secon^ Person in the Trinity, not incarnate at that time;
and he is calle^ Jehovah, and Abraham calls him the Judge of all the Earth: And
in Genesis 19. 24. he acted as a Judge; he Jehovah the Son, rained fire and
brimstone upon Sodom from Jehovah his Father. And in Isai. 45. 22, 23. Christ
calls himself God, and says, there is none else; and says, that every knee
shall bow to him, that is, in the day of Judgment, as the Apostle (an Expositor
without exception) holds forth in Romans 14. 10, 11. But Christ as considered in
flesh, being found in fashion as a man, as he is Mediator betwixt God and man,
being both God and man in one Person, is designed and ordained by the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost to judge the world in righteousness, as from Act. 17. 31. he
proves. And so the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost judge no man, but have committed
all Judgment to the Son in flesh, Ioh. 5. 22. and in the Son in flesh they
judge, and this Power and Honor has he received as Mediator in flesh; but when
all enemies are subdued and judged, then he shall deliver up this Kingdom and
Power, and Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the one true God, who
shall be all in all, and the Son himself according to the flesh shall be
subject. And in this sense as Mediator in flesh, he may be called a delegate
Judge; for that the humane Nature of Christ should be taken up into the
fellowship of this Glory with the eternal Son, this was by ordination. As the
Son in flesh had been humbled, so the flesh with the Son must be exalted to
this Glory, Phil. 2. 9, 10. And the Glory which Christ has as Mediator, is
founded upon Christ's sonship in this respect as Judge, as in all other respects,
and indeed in any other respect but as the Son, he is not capable of being
Judge; for though whole Christ be Judge, yet the natural right to it, and ability
to perform it, is as he is the Son; and that the whole in both Natures is Judge,
is of grace, And can any rational man think, that Christ a mere man should be
able to judge the secrets of men, if he were not God as well as man; so that that
honor to judge as Mediator, is given to him in flesh, as declarative of that
essential Power and Glory which he had as Son with the Father and Spirit from
Eternity, that all might honor the Son with the equal honor as the Father is
honored.

And whereas he says, That the Father is principal in Judgment, and is the
Alpha and Omega of it, alluding to the place where the Father is so called, why
should not the Son be principal in Judgment with the Father, being the Alpha
and Omega of it, seeing he also is so called in Scripture.

Thus I have followed him in all his Evasions and shifts, and have unmasked his
Answers, and plucked off the fair Vizard that he had put upon them, and have
discovered the deceit, and found fraud, and falsehood that was hid under them.
And I have vindicated the rest of the Scriptures that I alleged from his
corrupt Interpretations that he put upon them, and have confirmed the Arguments
which I produced, and they now abide in their strength, and have removed and
taken out of the way that which troubled their Testimony, which they brought to
the Godhead of Christ, that they could not be heard, by reason of the noise
that his Answers made in men's ears.

Let it be considered from first to last, what a poor, weak feeble, base, mean,
contemptible, dispiseable Christ, Savior, Mediator, Intercessor he makes this
great God and our Lord Jesus to be; and what a penurious, defective lame, and
beggarly righteousness and satisfaction he brings unto us for our support and
how shamefully and reproachfully he strips him, robs him of the Honor and
Glory in all things that is due unto him: The worship which he must have, can
but amount to Reverence, which is only due to one, that has the mere honor to
come in the name of another, which is all he grants to Christ; for he denies
him to be the ultimate object of worship, and there is no intermediate object
of worship which is not founded in the ultimate or last object: and all that
come in Gods name, Moses and all the Prophets share with him upon that account
in this reverence. And he cannot be the object of faith at all, according to
him, but a medium or mean by which we come to believe ^n him who is the object
or end; and such is the wtitten Word of God and all the publishers of it,
mediums or means by which we come to believe on God; and herein Christ is
become like one of them. This is an humbling of him with a witness: and he is
but an instrumental Savior whose virtue is in an other according to him, as
there have bin many since the beginning of the world, and still are; the beasts
which were sacrificed, and the Priests who sacrificed them, were instrumental
saviors; and now the Gospel, and the Preachers thereof are instrumental
saviors, and Gods appointment and assistance (which he says Christ had) might
have made them (as he must needs grant) as effectual as he; thus he levels
Christ and brings him down from his height to be like to other things, which
are fellow instruments with him. And so he makes Christ to be a mere mediator
by assistance, but impotent in himself; for says he, what work soever you can
instance in belonging to Christ's mediatorship of himself he was not able to
perform it, unless by the assistance of another and so he was a complete
Mediator; and so might Moses or any other man be: and thus he is made weak and
feeble like one of us, not having the least sufficiency of himself, but a
capacity to partake of Gods sufficiency, which also may be predicated of any
other person, they may not say they are able to do all things that God will
call them forth to, through Gods strengthening them; and he makes Christ to be
but an instrumental Agent in that righteousness by which believers are
justified: an instrumental Agent also in forgiving sins; he does but act about
these things, is not the Author of them: and herein other men have the same
privilege. He himself tells us that it is the privilege of some men to forgive
all sins in reference to the curse of the Law, and he quotes Joh. 20. 23. which
is to be understood in a declarative way, and Christ has no greater honor
then this. The satisfaction also of Christ is rather satisfaction of grace, as
he presents it, then satisfaction of justice; it is satisfaction without any
proportion to the offense. As he lays it down he does in effect bring in God
speaking of it, as the Apostle brings in God speaking of mercy, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy; and so he, I will be satisfied wi^h what I will
be satisfied with, whether it be proportionable or not without respect to
justice. And his ability to intercede according to the condition and necessity
of the Church, is not from himself nor in himself, but from a communication of
power from the Father. And for judging he does it in an instrumental way and
has all saints copartners with him in the work, sharing in the like honor only
he is superintendent in it, which belongs rather to order then to power.

After this manner he deals with Christ, who was, and is, and ever will be in
the form of God, and equal with God, with him he deals thus; humbling him
abasing him, and making him in all things to be like unto men, proportioning
him, and equalling him to others, not by vayling his his glory and majesty, but
by denying* it; which is the highest indignity that can be offered to this Lord
of glory. And yet (which is not a little to be wondered at, and sorrowed for)
how many are there who will not understand this, but cry him up for a great
advancer of Christ, yea he is made superlative herein! they say he exalts
Christ above all that ever they heard preach him; but either they declare their
gross ignorance, or something that is worse. They may sow fig leaves together to
cover his nakedness, and hide his shame, but if they be intelligent persons,
they must needs know that the substance and truth of divine glory and
excellency is plucked off, and torn away from him, and that the shadow only
remains; he has taken away all glorying from Christ, as the Apostle took it
away from saints; it may be said of Christ, as of others; What have thou oh
Christ, which thou have not received? Christ has received more of Gods grace,
and is more indebted to the most high, and that is all he can glory of
according to him, for he has nothing of his own to glory of.

And yet many poor Christians though thus defrauded and cheated of the true
Christ, are contented with the Christ which he obtrudeth upon them, and bless
themselves with the knowledge of such a Christ which he has shaped out, or
mishaped rather, who holds no proportion with that which Scripture has limned
out and presented to us; yet they rejoice and glory in this Christ. O miserable
darkness and blindness (that I say not perverseness) in men, in Christians, that
they do not discover how great and dangerous the cheat is! Oh how dangerous is
this? If God should not be merciful to them, and open their eyes to see the
horridness of it, what would become of them? Such an impotent weak Christ who
could not save himself by any strength in himself, is unlike to save them. And
thus far in Answer to him and his book.

Now because I discern that very strange and very unsafe opinions are very rife
in this Nation, and very detestable and horrid doctrines are set to sale, and
many come (who have been accounted and no question some of them are so) very
precious Christians, and cheapen them, and (be^^use they be fair fruit, some of
them) to the ey, they buy them up, and make them their own, they receive them
and intertain them, and are very fond of them, they hugg them and embrace them
as precious doctrines, and they lay out their time, and parts, and all their
talents in the defense of them, and so it comes that as they themselves were
deceived by them, they deceive others by them also; by which means they come to
grow and spread: I think my self bound to present something by way of
prevention, that they may not be so abundantly engendered, and multiplied in
conception, or if they be, that they may be abortive, and not brought forth; at
least, that the current of them may be stopped, that they may not have such
free passage; for it is to be much lamented, that they should spread, prosper,
grow, and fill good ground so much, which if they must have a being, are fitter
for reprobate ground, which God has rejected; but this is the hour of
temptation, and if ever the Elect be in danger to be deceived, they are now in
danger; for there are winds of doctrine which will shake those that are built
upon the rock Christ, and will overturn others, whose foundation is but sandy
and is not right, let them therefore take heed, for if they fall not now, they
may probaby stand fast for ever.

In order therefore to the stifling and strangling, to the consuming and
destroying of them, and that saints may be kept and preserved sound and
incorrupt in the faith, or at least may be recovered out of errors into which
they have fallen, I shall give some few hints of these four particulars.

1. Of the cause of Errors, how they come to spring. 2. Of the growth of
Errors, how the^ come to spread. 3. Of the cure of Errors, what ought to be
done to heal the persons of them, and to destroy the Errors in them. 4. Of the
preservatives against errors, when they are rife, and not easily cured where
they have taken root, and how Christians may be kept untainted and undefiled of
them.
1. The causes of Errors are many, by which means it comes to pass that many
are leavened with them.

1. There are many Apostate Christians who have put away a good conscience, and
concerning faith they have made shipwreck of it, as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy
1. 19. and in Gods just Judgment it comes to pass, many times, that these have
a Spirit of error let lose upon them; and these, as the false Prophets and
false Apostles of old, go about as seducers, and deceivers, and say that they
have dreamed, and they have received a word from the Lord, and they utter lies
and falsehoods in the name of the Lord; these have a dextrous way of
insinuation, to ingratiate themselves among the people, and to steal away
their hearts from their sound and powerful Pastors and Teachers, as the false
Apostles bewitched the people, and alienated their affections from the Apostles
of Christ. These serve not the Lord Jesus (as the Apostle Paul speaks Romans
16. 17.) but their own bellies and for filthy lucre sake, make merchandise of
the souls of the poor people.

2. There are many persons of great parts and gifts, and of unsanctified hearts
and spirits: these are apt to be puffed up with pride, and to fall into the
snare and condemnation of the devil. 1. Tim. 3. 6. These are ambitious of
glory, and would fall under observation for singularity; These are seldom wise
to sobriety: these have bin wont to abound in notions and conceptions, and to
be greatly extravagant therein; and Satan has commission given unto him to
enter into them, and to work effectually in them, and by them, and they become
notable instruments in his hands, and he is a lying spirit in their hearts, and
tongues, and these have the art and skill of putting off corrupt and adulterate
Doctrine, as if it had Gods touch and stamp upon it, and by the sharpness and
acuteness of the parts and wits of these, simple and more unwary Christians
come to be beguiled.

3. Many of the people are weak and injudicious, and have not a good root of
knowledge in them, they do not know things in the reasons and causes of them;
but have received the notion of the truth without the ground of it; they have
not a deep insight, but a superficial knowledge only; and have seen the out
side, but know not the mystery within; and so it comes that with every wind of
Doctrine they are shaken, Ephesians. 4. 14. through the slight of men and cunning
craftiness: for it is easy to present things with another face, while persons
look not after that which is within, and the fraud and falsehood comes not to be
discerned, for the net and the snare is not in sight, and that which is
specious is only presented.

4. Many persons are ambitious after knowledge that they may increase it, and
are wholly given (as the Athenians to understand news, so they) to understand
Doctrine, and to arrive at higher notions and conceptions, nor for the honor
of God, nor in affection to the truth, but to furnish themselves unto discourse
and to increase their repute, and so they become swift in hearing, and quick in
receiving, any new Doctrine, and God gives them up to strong delusions that
they may believe lies. 2 These. 2. 10 etc. who neither seek nor receive the
truth in the love of it, that they may be saved, but that they may be praised.

5. Persons that have a real inplantation into Christ, and those that have
only a visible and formal inplantation, but want a true ingraftment, they live
together, not only in the world but in the Church of Christ also, and are under
some droppings and waterings of external enjoyments, and have a name to live
and yet are truly dead; and the honor and praise of those that are saints
indeed are put upon them. Now God that discernes betwixt the sheep and the
goats, and seperates betwixt them, and he also who unmaskes hypocrites, and
pluckes the vizard off from them, he that can distinguish betwixt the natural
complexion in his own people, and the paintings of others who pretend to him,
but are none of his, he in his providence brings an hour of temptation both
upon the one and other, he tryes them both with the wind of false Doctrine, and
heresy, and for this end he does it, that they which are approved may be^e
manifest, and that the hypocrisy of the rest may be made detected; that
himself may have glory in his own, and that the others may ly under shame. 1
Cor. 11. 19. And the Apostle John says they went out from us, because they
were not of us; which is appliable to false Doctrine, and error, and heresy;
they left the truth, and those that adhered to it, and they went out after
error.

6 Many persons forsake, or never put themselves in to that order which Christ
has appointed for Saints to walk in, in which they might be watched over, and
so kept, by which means they are in a state, as sheep without shepherds, and
when the Wolf comes they become a prey; for the shep are not able through
weakness and simplicity to defend themselves, if there be no shepherd to
provide for their safety: and poor weak well meaning Christians are less able;
sheep will fly from danger though that does not save them always, but Saints
many times mistrust no evil, and so decline not the danger.

The Apostle declares how he himself watched for the space of three years, with
many tears, to prevent this evil of the flock being devoured by Wolves; and
he calls the Elders of Ephesus together, and gives them this charge, that they
would take heed to themselves and to the flock over which the holy Ghost has
made them overseers, to feed the Church of God, that is, with sound incorrupt
doctrine; and he renders this reason, because after his decease grievous Wolves
should enter in not sparing the flock, and men of perverse minds amongst
themselves, Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. And it is to be observed, that such persons,
how wise soever, how holy soever they do profess to be, and really may be, who
cast off Ordinances and Churches, and Ministry, and say there are now no
Pastors, nor Teachers, nor flocks committed to them, as in Primitive times
there were, and so withdraw themselves from the vigilancie of such Shepherds,
of all Christians they are the most unstable and the most apt to err and go
astray, and the most apt to entertain strange and unscriptural doctrine; and
the reason of this is, not because of the wisdom and righteousness of such
persons who are Pastors and Teachers, above all other men, as if they by their
prudence and understanding and holiness were able to preserve those that are
committed to them, from evil, but because it is the Ordinance of Christ that
Saints should be in fellowships, and should have Pastors and Teachers as
Guides, and Watchmen, and Overseers over them, therefore a blessing goes along
with it for the most part; and those that cast off this Order, are left very
much to themselves, and deserted of Christ's strength, not being found in
Christ's way: Yet it is not arrogating to assert that Pastors and Teachers
either are, or ought to be the most prudent, and most sober minded, and best
tempered, and best settled and stablished, and most firmly rooted and grounded,
and each way the most able of the body, to which they do belong for they are by
office as eyes to the rest of the members.

7. Many unite and congregate together without any that are competently
furnished with gifts among them to be Pastors and Teachers, neither having any
in their eye whom they may call thereto and obtain; and being thus in
fellowship, they propound the edifying of one another by holding out their
conceptions each person to other, both in prophecy and in conference, and in
this case much comes to be spoken, and perhaps in some places none able to
judge, and he that has the ripest and accutest parts leads the rest; and if he
be not very sober minded, he is sure to lead them into error; the sad effects
of this I have much observed. Now this is more dangerous in these times then it
would have been in some other ages, because corrupt doctrine is very rife, and
one shall hardly live any where but there will not be providence that will
cast him into places and meetings where it will be vented, and if any be taken
therewith, he will be sure to vent it, if he be not very humble when he is put
upon exercise among those he stands thus related to; and dangerous doctrine
comes out in print, and may be read in books which are dispersed abroad, and if
persons be not very well able to judge of them, but are deceived with fair
pretexts, and if they have not settled, sober, and well established spirits,
those doctrines (of all other) will fall most under their observation, and will
have the deepest impression, and will be best remembered, and will be the
soonest communicated, because of the rarity of them by such persons when they
meet with the rest of the body, especially if such persons do affect
singularity.

8. Many Pastors and Teachers are men of corrupt judgments and unsound
principles, and by reason of the opportunity that such have of venting their
Tenants, and the interest that they have in their own flocks and other people
to whom they preach, comes to pass that from them Error and Heresy passes
into others that relate to them, and are hearers of them; and from hence it was
that formerly, and of old, falsehoods and doctrines of lies dispersed themselves
abroad, and filled the land.

9. But now the danger is less in reference to the Ministry, because it is but
of little account among many that pretend to Saintship, amongst whom (I doubt
not but that) some of them are truly good, at least comparatively the esteem
is small to what it was. And this proceeds partly from the too much bitterness
and fierceness which has been showed by many Ministers, against such who have
in the smallest points dissented from them, by which means they have estranged
the hearts of such from them, and lost their repute among them. And partly from
that selfseeking, and too much affectation of rule, and power, and pre-eminence
which has been justly observed to be in many Ministers, the good of the flock
having in the interim been much neglected, but though some are guilty herein,
yet all connot be justly charged. And partly because the just liberty of
prophesying (which belongs (as I conceive) without contradiction, to the
people, if it be rightly bounded) has been denied them by the generality of
the Ministers of this Nation, which have cried out against it; whence it has
come to pass that many precious ones among the people have entertained
thoughts, that the Ministers design has been to keep them in bondage, and to
advance themselves over them, and so they have broken from them, and have had
them in disesteeme. But principally it comes to pass through the practice of
some evil workers, who have aspersed the Ministry more then there has been
cause, and have rendered them odious to others. And now the danger of the
springing and spreading of Errors is more in reference unto these, who have
withdrawn the affections of the people from the Ministers, and have brought in
themselves into favor in stead of them, and are carried with those temptations
which they have been wont to charge the Ministry with, affecting singularity
and pre-eminence, and would be thought to know much, and would be accounted
Prophets and Teachers, and their design is to draw away disciples after them;
and they affect new notions, and high expressions, which they perceive to be
taking with the people, and so a door comes to be opened to Error.

10. There is an exorbitancy in that liberty which Saints have to exercise
their gifts in prophecy. All the Brethren that are in a Church are not
Prophets, that is, all have not the gift of Prophecy; 1 Cor. 12. 29 and chap.
14. 1. But they must be proved first, and approved, before they take upon them
to prophecy, and those who are sound and sober should only be allowed. What is
spoken of Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 10. will hold in proportion to others, and hands
must not be laid on suddenly, ver. 12. A sudden approbation of any to office is
not allowed, and there is the same reason for the exercise of gifts. As every
one has received a gift, so let him dispense it; there are private gifts, and
there are public gifts; there are gifts that may edify a few, and there are
gifts that may edify many; there are gifts that may edify weak ones, and
there are gifts to edify strong ones; there are gifts that may edify a
family, and there are gifts that may edify a Church; there are gifts that may
edify a part of the body, and there are gifts that may edify the whole body;
There may be profit in the exercise of some gifts to some, when there is no
honor to Christ before men, that such gifts should be publicly exercised. The
Ordinances of God by this liberty, unwarily and unsoberly used, falls under much
contempt. Not but that I wish from my very soul that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that all had gifts by which all might edify and be edified, and
Christ glorified in all, who has given such gifts to men; but till there be
such a pouring out of the spirit, let none be carried out beyond what he has
received, some have much more need to learn then to teach in an Assembly.

And how can any preach unless they be sent, Romans 10. 11. unless persons can
assume to themselves and make out to others an immediate calling, as the
Apostles did. If they be not able to say that their calling to preach is not of
men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ, then there must be an order in the
Churches of Christ, and they must fall under it. If they think they have a
gift, they must not exercise it because they think so, but they must be called
forth, and their gift tried, and the Church must judge. And unless this
Christian-liberty of exercising gifts be thus bounded, how will the exorbitancy
in the exercise of it be repressed? Many run upon this work being driven thereto
by their lusts, I speak what I know, and what many with me have had woeful
experience of. A flood-gate to error is set open by this means, and I think
truth has been as much undermined by this one stratagem of Satan, viz. The
setting up of multiplicity of teachers, as by any other policy of his, these
many ages. The time was that the Ministry undermined prophecy in the gifted
Saints, but the time is, that prophecy in those that are (many of them neither
gifted nor called, undermines Ministry. And the peoples spirits are many of
them inordinately carried, rather after prophecy, by the poorest, weakest, and
rawest persons, that will consume time that way, then after the best gifts that
are ministerially exercised among them. I am loath to say that such who are
exercised, and such who put them upon it, and encourage them in it, do seek
honor one of another, and not that honor so much which is of God: but if I
say that there is some temptation upon their spirits, sure I am, I shall not
miss it in reference unto many, and I charge not all. I am afraid lest the
times be come or coming, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. That
sound doctrine will not be endured, and that men after their lusts, will heap
unto them teachers, having itching ears, and that they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned after fables. For the last times are
spoken of by Paul, and these are the last times; and now there are more
teachers then all latter ages have showed, and Truth has less acceptance
among many then Error, at least the Reprovers of error will not be endured,
but such ones in many places, and to many persons, makes themselves a prey. And
it is most certain, that there is a lusting in persons to partake of every man's
gift, though he be a very stranger that is come among them under the profession
of a Saint, whose face they never saw before; and there must be some new notion
presented, or there will be but slender acceptance expressed. I desire to
mourn for these things, of which there has been very sad experience in the
parts where I have lived, and the consequence has been dreadful and
detrimental to faith and holiness.

I have cleared my self from being any enemy to prophesying, yet lest I should
be suspected, I declare it again, that I am not against it, but I look upon it
as an ordinance of Christ, if it be rightly regulated, and it is on foot in
that fellowship of Saints to which I stand related; those whom we have found
competently furnished with the spirit for such an undertaking, we have opened
the door to, for an occasional exercising of their parts; and we have shut it
against others whom we have not conceived able; but I look upon that
promiscuous way, licentious liberty of prophesying by any that will put
themselves upon it, as unscriptural and justly scandalous to many that are
truly good And I conceive that at this door much error has entered in among
us, for some are weak and err in holding forth their conceptions; and some are
immodest, and soar up in notions which themselves understand not; and some are
leavened, and are glad of an opportunity to vent such opinions which they have
received, and of which they are in travel, till they get a time to vent them
and broach them to others.

11. Many receive strangers in among them that have knowledge, and plausible
expressions, and seeming Sanctity, without inquiring after them, without
assurance of their soundness given to them, without any letters of
commendation from known approved persons or Churches concerning them, which the
Primitive Saints and Churches expected and required, in reference to all
strangers that came among them, and it was found a necessary and a safe way for
the preservation of the Churches then, 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2. and they are an example
therein to us, for otherwise wolves may be entertained in stead of the Teachers
and Preachers of Christ. The Apostles when they sent messengers to other
Churches, speaks of chosen men, and pass a singular commendation upon them,
that they might be received and credited: and they speak of others that went
out from them, but were not sent, who had troubled them with words and
subverted their souls, Acts 15. 24, 25, 26. There is good doctrine in this
history, and it was written for our learning that Saints and Churches may be
warned, that they receive not any that are not sent, that are not chosen men
and known persons among the Saints, for while they harbor such, and entrust
their souls in their hands, they are misled, and in danger to be destroyed.

12. There are many that have been raking in the filthy channel of all the old
and horrid errors and heresies of former ages, and have exserted the Scriptures
and Arguments, which they have judged most plausible and taking with the
people, wherewith such opinions were fortified and enforced, and have held
forth as if they had received them through some divine light, that the spirit
of God has imparted to them, and they have been entertained by the people as
singular revelations, and rare discoveries of the hidden truths of God, which
God has made known to such who have had secret Communion with him, and so they
have been infected and corrupted.

13. Many are grown suspicious of all that they have believed and received, as
if all had been taken up by them upon tradition, and they give out that they
must try all things, yea principles themselves, and that they must see with
their own eyes, by which it appears that they profess to be established in
nothing, rooted and grounded in nothing, and so they lie open to all danger,
and are subject to be carried away with every wind of doctrine, for if any
come to them in the habit of a Saint, pretending the study of divine mysteries,
and be able to our-reason them, or to present as they judge, some unanswerable
things to them, such an one becomes prevalent, and draws away such after him.

14. Many conceive that they are fallen into times of great discoveries, and
that mysteries that have been hid from ages, are now revealed to the Saints.

Whence it comes to pass, that if any strange doctrine be broached, how horrid
an error soever it be, provided that plausible grounds be laid down for it, it
is presently sucked in and received, with apprehensions that a doctrine that
has layn in darkness many generations, is now manifested to the Saints; when
as in truth and deed the foundation is truly laid already, and has been truly
built upon, else both we our selves and Christians of former ages were very
wretched and miserable, and that which Saints shall be heightened in is this,
they shall know more perfectly what they knew more darkly, and that which the
Saints have doubted of, and have been divided about, they shall understand.

15. The esteem of Saints is now very low among many, unless they be able to
bring some doctrine which former ages have not known, or to produce some new
notion and discourse of some high point, which neither themselves nor others do
well understand; and unless they be able to speak in a language which the
Christians of former ages have not understood, plain Scriptural language will
not now satisfy, unless there be high strains which sober Christians have not
been much acquainted with. This lays a temptation upon many precious souls, to
affect and to seek after novelties, and so they come to be darkened with new
errors that arise, and are turned after fables.

The second thing that I propounded to discuss, is the causes of the growth of
errors, and how they come to spread.

It is a certain truth, that that which begets them, does also nourish them,
and increase them, and so there must be a looking back to the causes of the
springing of them, and the self-same things will be found, the causes of the
spreading of them, and of the prospering of them.

Ignorance and pride, and affectation of glory, praise and a corrupt
conscience, and unsanctified parts and gifts, and formal implantations into
Christ without reality and power, and forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, and aspiring unduly to prophesying without a calling thereto; and
many others that have been mentioned, these have given life to errors, and
these have given strength to them also.

But there are some special causes of the growth of errors, diverse from such
which have been already presented as the rise of them.

1. The censures of the Church are not duly exercised to repress that
inordinate lusting after strange doctrine, and that pride, vain gloriousness,
vanity of spirit, and wantonness of mind, with which many Saints are too much
carried, and are sick of; Not that I would have Saints cast out of the Church,
for every difference in judgment from their brethren, or dissenting in
opinion; those that have known me, have known that I have been evermore a
stranger to such rigidnesse. I would not have so much as the peace of such
disturbed in the least kind by any, but if any opinion strike at the
foundation, threatening the overturning of it, and be very destructive to the
faith and holiness of Saints, I think there is warrant enough, (and I hope I
shall be able to make it out from Scripture) to proceed to the questioning and
censuring of such persons, who by other means cannot be reclaimed. And the
neglecting of this ordinance of Christ is of evil consequence unto the
furthering and ripening of error; for however it may be thought and spoken by
some, that Church Censures bring no light to men with them, nor can be
effectual for the conviction of persons judgments (which has truth in it,)
yet the distemper of spirit (from which error, when it is gross, does as
commonly arise as from weakness of judgment) and unsobernesse of heart is
healed and cured by Church censures.

2. Communion and fellowship with those who are corrupt and unsound in their
opinions, is not forborne, but there is the same liberty used of conversing with
such, and the same intimacy and familiarity showed, as with any others how
sound soever; when yet the Apostle says, Avoid them, Romans 16. 17. The Psalmist
says, They were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their works. The latter
followed upon the former, the Apostle says, A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump, that is, when it is put to the whole lump, and is with it, but
purge it out and it cannot; therefore his council is To purge out the old
leaven, which though it be spoken of the leaven of ungodliness in persons, is
yet applicable to the leaven of heresy and error, which is more infectious
and spreading then the other.

Obj. But such persons are Saints; why should their Communion be declined?

Sol. Why does God himself withdraw from Saints, and hide his face from them?
is it not to humble them and make them ashamed, and bring them to repentance?
And may not, yea ought not we to withdraw from unsound and corrupt persons
(though they should be Saints,) for the same reasons? especially seeing our own
preservation is in it.

Obj.

But it will make divisions among Saints to forbear the fellowship of such, and
it will rejoice the common adversary, therefore for the scandal that is in it,
such withdrawing must not be allowed.

Sol. A holding of Communion with such, will at last cause division, and not a
withdrawing from them, for such who bring any other doctrine by conversing with
Saints, do get a Party, and so make division. The Apostle declares whence
division proceeds, Romans 16. 17. not from those who shun Communion with leavened
persons, but from such who are corrupt and leavened, Mark those (says he) who
cause divisions contrary to the doctrine that ye have received; Such persons
who bring unscriptural doctrine cause the divisions, for by their crafty
insinuations they deceive the simple, and draw away disciples, and this
ingenders a rent, for the rest must oppose and resist, unless they also will
become disciples; and if they do appear for the truth, against the error the
rest are carried away with, then there will be division following upon it.

As for the glorying of the common adversary, there is more occasion given him
to glory at that union that is betwixt heretics and erroneous persons, and
such who profess to be Saints; and the scandal is greater, because the
Adversary will give it out they are all corrupt, they are unsound, they are all
heretics, all erroneous corrupt persons, for they mix together, and at least
there is an allowance; this is justly more scandalous then the other, nay the
other is not scandalous at all; but it is the glory of the Saints in the
presence of their enemies, to keep themselves from all corrupt things and
persons, what profession soever they make.

3. There is a tampering with opinions that are unsound, and with persons also
who are corrupt, by which means it comes to pass that many lay themselves
under strong temptations, and through the righteous hand of the Lord they come
to be left to error, and become as corrupt as any. There are some, and not a
few, that take great delight to talk with all kind of persons, who hold any
strange opinion, as bring any new doctrine, and if there be any book into which
any poison of corrupt doctrine is instilled, they will use all means to get
such a book, and will choose rather to read therein then in any other, till at
length they be changed into the same image, and be principled alike to the
persons and books they are so conversant with. Now this evil proceeds,

1. From an opinion that some hold, that it is the duty of Christians to try
all things, and to keep that which is good; but the commandment of the Apostle
is mistaken; for first, this trying respects all the doctrines and spirits of
men that we are called necessary to partake of, and be conversant in; so the
doctrines of our own Pastors and Teachers must be tried, and of others also,
whom providence leads us to hear, and it respects the knowledge of doctrines
whereto we have not yet attained; but we are not by virtue of this commandment,
to rake into all opinions that are or have been among Apostate Christians; nor
is it a duty to be always trying, but we must be rooted, and grounded, and
established as we have been taught. And this is a commandment of the Apostle,
whereto we ought to attend; and we must leave the principles, and pass on to
perfection, that is, having laid them in the foundation, we must build higher
and higher upon them, till we come to a perfect man in Christ.

2. From a presumption which persons have of their own strength, they think
there is no danger, but that they shall be able well enough to discover the
evil in any opinion, and not be hurt by it, and in the interim they may read
or hear something that may edify them. But indeed the most of these are
unacquainted with their own weakness, and they know not the depth of Satan
till they fall by them.

3. From some decay of appetite, so far as concerns feeding upon wholesome
nourishing truths, for it is a symptom of a weak distempered stomach, that it
would behold variety of meats, but it cannot feed upon any; so when the soul
is carried out to curiosity, to be looking and prying in all things, that any
are carried to, it is to be feared that it feeds upon nothing which may build
it up and strengthen it.

4. Error comes to be spread by the temerity, invigilancy, insobriety, and
imprudence of many Christians; some are sudden in entertaining of opinions, and
not sober; some are close and secret in their search and enquiry after them,
and never discover any thing till they be formed within them, and till
themselves come to be formed into the similitude of them, and then it becomes
an hard work to destroy that which is so firmly received; and some over-match
themselves, while they oppose their understanding parts and abilities to the
intellect and sharpness of apprehension, and dextrousnesse of wit, and
vastness of parts, and strength of brain, that false Teachers and Seducers
have; by which means it comes to pass that they are easily overcome, and
advantage is given to the erroneous to propagate their corrupt opinions;
Whereas there ought to be great deliberation, much consultation, open
heartedness also in persons to their own Pastors and Overseers, or dear
friends whom they may confide in, and a calling out for help where it is most
like to be afforded, that such doctrines may be debated upon equal terms,
before they be received.

5. The countenance and encouragement that is given to persons that bring
unsound and unscripturall doctrine; and the applauses and praises wherewith
they are followed by some high ones, and holy ones, (it may be for some parts
that are eminent in them, and for some dress of holiness that they appear in)
do give life and strength to such doctrines; for when great ones and godly ones
are become admirers and adorers of such persons, and harbor them, and honor
them, the eyes of others are thereby turned after them; and there will be many
that in a moment will be found to strengthen the hands of such evil workers
and seducers that do traverse the land, and to strengthen their errors also.

6. If it once come to pass that any eminent ones in office, interest,
abilities, graces, upon whom the eyes of many people are, and who are leading
persons in the places where they live, and after whose example many go; if any
such be left of God to strange doctrine, they will draw away many disciples
after them, and the land will in a short time be filled with error, if there be
not some merciful providence to prevent the diffusion of it: And when it
begins to take hold of Saints, it is most likely to increase, for then there is
honor put upon it, while it lodges in such subjects, while temperizers and
self-seeking persons (which were men of carnal and low principles) harbored
it, it was of base repute and prospered not, but gets a better name by getting
into heads and hearts of believers.

The third thing that comes to be discussed is the means of cure how persons
may come to be healed of errors, and errors may come to be destroyed in them.

1. There must be an encountering with such erroneous doctrines, and they must
be brought to scriptural trial, and there they must be arraigned, and thence
they must be condemned. The reason is, because they are presented with the
pretext of Scripture, Scripture is made use of to usher them in, else they
could get no entrance, therefore Scripture must throw them out again; And
Seducers mouths will not be stopped any other way, nor will their followers be
undeceived any other way; Therefore there is a necessity that the truth should
be held out, and strongly fortified with Scripture and with agrument, by which
the mind may be filled with light, and that error should be confuted, and the
nakedness and sordidnesse thereof detected, that those that are ingenuous may
come to be ashamed, that have adheared to it, and may learn to abhor it, Tit.
1. 9, 10. An Elder or Bishop must be able by sound doctrine to convince
gainsayers, for there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose
mouths must be stopped, etc. This place is worthy of observation, for is shows
what ought to be done in these times. And look how many ways error has been
propagated, such ways should be taken for the spreading of truth. The contrary
truths to the grand errors of this age ought to be held out in words that
cannot be condemned by preaching, printing, letters written, private
communication and suggestion by open conferences also and disputes, and happy
are those that have gifts and hearts to contribute any thing this way. See we
the sedulity and industry of Paul this way, Acts 20. 31. for the space of three
years I coased not (said he) to warn every one of you night and day with
tears.

2. The care and vigilance of the Churches of Christ, and of the Officers and
Overseers thereof, must be showed toward their own members, which relate to
them, for the healing of any that have been shaken, or have departed from the
faith; for, for that end are they associated together, that they might watch
over one another; and the Elders are principally called forth to this work,
Acts 20. 31. Therefore Watch; why, what is the matter? and he tells us, because
grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock; and of your
selves men shall arise, speaking perverse things, drawing away disciples after
them, therefore watch. And in order to a Churches discharging of its duty this
way, it is necessary in these times, wherein the members of Churches are
scattered abroad through many Providence, and wherein error is very
prevalent, for the Churches of Christ, and the watchmen thereof. 1. To send to
all such, (who are at distance from them, and live in dangerous places) to know
their faith, least they should be tempted, 1 These. 3. 5. which place, though it
may respect the grace of faith, which through affliction may be shaken, yet it
will hold in proportion in reference to the doctrine of faith. And though the
Apostle declares what he did, yet therein he is a pattetne what those that
have a flock committed to them ought to do; for without doubt what power the
Apostles had for edification, and not for destruction, over all the Churches
and Members thereof, the same has each Church, and the Officers thereof, over
those that stand related to them. And such who so belong to such Churches, and
have such Overseers, are bound to render an account in a Christian way, it is a
duty by the Apostle Peter's Precept, but much rather is there an obligation
where there is such a relation.

2. It is necessary for the Churches to put this burden upon such members of
theirs, where such danger is of seducers, (if they will count it a burden) to
abstain from the fellowship of such persons who are not sound in doctrines
among them, because the Apostle requires it, Rom 16. 17. 2 John 7. 8, 9, 10.
and because there is a double benefit in it. 1. To such which err so
dangerously, they may come to be awakened and afterward ashamed. 2. To those
that shun them, and decline them, they come to be kept thereby, and preserved
from their error. 3. It is the duty of the Church and watchmen thereof, to
withstand such who are false teachers, and who deceive those of their flock by
their lies, as Paul resisted Elimas, who would turn away the Deputy from the
faith, and as the shepherd is bound to chase away the wolf for the safety of
the flock. 4. The Church and Elders thereof ought to be warning such of theirs
that are in danger, that is, to be presenting them with the evil and danger of
such doctrine, and showing them the horrid effects and consequences which will
follow upon it, as in Acts 20. 31. Remember how I warned you, and in 1 Cor. 15.
he shows the evil consequences of denying the Resurrection, which they saw not,
but made light of it, but the Apostle had looked into it, and did faithfully
hold it forth to them. 5. The Church of Christ and the Rulers thereof ought to
reject and cast out such among theirs who are heady and high, and are not
reclaimed from such errors which they have sucked in from such seducers, which
have been among them, after they have clearly held out the truth, and detected
the contrary error, and confuted it; and after they have admonished and warned
such, once, or twice, or thrice, or while there is hope. It is clear from the
Apostles example, in delivering up Hymeneus for no other fault but for denying
the Resurrection, and troubling others with that doctrine. And also from the
Apostles direction given to Titus, Tit. 3. 10, 11. An heretic after once or
twice admonition reject, etc. And indeed avoiding such, and not receiving such,
nor saying Gods speed to such, is an high censure, little below that of
delivering up to Satan.

Obj.

But the question may be, what edification there can be in passing such a
sentence upon one that erres in doctrine, either to him that is so censured, or
to others.

Sol. Gross errors or heresies are not fallen into, especially not persisted
in (after a clear light held out) through simple ignorance, but through some
distemper of the Will, and some temptation upon the spirit. Now though the
censure of the Church has no aptitude in it to give light where it was wanting
to open their eyes, to rectify an erring judgment, to convince the
conscience, or satisfy doubts and scruples, which did arise through simple
ignorance, yet the censure of the Church may be a means to heal the will, and
to remove the temptation from the spirit, what ever it be which may obstruct
the right exercise of that light, and understanding which such persons have;
and first the censure of the Church may occasion a more serious and deep
searching into the truth, or falsehood of doctrines, and may cure that
precipitancy and headiness, and rashness, in entertaining and engaging in
doctrines that are not sound and scriptural. There is a vanity of spirit, which
lusts after new opinions, which causes such facilenes in receiving, that
doctrines are no sooner presented, but they are taken up, but
Church-proceedings may be a means to bring on sobriety. 2. That partiality
which is in persons in reference unto those whom they respect and affect, may
come to be healed, for nothing is more frequent then to hold opinions and
tenants, with respect to persons, but this distemper is many times best cured,
through the execution of Church power 3. If the truth be departed from for
advantage sake, that persons thereby may rise up to greater honor or
preferment, Church discipline gives a check many times to such lusts of the
flesh, that they cannot prevail with that strength as before they did; when
the love of them carried persons to corrupt engagements that way. 4. Persons
are engaged to that opinion which they have turned aside to, least they should
be accounted fickle and wavering, when yet they want Scripture-strength to
maintain them; but this perversenes and obstinacy is best cured by the
admonitions and withdrawings of the Church from such persons. 5. And if there
should be any darkness in the judgment, in reference to plain and clear
doctrines, where such darkness was not before; it is argument to me that God
has justly put out their eyes, in reference to something that has displeased
him, and till they have been ashamed, and have showed repentance, God will not
dispel nor scatter the clouds, nor clear up their judgments; Now Church
admonition is the best expedient to bring them to repentance, as the Apostle
speaks of Hymeneus, I have delivered him up to Satan (says he) that he may
learn not to blaspheme, that is, by denying a doctrine which he ought to have
professed. And so such scales of ignorance which were by sin contracted, are by
Church-censure removed many times.

Obj.

But what if such persons be very holy in their lives, and very profitable in
their Communion, must they notwithstanding undergo the censure of the Church.

Sol. 1. There is no holiness but what flows from the doctrine of the Gospel,
rightly entertained and held by faith. Therefore so long as they waver in the
faith in points of great concernment and moment, their holiness must of
necessity be waved also; the Apostle says, Gal. 1. 7, 8. Though I or an Angel
from heaven bring any other Gospel (and yet he means it of circumcision held by
some as necessary to salvation) let him be accursed. 2. Such persons that are
pertinacious in a corrupt opinion, are evil leaven, and their Communion cannot
be so profitable, as it is like to be hurtful to the fellowship to which they
do belong. 3. If they be Saints which do so greatly err from the faith, there
ought to be so much the more compassion showed to them, and the greatest love
and compassion that can be showed lies in this, to use the last remedy to them,
when other remedies fail, and are ineffectual; and it is the greatest cruelty
to withhold any means which God has sanctified for the healing of such, as
from Exodus 23. appears.

5. What one Church of Jesus Christ does this way in the execution of censure,
justly and according to rule, all the Churches ought to ratify; for if such
who are bound by any Church on earth, be bound also in heaven, then all the
Churches in the world have not power to acquit or lose from it; therefore in
their walking toward such persons (great or small) they ought to confirm it,
by having no Communion nor fellowship with such, that so such persons may come
to see the miserable condition that they are in, and may be ashamed; and if any
Churches or Christians should walk otherwise, they sin against Christ's
ordinance, and harden such persons in their sin, and hinder their repentance,
and returning to the truth, and will draw the blood of such souls upon their
heads.

If this course were held with such who err grossly, and will not be healed,
it would awaken those who have left their first faith, and are turned after
fables, and might recover them, and would bring a trembling upon the rest, that
stand firm and unshaken, and might preserve them from the like temptations,
and then there would be no cause for the interposing of the Magistrate, which
some do relish so evilly.

The fourth and last thing that I am to discuss is, what the preservatives are
by which persons may be kept, in times in which errors are rife, and the
danger great in that respect.

1. Let every person that pretends to saintship look to his implantation into
Christ, that it be right and true, and that it be firm and sure, and then it
is to be hoped that he will abide in the Vine, and the Vine in him, and then he
is more likely to stand fast in the faith, for there is one that is able to
keep him from falling, and will keep him, and if he fall he shall rise again;
for there is one that is able to raise him, and will raise him; The greatest
security of the Saints, that they shall not depart from the faith, is in their
union and communion with Christ.

2. Let persons commit themselves to God, to be kept by him, who can strengthen
and settle, and establish those that rest on him, and wait for him; while
persons have leaned to their own understanding, and have not looked up to the
rock that is higher then they, and come out of themselves, and put their trust
in him, and begged his teaching and leading, they have become vain in their
thoughts, and have erred from the truth.

3. Let persons get a good root of knowledge within themselves, and not attain
only to a general knowledge of things, but come up to a particular knowledge
of them, and know all things in the causes thereof, so far as Scripture gives
light, or as they have been taught; for then, though some other thing may be
presented to them, then what they have received, yet the reasons of the things
which they have believed, will not be so soon answered in their souls. If
persons have but a form of knowledge within them, it is soon overturned.

4. Let the love of the truth be labored after, as well as the knowledge of
it, for persons will be unwilling to relinquish that truth which they have
found much sweetness in.

5. Let the Scriptures be diligently searched into, and perused, and studied,
and let them be compared together, and let Scripture intepret it self, and let
one Scripture give the sense of another Scripture, when persons take up some
one or two single scriptures, and run away with them, without comparing them
with other Scriptures, they are led aside to error.

6. Christians ought to take heed whom they hear, what they hear, and how they
hear, because of many Seducers and Deceivers, that are gone abroad into the
world, and because there are many spirits of Antichrist, who yet pretend to
Christ.

7. Christians ought to become wise unto sobriety, and not to think of
themselves above what is meet, but to have humble and low thoughts of
themselves, for if once Christians be lifted up, they readily fall in this
snare of the Devil, which is Error and Heresy.

8. Christians ought to walk up to that light of truth that they have attained
to, because there is a promise belonging to such who will live in and practice
the truths which they know, John 7. 17.

9. Saints ought to consider that they have no more of the grace of faith, then
they hold of the doctrine of faith, for they therefore believe because they have
such a word of God to ground their belief upon; if then they hold not that
Word, their belief will fall with it, and then must needs be shaken, as much in
the grace of faith, as they are in the ground of faith.

10. Let them consider that there is no godliness but what grows out of the
Gospel, and springs from the truths of it, if therefore the doctrine of grace
in Christ be once overturned in the soul, all godliness will be soon
overturned with it. 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1.

11. Let them consider that if once they become unstable in the faith, they
become unstable in all their ways, for it is as when a tree is not firmly and
deeply and surely rooted in the earth, but is loose in the ground, it grows
not, flourishes not, nor is fruitful like to other trees; therefore says
Christ, unless you abide in me, that is, firmly and surely hold me, ye cannot
bring forth fruit.

12. Let all Christians take heed how they hold the truth in unrighteousness,
how they put away a good conscience in any thing and so tempt God, lest God
give them up to darkness, as a punishment of such an offense.

13. Let every Christian join to some Church of Jesus Christ that walks closely
with God in the truth, that by the watchings of others he may be the better
kept. This is regular walking and God will be sure to bless it.

4 Let not any Christians run into temptations, least God should leave them
under the power of them, and suffer them to be overcome of them; but if they
hear or read a doctrine that is contrary to what they received, let them with
much fear and trembling hear and read it; and with much looking up to heaven
for guidance; and let them be slow in entertaining that which is new and
strange to them; and after much examination and consultation, and abundant
confirmation out of Scripture, let them do it. If Saints will walk in this way,
the God of truth and grace will be with them, and they shall be kept unto
salvation.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Scriptures and Arguments formerly produced to prove the Deity
of Jesus Christ, and now vindicated and confirmed in the later Treatise.
ALSO, Six other Arguments added, showing the dangerousness and destructiveness
of the contrary Doctrine.
The first Scripture is Revel. 1. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the End. page 15 The second Scripture is Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. p. 29 The third
Scripture is Matthew. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the
world. p. 35 The fourth Scripture is Rev. 2. 2. I know thy works; etc. p. 51
The fifth Scripture is Col. 1. 15. The firstborn of every creature. p. 61 The
sixth Scripture is Col. 1. 16. By him were all things created. p. 63 The
seventh Scripture is Heb. 7. 3. Without father, without mother, without
beginning of days and end of life, made like unto the Son of God. p. 90 The
eighth Scripture is Prove. 8. 22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his
way before his works of old: I was set up from everlasting. p. 94 The ninth
Scripture is Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, against the man
that is my fellow. p. 97 The tenth Scripture is Joh. 3. 13. No man has
ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man that
is in heaven. p. 103 The last Scripture is Joh. 17. 5. And now, O Father,
glorify me with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. p. 114
Arguments brought to prove the destructiveness of the contrary Doctrine.
Arg. 1. To make whole Christ a creature, brings in a strange and a false God.
p. 126 Arg. 2. To make whole Christ a creature, brings in a strange and false
Christ. p. 137 Arg. 3. To make whole Christ a creature, brings in a false
Faith. p. 149 Arg. 4. To make whole Christ a creature, brings in a false
Baptism. p. 158 Arg. 5. To make whole Christ a creature, destroys the
sufficiency of Christ as a Savior. p. 163 Arg. 6. To make whole Christ a
creature, overturns godliness. p. 168
Arguments formerly produced, now vindicated and confirmed.
Argum. 1. To make whole Christ a creature, is to make a mere creature the
object of Divine worship; which yet, according to Scripture, is Idolatry. Where
the doctrine of Worship is discussed. p. 173 Arg. 2 and 3. To make whole Christ
a creature is to make a creature the object of faith and to make faith in a
creature saving; which yet is contrary to the Scripture. p. 205 Arg. 4. To make
whole Christ a creature, is to make a creature a sufficient Savior; which yet
is repugnant to the Scripture. 214 Arg. 5. To make whole Christ a creature, is
to make a mere creature Mediator; which is contrary to the Scripture. Where the
doctrine of Christ's Mediatorship is discussed. p. 225 Arg. 6. To make whole
Christ a creature, is to make the righteousness not of God, but of a mere man,
to he imputed to believers; which is against the Scripture. p. 252 Arg. 7. To
make whole Christ a creature, is to make a mere creature authoritively able
from himself to forgive sin; which yet is contrary to the Scripture. p. 262
Arg. 8. To make whole Christ a creature, is to destroy the doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction to God. Where the doctrine of Christ's satisfaction is largely
handled. p. 285 Arg. 9. To make whole Christ a creature, destroys the
intercession of Christ. p. 363 Arg. 10. To make whole Christ a creature, is to
disable Christ to protect, defend save, direct rule and govern his Church in
all the world; which yet is attributed to Christ, etc. p. 373 Arg. 11. To make
whole Christ a creature, is to make prayer to him vain and frivolous, he being
now in heaven, and we on earth. p. 377 Arg. 12. To make whole Christ a
creature, is to make a mere creature the Judge of the world; which is repugnant
to Scripture. p. 384 Concerning Errors: the rise, growth, cure, and
preservatives against them. p. 397
FINIS.

