Die Lune, 20. September. 1647
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all
Moneys upon Bonds entered into in the Court of Wards and Liveries, or due by
composition before the late Vote or Ordinance passed both Houses for taking
away the said Court, and likewise all Rents due before the date of the said
late Vote or Ordinance, shall be received according to the directions of an
Ordinance of Parliament, for the due and orderly receiving and collecting of
the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenue, and the Arrears thereof, bearing date
the one and twentieth day of September, 1643. And all persons whatsoever that
do owe any Moneys, or Rents by Bond, or otherwise entered into, or payable in
the said late Court of Wards and Liveries, before the date of the said late
Vote or Ordinance, are hereby required to pay the said Rents and Moneys unto
Charles Fleetwood Esquire the Receiver thereof, or to the Receiver thereof for the
time being, who is hereby required and authorized to give such Acquittance, or
Acquittances, or Discharges for the same as legally he ought or might have
done, if the said late Vote or Ordinance for taking away the said Court had not
been passed. And it is hereby further Ordained, That the said Acquittance, or
Acquittances, or Discharges so given, or to be given by the said Receiver as
aforesaid, shall be good and sufficient in Law to all intents and purposes to
all, and every person and persons which shall pay in any Rents, or other Moneys
to the said Receiver for every such sum and sums of Money as shall be paid
in by them as aforesaid; and that the parties paying in the same shall be
respectively saved harmless, and kept indempnified for or by reason of the
respective Rents, or sums of Money paid, or to be paid, as aforesaid. And in
case all, every, or any of the persons that owe Moneys by Bond, or otherwise in
the said late Court of Wards and Liveries, do refuse or neglect to pay the
several and respective sums of Money by them due to the said Receiver, then
Process shall issue out of the Court of Exchequer for the same, in such manner
as is usual for other His Majesty's Rents and Debts; And the Barons of the
Exchequer, Officers, and other Ministers thereof whom it may concern, are
hereby required and authorized to issue Process accordingly; And the Sheriffs
and other Officers concerned are at their peril to execute the same, and pay
the Moneys leavied respectively to the said Receiver in like manner, as
payments have been made upon Process in like kind heretofore issued forth of
the said late Court of Wards; And the several Officers and Ministers of the
said late Court of Wards and Liveries respectively whom it may concern are
hereby authorized, required, and commanded from time to time according to the
directions of the said Committee for the Revenue, to deliver such Schedule and
Certificates of the Rents, Fines, Compositions, or other Moneys in the late
Court of Wards and Liveries upon Bonds entered into, or due before the said late
Vote or Ordinance as thereunto they shall be required; together with all such
Bonds for the same as remain in their hands, or in the hands of any of them;
And in case any difference or just exceptions shall arise touching the several
and respective Rents, Debts, Compositions, or other Moneys aforementioned, then
the hearing and determination thereof shall be referred to the Court of
Exchequer, who by virtue of this Ordinance shall have power to give relief in
Law and equity, in such manner as the Court of Wards might have done before the
taking away of the same. And it is hereby lastly Ordered and Ordained, That all
and every person and persons acting by authority of this present Ordinance,
shall by power of Parliament be saved harmless and indempnisied, for
whatsoever they shall respectively do in persuance and direction thereof.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Printed at London for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1647.


