THE ARTICLES OF CESSATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT, Presented to
HIS MAJESTY upon consideration of the former Articles, with the Alterations and
Additions offered by HIS MAJESTY.

AND HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer thereunto. March 22. 1642.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command AT OXFORD, March 25. By LEONARD LICHFIELD,
Printer to the University. 1643.

THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, being still carried on with a vehement
desire of Peace, that so the Kingdom may speedily be freed from the Desolation
and Destruction wherewith it is like to be overwhelmed, if the war should
continue, Have with as much expedition as they could, considered of the
Articles of Cessation, with those Alterations and Additions offered by His
Majesty; unto which they are ready to agree, in such manner as is expressed in
these ensuing Articles. viz.

1. THat all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Money, Bullion, and all
other Commodities passing without a safe Conduct from the Generals of both
Armies, as well of His Majesty's as of the Armies raised by the Parliament, may
be stayed and seized on, as if no such Cessation were agreed on at all.

2. That all manner of Persons passing without such a safe Conduct, as is
mentioned in the Article next going before, shall be apprehended and detained,
as if no such Cessation were agreed on at all.

3. That His Majesty's forces in Oxfordshire, shall advance no nearer to
Windsor then Wheatly; and in Buckingham-shire no nearer to Aylesbury then
Brill; And that in Berk-shire the forces respectively shall not advance nearer
the one to the other, then they shall be at the day to be agreed for the
Cessation to begin; And that the Forces of the other Army raised by the
Parliament, shall advance no nearer to Oxford, then Henly, And those in
Buckingham-shire no nearer to Oxford then Aylesbury; And that the Forces of
neither Army shall advance their Quarters nearer to each other then they shall
be upon the day agreed on for the Cessation to begin.

4. That the Forces of either Army in Gloucestershire, Wilts, and Wales, as
likewise in the Cities of Gloucester and Bristoll, and the Castle and Town of
Berkely, shall be guided by the Rule expressed in the later part of the precedent
Article.

5. That in case it be pretended on either side, That the Cessation is
violated, no Act of Hostility is immediately to follow; But first the party
complaining is to acquaint the Lord General on the other side, and to allow
three days after notice given for satisfaction, and in case satisfaction be
not given, or accepted, then five days notice to be given before Hostility
begin; And the like to be observed in the remoter Armies by the Commanders in
Chief.

6. That all other Forces in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, not
before mentioned, shall remain in the same Quarters and Places as they are at
the time of the publishing of this Cessation; And under the same conditions, as
are mentioned in the Articles before, And that this Cessation shall not extend
to restrain the setting forth or employing of any Ships for the defense of His
Majesty's Dominions.

7. That as soon as His Majesty shall be pleased to disband the Armies, (which
both Houses earnestly desire may be speedily effected) and to disarme the
Papists according to Law; The Subjects may then enjoy the benefit of Peace, and
the Liberty of their Persons, goods and freedom of Trade; In the mean time the
Generals and Commanders of the Armies of both sides shall be enjoined to keep
the Soldiers from plundring, which the two Houses of Parliament have ever
disliked and forbidden.

And for the speedy settling of this so much desired Peace, they have thought
good to send their Committees with instructions, That if His Majesty be pleased
to consent to a Cessation so limited, and qualified, They may forthwith proceed
to treat upon the Propositions; And because the time is so far elapsed in
these preparations, They desire the Cessation may begin the five and twentieth
of this instant March, or sooner if it may be, And in the mean time notice to
be given to all the Forces in the several and remote parts, And the
Commanders, Officers and Soldiers enjoined to observe this Cessation
accordingly; To which they hope and pray, That God will give such a Blessing,
as may produce and confirm Peace, Safety and Happiness to His Majesty, and
all His People.

Io. BROWN Cleric. Parliament.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER TO THE AFORESAID ARTICLES.
HIS MAJESTY has immediately upon their arrival admitted the Committee sent to
Him from both Houses of Parliament (as the Messengers of Peace) to His Royal
presence, and received the Articles of Cessation brought by them, which are in
effect the same His MAJESTY formerly excepted to, though their Expression in
the preface to these Articles of their readiness to agree to those alterations
and additions offered by His Majesty in such manner as is expressed, made him
Expect to have found at least some of the real alterations and additions made
by Him admitted, which He does not discover.

1. His Majesty desired that provision might be made, and license given to his
good Subjects, for their Freedom of Trade, Traffic, and Commerce, (though in
matters which concerned Himself more immediately, as in Arms, Ammunition,
Money, Bullion and Victual for the use of His Army, and the Passage of all
Officers and Soldiers of His Army, He was contented the restraint should be in
such manner as was proposed) of which his Majesty is so tender, that as he has
provided for the same by His gracious Proclamations, so he does daily release
and discharge such Merchandise and Commodities as are contrary to those
Proclamations stayed by any of His Majesty's Forces.

To this freedom and liberty of His good Subjects there is not the least
Admission given by these Articles, so that they have not any ease or benefit by
this Cessation, which His Majesty desires both Houses to consider of, and
whether if his Majesty should take the same Course to stop and interrupt the
Trade of the Kingdom, as the other Army does, a general loss and Calamity
would not seiz upon His good Subjects.

2. His Majesty to the end that a full Cessation might be as well at Sea as at
land, and He might be secured that the Ships proposed to be set forth for the
defense of His Majesty's Dominions, should be employed (...) only to that end
and purpose, desired that they might be put under the command of Persons to be
approved of by His Majesty, which is not consented to by these Articles, but
their former, to which His Majesty Excepted, strictly and entirely insisted on,
by which (besides that part of hostility remains) the conveying of any number
of Forces from any part to any other by that means remain free to them.

3. For the prevention of any inconveniences which might arise upon real
differences or mistakes upon the latitude of Expressions (as if His Majesty
should now consent to these Articles proposed in the terms proposed, He must
confess the Army of which He complains to be raised by the Parliament, and
either Himself to be no part of the Parliament, or himself to have raised
that Army) and for prevention of that delay, which he foresaw could not
otherwise be avoided, if upon every difference the Questions must be remitted
to London, His Majesty desired, that the committee (for whom He then sent a
safe Conduct) might have liberty to debate any such differences and
expressions, and reconcile the same, that all possible expedition might be used
to the main Treaty.

In this point of so high concernment no Power is given in these Articles, and
the Committee confessed to His Majesty they have no power given, but are
strictly and precisely bound to the very words of the Articles now sent, and
that before these are consented to by His Majesty, they cannot enter into any
Treaty concerning the other Propositions.

4. His Majesty desired that, during the Cessation, none of his good Subjects
might be imprisoned, otherwise then according to the known laws of the Land.

This is in no degree consented to, but the Privilege and liberty (to which
they were borne) reserved from them till the disbanding of both Armies, (though
they are no part of either Army) and so have no benefit by this Cessation.

5. His Majesty desired that, during this Cessation there should be no
Plundering or Violence offered to any of His Subjects.

In the Answer to which, His desire against Violence is not at all taken notice
of, nor is his desire against Plundering any ways satisfied, His Majesty not
only intending by it the robbing of the Subject by the unrulines of the
uncommanded Soldier (which their clause of requiring the General and Officers
to keep them from it seems to imply, and the assertion that the two Houses of
Parliament had ever disliked and forbidden it, declares plainly to be their
only meaning) but particularly the violence and Plundering used to His
Subjects, by forcibly taking away their goods, for not submitting to
Impositions and Taxes required from them, by Orders or Ordinances of one or
both Houses of Parliament, which are contrary to the known Laws of the Land.

6. Besides, that there is no consent given to those alterations and additions
offered by His Majesty (whatever is pretended) so, where an absolute consent
may be supposed, because the very words of His Majesty's Article are wholly
preserved, yet by reason of the relation to somewhat going before, that is
varied by them, the sense of those words is wholly varied too, as in the fourth
Article, that part of the third Article, to which that did refer, being
wholly left out. So that upon the matter all the Propositions made by His
Majesty (which did not in terms agree with those presented to Him) are utterly
rejected.

For these Reasons, and that this entrance toward a blessed Peace and
Accommodation (which has already filled the hearts of the Kingdom with joy and
hope) may be improved to the wished end, His Majesty desires that the Committee
now sent may speedily have liberty to Treat, debate, and agree upon the
Articles of Cessation, in which they, and all the World shall find, That His
Majesty is less sollicitous for His own dignity and greatness, then for His
Subjects ease and liberty. And He doubts not upon such a debate, all
differences concerning the Cessation will be easily and speedily agreed upon,
and the benefit of a Cessation be continued and confirmed to His People, by a
speedy disbanding of both Armies, and a sudden and firm Peace, which His
Majesty above all things desires.

If this so reasonable, equal, and just desire of His Majesty shall not be
yielded unto, but the same Articles still insisted upon, though His Majesty
next to Peace desires a Cessation, yet that the not agreeing upon the one may
not destroy the Hopes of, nor so much as delay the other, He is willing however
to Treat (even without a Cessation, if that be not granted) upon the
Propositions themselves in that order as is agreed upon, (and desires the
Committee here may be enabled to that effect.) In which Treaty He shall give
all His Subjects that satisfaction, that if any security to enjoy all the
Rights, Privileges and Liberties due to them by the Law, or that happiness in
Church and State, which the best times have seen, with such farther Acts of
Grace as may agree with His Honor, Justice and Duty to His Crown, and as may
not render Him less able to protect His Subjects, according to His Oath, will
satisfy them, He is confident in the Mercy of God, that no more precious Blood
of this Nation will be thus miserably spent.

FINIS.

