Die Sabbathii, 20 Maii, 1648.
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the
suppressing of all Tumultuous Assemblies, under pretense of framing (...)
presenting Petitions to the Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled do Declare, That as
it is the Right and Privilege of the Subjects of England to present unto the
Parliament their just Grievances by way of Petition, in a due manner, and they
shall be always ready to receive such Petitions, and to provide such remedies
for redress of such Grievances, as they in their wisdom and judgment shall
think best; so in regard that by the tumultuous Assemblies of persons in
several Counties and Cities of this Kingdom, in the framing of such Petitions,
diverse plots and designs are carried on by Malignants and Delinquents, and
persons ill-affected; to the endangering the destruction of Religion, this
present Parliament, and the Laws of this Kingdom, and Liberties of the Subject,
and by the like tumultuous presenting of the same by great numbers of riotous
and ill-affected persons, contrary to former usages in ancient times, many
mischiefs have ensued and bloodshed, and both Houses of Parliament hindered and
interrupted in their Debates and Resolutions concerning the settlement of the
great Affairs, peace and safety of the Kingdom; The said Lords and Commons do
hereby also Declare and Ordain, and be it Ordered and Ordained by Authority of
this present Parliament, That every such Petition, which hereafter shall be
brought up and presented to the Houses of Parliament, from any County or City,
or other ways, shall be brought up and presented only by a convenient number,
not exceeding twenty persons; and all such Petitions shall be by them delivered
to the Knights, Citizens or Burgesses who serve in Parliament for the said
County, City or Borough from whence the said Petitions come, or to some Member
of either of the said Houses, by them to be offered to the said respective
Houses; and that all persons who shall bring up any such Petition, do behave
themselves peaceably, orderly, and without offense: And if any person or
persons shall hereafter under such or the like pretense, tumultuously assemble
as aforesaid, the said person or persons so offending, shall be adjudged as
persons ill-affected to the Parliament and Kingdom.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Lunae, 22 Maii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the several and
respective Committees in the several Counties of England and Wales, be
enjoined, and are hereby required to disperse through their Counties, and
publish in all the Market Towns, The Ordinance passed on Saturday last
concerning Petitioning; And that the Knights and Burgesses of the several and
respective Counties, do send Copies of the said Ordinance, to the said
Committees, to be dispersed and published accordingly. It is further Ordered,
That Edward Husband the Printer do forthwith Print a sufficient number of these
Ordinances, and bring them in by to morrow twelve of the clock at the farthest.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com


