THE ROMAN HISTORY, FROM THE Building of the City, To the Perfect Settlement of
the EMPIRE, BY AUGUSTUS CAESAR. Containing the Space of 727 Years.

Designed as well for the Understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman
Affairs.

The Second Edition, carefully revised, and much improved.

By LAVRENCE ECHARD, A. M. Of Christ-College, in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by T. Hodgkin, for M. Gillyflower, in Westminster Hall; I.
Tonson, at the Iudge's-Head in Fleet Street; H. Bonwick, at the Red-Lyon in St.
Paul^s- Churchyard; and R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill: MDCXCVI.

THE ROMAN HISTORY



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Summers, Knight.
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Lordship,
HAving undertaken to collect a short Account of the Roman Affairs, I here
presume to present it to Your Lordship; and were the Performance in any degree
answerable to the Nobleness of the Subject, and the Greatness of Your
Lordship's Skill in this, as well as in all the politer Parts of Learning, I
might justly hope to find it in some measure acceptable. But how mean soever
the Performance is, I have still some fair Prospect of the Design; and I was
almost assured, from Your Lordship's generous Inclinations, to promote the best
and most useful Parts of Learning, that such a Design, could not, by any other
Means, be so acceptable to the Public, as by having the Advantage of Your
Lordship's Name before it.

My Lord, I cannot pretend to any such Knowledge of the Law, as to understand
which is the surest Method of attaining to Perfection in it. But, as I am
informed, some lay their Foundation in the ancient Histories of the Saxons,
Danes, and Normans: Others, I am told, only by the Way of Institutes, Reports,
and Statutes, arrive to a considerable Fame and Practice. But some there are,
whose generous Industry carries 'em yet further, who think it necessary to
spend some time in the Roman History, Classical Authors, Civil Law, and the
Pleadings of Cicero. And, I need not go about to acquaint the World, That Your
Lordship's Excellency in all these, together with Your great natural
Endowments, and answerable Improvements, did not only give Your Lordship very
high Advantages over Others, at Your first Appearance, but in a very short time
raised You to the highest Dignity in the Law, and the utmost Favor of the
greatest Prince in the World.

I speak not this, my Lord, so much to celebrate the singular Prudence and
Justice of His Majesty, in advancing Your Lordship to this most honorable
Station, as to show the World what peculiar Reason I had to offer this humble
Address, and how ambitious I was of appearing,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble, obedient, and devoted Servant, Laure^nce
Echard.

THE PREFACE.
THERE are required so many Qualifications and Accomplishments in an Historian,
and so much Care and Niceness in writing an History, that some have reckoned it
One of the most difficult Labors that Human Nature is capable of. And this
seems the more probable from the small Number of good Histories that ever yet
appeared in the World. Even the principal Writers of the Roman History, who are
doubtless as excellent as any in the World, have not been free from Faults, or
at least from Critics, who have been very ready to make their several Remarks
upon 'em. Polybius, say they, is a very good Author, but is too much addicted
to Preaching. Dionysius Hal. is a very great Critic, but too morose, and may
rather be placed among the Writers of Antiquities than History. Diodorus
Siculus spends too much time in Fables, and is not free from trifling, and has
but little of the Roman Affairs. Dion Cassius, they look upon to be fickle,
partial, a great Flatterer, and as great a Reviler. Appian is very well for
Military Discipline, but is often out in the Roman Affairs. Caesar only wrote
of some of his own Matters, and was so Modest and Just as not to call his Book
History, but Commentaries. Neither will Plutarch nor Suetonius go for
Historians, they being only Biographers. Livy, say they, is indeed a great Man,
but he is a little too verbose and circumstantial, and too much given to
Prodigies and Patavinity. Salust is blamed for his Preface, which, they say, is
not only large enough for the History of the World, but might as well stand
before any other Book whatsoever. And something they have to say of all the
rest, which I need not trouble the Reader withal.

But notwithstanding these several Censures, most of these Authors are very
extraordinary in their kind, and generally are excellent Patterns to imitate;
if it be done with Judgment. But how extraordinary soever they are, they are
either all Fragments, or else so unfinished, that a complete Body of the Roman
History, for six or seven hundred Years, can never be gotten out of any one of
'em. So that he, who expects to have any tolerable Account of the Roman
Affairs, for so long a time, from old Writers, must, besides his understanding
the Latin and Greek Tongues, put himself to a considerable Expense both of
Money and Time; except he will content himself with that little he can learn
from Florus, and such other immethodical and imperfect Epitomies. This
Consideration is sufficient to vindicate my Design, in this following
Collection; and I know none which is of it self more useful for Young Scholars
or Gentlemen, or perhaps more entertaining. There never was any thing of this
kind in our Language before, nor any thing relating to the Roman Affairs, but
either what has been intermixed with much more other History, or what has
contained but a few Years of this Part. Of these I find none of any Note
besides Raleigh, Ross, Howel, the Author of the History of the two
Triumvirates, and Pedro Mexia, Author of the Imperial History; the two last of
which are Translations.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Account of the Romans, begins at the Building of the
City, but contains but 586 Years, ending at the second Macedonian War: And though
it cannot be denied but the last hundred Years is written with very much Spirit
and Judgment, and all of it with as much Skill and Clearness; yet, besides the
Inconveniency of being so intermixed with other Matters, all before the first
Punick War, bear no manner of Proportion with the rest, as to length. Ross
carries on Sir Walter's Design, but after such a disproportionate Manner,
either for Length or Vigor, that I need not say any more of him. Howel is much
more exact, both for Method and Proportion in the Roman History, than Sir
Walter, and does not only continue it as far as this goes, but above 300 Years
further; which he has done with wonderful Pains and Industry. Yet
notwithstanding all his Method, he has not justly proportioned his Matter; his
57 Years Period, after the Expulsion of the Kings, is too long for the rest of
his History; many memorable Actions, between that and the first Triumvirate,
are too short; the first Triumvirate it self is too long in his second Edition,
and too short in the first; and the second Triumvirate is too short in both.
Besides, he is often too flat and insipid to affect us thoroughly, and the
Actions of the bravest Men are related too coldly and unconcern'dly to move us
as they ought; which, together with his frequent Want of Transitions and Words
of Connection, and his often mixing of critical Learning, makes him far less
pleasant than otherwise he might be. And what still adds to these
Imperfections, is the Obscurity of his Style, which proceeds sometimes from his
unlucky or unnatural Misplacing of his Words, and sometimes from his affecting
a Shortness, without thoroughly considering and pre-observing the Dangers that
attend that useful Way of Writing. His Collections indeed are admirable, both
for their Usefulness and Exactness; his Decision's very just and faithful; and
his Learning very uncommon and curious: In short, we may say, that no Man ever
more truly and carefully brought together the principal Matters of all the
Roman Historians, than he; and that he was an incomparable Collector and
Compiler, though at the same time he was but an indifferent Historian.

I fear I have been too long upon this last, but still I must beg the Reader's
leave to consider the two remaining. The History of the two Triumvirates is a
Translation from the French, and contains only 30 Years, but of the busiest
Time of the Commonwealth. It is a History very ingeniously writ, handsomely put
together, and faithfully collected; and is far more pleasant and palatable than
Howel's. Yet as few Years as it contains, it is manifestly too tedious in many
Places, which is occasioned sometimes from the natural Verboseness of the
French Temper, and sometimes from the Author's descending too particularly to
the lesser and more private Actions of Mankind; which makes him fall from the
Majesty of a Historian to that of a Biographer. And, notwithstanding his being
so very particular, he has wholly left out all Caesar's Wars with the Gauls,
which gained him so much Glory and Reputation, and was the Original of all his
future Greatness. Pedro Mexia is a Translation from the Spanish, and contains
the Lives of all the Roman and German Emperors to his own Time, which plainly
shows him a Biographer; though, besides, he has many excellent Marks of a
Historian. He begins almost at the latter end of this History, and in effect
contains not much more than 33 Years of it; and in that short Space he is
extremely imperfect in one of the most principal Actions of the Roman History,
namely, the Settlement of the Roman Empire by Augustus.

After all this, I suppose it will be expected that my own Piece is every way
faultless, and has all the Perfections that can be desired from a Book of this
Size or Proportion; but I will not be so foolishly vain as to pretend to that;
I can only say, that I have in some measure endeavored to avoid the Defects
and Faults of those Writers whom I have here taken notice of, and likewise to
imitate their Excellencies, especially those of the Ancients, as far as the
Compass I have taken would admit of, which has been a severe Curb to me. But to
come closer to the Matter, it will be convenient to let the Reader know, in
short, what he is to expect from this Book. It is an entire, though short,
Account of the Roman Affairs, for 727 Years, in which Compass of Time, the most
memorable things were Acted, and the most famous of the Classical Authors
flourished. It is collected with the utmost Fidelity from almost all the Roman
Historians whatsoever, but more especially from these seven most noted,
Dionysius Hal. Livy, Plutarch, Polybius, Dion Cassius, Appian, and Caesar. I
found it very inconvenient to crowd the Margent of every Page with these and
many other Names, as many do; but, when it is needful, I quote 'em in the Body
of the Book, particularly when any uncommon Story is related, or any doubtful
Point is to be decided. I have likewise been obliged to some of our Modern
Writers, but to none so much as Howel, and the History of the two Triumvirates,
both whose accurate Collections have often saved me much Trouble, though I
examined the Originals from whence they had 'em. Upon that Account I have
copied 'em in many Places, and that too almost verbally, whenever I found it
both for the Ease of my self and the Advantage of my Book: For I am never
cautious in Borrowing, as long as I acknowledge it, and can benefit my Reader,
whose Good I always study before my own Commendation.

The Method of the whole I have endeavored to make as easy and as natural as
I could, dividing and distinguishing the Books, Chapters, and Sections, with
all the Skill and Judgment I had; so that I hope it will be all of it clearly
comprehended, and the principal Matters as easily remembered. Nothing is more
necessary than convenient resting Places for a Reader to take Breath at; and
the want of this or the like Method will appear apparently in any Man's reading
over Livy. For though the Regal State may there be clearly enough comprehended,
by reason of the Nature of the Subject; yet the vast Variety of the Matter that
follows, will not be mastered and retained without toiling and sweating: For it
is a great Inconvenience when the Reader must separate and distinguish the
Matter, where the Author has not done it. Then to make it still more Clear, I
have all the way intermixed so much Chronology and Geography, as is necessary
to illustrate the Story.

As for the Style, I have made it as plain and intelligible as I could; and as
I have no ways affected Flourishes and the French Finery, so for the most part
I have avoided all Meanness of Words or Expressions, endeavoring in some
measure to preserve the Gravity which belongs to History, and which ought not
to be omitted in a Collection: Yet I must acknowledge, that I have bestowed too
little Pains in the perfecting of the Style in some places; at least not so
much as I should have done, had it been a Translation of any ancient Author; I
mean as to the Nicities of our Tongue, and the Perfection of Periods. The
Speeches are generally the most carefully done, though I could scarce take any
verbally, by reason of the little Compass I was allowed: And upon that account
I was forced in some places to follow their Sense at a distance, which some
that are over nice will scarcely allow to a faithful Historian. And this little
Compass likewise hindered me from having all the Transitions I could have
desired, though those are the principal Beauties belonging to the Way and Manner
of writing Historical Matters.

To come to the Use of this Book; It will be particularly useful to Young
Students and Gentlemen, by giving 'em an Insight into the principal of the
Roman Customs, Laws, and Magistrates; I mean such of 'em as cannot be so
clearly learnt from Rosinus, and Books of mere Antiquities. It is the
Historical Account of all the various Occasions and Circumstances that can best
clear some of these things. The Tribunes of the People may serve for one
Instance of this; for no Man can thoroughly understand the Nature of those
Magistrates, without reading the History of their Creation, and likewise their
chief Actions afterward. And still that this Book might be as complete as I
could make it, I have at the most convenient Places intermixed the History of
the Roman Learning, and given a short Account of all the Principal Authors, as
far as this History reaches. But still I have taken care to join all this to
the rest, in such a manner as both might make but one entire Body.

But to show more noble Uses of this Book, and that I may incite all Gentlemen
to be well acquainted with the Roman History, of which this is an Introduction,
I shall give 'em the sense of what a very Ingenious Man says upon this Subject.
It is the Story of the Fate and Fortunes of a City that raised it self to an
Universal Empire, and became the Metropolis of the whole World; and all from a
Troop of Vagabond Shepherds, packed together upon the Banks of Tiber. It is a
long Train of the Adventures of a People, scandalous as it were in their
Origin, coming of an Extraction in a manner Infamous, born and nursed up in
Plunderings and Murders, and trained up in Villainies; who became Wise, Frugal,
Just, Passionately studious of Glory, till they infinitely over-topp'd the rest
of Mankind: A People whose Prudence in their Counsels, whose Maturity of
Deliberations, whose Diligence in Execution, whose profound Secrecy in the most
important Affairs, and whose noble Resolution in unavoidable Dangers, and the
greatest Extre^ tremities, ought to be remembered to all Ages. It is a History
of a State that grew so mighty from so small Beginnings, of its Progress, its
strange Changes, the Revolutions of its Power and Greatness, its amazing
Exaltation, and the miraculous and almost unconceivable Pitch of Glory it
arrived at; and all by its patient enduring of Hardships, by its Perseverance
in Labors, by its exact Observation of Laws, by the inviolable Severity of its
Discipline in the Duties of Peace and War, and by training up a well regulated
and courageous Soldiery, encouraged and elevated with the sole Prospect of
aggrandizing the Roman Name. It was a Nation that was Virtuous through a true
Principle of Honor; whose Valor was more the Product of the Head than Heart;
a Nation that courted or avoided Danger, from a result of Prudence, and knew as
well when to expose it self, as when to retreat, by the Dictates of Reason; and
obtained the Sovereignty over the rest of the World, more by the Reputation of
its Virtue, than the Force of its Arms.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THIS Second Edition.
IN the Preface to this History, I acknowledged that I had not bestowed
sufficient Pains in the perfecting the Style in some places; which proceeded
not only from a want of Time, but also from the great Care I had upon me of
perfecting the Matter, and proportioning its several Parts to that small
Compass to which I was over-strictly confined. The principal Fault, besides a
little Abruptness in some few Periods, was the having Expressions in several
Places somewhat too low and vulgar for History, which requires the utmost
Purity as well as the greatest Strength. This Fault is in a great Measure
corrected in this Edition; which I assert with the greater Freedom, because I
have been much assisted by Persons of the greatest Judgment in these Matters,
whose Names I ought not to mention without their particular Leave.

In examining the Style, I likewise found the Matter in many Places defective,
and capable of great Improvements with no great Inlargements; for which reason
I have made several considerable Additions in most Parts of this History,
especially in the last Book, and particularly in the third and Fourth Chapters,
where several Material Actions were manifestly too shortly and lamely related.
I am truly sensible that I have disobliged those Persons who have bought the
First Edition, in not putting these Additions in distinct Places, whereby they
might have had 'em without buying the whole; but I hope they will the more
readily pardon me, since these Additions are of that Nature, that in many
Places it would be as difficult to separate 'em from the Body of the Book, as
to separate the Alterations made in the Style. I undertook this Second Edition
the more willingly, because the Number of the First was so small, and therefore
the less Injury done to the World; but I here promise never to make any further
Additions to it for the future, nor any Corrections except those of the Press:
Of which th^re are these following Errors in this Edition, occasioned by my
Distance from the Town, which I desire the Reader to correct before he reads
the Book.

ERRATA.
PAge 26. in the Margent, read 83. p. 73. l. 20. for are r. were. p. 153. l. 9.
between the and Dictator, r. first. p. 176. l. 21. r. being. p. 178. l. 1.
between the and time r. Night. p. 185. l. 26. for there r. th^^. p. 220. l.
(...). for stand r. and. p. 223. l. 10. after (...) add raised. l. 12. dele
raised. l. 25. after such add in. p. 249. l. 4. r. Massina. p. 257. l. 27 r.
Myssians. p. 276. l. 30. r. Ma^ilius. p. 283. l. 5. r. showed. l. 12. r.
proceeded. p. 284. l. 17. r. Dele. Notwithstanding. p. 300. in the Margent r.
696. p. 302. l. 26. dele Reveral. p. 303. l. 7. for (...) in r. not a Ti^^sand.
p. 306. l. 12. r. to hnder. p. 308. l. 12. r. Labienus. p. 312. l. 3. r.
Parthia. p. 416. l 17. r. Casari^. p. 440. l. 31. dele the second to. p. 445.
l. 9. after this add were. There are some few other Errors, but such as will
not easily mislead the Reader.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. The Regal State of Rome, From the Building of the City, to the
Overthrow of that Kind of Government. Containing the space of 245 Years.
THE INTRODUCTION: Of the Original of Rome, and its Inhabitants. CHAP. I. From
the Building of the City, to the Death of Romulus, the first King of Rome:
Containing the space of 37 Years. CHAP. II. From the Death of Romulus, to the
Death of Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome: Containing 44 Years. CHAP.
III. From the Death of Numa, to the Death of Tullus Hostilius, the third King
of Rome: Containing 33 Years. CHAP. IV. From the Death of Hostilius, to the
Death of Ancus Marcius, the fourth King of Rome: Containing 24 Years. CHAP. V.
From the Death of Ancus Marcius, to the Death of Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth
King of Rome: Containing 38 Years. CHAP. VI. From the Death of Tarquinius
Priscus, to the Death of Servius Tullius, the sixth King of Rome: Containing 44
Years. CHAP. VII. From the Death of Servius Tullius, to the Banishment of
Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh King of Rome; which caused the Dissolution of
the Regal State: Containing 25 Years.
BOOK II. The Consular State of Rome, From the Beginning of that Government, to
the Ruin of it by the first Triumvirate. Containing the Space of 449 Years.
CHAP. I. From the Banishment of the last King, to the first Dictator; which
was the first Intermission of the Consular Power: Containing 10 Years. CHAP.
II. From the Creation of the first Dictator, to the great Retrenchment of the
Consular Power by the Tribunes of the People: Containing 5 Years. CHAP. III.
From the Creation of the Tribunes of the People, to the second Intermission of
the Consular Power by the Decemviri: Containing 42 Years. CHAP. IV. From the
Creation of the Decemviri, to the third Intermission of the Consular Power by
the Military Tribunes: Containing 8 Years. CHAP. V. From the Creation of the
Military Tribunes, to the Burning of Rome by the Gauls; which almost ruined the
Roman Nation: Containing 54 Years. CHAP. VI. From the Burning of Rome by the
Gauls, to the Wars with the Samnites; when the Romans began much to extend
their Conquests: Containing 46 Years. CHAP. VII. From the first Wars with the
Samnites, to the Wars with Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, the first Forreig^er they
had to deal with; wherein the Romans began to learn the Arts of War: Containing
63 Years. CHAP. VIII. From the Beginning of the Wars with Pyrrhus, to the first
Punick or Carthaginian War; when the Romans first set Foot out of Italy:
Containing 16 Years. CHAP. IX. From the Beginning of the first Punick War, to
the Beginning of the second; the Romans now growing Powerful by Sea, as well as
by Land: Containing 17 Years. CHAP. X. From the Beginning of the second Punick
War, to the finishing of it by Scipio Africanus; when the Romans became perfect
in the Arts of War: Containiny 17 Years. CHAP. XI. From the End of the second
Punick War, to the End of the third, and the Destruction of Carthage; when Rome
got clear of all her Rival States: Containing 55 Years. CHAP. XII. From the
Destruction of Carthage, to the End of the Sedition of the Gracchi; which much
shook the Government, and was the first Step to the Ruin of the Consular
State: Containing 23 Years. CHAP. XIII. From the End of the Sedition of the
Gracchi, to the End of the first Civil War in Italy, and to the perpetual
Dictatorship of Sylla; which was the second great Step to the Ruin of the
Consular State: Containing 41 Years. CHAP. XIV. From the perpetual Dictatorship
of Sylla, to the first Triumvirate, namely, Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus; which
proved the Ruin of the Consular State, and was the first Step to the setting
up of the Imperial: Containing 22 Years.
BOOK III. The Mixed State of Rome, From the Beginning of the first
Triumvirate, to the perfect Settlement of the Roman Empire. Containing the
space of 33 Years.
CHAP. I. From the Beginning of the first Triumvirate, to the Death of Crassus,
one of the Combination; which broke and divided that Party: Containing 7 Years.
CHAP. II. From the Death of Crassus, to the Death of Pompey; which made way for
Caesar's Absolute Authority, and was the second Step to the Imperial State:
Containing above 5 Years. CHAP. III. From the Death of Pompey, to the Death of
Caesar; which finished the first Triumvirate, but still kept down the Consular
State: Containing 4 Years. CHAP. IV. From the Death of Caesar, to the Defeats
and Deaths of Brutus and Cassius, by the second Triumvirate, Octavius, Anthony,
and Lepidus; which ruined the Remains of the Commonwealth: Containing above 2
Years. CHAP. V. From the Deaths of Brutus and Cassius, to the Banishment of
Lepidus; which varied the Course of the Triumvirates Power: Containing 6 Years.
CHAP. VI. From the Banishment of Lepidus, to the Death of Anthony; which made
way for Octavius's Absolute Authority; and was the last Step to the Imperial
State: Containing 6 Years. CHAP. VII. From the Death of Anthony, to the perfect
Settlement of the Empire by Octavius; which ended all Disturbances, and brought
Rome to its utmost Glory: Containing 3 Years.
THE Roman History.
BOOK I.
The Regal State of ROME, From the Building of the City, to the Overthrow of
that Kind of Government.
Containing the Space of 245 Years.
The INTRODUCTION.
Of the Original of Rome, and its Inhabitants.
I. IN relating such great and remarkable Affairs as those of the Romans, it
will be necessary to give some Account of the Original of that People: And, to
make the Account as clear and intelligible as I can, it may not be amiss first
to observe, that that Country which was anciently called Italy, of which Rome
was afterward the chief City, did not contain above one half of what now goes
by that Name. But as small as it was, it contained many distinct Nations and
People; the principal of which were the Aborigines, Sabines, Hetrurians, or
Tuscans, Umbri, Samnites, Campani, Apulii, Calabri, Lucanii, and Brutii; and
others of inferior Note which were often dependant on these. As for the rest of
what is now called Italy, that was principally possessed by the Gauls, who had
driven out the Hetrurians, and settled themselves in these Parts; being
distinguished into several Names, as the Senones, the Insubres, etc. This Part
went by the Name of Gallia Cis-Alpina and Togata, to distinguish it from that
Gaul which is now called France, and was almost the same with the present
Lombardy: The chief Inhabitants of it, besides the several Nations of the
Gauls, were the Ligures and the Veneti.

Of all the forementioned People, the Aborigines, afterward called by the Name
of Latins, were of principal Note; not upon the account of any particular
Excellency, but as being better known, and much more inquired after by all
Historians. These were of the Posterity of the Oenotrians, a Grecian People of
Arcadia, who had driven out the Siculi, the first Inhabitants of these Parts of
Italy. They possessed the Country of Latium, Old (...)
a small Country along the River Tiber, about 30 Miles in length, and 16 in
breadth, containing near a fourth Part of that little Province in the Pope's
Dominions now called Campagna-di-Roma. We find these governed by their own
Kings nigh 200 Years before the destruction of Troy, and above 1300 before
Christ; the first Kings we hear of in Italy, or in all Europe, except Greece.
These Kings kept their Courts at Laurentum, a City about 5 Miles off the Mouth
of the River Tiber; and were Governors of a mixed People: For first, some
Pelasgians out of Thessaly settled among 'em; soon after, Saturn from Creet,
who fled from his Son Jupiter, which occasioned their changing of their Names
to Latins, Latini.
a latendo, from his lying hid there; next Evander from Arcadia, then Hercules
from Greece, with their several Followers.

But the last who settled in this Country, according to Dionysius, were some
Relicts of the Trojans, under the Conduct of their Prince Aeneas, who had left
his native Country, and his enraged Enemies, to seek out Foreign Habitations.
These were about 1200 in all, though some will allow but half that Number; and
arrived in these Parts three Years after the destruction of Troy, and above 400
before the building of Rome, A. M. 2824. Aeneas at his first landing, was very
civilly entertained by Latinus, the King then reigning, as a Person of great
Renown, who not only treated him honorably, but gave him his only Daughter
Lavinia in Marriage. This occasioned a War between him and Turnus, a Prince of
the Rutuli, their near Neighbors, who had formerly made Pretensions to her;
but these Wars soon ended in Turnus's death, which did not only free Aeneas
from a Rival, but secured his Kingdom, which Latinus gave him for his Daughters
Portion after his decease. A^neas thus settled, soon after built the City of
Lavinium, in honor of his Wife, about five or six Miles East of Laurentum,
where he kept his Court; and the more to oblige his Subjects, caused both them
and his own Countrymen to be called by the common Name of Latini: But engaging
in a bloody War with Mezentius, a King of the Hetrurians, he was slain, after a
short Reign of four Years. His Subjects, in honor to his Memory, dedicated a
Chapel to him, under the Title of Jupiter Indiges. Jupiter Indiges.


Upon the death of Aeneas, his Son Ascanius succeeded him in the Throne; but
Lavinia, being left with Child by him, out of fear fled to the Woods, and was
there delivered of a Son, who from the place of his Birth had the Name of
Silvius. Thirty Years after the building of Lavinium, Ascanius left it to his
Mother-in-Law, and founded Alba-Longa, about 12 Miles North of it, which he
made his Seat. Ascanius had a Son called Iulus, from whom came the famous
Family of the Iulii; Iulii.
this Son after his Mother's Death, contended with Silvius for the Kingdom, but
the People, judging that to belong to Latinus's Race, gave the Kingdom to
Silvius, and the Priesthood to Iulus, in whose Family it thenceforth continued.
After Silvius, succeeded 13 Kings of the same Race, for nigh 400 Years, who all
had their Seats at Alba, and many of them likewise had the Name of Silvius:
These Kings were as following; Aeneas Silvius, who reigned 31 Years, Latinus,
who reigned 51, Alba 39, Capetus I. 26, Capys 28, Capetus II. 13, Tiberinus 8,
Agrippa 24, Alladius 19, Aventinus 37, Procas 23, Amulius 42, and Numitor, who
was the last King of Alba. Except the two last, we have but little remarkable
concerning these Kings, only Tiberinus gave Name to the River Tiber, Tiber.
by being drowned in it, it being before called Albula; and Aventinus gave Name
to Mount Aventine, Aventine.
one of the seven Hills of Rome.

These were called the Kings of Alba, or of Old Latium, which scarce contained
the sixth part of what was called Latium in Augustus's Reign; New Latium.
which then comprehended not only the Old Latini, but also the Rutuli, Aequi,
Hernici, Volsci, and Arunci. This Kingdom, though very Small, according to the
Dimensions before given of it, was very Fruitful, Populous, and full of Towns;
and Alba it self was a great and flourishing City, and had been the Mother of
thirty Latin Towns, when it was destroyed by Tullus Hostilius the third King
of Rome.

II. But to come close to the Roman Story, Amulius and Numitor, A. M. 3209.
the two last of these Kings, were Brothers; and it was agreed between 'em,
that Numit^r the Eldest, should have the Kingdom, and Amulius the Treasure and
Gold that was brought from Troy. But Money having the Advantage of mere
Authority, Amulius soon got his Brother out of his Kingdom; and, to secure it
to himself against the Pretensions of his Posterity, caused his Son Lausus to
be Murdered in a pretended Hunting, and his Daughter Rhea to be made a Vestal
Virgin. In the fourth Year of her Priesthood, going to fetch Water, she was met
and ravished by some Lover, or probably by Amulius himself, rather, as was
suppos^d, to serve his other Designs, than to gratify his Lust. But for the
Honor of the Cause, the Fact was laid upon Mars, in whose Grove it was
committed, who came to her, as they will have it, in a most dreadful manner
with Thunder and Lightning. Rhea proving with Child, was delivered of two Boys,
and thereupon was condemned to Death, or perpetual Imprisonment, and her
Children were thrown into the River. But the Wind and Stream were both so
favorable, that at the fall of the Water, they were left safe upon dry Ground,
and there happily found by Faustulus, Amulius^s Herds-Man, and suckled by his
Wife Laurentia, who, for her Infamous Life, was called Lupa; and this probably
might occasion the famous Story of their being nourished by a Wolf: The Names
of these Twins were Romulus and Remus.

The Children, grown up, proved Active and Courageous, suitable to the
Greatness of their Birth; but the Meanness of their Education gave 'em occasion
of falling out with some of Numitor's Herds-Men; in which contest Remus was
taken Prisoner, and brought before the King. Upon which Faustulus discovered to
Romulus all the Particulars of his Birth and hard Usage from Amulius; begging
him to be assistant in the Rescue of Remus. Romulus soon drew together a great
Number of Herds-Men and inferior People, who hated Amulius, whom he divided
into Companies, consisting of an hundred Men each; every Captain carrying a
small Bundle of Grass and Shrubs tied to a Pole. The Latins call such Bundles
Manipuli; from whence it is, that in their Armies they call their Captains
Manipulares. Manipulares.
Remus gaining upon the Citizens within, and Romulus making Attacks from
without, Amulius not knowing what Expedient to think of for his Security, in
that Amazement and Distraction, was taken and slain; the Brothers settling
their Grandfather Numitor in his Throne, after he had been deposed forty two
Years.

The Affairs of Alba succeeding thus prosperously, A. M. 3251.
the Young Men, ambitious of Glory, were desirous of Founding a City in the
Place where they were brought up; which Design was approved of by their
Grandfather, who appointed 'em Land, with such of his Subjects as he knew were
of his Brother's Faction; and likewise gave free Liberty to all others who were
willing, to settle themselves in this new Colony. Most of the Trojans came in,
(of which there remained fifty Families in Caesar's Time, as Dionysius informs
us) and also all the Inhabitants about the Palatine-Hill, where the City was
built, which was about 14 Miles North-West of Alba, upon the River Tiber. For
the more speedy carrying on this Work, the People were divided into two Parts,
who were to work by way of Emulation: But what was designed for a considerable
Advantage, proved a greater Inconveniency; for it gave birth to two Factions,
whereof one preferred Romulus, and the other Remus; which swelled 'em with the
ambitious Desires of Preeminence. This soon appeared in their Disagreement
about the Place of Building, Romulus contending for the Palatine, where they
were brought up, and Remus for the Aventine-Hill. Upon which, the Matter was
brought before their Grandfather Numitor, who advis^d 'em both to go apart,
and observe the flying of Birds; and the most Fortunate of the two should be
counted the Founder of the Colony. They both took their Stations upon their own
Hills, and Remus first had a flight of 6 Vultures, but Romulus having, or
pretending to have, double the Number, both were saluted by the Title of King.
This widned the Breach, and the Contention grew so hot as to come to a Battle,
wherein Remus was worsted and slain, with several others, particularly
Faustulus and his Brother Plistinus. But it is likewise said, that before the
Battle, Remus gave his Brother many great Provocations, particularly by leaping
over his Wall, to ridicule him for the Lowness of it.

Romulus, now sole Commander, and Eighteen Years of Age, began the Foundation
of Rome in the fourth Year of the sixth Olympiad, according to Varro's Account,
which was in the Year of the World 3252, the sixth Year of Iotham King of
Judah, and the seventh of Pekah King of Israel, 431 Years after the Destruction
of Troy, 120 after the Building of Carthage, 214 before the Beginning of the
Persian Empire, and 752 before Christ; And having got Augurs, and such sort of
People from Hetruria, he set about it with much Ceremony, on the 21 Day of
April, according to Plutarch, which Day the Romans Anniversarily kept Holy,
calling it their Country's Birthday. He took in the Mount Palatine only, and
with a Heifer and a young Bullock, plowed up a Furrow where the Wall was
designed; which Custom was afterward observed by the Romans, both in the
building and razing of Cities; and wherever a Gate was to be made, the Plow
was lifted up, which occasioned it to be called Porta, a portando aratrum: All
within this Line was called Pomaerium, Pomaerium,
from Post-Murum, or Pone Maenia. The City was almost square, containing at
first about 1000 Houses, and was nigh a Mile in Compass, with four Gates,
namely Romanula, Ianualis, Mucionis, and Carmentalis; and a small Territory
belonging to it of 7 or 8 Miles long.

Thus we see Rome in its Original, a small inconsiderable beggarly Place, with
Dominions still of less Note; which yet from this mean and contemptible
Beginning became Mistress of the World; being first founded and supported by
its Kings, then strengthened and enlarged by its Consuls, and at last brought
to its utmost Perfection by its Emperors. As for the Arts and Contrivances, the
Policy and Cunning, the Strength and Valor, and the gradual Proceedings, with
the extraordinary Fortune, which contributed to make the Romans Masters of such
vast and powerful Dominions, these are the Subject of this following History.

CHAP. I.
From the Building of the City, to the Death of Romulus, the first King of Rome.
Containing the space of 37 Years.
I. ROmulus having thus Founded the City of Rome, U. C. 1. King.
by his Grand-Father's Advice, left the Choice of the Government to the People,
who immediately made him King, according to Dionysius; and he receiving it as a
Gift from them, his Power became the more plausible and undisputable. The
Number of the Colony consisted of about 3000 Foot, and 300 Horse; and the first
Method he made use of to increase this Number was his Building a Temple to the
Asylaean God, which he made a Sanctuary to all Malefactors and discontented
Persons, who thereupon came in great Numbers from all the Neighboring Parts.
He divided the People into three Parts, Tribe. (...).
which were called Tribes, that is to say Thirds; and each Tribe was divided
into ten Curiae, which were much the same as our Parishes, as the Tribes were
like our Wards; each Curia having its proper Temple and Sacrifices, and a
Priest called Curio over it, and over all an Archpriest called Curio Maximus.
Each Curia was likewise by Romulus subdivided into ten Decuriae, Decuria.
over which were appointed distinct Officers. According to the number of the
Curiae, he divided the Lands into thirty Parts, reserving one Portion for
Public Uses, and another for Religious Ceremonies. In all Matters of
Importance, for many Years, the People gave their Votes according to the
Curiae, and to what the major Part of the Curiae agreed, was reckoned the
Resolution of the whole Assembly, each single Man having a Vote; and this made
that Assembly called Comitia Curiata. Comiti^ Curiata.


Romulus made also another Distinction of the People, according to their Honor
and Dignity, which was into Patritians and Plebeians: Patritians. Plebeians.
The former, as being Elder and more nobly descended, were to take care about
the Religious Rites, bear Offices of Magistracy, administer Justice, and be
assistant to the King in his Government: The latter to till the Fields, feed
Cattle, and follow Trades; but not to have any Share in the Government, to
avoid the Inconveniences of a Popular Power. To bind the Principal each to the
other, he recommended certain of the Plebeians to the Protection of the
Patritians, liberty being given to the Plebeians to choose their own Patrons.
Patrons. Clients.
The Duty of these Patrons was to advise their Clients in Points of Law, to
manage their Suits, to take care of 'em, absent and present, as their own
Children; and by all Ways and Methods to secure their Peace and Happiness. On
the other side, the Duty of the Clients was to help their Patrons with Money
upon many Occasions, to ransom them or their Sons if taken Prisoners, and to
bear the Charges of their Magistracy, and other honorable Employments. They
were never to accuse each other, or take contrary Sides; for if they did, any
one might lawfully kill them without Examination. So that this Patronage was an
Obligation as effectual as any Consanguinity or Alliance; and it was the Glory
of the Nobility to have a great Number of Clients, and to treat 'em civilly.
This Patronage had admirable Effects toward the firm Union of the People, for
above 600 Years after, till Caius Gracchus broke the Peace of the City: And
because the Plebeians in the City received such Advantage from this
Constitution, in imitation thereof, afterward all Colonies, Confederate and
Conquered Cities, had their Patrons, to whom frequently the Senate would remit
such Controversies as were brought before 'em, and ratify their Judgment.

After this, Romulus chose 100 Men out of the Patritians to assist him in the
Government. This number he called a Senate, Senate.
either from their Age or Virtue, or, a sinendo, because nothing was transacted
without their Permission. Such of the Fathers as he enrolled or entered into
this Venerable Assembly, Patres Conscripti.
he called Patres Conscripti, as Dionysius rightly observes; and, to make up
this Number, he chose three out of each Tribe, and as many out of each Curia;
over all which he placed a particular Magistrate, to whom he committed the
Government of the City when he was absent in the Wars; and this Magistrate was
called Praefectus Urbis. Presectus V^bis.
After this, he immediately proceeded to settle the Authorities of King,
Senate, and People. The King's Office at home, was, To take care of the
Religious Rites; to preserve the Laws and Customs; to decide the chief Causes
between Man and Man, and refer the less Matters to the Senate, into which he
had an Inspection; to call the Senate, assemble the People, first giving his
own Opinion, then ratifying what was approved of by the major Part: Abroad, and
in the Wars, He had absolute Authority. The Senate's Office was, To debate and
resolve about such things as the King proposed, which were decreed by the
Majority of Voices. To the People he committed three Things; To create
Magistrates, make Laws, and resolve about any War that was proposed by the
King; yet still in such a manner as the Authority of the Senate always
interposed.

The next thing that Romulus did, was to take care of a Guard for his Person;
and therefore he ordered the Curiae to choose him out 300 lusty young Men, ten
out of each; Celeres.
and these were called Celeres, a celeritate from their Activity and Readiness
to assist the King upon all Occasions. They were commanded by a Tribune or
Colonel, Tribunus Celerum.
called Tribunus Celerum, three Centurions, and other Inferior Officers. This
Company, with their Spears, defended the King in the City, and in Battles were
the foremost Leaders, Charging first and Retreating last. Besides these, he had
for his Attendance, Lictors.
twelve Lictors or Sergeants, who punished Offenders, and executed his
Commands; these always going before him in Public, with their Bundles of Rods,
called Fasces, and their Axes, signifying different Punishments, according to
Men's different Crimes. Thus Romulus, with all the Industry and Prudence
imaginable, took care to settle the State, being very exact in Justice, and
forbidding all sordid Arts and Trades, especially such as were subservient to
Luxury, which being left wholly to Slaves and Strangers, the Romans for many
Years scorned to be concerned in 'em. This is the Form of the Commonwealth, as
Romulus first established it, which in general was so excellent, that it was
admired by Dionysius above all the Constitutions, even of his own Countrymen
the Grecians; and by its Healthfulness, and robust Constitution, had all the
manifest Signs of a thriving and long-lived State.

II. Romulus, finding he was encompassed with several powerful Nations, U. C. 4.
who, with envious Eyes beheld the extraordinary Growth of his City, and
observing how much it was filled by Fugitives, who had no Wives, he bethought
himself of Means to contract Alliance with his Neighbors, and to procure Wives
for his Subjects, which was his second Device to increase the City: Therefore,
by Advice of his Grandfather Numitor, and the Consent of the Senate, he
proclaimed a Solemn Feast and Public Games, in Honor of Neptune, through all
the Country thereabouts. This immediately occasioned a great Concourse of all
sorts of People, who came flocking in, with their Wives and Children, from
several Neighboring Places, to behold these Pompous Shows, together with the
new City. In the midst of the Solemnity, upon a Signal given, the Romans, with
their drawn Swords, seized on such Virgins as they could most conveniently
catch, and by main Force carried 'em to their Houses. The Number of these
amounted to 683, for whom Romulus chose so many Husbands, and married 'em after
their own Country Rites, making 'em sign a Covenant or Agreement, with the
Ceremonies of Fire and Water; which Custom continued among the Romans for many
Ages.

This Act was highly resented by most of their Neighbors, especially the
Sabines, who were principally concerned; but their Backwardness in their
Preparations made the Cities Caenina, Antemna, and Crustumium, begin the War
first. The two former (three or four Miles North of Rome, and Inhabited by the
Aborigines) Romulus soon subdued, with the Death of their King Acron, whom he
slew in a single Combat; and afterward the latter, a Colony of Alba, a little
way within the Country of the Sabines. The Lands were divided between some of
the Romans and the old Inhabitants, of whom 3000 were made Free of Rome,
without losing their former Estates; so that the Footmen of the City were now
much increased. For this Victory Romulus first Triumphed, and bringing home the
Spoils of King Acron, Opi^a Spolia.
which the Romans named Opima Spolia, or Royal Spoils, he designed a Spot of
Ground upon Mount Capitoline for a Temple to Jupiter Feretrius, Jupiter
Feretrius.
so called either a ferendo to bear, or rather from ferire to strike; and this
was the Place where the Capitol afterward stood. The Valor of Romulus and his
good Conduct in this War, together with his Clemency to the Conquered, had so
great Effects, that not only many eminent Men went over to him with their
Families, (amongst whom was Caelius, who gave Name to a Hill in the City) but
some whole Nations committed themselves to his Protection, and received
Colonies from Rome.

This notable Success was a great Disappointment to the Sabines, U. C. 6.
who resolving to correct their former Carelessness by double Diligence,
assembled themselves at Cures their Metropolis, proclaimed War against Rome,
and made choice of Tatius their King for General. On the other side, Romulus
made all possible Provision for Resistance, fortifying the Capitoline and
Aventine Hills, and receiving Auxiliary-Troops, both from Hetruria and his
Grandfather Numitor. The Sabines to have the fairer Pretense, first demanded
Restitution of the Virgins, and to have the Authors of the Injury delivered up
to them; but receiving no satisfactory Answer, both Armies drew out into the
Field, the Sabines, being 25000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and the Romans 20000 Poot
and 800 Horse; a great Number for a new built City. Tatius encamped between the
Capitoline and Quirinal, but found 'em too well fortified to be attacked; but
one Tarpeia, Daughter to Tarpeius, Governor of the Capitoline, called to his
Men from above, and agreed to betray the Place into their Hands, which was in a
short Time effected. What she required of 'em, as a Reward for this, was what
they wore on their left Arms, meaning their Bracelets; but they threw their
Targets upon her, which they wore on their left Arms, and pressed her to Death.
From hence this Hill was called Tarpeius, till the building of the Capitol,
which made it lose the Name, except that part of it which was called the
Tarpeian Rock, from whence they threw Malefactors down headlong.

The Sabines, now Masters of the Capitoline, had the Advantage of continuing
the War at their pleasure; and for a long time only light Skirmishes passed
between both Parties, with little or no Advantage to either side: But the
Tediousness and Charge of the War so wearied out both Romans and Sabines, that
they very much desired a Peace, but neither side would stoop to sue for it.
Thus they continued for a very considerable time, till both resolving to do
their utmost, they came to a general Battle, which was renewed several Days
with almost equal Success. In the last Contest, the Romans were much worsted in
the beginning, and fled to the Palatium; but rallying and renewing the Fight
with Success against the Sabines, the Women who were stolen and married to the
Romans, and the cause of this War, through the Persuasions of Hersilia, one of
the principal among 'em, ran desperately into the midst of the Darts and dead
Bodies, with their Children in their Arms, and their Hair about their Ears,
making such lamentable Shrieks and Out-crys, that both Armies immediately
desisted. These became Mediators, and made Peace between the Fathers and
Son-in-Laws, after the War had lasted six Years. The Articles were, First, That
Romulus and Tatius should reign jointly in Rome, U. C. 12.
with equal Power and Prerogative: Secondly, That the City from Romulus should
still be called Rome, but the Citizens Quirites, Quirites.
from Cures the native Place of Tatius: Thirdly, That now the two Nations
should become one, and as many of the Sabines as were willing, should be made
Free of Rome.

The City being now much increased by the Number of the Sabines, Mount
Capitoline was taken in, built upon, and laid out for their Habitation. Romulus
chose out 100 of the most noble of the Sabines, and added 'em to the Senate, so
that it now consisted of 200 Persons. Legions.
The Legions, (so called ab eligendo, because they were choice select Men)
which before contained 3000 Men, were now increased also to 4000, whence a
Legion was called Quadrata; yet afterward a Legion comprised as many Men as
was found convenient for the Service of the Commonwealth. Several new Feasts
were instituted upon the account of this Union, as Matronalia, Carmentala, etc.
and a particular Respect was had to those Women who procured this happy
Reconciliation, and several Privileges were allowed 'em, particularly they were
exempted from all Work unless Spinning and making of Cloth. Now the Tribes were
called by distinct Names; the first Rhamnenses, from Romulus; the second
Tatienses, from Tatius; and the third Luceres, from the Lucus or Grove where
the Asylum stood. For five Years the two King's reigned quietly and peaceably
together; but in the sixth, Tatius protecting some of his Friends who had
robbed and plundered the Lavinians, and killing the Ambassadors who were sent
to demand Satisfaction, was slain by the Lavinians at his going to sacrifice
there. Romulus, like a generous Prince, made Satisfaction to the injured
Persons, and buried Tatius in Rome very honorably.

III. Romulus, U. C. 18.
once more sole Monarch of Rome, marched against Fidenae, and subdued it, a
Town five Miles off Rome, that had seized on Provisions coming thither in time
of Famine; and soon after, he took Cameria, an Alban Colony not far distant;
into both which he sent a sufficient Number of Romans to inhabit 'em, according
to his usual Custom. Then he punished the Crustumini, who had killed their
Planters which he had placed among 'em; and over all these he obtained a second
Triumph. The Action of Romulus against the Fidenates was extremely resented by
the Veientes their Neighbors, who immediately by an Embassy required the
Romans to withdraw their Garrison, and restore the Inhabitants to all their
former Privileges. These Veientes were one of the twelve Nations of Hetruria, a
powerful People, inhabiting a strong City, and of extraordinary Largeness,
situated upon a craggy Rock about twelve Miles North of Rome. Their Demands
being rejected, they began their Acts of Hostility, and both Armies met at
Fidenae; where, after two sharp Engagements, Romulus became Conqueror. The
Veientes were now forced to betake themselves to Entreaties, and so entered
into a League with the Romans for 100 Years, U. C. 21.
upon these Articles; To quit a seventh part of their Dominions, with their
Salt Pits nigh the River, and to give up fifty Hostages of the most
considerable Families. Romulus for this, triumphed a third time, leading with
him their General, an aged Man, who had so badly performed his Duty, that he
was afterward personated by an old Man in all Triumphs.

This was the last War managed by Romulus, who after that employed most of his
Time in settling the Government, and placing it upon the surest Foundations. He
made many good and profitable Laws, most of which were unwritten. Particularly
he made one concerning Marriages, where the Authority of the Husband was so
well and conveniently settled, that for 520 Years, a Divorce was not known in
Rome. He gave Fathers absolute Power over their Sons, to sell, imprison,
scourge, or kill 'em, though in never so great an Office, and that as long as
they lived. He appointed no Punishment for real Parricide, but called all
Murder by that Name; thinking the latter a destable Crime, but the other
impossible: And it was a indeed Crime never known in Rome for 600 Years. For
the Peoples Way of Living, he enjoyed two Courses of Life, Warfare and
Husbandry, equally dividing the Lands, Slaves, and Money, taken from the Enemy;
he appointed a Market once in nine Days, which from thence was called Nundinae.
Nundin^.
When any Town was taken, he suffered no Prisoner of Man's Age to be slain or
sold, or their Lands left untilled, but ordered a Colony from Rome to cultivate
them, and some of the Strangers to be admitted to the Freedom and Privileges of
the City; and this was his third Contrivance to increase the City. As to
Controversies that might arise upon any Injuries, he immediately decided 'em,
or referred 'em to others, inflicting speedy Punishments according to the
Nature of the Crime. Finding public Spectacles to have a great Influence upon
the People, he set up his Judgment Seat in the most conspicuous Place in the
Forum, where his Guard of 300 Celeres, and his twelve Lictors with their Rods
and Axes, in view of all the People, scourging or executing Malefactors,
occasion^d an extraordinary Awe and Respect.

In the latter end of his Reign, whether swelled with the Imagination of his
former Successes and present Security, or carried away with some pleasing
Notions of Arbitrary Government, he began to grow very Tyrannical, enlarging
his Prerogative beyond those Bounds he had formerly set to it, and making use
of the Senate only to ratify his Commands. Though he was extremely beloved by
the common People, yet these Actions gained him the Hatred of the Nobility and
Senate, and brought him to an untimely Death; he being torn in pieces, as is
generally believed, in the Senate House, the Senators carrying his Body out by
Piecemeal under their Gowns to prevent Discovery. The Senators took an
occasion from the Secrefie of the Fact, and the Concealment of the Body, to
persuade the Multitude that he was taken up among the Gods; and Julius
Proculus, one of the chief of the Nobility, did almost put all out of doubt by
swearing solemnly, That Romulus appeared to him, and told him, It was the
Pleasure of the Immortal Gods to have him continue among Mankind, till he had
founded a City whose Empire and Glory should far surpass all others. He ^ad him
farewell, and tell his Subjects, that by their strict Exercise of Temperance
and Fortitude, no human Power should ever withstand the Roman Arms; and he
would always be a propitious God to 'em, under the Name of Quirinus. Quirinus.
The Day, in which he was said to be taken up, was kept after that as a great
Holy Day; and a Temple was built in Honor of him on one of the Seven Hills,
from him called by the Name of Quirinalis.

He reigned 37 Years, in which space he very much advanced the State of the
City, leaving in it 46000 Foot and 1000 Horse; a happy Increase for so short a
time. After his Grandfather Numitor's decease, the Kingdom of Alba fell to
him, which he governed by Deputies; and the more to please that People, he
allowed 'em the Privileges of a Free State, which probably occasioned the
Senate to bear his Encroachments the worse. So now the Roman Dominions
consisted of a considerable part of the Sabines Country, a small part of
Hetruria, and a mixed part of Latium.

CHAP. II.
From the Death of Romulus to the Death of Numa Pompilius, the Second King of
Rome.
Containing the Space of 44 Years.
I. ROmulus being dead, U. C. 38.
or, as some are pleased to believe, taken up; the City was greatly divided
about the Election of another King; but lest these Discords should occasion
Anarchy and Confusion in the Commonwealth, the Senate agreed to divide
themselves into Decurys or Tens, and that Decury which was chosen by Lot should
exercise the Regal Authority for fifty Days, each Man governing in his Turn
five Days, the Authority then falling to another Decury; Interrex.
and this they called an Inter-regnum. This Government continued a whole Year,
till the People at last began to murmur, saying, It was a Trick of some few who
intended to get the Power into their own Hands, and that for one pretended
Tyrant they had now got 200 real ones; therefore they resolved that a King
should be chosen. In the Election great Contests arose between the Romans and
Sabines, each believing it reasonable to have one of their own Country; 'till
at length they came to this Conclusion, That the Party which elected should
choose one out of the Body of the other, so by that means the elected Prince
might be obliged to favor both Parties, one for their Votes, and the other for
their Alliance. It falling to the Romans to choose, the Patritians fix^d upon
Numa Pompilius, a Sabine, a Person of about forty Years of Age, who by the
Consent of the People was elected King. Numa then resided at Cures, being a
Person of the greatest Virtue, Knowledge and Abilities of that time, and had
withdrawn himself from the Noises and Troubles of the World; therefore
Ambassadors, one a Roman, and the other a Sabine, were dispatched to him to
offer him the Kingdom.

The Ambassadors finding him with his Father and Kinsman Marcius, by their
Speakers, Proculus and Valesus, told him the occasion of their coming: To whom
the elected King made this philosophical and modest Answer: Since every
Alteration of a Man's Life is generally hazardous in the Attempt, as well as
dangerous in the Consequence; it would be the highest Indiscretion for one,
who, in his own Opinion, is sufficiently Happy, to endeavor, or admit of any
Change; though there were nothing more in it than the preferring a turbulent and
uncertain Life, before a constant Quiet and certain Security. For my part,
Romans, I must freely tell you, That I am not only discouraged, but even
deterred from accepting your generous Offers, even by what is commonly reported
of your famous Romulus, who was not only suspected of contriving Tatius's
death, but was likewise supposed to fall himself by the Rage of the Senate. And
if Romulus himself, sprung, as they say, from Divine Race, miraculously
preserved, and as miraculously brought up, labored under such vast
Inconveniences; how successful can I hope to be, begotten by a mere Mortal,
and brought up the ordinary Way, when I come to struggle with such insuperable
Difficulties? Besides, you much mistake your Person, as well as forget your
Interest and Glory, when you think I can be any ways serviceable to you: For my
Temper naturally leads me to Peace, to Books, and the Worship of the Gods; but
you Romans require a vigorous and active King, who may diligently cherish that
Warlike Humor which your late Success has excited: And therefore such a Prince
as should come to inculcate Peace, Justice, and Religion into the Minds of a
Martial Nation, must of necessity appear not only strange and ridiculous to the
World, but also mean and despicable to his Subjects.

The Romans were much surpised at this Answer, but still were very urgent with
him to accept of the Kingdom; in which they were not a little assisted by his
Father and Marcius, who returned him this Reply: Though you remain contented with
your present fortune, and court neither Riches nor Power; yet you may
reasonably imagine that such large Talents of Justice, Moderation, and Piety,
were never given you by the Gods to lie useless and conceal^d: And you are
sensible these are Virtues that can never have a greater Influence upon
Mankind, than when they so publicly appear in the Person of a King. Tatius,
though a Foreigner, was highly esteemed by the Romans, and the Memory of Romulus,
was so precious to 'em, that after his decease, they voted him Divine Honors:
And if the Affections of the People should break out into a furious Desire of
War, what can better manage the Reins of that Passion than such a moderating
Hand as Yours? And who knows but that the People, being ever Victorious, may be
satiated with the Spoils and Trophies they have gained, and gladly entertain a
mild and peaceful Prince, who being a lover of Justice and Equity, may settle
the City in a strong and inseparable Union, and in a sure and lasting
Happiness? These Reasons and Persuasions, together with the Ambassadors
Entreaties, at last prevailed upon Numa to accept of the Kingdom; and after a
solemn Sacrifice he went for Rome. He was met by the Way by the Senate and
People, who with a general Consent invested him with the Regal Authority; and
so universal was the Joy, that they seemed not so much to receive a King, as
the addition of a new Kingdom.

II. Numa being a Person of extraordinary Wisdom and Policy, U. C. 40.
as well as Devotion, thought it most convenient to raise and strengthen that
City by wholesome Laws, and Religious Customs, which had been founded upon War
and Bloodshed; judging it as necessary to employ a People well at home, as to
exercise 'em abroad. The first thing he did was to disband the Royal Guard of
the 300 Celeres, lest the Maintenance of such a Force might seem to argue a
Diffidence of them that chose him, saying, That he would not Rule over that
People of whom he conceived the least Distrust. Ianus.
Next he built a Temple to Ianus, which was always to stand open in time of
War, and to be shut in time of Peace, as it continued all his Reign; which, as
some observe, never happened but four times from his Reign to that of Tiberius
Caesar. To the two Flamens or Highpriests of Jupiter and Mars, he added a
third of Quirinus or Romulus; and to this Prince also is ascribed the bringing
in of the Pontifices, Pontifices.
whereof he himself was one, and officiated accordingly. He also ordained the
Vestal Virgins, Vestal Virgins.
being four in Number, to whom he gave very great Privileges; particularly when
they went abroad they had the Fasces carried before 'em, and in their Walks, if
they met with a Malefactor leading to Execution, they had the Power of freeing
him from Death, upon Oath given that the Meeting was merely Accidental. He also
Instituted the Orders of the Salii and the Feciales, Salii. Feciales.
Priests devoted to Mars; the former were to carry those Sacred Shields called
Ancilia, and the latter to judge of the Equity of War, and proclaim it with
much Ceremony.

This Prince, though naturally averse to all Wars, yet considered that Peace and
Security might too much soften and degenerate the Minds of the Multitude;
therefore he used his utmost Endeavors to imprint on their Minds the Notions
of Religion and Virtue, and the due Reverence of God: And to gain the more
Credit and Obedience to his Constitutions, he pretended he had often and
immediate Converse with the Goddess Eg^ria, and would be often telling them
that strange Visions and Apparitions were seen, and Prophetic Voices heard;
which Stories had great and remarkable Effects upon a People so superstitiously
inclined. Yet his Religion was of a refined Nature, being much like that of
Pythagoras afterward; and as he taught, That the Principle of all Things was
not to be perceived by Sense, nor was liable to Motion, but was Invisible,
Immortal, and to be apprehended by the Understanding alone; so Numa forbad the
Romans to use the Image of any God, which represented him under the Form of a
Man, or any other living Creature: And this was strictly observed in all their
Temples and Sacred Places, for 170 Years at the least; they holding it a great
Crime to liken such superior Beings to Things so much below 'em.

For the Encouragement of Agriculture, he divided those Lands which Romulus had
gained in War among the poorer sort, causing his Subjects to apply themselves
to Husbandry, and by such kind of Employments to cultivate their Minds as well
as the Earth: Then he divided all the Lands into several Parcels, to which he
gave the name of Pagi, Pagus.
or Boroughs; and over every one of these he ordained a Chief, or Arbitrator in
Judicial Causes. And that he might take away all Distinction of Roman and
Sabine, which threatened the State with endless Factions and dangerous
Divisions, he divided all the Inhabitants according to their several Trades and
Occupations, making every Art a particular Company and Society, and appointing
to every one their respective Courts and Privileges; and this was his
Masterpiece in Politics. He much abated the Rigor of that Law made by
Romulus concerning the Power of Fathers over their Children, making it unlawful
for 'em to sell their Sons after Marriage, because it was very unjust that a
Woman who had married a Freeman should be constrained to live with a Slave. He
also prescribed Rules concerning Mourning; a Child of Three Years, and so
upwards to Ten, was to be mourned for so many Months as it was Years old; and
the longest time of Mourning for any Person, was not to exceed the term of Ten
Months: Which also was the Time appointed for Widows, before which, they could
not, without great Indecency, marry again; but in case Circumstances were such
as not to admit of so long a Term, they were first to sacrifice a Cow with a
Calf for Expiation of their Fault.

One of the principal Things done by this Prince was the Reformation of the
Year, which, in Romulus's Time was much out of Order, some Months having more
than 35 Days, and some fewer than twenty. Numa finding the Solar Year to exceed
the Lunar by eleven Days, doubled these eleven Days, and every other Year
inserted a Month after February, consisting of 22 Days, which was by the Romans
called Mercedonius, Mercedonius.
because it was the usual time for paying of Wages. He likewise changed the
Order of the Months, making January and February the first and second Months,
which were the two last in Romulus's Days. The Months.
January had its name from Ianus, the most ancient God or King in Italy.
February was so called from the Expiations which used to be in it, signified by
the wor'd Februa. March, so called from Mars, the supposed Father of Romulus,
which, upon that account, had been placed first. April from Aphrodite or Venus,
because of the Superstitious Worship which was performed in it, when the Women
were crowned with Myrtle. May, so named from Maia, the Mother of Mercury, to
whom this Month was made Sacred. June, from Juno, or as some will have it, from
Iuventus, because the Season is warm, and, as it were, Iuvenile. The rest had
their Names from their Order, as Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October,
November, and December; only Quintilis and Sextilis were afterward turned into
July and August, by the Emperors Julius Caesar and Augustus.

Numa was married to Tatia, King Tatius's Daughter, by whom he had one Daughter
named Pompilia; and after a Reign of 43 Years, being above 80 Years old, he
died, and was buried with great Honor and Solemnity. He forbad his Body to be
burnt, as it was usual in those days, but was buried in a Stone Coffin, under
the Hill Ianiculum; and the Books of his Ceremonies were laid by him in
another, being Twelve, written in Latin, and as many in Greek: These were taken
up about 400 Years after; and because it was thought a piece of Impiety to
communicate such Mysteries to the Multitude, were burnt by Order of the Senate.
He kept the State in such a constant Peace, by his prudent Management, as did
very much contribute to the Strength and Security of the City, and he much
improved and polished the rough Genius of the Roman People.

CHAP. III.
From the Death of Numa, to the Death of Tullus Hostilius, the Third King of
Rome.
Containing the space of 33 Years.
I. UPon the Death of Numa, U. C. 82.
the Government once more devolved upon the Senate, and after several
Interreges, Tullus Hostilius was created King by the universal consent of all
People. He was Grandson to the famous Hostilius, who, in Romulus's Days had
behaved himself very Valiantly against the Sabines in the Citadel, and had
Married the Daughter of Hersilia. He was of a bold and fiery Temper, and one
who often sought and greedily embraced all Occasions of War; led to it partly
by his own proper Inclination, and partly by the Glory and Renown of his
Grandfather. As he thought the Love of his Subjects the most necessary thing
to carry on the Designs of a Warlike Prince; so in the beginning of his Reign
he purchased the good Opinion of the Poorer sort, by dividing to them, Man by
Man, that Portion of Land which his Predecessors, the two former Kings had kept
to bear their Charges, saying, That his own Inheritance was sufficient for his
own Expenses. That none of these might want Room, he enlarged the City, and
took in the Hill Caelius, where he also had his Palace; and all such as had now
gotten Ground, and wanted Habitations, built upon it; so the City increased in
Bulk every day.

It was not long before this Prince had a fair Opportunity of War offered him,
U. C. 41.
for Cluilius, Governor or Dictator of Alba, envying the Growth of Rome, had
procured some Persons to Rob and Pillage in the Roman Territories, knowing they
would revenge the Injury; which, when they did, he persuaded the Albans, that
they had received a great Affront, and caused 'em to take up Arms: But that
there might be some Appearance of Reason, and for the greater Formality,
Ambassadors were sent to Rome to demand Restitution. Hostilius presently
perceived the Design, and well knowing that they who first refused
Satisfaction, would bear the greatest Blame, by nobly treating the Ambassadors,
cunningly delayed giving Answer, till he could send to demand Restitution at
Alba. His Ambassadors received a sharp Repulse from Cluilius at Alba, upon
notice whereof, Hostilius gave Audience to the Alban Ambassadors, telling them,
How he had received such an Answer from Alba as argued the League broken;
whereupon he proclaimed a just and necessary War against the Albans, which he
would carry on to the utmost. Both Parties made all possible Preparations, and
drew out their Forces about five Miles from Rome, to a Place afterward called
Cluilius Ditch; where, when they expected to have decided the Quarrel, Cluilius
was found dead in his Tent, but whether by a natural or violent Death is
uncertain. In his Place was chosen Metius Fuffetius, a Person who had no other
Qualifications to recommend him to this Office, besides his turbulent Spirit,
and his being as great an Incendiary as his Predecessor.

At the same time the Fidenates and Veientes, who in Romulus's days had
submitted to the Romans, and in Numa's Reign were preparing and seeking for an
Opportunity to shake off their Yoke, had now drawn their Forces together at
Fidenae, with Design to fall upon both Romans and Albans, after they had
weakened themselves in Battle. The News of these Preparations at first put the
Armies to a stand, and made 'em both decline Fighting for a while; till at last
Fuffetius fearing these People, and Hostilius desiring to punish them, came
both to a sort of an Accommodation; agreeing, That for the Safety of both
Nations, the Quarrel should be decided by a Combat of three Persons on each
side, and the Conquering Party should obtain the Preeminence and Command over
the other. These Proposals were no sooner ratified, but many Valiant Persons,
ambitious of the Honor of serving their Country, offered themselves to be the
Combatants, but could not be accepted of, others being before agreed upon: For
it happened that one Segvinius of Alba had formerly two Daughters, one married to
Curiatius an Alban, and the other to Horatius a Roman, who being both with
Child at the same time, were delivered of Three Sons at a Birth. Now, to these
two Ternions of Brothers was this great Combat committed, as being of equal
Years, Strength, and Courage; and all Matters of Consanguinity and private
Affections dispensed withal.

Now was the Fate of Rome to be decided by Six Persons only, which raised all
Peoples Hopes and Fears to a more than ordinary Pitch: The Lists were prepared
between the two Armies, Judges were appointed, and the Combat performed with
extraordinary Pomp and Solemnity, and with as much Courage and Resolution on
both Sides. The Curiatii were in a short time all wounded, but two of the
Horatii were slain downright, and the third, unhurt, left to oppose three
Adversaries. At this the Albans gave a great Shout; but he, not the least
daunted, cunningly retreated as though he had wholly fled, and drawing 'em out
severally, so as to have but one against him at once, he slew 'em all, and Rome
became Conqueror. At his return to the City, his Sister met him with many
provoking and reproachful Words, for imbruing his Hands in the Blood of his
Cozen-Germains, whereof one was contracted to her; upon which Horatius,
elevated with the Honor of his Conquest, and transported with the Love of his
Country, slew her upon the Spot. For which Fact, when he was accused, Hostilius
avoided giving Judgment himself, but hereupon created those Officers, called
Duumviri, Duumviri.
for Capital Punishments, and they Condemned him: But there lying an Appeal
from these Officers to the People, they gave him his Life at the Request of his
Father, who esteemed it as a great and Heroic Act, and gave his Daughter
Ignominious Burial, for a dreadful Example to all who preferred Private Respect
before the Public Good. Hostilius dealt very gently with the Albans, but,
notwithstanding, for the Advantages gained over them, had a Triumph.

II. The Fidenates and Veientes, U. C. 85.
finding that they were like to be called to an Account for their treacherous
Practices, now broke into open Rebellion; and Fuffetius enraged at the Event of
the late Combat, and hoping to free himself from the Roman Power, privately
encouraged 'em with large Promises of Assistance if they stood in need of it.
The Romans and Albans now made up one Army, and were advancing toward the
Fidenates and Veientes; but, upon their nigh Approach, Fuffetius, who had laid
all his Designs beforehand, drew off all the Alban Troops on one side, with a
Resolution of joining with the prevailing Party. The Romans, apprehending the
danger of their Separation, and fearing some Treachery, were greatly
discouraged at it; but Hostilius, though satisfied of the Villainy, immediately
gave it out as publicly as he could, That it was done by his Order, and was
all a Stratagem to surprise the Enemy: At this unexpected Report the Fidenates
and their Companions were quite disheartened, upon Suspicion of their Friends
Infidelity, and, in a short time were put to the Rout by the Romans; for which
Victory Hostilius triumphed a second Time. After the Battle, Fuffetius joined
with the Romans again, like one that had done nothing amiss; but Hostilius,
assembling the whole Body of the Albans, and then laying before them all his
treacherous Practices and villainous Designs, caused him to be torn in pieces by
Horses; having beforehand sent Marcus Horatius to Alba, who utterly demolished
that City, and transplanted the Inhabitants to Rome. Thus fell the City of
Alba, once famous for its Riches and Number of Inhabitants, after it had
flourished 487 Years.

Rome grew much in Strength, Riches, and Grandeur out of the Ruins of Alba;
Mount Caelius being appointed for the Inhabitants that came from thence; and
the King allowing 'em all the Roman Privileges. He chose the Nobility of the
Albans into the Senate, particularly the Tullii, Servilii, Quintii, Geganii,
Curiatii, and the Claelii; and that he might out of those new People make some
Addition to the Strength of every Order, he chose ten Troops of Horse out of
the Albans: In Confidence of this his Strength, after an ^^ntire Reduction of
the Fidenates, he declared War against the Sabines, U. C. 88.
who before had committed several Robberies upon the Romans that traded with
'em. He met 'em at the Wood called Malitiosa Sylva, where, especially by the
help of his Horse who broke all their Ranks, after a short Engagement, he
entirely defeated 'em, forcing 'em to beg Peace; over whom ^e obtained a third
Triumph. The Latins were not yet quiet, refusing to pay Obedience to the
Romans, which occasioned several Contests; but this War was managed with great
Moderation, no Battle ^eing fought, no Town taken or plundered besides
Medallia, which Hostilius punished for an Example, because it had received a
Roman Colony in Romu^us's time.

This War lasted most of the rest of his Days, and in the latter end of his
Reign, Rome was much infected with Plagues and Famines, and as much frightn'd
with Prodigies. Then Hostilius began to think of bringing in the Religious
Ceremonies of Numa, which he had all this time took little Notice of; but soon
after he died, after a Reign of 32 Years; some say by Lightning, with his whole
Family, though more probably by some treasonable Practices. In this Reign, the
300 Celeres were again reassumed, which had been dif-us'd in the last; and the
City was very much increased, though the Dominions were little different from
those in Romulus's Days, only they seemed to have a surer Footing in some
Places than before.

CHAP. IV.
From the Death of Hostilius to the Death of Ancus Marcius, the Fourth King of
Rome.
Containing the space of 24 Years.
I. AFter the Death of Tullus Hostilius, U. C. 115.
the State fell into an Interregnum, as formerly; and in a short time, Ancus
Marcius was made King by the Inter-Rex and Senate, and was confirmed so by the
People. He had his Surname Ancus from his crooke^ Arm, which he could not
stretch out in length, as Festus has it: He was Grandson to Numa, the second
King of Rome, by Pompilia his Daughter, and Marcius his Kinsman, who was the
Son of that Marcius who had persuaded Numa to accept of the Kingdom, and after
Numa's death had killed himself because he did not succeed him. This Prince was
much of the same Temper with his Grandfather Numa; and considering that much
of the Religion, and many of the Ceremonies had been neglected in the last
Reign, he set himself to restore them to their former Use. For that reason he
insinuated to the People, that the Diseases, Pestilence, and other innumerable
Calamities which had lately befallen the City, together with the disasterous
End of Hostilius, proceeded from want of Devotion and a Neglect of their Gods.
He highly commended the Orders and Institutions of Numa, and would be often
showing the great Blessings of the State, and how much it flourished under that
happy Reign; advising his Subjects to return to their Husbandry and more
peaceable Employments, and to lay aside all Sorts of Violence, and all Profit
that arises from War and Bloodshed.

The State thus settled, U. C. 116.
he expected, as his Grandfather had done, to pass his time free from all Wars
and Troubles; but he soon found his Designs crossed, and was compelled to be a
Warrior against his Will, and was scarce ever free from public Perils and
Troubles. He had scarce began his Reign, and modeled the Commonwealth, when
the Latins contemning him as a sluggish Prince, and unfit for Military
Affairs, made Incursions into the Roman Territories. Upon which, he was obliged
to make all necessary Preparations for a War, proclaiming it according to the
Ceremonies appointed by his Grandfather Numa. First an Ambassador was sent to
the Frontiers of the Agressor's Country, who in a Woollen Shash, and a peculiar
Dress, and likewise in a solemn Form of Speech, demanded Satisfaction; which
not being granted in 33 Days, after a Consultation with the Senate, the
Feciales or Heralds were immediately sent in their proper Habits, Feciales.
with Javelins headed with Iron, or all bloody and burnt at the end; where in
the Presence of three young Men at least, they in the Name of the Gods and
People of Rome, solemnly proclaimed War with that Country, and then threw their
Javelins into their Confines. This Custom was brought in by Numa, the Rules
whereof were taken from the Aequicoli, a very ancient People.

Ancus began this War with good Success, and first took Politorium by Storm, a
Town of the Latins, 14 or 15 Miles South-East of Rome; the Inhabitants of
which, according to the usual Custom, he transplanted to Rome, allowing them
the Privileges of Free Citizens. And whereas the old Romans inhabited the
Palatine, the Sabines the Capitoline, and the Albans the Caelian, he granted
the Aventine Hill for the Latins to possess; the number of whom were
increased, upon the subduing of Tellene and Ficania, two Latin Towns nigh
Politorium, which he took soon after. He is a little time likewise took
Medallia, a Place of considerable Strength, and also Politorium again; for the
Latins finding it empty had possessed themselves of it, which made Ancus
entirely demolish it. The Latins, enraged at their Losses, made greater
Preparations for the next Campaign; but, at several times, he ruined their
Designs, broke their united Forces, U. C. 117.
forced 'em to beg Peace, and obtained a Triumph over 'em. Not long after he
subdued the Fidenates, Veientes, and the Volsci, who had fallen out with him;
and likewise such of the Sabines, who, not having felt the strength of Rome,
had sorely repined at the exceeding Growth of an upstart City. These latter he
overthrew again, U. C. 120.
and obtained over them a second Triumph.

II. Ancus did not only perform many great Acts abroad, but also did many noble
Works at home: First upon the Account of the Success of his Arms, he rebuilt
the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius after a more stately and magnificent manner
than before. He fortified the Hill Ianiculum, on the other side of the River
Tiber, for the greater strengthening of the City, and to prevent its being a
Refuge for Enemies, uniting it to the City with a wooden Bridge over that
River. He likewise made a large Ditch called Fossa Quiritium, which was no
small Defense against such as came from the Plains. And now, the City having
received a vast Increase, seeing that such Multitudes of People of all sorts
could not but produce many Criminals, he built a large Prison for Malefactors
in the Heart of the City, just facing the Forum, to be a Terror to their
growing Boldness. He did not only enlarge the Pomaerium of the City, but
likewise its Dominions; for having taken from the Veientes the Maesian Forest,
his Territories reached to the Sea, U. C. 127.
upon which, at the Mouth of the River Tiber, he built a Town called Ostia,
nigh ten Miles South of Rome, to secure the Advantages of Trade to his
Subjects; for thither Commodities being brought by Ships, were in lesser
Vessels conveyed up the Tiber to this City; and about this Town, many Salt Pits
were made.

This Prince, as well as his Predecessors, was very ready and careful to
encourage Strangers; and by reason of the frequent Advancement of such, and the
great Privileges they received, many came daily hither, and often such as were
of good Note. Among these Lucumon an Hetrurian was one, a Person of great
Accomplishments as well as large Possessions, who came hither from Tarquinia in
Hetruria, with his Wife Tanaquil, and several Followers. He was Son to
Demaratus a rich Merchant of Corinth, who had left his Country upon the account
of the Troubles at that time, and settled in Tarquinia, where marrying a noble
Matron, he had this Son, besides another who died Childless. Lucumon finding no
Encouragement in his own Country, being the Son of a Foreigner, removed to
Rome, where by his Hospitality and Bounty he soon became known to the King;
having now taken upon him the Name of Lucius, adding that of Tarquinius from
the Place of his Birth. He was honorably treated by Ancus, to whom he
generously offered his whole Patrimony for the Public Good, and by that means
obtained Freedom for himself and Followers, with Lands both for Building and
for Sustenance. Ancus in a little time chose him into the Senate, for he was
greatly esteemed by the King, and as much beloved by the People; no Man being
more hardy in War, or more prudent in Council.

Ancus bestowed most of his latter Time in enriching his Subjects and improving
the City, and at the end of 24 Years Reign he died; a Prince not inferior to
any of his Predecessors, either for the Glory he gained in Peace or War. He
left behind him two Sons, both under Age, which he committed to the
Guardianship of the forementioned Lucius Tarquinius, as the fittest Person he
could employ in such an Office. The Roman Dominions were now increased beyond
what they were in the last Reign, by a larger Part of Hetruria taken from the
Veientes, and a much better Footing in Latium.

CHAP. V.
From the Death of Ancus Marcius, to the Death of Tarquinius Priscus, the Fifth
King of Rome.
Containing the space of 38 Years.
I. ANcus being dead, the Senate received Power from the People, U. C. 138.
to order the Affairs of the Commonwealth, and created certain Interreges, as
formerly. In this short Interregnum, Tarquin was extremely busy about the
Election of a King, having great hopes of it himself: Therefore to remove all
Obstacles to his Designs, he sent Ancus's two Sons out a Hunting, the eldest
being then nigh 14 Years of Age, and assembling the People, he made a plausible
Speech to 'em, wherein he plainly begged the Kingdom, urging the Examples of
Tatius and Numa; the first an Enemy as well as a Stranger, and the second
wholly unacquainted with the City; whereas he himself was so great a Friend to
the City, that he had spent all his Riches upon it; and so well acquainted with
it, that he had been trained up several Years both in Civil and Military
Affairs under their King. Then he cunningly insinuated his past Services, and
insisting more than ordinary upon his Liberality, he obtained the Kingdom,
being the first who obtained it by his own ambitious seeking. At the beginning
of his Reign, the better to gain the Love of the Common People, he chose out
100 of the Plebeians, who for Valor or Wisdom were most Eminent, and added
them to the Senate, which made up the Number 300; those of Romulus's Creation
being called Patres Conscripti, these were called Patres minorum Gentium;
Patres minorum Gentium.
that is, Senators of a lower Rank. He likewise increased the Number of Vestal
Virgins from four to seven; but Plutarch says there were but two before.

His first War was with the Latins, U. C. 139.
from whom he took several Towns, among the rest Collatia, a Place five Miles
North-East of Rome; over which pe placed his Nephew Aruns Tarquinius for
Governor, the Posthumus Issue of his Brother, surnamed Egerius from his want
of Patrimony, and Collatinus from the Place, which Surname continued to his
Posterity. Notwithstanding the Latins great Supplies from Hetruria, he soon
forced 'em to beg Peace; and then turned his Arms against the Sabines, who had
again risen up against Rome. Both Armies met upon the Banks of Anio, where the
Romans made use of a Stratagem, by sending a Party of Men, to burn a great Heap
of Wood that lay by the Riverside, and to throw it in; which being driven
forwards by the Wind, much of the flaming Wood got hold on the Wood of the
Bridge, and set it on fire. This not only terrifi^d the Sabines while they were
engaging, but when they were routed, hindered their Flight, their Bridge being
burnt down; and therefore many of 'em, though they escaped the Sword, perished in
the Water; whose floating Arms being carried down the Tiber to Rome, discovered
the Victory there, almost before the News could be carried. Tarquin proceeded
to march into the Sabine Territories, where the Sabines, though with small Hopes,
met him with an undisciplined Army; and being defeated a second time, they were
forced to beg Peace. U. C. 143.
Over the Sabines, Tarquin obtained his first Triumph.

Soon after the Sabine-War was finished, all Hetruria (or rather the
Neighboring Parts) combined against him, upon the Account of his detaining
some Prisoners of theirs whom he had taken among the Sabines. They had made a
Law among themselves, That whatever Town refused to join against the Romans,
should not be accounted of their Body; and they soon after possessed themselves
of Fidenae, a Roman Colony. But he was so successful against 'em, as to
overthrow 'em in several Battles, and upon his preparing for another Campaign,
they were humbled, and to purchase Peace, they own^d him for their Prince; and,
in tokens of Allegiance, sent him all the Ensigns of Sovereignty which their
Kings were usually adorned with: These were a Crown of Gold, an Ivory Chair, a
Sc^p^re with an Eagle on the top, a Purple-Coat wrought with Gold, and a
Purple-Gown pink'd, almost like the Robes of the Persian and Lydian Kings, only
it was not apiece, but of a semi-circular Figure. From hence also came the
R^bes and Coats used by the Augurs and Heralds, with many of their Ornaments
used in Rome afterward; the Axes they had before, though now they received 'em
again. U. C. 153.
Over these People Tarquin triumphed a second time. This War finished, which
continued nine Years, he fell a second time upon the Sabines, who now alone
contended with the Romans for Superiority, over whom he obtained a third
Triumph; and providing for another Expedition, they yielded, whom he received
on the same Terms with the Hetrurians.

II. Tarquin was no less mindful of strengthening the City at home, than of
enlarging his Dominions abroad; for when he found leisure, he built the Walls
of the City, which before were patched up in haste, with large square Stone,
each consisting of a Load Weight. Then he took care of the other public
Buildings of the City, adorning the Forum with lofty Portico's, Galleries, and
Shops, being a Prince much delighted with stately Buildings and noble Sights.
Cloacae.
He likewise made many Cloacae or Common-Sewers, to drain the City, and carry
the Filth of it into the Tiber; a Work of such vast Charge and Labor, that
when they were afterward stopped, the Censors spent a Thousand Talents only to
clear 'em; a Work likewise so admirable, that Dionysius thinks, that from the
Magnificence of these, as well as their Aquaeducts and Highways, the Grandeur
of the Roman Empire appeared. In the Circus Maximus, that vast Place for Games
and Exercises between the Palatine and Aventine Hills, he caused Seats to be
raised for the Spectators, with great Skill and Charge; and likewise
distinguished all their Places according to their several Ranks* and Dignities.
In the Sabine War he vowed a Temple to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, if he got
the Victory; for that reason afterward he, with wonderful Cost levelled the
Rock on the Capitoline, and formed a Plat for building it, but lived not to go
on with it any further; and this was the beginning of the Capitol.

Tarquin had designed after these things, to have added three Centuries of the
Celeres to those three Instituted by Romulus, but was forbidden by Actius
Naevius to alter the Constitutions of that King; therefore without creating of
new Centuries, he doubled the Number of the former. This Naevius was the most
famous Augur that Rome ever knew; and Tarquin one time, to try him, asked him,
If what he had in his Thought might be done; he answering in the affirmative,
Tarquin jeeringly told him, He thought of cutting a Whetstone with a Razor:
Naevius ^ad him strike hard, and he cut it through. This much enhanc^d the
Reputation of Augury, especially of Naevius's Skill therein; but his being
suddenly missed soon after, was a great Prejudice to Tarquin: For the two Sons
of Ancus Marcius, grudging him their Father's Throne, accus^d him to the People
of the Death of this Augur; but his Son-in-Law answered their Objections, and
cleared him of that Scandal. Missing their Design, they pretended Repentance,
and were easily received into Favor; but three Years after, they disguised
several of their Companions like Shepherds, and appearing in Court, pretended a
Quarrel, and demanded Justice of the King. Tarquin appearing, they set upon
him, and killed him; but were soon caught, and received their just Reward.

Thus fell Lucius Tarquinius, for distinction surnamed Priscus, after the last
Tarquin had obtained the Kingdom, in the Eightieth Year of his Age, after he
had Reigned 38 Years, and done many and great Services to the Commonwealth.
The Roman Greatness and Magnificence began to appear much more in this Reign
than in the former; and this King was the first that ever Triumphed in a
Chariot: Likewise the Roman Dominions were much increased in this Reign, by a
larger Authority in the Sabines Country, and by some considerable Additions in
Hetruria and Latium.

CHAP. VI.
From the Death of Tarquinius Priscus, to the Death of Servius Tullius, the
Sixth King of Rome.
Containing the Space of 44 Years.
I. TArquinius Priscus being dead, U. C. 176.
Servius Tullius his Son-in-law, succeeded him: which Tullius was Son to
Ocrisia, a considerable Woman taken Prisoner by Tarquin at Corniculum, a Town
in Latium, and given to his Wife Tanaquil; where she was delivered of Tullius,
surnamed Servius, in remembrance of her Bondage, her Husband being slain at the
taking of the Town. Tullius being an Infant in his Cradle, a Flame of Fire is
said to have appeared and encompassed his Head; which raised great Expectations
in Tanaquil, a Woman much esteemed for such kind of Knowledge. She brought her
Husband to so good an Opinion of him, that he both gave him Education, and in
time made him his Son-in-Law. When the King grew old, he managed his Public
Affairs for him both abroad and at home, with that Valor, Prudence, and
Integrity, that he gained the highest Esteem of all People. Tarquinius having
no Sons, but only two Grand-sons, both Infants, Tanaquil much desired that
Tullius should succeed him, therefore she kept his Death private for a while,
pretending he was only dangerously wounded, till Tullius had prevailed with the
People to banish the Marcii. Being thus secure of that Faction, he carried out
Tarquin as newly dead, to be buried; and as Tutor or Guardian to the young
Children, executed the Office of King; which Tanaquil, out of the Window, had
told the People was her Husband's Will, when she feigned him still alive. The
Patritians were much concern^d at this, not knowing how to come to an Election,
since they perceived the People would not approve of their Choice, but would be
all for Tullius; so they thought it better to let him Reign in an unlawful
Manner, that they might ever have a just Pretense against him, than by stirring
to procure him a legal Title.

Tullius discovering all their Designs and Practices, immediately assembled the
People in the Forum, where appearing with his Mother, Mother-in-Law, the two
Children, and all his Kindred, in deep mourning, and all the utmost signs of
sorrow, he showed the People how sad and lamentable his Condition was, through
the Contrivances of the Patritians against him, which he had no otherwise
deserved than by his good Services to his Country. That they had designed to
recall the Marcii, who had treasonably Murdered Tarquin, and to expose the
Posterity of him whose Mem^ry ^ught to be so precious to 'em, as well as
himself, to the same Cruelty: But if it was the Pleasure of the People, he
would freely give up all Pretensions; and rather than offend them, undergo the
severest Hardships. A great Clamor immediately arose, mix^d with the Prayers
and Tears of those who besought him to retain the Government; and some, who
were provided beforehand, began to cry out, He was to be chosen King, and the
Curiae were to be called to the V^te; which thing was instantly resolved by the
Multitude. He thank^d 'em very heartily for being mindful of the Benefits
received from him, and promised to pay their Debts, and divide the public
Lands among such as wanted, if they would elect him King; and thereupon he
appointed a day for the Assembly. At the Comitia Curiata, he was chosen King by
the Votes of 'em all, in spite of all the Opposition of the Senate, who refused
at last to confirm the Choice, as their Cust^m was.

II. Not long after his Settlement, U. C. 177.
according to his Promise, he divided the public Lands among the poorer Sort;
and in the Curiata Comitia, preferred fifty several Laws concerning Contracts
and Injuries. He very much enlarged the City, taking in three Hills to the four
former, namely, the Quirinal, the Viminal, and the Esquiline; on the latter of
which he dwelt himself, and compassed the whole Seven with a stately Wall: Some
say the Walls were never extended further, though vast Suburbs were afterward
added. After this, he divided the City into four Parts, and instead of three,
made four Tribes, which he called by the names of Palatina, Suburana, Collina,
and Esquilina. As Romulus, according to their Seats and Communions in
Sacrifices, distinguished the People into Tribes and Curiae; so Tullius,
according to their Estates and Riches, distinguished 'em into six Ranks called
Classes. Classes.
His principal Design was to know how many were fit to bear Arms, and what
Treasure might be supplied for Wars and other Uses. These Classes were each
divided into Centuries (the Word here signifying such a particular Division,
Centuries.
and not 100 Persons) which made up 193 in all. The first consisted of such as
were worth 110000 Asses, (each answering to obq of our Money) and contained 98
Centuries, the Equites or Knights being reckoned in: The second valued at 75000
Asses, containing 22 Centuries, taking in Artificers; the third at 50000 Asses,
containing likewise 22 Centuries; the fourth at 25000 Asses, containing 20
Centuries; the fifth at 11000 Asses, containing 30 Centuries; and the sixth
consisted of the rest of the poorer Sort and Multitude, excepting Servants and
Slaves, which made up but one Century.

The constant way of levying Men and Money, Censi.
was, for the future, according to these Centuries, each Century such a
quantity; so that the middle Rank having fewer Centuries, and yet more Persons
than the richer, went to War by Turns, and paid but little Tribute; and the
poorer Sort scarce bore any Share at all. This seemed very just to him, that
they who were most concerned should take most Pains, and bear the greatest
Charge; the Romans at that time maintaining themselves in the Wars without any
Pay from the Public. But to the richer Sort, who sustained most of the Charge
and Danger, the King made a sufficient Recompense, by giving 'em much the
larger Authority in the Government, which he Politickly brought about this way:
Formerly the Matters of the greatest Concern, namely, The Creation of all
Magistrates, making or repealing of Laws, and decreeing of Peace and War, were
all voted in the Comitia Curiata; where every particular and private Person
having an equal Vote, the Plebeians being most numerous, had in a manner the
whole Power in their Hands. But Tullius, upon these and the like occasions,
assembled the People according to their Centuries, which were called Comitia
Centuriata, Comitia Centuriata.
where the Plebeians must of necessity be out-voted, having little more than
the Shadow of Authority; which they, for many Years, were sufficiently
satisfied withal; either for that they perceived not the Design, or rather,
because they were thereby freed from the greatest part of the Charges,
Troubles, and Dangers of the Public.

After the Census or Tax, Tullius first instituted the Lustrum to be
Celebrated, Lustrum. U. C. 187.
so called a luendo, from Paying. On a certain day after the Valuation or
Census, he ordained all the Citizens to meet in the Campus Martius, all in
Armor, each Man in his proper Class and Century; where, by solemn Sacrifices,
the City was Expiated or Lustrated. This great Solemnity was called
Salitaurilia, or rather Suovetaurilia, because a Hog, a Sheep, and an Ox were
there Sacrificed. These things performed, the Lustrum was finished, which,
because of the continual Change of Men's Estates, he ordered should be
reiterated every five Years; so that the old and proper Lustrum contained five
Years complete, which was as often as this Tax or Valuation, called Census, was
made; though afterward the Julian Lustrum contained but four. Tullius held the
Lustrum four times in his Reign, and at the first were found 84700 free
Citizens; but, to increase their Number, he brought in the Custom of making
Slaves Free of the Commonwealth, either for their Money or their Deserts, who
being Manumitted, he distributed into the four Tribes of the City. Slaves, as
was hinted before, had never any Vote in the Government, and these were either
made or born so; the former sort were taken in War, thence properly called
Mancipia; Mancipia.
and the latter sort came of Parents who were such, or of the Mother only.

Besides the Division of the City it self, this Prince took an extraordinary
Care about the Roman Dominions, dividing the whole Territory into 26 Parts,
which he likewise called by the name of Tribes; and these he again
distinguished into their several Pagi, appointing for 'em their respective
Officers and Places of Worship, as Numa had done when the Dominions were much
smaller. In his way of judging of Controversies, he gave away much of the
Kingly Prerogative; for whereas the former Princes called before themselves all
Controversies, and took Cognizance of Crimes committed against private Persons,
as well as the Public, he separated their Causes, making himself Judge only of
such as respected the Commonwealth, referring the Quarrels of particular
Persons to others, to whom he prescribed Laws and Rules to go by; and if any
Controversy arose between particular Towns, it was to be decided by the
Judgment of others. After he had thus ordered the Commonwealth, he caused the
Latins to build a Temple to Diana, upon the Aventine-Hill, at which place they
should meet and Feast every Year, and so preserve themselves as one Body
Politic in Unity and Concord. To all these things we may add, that he was the
first who Coined Money in Rome, stamping it with the Image of a Sheep, whence
it had the Name of Pecunia, Pecunia.
whereas the Romans before this time used it in a rude Lump or Mass.

III. At the same time that Tullius was settling and ordering the Affairs of
the Commonwealth at home, he was often employed in many and considerable Wars
abroad: For the Hetrurians looking upon him as an obscure Man, and a private
Person, refused to pay him Obedience, and renounced the League made with his
Predecessor Tarquin. He had Wars with 'em for 20 Years successively, overthrew
'em in many Battles, and Triumphed over 'em three several times; the first time
in the Year 182, the second in 186, and the third time in 188. And at last he
so weakened and harras'd them, that they were willing to beg Peace of him, which
he granted 'em upon the same Terms that Tarquin before had imposed upon 'em;
only from three of the twelve Nations, namely, the Veientes, the Caeretanes,
and the Tarquinii, which had been Principals in the Revolt, he took part of
their Lands, and divided 'em among such as were lately made free of Rome. At
the finishing of these Wars, he built two Temples, both dedicated to Fortune,
one to Fortuna Bona, and the other to Fortuna Virilis. In the latter end of his
Reign he designed to have laid down his Office, and restored absolute Liberty,
with the Care of the Commonwealth to the People, and was preparing a Model for
that purpose, but lived not to perform it; for being old, and not far from the
natural Period of his Life, he was slain by his Daughter and Son-in-Law, after
this manner.

Tullius had two Daughters, whom he married to Tarquin's Grandsons, Lucius
Tarquinius and Aruns Tarquinius. The first, of a proud tyrannical Nature, had a
very modest good Wife; and the last, of a mild sweet Temper, had a haughty
wicked Woman. Lucius enraged at Tullius for possessing his Grand-Father's
Throne, and finding his Brother's Wife of a fiery Temper, and rather more cruel
than himself, agreed with her to change Husbands; both promising to dispatch
their Consorts, which they soon effected, and were married together. After
this, they resolved the utter Ruin of the King, raising what Factions they
could against him, alleging his illegal Title, then claimed the Crown as Heirs
to Tarquin. But Tullius by his great Modesty and prudent Management, defeated
all their Designs, and came off with great Honor, both with the Senate and the
People; which brought Lucius to a feigned Repentance on his side, and that
produced a real Reconciliation on the King's. Lucius, covered with this
Disguise, took an opportunity one day, when most of the People were out of the
City, to go to the Senate House, with the Robes and Royal Ensigns as King; and
getting together such of the Fathers as were his special Friends, he boldly
took Possession of the King's Throne. Tullius unadvisedly with a few Followers
hastened thither, and going to thrust him out, Lucius threw him down the Stairs.
The old Man, hardly recovering his Spirits, was led homewards in great
Disorder, when Lucius's Wife coming to see the Event, saluted her Husband King,
and advised him to send after Tullius, and dispatch him; which was immediately
performed. In her Passage home, coming to the Place where the Body lay,
weltring in Blood, and as yet almost gasping, her Charioteer stood still,
startled and amazed at the Inhumane Spectacle, not having Room to pass by it:
Whereupon she in a Rage threw her Footstool at his Head, and in a barbarous
manner forc^d him to drive her over it; the Place which before was called
Cyprius Vicus, was after this Act called Sceleratus.

This was the End of Servius Tullius, a Prince of eminent Justice and
Moderation, after a prosperous Reign of 44 Years; but the less pitied upon the
Account of his undue Admission to the Crown, which made most of the Patritians
espouse his Successor's part; especially since he was about altering the
Government, which would have proved the Weakening, if not the Ruin of their
Authority. He left the Roman Dominions in much the same Condition as they were
in the last Reign, only he got a larger Footing in Hetruria.

CHAP. VII.
From the Death of Servius Tullius, to the Banishment of Tarquinius Superbus,
the Seventh King of Rome, which caused the Dissolution of the Regal State.
Containing the space of 25 Years.
I. Lucius Tarquinius, having barbarously murdered his Father-in-Law, U. C. 220.
obtained the Kingdom by mere Force and Violence; and by his Tyrannical and
Imperious Carriage, soon got the Surname of Superbus, as that of Priscus, for
distinction sake, was given to his Grandfather. He would not permit the King's
Body to be publicly interred, lest the People should rise and cause some
dangerous Disturbances, he alleging, That Romulus died without Burial. He
murdered such as he suspected to be of Tullius's Faction; and fearing the
natural Consequences of his Tyranny, he kept a stronger Guard than ordinary
about his Person. All Controversies whatsoever he decided himself, assisted by
his intimate Friends; and executed, banished, and fined, all at his own
Pleasure. He endeavored to establish his Tyranny with the more Security, by
great Alliances, marrying his Daughter to Octavius Mamilius, the greatest Man
among the Latins, being descended from Telegonus the Son of Ulysses by Circe;
and by his false Accusations and a cunning Device, caused 'em to stone Turnus
Herdonius, who had discovered to 'em his Baseness and Villainy. He neither
considered the Consent of the Senate or People; but much diminished the
Authority of the former by the Murder of many of the higher Rank, whose Wealth
he seized on for his own use, resolving to choose no more in their Places, that
their Power might decrease insensibly, and in time be worn out.

Among those whom he murdered for their Estates, Marcus Iunius was one; a most
eminent Man among the Romans, descended from the Companions of Ae^eas, and
married to Tarquina, Daughter to Tarquinius Priscus, by whom he had Lucius
Iunius. This Lucius was nobly educated, and had an admirable Wit and Knowledge,
with a profound Judgment and Understanding; but after Tarquin had privily
murdered his Father and his eldest Brother, the better to save himself, and
revenge his Father, he counterfeited himself a Fool, and thence had the Surname
of Brutus. Tarquin thinking his Folly real, despised the Man; and having
possessed himself of his Estate, kept him as an Idiot in his House, suffering
him to converse with his Children, not out of any Respect as a Kinsman, but to
make 'em Sport by his ridiculous Words and Actions. It hapn'd in the time of a
great Pestilence, he sent his two Sons Sextus and Titus to consult the Oracle,
and with them Brutus, as a Companion for their Diversion. The Sons were well
pleased with his Company, and laughed very heartily to see him offer a wooden
Staff to Apollo, wherein he had secretly conveyed Gold. The young Men having
executed their Father's Commands, inquired of the Oracle, Which of them should
be Prince of Rome? It was answered, He who first should kiss his Mother; which
the Sons misunderstanding, agreed to do it both at their return, and reign
jointly together. But Brutus, knowing the meaning of the Oracle, as soon as
they arrived at Italy, pretended to fall down by chance, and kissed the Earth,
which is the common Mother of all Men. After this, he ever made it his Business
to find Opportunities of ruining the Tyrant, and restoring the Liberties of
Rome; all which he carried on by a profound Secrecy and a wonderful
Dissimulation.

II. Tarquin being a Warlike Prince, first marched against the Sabines, who
refused to pay him Obedience, and so reduced them to Submission; over whom he
obtained a Triumph. U. C. 223.
Soon after, he began a War with the Volsci, a People bordering on Latium,
which continued with some little Intermissions above 200 Years: From these he
took Suessa-Pometia, a considerable City about 26 Miles South-East of Rome,
where he found great Spoils and Plunder; and over them he obtained a second
Triumph. Next he fell upon Gabii, U. C. 225.
a City of great Note, 10 or 11 Miles East of Rome, which had taken part with
Suessa-Pometia: He invested it, but meeting with great Difficulties, he caused
his eldest Son Sextus to counterfeit Desertion, upon Pretense of barbarous
Usage from his Father; who being honorably received by the Gabines, by his
cunning and insinuating Behavior, got to be their Governor. After some time
he sent to his Father to know what Measures to take; Tarquin took the Messenger
into the Garden, and, in imitation of Thrasybulus the Milesian, cut down the
tallest Poppies before his Face, then dismissed him without any other Answer.
Sextus, knowing the meaning of all that, put to death the most principal
Citizens, and easily betrayed the Place into his Father's Hands. U. C. 232.
After this, Tarquin made a League with the Aequi, a neighboring People
between the Volsci and the Sabines, and renewed that with the Hetrurians.

Tarquin, having gained great Riches and Spoils from Suessa-Pometia, resolved
to set about the Temple his Grandfather had designed; and when he found some
Respite from War, he employed a great number of Workmen about it. U. C. 240.
At their digging to lay the Foundation, a Man's Head was found bleeding
afresh, belonging to one Tolus, which gave the Name of CAPITOL to the Building.
Capitol.
It was seated upon a high Crag or Rock on Mount Capitoline, which from
Romulus's time had been called Mons Tarpeius, and before that Saturnius. It was
eight Acres in compass, 200 Foot long, and as many broad wanting 15 Foot, its
height being equal to its length; a most magnificent Building, dedicated to
Jupiter in Chief, but containing three Temples within the same Walls, the
middle belonging to Jupiter, and the other two to Juno and Minerva, all under
the same Roof. It had a noble Front, looking toward the South, to the grand
Forum, the most frequented part of the whole City. It had also a stately Porch
or Gallery, with three Rows of Pillars, each side having a double Row; and to
this they ascended by an hundred Steps, with large Spaces between several of
'em. To carry on this great Work, Tarquin employed much of the Public Money
and Stock, and likewise the Labor of the Common People; but the Building was
not finished till two Years after his Banishment.

The Building of the Capitol was not only counted a great Ornament to the City,
in respect of Magnificence, but was likewise looked upon as a very great
Blessing upon the account of Religion: And in the same Reign another, as great
in their Opinion, happened likewise to the Romans, which was this. A certain
strange Woman came to the King, offering to fell him nine Books of the
Sibylline Oracles. Sibyl's Books.
He refusing to buy 'em at her Rate, she departed, and burning three of 'em,
returned, demanding as much for the six remaining. Being laughed at for a
Mad-Woman, she again departed, and burning half of 'em, returned with the other
three, still asking as much as at first. Tarquin, surpised at the Strangeness
of the Thing, immediately sent for the Augurs to know her Meaning; who much
blam^d him for not buying the nine, and advised him to buy the three at the
same Rate. The Woman, after the Sale and Delivery, advising him to have a
special care of 'em, vanished, and was never after seen, as Dionysius relates
the Story. Tarquin chose two Men out of the Nobility to keep them, to whom he
allowed two Public Servants; but afterward, in the time of the Commonwealth,
they were kept with the greatest Care imaginable, fifteen of the most eminent
Persons of the Nobility being chosen and appointed to keep 'em in a Stone
Chest, in a Vault under the Capitol; and these were exempted from all other
Burdens both Military and Civil; and for them only it was lawful to look in
'em. These Magistrates from their Number were afterward called Quindecemviri.
Quindecemviri.
These Oracles were consulted by the Senate's Decree in times of Seditions,
Plagues, and any Public Calamities; and were kept here till they perished with
the burning of the Capitol.

III. The People being so much employed for four Years together about the
building of the Capitol, U. C. 244.
began to make some Complaints; but Tarquin, to satisfy 'em, but especially to
recruit his own Coffers, proclaim^d War against the Rutili, a People joining to
the Latins, the Volsci, and the Sea, pretending they had receiv^d and
entertained some Roman Exiles; and upon that account he invested Ar dea, their
Metropolis, a City 16 Miles South-East of Rome. While he lay before this Place,
his Son Sextus, with Tarquinius Collatinus, the Son of Egerius Priscus's
Nephew, and some of the Principal Courtiers, were drinking together in the
Camp; where there happened a Discourse concerning their Wives, each Man praising
his own to a very high Degree, which occasion^d a kind of a Quarrel. Collatinus
told 'em, it was in vain to talk, when their Eyes might so soon convince 'em
how much his Lucretia excelled the rest, if they would but immediately put it
to a Trial; whereat they all cried, Come on, and being well heated with Wine,
they took Horse without Delay, and posted for Rome, From which Place they rod
to Collatia to see Lucretia, where coming late at night, they found her, not
like the rest of their Wives, spending her Time in Ease and Idleness, but in
the midst of her Maids hard at Work. Her Goodness and Modesty, as well as her
Shape and Beauty, so charmed 'em all, that they unanimously gave her the
Preferrence. Here Collatinus made a noble Entertainment for his Guests, and the
next Day returned with 'em to the Camp.

Sextus, now inslam'd by Lucretia's Beauty, and the more by the Reputation of
her famed Chastity, was resolved to enjoy her upon any Terms; therefore, within
few days after, he went privately with one Servant to Co^lacia, where he was
kindly entertain^d by her, and without any suspicion, lodged in the House. At
Midnight he found Means to convey himself into her Bedchamber, approached her
Bedside with his drawn Sword, and rudely laying his Hand on her Breast,
threatened her with present Death if she offered to stir or speak. The poor
Lady, affrighted out of her Sleep, and seeing Death so nigh, was in the
greatest confusion imaginable; but Sextus at first, with all the Prayers and
Entreaties, told her the Violence of his Passion, withal, endeavored to
corrupt her with the glittering Promises of Empire and a Crown, but all in
vain. At last he told her, If she would not yield, he would first kill her,
then lay his own Slave dead by her side, and report it was for surprising her
in Adultery with him; by which means he obtained his End; and in the Morning he
departed. Lucretia, enraged at this barbarous Usage, immediately sent for her
Father from Rome, and her Husband from the Camp; desiring them to bring with
them some particular and special Friends, for a most dreadful Mischief, and
that of the vastest Importance, had befallen her. With her Father Lucretius
came Publius Valerius, and with her Husband, Lucius Iunius Brutus, formerly
mentioned; who finding her in her Chamber, in a most lamentable and desperate
Condition, she told 'em the whole Matter, and rejecting all Thoughts of
Comfort, she most solemnly adjur^d 'em all with the most powerful Persuasions
imaginable, To revenge her Cause to the utmost, and immediately with her Knife
stabbed her self to the Heart, as the truest Instance she could give of her
real Chastity.

The whole Company were stricken with a Mixture of Sadness and Amazement at the
Greatness, as well as Strangeness of the Act; but while they were lamenting
over the dead Body, Brutus catching at this Opportunity, now threw off his long
Disguise, giving them to understand, How far different he was from the Person
they always took him for; and further showed 'em most manifest Tokens of the
Greatness of his Spirit, and the Depth of his Policy. He told 'em, That Tears
and Lamentations could never he heard, whilst Vengeance cried so loud;
thereupon, in a great Rage, going to the Body, and drawing the bloody Knife
from out the Wound, swore by Mars, and all the Celestial Powers above, Utterly
to exterminate Tarquin with his Impious Wife and Fr^ge^y, to prosecute them and
all their Friends with the utmost Rage of Fire and Sword, and never after to
suffer the Tarquins or any other to reign in Rome. Then he deliver^d the Knife
to the rest, who, all wondering at so extraordinary a Change in Brutus, swore as
he had done; and turning their effeminate Sorrow to a masculine Fury, they
resolved to follow his Instructions, and extirpate Kingly Government. Brutus,
as soon as he could, procured the Gates of the City to be shut, that all might
be kept secret from Tarquin, till such time as the People might be assembled,
the dead Body exposed, and a public Decree for Tarquin's Banishment procured.

The Senate being assembled, all showed their Willingness to banish Tarquin,
but at first had very different Opinions concerning the new Modelling of the
Government, which probably might make it a tedious Business. Brutus represented
to 'em the absolute Necessity of a quick Dispatch, and immediately prescribed
'em a Form of Government; showing them, That before Tarquin's violating his own
and his Predecessors Oath, Rome had been happy and famous, both for her Acts
abroad, and her Constitutions at home; and that the Regal Power had at last
been dangerous, and almost destructive to the Security of the State, and the
Safety of the People; and therefore was not to be trusted in one Man's hands,
but two were to be chosen, who should govern with equal Authority and Command.
Then, because Names alone were offensive to many People, he thought that of
Kingdom was to be left off, and the other of Commonwealth to be assumed; and,
instead of the Title of King and Monarch, some more Modest and Popular was to
be invented; as likewise were some of their Ensigns to be laid aside, and
others to be retained. That the main and only thing to keep these Magistrates
in Order, was, to prevent their perpetual Power; and if they were Annual, after
the manner of Athens, each might learn both how to be Subject, and how to
Govern. Lastly, That the Name of King might not be wholly lost, the Title was
to be given to one who should be called Rex Sacrorum, Rex Sacrorum.
who having this Honor for Life, and Immunity from Warfare, should only
concern himself with those Religious Rites which the King had Charge of before.
The Particulars of this Speech were all approved of by the Senate, who
immediately issued out a Decree for the King's Banishment in this Form, That
the Tarquinii should be banished with all their Offspring, and that it should
be Capital for any one to speak or act for their Return.

Brutus having procured thus much, the Comitia were immediately a^sembled by
him, and the Body of Lucretia, all dismally bloody, brought, and set there for
a pitiful Spectacle to all the People. There Brutus, to their great Surprise,
discovered himself, telling 'em the Reasons of his long and strange
Dissimulation, and the great Occasion of their present Meeting, withal showing
'em the Senate's Decree. Then he fell to enumerating all the several Crimes and
Villainies of Tarquin, particularly, That he had Poisoned his own Brother,
Strangled his Wife, Murdered his lawful Sovereign, and filled Di^ches and
Common-Sewers with the B^dies of the Nobility: That he came to the Kingdom on
Usurper, and continued in it a Tyrant; being treacherous to his greatest
Friends, and barbarous to all Mankind: That his three Sons were of a Temper as
Insolent and Tyrannical as himself, especially the Eldest, of which they now
had a s^d and doleful Instance before their Eyes. That since the King was
absent, and the Patricians all resolved, neither Men, M^ney, nor Foreign Aid
should be wanting to 'em, had they but Courage for the Enterprise. Urging
withal, that it was a shame to think of Commanding the Volsci, Sabines, and
Nations abroad, and be Slaves to others at home; and to maintain so many Wars
to serve the ambitious Ends of a Tyrant, and not undertake one for their own
Liberty. And that as for the Army at the Siege, their own Interest in all
Respects w^u'd oblige 'em to join in what ever was agreed upon in the City.

The Multitude, transported with the Hopes of Liberty, and charmed with the
Person and graceful Behavior of Brutus, with loud Acclamations gave their
Assent, and immediately called for Arms. Lucretius was appointed Inter-rex for
holding the Comitia, who strait adjourn^d it to (...) Campus Martius, where
Magistrates were elected in their Armor. There he nominated Brutus and (...),
to exercise the Regal Power, as they before had agreed on among themselves, and
the Centuries confirm^d 'em by their Suffrages. In the mean time, Tarquin
having heard something of these Transactions, came riding in all haste to the
City, with his Sons, and some of ^is most trusty Friends, to prevent the
Mischiefs that threatened him; but finding the Gates fast shut, and the Walls
full of Armed Men, in great Grief he return^d to the Camp. But Brutus
foreseeing his sudden Coming, had industriously got before him to the Army
another Way, and acquainted them with the Decree both of Senate and People,
pressing 'em hard to a Revolt. Immediately their Suffrages were called over
according to their Centuries, and they unanimously agreed to do exactly as
their Friends in the City had done; so that when Tarquin return^d, they refused
to admit him. Thus frustrated of his Hopes, he went to Gabii, or to Caere in
Hetruria, now Grey-headed, having reigned 25 Years. U. C. 245.
Herminius and Horatius, Chief Commanders of the Army, made a Truce with the
Enemy for 15 Years, and raising the Siege before Ardea, returned to Rome with
all their Forces.

IV. Such was the End of the Regal State of Rome, 245 Years after the Building
of the City, in the first Year of the 68th. Olympiad, A. M. 3496, 31 Years
after the Ruin of the Babylonian Empire, and the setting up of the Persian,
179 before the beginning of the Macedonian, and 507 before our Savior Christ,
occasioned by a Man who knew neither how to govern according to the Laws, nor
yet to reign against them. The Roman Dominions now contained most of Old
Latium, with the greatest part of the Sabines Country, a considerable part of
Hetruria, particularly of the Veientes, Caeretanes, and Tarquinii, besides some
small Parts of the Volsci and Aequi; being much about 40 Miles long and 30
broad; a Spot of Ground not so large by a fourth part as either the Dukedoms of
Modena, Parma, or Mantua, and not much larger than the Territory of the
Commonwealth of Luca: so that this was rightly termed by Historians, the
Infancy of Rome, especially since most of these Parts were both able and ready
to Revolt upon every little Occasion, as the Romans often found afterward; so
that it cost 'em many Years trouble, and many hazardous Wars before they could
wholly subdue 'em, and much enlarge their Dominions.

If we look upon the City it self at this time, we may find it increased after
a far greater Proportion than formerly, and its large Extent, its numerous
Inhabitants, and its magnificent Structures, were happy Forerunners of its
future Grandeur and Empire. And these, together with the wise Institutions of
its Prince, and the great Prudence and Gravity of its Senate, were the main
Supporters and Preservers of it, in the midst of so many envious Neighbors and
powerful Enemies; though indeed the Inhabitants themselves were an extreme rough
and unpolished People, little acquainted with Knowledge and Learning, and far
unlike their Successors in Skill and Conduct: Their Engagements were more like
so many Tumults than real Battles, where Obstinacy in Fighting generally
supplied the place of Discipline in War; only they had the good Fortune to deal
with Neighbors who had more Barbarity and Ignorance than themselves. In short,
what may truly be affirmed of the old Romans, is, they were a People of most
extraordinary Courage and Fierceness, a People of prodigious Hardiness and
Austerity of Life, a People of indefatigable Industry, and wonderful Lovers of
their Country; and from these main Springs afterward proceeded many great and
noble Actions.

Before the Conclusion of this First Book, to make the Roman History as clear
and intelligible as possible, it may be convenient to give a Hint of the
several Countries the Romans afterward became Masters of. First Gaul, which
was then inhabited by an unciviliz'd, though a Warlike People, was broken and
divided into a great number of petty Governments. Spain and Germany was much in
the same Condition, and Britain not much better, as likewise was Dacia and
Illyricum. Greece was in a most flourishing wealthy Condition, under several
Monarchs of Renown, and powerful Commonwealths, but not long after became
subject to the Macedonian Empire. Asia Minor was almost in the same Condition,
then subjected to the Persian, and next to the Macedonian Empires, but at last
partly freed from the latter. Armenia was a considerable Monarchy. Syria,
Chaldea, Assyria, and Mesopotamia, were all powerful States, but successively
subject to the Persian and Macedonian Empires, the first of which proved a
separate Kingdom. Iudaea was a small but noble Kingdom. Egypt was also a
flourishing Kingdom, subject to its own Kings. Africa was a powerful and
growing Commonwealth, who had Sicily in a great measure. As for Italy it self,
that was divided among many petty Nations and People, as was observed in the
beginning.

The End of the First Book.
THE Roman History. BOOK II.
The Consular State of ROME* From the Beginning of that Government, to the
Ruin of it by the first Triumvirate.
Containing the Space of 449 Years.
CHAP. I.
From the Banishment of the last King, to the first Dictator; which was the
first Intermission of the Consular Power.
Containing the space of 10 Years.
I. THE State of Affairs in Rome was now wholly altered, U. C. 245.
and the Government quite changed; Restoration of Ancient Privileges was the
Peoples constant Discourse, and an odd mixture of Fury and Cunning ran through
the whole Body of the Nation, which caus^d 'em to put down Kingly Government,
and set up that of Consuls. Consuls.
These High Officers were two in Number, first called Praetors, next Iudices,
and afterward Consuls, a Consulendo, from Counselling or Consulting the Common
Good of the People: They were yearly elected by the People in the Centuriata
Comitia, out of the Patricians, being Persons no less than 43 Years old, or
nigh, and of excellent Qualifications, as long as there was little or no
Corruptions. The Consular Power was at first equal to the Regal, till in a
short time Poplicola brought in the Liberty of Appealing to the People: Yet,
after this, their Authority was very large, for they were the Heads of the
People and Senate, superior to all other Magistrates, governed the State,
disposed of the Public Revenues, administered Justice, called and dismissed
the Senate, and all General Assemblies, had all the Laws enacted in their
Names, led Armies, appointed Officers, treated with all Foreign Princes and
Ambassadors, and transacted many other Things in their own Names. They had also
the Royal Ornaments used by the Kings, as the Golden Crown, Scepter, Purple
Robes, White Robes the twelve Lictors, with the Axes and Fasces, the Ivory and
Curule Chairs; only to prevent the People's Jealousies, the Crowns and Sceptres
were never used but upon extraordinary Days of Triumph; and commonly one was
attended by the Axes, and the other by the Rods, changing each Month. The first
Consuls were L. Iunius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus, who had been the
Authors of this Settlement; and they immediately revived the Laws of Servius
Tullius, concerning Public Meetings and Assemblies, with other things that
conduc^d to the Satisfaction of the common sort, who looked upon their ancient
Rights as newly recovered.

Before Affairs were perfectly settled in the Commonwealth, some Ambassadors
from Hetruria arrived at Rome, in behalf of the late King Tarquin, who was now
so mortified, and so sensible of his Mismanagement, that he made very large
Promises of observing all regular Administration for the future, If they would
receive him as their lawful King. When this Proposal could not be heard, the
Ambassadors only desired, That he might have his Goods returned him, at least
such as were his Grandfather Priscus' s, who had deserved no Ill at their
hands. But Brutus very violently opposed that Demand, as being almost as
dangerous as the other, he esteeming it no good Policy to furnish an Enemy with
Money against themselves; however his Colleague Collatine most readily complied
with it, but putting it to the Vote, it passed in the Negative, the Voices
being very nigh equal. The Ambassadors meeting with no Success, according to
their Instructions, made several plausible Excuses for tarrying in Rome longer
than ordinary; and in that time, by their cunning Management and fair Promises,
found means to draw over some of Collatine's Family to their sides, namely, two
of the Aquilii, and three of the Vitellii, together with Brutus's two Sons,
Titus and Tiberius. These, with some other, all joined in a Conspiracy, keeping
their private Meetings at the House of the Aquilii, there to consult about, and
manage their Designs, which were to kill both the Consuls, and to endeavor to
re-inthrone Tarquin.

These Conspirators could not long conceal their Practices, but were discovered
by a Slave called Vindicius, who had accidentally hid himself in the same Room,
fearing to be found there, and not having time to come out. Now Vindicius,
fearing to discover this strange Accident to either of the Consuls, upon the
Account of such a nigh Relation, went directly to Valerius, afterward called
Poplicola, a great Assistant in this Revolution, and laid open the whole Plot.
Valerius was much startled at the Discovery, therefore to proceed warily, he
first secured the Slave to have him in readiness; then sending his Brother
Marcus to beset the King's Palace, and watch all the Servants there, he
himself, with his Friends and Clients went to the House of the Aquilii, where
he seized on several Letters writ to Tarquin by these Conspirators. The Aquilii
being abroad, met 'em at the Gate, where they endeavored to recover the
Letters by force of Arms; but Valerius, by the help of his Followers, violently
dragged 'em to the Forum, where he found some of the King's Servants with other
Letters, who had been likewise forc^d thither by his Brother Marcus. The People
thronged on all sides, but the Consul's Sons drew the Eyes of the whole
Multitude upon 'em, and several Tumults were like to arise, till both the
Consuls came, and ascending the Tribunal, appeased all.

Vindicius was immediately sent for by Valerius's Order, and coming before the
Consuls, he related the whole Story at large, and for a greater Proof against
'em, the Letters were read publicly before all, Brutus all the while inwardly
burning with Rage and Fury. The Accused Parties pleaded nothing for themselves,
but all stood wonderfully astonished, and in a profound Silence; till at last
some, to flatter Brutus, proposed Banishment as a sufficient Punishment, and
Colatine's Tears, with Valerius's Silence, gave the Prisoners great Hopes of
Mercy. But Brutus at last rose up, with a stern Majesty, and a Resolution to do
something that the World should wonder at, he called aloud to both his Sons,
Can not thou, O Titus, nor thou, Tiberius, make any Defense against these
Crimes, now laid to your charge? This Question he put to them three several
times, and receiving no Answer, he turned himself to the Lictors and
Executioners, saying, Now it is your Part to perform the rest. Nor could all the
Sentiments of Paternal Pity, nor all the sad pleading Looks of the People, nor
yet the lamentable Complaints of the unhappy Youths, move the Firmness of his
Resolution; but presently the Lictors seized on the two Young Men, and
stripping 'em, tied their Hands behind 'em, then tore their Bodies with
Scourges, and presently after beheaded 'em; Brutus all the time gazing on the
cruel Spectacle with a most steady Look and unaltered Countenance, while the
Multitude looked on with a strange Mixture of Pity and Amazement. Brutus after
this Execution immediately departed out of the Assembly, leaving the rest of
the Criminals to the Discretion of his Colleague.

Collatine's Backwardness in punishing the Prisoners, encouraged the Aquilii to
desire some time to answer, and to have their Slave Vindicius delivered up to
'em, and not to continue in the hands of their Accusers. Collatine was ready to
do both, and to dismiss the Assembly, when Valerius, who had the Slave in his
hands, would neither deliver him, nor suffer the People to break up without
censuring the Accused; but immediately laid hands on the Aquilii, and sent for
Brutus, exclaiming against Collatine's partial Dealings, whereupon the Consul
in a Rage commanded the Lictors to take away Vindicius, who laying hold on him
by Violence, were assaulted by Valerius's Friends, the People all the while
crying out for Brutus. Upon his appearing, Silence being made, he told the
People, He had already shown himself a sufficient Lover of his Country by his
Justice to his Sons, and left the other Delinquents to them, giving leave to
every Man to speak freely. They immediately put it to the Vote, and condemned
'em to be beheaded, which was presently executed. Collatine finding the People
so enraged at him, partly for the sake of his nigh Relation to Tarquin, and
partly for his unfortunate Behavior in this Business, willingly resigned his
Place, and departed the City. Valerius was strait chosen Consul in his room,
who, to reward Vindicius, made him Free, allowing him some Privileges above
former Freed Men; and from him a perfect and full Manumission was afterward
called Vindicta. Vindicta.
This done, the Consuls divided Tarquin's Goods among the People, demolished
his Palace, and laid the Campus Martius, which he had kept to himself, open as
before, where happening to be Corn which had been newly cut down, they threw it
into the River; and after that the Trees that grew there, which fastening in the
Ground, and stopping the Rubbish that was brought down by the Stream, at last
grew into an Island, ^^sula Sacra.
which they called Insula Sacra.

II. Tarquin now finding all his Endeavors ineffectual, U. C. 246.
drew together a considerable Army of Hetrurians, and advanced toward Rome.
The Consuls likewise drew out theirs to oppose him, and upon their joining, the
two Generals, Aruns the Son of Tarquin, and Brutus the Consul, imprudently
singled out each other, and fighting with more Zeal and Fury than Conduct and
Discretion, were both Slain. A very bloody Battle followed between both Armies,
which the Night parted, but with such equal Fortune, that neither Party had
much reason to boast; but in the Nightime, either from a Voice out of a
Grove, as the common Story goes, That the Hetrurians had lost one Man more than
the Romans, or from some other extraordinary Fright, the Enemy abandoned their
Camp, and being fallen upon by the Romans, were nigh 5000 taken Prisoners,
having lost 11300 in the Battle before. For this Victory, Valerius triumphed at
his return to the City, after a more magnificent Manner than any before him;
whose Example was always observed by Posterity. Soon after, he buried his
Colleague Brutus with great Honor, he himself making a Funeral Oration in his
Commendation; and this Custom was continued in Rome for the future, upon the
Death of all great and memorable Persons. There was such an universal Concern
through all the City for Brutus's Death, that the Women by general consent
mourned for him a whole Twelvemonth, which was two Months more than Numa had
appointed.

Valerius now sole Governor, deferred the Election of another Consul, that he
might the more easily settle the Commonwealth himself; but the People
complaining, and fearing another Tarquin, he soon let 'em see their Mistake by
his Courteous Behavior and ready Compliance with all their Desires, even to
the demolishing his own House, which they thought too large and stately for
him. His courteous and obliging Carriage, and his Bowing to the People in the
Assembly, got him the name of Poplicola. He first filled up the Senate, which
wanted 164 Persons; then made several Laws in favor of the People, and for the
Retrenchment of the Consular Power. By one, he allowed an Appeal from the
Consuls to the People. By another, he made it Death for any Man to take any
Magistrate's Office without the Peoples Consent. A third, gave Relief to poor
Citizens, by taking away the payment of Tribute. Another punished Disobedience
to Consuls, and appointed a Penalty of five Oxen, and two Sheep; a Sheep being
in those days valued at ten Oboli, (each Obolus 1 d. 1 q.) and an Ox at a
hundred. Another Law gave Power to any Man to kill the Person unheard, who
affected the Supreme Power, if he could demonstrate the Crime. The last Law was
for the Creation of two Quaestors or Public Treasurers, Quaestors.
who were to take care of the Public Moneys and Contributions, and appointed
the Temple of Saturn for the Aerarium or Treasury. These Officers were so named
a quaerendo, because they inquired after the Public Money, and likewise after
Malefactors. Some say Romulus and Numa had their Quaestors, but then they were
for Punishment, such as were afterward the Triumviri, for Capital Matters.
This Quaestorship was the first step to the Offices of Magistracy, and they
were likewise to keep the Military Ensigns in the Treasury, to sell Plunder and
Booty, lodge and carry out Ambassadors, and several other things of the like
Nature. Their Number was afterward very much increased, till in the time of
Julius Caesar they came to forty, some being used for the Armies, and others
for the Provinces. Of which, these two of the first Creation were termed
Urbani, the rest Provinciales, and Militares.

Poplicola having thus settled Affairs, held an Assembly for the Election of
another Consul; where Lucretius, the Father of Lucretia, was chosen, to whom,
as being the Elder, Poplicola granted the Fasces, or Bundle of Rods, which
respect of Age was ever observed by their Successors. Lucretius dying a few
days after his Creation, was succeeded by M. Horatius, in whose time the
Capitol was finished, and the Dedication of it fell to Horatius, much against
Poplicola's will, who was forced to be abroad in the Wars at the same time.
This was performed with great Pomp and Solemnity, and with as great a Concourse
of People of all sorts. In the same Year was the first League made between the
Romans and Carthaginians, according to Polybius; wherein it was provided, that
the Romans should not Sail beyond the Fair Promontory, which lay before
Carthage toward the North; but were allowed to Traffic in all that Part of
Africa on this side the Promontory, as also in Sardinia, and that part of
Sicily that was then under the Carthaginians. From whence it appears, that the
Carthaginians looked upon Africa and Sardinia as all their own, but Sicily only
in part; but the Romans included in this League only Latium, making no mention
of the rest of Italy, which was not then in their Power. In a little time after
Horatius's Election, the time coming for new Consuls to be made, Poplicola was
chosen a second time, and with him Lu^retius Tricipitinus, in whose time a
Census being performed, 130000 were cess'd and valued, besides Widows and
Orphans.

III. Before Poplicola's second Consulship was expired, U. C. 247.
Tarquin after his last Defeat, had betaken himself to the Clusini, one of the
twelve Nations of Hetruria, and had procured Porsena, King of Clusium, and of
great Power, to undertake his Quarrel. Poplicola to appear as magnificent as
this King, founded the City Sigliucia, or rather Signia, while he was
approaching, which he fortify^d with great Expense, and planted it with a
Colony of 700 Inhabitants. But Porsena marched directly to Rome, laid a close
Siege to it, and made a furious Attack upon the Place; in which Contest the two
Consuls with much difficulty repulsing the Hetrurians, were both wounded and
carried off. Upon which the Romans were much disheartened, and flying in great
Disorder, were closely pursued by the Enemy to the Bridge, who would also
undoubtedly have entered the Town with 'em, had not Horatius Coecles, with only
Herminius and Lartius, most valiantly opposed 'em. Coecles defended the Passage
with a wonderful Bravery, till his own Party found time to break down the
Bridge, then cast himself armed, as he was, into the River, and swam over to
his Friends, having received a Wound with a Spear in his Passage over.
Poplicola, to reward him for this extraordinary Piece of Service, gave him
several great Privileges, and appointed a Statue to be erected to his Memory in
the Temple of Vulcan. Porsena held the Siege a long time, and reduced the City
to great Straits; but Poplicola, now exercising his third Consulship, together
with his last years Colleague, drew out his Forces, engaged the King, overthrew
him, and killed 5000 of his Men.

Nevertheless, the Siege continud'd, till Mutius, a Man of a most undaunted
Courage, resolving to attempt the Life of Porsena, though amidst his own
Soldiers, put on a Tuscan Habit, and using that Language, came into the Camp,
where by a Mistake he stabbed the King's Secretary, who sat nigh him, instead
of the King himself. Being apprehended, and ready to be examined, he like a
Person more dreadful to others than fearful himself, told 'em, That he was a
Roman, and knew as well how to suffer as to act. Upon which he courageously
thrust his Right Hand into the Fire, intending to punish it for so great a
Mistake, all the while beholding Porsena with a steady and angry Countenance,
who struck and amazed at the greatness of his Resolution, dismissed him with
much Applause, and reached him his Sword back from his Throne. Mutius taking it
with his Left Hand (whence he had the Name of Scaevola) told the King, That the
Nobleness of his Generosity had more vanquished him than all the Terrors of his
Threats; and that in requital he would reveal a Secret to him, which no
Torments should ever have extorted from him: That Three hundred Romans in the
Camp were now waiting for his Life; that the first Attempt was appointed for
him; but now he was extremely satisfied that he had so happily missed killing a
Person, whose Magnanimity better entitled him to the Friendship, than the
Hatred of the Roman Nation. P^rsena hearing this, was immediately inclined to
an Accommodation, not out of Fear of the 300 Men, but in Admiration of the
Roman Courage. Poplicola was well pleased with the Proposal, and agreed to make
him Arbitrator between Tarquin and the People; but Tarquin resolutely refused
to admit of any Judge; much less Porsena, Who, as he said, had promised him
Aid, and now basely falsify'd his Word. Porsena, angry at this, immediately
made Peace with the Romans upon these Articles, That the Romans should quit
those Tuscan Lands, which they had taken from the Veientes, rest^re all
Prisoners, and receive all their Deserters.

For the ratifying this Peace the Romans deposed Twenty Hostages, Ten young
Men, and as many Virgins, among which was Valeria, the Daughter of Poplic^la.
All Acts of Hostility ceasing, Claelia, a bold Virago, and one of the Hostages,
got from her Keepers, and at the Head of the rest of the Virgins, swam over the
River Tiber, amidst the Darts of the Enemies; and being all got home, they
presented themselves before Poplicola; but he fearing the dangerous
Consequences such an Act might occasion, sent them all back to Porsena; which
Tarquin understanding, laid an Ambuscade for them and their Convoy, but they
were rescued by Aruns, Porsena's Son. Porsena examining them, was so much taken
with the extraordinary Courage and good Behavior of Claelia, presented her
with one of his own Horses sumptuously equipped, and gave her Power of disposing
of a set number of the Hostages, which she did with much Discretion, choosing
out the Youngest, as being less able to bear Injuries and Hardships. Then to
give a further Testimony of his great Respect to the Romans, besides other
pieces of Magnificence, he commanded all his Soldiers to leave the Camp with
only their Arms, delivering to the Romans his Tents well furnished with
Provisions and Riches. On the other side, the Romans to show their Gratitude,
and to preserve his Memory, erected a Statue for him by the Senate House; and
another to Claelia, as Livy relates it, which was a Maid on Horseback, in the
Street called Via Sacra; giving likewise to Mutius a Field beyond the Tiber,
afterward called Mutia Prata. Thus ended the Hetrurian War, much to Tarquin's
Dissatisfaction; and soon after Herminius and Lartius, who had so bravely
defended the Bridge, were together chosen Consuls.

IV. A Year or two after, U. C. 249.
the Sabines began to be very troublesome, making Incursions into the Roman
Territories. M. Valerius being one of the Consuls, by the Instructions of his
Brother Poplicola, obtained great Honors, overthrowing 'em twice, the last
time killing 13000, with little or no Loss to the Romans. Besides his Triumph,
he had the additional Honor of a House built for him at the public Charge.
The Year following, when Poplicola was Consul the fourth time, the whole Nation
of the Sabines joined in Confederacy with the Latins against Rome; but Appius
Clausus, an Eminent Man among the Sabines for Riches, Valor, and Eloquence,
being much against the War, first retarded their Preparations, then after a
short time came over to the Romans with 5000 Families of his Friends and
Dependants. These had a considerable quantity of Land, and large Privileges
allowed 'em, besides their Freedom, especially Clausus himself, who was made
also a Senator; and the Claus^, afterward called Claudii, Claudii. Tribes
increased a second time.
became as great a Family as any in Rome. Soon after this, the Tribes of the
Roman State were increased from Four to One and twenty, and one of the four in
the City was called Tribus Claudia, from the forementioned Appius Claudius; and
this remarkable Change happened in the 250th Year of this City, but upon what
Account, and by whose Means it was effected, Historians are very silent.

The Sabines having made all necessary Preparations, advanced with all the
Troops to Fidenae, laying an Ambuscade of 2000 Foot; whereof Poplicola having
some Notice by Deserters, he divided his Forces into three Parts, and taking
the advantage of a Mist, fell upon the Enemy on so many Sides, that only the
nigh Distance of Fidenae saved 'em from being all cut off; the Romans obtaining
large Plunder, and Poplicola a noble Triumph. Not long after, Poplicola having
ended his Consulship, died; and the People, as well upon the account of his
Poverty, as to show their Respect to so great and serviceable a Person,
decreed he should be buried at the Public Charge, and by a favor peculiar to
that Family alone, within the City. This was performed with an equal Mixture of
Pomp and Sorrow; the Women, by a general Consent, mourning for him a whole
Year, as they had before done for Brutus. U. C. 251.
In the same Year, Posthumous and Meneni^s being Consuls, the Sabines once more
drawing together a numerous Army, marched up almost to the Walls of Rome. As
the Consuls advanced toward 'em, Posthumous fell into an Ambuscade, lost many
of his Men, and narrowly escaped himself; which unfortunate Disadvantage put
the Citizens into so great a Consternation, that they ran back with all speed
to their Walls, expecting when the Enemy should attack the City: But the Enemy
making no such Attempt, they marched out again, resolving to redeem their lost
Credit; and Posthumous more concerned than the rest, behaved himself nobly, and
together with his Colleague, obtained a notable Victory, which had been finished
with the entire Ruin of the Sabines, had not the Night interposed.

For the greatness of this Victory, the Senate decreed Menenius a full Triumph;
but Posthumous, by reason of his ill Success in the beginning, had only an
inferior one, Ovation.
which the Romans called Ovation, so named from the Letter O, as it is said,
which the Soldiers in way of Joy were wont to echo at their return from
Victory, whereas in Triumphs they cried Io Triumph! Triumph.
Now an Ovation differed from a Triumph, properly so called, in these
Particulars; namely, that in an Ovation, the General entered the City on foot,
and not in a Chariot; that he was met only by the Knights and Gentlemen, not by
the Senators in their Robes; that he himself had only the pretexta toga, the
ordinary Habit of Consuls and Praetors, and not the Robe interwoven with Gold:
And lastly, That he had not a Scepter in his Hand, but had only Laurel, and a
Wreath of Myrtle on his Head. U. C. 252.
The Year following, Cassius and Virginius being Consuls, the Sabines received
another great Overthrow at Cures, 10300 being killed, and 4000 taken Prisoners;
which Defeat forced 'em to beg Peace, and purchase it with Corn, Money, and
part of their Lands. While Cassius did this good Service against the Sabines,
his Colleague Virginius subdued the Camarinaeans, who had revolted, and having
executed the Ringleaders, he sold the rest, and demolished the City: And thus
ended the Contests with the Sabines for a while.

V. Tarquin still restless and unsatisfied, U. C. 254.
by the Assistance of Mamilius Octavius, his Son-in-Law, stirred up the whole
Body of the Latins to declare War against Rome; and moreover, had procured
Fidenae to revolt. But the Senate prudently declined making War with all the
Latins, well knowing that many of 'em were rather inclined to live in Peace;
therefore at first they blocked up Fidenae, which had received some of
Tarquin's Forces. Tarquin meeting with no greet Success, now endeavored to
accomplish his Designs a more easy Way, by fomenting Differences and Quarrels
between the Rich and Poorer sort of Rome; for the effecting of which, he
happened on a very convenient Opportunity for his purpose. For about this time,
the common People, who were burdened by Usury, were much dissatisfied with the
present State of Affairs, especially with the unreasonable Severity of
Creditors, who generally seized upon the Body of their Debtors, and used 'em
worse than Slaves. Tarquin being sensible of all this, sent certain of his
Friends with good quantities of Gold, giving 'em some in hand, and promising
more after the King's Restoration, and thereby procured a Conspiracy of many
poor Citizens, and discontented Slaves. But the whole Matter was soon
discovered to Sulpicius, one of the Consuls, who after he had returned a very
civil Denial to the Latin Ambassadors, then present about Business, by a Wile
drew the Conspirators into the Forum; where incompassing 'em about, he put 'em
all to the Sword.

These dangerous Stirs being thus allayed for a time, the Consuls of this and
the following Year looked abroad, and in no long time Fidenae was yielded to
Largius Flavius. The Latins now enraged at the Loss of this Town, began to
complain of their principal Men; which Opportunity Tarquin and Mamilius so far
improved, as to procure all the Latin Cities, 24 in number, to declare War
against the Romans; withal engaging them, that none should forsake the Interest
of the Associates, nor make any separate Peace, which they sealed with dreadful
Oaths and Curses against them who should break the Confederacy, who were to be
held as Enemies by all the rest. U. C. 255.
The Latins made extraordinary Preparations, as likewise did the Romans, but
the latter could procure no Auxiliaries abroad, therefore were forced to rely
all upon their Domestic Strength, which Necessity made the better sort more
courageous and valiant. But in levying Men, to the great surprise of the
Consuls and Senate, the poorer sort and Debtors, which were very numerous,
refused to list themselves, except their Debts were all remitted by a Decree of
Senate; nay, some began to talk of leaving the City, since they could have no
happy Life while they were there.

The Patritians endeavored to appease the Multitude by gentle words, but all
in vain; upon which the Senate fell into a serious Debate about this weighty
Matter. There are some for a free Remission of all Debts, as the safest and
securest Method at that Juncture; others urged the dangerous Consequences of
this Condescension, advising 'em to list such as would give in their Names, and
slight the rest. Between these two Extremes, several other Methods were
proposed; but at length this Order prevailed, That all Suits and Processes
concerning Debts should cease till this War was finished. This Expedient, though
in some measure useful, had not the intended Effect upon the unruly Minds of
the Multitude, therefore the Senate was put upon another. Whereas by the Laws
of Poplicola, the Consular Authority was much restrained and diminished by the
Appeal to the People, so that no Man could be obliged to go into the War
against his Will; therefore they found it necessary at this time, as well as
upon the account of the Wars abroad, as the Troubles at home, to create a
particular Magistrate, from whom should lie no Appeal, and who for a set Time
should be the sole Governor. This Supreme Officer was called Dictator; Largius
Flavius was the first that was created by the Senate; and this was the first
Intermission of the Consular Power, about ten Years after their first Creation,
and afterward proved the Ruin of the Popular State, and the bringing in of
Mo^archy a second time.

CHAP. II.
From the Creation of the first Dictator, to the great Retrenchment of the
Consular Power by the Tribunes of the People.
Containing the space of 5 Years.
I. NOW was the Consular Power for a while laid aside, Dic. i. U. C. 255.
and another Officer made, who had more Power than both the Consuls; so named a
dictando, from dictating or commanding what was to be done. He was also called
Magister Populi, and Praetor Maximus, and was always created in the Nightime
by the Senate's Order, and Nomination of the Consuls without the People; and
was generally made, either upon some urgent Occasion of War and Sedition, or in
the times of Plagues and Famines, or for the Celebration of some particular
Games, or whenever else there was need of a sudden and extraordinary Command;
and this was oftentimes a Means of preserving the Roman Commonwealth from
Ruin. His Authority was absolute, he had Power of Peace and War, to levy
Forces, to lead 'em out, to disband 'em, and to act all things according to his
Pleasure, without referring them to the Senate; and upon his Creation, all
other Magistrates, except the Tribunes of the People, laid down their Offices,
and the whole Government was left in his Hands. He had 24 Bundles of Rods
carried before him, with as many Axes, and he punished as he pleased without
any Appeal; hence this Office came to be so terrible, that the Edict of a
Dictator was observed as the Command of a Deity. But then this extraordinary
Power was limited both by Time and Place; for the Office was never to continue
above six Months; nor was the Dictator allowed to march out of Italy, nor ever
on Horseback without leave, to show that the Roman Strength lay in the
Infantry. The Dictator upon his Creation, always made choice of another
Officer, one that had either been Consul or Praetor, to assist him; Magister
Equitum.
this Officer was called Magister Equitum, who had chief Command over the
Horsemen, as the Dictator had over the Roman People. In the Dictator^s
Absence, this Master of the Horse executed his Place in the Army; if present,
he Commanded the Horse, yet so as to be obedient to the Dictator's Orders, and
never to fight either contrary to, or without his Commands.

Largius Flavius, one of the Consuls for this Year, being, as was said before,
made Dictator, chose Sp. Cassius for his Master of the Horse, who had been
Consul in the Year 252, and immediately appeared in Public with his 24 Axes
and Rods before him; which soon changed the Face of Affairs in the City. Having
with these and other Ensigns of Power terrified and stopped the Seditious
Murmurs of the Multitude, he began the Census, after the Pattern of Servius
Tullius the sixth King, according to the Tribes, taking the Names and Ages of
such as were cessed, and of Children. In a short time, the Fear of losing
Freedom and Estates, so far prevailed, that 150700 of full Age gave in their
Names, which he distributed into four Parts, taking one for himself, ordering a
second for his Master of the Horse, and the two remaning to two Persons
Commissioned on purpose, one of which was to continue in the City for the
Defense of it Affairs thus settled, he sent some private Ministers, who dealt
privately with several Latin Cities, and procured 'em to suspend the War, and
make a Truce for one Year, notwithstanding the great Oppositions made by
Tarquin and Mamilius, for whose sakes they undertook the Quarrel. Upon this,
Largius returned home with his Army, and before his six Months were out, he
laid down his Office, and the Consular Power took place again, no Citizen being
punished either by Death or Banishment, or cruelly used in all that time; and
this Carriage was imitated by his Successors for many Ages; and notwithstanding
the Vastness of this Authority, it was very rarely abused; nor was the
Commonwealth any ways prejudiced by it, till Sylla's time.

When the Truce between the Romans and Latins was at an end, both Parties
prepared to take the Field, the former cheerfully, and the latter unwillingly.
The Latins were so strong, that the Romans thought it convenient to create a
Dictator, Dic. ii. U. C. 257.
and accordingly Virginius the Senior Consul nominated Posthumous his Colleague,
who chose Ebutius Helva for his Master of the Horse; and hastening his Levies,
divided his Troops into four Parts, reserving one to himself, assigning the
second to Virginius, the third to Ebutius, and the fourth to Sempronius, who
was to defend the City. Upon Intelligence that the Latins had taken the Field,
Posthumous advanced with all speed to the Lake Regillus, 14 Miles East of Rome
by Tusculum, where he fortified himself against the Enemy, who as yet were not
all united, but expected Aid from the Volsci. The Romans divided themselves
into three parts, and were so conveniently posted as to cut off all Provisions
from the Latin Camp, designing to starve 'em; but the News of the March of the
Volsci altered their Measures, making 'em resolve to engage. The Roman Army
consisted of 24000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and the Enemy of 40000 Foot, and 3000
Horse, Tarquin's Son Titus commanding the main Body, his Brother Sextus the
Left Wing, and Mamilius the Right: Posthumous stood against Titus, Ebutius
against Sextus, and Virginius against Mamilius, and so began a bloody Battle.
Florus says that Posthumous cast one of the Ensigns among the Enemy, that his
Men might be the more eager to fall upon 'em and recover it; and that Ebutius
commanded the Bridles to be taken off the Horses, that they might Charge with
the greater Violence and Fury. The Victory at last fell on the Romans side; and
the Battle was fought with so much Bravery and Courage, that it was reported
that the Gods themselves were present, particularly Castor and Pollux mounted
on milk white Steeds. The Latins lost Mamilius and Sextus, and were so broken,
that scarce a fourth Part of 'em escaped; and from the Place of this Victory,
Posthumous obtained the Surname of Rhegillensis; many others likewise gaining
great Honor, particularly Caius Marcius, afterward called Coriolanus.

After the Battle was over, the Volsci arrived at the Camp, whereof one Party
was for attacking the Romans now weary; but another Party, willing to
ingratiate themselves with the Conquerors, prevailed to send to the Dictator,
to let him understand, That they came to his Assistance. But Posthumous
convinced 'em of their Falsehood by their own Letters which he had intercepted,
and giving leave to the Messenger to return, whom the Multitude would have
pulled in pieces, resolved to fall on 'em the next Day; but in the Night they
abandoned their Camp and fled. The Latins, now in a very bad Condition, sent
in the humblest manner imaginable to beg Peace of the Romans; and their
Ambassadors with so many Tears and submissive Entreaties laid all the Blame on
the Nobility, that the Motion of Largius prevailed in their behalf for the
former League to be renewed. Thus ended all the Wars made upon the Tarquin's
account, which had been carried on for 13 Years. As for Tarquin himself, the
only Person left of all his Family, now abandoned by the Latins, Hetrurians,
Sabines, with the rest of the Neighboring People, who all refused to harbor
him, he went into Campania to Aristodemus Prince of Cuma, where he shortly
after died, being about 90 Years of Age, and the last King that Rome ever saw.

II. Upon the finishing of this War, U. C. 258.
Posthumous laid down his Office, and Appius Claudius the Sabine, and Servilius
Priscus were made Consuls for the Year following; and now the Courts of Justice
were again opened, and Processes against Debtors revived. This caused great
Disturbances among the Common People, the Plebeians alleging their Inability
of paying their Debts upon the account of their Losses by the Enemies
Incursions, and their want of Tillage; which Plea their Creditors likewise made
use of, showing that these Losses were such as made the remitting of their
Debts impossible; which occasioned many Tumults and Quarrels. The Consuls
endeavored to divert these threatening Mischiefs, by making War against the
Volsci, who had lately assisted the Latins; but none of the Plebeians would
List themselves, making grievous Complaints against the intolerable Severity
of their Creditors, and declaring, That they had ventured their Lives to
preserve the Liberty of the State abroad, and in requital were made Slaves by
their Countrymen at home. Now Servilius was willing to comply in some measure
with the Poor, but Appius very hotly opposed it as the most dangerous Remedy in
the World; and the Disagreement of the Consuls added much to the common
Calamity. However, the Senate at last was forced to have recourse to the
Popularity of Servilius, who with fair Words and Promises persuaded the People
into the Field; where when he had by his good Services deserved a Triumph, the
Honor was denied him by the Insinuation of his Colleague Appius, who
represented to the Senate, That by bearing and complying with the Multitude, he
had impaired the Dignity of his Order. The People now expecting the
Performances of Servilius's Promises, were wholly disappointed by Appius's
Contrivances, which doubled their Rage, and made 'em carry all things by open
Force, rescuing their Companions out of the hands of the Sergeants, holding
Secret Cabals, denying ever to touch a Weapon till their Burdens were removed.

These dangerous Stirs put the Senate to a great stand; Appius still urged,
That nothing ought to be granted to the Rabble; and the better to quell the
Disturbances, procured a Dictator to be created, Dic. iii. U. C. 259.
which most supposed would be himself: But the present Consuls made choice of
M. Valerius, a popular Man, supposing that the Terror of the Office alone would
perform the Work, and that a Person of a mild and moderate Temper would best
manage it. Valerius chose Servilius the late Consul for his Master of the
Horse, and he minding the Pleasure of the People more than his own Authority,
told 'em, That if they would freely follow him, not only what they justly
required concerning their Debts, but other Rewards should be granted 'em; by
which means he procured ten Legions to be listed. With these he marched against
the Volsci, Aequi, and Sabines, who were all up in Arms; and having reduced
'em, he divided some Lands he had taken from the Volsci, among the Soldiers. At
his return he requested the Senate, that his and their Promises might be made
good, but was checked for his too great Compliance with the Multitude; and
because he was an old Man, above Seventy, unfit as he said to contend, and
unwilling to show his utmost Authority, he immediately laid down his Office.
This more inflamed the common People, who now had their private Consultations,
designing to separate themselves from the Patritians; which when the Senate
perceived, order was given to the Consuls not to disband the Army, pretending
that the Sabines and Aequi had new Designs against Rome. Now the Soldiers being
strictly bound by their Oath, called Sacramentum, at their first Listing, could
not forsake their Standards; but the Consuls having their Camps nigh each
other, by the Advice of one Sicinius Bellulus, they all removed to one of them;
and then taking away the Ensigns and Standards from the Consuls, they retired
to a Mountain afterward called Mons Sacer, three Miles North of Rome by the
River Anio, now called Taverone.

Upon this News, the whole City was in a strange Consternation and Tumult;
insomuch that the Patritians fear*d least Civil Wars should ensue, for the
Plebeians growing extreme high, many of 'em left the Town and flocked to the
Army, though the other hindered it as much as possible. The Fathers had great
Contests among themselves, some pleading for the Multitude, others urging
nothing but right down Force; till the former sort prevailed to send a Message
to the Armies, desiring 'em To return home, and declare their Demands; withal
promising 'em, To forget their Crimes, and to reward their good Services. But
this Message was received with disdainful Words, and violent Complaints,
intermixed with threatening Language; which the more sensibly afflicted the
Fathers, as not knowing which way to procure a Reconciliation, since they could
no longer keep the People in the City from going over to the Army. Now was the
time for electing of new Consuls at hand, but the Stirs were so violent,
Candidates.
that no Candidates (so called, because they su'd for the Place in white
Garments) would stand for the Office, nor any accept of it; till at last the
Consuls by their sole Authority appointed Posthumous Cominius, U. C. 260.
and Sp. Cassius, who had been Consuls before, and were equally in favor with
the Nobility and Commons.

The Consuls immediately called the Senate, and consulted 'em about the Return
of the Commons. Agrippa Menenius, a very discreet Person, and a great Orator in
those days, urged the great Necessity of a Composure, and a Compliance with the
People, since the Roman Dominions could neither be increased, nor yet preserved
without the Inferior sort. Valerius the last Dictator seconded him, and
upbraided the Senate for not believing him when he foretold these Distempers;
that now they ought to heal the Wound before it was gone too far; that there
were several Reasons the Roman People had to separate themselves from the
better sort, all which had great and plausible Appearances of Justice. But
Appius, according to his usual Manner, violently declaimed against the
Insolence of the Mob, and the Imprudence of the Senate in any sort of
Compliances; that if they granted these Things when Enemies, which they refused
when Friends, they would not rest here, but require a Communication of all
Honors, and what not? So that at last the whole Power of the State would come
into the hands of the Rabble. This Speech so pleased and transported some of
the younger sort of his Party, that nothing could be determined by reason of
the Heats on both Sides. This put the Consuls upon dismissing the Senate for
that time, admonishing the younger sort, to carry themselves more modestly for
the future, or else they would prefer a Law to limit a certain Age for
Senators; exhorting likewise the graver sort to Concord, letting them know,
That they had a Way to end the Controversy, by referring the Matter to the
People, who had a Right to judge of it, as a Case of Peace and War. Upon which,
the Senate broke up.

At the next Meeting, the Senate almost unanimously agreed to treat with the
People, though Appius opposed it what he could; and Menenius with nine others
were Commissioned with full Power to compose the Differences. At their first
arrival at the Camp, their Proposals could not be heard through the
Instigations of two cunning and turbulent Fellows, Sicinius and Lucius Iunius,
who out of Conceit had likewise affected the Name of Brutus; but by degrees
they were so far appeased as to listen to the Commissioners. Menenius finding
the Rage and Violence of the People too great to hearken much to Rhetoric,
bethought himself of a more effectual Way, and such as was more likely to make
Impression; therefore laying aside his former Way of Speeches and Oratory,
after a short Promise or two of discharging all disabled Debtors, he in a plain
and familiar Way began thus: Once upon a time, the Members and Parts of Man^s
Body fell out with the Belly, alleging, that they were all forced to toil and
moil to provide Necessaries for the Belly, whilst that lived idle and lazy in
the Midst of the Body, and did nothing but enjoy its Pleasures. Whereupon they
resolved that the Hands should not lift the Meat to the Mouth, nor the Mouth
receive, nor yet the Teeth chew it; by which Means while they endeavored to
famish the Belly, they themselves and the whole Body were all starved for want
of the Nourishment they received from it. This Story, and his home Application
of it, had so great an Effect upon the People, that they unanimously cried out,
He should lead 'em h^me without Delay.

The Multitude were so well satisfied, that they were ready to depart with no
other Security than the bare Words of the Commissioners; but Iunius Brutus
beforementioned, kept 'em from that, alleging, That though they were gratefully
to acknowledge the kind Offers of the Senate, yet some Persons of revengeful
Tempers might notwithstanding reserve their Anger for a more convenient
Opportunity; and that therefore it was necessary for the Security of the
Commons, to have certain Officers created Yearly out of their own Body, whose
Power should be to give Relief to such Plebeians as were injured, and suffer
none to be defrauded of their Rights. This was greatly approved of by the
Multitude, and closely insisted on and urged to Menenius and his Fellow
Commissioners; who thought it not proper to yield to a Matter of that great
Consequence without leave from the Senate, but demanded time to know their
Pleasures. Upon the Debate of this Matter in the Senate House, Valerius thought
the Favor was to be granted to the Commons, but Appius most violently opposed
it, invoking the Gods, and truly foretelling, What vast Troubles and Calamities
the Granting it would certainly bring upon the Commonwealth; yet the Majority,
weari'd out with the present Misfortunes, and desiring Peace, gave it in Favor
of the People, and Commissioners were immediately dispatch^d to ^em with the
Resolution of the House. The Commons by the Advice of Menenius, first sent to
have a Religious Confirmation of this Privilege from the Senate, and afterward
in the Assembly of the Curiae, or Curiata Comitia, elected I. Brutus and
Sicinius Bellulus, to whom they afterward joined C. and P. Licinius, and
Icilius Ruga, which made five in all.

These Officers were called Tribunes of the People, either because they were
elected by the Tribes, Tribuni Plebis.
or because they were first made out of the Tribunes or Colonels of the
Soldiers. They were first five in Number, 37 Years after, five more were added,
and this number of Ten so continued; and they were always elected by the
Plebeians, and ever out of their Body, except once, and most commonly of the
lower sort, till by a Law made afterward, they were ordered to be created out
of such of the Plebeians as were Senators. They had the Power of Interposing,
and the Design of that Power was to relieve the Oppressed, and to be a Shield
to keep off all Evil and Mischief. They nulled all such Decrees and Commands of
the Senate and Consuls as they reckoned unjust, and of all other Magistrates,
except the Dictators; and to show their Readiness to protect the meanest, their
Doors stood open Night and Day to their Complaints. They at first had their
Seats plac*d before the doors of the Senate House, though afterward they entered
in, where examining the Decrees of the Fathers, they either interposed by the
word Veto or Vetamus solemnly pronounced, or else signed 'em with the Letter T,
which made 'em pass. They procured themselves to be accounted Sacrosancti, so
as by a Law made they were free from all manner of Compulsion, and were
inviolable, either by Word or Deed, and s^evere Penalties laid on such as broke
it; and lest the People should afterward repeal this Law, they made all the
Citizens take the most solemn Oath imaginable to preserve it entire and
untouched. As for the Ensigns of their Office, they had no Toga Pretexta,
Lictors or Curule Chair, but only a sort of a Beadle, called Viator, went
before 'em. The want of these Attendants, their not entering at the beginning of
the year, and their not laying down their Office upon the Creation of a
Dictator, made some hold 'em to be no Magistrates, but rather a Curb and
Restraint to all others. Notwithstanding the disproportionate Greatness of
these Tribunes Power, it was considerably limited by these two Things, which
they scarcely perceived at the Beginning: The first was their Confinement to
the City Walls, out of which they had no authority; neither was it lawful for
'em to be absent from the City a day, Dion says not an hour: The second was
their Number, for any one of the ten had a Negative Vote, and this was the only
effectual means to moderate the Power which they afterward assum^d; the
Patritians generally prevailing with one of the ten to be of their side, which
was sufficient to hinder the Designs of all the rest.

This was the first great Retrenchment of the Consular Power, besides what had
been caused by Poplicola before: and now the Commonwealth was turned from an
Aristocrac^ to a Democracy, or at least to a Mixture of both. The Awe which
this Sacrosanct Magistracy had upon most People, gave 'em occasion afterward
to enlarge their Power and Authority, and to become most extravagantly
Imperious, assembling and dismissing the Senate, imprisoning the Consuls, and
the like, as shall be more particularly shown afterward: So that they often
proved the Cause of many dangerous Seditions and Tumults, and were the greatest
Disturbers of the Peace of the Commonwealth, insomuch that they were by some
Authors called Pestes Reipublicae. This remarkable Innovation on the Government
happened in the 260th Year of the City, 46 after the Ruin of the Babylonian, and
the Beginning of the Persian Empire, and in the third Year of the 71st Olympiad.

CHAP. III.
From the Creation of the Tribunes of the People, to the Second Intermission of
the Consular Power, by the Decemviri.
Containing the space of 42 Years.
I. THE Commons having got a Confirmation of the Office of Tribunes from the
Senate, U. C. 260.
obtained further, that they might yearly choose two out of their own Body, to
assist these Officers. These were first called Ministers and Assistants of the
Tribunes, but afterward Aediles, ab Aedibus curandis, because one part of
their Office was to take care of the Repairing the Public Buildings, Aediles.
Aqueducts, and Common-Sewers, especially the Temple of Ceres, where all the
Plebiscita or Ordinances of the Commons were kept, of which they had an
Oversight. Besides the care of the Public Buildings, they were by the
Permission of the Tribunes to determine some particular Controversies; to look
after such as held more Land than the Laws allowed 'em; to accuse such Matrons
as lived Scandalously; to punish excessive Usur^rs, and Extortioners; to
restrain Tippling and Gaming-houses; to Fine Persons for lewd and uncivil Words
or Actions; to Correct false Weights and Measures; to provide Bread-Corn and
Oil in the time of Famine, and to see that the same was not hoarded up, nor the
Markets forestalled; as also to take care that necessary Provisions were sent
to the Armies, and the like. About 127 Years after, were added two more out of
the Patritians, called Aediles Curules, who shall be spoken of in their proper
Place.

After the Commons had obtained these Officers, and what else they desired,
they readily listed themselves to go against the V^lsci, under Posthumous the
Consul. He soon took Longula and Polustia from 'em, then invested Corioli, a
strong City, and the Metropolis of the Nation; but the Antiates marching to its
relief, he left part of his Army under T. Largius, and with the other advanced
to give the Enemy Battle. Largius in the mean time attempting to Storm the
Town, the Besieged received him with so much Courage and Vigor, that the
Romans were driven back to their Trenches in great Disorder; but Caius Marcius,
a valiant Patritian formerly mentioned, with a small Party, most courageously
stood the Enemies Shock, and with a wonderful Bravery forced 'em back into the
Town, whom he followed so close at their Heels, that he went in with 'em: By
which the Besieged were so terrified, that not considering their own Numbers,
they fled to the contrary part of the City, suffering him to let the rest of
the Army into the Town, which they soon possessed themselves of. Which done,
Marcius would not permit the Soldiers to stay for Plunder, but hastened 'em to
join the Consul with all Speed; and whilst the Armies were approaching, desired
leave of Posthumous to engage in the main Body with his Party, where the chief
Strength of the Enemy lay; and having obtained that Post, he behaved himself
with that admirable Courage and Conduct, that the Enemy were soon overthrown.
The Consul gave him extraordinary Commendations, owning him to be the chief
Cause of the Victory, and offered him a large Share of the Booty before the
Division among the Soldiers. But he modestly refused all but one single Horse,
which gained him greater Honor among the Soldiers, and caused Posthumous to
bestow the Surname of Coriolanus upon him, for his incomparable Valor shown at
Corioli. The Volsci by this Overthrow were forced to Submission, and made their
Peace. This same Year was the League of Confederacy renewed with the Latins,
and likewise a third Feria or Holy Day appointed by the Senate for the Union of
the Nobility and Commons, the first being for the Conquest of Hetruria in the
fifth Kings Reign, and the second for the Banishment of Tarquin. This Year also
died Menenius, whom the People out of Gratitude buried at the public Charge,
because he died Poor, and Money was bestowed on his Children. Now likewise was
the Census performed and 110000 Heads were cessed.

II. The Year following, U. C. 261.
there was a great Famine in the City, occasioned chiefly by the want of
Tillage during the late Separation. This put the Senate upon sending to Sicily,
and several Parts of Italy to buy Corn; but notwithstanding this Care, the
Common sort, now extremely pinched with Want, grew very turbulent, laying all
the Blame upon the Patritians. This Advantage the Volsci endeavored to
improve, but were diverted by a grievous Plague, which so raged among 'em, that
Velitra a Noble City of that Country being exhausted of its Inhabitants, they
begged of the Romans to send a Colony thither. Which occasioned many of the
Romans, though unwillingly, to be sent thither, and also to Norba, a Latin Town.
Upon which the rest were so enraged, imagining it a Design to destroy 'em, that
they called the Tribunes into the Comitium, where they and the Consuls had a
violent Contest; which occasioned a Law to be made, That no Man should dare to
interrupt the Tribunes, when they spoke to the People. This still bred greater
Aniniosities between the Senate and People; but the Consuls to divert 'em, and
to ease their Wants, offered to lead 'em into the Enemies Country; but few or
none would List themselves; so that Marcius Coriolanus with some Patritians,
and a few of their Clients, made Incursions, and returned home laden with
Booty; the Knowledge of which put the poorer sort into a fresh Murmuring
against the Tribunes, who had dissuaded them from the Expedition. So that now
the City was almost all in a Flame and Confusion, but more from the Infirmity
of the Government, than the Disposition of the People.

These Tumults and Disturbances were considerably appeased by the happy Arrival
of great Quantities of Corn from Sicily, which was bought at a cheap Rate, and
half given in by Gelon of Sicily. Now the Patritians considering at what Rates
to dispose of the Corn, Coriolanus, incensed at the Behavior of the Commons,
counseled 'em to keep it up at a high rate, and to show no Favor, nor give
any Encouragement to the Insolence of the Tribunes and the Rabble; but wholly
to take away the Tribune- ship, as the only Way to remedy the Disorders of the
State. Upon Notice of this, the Multitude in a mad Fury would have fallen upon
the Senate, but were stopped by the Tribunes, who laid all the Blame upon
Coriolanus, and sent the Aediles to apprehend him, and bring him before the
People. The Aediles going to execute their Office, were repulsed and beaten by
the young Patritians, who were gathered about Coriolanus. This put all in a
greater Flame than ever, and the whole City tumultuously assembled together,
where the Tribunes decreed, that Coriolanus should immediately be cast down
headlong from the Tarpeian Rock. The Aediles strait seized on him, and the
Patritians again rescued him, and there was nothing but Tumults and Uproars in
all Places: But the Senate by selling of Corn at low Rates, and by good Words
and Entreaties, so far appeased 'em, that the Tribunes nulled their former
Decree, and set him a Day to Answer for himself before the People. The Consuls
finding their Authority was like to be much weakened, after long Debates and
much Difficulty, procured the Tribunes to sue out this Decree from the Senate,
which was granted; and the third Market Day after was appointed for his Trial.
Coriolanus demanded of the Tribunes what they would lay to his Charge; who
after some Consultation, told him, They intended to accuse him of Aiming at
Sovereignty and Tyranny; whereupon he cheerfully put himself upon Trial, not
refusing the severest Punishment if they could prove that against him.

When the appointed day was come, all Persons were filled with great
Expectations, and a vast Concourse of Country People early in the morning had
placed themselves in the Forum, and the Tribunes assembled the People,
separating the Tribes from one another with Cords, and ordering them to give
their Votes according to their Tribes, and not according to their Centuries;
which Innovation the Patritians much complained of, but after some Debate,
admitted it. Minucius, the Consul, began first, Declaring the great Worth of
the Person to be tried, signifying that the Senate became Petitioners in his
Behalf, and desiring the Tribunes that they would keep wholly to their first
Impeachment, namely, his aiming at Sovereignty, which they promised to do.
Sicinius, one of the Tribunes, enviously urged all he could imagine would make
for his Purpose, putting the worst Construction upon all his Actions: But when
Coriolanus came to speak, his Affairs soon seemed to be in a more favorable
Condition; for his graceful relating all his great Services to the State, his
showing his Scars received all over his Body, and the Cries and Lamentations of
such as he had saved in the Wars, made such a powerful Impression upon the
People, that they generally cried out, He was to be released. But Decius,
another of the Tribunes, a cunning and spiteful Fellow, stood up, alleging,
That he would wave all Words and Expressions, and insist on his Actions, which
would make good the Charge of Tyranny: There was a certain Law, that all Booty
and Plunder gained in War should be appropriated to the Public Use, and be
given into the Hand of the Quaestor, untouched by the General. Now, whereas
that Law had ever been looked upon as inviolable, Coriolanus had wilfully broke
it: For in the late Incursion into the Territories of Antium, where he had got
great plenty of Slaves, Cattle, and Provisions, he neither delivered these
things to the Quaestor, nor paid any Money into the Treasury, but divided the
Booty among his Friends, which was a manifest Argument that ^e designed to
Enslave his Country; it being the constant Practice of all that affect Tyranny,
by such Means to procure themselves Instruments for their Purpose. Coriolanus
was strangely surpised at so unexpected a Charge; and the Consuls and
Patritians being likewise utterly to seek for an Answer, the Tribunes
immediately named perpetual Banishment, and gathered the Votes of the Tribes,
where only nine of the one and twenty cleared him, so he stood condemned by the
Majority. This was the first Sentence passed by the People upon any Patritian,
and henceforth the Tribunes usually set a Day to whomsoever they pleased;
whereby the Power of the Commons was very much enlarged, and the Interest of
the Patritians more and more diminished.

Coriolanus, accompanied home with the Sighs and Tears of a great many, took
his leave of his Mother, Wife, and Children, who all made lamentable
Complaints; but he, like a true Roman, with small Appearance of Concern, bad
'em bear all cheerfully, and departed the City without any thing to bear his
Charges, attended only by a few of his Clients. Thus he went to Antium, and
applied himself to Tullus Attius, a Man of great Note among the Volsci, of a
Magnanimous Spirit, and a Violent Enemy of the Romans, where throwing himself
at his Feet, he begged of him to Revenge his Countries Losses by his Death, or
his own Wrongs by Rome' s Destruction, which by her unnatural Carriage toward
him, had now forfeited all that Duty and Service she might have justly expected
at his Hands. Tullus most readily espoused his Quarrel, and by his Advice sent
many of the Volsci to Rome upon pretense of seeing some Solemn Games at that
time celebrated, but with Design to make a Breach between the two Nations.
These Volsci procured a Person to go to the Consuls, and accuse the Strangers
of having some dangerous Design against the City, which immediately occasioned
an Order from the Consuls, That all Strangers should depart by Sunset. This
Order Tullus represented to his Countrymen as a Breach of the Peace, and so
aggravated the Matter, that he procured 'em to send to Rome, to demand all the
Towns and Territories which the Romans had taken from 'em. The Senate received
this Message with great Scorn, telling them, That if the Volsci were the first
that took up Arms, the Romans would be the last that should lay 'em down. Upon
which Answer, the Volsci made all necessary Preparations for a War.

Coriolanus, U. C. 265.
together with Tullus, was made General of the Volsci, and accordingly invaded
the Roman Territories, ravaging and laying Waste all such Lands as belonged to
the Plebeians, but not suffering those of the Nobility to be injured in any
part. This raised new Commotions between the Nobility and Commons; the former
upbraiding the latter with Ingratitude to so considerable and deserving a
Person; and the latter charging the other with Treachery to their Country, and
saying, It was by their Procurement that he invaded their Dominions. Coriolanus
returning with his Men richly laden with Booty, was sent out soon after with
the sole Command of half the Forces, and taking Circaeum, a Roman Colony, he
then fell upon the Latins, who immediately sent to Rome for Succor; but the
Commons Averseness to the Wars, and the approaching End of the present Consuls
Office, rendered their Message of no Effect. But Coriolanus still proceeded
with great Success, taking Tolerium, Lavici, Pes, and Bola, all by Storm,
plundering them, and making the Inhabitants Prisoners of War. Such as yielded
he treated mildly, others he put to the Sword; and the Volsci now so admired
his extraordinary Courage and Conduct, that they left their Towns bare,
flocking in great Numbers to him, and owning him for their sole Commander. At
Rome there was nothing but Confusion and Despair, and all the Peoples
Satisfaction was by venting their Rage against one another; but soon after,
when News was brought that Lavinium was invested, the Commons all cried out,
That Coriolanus was to be restored, and his Banishment repealed. The Senate
utterly refused to assent to this, either out of Desire to oppose the People in
all Things, or out of Scorn to have his Restoration ascribed to the Commons, or
else out of a just Indignation against Coriolanus, who was now become an open
Enemy to all his Country in general.

Coriolanus understanding the Dissentions of the City, immediately rose up from
before Lavinium, and advancing toward Rome, Encamped at Clulius's Ditch, five
Miles from the City. This struck the Romans with such a Terror, that now both
Senate and People unanimously agreed to send Ambassadors to him with Proposals
of Restoration. The Ambassadors behaved themselves with all possible Respect;
notwithstanding which, and their being Patritians, and his Choicest Friends, he
received 'em with all the Sternness and Severity of a most Injured Person; and
in a Council of War made Answer, That if they hoped for Peace, they must
immediately restore all the Towns and Territories taken from the Volsci; and
make 'em Free of the City as the Latins were; and for that he would give 'em
thirty Days to consider of it. And this he spoke as he was General of the
Volsci, and not as he was a Roman, ungratefully used, and barbarously treated
by his own Countrymen. This Space of Time he employed in subduing Seven great
and strong Towns; and at the end of it, another Ambassy was dispatched to him,
declaring, That they were still Romans, and that neither Constraint nor Fear
should influence their Souls to stoop to any Thing that is Base, but desired
him to draw off his Troops, and consult in Common. And that if he thought the
Volsci were to be gratified, they would yield to him, provided they would lay
down their Arms. Coriolanus, a little more moderate, replied, That now he
behaved himself not as General of the Volsci, but as a Roman Citezen, and
desired that having a Respect to Interest and Moderation, they would return in
three Days with a Grant of his former Demands, or else he must proceed in his
Enterprise. The Senate being reduced to this Extremity, their Courages began to
fail 'em, and as their last Remedy, ordered all the Pontifices, Priests,
Governors of Religious Houses, and Augurs, all in their proper Ornaments and
Habits, to go in Solemn Procession, and humbly to beg for an Accommodation. But
this Pompous Train, with all their earnest Prayers and Supplications did not in
the least move Coriolanus; he still insisting, That they should either accept
of his Proposals, or else they must expect the utmost Severity of War and
Bloodshed.

Upon the Return of the Priests, the whole City was full of Tumults, Trembling,
and Amazement, the Men running in Disorder to the Walls, and the Women in
Confusion to the Temples; especially to that of Jupiter in the Capitol. Among
which, was Valeria, Poplicola's Sister, who put 'em in mind of going to
Veturia, Coriolanus's Mother, with his Wife Volumnia, to get them to intercede
for their Country. Veturia was very ready to undertake so pious a Work, though
with little hopes of succeeding; and thereupon set forward, accompanied with
many of these Ladies, her Daughter-in-Law, and her two Grandchildren.
Coriolanus discovering this Mournful Company, fully resolved to give 'em a
Denial; but perceiving his Mother among 'em, immediately descended from his
Tribunal, and went to meet her; courteously receiving her with his Wife and
Children, and carefully listening to her Petition, which she urged with all the
Skill and Rhetoric she could, from the Consideration of the impending Ruin of
his Country, and of the certain infamy which he would incur if Victorious, and
the unavoidable Dishonor he would receive if he were Successless in his
Attempts. But this not prevailing, she put him in mind, How much the Sacred
Ties of Nature and Religion, together with her most tender Education of him in
her Widowhood, had engaged him to Obedience, or at least to a Compliance:
Declaring likewise, That he should not stir one Foot toward the treading down
of his Country, without first trampling upon the dead Body of her who brought
him into the World. And in Conclusion, with his Wife and Children, cast her
self at his Feet, Embracing and Kissing 'em; which with the lamentable Sighs
and Tears of the fair Train, so far moved his great Spirit, that lifting 'em
up, and embracing 'em, he cried, O Mother, you have gained the Victory, most
fortunate for my Country, but most destructive to my self; and accordingly drew
off the Volsci into their own Country. Tullus, who now envy^d his Glory,
represented this Act to the Volsci as the highest Piece of Treason against 'em,
and procured him to be cut in Pieces, scarce allowing him to speak for himself,
as Dionysius relates it. This was against the Consent of the greatest Part of
the Volsci, who buried him Honorably, adoring his Tomb with Arms and Trophies
as a Great General, and a Famous Warrior, and the Roman Women themselves were
permitted to mourn for him 10 Months, all acknowledging him to be the most
valiant and most courageous Man in this age.

III. Great and many Public Rejoycings were made at Rome for Coriolanus's
Retreat, U. C. 266.
and the Senate decreed to grant the Women what Honors they would demand; but
they only desired to have a Chapel ded^cated to Woman's Fortune, built in the
same Place where they had delivered their Country, which was done at the
Public Charge. The Consuls soon after took the Field with a considerable Army,
but had no occasion to use it; for the Volsci and Aequi joining Forces, had
such violent Contests about a General, as they almost ruin^d each other. The
year following the New Consuls, Aquilius and Sicinius, overthrew one the
Hernici, and the other the Volsci, among whom fell Tullus their General. The
next Year, the Consuls, Virginius and Cassius took the Field, the Aequi falling
to the former, as the Volsci and Hernici did to the latter: But the Volsci
immediately begged Peace, having lost their best Men in the last Battle; as
soon after did the Hernici, who now refused any longer to contend with the
Romans for Superiority. Cassius having received Money and Provisions from 'em
as Persons who owned themselves Conquered, made a Truce, but referred the
Articles to the Senate. But the Fathers, after resolving to accept of their
Alliance, left the Conditions of the League to Cassius's Discretion; who now
affecting Sovereignty, and desiring Popularity, granted 'em equal Privileges
with the Latins, which together with his Triumph lately obtained without
performing any thing for it, procured him much Envy and Hatred.

Cassius now grown Insolent by his three Consulships, U. C. 268.
and his two Triumphs, was resolved to push on his Design of Sovereignty; and
the more to gain the Favor of the People, proposed the Division of some late
conquered Lands among the Meaner Sort, together with such Public Grounds,
which through the Neglect of the Magistrates had been seized on by the Rich.
Then he recounted to the People his many Services to the State under his three
Consulships, insinuating, That his extraordinary Care and wise Management in
those Times, had shown him no less than sole Governor; and that since he had
already taken Charge of the Commonwealth, it was but just and reasonable he
should continue to do it. This Speech, though so strongly ^avouring of Tyranny,
would have been far more serviceable to him, had he not brought in the Latins
and the Hernici as Sharers in these Lands, which he did to gain their Favors,
though with the weakening his Interest with the Common People. This Proposal
concerning the Lands, met with many Oppositions in the Senate, created Fears
and Jealousies among some, and caused various Discourses among others: But the
Commons Forwardness, and the Disturbances that were like to follow, caused the
Senate after many Debates, to publish their Resolution for dividing the Lands
among the Commons, withal excluding all new Allies and Associates, as having no
Reason to expect a Share of what was gained before their Times. This was the
famous Agrarian Law, Lex Agraria.
which afterward occasioned such Mischiefs and Disturbances; but at present
the Promise of it appeased the People, and ruined Cassius's Designs: For the
year after his Consulship, the Quaestors set a day to him to answer to the
Charge of Aiming at Tyranny, before the People; where he was accused of a
Multitude of Crimes of that Nature; and notwithstanding his premeditated
Orations, his many Services, and the Intercession of all his Friends and
Clients in Mourning, he was condemned to be thrown down the Tarpeian Rock, and
was straight executed accordingly.

Soon after his Death, the Commons were very urgent for the Execution of the
Agrarian Law, which Cassius had set on foot; but the Senate being resolved to
divert it as much as possible, caused the Consuls to prepare for an Expedition.
The Plebeians inrag^d at their Disappointment, and the Loss of a Person whom
they expected to have been so serviceable to 'em, refused to List themselves,
the Tribunes always protecting 'em from Punishment; but the Name of a Dictator,
and their suspecting Appius to be the Man, soon frighted 'em into a Compliance;
so Cornelius, one of the Consuls, wasted the Territories of the Veientes, as
Fabius the other, did those of the Aequi. Not long after, the Commons refusing
to List themselves, the Consuls found means to sit in the Campus Martius, out
of the City, where the Tribunes had no Authority; and there they severely
punished and fined such as did not appear, to the great Mortification of the
Popular Faction. A third time the Consuls gained their Designs by getting over
one of the Tribunes to their side; a way they were often forc^d to make use of
afterward. In the mean time, they had several Wars abroad with the Volsci and
Aequi, and soon after the Veientes; there being many Ravages on both sides,
with some Battles, but of no great Note or Consequence. At home were greater
Contests and Quarrels between the Consuls and Tribunes concerning this Agrarian
Law; the former always declining the execution of it, and the latter as
constantly urging it, but with no other effect than the blowing up of
Dissentions, and the increasing of Factions. And this was the troublesome and
unhappy State of Rome for about five Years together, as may be seen at large in
Dionysius.

IV. In the midst of these Troubles, U. C. 274.
when Fabius and Virginius were Consuls, two Years after Xerxes's Expedition
into Greece, the Veientes by the Assistance of other of the Hetrurians, marched
with a powerful Army against the Romans. Virginius oppos^d 'em with another,
but was so overpowered by 'em, that he had lost his Army, had not Fabius came
from the Aequi with timely Succor, and brought him off. Upon the Roman
Retreat, the Veientes made Incursions almost to the Walls of Rome, to the great
Injury and Dishonor of the City; and what added more to their Inconveniences,
was the lowness of the Treasury, and the Discontents of the People about the
Agrarian Law. This reduced the Senate to very great Extremities, till at last
the whole Family of the Fabii, a noble Stock, generously offered their Service
to be a constant Guard to the Frontiers, without any Charge to the Public,
which was gratefully accepted by the Senate. They were in Number 306, which
with their Clients and Friends, made up 4000, all commanded by Marcus, the last
years Consul; and to them was afterward sent another Company under Fabius the
present Consul. These brave Adventurers fortified themselves in a Castle, which
they called Cremera, as standing upon a River of the same Name, nigh the
Frontiers of the Veientes, from which they made great Incursions, and extremely
annoyed the Enemy. The following Year, the Veientes, Volsci, and Aequi, all
agreeing upon an Invasion, great Preparations were made by the Senate; Aemilius
one Consul, led an Army against the Veientes, with whom was joined Baebius, as
Pre-Consul; Servilius the other Consul, led another against the Volsci; and
Furius a third, against the Aequi. The latter soon finished his Work; Servilius
was forced to draw out the War at length; but Aemilius engaged the Veientes and
their Allies, and overthrew 'em; then falling upon their Camp, forced 'em to
beg Peace; the Conditions of which being left to his Discretion by the Senate,
he made a League with 'em upon Terms so little Advantageous to the Romans, that
they gained him much Hatred, and lost him the Honor of a Triumph; which so
enraged him, that he immediately disbanded his Troops, endeavoring still more
to incence the Commons against the Senate.

The Year following, when Horatius and Menenius were Consuls, eleven Cities of
Hetruria declared against the Veientes for making Peace without their Consent,
and forced 'em to break it. Their Pretense against Rome was, that the Fabii
were not drawn off from Cremera, upon which they advanced toward 'em with a
powerful Army; whereupon Menenius was ordered against Hetruria, and Horatius
against the Volsci. The Veientes not daring to Attack this Valiant Body of the
Fabii in their Fortress, drew 'em out by a Stratagem, causing several Herds of
Cattle, and Flocks of Sheep to be driven to the neighboring Places, and laying
several great Parties in Ambuscade. The Design^ took, and the Fabian
Adventurers were all unfortunately cut off; though at first by forming themselves
into a Wedge, they gained the top of a Hill, and there though wholly
encompassed, made an incredible Slaughter of the Enemy. U. C. 276.
Livy says, That none of this Family was left, but only one young Lad, from
whom afterward sprung Fabius Maximus; but Dionysius much questions this
Tradition. The Veientes, now Masters of Cremera, advanced boldly toward the
Roman Army, which lay encamped not far off, and might have relieved the Fabii:
Then taking advantage of Menenius's Unskilfulness, they possessed themselves of
a Hill nigh his Camp, from whence they straightened him so, that he was forced
to Fight upon very unequal Terms, and his Army was much worsted. The Romans
quitted their Camp, and fled in such Disorder, that had the Veientes been
mindful of any thing but Plunder, they might have destroyed 'em all. The next
day they entered the Roman Territories, and possessed themselves of the Hill
Ianiculus, two Miles from Rome, to the great Damage and Disgrace of the City:
But Horatius, the other Consul, returning from the Volsci, overthrew 'em twice,
and much eased the People, but could not yet wholly dislodge the Enemy.

The Year following, Servilius and Virginius, two experienced Warriors, were
made Consuls, which gave great Hopes to the People, who were now extremely
straightened for want of Corn and Trade, which was the more felt by reason of
the Populousness of the City; for at the next (...) appeared to be 110000 Men
of ripe Age, and three times as many Women, Children, Slaves, Merchants, and
Artificers. The People were ready upon every Opportunity to seize on the Stores
of the Rich; and the Consuls endeavored to appease 'em by buying what Corn
they could, and causing such as had Corn to expose it to Sale, till their
Levies and Troops were completed. When they had raised a sufficient Number of
Men, one Night they drew out their Troops from the City, toward the Enemy, and
passing the River before day, unexpectedly fell upon 'em, entirely routed em,
and cleared the Hill, they retiring in great Disorder to their own Territories.
This Campaign ended, Menenius, the last Years Consul, was called to an Account,
and severely fined for suffering the Fabii to be cut off, whom the People so
gratefully esteemed, that they placed the day of their Defeat among their
Nefasti, or unlucky days, whereon no Work of great consequence was to be
undertaken. The War was still carry^d on, and within two years after, the
Veientes were so overpowered, having been overthrown in Battle, together with
their Confederates the Sabines, and now closely hemmed in, that they begged
Peace of the Romans: And having purchased leave to send to the Senate, with a
whole Years Pay for the Consuls Army, and Money for two Months Provision, they
obtained a Truce for Forty Years. Thus ended the War with the Veientes, after
Seven Years Contests on both sides.

V. The following year, U. C. 280.
Aemilius and Vopiscus being Consuls, the old Stirs about the Agrarian Law were
revived by Genutius, one of the Tribunes, who boldly set a day to Manlius and
Furius, the last Years Consuls, to answer before the People, why they did not
divide the Lands. This Quarrel had like to have been fatal to the City, had not
Genutius's sudden Death prevented it; after which the Sedition might have been
quite appeased, had the Consuls born their Success with Moderation: But, making
new Levies, they offered to force one Volero, a turbulent Fellow, and formerly
an Officer, to List himself for a Common Soldier, and upon his refusing, they
ordered him to be stripped and scourged. But Volero fled to the Tribunes, who
protected him, and violently exclaimed against the Tyranny of the Consuls. This
diverted the People from the thoughts of Lands, and raised new Quarrels
concerning Privileges and Liberty. And the Year after, Volero getting to be
one of the Tribunes himself, the more to retrench the Consular Power, proposed
a Law for holding the Assemblies of Tribes instead of that of the Curiae,
called Comitia Curiata; which was so contrived as to take in greater Numbers,
and to give the Commons much more Privilege and Power than formerly. This
Proposal was much urged by the Pl^beians, but so strongly opposed by the
Patritians, that Volero could not accomplish his Designs before his Time was
expired.

The next Year, Volero, by his mighty Promises, procured himself to be made
Tribune a second time; and the Senate to balance him, got Appius Claudius, the
Son of Appius now absent, to be made Consul, though against his Will, and with
him Quintius Capit^linus, who hapn'd to be of a contrary Temper. Appius in a
Public Assembly opposed the Common's Designs so hotly and violently, and so
sharply reprimanded them for their rude Actions and Seditious Practices, that
the Tribunes saucily commanded him to depart the Assembly; and upon his
Refusal, to be sent to Prison. This Piece of Boldness was so surprising to the
Fathers, that all were ready to rise up in Arms, and the Lictors were beaten
back that went to lay Hands on him; he being defended by a Company of stout
young Men, an unseemly Contest ensued, which beginning with Railings and
Jostlings, proceeded to Blows and throwing of Stones. But Quintius, the other
Consul, by his Entreaties, and throwing himself into the Middle, and by the
help of the Graver Senators, prevented the Tumult from proceeding to any
further Inconveniences, which was ended shortly after by the Night. But all
Disturbances did not end here, for within a few Days after, the Tribunes and
the People seized on the Capitol, and there fortified themselves against the
Patritians. This might have been of the most dangerous Consequence, had not
Quintius by his mild Entreaties and fair Promises persuaded the Tribunes to
refer this Law to the Senate's Discretion; U. C. 282.
which after many long Debates, permitted it to be put to the Comitia, and so
it was passed.

This was called the Comitia Tributa, Comitia Tributa.
where all the Free Romans voted according to their Tribes: Whereas in the
Comitia Curiata, none could Vote but Inhabitants of Rome; in the Comitia
Centuriata, the Rich Men had the advantage, by reason of their Number of
Centuries; but in this Comitia Tributa, there was no Respect to either of these
Qualifications, but all Free Romans in or without the City, Poor or Rich, might
have Voices. Another Difference between this and the Curiata Comitia, was the
Place of Assembly; that being ti'd to the Comitium in the Forum R^manum, and
that with the Superstitious Observations of Birds, called Auspicia; but this
Tributa was ti'd to no set Place, being assembled in a great many several,
without any Observation of Birds. But the most material Difference between
these two Comitia's, was this; in the Curiata such things were treated of, and
confirmed by the Suffrages of the Curiae, as the Senate had first decreed; but
in the Tributa, all Things were managed without any consulting of the Senate,
and were wholly determined by the Votes of the Tribes gather^d apart. The
Matters that were managed here, were chiefly, The choosing of Inferior
Magistrates, as the Tribunes, Aediles, Priests, etc. making of those Law^,
^all'd Plebiscita, or whatsoever should concern the Commons; as als^ the
Punishment of Misdemeanors, but not as to Life and Death; and the making Peace,
but not War. This new Law gave the Commons still more Power and Authority, and
made 'em still more Bold and Insolent, to the danger of many a Patritian, and
to the Ruin of Appius, whose ill Success against the Volsci this same Year,
and ^his violent opposing the Agrarian Law the next, made the Tribunes set him
a Day to answer for his Life before the People, which he prevented by killing
himself.

VI. Still the Romans had Wars with the Aequi, U. C. 284.
Sabines, and Volsci, and had generally the Advantage. From the Volsci was
taken Antium, a considerable City on the Sea, 28 Miles South-East of Rome,
which they made a Roman Colony. For nine Years together, none of these got any
considerable Advantage over the Romans; though in the midst of these Wars, there
happened a most grievous Plague in Rome, which swept away an innumerable Company
of the Slaves, a fourth Part of the Senators, both the Consuls, and most of the
Tribunes. The Aequi and Volsci were at last much weakened, their Territories
greatly wasted, and Lucretius and Veturius, the Consuls, obtained one a
Triumph, and the other an Ovation over them. The Year after this, and of the
City 292, Voluminous and Camerinus, the Consuls, having no Action Abroad,
employed themselves at Home against the exorbitant Power of the Tribunes, who
were now got to that height of Boldness as to assert, That the Citizens ought
all to have equal Power in the Government; they likewise made great Complaints,
that the Roman Laws were yet unwritten; and thereupon propos^d a Law to have
Ten Men chosen in a lawful Assembly, to publish Laws both concerning a^ Private
and Public Business. The young Patritians furiously opposed their Designs,
casting the meaner Sort like Slaves out of the Forum. Among these, Caeso
Quintius, the Son of Quintius Cincinnatus, was Principal, a Person of great
Courage, whom the Tribunes resolved to make an Example to all young Men, and
therefore set him a Day to answer for his Life before the People, which caused
new Stirs and Commotions. Caeso being admitted to Bail, fled into Hetruria;
whereupon his Father sold almost all his Estate to reimburse the Sureties, and
then retreating to a small Farm, and a little Cottage beyond the Tiber, lived
retired from the World, laboriously working for his Living.

The Tribunes were much deceived in their Expectations, and the young
Patritians so hotly opposed 'em, that they could act nothing of Consequence
this Consulship. The next Year, the same Tribunes being chosen again, they
caused various Rumors to be spread abroad, That many of the Senators and
Patritians had formed a Plot, and conspired to Murder the Tribunes, and Ruin
all the Authority of the Plebeians. This Contrivance was designed to fright the
Senate into a Compliance, but had no other Effect than the causing great
Tumults and Disturbances among the Commons. These Troubles were so great as to
give Occasion to Herdonius, U. C. 293.
a Sabine, with 4000* Men to seize on the Capitol, calling in the Slaves to
their Liberty, which put the whole City into a great Consternation, all being
in a Confusion. Valerius and Claudius were then Consuls, and the Tribunes
persuaded the Multitude not to Fight, except the Patritians would engage by
Oath to create Ten Men for making of Laws, and suffer the Commons to have equal
Privileges with them. Claudius would have wholly slighted their Assistance,
but Valerius finding such pres^ing Necessity for 'em, promised upon Oath to
endeavor to satisfy the Desire of the Commons when the War was ended.
Whereupon Claudius was appointed to look to the City, and Valerius valiantly
attacked the Capitol on all sides, and took it by Storm, but with the Loss of
his Life; the Slaves being punished according to their Deserts, and the rest
made Prisoners of War.

This War finished, the Tribunes required Claudius to make good the Promise of
his deceased Colleague; but he alleged, He could do nothing himself, and
appointed the Comitia for the choosing a new Consul. The Fathers, the better to
support their Interest, resolved upon Quintius Cincinnatus, Father to Caeso
lately fled; and immediately sent for him to the City. The Messengers found him
hard at Plow, only in his Truss, and a Cap on his Head; but being told of their
coming by a Viator that ran before, he presented himself in a better Habit.
Being saluted by the Name of Consul, invested with Purple, honored by the
Fasces and other Ensigns of Magistracy, he was desired to begin his Journey;
but after a little Pause he answered with Tears, Then for this Year my poor
little Field must go unsown, and we shall be in danger of Want. After this,
taking his leave of his Wife, he departed for the City. There Quintius partly
by Cunning, and partly by Threats restrained the Tribunes from preferring the
Law; and carried himself so as to be a Terror to the Multitude when ever they
refused to List themselves, and their greatest Incourager when their Behavior
was such as deserved it. He performed his Office with that Prudence and
Justice, and likewise with that Civility and Courtesy, that the Commons were
now of Opinion, that they stood in no need of new Laws: Then having finished
his Consulship, he to the Concern of the whole Senate, betook himself to his
little Cottage, and his former laborious Course of Life. The Year following,
the Aequi surpised Tusculum, but were worsted by the Romans, together with
their Friends the Volsci, and were forced to beg Peace: And in this Year, there
were found 119000 Free Citizens, according to Eutropius.

In the next Consulship, the Aequi and Volsci were drawn to revolt by Gracchus
Claelius, a ruling Man among 'em, who by his Industry so hemmed in and blocked
up the Roman Army, that it was in great danger of being lost. This put the City
into a great Consternation, so that they were glad to have recourse to a
Dictator, and Quintius Cincinnatus was immediately resolved upon. Dic. iv. U.
C. 295.
The Messengers found him sweating and laboring as before; but he seeing
himself made Dictator by the 24 Axes, the Purple, the Horses, and other Royal
Ensigns, was so far from being pleased with the Honor, that he said with great
Concern, This years Crop will also be lost, and my poor Family must be Starved.
At his entering the City, he encouraged the People what he could, and chose
Tarquinius for his Master of the Horse; then drawing out his Troops, he fell
upon Claelius and forced him into his Intrenchments; and Besieging him a while,
brought his whole Army to his Mercy, who were forced to yield at Discretion.
They were all made Prisoners of War; and in token of Servitude, Quintius made
'em pass under the Iugum, Iugum.
which was two Spears set up, with a third cross, like a Gallows; and likewise
made 'em deliver up Corbio. He ordered the choicest Plunder for Rome, and the
rest to be given to his Soldiers; then returned to the City with a more
Magnificent Triumph than any before him, having defeated a powerful Army, and
plundered and fortified a City of the Enemy within Fourteen Days after his
Creation. He immediately resigned his Office, and when the Senate and his
private Friends would have enriched him with public Lands, Plunder, and
Contributions, he utterly refused all, betaking himself again to his Cottage,
and his old Course of Life; which is one great Instance of the Abstinence of
the Romans at that time. The Year following the Sabines with the Aequi retook
Corbio, against whom when Levies were to be made, the Tribunes, who were all
created a Fourth time, withstood them again. Whereupon the Fathers with weeping
Eyes, made use of Entreaties, offering to go in their own Persons if they
refused; which so sensibly moved the People, That they promised all manner of
Obedience, if they would permit the Number of their Tribunes to be increased to
Ten: Tribunes en^reas'd. U. C. 296.
Which the Senate after some Debates, Granted, reasonably supposing, that their
Number would prove the most probable Means to divide 'em; but then with this
Proviso, as Livy says, That they should never choose the same Tribunes twice.
This done, Levies were made, and a successful War was carried on against the
Sabines and Aequi.

VII. The Domestic Troubles seemed for a while to be allayed, U. C. 297.
but in a Years time, the Tribunes uniting all together, made farther
Encroachments than ever, and ventured so far as to Assemble the Senate by their
own proper Authority; moreover requiring Mount Aventine for the People to build
on, which being a Mile and an half in compass, was not yet fully inhabited, but
Common, and full of Wood. The Senate, after most violent Quarrels on both
sides, out of hopes it might be a Means to suppress the Agrarian Seditions,
granted those Parts that were Common, to the People, who spent the remaining
part of the Year in Building, to the considerable Increase of the City. This
Grant satisfied the Commons but for a short time; for the next Year their
former Complaints were renewed, and carried on with all the violent Heats und
Animosities that could be imagined, often proceeding to Blows; till at last the
Tribunes, having thrown off all Respect and Reverence, insolently set a Day to
the Consuls themselves to answer before the People. But this appeared so odious
to many, that they were prevailed upon to let such a Matter fall, as being most
dangerous both to themselves, and the whole State of Rome. But at the same time
they made a firm Resolution to prefer the Agrarian Law, which they agreed to do
in the next Assembly, and for that Reason they appointed a day apart for the
Comitia.

At this Assembly were gathered together great Numbers of all Ranks and
Qualities; where the Tribunes having spoken very largely on that Subject,
several of the Plebeians related what good Services they had done the
Commonwealth, and how little Reward they had for their Pains; Among which was
Siccius Dentatus, a Man of admirable Shape and Courage, 58 Years of Age, and
well furnished with Military Eloquence for a Seditious Attempt, who told 'em,
He had served his Country in the Wars forty Years, had been an Officer thirty,
first a Centurion, then a Tribune; had fought one hundred and twenty Battles,
in which, by the Force of his single Arm, he had saved many Patritians Lives,
recovered several Standards, performed many great and dangeros Exploits, gained
14 Civick Crowns, 3 Mural Crowns, and 8 Golden Crowns; besides 83 Golden
Chains, 60 Golden Bracelets, 18 pure Spears, and 23 Horse-Trappings, whereof 9
were for killing Enemies challenged to single Combats; moreover he had received
45 Wounds, all before and none behind, particularly twelve in that Day the
Capitol was recovered: Yet notwithstanding he had fought so many Years, served
in so many Expeditions, received so many Wounds, helped to gain so many large
Territories for his Country, and had spared no Cost or Labor, nor refused any
Danger or Difficulty; yet neither he, nor any of his Fellow-sharers in his
Dangers, had received the least Portion of those Lands they had gained by their
Swords, but that they were possessed by others who had not the least Title or
Merit to show for 'em; and to such too, whose private Attempts, and sinister
Designs, better entitled 'em to a disgraceful Punishment, than to any Public
Reward. These Particulars he urged at large, withal accusing the Patritians of
many Designs against the Privileges of the People, and the Public Peace of the
City; which he did with such Rhetoric and Cunning, that the Commons were
almost transported with the Man. Yet still the Patritians by their wonderful
Prudence and cautious Management, though with extreme Hazard to themselves, so
far defeated their Designs, that the Law could not be passed.

These Disturbances were a little diverted by the Enemies March as far as
Tusculum, against whom Siccius went as Volunteer, where the Consuls put him
upon a most desperate Attempt, which gained him the highest Honor, instead of
procuring his Ruin, as they imagined it would have done. A notable Victory was
gained over the Aequi by his Means, and he revenged himself upon the Consuls,
by preventing their Triumph this Year, and by getting 'em fined the next, when
he himself was made one of the Tribunes. U. C. 299.
Upon which a Law passed in the Centuriata Comitia, That all Magistrates should
have Power to punish such as violated their Authority (which before was only
the Privilege of the Consuls) But not by any Fine exceeding two Oxen or thirty
Sheep; which Law was long observed by the Romans. This new Law pleased the
People, and all now being a little more moderate, the whole Body of Rome began
to consider of Ways and Methods to settle the Government more firmly, and to
prevent all dangerous Feuds for the Future; thereupon it was agreed, That
Ambassadors should be sent to the Greek Cities in Italy, and to Athens, to
bring such Laws from thence as were most excellent, and most convenient for the
good of the Commonwealth.

For this great Design, Posthumous, Sulpicius, and Manlius were fixed upon, and
Galleys assigned for their use, suitable to the Majesty of the Roman People.
The Year following, there happened a great Famine, and a most grievous Plague, to
the great Damage of the City: And the Year after, the Ambassadors returned out
of Greece with their Laws, presently after which the Tribunes required, that
Lawmakers might be appointed; and after many grave and prudent Debates, and
some Opposition, it was Granted. The Method that they all agreed upon was, That
Ten Men out of the Chief of the Senate should be elected, whose Power
continuing for a Year, should be the same with that of Kings and Consuls, and
that without any Appeal; that all other Magistracies should lay down their
Authorities till they might be renewed according to the Laws. This was agreed
on by the Senate, and confirmed by the People; and the Consuls elect,
immediately resigning their Office, were made part of the Decemvirate; and also
the Tribunes, Aediles, Quaestors, etc. were divested of all Power and
Authority. This was a most remarkable Change of Government, as great as that
from Kings to Consuls, and was the second sort of Intermission of the Consular
Power, which happened in the second Year of the 82d, Olympiad, 302 Years after
the Building of the City, 57 after the Banishment of Tarquin, 30 after Xerxes's
Expedition into Greece, and 450 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. IV.
From the Creation of the Decemviri, to the Third Intermission of the Consular
Power, by the Military Tribunes.
Containing the space of 8 Years.
I. THE ten Persons chosen by the Centuriata Comitia for this high Office, U.
C. 302.
were Appius and Genutius, the late Consuls elect; Posthumous, Sulpicius, and
Manlius, Decemviri.
the three Ambassadors; Sextius and Romulius, former Consuls; with Julius,
Veturius, and Horatius, all Senators. These being invested with almost absolute
Power, agreed that only one of 'em at one time, should have the Fasces and
other Consular Ensigns, to which they were to succeed by Turns, for a certain
limited Time, till the Year came about. And he whose Turn it was for the time
being, assembled the Senate, confirmed the Decrees, and did all other Things
that belonged to a chief Magistrate to do; the rest, to avoid Envy and
Suspicion, differed little in Habit from private Persons, having only an
Accensus, or a sort of a Beadle going before 'em. These great Men for a time
managed all things with such Justice and Moderation, that the Commonwealth
seemed most Hapy under them; and Appius above the rest grew exceeding Popular,
carrying away the chief Praise from the whole College, having indeed greater,
and more secret Designs than the rest. At length, having made a Model out of
such Laws as were brought from Greece, and their own Countries Customs, they
exposed 'em to the View of all Men in Ten Tables, that any one might make
Exceptions. When all were approved of, a Senatus Consultum passed Nemine
contradicente, for the ratifying of these Laws; and the Question being put to
the People in the Centuriata Comitia, they were most Religiously and
Ceremoniously confirmed in the Presence of the Pontifices, Augurs, and Priests;
then they were engraven in Brass (some say Ivory) and placed for public View
in the most conspicuous Part of the Forum.

The Year being almost expir^d, the Decemviri moved the Senate for a
Continuance of this Office; and after a great Debate, it was resolved by them,
to have the same kind of Magistracy for the following Year, because something
seemed yet Wanting to the new Model; but especially because this Office
Suspended the Tribune-ship, which had been an intolerable Burden to the State.
A Comitia was appointed on purpose, where the most Ancient and Honorable of
the Fathers stood for this Office, fearing if it fell into the Hands of
turbulent Persons, it might prove very dangerous to the Peace of the
Commonwealth. Appius had now gained the Hearts of the People, and his Behavior
and Actions were extolled to the Skies, therefore they labored earnestly to
retain him in his Place; but he cunningly desired to be excused the Undertaking
such a troublesome and ungrateful Work. But at last, overcome as it were by the
Entreaties of the People, he placed himself among the Candidates; where by a
crafty Insinuation of his own Services, and a malicious Accusation of the other
Patritians, as owing him a Spite for his public Spirit, he not only made way
for himself, but for his Friends too. He procured to be chosen with himself,
Fabius, a former Consul; Cornelius, Servilius, Minucius, Antonius, and
Rabulius, all Patritians; and Petilius, Duellius, and Oppius, all Plebeians;
whom he took in, the more to Ingratiate himself with the Rabble; saying, It was
very just that the Commons should have a Share in that Magistracy, which was to
Govern and Command all.

On the first Day after their Creation, they all made their Appearance with
Regal Ensigns, which exceedingly terrified the People, especially the Axes now
added again to the Rods, which Poplicola had laid aside to prevent the
Dissatisfaction of the Common Sort. The first thing the Decemviri did, was
their promising each other by Oath, To be of one Mind; to retain the Power in
their own Hands; to be of equal Authority among themselves, and to admit none
into their Number; never to make use of Senatus Consultum' s and Plebiscitum' s
but in Case of Necessity, Acting most Things by Virtue of their own Power.
These things they observed with great Exactness; nothing valuing the Roman
Senate and People; and exercising their Authority with all Licentiousness: By
which Means it came to pass, that they being both Legislators and Judges, many
Citizens were unjustly put to Death, and others illegally deprived of their
Estates; whose Causes they all formally judged, that they might make the
greater Show and Pretense of Justice. Accusers were subborn'd out of their
Dependents, each one affording all Assistance herein to his Colleague; and such
private Persons as had Suits depending, had no other way to secure their
Causes, but by joining themselves with the Judges Party, so that in a short
time most of the Citizens were also Corrupted. And such as were most offended
at the Extravagancy of the Decemvires Actions, withdrew themselves, waiting for
a new Creation of Magistrates.

One very memorable Thing was done by 'em this Year, U. C. 303.
which was their adding two Tables of Law to the ten that were made the Year
before; whereof one forbad all Marriages between the Patritians and Plebeians.
These two together with the other ten, always went by the name of the Laws of
the Twelve Tables, The Twelve Tables.
being much talked of by many Authors, and extremely commended by Cicero, as
containing Matters of the greatest Policy, and excelling the Libraries of all
the Philosophers. They were divided into three Parts, whereof the first
contained what belonged to the Religion of the Romans; the second, what
concerned the Public; and the third, the Rights of private Persons. These Laws
being established, it necessarily followed, that Disputations and Controversies
would arise, which required the Interpretation, and Determination of the
Learned: Now this Interpretation, or this unwritten Law framed by the Learned,
was called by the common Name of Ius Civil, Ius^ Civil^.
or Civil Law. Besides, certain Cases were composed out of these Laws almost at
the same time; which Cases, least the People should make 'em at their Pleasure,
were to be certain and solemn; and this part of Law was called Acti^n^s Iuris,
Actiones Iuris.
or Cases at Law: So that almost at the same time arose these three sorts of
Law: Namely, the Laws of the Twelve Tables, called barely Leges, the Civil Law,
and the Cases at Law. The rest of the Roman Laws, that were either before or
after these, according to Pomponius, were of these sorts; namely, a
Plebiscitum, Plebiscitum.
made by the Commons without the Authority of the Fathers; or an Edict of a
Magistrate called Ius Honorarium; Ius Honorarium. Senatus Consultum.
Principalis Constitutio.
or an Ordinance of the Senate by their sole Authority, called Senatus
Consultum; or Lastly, that called Principalis Constitutio, which was Enacted by
the Prince or the Emperor.

But to return to the Decemviri, who now neither regarded the Approbation of
Senate nor People; but in a mere Arbitrary Way, continued themselves in Power
for the Year following, which was the third of the Decemvirate. They so managed
the Affairs, that in a short time even the most considerable of the Citizens,
Patritians and others, were either Murdered or forced to quit the City. At the
same time the Sabines and Aequi began to invade the Roman and Latin
Territories, which did not a little startle the Decemviri, because they found
no means of Resistance without first assembling the Senate, which had been laid
aside for some considerable time. At this pressing Juncture a Senate was at
last called, where Appius in a premeditated Oration propounded the Business of
the War: Upon which, Valerius the Grandson of Poplicola, first stood up, and,
though Appius commanded him to forbear, violently exclaimed against the Tyranny
of the present Usurpers. He being forced to Silence, was seconded by Marcus
Horatius, Grandson to Poplicola's Colleague, who having expressed great
Indignation against the Decemviri, threatened to have him cast Headlong down the
Tarpeian Rock. All the Senators exclaimed against this, as the highest Breach
of their Privileges, and an intolerable piece of Injustice: Whereat the Ten,
a little repenting this Rashness, began to excuse themselves, saying, They
hindered none of the Liberty of speaking to the Matter propounded, but
interrupted all Seditious Orations, which they might do by their Power of
Consuls and Tribunes received from the People, not for a Year, or any limited
Time, but till the great Work of the Laws should be finished; until which they
were resolved to Act, and would then give an Account of their Administration.

The Design of Tyranny and Slavery, too openly appeared under this Veil;
whereupon Claudius, Appius's Uncle, stood up, and very handsomely exposed the
Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Carriage of his Nephew and nine Companions; plainly
demonstrating, that this War was solely occasioned by the present Distempers of
the State; withal advising the Senators to resolve nothing till the accustomed
Magistrates were first Created. Many of the younger Sort were of Opinion, that
the present Urgency required the War to be committed to the Management of the
Decemviri; and others were for creating a Dictator, which Opinion had the most
plausible Appearance of any: So that the House was very much divided; many, out
of Fear either of the Decemviri, or the Enemies, having altered their first
Intentions. Appius took Advantage of these Divisions, and looked upon his own
Parties Votes as a ^ufficient Determination; whereupon he immediately commanded
the Clerk to draw up a Senatus Consultum, whereby full Power of Levying Forces,
and Commanding them, was given to the Decemviri; and straight the Senate was
dismissed, to the great Dissatisfaction of many. This new way of Proceeding
made Horatius and Valerius stand upon their own Defense, gathering together
their Clients and Dependents; and caused Claudius to go over to the Sabines,
where he lived. And notwithstanding all the Care and Provision of the
Decemviri, great Multitudes followed his Example, leaving their Native Seats,
with their Wives and Children, and went into a voluntary Exile.

II. The Decemviri divided their Army into three Parts, whereof on continued
with Appius and Oppius in the City; and the other two were commanded by their
Colleagues, one against the Aequi, and the other against the Sabines. The Aequi
forced the Romans to abandon their Camp, and fly shamefully; which caus^d great
Joy in Rome among the Enemies of the Decemviri: So thar Appius fearing some
Attempt, wrote to his Colleagues in the Army, to destroy their known Adversaries
by any Means, which was Effected upon several. But at Rome, among many others
Siccius Dentatus, the Roman Achilles, as he was called, blamed the Commanders
as Cowards and Unskilful; whereupon Appius, to secure him, with good Words
persuaded him to go as Lieutenant, or Legatus, ^o the Army then lying at
Crustumeria against the Sabines. Siccius without any suspicion or distrust,
undertook the Employment; Legatus.
for the Office of Legatus was most Sacred and Honorable among the Romans,
having the Power and Authority of a General, and the Inviolableness, and
Veneration of a Priest. Upon his Arrival at the Camp, he was sent out with a
Party of 100 Men, who had strict Orders to Murder him; where he showed such
incredible Strength and Valor, that he killed fifteen of 'em himself, and
wounded twice as many, as Dionysius relates it; so that at length they were
forced to throw Darts and Stones at him, keeping some distance, and by that
Means effected their Design. The Assassinates gave out that he fell into the
Enemies hands; but the Soldiers easily perceiving the Villainy, began to grow
very Mutinous; and the Decemviri to appease 'em, gave Siccius a very Honorable
Burial, which was performed with much Ceremony, and an universal Sorrow among
the Soldiers, who from that time thought upon nothing but a Revolt; which the
other Army lying at Algedum against the Aequi, soon after found a fair
Opportunity to effect.

It was occasioned die one Virginius a Plebeian, who had a Daughter of most
admirable Beauty, and of as eminent Chastity, whom Appius saw by chance, and
was so extremely smitten with her, that nothing could allay his violent
Passion. His own Laws had forbidden him Marrying her, as being a Plebeian; nor
could he hope to enjoy her any other Way, but by procuring Claudius, one of his
Clients, to challenge her for his Slave; so that the Matter being brought
before him, he might judge her to be so. Claudius, according to his
Instructions, laid Claim to her; and bringing the Matter to a Trial before
Appius, he affirmed, That she was natural Daughter to his Slave, procured by
Virginius' s Wife, being Barren and now Dead, and brought up for her own; a
thing though known to others, as well as himself, he had no Opportunity till
now to make it ^^^ear. This Pretense was so Impudent and Groundle^^ that it
raised the Indignation of all unconcerned Pe^^ons; and Numitor the Maids Uncle,
with Icilius who was Contracted to her, ^ufficiently proved the Falsity of the
Assertion. But Appius, resolutely bent upon his lustful and base Design, would
hear no Reason, nor mind any Proof; till at last the loud Cries and Murmurs of
the Multitude, prevailed with him to deferr the Matter till her Father could be
sent for from the Camp to defend her Cause, for which he would allow but one
Day. He immediately wrote to Algedum at the Camp to confine Virginius; but
Numitor and Icilius's Brother intercepted the Letters, and Virginius pretending
the Death of a near Relation, got Leave to leave the Camp, and come posting to
the City.

The next Day, Virginius appeared at the Place, to the great Surprise of
Appius, he and his Daughter both in Mourning, accompanied with several weeping
Matrons, and a numerous Train of Advocates, the whole City crowding into the
Forum. Virginius proved the Maid to be his own Daughter; but Appius, corrupted
by the Greatness of his Power, and inflamed with the Heat of his Lust, neither
considered the just Defense of the Father, nor the bitter Tears of the poor
Virgin; but was enraged at the Pity of the Standers by, thinking himself a
greater Object of Pity, who endured more for her Beauty's sake than she her
self did. He interrupted all that pleaded in her behalf, Commanding their
Silence, and strait judged Claudius to be right Lord and Owner of her. Great
Outcries and Lamentations being made, as well by others, as the Virgin and her
Relations, all knowing she was doomed to the Tyrant's Lusts, Appius commanded
all to depart, and ordered Claudius to take Possession of his Slave. Virginius
finding no relief, desired he might speak a Word with his Daughter before he
parted from her; which being Granted, he dragged her han^^ng about him to a
Butcher's Stall hard by, and (...) bewailing her deplorable Condition; where
catc^^ng a Knife in his Hands, he said, Daughter, I will send thee to our
Ancestors both Free and Unspotted, for the Merciless Tyrant will suffer thee to
be neither here; and thereupon stabbed her to the Heart: Then casting his angry
Eyes up to the Tribunal, he cried out, Appius, thou Tyrant, with this Blood I
doom thee to certain Death! With the bloody Knife in his Hand, in a great Rage
and Fury, he ran through the City, wildly calling upon the People in all Places
to regain their Liberty; and coming to the Gate, rod Post to the Army, a
Company of 400 Plebeians following him.

In this Posture Virginius arrived at the Camp, with the Knife and his Clothes
all Bloody; where with all his Rhetoric and Pathetick Reasons he persuaded 'em
to revolt from the Ten, and redeem their sinking Country; showing 'em likewise,
That their Sacramentum or Military Oath, was no ways binding in this Case,
because the Oath supposed the Commanders to be made according to Law, which the
Ten were not, having Usurped all the Power and Authority they could pretend to.
The Army, ready enough for such a Design, immediately decamped, some few
Centurions only remaining, and took their Station on Mount Aventine; and the
next day, fortifying their Camp, chose Ten Captains, whereof one Oppius was
Chief: And soon after came great Parties from the other Army, who were much
Offended at the Murder of Siccius, and joined them; and this was the second
Separation of the Commons. Appius in the mean time having endeavored by Force
to suppress the Disturbances he had raised in the City, was so overpowered by
the Parties of Valerius and Horatius formerly mentioned, that he was forced to
keep himself to his House. Oppius, one of the Decemviri, assembled the Fathers,
and urged the Punishment of all Deserters; but the Senate was so sensible of
the threatening Dangers and Miseries of the State, that they were glad to come
to any Agreement with the Sol^^ers: Therefore, to compose all Differences, they
immediately dispatched Messengers to the Army, which had lately removed to the
Holy Mount, as they had once done above 40 Years before. Where the People
demanded to have the same Form of Government as was settled before the Creation
of the Decemviri, which was readily Granted 'em, the People all returning home
to the City. Thus in less than three Years time, ended the famous Decemvirate.

III. Valerius and Horatius were for their Services made Consuls for the
remaining part of the Year. U. C. 304.
These preferr^d diverse Laws in favor of the Commons, to the great Regret of
the Patritians; whereof one was, That such Laws as the Commons enacted in the
Comitia Tributa, should have the same Force as those made in the Comitia
Centuriata; which was a great Advantage to the People. After this, the
Tribunes, whereof Virginius was one, thought it convenient to call the
Decemviri to an Account. Appius was Committed to Prison, no Bail being allowed
him; but before his Trial was found Dead, but by what means is uncertain.
Oppius, the next to him in Guilt, was accused; and being Condemned, dy^d the
same day in Prison by his own Hands. The other eight banished themselves, and
Claudius the pretended Master of Virginia, was driven out after 'em; with which
Justice the State was satisfied, and Indemnity granted to all others. Affairs
thus settled, the Consuls took the Field against the Aequi, Volsci, and Sabines,
and so successfully as to deserve a Triumph; but the Senate gave 'em a Repulse
for making Laws so much in favor of the Commons, and so disadvantageous to the
Patritian Privileges. The Consuls appealed to the People, and complaining much
of the Senate, by the Assistance of the Tribunes procured a Law to pass, for
receiving the Privilege of Triumph from the People. Thus did the Pl^b^ian
Power increase daily, each Morsel of the Patritians Prerogative serving only to
add to their insatiable Appetites.

Little was performed by the Romans for three years after, besides the Wars
with the Volsci and A^qui, which were carried on with no great Vigor, by
reason of the frequent Disputes between the Senate and People; till the Year
308, the Enemy making Ravages and Incursions to the Walls of Rome, put the
People upon considering the Common Safety of the State, and under the command
of Quintius and Furius the Consuls for this Year, they obtained a notable
Victory over them. This Victory was attended with a remarkable Determination of
the Romans, between the Inhabitants of Ardea and Aricia, who had frequent
Contests about certain Lands, and had left it to Rome to be Judge. One
Scaptius, an Old Commone^ of 84 Years old, stood up, and declared, That these
very Lands by Right belonged formerly to Corioli, and consequently to the
Romans, who ought to have 'em. The Senate were ashamed to determine the Thing
this way, because it had been left to them to be Judges; but the People, ready
to make use of any Advantage, caused it to be Voted in the (...) Tributa; where
the Lands were adjudged, To be the Public Possession of the Roman People, to
the great Surprise of the Ardeans and Aricians, who were forced to return home
as well satisfied as they could.

IV. The Tribunes now grew more and more turbulent, U. C. 309.
and nothing would satisfy the Commons but a Share in the highest Offices, and
Places of greatest Trust; and for that Reason they proposed two Laws, one to
permit the Marriages of Patritians with Plebeians; and the other to make the
Plebeians capable of the Consulship, which they never were before. The Senators
took these Proposals most hainously, seeing their Privileges in danger to be
ruined, and were resolved to endure the utmost Extremities rather than pass
these Laws; but finding such violent Commotions in the State, they passed the
Law about Marriages, in hopes that would satisfy the People, and make them not
insist upon the other. This appeased the Commons for a short space; but soon
after, when the Aequi and Sabines made great Ravages in the Roman Territories,
they took the Advantage of these Troubles, and utterly refused to List
themselves, till they were made likewise Partakers of the Consulship, nor could
they be prevailed upon to defer the Matter till the War was over. Upon this,
the Consuls were forced to hold a private Conference of the Chief of the
Senators, where after some Debates, Claudius proposed an Expedient as the most
seasonable in this pressing Conjuncture. He advised 'em by no means to suffer
the Consulship to come into the Hands of the Plebeians, but to create certain
Governors in the room of Consuls, Six or Eight, whereof one half at least
should be Patritians: For by this means they should seem not to take too much
Power to themselves, and yet retain all their Prerogative. This Project
extremely pleased the whole Meeting; and that nothing might seem to be designed
beforehand, they agreed, That at the next Meeting of the Senate, the Consuls
should not ask the Senior's Opinions first, as the Custom was, but the
Younger's, and such as were most Popular. And Genutius, the Consul's Brother,
was fixed upon to propound this way of Reconciliation, purely as his own
private Opinion.

Upon the Assembling the Senate, Canuleius, the Tribune, upbraided the Consuls
with holding of secret Meetings, and of managing dangerous Designs against the
State. The Consuls on the other side protested their Innocence, and to
demonstrate this more clearly, gave leave to any of the younger sort to speak
first, who could not be supposed to be acquainted with any private
Contrivances, and to Valerius in particular. Valerius advised the Fathers to
favor the Commons, who had so well deserved both in gaining of Dominions, and
getting and preserving the Liberty of the City; and urged further, That the
City could not be Free till there was an Equality of Right. Horatius, and
others, being next asked, seconded him; and after that, Claudius being desired
to speak, the better to conceal his Design, according to his old way, broke out
into bitter Invectives against the Commons, and advised, That the Law might not
pass, neither then nor ever after. This caused some Disturbance, but at last
Genutius was asked his Opinion, who as it was before designed, propounded this
Expedient to the Senate and People, That Six Governors should be chosen with
Consular Authority, three Patritians, and three Plebeians; and when the time of
their Magistracy should be expired, then the Senate and People might resolve
whether they would have the same Office, or that of Consuls for the Year
following.

This Project was gladly embraced both by the Senate and Commons; and leave was
given to any Plebeian to stand for this new Office* Yet so fickle were the
Minds of the Multitude, and so pleased with the bare Novelty of the thing, that
though many Plebeians stood for this Office, they thought none of 'em worthy of
that Honor, but bestowed it upon Eminent Patritians only, who appeared as
Candidates. This was the third Intermission of the Consular Power, though the
Authority was equivalent; and likewise the third great Change in Rome, which
happened scarce eight Years after the second, in the 310th of the City, 65 Years
after the Expulsion of the Kings, and 442 before our Savior Christ's Nativity.

CHAP. V.
From the Creation of the Military Tribunes, to the Burning of Rome by the
Gauls; which almost ruined the Roman Nation.
Containing the space of 54 Years.
I. THE Consuls being for once more laid aside, U. C. 310. Tribuni Militum.
these new-mention'd Magistrates succeeded, being called by the Name of Tribuni
Militum, or Military Tribunes, three Patritians only being chosen, namely
Sempronius Atratinus, Claelius Siculus, and Attilius Longus. Thus at first they
were but three in Number, afterward they were increased to four, and at length
to Six. And though these had the Power and Ensigns of Consuls, yet their Number,
together with the Mixture of Plebeians which afterward pressed in, made their
Privilege and Dignity seem something Different and Inferior: Whence a Tribune
of the People afterward in way of Contempt, called them a Proconsular Image;
and Manlius the Dictator, showing that a Master of the Horse was inferior to a
Consul, compared his Power to that of these Magistrates. These Military
Tribunes having held their Office almost eight Weeks, were constrained to lay
it down, for that the Augurs found some Flaw in their Election, and Consuls
were created afresh, Sempronius being one: So that in Seventy three Days here
was another Change of Government, the Old one prevailing over the New.

The following Year they procured Consuls again to be elected, and not Military
Tribunes, who were Geganius and Quintius, who had both been Consuls before. In
this Year the Consuls finding the Public Business to increase, U. C. 311.
Censors.
to ease themselves, procured two new Magistrates to be created, called
Censors, so named because the Business of the Census, which had been instituted
by Servius Tullius the Sixth King of Rome, was one great part of their Office.
These Magistrates at first made no great Appearance, but in a short time they
became Persons of extraordinary Dignity and Power, having all the Ornaments and
Ensigns of Consuls, except Lictors. At the beginning, they were created for
five Years, which space was called Lustrum, as was formerly observed; but soon
after, their time was shortened to a Year and half, but still they were chosen
but once in five Years, the Census being no oftener performed. Their Power was
very large, and their Office very extensive; for though at first they only
performed the Census, making an Estimate of Men's Estates, distributing them
into their several Classes and Centuries, taking the Numbers of the
Inhabitants, etc. yet in a short time they became Public Inspectors of Men's
Lives and Manners, and were therefore frequently called Magistri Morum; and
took upon 'em to degrade Senators upon Misdemeanors, to take away Horse and
Ring from Equites or Knights, and to turn Plebeians out of their Tribes, and
put 'em into a Lower, and many other things of the like Nature. The two first
Censors were Papirius and Sempronius, both Patritians, and the two last Years
Consuls; and these high Officers were for nigh 100 Years chosen out of the
Patritians, and only such as were Eminent and Famous, and had formerly been
Consuls, till the Plebeians found the way to this, as they did to all other
Offices. Afterward the Roman Colonies had their Magistrates, called
Sub-Censors, who gave an Account to these, of the Number of Inhabitants, and
their Wealth, which was immediately registered in the Censor's Books.

The Fathers were extremely satisfied that they had got these Magistrates
created out of their own Body, and the Tribunes esteeming their Power to be
inconderable, were willing enough to agree to it. In this same Year, the
Ardeans, as being Allies, sent to the Romans for Succor against the Volsci,
who were called in by some dangerous Factions among themselves, and had reduced
them to great Extremities. The Romans were ready to serve the Persons they had
so lately injured about their Lands, and immediately Geganius, the Consul, was
sent with a considerable Army against the Volsci, and he soon relieved the
Ardeans, and cleared the Country of the Enemy. This Victory was very memorable,
and the Consul had a noble Triumph, Clulius, the Volscian General, being led
before the Chariot. Ardea had now been so dispeopled with the Factions, and the
late Wars, that they were willing to accept of a Roman Colony, which the Senate
sent soon after; and to show a further Piece of Generosity, restored all the
Lands they had before adjudg'd to the Public Use, though with the great
Complaints of many of the Commons.

II. The Heats of the Commons were still kept alive but for some time were of
no dangerous Consequence, till three Years after, Sp. Maelius, a rich Knight,
encouraged upon these Contentions, by his large Bounty to the Poorer Sort in
time of a great Famine, began to affect Popularity, and by that means to aspire
to the Sovereignty. His Designs were soon guessed at, and he was accused of
this by Minucius, who had the care of the Provisions; which thing in these
unsettled times so startled the Senate, that by advice of Quintius, the Consul,
they ordered a Dictator to be immediately created, the Tumult hourly
increasing. Quintius Cincinnatus, Dic. v. U. C. 314.
now 80 Years old, was the Person, who chose Servilius Ahala for his Master of
the Horse. The Dictator presently summoned Maelius to appear, who being well
backed and supported by the Mob, refused to obey, now breaking out into open
Rebellion; whereupon Ahala set upon him in the Forum, and killed him, and was
justified by Quintius, who commanded his Goods to be sold, and his House to be
demolished. The Tribunes enraged at the Death of their great Friend, Maelius,
procured Military Tribunes instead of Consuls to be created for the following
Year, now six Years after their first Institution, hoping that some Plebeian
might get into the number of Six, which might give 'em an Opportunity of
revenging his Death: But Three only were created, all Patritians too, and their
Expectation wholly unanswered.

The following Year, Consuls were created again, and in the same Year, Fidenae,
a Roman Colony, revolted to Tolumnius, King of the Veientes; and to inhance
their Crime, by his Instigation, they treacherously murdered the Ambassadors
sent thither, who dying thus for the Public, the Senate generously appointed
Statues to be erected in their Honor. This War in the beginning proved so
dangerous and threatening to the Romans, that they were forced to create a
Dictator to manage it, Dic. vi. U. C. 316.
Mamercus Aemilius being the Person, who made choice of Quinctius Ci^cinnatus,
an Eminent Youth of the City, for his Master of the Horse. Aemilius, the
Dictator, obtained a great Victory over the Enemy, in which Battle Cornelius
Cossus, a Tribune in the Army, slew King T^lumnius with his own Hands, and by
that means obtained the Honor of the Opima Spolia, or Royal Spoils, which were
the only Spoils of that Nature since the Reign of Romulus. These Spoils were a
great Grace to Aemilius's Triumph, and a great Honor to Cossus, they being
with extraordinary Pomp and Ceremony consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius.

Two Years after this, there happened a great Plague in the City, and the
Fidenates and Veientes pressed so hard upon the Romans, that they were forced
to have recourse to another Dictator; Dic. vii. U. C. 318.
and Servilius Priscus was created, who chose Aebutius Elva for his Master of
the Horse. Servilius was so successful, as not only to drive the Enemy back,
but to take the Town of Fidenae, which he did by a Mine. The taking of Fidenae
was so disadvantageous to the Enemy, that the Veientes sent to all their
Neighbors about for Succor, threatening no less than entire Destruction to
Rome. These formidable Preparations put the Romans upon creating another
Dictator, a little above a Year after the last, Dic. viii. U. C. 319.
which was Aemilius, who had been Dictator three Years before, and he chose
Posthumous Tubertus for his Master of the Horse. In a short time, the Romans
found that the Veientes could procure no Aid, so the Dictator had little
Employment abroad; but resolving to do something at home, he caused the
Censorship to be reduced to a Year and a half, which was eight Years after its
first Institution, and then laid down his Office. The Censors from this took an
Occasion to remove him out of his Tribe, which so enraged the People, that the
next time they procured Military Tribunes to be brought in again, after there
had been Consuls four Years: And in this Election, notwithstanding the great
Industry of the Tribunes of the People, they could not get in one of the
Commons, which was a great Mortification to the Multitude.

At two years end, the Senate took occasion from the Wars of the Aequi and
Volsci to bring in Consuls again; and partly for the Enemies great
Preparations, and partly for the violent Humor of the Tribunes of the People,
a Dictator was likewise created, though against the Consuls Consent. Dic. ix. U.
C. 322.
This was Posthumous Tubero, who had Julius Vopiscus for his Master of the
Horse, who having finished this War successfully, triumphed and laid down his
Office. For four Years after this, they had Consuls, in which space little was
acted abroad or at home; then the Commons prevailed to have Military Tribunes
again created, Mil. Tribunes increased. U. C. 326.
which was now the fifth time, and they had four in Number, but still they
could not bring about their Designs. In this Year Fidenae revolted again, and
joined with the Veientes; whereupon three of the Consular Tribunes were sent
against the Enemy, and the fourth left to govern the City. When they proceeded
to an Engagement, one of the Tribunes cried Charge, another cried Halt, all
three being of a several Mind, till there was such Confusion, that the Romans
betook themselves to their Heels and fled; which sufficiently convinced 'em of
the Folly of having several Generals in one Army. The City upon this was put
into such a Consternation, that immediately a Dictator was created, which was
Aemilius, Dic. x. U. C. 327.
a third time, who chose Cossus, who had obtained the last Opima Spolia, for
his Master of the Horse. By the Prudence and Valor of these two, the Veientes
were overthrown, and Fidenae once more taken and plundered: Then Aemilius
returning to Rome in Triumph, laid down his Office, after he had held it but 17
Days.

For two Years after this, Military Tribunes continued; at the end of which,
the Senate took Occasion from the War with the Volsci, and the Absence of those
Magistrates, to bring in Consuls again, notwithstanding the Tribunes of the
People opposed it as much as possible. But Sempronius, one of the Consuls,
managing this War very carelessly, the Tribunes from thence took advantage, and
Military Tribunes were created again the next Year. This was for one Year, at
the end of which, the Senate procured Consuls to be made again; and
Capitolinus, one of 'em, gained advantage enough over the Aequi, to procure him
an Ovation. When this Year was expired, there happened so great a Contention
about two Quaestors or Treasurers, whom the Commons would have created out of
their Body, that the State fell into an Interregnum. Papirius being Interrex,
for a Composure, procured Military Tribunes to be again admitted, and four
Quaestors (which was two more than formerly) to be created either out of the
Patritians or Plebeians, Quaestors increased. U. C. 333.
as the People should think most proper in their Comitia. Notwithstanding this,
though many of the Commons strived for it, not one of 'em could get to be either
Military Tribune, or so much as Quaestor, which much incensed the People. In
the second Year after this, Military Tribunes still continuing, the Slaves
conspired to Fire the City, and seize on the Capitol; but the Plot was timely
found out, and the Discoverers greatly rewarded. The following Year, the Aequi
joined with the People of Lavicum, pressed hard upon the Roman Territories, and
the Consular Tribunes quarrelling among themselves for the Superiority, they
got great Advantages; Dic. xi. U. C. 335.
insomuch, that a Dictator was created, which was Servilius Priscus, a second
time, who chose his Son Axilla for his Master of the Horse. Servilius soon
dispatched his Business, and laid down his Office, after he had kept it but
eight Days.

After this, for four Years successively, were Military Tribunes instead of
Consuls, till new Contentions arising between the Patritians and Plebeians,
though partly from old Heart-burnings, and especially upon the account of the
Agrarian Law, the State fell again into an Interregnum. Fabius being Interrex,
brought in Consuls again, which Government continued for five Years longer, in
which space of time not very much was transacted either abroad or at home. In
the fifth Year, the Commons being crossed in their Designs of bringing in
Military Tribunes, bestirred themselves so much, as to procure three of the
Quaestors to be created out of their own Rank, who were the first Plebeian
Quaestors that ever were in Rome. Quaest. Plebeian. U. C. 344.
The Aequi and the Volsci, strengthn'd by Confederacies, made great Ravages in
the Roman Dominions; and the Commons refusing to List themselves according to
their usual Custom, procured Military Tribunes again, who marched against the
Enemy, but with so little Success, Dic. xii. U. C. 345.
that a Dictator was thought necessary to be created. This was Cornelius
Cossus, formerly mentioned, who appointed Servilius Ahala for his Master of the
Horse, and marched against the Enemy, overthrew 'em in one Battle, wasted their
Country, and then returned. Two Years after, the Patritians and Plebeians were
in some measure reconciled by means of the great Plunder of Anxur or Terracina,
taken from the Volsci; but especially by a Decree of the Senate for the Public
Pay of the Army with Brass Money, before which time every Soldier bore his own
Charges in the War, as was hinted formerly; and this was the first time of the
paying of Soldiers in Rome, which happened in the 347th Year of the City. The
taking of Anxur, and some other Places from the Volsci, in a short time brought
'em to a Peace; and now the Roman Dominions were considerably increas^d.

III. About the same time, ^. C. 347.
War was proclaimed against the Veientes with that Resolution, and carried on
with that Vigor, that it was evident that one of the two Cities must fall.
Veii was an exceeding large strong and wealthy City, and had not only been a
Rival to Rome for many Years, but had always been so perfidious, that a full
Revenge was necessary. The Romans invested the City, but it being seated upon a
craggy Rock, they soon found it would cost 'em several Years Siege; so that
they were constrained to carry it on both Winter and Summer, the Soldiers lying
under Beast-skins. At this the Tribunes of the People began to repine, as a
thing wholly new and dangerous; complaining likewise of the Payment of Soldiers
as an Innovation, and an unjust Artifice to ruin the Commons. And the next
Year, they got the Number of the Military Tribunes to be increased from four to
six, Mil. Tribunes increased. U. C. 348.
as it was at first design^d, but still could not procure one Plebeian to be
elected; and this Number continued always for the future. New Stirs daily
arose, notwithstanding the great Diversion by War; sometimes upon the account
of the little Succes^ against Veii, the Tribunes blaming the Commanders, and
prohibiting the Taxes which had been laid upon the City ever since the Soldiers
had received Pay. About six Years after, they renewed their ancient Contest
about the Agrarian Law, and carried it on so far as to get it promulg'd among
themselves, though not in the Senate: And in the same Year, after much Trouble
and Pains, Mil. Trib. Pleb. U. C. 353.
they procured one Plebeian to be elected into the Consular Tribunes, Licinius
Calvus being the Person. They extremely applauded themselves for this, it being
the first time that the Commons could make themselves sharers in the highest
Offices; and now they most readily permitted the Pay of the Army to be
gathered, all Stirs being for a while laid aside.

The Siege of Veii was still carried on from Year to Year, but with various
Success, and under diverse Commanders; sometimes all the Besieger's Works were
destroyed, and the Men driven back with great Loss by Sallies from the Town:
Then the Falisci, one of the twelve Nations of Hetruria, joined with the
Veientes, and very much annoyed the Romans, sometimes to the great hazard of
their whole Army. Besides, the Roman Forces were much diverted by the Volsci,
who suddenly took Anxur; and though in no long time it was retaken, yet still it
was great hinderance to the Siege of Veii. In the third Year of this Siege,
Furius Camillus, a Person extraordinary for Courage and Valor, as well as
other Excellencies, was made one of the Censors. He finding the Wars lay heavy,
caused the Batchelors to marry the Widows of such as had lost their Lives for
their Country; and likewise was the first, who obliged Orphans to pay Taxes.
Two Years after, he was made one of the Military Tribunes, but little fell to
his Share then. Three Years after that, which was the eighth Year of the Siege,
he was a second time made Military Tribune, in which time he marched against
the Falisci and Capenates, both Confederates of the Veientes, and great
Disturbers of the Romans in the Siege, and forced them all into their Towns of
Defense.

The tediousness of the Siege, made the Romans resolve to carry it on with the
utmost Vigor; and for that reason they created Camillus Dictator, (...). xiii.
U. C. 357.
and he appointed Corn^lius Scipio for his Master of the Horse. Camillus drew
out all the Forces he could raise, and made a solemn Vow, that if he took Veii,
he would dedicate the tenth Part of the Plunder to Apollo; Then marching into
the Country of the Falisci, he overthrew 'em in a great Battle, together with
the Capenates their Confederates; and after that, he turned all his Forces
against Veii, all People greatly expecting the Avent of this important Siege.
Camillus finding it very hazardous to attempt the storming a Place of that
Strength both by Art and Nature, secretly wrought a Mine into it with vast
Labor; and finding the City incapable of Relief, sent to the Senate, who
ordered all who had a desire to share in the rich Spoils, immediately to repair
to the Army, which caused great Multitudes of all Ranks to go thither. Camillus
at an appointed time ordered a Party of Men to enter the Mine, who with ease
became Masters of the City, to the great Amazement of the Besieged. Thus was
the rich and strong City of Veii taken, like a second Troy, after Ten Years
Siege, which enriched the Romans with vast Plunder. As for Camillus himself, he
transported with the Honor of subduing the great Rival of Rome, triumphed
after a more magnificent Manner than ordinary, having his Chariot drawn by four
Milk-white Steeds; a thing which the Romans looked upon as Sacred and peculiar
to the King and Father of the Gods, and therefore they were much offended at
his Carriage: And indeed no Man either before or since him ever assumed so much
Honor to himself.

Soon after the taking of Veii, the Tribunes of the People, who were ever
restless, proposed a Law to divide the Senate and People into two Parts,
whereof one should stay at Rome, and the other remove to Veii, and there
settle; this Separation, as they imagined, being a ready means for the
enriching of both by the Possession of two such considerable Cities. The
Plebeians, now Rich as well as Numerous, pressed hard for this Division; but
the Patritians judging it would prove the Ruin of the State, as earnestly
opposed it, betaking themselves to Camillus, who by prudently employing, and
variously diverting the Multitude, with much difficulty put it off, but with
the Hatred of many of the Commons. But not long after, there happened a greater
and more apparent Cause of their Hatred to him, occasioned by his neglecting,
either through Business or Forgetfulness, while he continued Dictator, to offer
those Tenths of the Spoils of Veii, which at the beginning of his Expedition he
had vowed to Apollo. When therefore he had laid down his Office, he moved the
People to restore the Tenths of what they had received; and the Priests also
reported that all the Sacrifices portended the Anger of the Gods, which must be
appeased by Gifts. So that the Soldiers, who had already spent what they had
gain^d upon their necessary Occasions, were forced upon Oath to restore the
tenth Part to Apollo, which was looked upon as a very hard Injunction, and
caused great Murmurings among the People. Now, because there was little Gold in
the City, the Ladies freely contributed their Dresses and Ornaments, which
amounted to eight Talents in Gold. And the Senate in requital of this generous
Act, decreed that Women should for the future have the Privilege and Honor of
Funeral Orations, which before had never been allow^d ^em.

The Commons still grew more turbulent and Uneasy, and moving again for a
Separation, the War with the Falisci happily fell out to divert them; for which
Camillus was made Military Tribune a third time. U. C. 36^.
He soon invested Falerii, the chief City, a large and strong Place, 25 Miles
almost North-West of Rome, where the Schoolmaster of the Town drew (...) his
^oys into the Roman Trenches, and offered him to betray the Town, by delivering
up the Sons of the Nobility and Magistrates. Camillus's noble Spirit would not
permit him to hearken to such Baseness, but out of an extraordinary Greatness
of Mind, he immediately ordered the Schoolmaster to be stripp^d, his Hands
tied behind him, and in that ignominious Manner to be whipped into the Town by
his own Boys. The Magistrates were so affected with the great Generosity of the
Roman, that they immediately yielded; and the Senate leaving the Conditions to
Camillus, he only fined them a Sum of Money, and received 'em with all the
Falisci into Friendship. But the Soldiers, who expected great Plunder, were
extremely disgusted, and from that Instant sought his Ruin. This same Year,
the Senate with much difficulty procured Consuls to be chosen, instead of
Military Tribunes, after an Intermission of 15 Years. And the Year following,
Consuls also were chosen again; but in the third Year, Military Tribunes, in
which time the Tribunes of the People moved again for a Separation, but were so
sharply opposed by Camillus, that in Revenge they accused him of fraudulent
Practices in the Plunder of the late Wars. Camillus finding the Multitude
exasperated against him for several Reasons, and that they were now ready to
condemn him, left the City; but first lifting up his Hands toward the Capitol,
he prayed, That if his Banishment were unjust, and merely the effect of the
Rage and Malice of the Multitude, they might suddenly repent it; and that it
might visibly appear to the World, how much the Romans were obliged by his
Actions, and stood in need of his Presence. Thus, like Achilles, leaving his
Imprecations on the Citizens, he went into Banishment, being fined 15000 Asses.

IV. About this same time, U. C. 363.
many thousands of the Gauls finding their own Country too narrow for them, and
desirous of removing, under the Conduct of Brennus their King, broke into
Hetruria, and invested Clusium, a City in Alliance with Rome. These were the
Galli Senones, a very numerous and warlike People inhabiting most of that Part
of Italy, which now goes by the Name of Lombardy, and which the Hetrurians had
been Masters of before them; a People vast in Body, rude by Nature, barbarous
in Conditions, and wandering as Rovers over many Countries. The Inhabitants of
Clusium, much affrighted at their great Numbers, and dreadful Looks, sent
immediately to Rome, begging that State to interpose by sending Ambassadors and
Letters to dissuade these unjust Aggressors from proceeding in their
Enterprise. The Senate willing to perform this friendly Part, dispatched
Ambassadors to the (...), choosing out three of the Family of the (...), Persons
of the greatest Quality, and the most Honorable in the City, for that Office.
The Gauls at first received 'em courteously enough; and coming to a Conference
with 'em, the Ambassadors demanded the Reason of this their present
Undertaking, and what Injury the Clusians had done them: Brennus made answer
somewhat sharply, That they had much injured 'em by refusing to part with some
of their Lands, when they had more than they themselves could easily manage;
and this was nothing more than what the Romans themselves had done to the
Albans, the Fidenates, the Ardeates, the Veientes, and many other People that
they made War with. These Reflections so enraged the Ambassadors, that they
immediately stirr^d up the Inhabitants to make a Sally against the Besiegers,
they themselves heading 'em. It happened, that in the midst of the Fight, Fabius
Am^usius, one of the Three, kill^d a Gaul of huge Bulk, and was discovered
while he was disarming of him; whereupon Brennus moved with a just Indignation,
immediately broke up the Siege, and marched directly for Rome.

Brennus, that he might not seem to do any thing meanly or unjustly, sent first
to Rome, demanding the Ambassadors to be delivered up, as having broken the Law
of Nations. But Favor so far prevailed above Equity, that the Matter being
referr^d from the Senate to the People, no Satisfaction could be had from
either: Nay, further, the Ambassadors themselves, were with three others
created Military Tribunes for carrying on the War. The Gauls hearing this, in a
great Rage hastened their March, breathing out nothing Revenge and Destruction
to Rome. The Places through which they marched, were so terrified with their
Numbers, the Fierceness of their Natures, and their dreadful Preparations of
War, that they gave their Countries for lost. But contrary to their
Expectations, they did no Injury as they marched, crying, That the Romans only
were their Enemies, and that they took all others for their Friends. The Romans
met 'em at the River Allia, 11 Miles from the City, with an Army of 40000 Foot,
but most of 'em raw and unskilful Men, U. C. 364.
and what was more dangerous, under the Conduct of several Commanders. In this
Condition they engaged the Gauls, without either Order or Discipline, or scarce
any Courage, and were miserably defeated. The Left Wing was immediately driven
into the River, and there entirely cut off: The Right escaped better, though with
great Loss, some dropping into Rome; the rest, as many as escaped, stole by
Night to Veii, giving Rome for lost, and all that was in it for ruined. This
Day was ever after branded for an unlucky Day by the Romans, wherein no Work of
Note was to be done, and was called Alliensis in their Calendar.

Never was Rome in the like Consternation, as at the News of the loss of this
Battle, and the sudden Approach of the Enemy: Nothing but miserable Howlings
and Lamentations were heard on all Parts, some leaving the City, others
creeping into Holes, Priests hiding their Relics, Women running like
distracted Persons with their Children in their Arms, and every one shifting
for himself; so that Rome became abandoned, and was left open to the Rage and
Fury of the Enemy. For they who resolved to stay at Rome, quitting the rest of
the City, betook themselves to the Capitol, which they fortified, in order to
hold out a Siege. Only some of the Pontifices and Priests, and the most ancient
of the Senators, such as had been honored with several Consulships and
Triumphs, who could not endure to think of leaving the City, put on all their
Robes of State, placed themselves in the Forum on their Ivory Chairs, resolving
since they had lived in Honor, to die in State, and in that noble Posture
expected the utmost of what would follow.

On the third Day after the Victory, the Easiness of which much amazed the
Gauls, Brennus appeared with all his Forces before the City, and finding the
Gates wide open, the Walls unguarded, and all things defenseless, began to
suspect at first some Stratagem of the Romans; but after a little
Consideration, he entered the City, and marching into the Forum, he was more
surpised than ever, to find so many Men sitting all in that remarkable Order,
and profound Silence, like so many Statues. Their splendid Habits and
Ornaments, their steady Unconcern'dness, their Majestic Gravity, their
venerable Looks, together with that Air of Greatness which appeared in 'em,
made the Gauls imagine 'em to be an Assembly of the Gods, or at least somewhat
more than Human; till one Bolder than the rest stroaking Papirius's Beard, was
struck by him with his Ivory Staff, whereupon he immediately killed the old
Man. Upon which began the Slaughter, the rest of the Gauls following his
Example, set upon the rest, and killed 'em all without Mercy or Distinction;
and continuing their Rage and Fury, dispatched all that came in their Way. In
this Manner they proceeded, Sacking and Plundering the Houses for many days
together; then setting the whole City in Flames, burnt down every House to the
Ground.

Thus was the famous City of Rome laid all in Ashes, except the Capitol;
occasioned by the Romans manifest Breach of Justice, and the Laws of Nations.
This happened 364 Years after it was first built, 119 after the Expulsion of the
Kings, Anno Mundi 3615, in the third Year of the 97th Olympiad, 60 Years before
the Ruin of the Persian Empire, and the setting up of the Macedonian by
Alexander the Great, and 388 before our Savior Christ's Nativity.

CHAP. VI.
From the Burning of Rome by the Gauls, to the War with the Samnites; when the
Romans began much to extend their Conquests.
Containing the space of 46 Years.
I. ROme now felt the utmost Afflictions and Severities of Fire and Sword, U.
C. 364.
and was the true Scene of all kind of Misery and Desolation; the Town deserted
by its Inhabitants, and all its stately Buildings a heap of Rubbish; no hopes
being left but in the Capitol, which was now closely besieged by the Gauls, and
in the Banished Camillus, whose Presence was now heartily wished for. While the
Gauls lay before the Capitol, they sent out many Parties to Forage in all the
Country about, who ravaged and destroyed all the Towns and Villages they
arrived at; and that with the greatest Carelessness and Security imaginable,
conceiving no sort of Opposition, or any manner of Danger. But the greatest and
best ordered Body of their Forces approaching Ardea, Camillus, who had lived
there a retired Life, began to rouse himself from the sullen Resentments of his
Wrongs, to the moving Considerations of the Miseries of his Country; and by a
brave and encouraging Speech persuaded all the Ardeans, that were able to bear
Arms, to fall upon the Enemy in the Night time; which was done so effectually,
that scarce any were left to carry the News of the Defeat. The Fame of this
Victory began to revive the fainting Spirits of the Romans, who now found that
these dreadful People were not invulnerable; and the Romans who lay at Veii,
now finding Camillus's readiness, immediately sent to him to be their General;
begging of him to forget all former Injuries, and succor his distressed
Country. He objected his banished Condition, and refused to Act, unless by
Commission from those in the Capitol; whom he considered as the true Body of
the surviving Roman State. This modest Answer was extremely well taken, but
they could not imagine by what means to send to the Capitol, while the Enemy
was in full Possession of the City.

But for the Undertaking this desperate Attempt, one Pontius Cominius offered
his Service, which being kindly accepted of, he thus performed: Putting on a
poor Garment, carrying Corks underneath, he went for Rome, and arrived at the
City when it was dark: The Bridge he could not pass by reason of the Guards,
but taking his Clothes and binding 'em about his Head, he swam down the Tiber
upon his Corks; and avoiding those Quarters, where he perceived the Enemy to be
awake, which he guessed at by the Lights and Noise, he got into the City, and
from thence to the Capitol, climbing up in the steepest Place with extreme
Danger and Difficulty. The Besieged were much surpised at the Greatness of the
Attempt, and presently giving him his Instructions, sent him back the same Way
he came; and this part of his Expedition he performed with the same good
Success that he had done the other, and upon his Return delivered to Camillus
an Order of the Senate to make him Dictator. Dic. XIV. U. C. 364.
Camillus chose Valerius Potitus for his Master of the Horse, and getting
together an Army of above 40000 Men, he prepared to march against the Enemy. In
the mean while, at Rome some of the Gauls happened to discover some Footsteps
and Prints made by Pontius at his climbing the Hill, which being privately told
to Brennus their King, he ordered a select Party of Men in the dead of Night to
climb up the same Way, and take the Capitol by Surprise. These Men performed
their Office with great Difficulty, and much Time, not any of the Dogs
appointed for the Watch perceiving it; nevertheless it so happened that some
Sacred Geese which were kept by the Temple of Iun^, by their Gaggling and
clapping their Wings, discovered them. The Romans every one snatching what
Weapon he could, did their utmost on this sudden Occasion; and Manlius, a
Patritian of great Courage, was the first that made Head against 'em, boldly
mounting the Rampire, and presently tumbling down two of the Enemy at once.
Others soon came in to his Assistance, and drove down all the rest, not a Man
escaping; and the next Morning the Captain of the Watch was thrown Headlong
down the Rock, and Manlius rewarded as well as Circumstances would permit.

Henceforwards the Affairs of the Gauls were in a worse Condition, first
wanting Provisions, then infected with the Plague, which raged much among 'em;
but still the Besieged could have no Relief, being reduced to a languishing and
desponding Condition for want of Provisions and Necessaries. So that after a
seven Months Siege, they were forced to Capitulate, and it was agreed, That the
Romans paying down 1000 Pound weight of Gold, the Gauls should immediately quit
the City and Territories. This Agreement being confirmed by Oath, and the Gold
brought forth, the Cauls out of Covetousness used false Dealings in the
weighing, pulling back the Balance as they thought fit; at which the Romans
complaining, Brennus cast in his Sword and Belt into the Scales, scoffingly
crying, Vae Victis, Woe to the Vanquished, which afterward became a Proverb.
Whilst this Difference lasted, Camillus was arrived with his Army, and hastening
with a choice Party of Men to the Place where the Gold was a weighing, he came
boldly and took it out of the Scales, telling the Gauls, that it was the Custom
of the Romans to deliver their Country with Iron, not with Gold: Therefore he
nulled the Compact, because made without his Consent, who alone, as being then
their Dictator, had the sole Power of making Peace. Upon this therefore a Fight
immediately ensued, where, after a most bloody Contest, the Gauls were entirely
routed, and such great Execution done upon 'em in the pursuit, that all the
Roman Territories were in a short time cleared of 'em. Thus was Rome
unexpectedly taken, and in seven Months, as unexpectedly recovered; Camillus
for his excellent Services having a noble Triumph, being now deservedly looked
upon as their second Romulus.

II. After this War was finished, U. C. 365.
the Tribunes of the People began to urge once more for the removing to Veii,
which caused the Senate to procure Camillus to hold his Office of Dictator for
a whole Year, which was six Months longer than the usual time. Camillus with
kind Words and gentle Language appeased the Multitude, showing 'em, How
unworthy and dishonorable a Thing it would be for 'em to forsake the venerable
Seat of their Ancestors, and all their Sacred Rites, which were appropriated to
this Place, to inhabit a conquered and enslaved City. Upon this therefore Rome
was ordered to be rebuilt with all Diligence, and all Persons were employed
about it; but it was carried on with that Haste and Hurry, that the City wanted
much of its former Beauty and Regularity; and the Watercourse formerly laid
in the Streets, now ran for the most part under private Houses. Dic. xV. U. C.
366.
When Camillus's second six Months were out, Military Tribunes were chosen; and
in the same Year the Aequi, Volsci and Hetrurians all took up Arms and invaded
the Roman Territories. The Military Tribunes were soon blocked up by the Enemy,
and were brought to such Straits, that the Senate made Camillus Dictator a
third time, and he chose Servilius Ahala for his Master of the Horse. Camillus
overthrew both Aequi and Hetrurians, and forced the Volsci to yield themselves,
after the War had continued for seventy Years; for all which he had a third
Triumph. Three Years after this, Camillus being Military Tribune, overcame them
again, together with the Hernici and Latins, the latter of which till now had
been faithful ever since the Battle at the Rhegillan Lake above a hundred Years
before: And from the Hetrurians he recovered two Towns, Tribes increased a
third time. U. C. 369.
which they had taken from the Allies of Rome. The Year following four Tribes
were added; namely, the Stellatine, the Normentine, the Sabbatine, and the
Arnian; which now made the whole Number twenty five.

About this time Manlius, who for his great Services in saving the Capitol had
now got the Surname of Capitolinus, began to grow very haughty and ambitious;
and by his ingratiating himself with the common Sort, his paying their Debts,
and his railing at the Nobility, it was apparent that Sovereignty was his Aim.
The Numbers that he got over to his Party, together with the War renewed with
the Volsci, made the Senate procure a Dictator to be created; Dic. xvi. U. C.
369.
who was Cornelius Cossus, who made choice of Quintius Capitolinus for his
Master of the Horse. Cossus soon overthrew the Enemies, and returning home in
Triumph, called Manlius to an Account, and put him in Prison. But the
Multitude, extremely afflicted at this, put on Mourning Garments, and made such
dangerous Disturbances, that after some time he was set at Liberty, and soon
after Cossus laid down his Office. But Manlius still growing more insolent,
holding private Cabals, and filling the whole City with Faction and Sedition,
the Senate remitted his Business to the Care of the Military Tribunes, whereof
Camillus was one, and a Day was ^et him to answer for his Life. The Place of
his Trial was right over against the Capitol, where when he was accused, he
often pointed to it, and with weeping Eyes and moving Voice let the People
know, what a Noble piece of Service he had done there. This moved the Multitude
to such Pity and Compassion, that Camillus caused the Judges to remove him
without the Gate to the Peteline Grove; where having no View of the Capitol, he
was condemned to be thrown down the Tarpeian Rock, the Place both of his
highest Honor and greatest Infamy: Ant it was decreed that none of the Manlii
afterward should be called Marcus. Thus jealous was Rome of her Liberty, that
no Deserts could atone for presuming to offer at that.

About three Years after, U. C. 372.
Camillus was chosen Military Tribune a sixth time, though much against his
Consent, and marched against the Volsci; where Lucius his Colleague, eager to
engage the Enemy when Camillus judged it dangerous, was permitted to Fight
alone, Camillus being left weak in his Bed. Lucius was soon worsted, and his
Army almost routed, when Camillus rousing himself, was presently helped up on
Horseback; where making his Way through them that fled, he drove furiously to
oppose the Pursuers; which Boldness so encouraged the Soldiers, that they all
rallied again, resolving never to forsake a General so famous for his Actions,
and so venerable for Age: By this the Enemy were soon stopped, and the next day
entirely routed, losing Bag and Baggage, and the greatest part of their Men.
The Year following, great Stirs were raised in the City about the Creditors and
Debtors, which gave an Opportunity to the Inhabitants of Praeneste, a Town of
Latium, with its Dependents, to make Incursions and Devastations to the Walls
of Rome, to the great danger and damage of the City. This and the Troubles at
home, caused the Senate to create a Dictator, Dic. xvii. U. C. 373.
which was Quinctius Cincinnatus, who appointed Sempronius Atratinus for his
Master of the Horse; and he was so Successful against them, that he overthrew
'em, took the eight Towns that were their Dependents, by Storm, and Praeneste
it self by Surrender. Then returning in Triumph with the Statue of Jupiter
Imperator, which he put into the Capitol. he laid down his Office, after
keeping of it but twenty days.

Two Years after this, U. C. 275.
a dangerous Contest happened between the Patritians and Tribunes of the People,
occasioned by Fabius Ambustus a Tribune, who had Married one Daughter to a
Patritian, and the other to a Plebeian: The latter being very much concerned at
her Husband's want of equal Honor, Fabius told her, That he would so manage
Affairs, that her House should shortly be of the same Dignity as her Sisters.
From that time therefore he consulted with Licinius Stolo her Husband, and L.
Sestius, about preferring a Law for making one Consul out of the Commons. These
two being made Tribunes of the People, labored so violently about this Law,
and the Contests were carri^d with such wonderful Heats and Animosities on both
sides, that from the Year (...) to ^82, which was five Years, no Supreme
Magistrates were chosen at all, nor any other but Tribunes and Aediles, who
kept their Places all that time. And in all this unhappy Space there was little
better than Anarchy and Confusion in Rome, till the Year 282, they procured
Military Tribunes to be chosen; but still the Contests were kept up on both
sides; Dic. xviii U. C. 284.
when two Years after, Camillus was made Dictator a fourth time, but much
against the Consent of the People. He chose Aemilius Mamercinus for his Master
of the Horse, and with much Difficulty brought both Parties to a better and
more moderate Temper; but finding the Multitude so very stubborn and resolute
in their Designs, withal threatening to Fine him if he compli'd not, he soon
laid down his Office. Upon this another Dictator was immediately created, which
was one Manlius Capitolinus, who chose Licinius Stolo for his Master of the
Horse, Dic. xix. U. C. 285.
and he was the first Plebeian that ever obtained this Honor. Stolo, who had
been the great Occasion of these Disturbances, now took an Occasion to prefer a
Law that no Man should possess above 500 Acres of Land, which was very
disadvantageous to the Patritians, and more to himself* for soon after* he was
found to have above that Proportion, and so was punished by Virtue of his own
Constitution.

III. In the midst of these violent Contentions about the Consul-ship, News was
brought to Rome, that many thousands of the Gauls were marching from the
Adriatic Sea toward Rome. This put the City into a great Fright, and all
began to lay aside their private Differences, and to think of nothing but of
the common Safety; for they had feared the Gauls so much, that a Law was made,
That Priests should be excused from all Wars, unless in an Invasion from the
Gauls: Dic. xx. U. C. 387.
All Unanimously agreed to make Camillus Dictator a fifth time, now near 80
Years old, who refused not the Employment in this dangerous Juncture, but
presently chose Quinctius Cincinnatus for his Master of the Horse. Camillus
considered that the Force of the Gauls lay chiefly in their Swords, with which
they laid about 'em in a rude and unskilful Manner: Therefore he furnished his
Men with light Iron Helmets, and bound their wooden Targets about with Brass,
teaching them how to fence and receive the Enemies Blows without Hurt. By this
means he rendered the Swords of the Gauls so unserviceable, that giving 'em
Battle at the River Anio, he easily overthrew 'em, which happened 23 Years after
they had destroyed the City; and after this Defeat the Romans began now to
despise the Gauls as much as they had feared 'em before. Soon after this
Camillus in his Return homewards had Velitrae surrendered to him without any
Resistance.

But Camillus's greatest Contention, and which was hardest to be managed, was
with the People, who now returning home full of Victory and Success, violently
insisted again to have one of the Consuls chosen out of their own Body. The
Senate strongly opposed it, and would not suffer Camillus to lay down his
Dictator-ship, thinking that under the Shelter of his great Name and greater
Authority, they should be the better able to contend for the Power of the
Nobility. But when Camillus was sitting upon the Tribunal, dispatching public
Affairs, an Officer sent by the Tribunes of the People commanded him to rise
and follow him, laying his Hand upon him as ready to seize him: Upon which such
a Noise and Tumult followed in the Assembly, as was never before known in Rome:
Some that were about Camillus, thrusting the People from the Bench, and the
Multitude below Crying out, Pull him down, Pull him down! Still he wou^d not
lay down his Office, but taking the Senators along with him, he went to the
Senate House; where great Contests arose, by reason of contrary Opinions; but
at last the most Popular Party prevailed, and a Law was made, That one of the
Consuls for the future might be chosen out of the Plebeians; U. C. 388. Consul
Pleb. Military Tribunes put down.
and this happened 143 Years after their first Creation, and 24 after the burning
of Rome by the Gauls. From this time forwards the Military Tribunes were for
ever laid aside, now 78 Years since their first Creation, after 49 Courses of
that Office, and 15 from the Consul-ship to that, and from that to the
Consul-ship. Now the People were reconciled to the Senate, and a Temple was
presently built and Dedicated to Concord, according as Camillus had vowed; and
the Patritians desiring a Praetor to be created out of their Body for the
Administration of Justice in the City, it was immediately Granted 'em.

This Praetor was a Magistrate of extraordinary Note, Praetor.
so called a Prae^undo, a Name which the Consuls themselves had for some time.
The Power and Authority of this Magistrate was very great, for he executed the
Office of the Consuls in their Absence, both in the Senate and in the Comitia.
But the Principal Business of these Praetors was to Administer Justice in the
City or Provinces to which the Consuls could not so easily attend; and upon
that account they may be Englished, Lord Chief Justices. They judg^d all Causes
both Civil and Criminal, which last were called Capitales; in Civil Causes they
were clothed in Purple; but when they passed Sentence in Criminal Causes, they
were in Mourning. Upon the account of their Power and Honor, and likewise
because they were created by the same Auspicia with the Consuls, Livy calls
them Colleagues of the Consuls. Their Ornaments and Ensigns were six Lictors
with their Fasces, the Toga Praetexta, and Cella Curulis; and besides those
Marks of Consular Dignity, the Sword and Spear, placed by them in the Court.
Their Officers in Court, besides the Lictors, were the Scribes or Notaries, to
enter things in Writing, and the Accensi or Bailiffs, who Summoned the People
together. At first there was but one Praetor, and that for above 100 Years;
then another was Created, who administered Justice to Strangers; whereupon for
Distinction sake the first was called Praetor Urbanus, or Major, and the latter
Peregrinus, or Minor. But as the Business and Dominions of Rome increased, the
number of these Praetors was likewise enlarged, and increased gradually, till
in Augustus's Reign they came to Sixteen.

Immediately after the Reconciliation between the Nobility and Commons, a 4th
Day was added to the Latin Feriae, and the greater fort of Games were
Solemnized; which when the Aediles of the Commons were unwilling to manage
according to their Office, the young Patritians offered themselves, and the
Senate procured also of the People, that two Patritians every year might be
made Aediles, Aediles cudules.
who from the Ivory Chair called Cella Curulis, had the Name of Aediles
Curule^* These were Created 128 Years after the Aediles of the Commons, but
were of greater Account, as being Curule Magistrates, their Chair being so
called either from Currus, the Chariot which carried it and the Magistrate
about, or from Curvus, because it was made with Crooked Feet. They had all the
same Offices and Business as the Aediles of the Commons, but had rather greater
Authority; but more especially they took Care of the great and public Games,
such as the Ludi Florales, Circenses, Megalenses, Romani, etc. as also of
Tragedies and Comedies. Sometimes at their own Charge they made these Shows,
and ever examined the Plays written before they were Acted; and (whether from
this Inspection of all Plays and the like, it is uncertain) they seem to have
been the Licensers and Judges of other Writings. It is further observed, that
the Generals of Armies when returned home from Victory, delivered up the Corn
and Provisions which were Prize, to these Aediles Curules, as they did the
Prisoners to the Praetor, and the Money to the Quaestor. Thus were the
Disturbances of Rome allayed, and all things for a short space continued in
Peace and Quiet.

IV. Soon after these Affairs were settled, News came of the Gauls meeting
together, U. C. 389.
who had before been dispersed through Apulia, and of the intended Revolt of
the Hernici: But all Preparations were deferred by the Senate, because they
were unwilling to have any thing done by a Plebeian Consul. On the other side
the Tribunes began to complain, that for one Plebeian Consul, the Nobility had
got three Patritian Magistrates, who sat as Consuls in their Curule Chairs,
and their Praetexta. Modesty therefore suffered not the Fathers to Create both
the Curule Aediles out of their own Body; so that it was agreed first that
every other Year they should be chosen out of the Commons; but afterward they
were Elected promiscuously. The Year following there happened a grievous Plague
in the City, which swept away vast Numbers, among the rest Camillus himself,
after he had done so many Noble Services for the City, that he was deservedly
called the second Founder of Rome. The Plague raging both in this, and the
following Year, Stage Plays first used. U. C. 391.
the Romans to appease their Gods brought in Stage Plays; sending for Actors
out of Hetruria, in the Language of which Country Hister signifying a Player,
thence came the Roman word Histrio. These Plays were at first very Barbarous
and Antic, beginning with a plain Country Dance to a Pipe; after which the
young Men, who Jeared one another, at first began with Rude and Artless Verses,
called Versus Fescennini, from Fesc^nninum a City of Hetruria: This was about
40 Years after the Deaths of Sophocles and Euripides in Greece. Still the
Plague continued, which with the Overflowing of Tiber, made the Romans Consider
of some other Ways; and some of the elder People reporting, That a Pestilence
was formerly asswag'd by the Dictator's driving of a Nail; the Senate
immediately created a Dictator, which was Manlius Capitolinus, Die. xxi. U. C.
391.
who appointed Pinarius Natta for his Master of the Horse. This Nail with great
Ceremony and Superstition, was driven on the right side of Jupiter's Temple in
the Capitol, just by that of Minerva, and this was the first Dictator created
upon this Account.

The Year following, the Ground cleaving asunder in the Forum to a vast Depth,
M. Curtius a brave young Soldier, is said to have rode into this Gulf, Armed,
and with great Solemnity, and so being swallowed up, purchased the Deliverance
of his Country, according to the Declaration of their Gods. The same Year the
Hernici being up in Arms against Rome, Genucius the Plebeian Consul marching
against 'em, was slain, and his Army routed; which threatening Danger caused the
Senate to create a Dictator, Dic. xxii. U. C. 392.
which was Claudius Crassinus, who made Cornelius Scipio his Master of the
Horse, and gained so much Advantage over the Enemy as to obtain an Ovation.
Within a Year after, the Gauls were gathered together in great Numbers, and had
marched within three Miles of Rome, which put the City into such a
Consternation, that according to their usual Way in such Cases, they created a
Dictator; Dic. xxiii U. C. 393.
and this was Quintius Pennus, who had Cornelius Maluginensis for his Master of
the Horse. The Armies being drawn up on both sides, a Gaul of vast Bulk and
Stature challenged any of the Romans to meet him in a single Combat; which
Challenge was accepted of by T. Manlius a Courageous young Man, who with great
Bravery and Agility overthrew his mighty Foe, and slew him: Then taking a
Torques or Golden Chain from his Neck, returned, and was Honorably received by
the Dictator; and from thence he and his Posterity had the Surname of
Torquatus. The Gauls were so discouraged at this Action, that they fled by
Night, and retired into the Tiburtines Country, a People of Latium; and the
Dictator returned in Triumph.

The War with the Tiburtines and Hernici gave the Gauls Opportunity to do much
Injury to the Roman Territories, which occasioned the Creation of another
Dictator, which was Servilius Ahala, Dic. xxiv. U. C. 394.
who chose Quintius Capitolinus for his Master of the Horse, and soon quelled
the Gauls; but Paetileus the Consul, who had been employed against the Hernici,
happened to come off with the greatest Honor. In a Year after Peace was made
with the Latins, which was advantageous enough to the Romans, by reason of
their frequent Auxiliaries from them: But the Year following, the great
Preparations of the Gauls, caused the Senate to create another Dictator, which
was Sulpitius Peticus, who appointed Valerius Poplicola for his Master of the
Horse, Dic. xxv. U. C. 396. Tribes increased a fourth time.
and marching against the Enemy obtained a Signal Victory over 'em. In this
Year were two new Tribes added to the former five and twenty, Namely, the
Pomptine and the Publican. About two Years after this, the whole Body of the
Hetrurians took up Arms against Rome, led on by the Tarquinii and Falisci; in
which great time of Danger, Marcius, Rutilus a Plebeian, was made Dictator,
Dic. Pleb. xxvi. U. C. 398.
which was the first Commoner that ever obtained this Honor, it being now 143
Years since their first Creation. He appointed Plantius Proculus for his Master
of the Horse, a Plebeian likewise; and though he was opposed by the Patritians,
as much as they could, yet he did great Service against the Enemy, and
Triumphed, but still against the Senate's Consent. The Patritians were so
enraged at this, that at the next Election they took away the Consul-ship from
the Commons, after they had enjoyed it ten Years; and this happened in the 399th
Year of the City.

This occasioned many violent Heats and vast Disturbances between both Parties,
for three Years successively, when some of the Hetrurians pressed so hard upon
the Roman Territories, that another Dictator was created, namely, Dic. xxvii.
U. C. 401.
Manlius Torquatus, who made Cornelius Cossus his Master of the Horse; but the
Enemy out of Fear was soon brought to a Peace, and so little was performed by
him. Now the Contests and Quarrels at home were grown to that height, that the
Senate was forced to give the Commons once more the Privilege of the
Consul-ship, four Years after they had taken it from 'em; and because Usury
again was grown exceeding Burdensome to the poorer Sort, they appointed five
Men to order the Payment of Debts out of the Treasury: So now all Differences
were again reconciled. Soon after this, a groundless Apprehension of the
Hetrurians, who were reported to be all united against Rome, occasioned the
Creation of another Dictator, which was C. ^fulius, who made L. Aemilius his
Master of the Horse, Dic. xxviii. U. C. 402.
but he had so little Employment that he left all to the next Consuls, who were
both Patritians. And they went against the Tarquinii and Falisci, who were not
yet quieted, and brought 'em to a Peace for the Term of 40 Years.

V. Now Rome was for a while at Peace abroad, and might have been longer so at
home, had not Marcius Rutilus, the Plebeian Dictator, stood for the Office of
Censor, and raised new Disturbances. The Plebeians urged it hotly, but the
Patritians the better to oppose 'em, procured a Dictator to be created, which
was M. Fabius, Q. Servilius being his Master of the Horse; Dic. xxix. U. C. 403.
but still without Success; for after many Contests, the Plebeian Faction
prevailed, and Marci^s was made one of the Censors, which was the first
Plebeian Censor in this City, Censor Pleb.
it being 92 Years after their first Creation. The next Year, a considerable
Victory was obtained over the Gauls, who now grew troublesome again, and one of
the Consuls being wounded, and the other sick, the Senate was forced to create
a Dictator for assembling the Comitia for a new Election of Consuls, which was
Furius Camillus, Dic. xxx. U. C. 404.
who made Cornelius Scipio his Master of the Horse; and this was the Dictator
created upon this account. Camillus himself was chosen for one Consul, and the
Death of his Colleague soon after, and the pressing Wars with the Gauls, caused
the Senate to give him the sole Authority, so that he was almost the same with
a Dictator. Camillus led a noble Army against the Gauls, and when they were in
sight of each other, a Gaul, remarkable both for his Stature, and the Richness
of his Arms, challenged any of the Romans to a single Combat. M. Valerius a
brave young Colonel of the Foot met him, and in a little time slew him; but in
the midst of the Combat a Crow came, and sitting upon Valerius's Head, with
Beak and Wings assisted him in his Fight, whence he had the Surname of Corvus,
and his Posterity all called Corvini. This Combat brought both Armies to a
Battle, and the Gauls were entirely routed. Dic. xxxi U. C. 405.
Camillus returning home, procured a Dictator to be created for the holding of
the Comitia for a new Election of Consuls. This was Manlius Torquatus, his
Master of the Horse being Cornelius Cossus; and in this Comitia, Valerius
Corvus, for his great Deserts, was made Consul at 23 Years Age, a thing indeed
very extraordinary.

Now the Armies were disbanded, and for a short Space there was both Peace
abroad, and Concord at home. This Year a Colony was drawn out from the City
Antia to People Satricum, which had been destroyed by the Latins; and also at
Rome, a League was concluded with the Ambassadors of Carthage, who came on
purpose to desire Amity between both Nations, as Livy relates it. Above three
Years after, the Arunci, a People beyond the Volsci, and one of the six Nations
of Latium in the largest extent, made a sudden invasion upon the Roman
Territories; and upon Suspicion that it was by the Instigation of the whole
Latin Nation, Dic. xxxii. U. C. 408.
Furius Camillus was created Dictator, as if all Latium had been up in Arms. He
chose Manlius Capitelinus for his Master of the Horse, and Marched against the
Enemy, whom he found more like Robbers than Soldiers, so that in the very first
Battle they were dispersed, and that War dispatched. A Year after, a Temple was
dedicated to Juno Moneta, on the Capitol Hill, as the last Dictator had vowed;
and soon after, some Prodigies were observed, of which the Romans were so
superstitiously fearful, that they created a Dictator, to constitute certain
Feasts and Holydays for the appeasing of the Gods, and diverting the Judgments
threatened: Val^rius Poplicola was the Person, and Fabius Ambustus his Master of
the Horse; Die. xxxiii. U. C. 409.
and this was the first created upon this Account. Orders were given, that not
only all the Tribes should go in Procession with their solemn Prayers, but also
the bordering Nations; with precise Directions, upon what Days each of 'em
should make their Supplications. This Year likewise, the Usurers were
prosecuted by the Aediles, and severe Sentences given against them by the
People.

These were the principal Wars and Actions of the Romans with their nearest
Neighbors, which are observed by their own Historians to have been all
Defensive, or at least, not begun without just Grounds and Provocations; yet
these, which may well enough bear the name of Defensive Wars, still increased
the Roman Dominions, which now contained in effect all Old Latium, and the
greatest Part of the other five Nations afterward comprehended under that
Name, viz. the Volsci, Aequi, Rutili, Hernici, and Arunci, together with most
of Sabina, and a great Part of Hetruria: So that now their Dominions contained
more than double the Extent of what they were at the Expulsion of the Kings.
The last Dictator beforementioned, was created a year before the Wars with the
Samnites, which Wars began A. M. 3661. in the first Year of the 109th Olympiad,
410 Years after the Building of the City, 165 after the beginning of the
Consular State, 46 since the Restoration of the City, 14 before the Ruin of the
Persian, and the setting up the Macedonian Empire by Alexander the Great, and
342 before our Savior Christ's Nativity.

CHAP. VII.
From the Wars with the Samnites, to the Wars with Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, the
first Foreigner they had to deal with; wherein the Romans began to learn the
Arts of War.
Containing the Space of 63 Years.
I. HItherto the Romans had all their Wars nigh home, U. C. 410.
and as it were at their own Gates; but now daily gathering strength, and
increasing in Power, they ventured against the warlike Samnites, a People above
100 Miles East of Rome. These Samnites were a hardy Nation, descended from the
Sabines, from whom they probably had their Name, and inhabited a considerable
Part of that Side of Italy, which now goes by the Name of the Kingdom of
Naples, having likewise seven other People as Dependents, namely, the Picentes,
Vestini, Marrucini, Frentini, Peligni, Marsi, and Hirpini. The Occasion of this
War was the Samnites Contesting with their Neighbors the Sidicini, who
immediately betook themselves to the Campanians for Succor. These Campanians
were a luxurious and effeminate People, inhabiting a delicious Country
bordering on Samnium, and were so weakened, that they sent to Rome for Aid,
their Ambassadors imploring it with Tears, and giving up both themselves and
Country into the Hands of the Romans. The Senate at first was very unwilling to
begin a War with the Samnites, as being their Friends and Allies; but the
importunate Cries and Prayers of the Ambassadors, and more especially the
scornful Refusal of the Samnites to desist from ravaging the Territories of
Capua and Campania, so far prevailed, as at last to make them undertake the War.

The Consuls, Valerius and Cornelius, began their Marches with two distinct
Armies; one to Capua, and the other into Samnium. Valerius after a most bloody
and obstinate Fight overthrew the Enemy in Campania, and became Master of their
Camp. The Romans confessed they never met with more resolute Enemies; and
demanding of 'em, What made 'em fly after so brave a resistance? They answered,
That the Eyes of the Romans appeared to 'em like Flames of Fire, and their
Looks so fierce and dreadful, as not to be born with. In Samnium, Cornelius,
the other Consul, having unwarily led his Army too forward into a dangerous
Place, P. Decius, a Tribune in the Army, boldly possessed himself of a Hill
above the Enemy, who much surpised at the Attempt, turned their principal
Force thither, which gave Opportunity to the Consul to draw off his Men to a
more convenient Place. Whereupon Decius with an undaunted Bravery, though
surrounded, brake through the Enemy, which more amazed 'em than ever; and the
Consul at the same time Charging with great Resolution, so great a Victory was
obtained, that 30000 of the Samnites were slain. Both the Consuls triumphed
over the Samnites, and Decius was highly honored by the Senate and People for
his great Services.

Soon after this, Ambassadors from Campania requested to have Garrisons from the
Romans that Winter, in Capua, and other Places, to secure 'em from the Insults
of the Samnites, which were accordingly sent. But many of the Roman Soldiers
were of corrupted with the Delights and Pleasures of Capua, that they began to
form a Design of destroying the Inhabitants, and taking the Town to themselves.
This Design was communicated to many of their Companions in other Places, and
well approved of, but it was soon discovered to some of their Officers, who
made several Removeals to disperse 'em. But the Soldiers finding themselves
liable to be called to an Account, and perhaps severely punished; as soon as
they found Opportunity, gathered themselves together, and daily increased their
Numbers, marched directly for Rome in a Rebellious and hostile Manner. This
piece of Boldness so surpised the Senate, that they presently created a
Dictator, Dic. xxxiv. U. C. 411.
which was Valerius Corvus, one of the last Years Consuls, who appointed
Aemilius Mamercinus for his Master of the Horse, and marched against the
Rebels, who had now forced T. Quintius an eminent Soldier, to be their General.
Upon the Approach of both Armies, the Rebels out of Fear yielded themselves,
and were received into Favor, the Dictator having no more Employment abroad.
In the same year, the frequent Inroads made by the Romans into the Samnites
Country, drew 'em to a Peace, the Sidicini being left to their Mercy.

II. Soon after this Peace, the Samnites desired of the Romans that the Latins
and Campanians might be commanded not to assist the Sidicini; but because the
Senate would not deny that these Nations were under their Command, and were
likewise unwilling to provoke 'em, such an ambiguous Answer was returned, that
the Latins and Campanians thought themselves so far disobliged as to revolt.
Manlius Torquatus, now Consul the third time, and his Colleague, Decius Mus,
were sent by the Senate to chastise the Latins, who now would be satisfied with
no less than having one of the Consuls; and half the Senators chosen out of
their Nation. Upon certain Dreams and Prognostications, that the General on one
side, and the Army on the other was certainly to be destroyed; the Consuls
Solemnly agreed, That in what Part the Roman Army should be distressed, the
Commander of that Part should devote himself to the Gods, and die for his
Country; which generous Resolution was confirmed by Oath: And because they were
all acquainted with each others Discipline, and way of Fighting, strict
Commands were given that no Man upon pain of Death should Fight without Orders.

Both Armies were drawn up in Battalia, and a bloody and obstinate Engagement
immediately followed; the Latins pressing very hard upon Decius's Part, he
according to his Promise devoted himself to the Gods, and rushing violently
into the midst of his Enemies, after a great Slaughter lost his Life, the
Latins being soon after entirely defeated. Nor was the Discipline of Manlius
less remarkable than the Courage of Decius, in relation to his own Son: For he,
passing with his Troops, before the Battle nigh the Enemy, was challenged by
Metius, Captain of the Tusculans, whom when he had slain and stripped, his
Father with Tears commended him for his Valor, but condemned him for his
Disobedience; which though a sad, was a profitable Example to the rest of his
Men: And after that, cruel Commands were usually called Manliana Dicta. The
Latins now defeated, begged Peace; which being given 'em, tho not with the same
Conditions to all, Manlius returned in Triumph, but was met only by the Old
Men, the Young Ones refusing to do him that Honor, and ever after hating him
upon the account of his Son. Soon after, the People of Antium and Ardea made
incursions into the Roman Territories: Dic. xxxv. U. C. 413.
But Manlius being Sick, he named Papyrius Crassus for Dictator, who appointed
Papyrius Cursor his Master of the Horse, and kept the Field some Months in the
Antiates Country, but no remarkable Action happened.

The Consuls for the following Year, Aemilius and Publius, overthrew the
Latins, who had again revolted upon the Account of some Lands taken from 'em.
Publius, by whose Conduct the Victory was obtained, received into Alliance such
Cities as had been worsted; and Aemilius marched his Army and sat down before
Pedum, which received Supplies from several Places. Tho he had the Advantage in
all Skirmishes, yet still the Town held out, and he understanding that his
Colleague was returned to his Triumph, he immediately left the Siege, and went
for Rome to demand that Honor likewise. The Senate was much offended at this
Presumption, denying him that Honor, except Pedum was either taken or
surrendered; which caused him out of Revenge to join with the Tribunes against
the Patritians the rest of his Time, his Colleague not opposing it, being
himself a Plebeian. The Senate, out of a Desire to get free of 'em both,
ordered a Dictator to be created, whom it fell to Aemilius's share to nominate,
as having the Fasces that Month. Aemilius named his Colleague Publius Philo,
Dic. xxxvi. U. C. 414.
who appointed Iunius Brutus for his Master of the Horse, and was the second.
Plebeian Dictator in Rome. Publius was a great Vexation to the Nobility, and
was full of Invectives against 'em, procuring three Remarkable Laws, whereof
the first altered the very Constitution of the State, which was, That the
Plebiscita should bind the Quirites or Citizens of Rome, of all Ranks and
Degrees whatsoever. The second was, That such Laws as were enacted in the
Centuriate Comitia, should be proposed or passed by the Senate before they were
voted by the People. The third, That whereas they had obtained before, that
both the Censors might be Plebeians; now one at least must of necessity be so.
So now the Majesty of the Roman State was more impaired by the Authority of
these two at home, than it was augmented by their Valor abroad.

In the following Year, wherein Furius Camillus and C. Maenius, were Consuls,
Pedum was taken by Storm, and the Consuls in pursuit of the Victory Conquered
all Latium, bringing it and some neighboring Parts to an entire Submission;
for which they triumphed, and had Statues on Horseback erected for 'em in the
Forum, an Honor very rare in those Days. The several People of Latium, had
several Conditions of Peace appointed 'em, some being rewarded and honored,
others punished and disgraced, according as their former Behavior had been. To
Antium was sent a new Colony, the old Inhabitants being forbidden the Sea, and
had all their long Ships taken from 'em, but had leave to enter themselves in
the Colony, and were made free of that City. The Ships were some of 'em brought
into the Roman Arsenal, others burnt, and with their Rostra or Beaks, was the
Gallery or Pulpit, for Orations in the Forum adorned; whence that had
afterward the name of Rostra. Rostra.
The Year following, Minutia, a Vestal Virgin, was buried alive in the Campus
Sceleratus, which, as Livy believes, had its Name from Incest; for so
Incontinency in those Women was called. And in this same Year, Publius Philo
was made Praetor, who was the first Plebeian that obtained this Honor, Praetor
Pleb. U. C. 416.
the Senate little regarding it, having been so often overpowered in Matters of
the greatest Consequence: And this happened in the 416th Year of the City, and 28
Years after the first Creation of this Office.

III. Not long after the Agreement between the Romans and Latins, a War broke
out between the Arunci and the Sidicini in Campania, in which the latter
constrained the former to abandon their ancient Seats, and settle in Suessa,
which was afterward called Arunca. The Arunci had given up themselves to the
Romans, who thereupon ordered 'em Relief; but the Consuls deferring it, lost
the Opportunity of assisting 'em. But in the next Year, the Sidicini with their
Confederates and Neighbors, the Inhabitants of Cales were overthrown; and
Valerius Corvus, now the fourth time Consul for the following Year, and one of
the greatest Roman Commanders of his time, took Cales also, in which he placed
a Colony of 2500 Persons, Corvus returned in Triumph; but he and his Colleague
being employed in some small Actions abroad, a Dictator was created for the
holding the Comitia for the Election of new Consuls, which was Aemilius
Mamercinus, who appointed Publius Philo for his Master of the Horse. Dic.
xxxvii. U. C. 418.
Two Years before this, a Dictator was created, and another a Year after this;
but by reason of their undue Election, and their not acting, I shall not reckon
'em among the Number of Dictators. Affairs abroad were in a peaceable Posture
for some time, but in two or three Years, the mere Rumor of an Invasion by the
Gauls occasioned the Creation of a Dictator, which was Papirius Crassus, his
Master of the Horse being V. Poplicola; Dic. xxxviii. U. C. 421.
but neither of 'em had any extraordinary Employment. In this same Year, two
new Tribes were added, namely, the Metian and the Scaptian, for the late
admitted Citizens, which now made the Number twenty nine: The Arunci were also
made free of the City, Tribe^ increased a fifth time.
but without the Privilege of Voting, by a Law preferred by Papirius the Praetor.

About a Year after the Settlement of these Matters, above 170 Women were put
to Death for the Art of Poisoning, being discovered by a She-slave. This was
looked upon, as such a Prodigy by the Superstitious People, that a Dictator was
created to drive a Nail into Jupiter's Temple, Dic. xxxix. U. C. 422.
as the best Remedy for the Distempers of the State. Quintius Varus was the
Man, and Valerius Potius his Master of the Horse; and this was the second
Dictator created upon that account. For the two succeeding Years, a War was
carried on against the Inhabitants of Privernum in the Volscian State, who were
drawn into it by Vitrurius Vaccus, a Man of principal Note among the Arunci.
The first Year they were overthrown, the next Vitrurius was taken Prisoner, and
Privernum surrendered; the principal Actors with Vitrurius being put to Death,
and the rest of the Inhabitants made free of the City: U. C. 424.
This happened in the same Year with Alexander's destroying the Persian Empire,
and his setting up the Macedonian, and 60 after the burning of Rome by the
Gauls. In a Year or two after, the Inhabitants of Palaepolis in Campania,
trusting to the Treachery of the Samnites, and taking advantage from a Plague
in Rome, committed great Acts of Hostility against the Romans, who dwelt about
Cumae and Falernus. War was presently declared against 'em and tho they we
assisted by the Samnites and Tarentines, a People beyond 'em, yet they were
forced to yield up their City, which stood in some Place, where Naples did
afterward, and the Samnites lost three of their own Towns. The Tarentines
nevertheless proceeded, and drew the Samnites with the Residue of the
Palaepoltians again into the War, wherein the Vestini, together with their
Allies, were also engaged.

In the beginning of this War, great Commotions happened in the City,
occasioned by one Papirius, who had given up himself as Slave to Publius, a
severe Usurer, to work out his Father's Debt. Papirius being both Young and
Beautiful, Publius attempted to abuse him after a filthy Manner, and upon his
Refusal, most cruelly scourged him. In this Condition Papirius fled to the
People, who were so affected with his barbarous Usage, that they procured these
two Laws Shortly after: First, That no Man should be detained in Bounds, except
for heinous Misdemeanors, and then not after Punishment. The second, That the
Money and Goods, not the Body of the Debtor should be responsible: Whereupon
all Prisoners for Debt were immediately set at Liberty. The following Year, the
Vestini were overthrown by Brutus Scaeva, the Consul, and two Towns taken from
'em. His Colleague, Furius Camillus, being Sick at Samnium, Dic. xl. U. C. 428.
named Papirius Cursor for Dictator, the most famous Commander in those times,
who appointed Fabius Rullianus for his Master of the Horse. Papirius being
encamped nigh the Samnites, was forced to return to Rome to renew his Auspicia,
leaving a most strict Command to Fabius not to stir out of his Trenches in his
absence: But Fabius finding a great Advantage, engaged the Enemy, and made a
great Slaughter of 'em. The Dictator in a great Rage returned to the Camp, and
would have put him to Death, but the Army rescued him; which caused Papirius to
make great complaints to the Senate, witha^ urging the absolute Necessity of a
strict Discipline and Authority. But at last the Entreaties of the Fathers,
with the Commotions of the Tribunes and People, prevailed with him to spare his
Life. This Severity of Papirius so alienated the Hearts of the Soldiers, that
it almost cost him the loss of a Battle soon after, which constrained him to be
more Popular for the future; after which he overthrew the Samnites, and so much
wasted their Country, as forced them to desire a Peace.

The Samnites soon returned to their former Enmity, and in two Years time they
grew so strong, that the Senate thought it necessary to create a D^ct^tor to
oppose 'em, and this was Cornelius Arvina, who appointed Fabius Ambustus for
his Master of the Horse, Dic. xli. U. C. 431.
and gave the Enemy a great Overthrow; by which the Samnites were so weakened,
that they sent all their Prisoners and Plunder to Rome, together with the dead
Body of the Author of the Revolt, who had kil^'d himself to avoid being
deliver^d up, and all to purchase Peace. The Senate only receiv^d the Men, with
such Goods as were particularly challenged, and dem'd 'em Peace. Enraged at
this, Pontius, the chief Man among em, drew out the Samnites to a Place, called
Caudium, and putting ten Soldiers in the Habit of Shepherds, he sent 'em to
Calatia where the Consuls lay, with Instructions to report that the Samnites
were now in Apulia before Luceria, and had almost taken it. The Consuls
believing this Report, made all speed to relieve the Town, lest their Allies,
the Apulians might be obliged to join with the Samnites. Now the Romans had but
two Ways to March to Luceria; one large enough, but far about; the other a
narrow Passage through the Straits of Caudium, a Place incompass^d with high
Mountains, and extreme difficult and dangerous to pass, if an Enemy were nigh.
The Consuls leading their Army through this, were immediately blocked up on all
sides by Pontius, who had possessed himself of all the Defiles.

The Samnites having got the Romans at this great Advantage, immediately sent
to Herennius, Pontius's Father, to know how to proceed. Herennius sent two
several Messages, the first to dismiss the Romans without any Injury at all,
the second to put 'em all to the Sword; urging, That one of th^se two Ways was
absolutely necessary; for the first would lay a perpetual Obligation on a most
powerful People, and the second would be a great weakening of a most formidable
Enemy; and that no third Way could either gain their Friendship, or diminish
their Strength. But this prudent Counsel would not be heard; so the Romans had
these Articles allowed 'em: First, That their Army should march away only with
their under Garments, having first in Token of Slavery passed under the Jugum
or Gallows: Secondly, They should wholly quit all Samnium, and remove all their
Colonies: And Thirdly, Both Roman and Samnite should live under the same Terms
of Confederacy and Alliance. The Romans were constrained to submit to these
disgraceful Articles, and with wonderful Shame, Anger, and Confusion, returned
to Capua disarmed and half naked, and from thence to Rome. The whole City was
most sensibly afflicted at this shameful Disaster, their generous Blood boiling
in their Veins, and nothing but Fury and Revenge appear^d in their Faces. The
Consuls refused to appear abroad, or to act, for which reason a Dictat^r was
created for holding the Comitia for a new Election, which was Aemilius Papus,
Dic. xlii. U. C. 432.
who appointed Valerius Flaccus for his Master of the Horse. But instead of an
Election of Consuls, the State for a while fell into an Interregnum, there
being nothing but Grief and Vexation in all Places, and the whole City put into
Mourning.

But the Year following, Consuls were chosen, Papirius Cursor and Publilius
Philo being the Persons; and the Senate being assembled, Posthumous, one of the
last years Consuls, generously offer^d himself to be deliver^d, together with
his Colleague up to the Enemy, and so to break the Caudine Treaty, urging, That
only they two were obliged to observe the Articles, and not the State, which
was altogether Ignorant of what was done. This was gratefully accepted of, but
Pontius refus^d to receive 'em, greatly exclaiming against the Perfidiousness
of the Romans. But the Army soon marched against them under the Conduct of
Papirius, and sufficiently revenged themselves of all former Affronts,
overthrowing 'em in several Battles, making em all pass under the Iugum,
recovering several Towns, and freeing the 600 Hostages which they had delivered
to em in the Caudine Treaty; so that the Samnites could very hardly obtain a
two years Truce. In the time of this Truce, two new Tribes were added to the
rest, namely, the Ufentine and Falerine, Tribes increased a sixth tim^^ U. C.
436.
which made the Number thirty one. The Samnites, incourag^d by some others,
broke their Truce, which together with the Hetrurians warlike Preparations,
occasion^d the Creation of a Dictator, which was L. Aemilius, who made L.
Fulvius moritious his Master of the Horse, Dic. xliii. U. C. 437.
and in a bloody Battle overthrew the Enemy, who came to relieve Saticula,
which he had invested. The next Year, another Dictator was created to carry on
this War, which was Fabius Maximus, who chose Aulius Cerretan for his Master of
the Horse, and took Saticula, managing the War with great Success against the
Samnites, Dic. xliv. U. C. 438.
and considerably enlarging the Roman Dominions in those Parts.

The following Year, a dangerous Conspiracy was discovered at Capua; and this
occasioned the creating of a Dictator, Dic. xlv. U. C. 439.
which was C. Maenius, who made choice of M. Foslius for his Master of the
Horse, and soon suppress^d that Disturbance. The next Year, the Samnite War was
carri^d on with great Vigor, and a Dictator created, which was C. Paetelius,
who made M. Foslius his Master of the Horse, Dic. xlvi. U. C. 440.
and gained great Advantages over the Enemy. After which the Romans had a short
Breathing Time, and but a short one; for soon after, the Hetrurians making
great Threats, and as great Preparations, another Dictator was created, which
was Iunius Bubulcus, Dic. xlvii. U. C. 441.
who performed little against 'em, by reason of their keeping upon the
Defensive. In this same Year, Appius Claudius being one of the Censors, made
the Famous Cawsey, or Highway, called Via Appia, a Prodigious Work, together
with the Channel of Fresh Water, which he brought into the City; which Works he
all alone Accomplish^d, according to Livy. A year or two was employ^d against
the Hetrurians, till at last Papirius was made Dictator, Dic. xlviii. U. C. 443.
who choosing Bubulcus his Master of the Horse, gave 'em the greatest Overthrow
that they ever received yet, all their Choicest Men being lost; and from that
time they were never able to perform much against Rome. Four years after, Dic.
xlix. U. C. 447.
a Dictator was created for holding the Comitia for Election of Consuls, which
was Cornelius Scipio, and Decius Mus was his Master of the Horse. In the second
Year after this, the Samnites, after many and great Losses, obtain^d a Peace,
12 Years after they broke their Truce, and the Ancient League was renew^d with
em, and this happen^d 37 Years after the first War with that Nation.

Soon after this Peace was concluded, the Romans turn^d their Arms against the
Aequi, U. C. 449.
and chastiz^d them for Assisting the Samnites, which affrighted other Nations
into Subjection, the Roman Dominions now daily increasing. But however such
Resistance was made as they thought it necessary to have a Dictator, which was
Iunius Bubulcus, who chose M. Titinius for his Master of the Horse, Dic. (...)
U. C. 451.
and in Eight days time returned in Triumph. In less than a Year after, the
Fame of the Hetrurians joining with the Umbrians, a People on the North of
them, and the Sabines, occassion'd the creating of another Dictator, which was
Valerius Maximus, who appointed Aemilius Paulus for his Master of the Horse.
Dic. li. U. C. 452.
This Dictator entirely broke the Power of all the Hetrurians, reducing all
their Territories to the Roman Subjection; which happened above 420 Years after
the first Wars with those People. The Umbrians were likewise much weakened, and
lost a considerable Part of their Country; the Romans still extending their
Dominions on all Sides, and continually Increasing their Strength.

During some sort of Intermission abroad, the Commons began to fall into their
former dissatisfied Humor, and the Tribunes much complained that all the
Priests and Augurs were created out of the Patritians, and urg^d that the
Plebeians might also partake of those Offices. The Senate made no great
Oppositions, as being sufficiently accustomed to yield in Matters of greater
Moment: So that whereas at present there were but Four Chief Priests, and as
many Augurs, answering to the Four Tribes in the City, now Four more were
added, and to those, Five more out of the Body of the Commons. And in this same
Year, Valerius, the Consul, preferred a Law of Appeal more carefully enacted;
which was the third time this Law was confirmed since the Expulsion of the
Kings, and always occasion^d by the same Family. The same Consul fell upon the
Aequi, who were now in Rebellion, and in a little time they had nothing left
'em of their Ancient Fortune, but the Stoutness of their Tempers. The following
Year was a Lustrum, and Two new Tribes were added to the former, Tribes
increased a seventh ^ime. U. C. 454.
namely, the Aniensis and the Tarentine, which now made the whole Number Thirty
three. The City was also much increased, for at the next Lustrum, five Years
after, there were cess'd no less than 262322 free Citizens.

Within a Year after this, the Samnites, after six Years Respite, broke their
League with the Romans, and with them were fought several Battles, the Samnites
being almost always Losers. But the most Memorable was that about three Years
after this last Breach, when they had got the Umbrians and Gauls, with some of
the Hetrurians to assist 'em, and receiv^d a most dreadful Overthrow by the
Consuls, Fabius Maximus, and Decius Mus. In the midst of this Fight, Decius
seeing his Party retire, and in danger of being defeated, he followed the great
Example of his Father above Forty Years before, and most solemnly devoted
himself to the Gods; then rushing into the midst of the Enemy with an
extraordinary Fury and Courage, he recover^d his Army, but with the loss of his
Life. About two Years after, Papirius, Son to the former, got a noble Victory
over 'em, took above 15000 Prisoners, gain^d several Towns, and obtain^d a
splendid Triumph. But the following Year, the Samnites ventur^d another Battle,
and had better Fortune, overthrowing Fabius Gurges, the Consul, which put the
Senate upon removing of him. But his Father, Fabius Maximus, to prevent the
Disgrace, promis^d to be Lieutenant to his Son; which Office he perform^d so
well, as he procured him a great Victory, and a Triumph. And within two Years
after, the Samnites were so mortified, as to beg a Peace, after Pontius their
General had been taken and slain, which was at last granted em, and the League
was renew^d with ^em a fourth time.

In less than a Years time, U. C. 462.
the Samnites again broke their League, but were punish^d with the loss of
several Battles and more Towns, over whom, Dentatus, the Consul, Triumphed
twice in one Year; after which were Colonies sent to Castrum, Sena, and Adria.
Two years after, the Triumviri for Capital Matters were created, Triumviri
capitales.
who had Power to Imprison, and Punish all Malefactors; and in the same Year
273000 Free Citizens were Cess'd. Three Years after that, the Commons, by
reason of their desperate Debts, and violent Contests between them and the
Patricians, withdrew themselves into the Hill Ianiculum; which was the third
Separation of the Plebeians. The Senate, to appease this dangerous Tumult, Dic.
lii. U. C. 467.
Created Q. Hortensius Dictator, who, with many Arts, and much Difficulty,
persuaded 'em to return, Promising them, That their Plebiscita should have the
Force of Laws, and bind the whole Body Politic. This was called the Lex
Hortensia, though the same, in Effect, had been granted twice before. Soon after,
Wars were successfully manag^d against the Lucani, a Nation in almost the
farthest Parts of Italy, who had molested the Thurini, the Roman Allies. U. C.
472.
But the last of the Italians that made much Opposition, were the Tarentines,
formerly mention^d, who inhabited a very large and rich City in the
South-Eastern parts of Italy, 240 Miles from Rome. These People had plunder^d
several of the Roman Ships, which was the Occasion and Beginning of that War.

Nevertheless these Tarentines, though joined with the Lucani, Messapii, Brutii,
Apulii and Samnites, (the four former being their Neighbors, and the
Inhabitants of the South-Eastern parts of Italy) were not able to oppose the
extraordinary growing Power of the Romans; but were in a short time so
distressed, that they were forc^d to send for Pyrrhus King of Epirus to come
over and Assist 'em. And thus began the Memorable War with that Famous
Commander, the most considerable the Romans ever before met with, which
happened in the 473d. Year of the City, A. M. 3724, in the 4th Year of the
124th Olympiad, 228 since the beginning of the Consular State, 109 since the
Burning of the City by the Gauls, 49 since the beginning of the Macedonian
Empire by Alexander, and 279 before our Savior Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
From the first Wars with Pyrrhus King of Epirus to the first Punick or
Carthaginian War; when the Romans first set Foot out of Italy.
Containing the Space of 16 Years.
I. PYrrhus was much Solicited by the Tarentines to come into Italy, U. C. 473.
who, in the Name of many of the Italians, made many large Presents to him,
signifying, How much they stood in need of a General, so Eminent both for
Abilities, and the reputation of his Arms. Pyrrhus being of a generous and
ambitious Temper, promised 'em to come over with an Army, and shortly after
dispatched Cineas a Thessalian, an excellent Orator and Scholar of Demosthenes,
with 3000 Men for Tarentum. Soon after him, he put to Sea with 20 Elephants,
3000 Horse, 20000 Foot, 2000 Archers, and 500 Slingers; but meeting with a
great Storm, his Ships were much dispersed, and some lost, so that he arrived
at Tarentum but with a small part of his Army. When he entered the Town, he
refus^d to act without their particular Order, till the rest of his Army were
Arrived; then observing how the Inhabitants applied themselves chiefly to
Bathing, Feasting, and their Pleasures, he shut up the Public Meeting Places,
restrained them from Drinking and Games, and called them to Arms, being very
severe in Listing Men fit for Action and Service. He now receiv^d Intelligence,
that Laevinus the Roman Consul was upon his March with a numerous Army, wasting
Lucania as he pass^d; and tho these Confederate Troops were not all arriv^d, he
drew out his Army against him; but before the Armies could join, he sent to
Laevinus, offering a Mediation between the Romans and their Adversaries. But
Laevinus returned Answer, That he neither esteemed him as a Mediator, nor
feared him as an Enemy; and taking his Messengers, he ordered 'em to be led
through the midst of the Camp, and bad them go tell their Master what they had
seen.

Pyrrhus advanced, and encamped on the Plain between Pandosia and Heraclia; and
perceiving the Romans lay on the other side of the River Lyris in good Order,
he Planted Men all along the Bank to oppose their Passage: But the Romans
hastening to prevent the coming up of those Forces he expected Attempted the
Passage with their Infantry, where it was fordable, the Horse getting over in
several Places; so that the Greeks fearing to be hemn'd in were oblig^d to
retreata little way which Pyrrhus perceiving, drew up his Men in Battalia,
himself at the Head of em, and began the Charge. He was very remarkable for the
Fineness and Richness of his Arms, but more for the Bravery and Nobleness of
his Acts; managing the Battle with a great Steadiness and Presence of Mind, and
performing the Drudgery of a common Soldier, as well as the Office of a
general. In the midst of the Fight, Pyrrhus^, Horse was killed under him, which
obliged him to change Armor with one near him, who being taken for the King
was slain, and his Armor taken. This Armor being carried about by the Romans
in token of his Death, struck such a Terror into his Soldiers, that it had lost
him the Victory, but that he seasonably, and with much Labor made himself
known. Whilst the Battle seemed, doubtful, the Elephants were sent in among the
Romans, and the Surprise they were in, together with their Horses not enduring
the Smell and Bigness of those Creatures, broke their Ranks; whereupon Pyrrhus
commanded the Thessalian Cavalry to Charge them in this Disorder, and gave them
a total Rout, with great Slaughter, tho with the Loss of many of his best Men,
he himself also being wounded. The Romans lost nigh 15000 Men, and had 1800
taken Prisoners: and the other side lost 13000, as Plutarch observes out of
Dionysius.

Pyrrhus used the Roman Prisoners with extraordinary Civility and Courtesy,
and generously bury^d their Dead; then taking a view of their Bodies, and
observing that they were all wounded before, and what noble and stern
Countenances they had, he lift up his Eyes, and Cry^d, O how easily might I
Conquer the World, were I Master of such Soldiers! After this Battle, Pyrrhus
being joined with the Auxiliary Troops of the Samnites, Lucani and Brutii,
directed his March toward Rome, and advanced as far as Praeneste, laying waste
all before him. The Romans used all necessary Diligence to recruit their
Troops, and to make new Levies, Stirring up their Courages as much as possibly,
Fabricius a Patritian insinuating, That the Loss was not through want of
Valor, but Conduct, and that the Grecians had not overcome the Romans, but
Pyrrhus had Conquered Laevinus. Pyrrhus finding the Romans very diligent and
expeditious in their Recruits, consider^d it was more Honorable to Treat with
'em after his Victory, since he had but small hopes of subduing them, and for
that purpose sent Cineas to find out their Inclinations, a Man so powerful in
Rhetoric, that the King acknowledg^d him, To have stormed more Towns by his
Tongue, than he ever did by his Arms. Cineas very closely apply^d himself to
several of the Nobility, with Presents for themselves and their Ladies as from
his Master; but he found 'em so Steady and unmoved, that not a single Person
wou^d receive any, and both Men and Women answer^d, That if a Treaty were
publicly concluded, They then should be ready to show all Respect and Service
due to so great a Man as the King was.

Cineas finding these Methods ineffectual, proceeded to his Business more
publicly, and being come into the Senate, he said the most soft and obliging
Things in the World; likewise offering in his Masters Name, to return all that
was taken in the Battle without Ransom, and Promising all the Assistance that
could be expected for the Conquering all Italy, only asking for his Master and
the Tarentines their Friendship and Alliance. These fair Promises at first made
the Senate somewhat inclin^d to a Treaty, till Appius Claudius, now blind and
very ancient, was brought into the Senate House, who by a stirring and
encouraging Oration, so warmed the assembly, that Cineas, could be heard no
more, but was dismiss^d with this Answer; That when Pyrrhus had withdrawn his
Forces from Italy, then if he pleas^d they would Treat with him about
Friendship and Alliance, but till then, they resolved to carry on the War with
the utmost Vigor, though they met with never so many Defeats. Cineas at his
Return, was ask^d by Pyrrhus, what he thought of Rome, he told him, That the
Senate appeared to him as a venerable Assembly of so many Kings; and the People
he thought were like the Hydra, whose Numbers increased the more for the
Defeat; for the Consul had alreday raised twice as great an Army, and there
were still far greater Numbers behind.

Soon after Cineas's Return, the Romans sent to Pyrrhus about Ransoming of
Prisoners, among others, C. Fabricius, a Person eminent for his great Virtues,
and remarkable for his professed Poverty. Pyrrhus receiv^d him with an
Extraordinary Civility and Kindness, likewise offered him Gold, assuring him,
It was no otherwise than an Hospitable Respect to a Person of his Excellencies;
but all this had no Effect upon the Steadiness of Fabricius's Temper. The next
Day, Pyrrhus trying all Methods to discompose him, commanded one of his largest
Elephants, completely Armed, to be placed behind the Hangings, and in the midst
of their Discourse, upon a Sign given, the Tapestry was drawn aside, and the
huge Elephant raising his Trunk over Fabricius's Head, made a hideous Noise.
Fabricius, tho he had never seen this Creature, was not at all afraid, but
gently turning about, and Smiling said, Neither your Gold Yesterday, nor you
dreadful Beast to Day can make any Impression upon me. Pyrrhus amazed at the
Greatness of his Mind, released the Prisoner^, intrusting 'em to him alone,
with nothing but a Promise, That if the Senate accepted not of Peace, they
should return to him; which accordingly they did, being commanded to do it by
the Senate upon pain of Death. In the same Year, Coruncanius, Laevinus^
Colleague, Triumphed over some of the Hetrurians who had revolted; and likewise
this Year the Lustrum being performed, 278222 Free Citizens were Cess'd.

II. The Roman Army being now recruited, Sulpicius Saverrio, U. C. 474.
and Decius Mus, the Consuls for the following Year, were sent against Pyrrhus.
The Romans had now learned not to fear the Elephants so much as formerly, and
were very carful in observing and understanding Pyrrhus's Art and Conduct in
Battle. Both Armies met about the City of Asculum, and Pyrrhus was incommoded
by a Woody Country very inconvenient for his Cavalry, and a very swift Current
of the River, that the Elephants for want of sure Footing could not get up with
the Infantry: But after many wounded and killed, the Night put an End to the
Engagement. The next Morning, Pyrrhus designing to Fight on even Ground, and to
have the Elephants in the thickest of the Enemy, caused a Detachment, to
possess themselves of those incommodius Grounds, and mixing Slingers and
Archers among the Elephants, with great Courage advanced in a close and well
ordered Body; and the Romans not having those Advantages of Retreating and
falling on as they had before, were obliged to Fight Man to Man upon plain
Ground making a bloody Slaughter among the Grecian Spear Men not minding or
valuing what they suffered themselves: After a long and obstinate Fight, the
Romans were so pressed upon, especially by the mighty Force of the Elephants
and the Gaecian Cavalry, and so overpower^d, that they retreated to their Camp
with the loss of 6000 Men, the Enemy having lost nigh 4000. This Battle is
variously related, but this is the truest Account that I can find of it.

After this Engagement, it is said, Pyrrhus replied to a Gentleman who
congratulated him for his Victory, If we overcome the Romans another time, we
are utterly ruined. For by this time, he had lost a great Part of his Forces he
had brought over, and almost all his particular Friends and Commanders. This
Battle finished the Campaign, and the rest of the time was employ^d in taking
Care for the next; at which time Fabricius himself was chosen Consul together
with Aemilius Papus. At the nigh Approach of the two Armies, Fabricius receiv^d
a Letter from the King^s principal Physician, Offering to take off Pyrrhus by
Poison, and so end the War without farther hazard to the Romans, provided he
might have a Reward proportionable to the Greatness of the Service. Fabricius
enraged at the Villainy of the Physician, and Disposing his Colleague to the
same Opinion, he immediately dispatch^d Letters to Pyrrhus to let him know what
an ill Choice he had made both of his Friends and Enemies; that he was in War
with Honest Men, and trusted and promoted Villains; and that the Romans abhorred
all Treacherous Practices, it being their Custom to Conquer an Enemy by the
Power of their own Arms, and not by Treason of the other Subjects. Pyrrhus
received the Message with all Courtesy, and being more and more surpriz^d at
the Roman Greatness and Generosity, he cried out, This is that Fabricius whom
it is harder to turn from the Ways of Virtue and Honesty, than the Sun from its
Course. Such was the noble Spirit of the Romans in these Days, where each Man
minded the Honor of the Public more than his own particular profit.

Pyrrhus made a strict inquiry into this Plot, and executed the Physician; and
that he might not be excell^d in Generosity, he immediately sent to Rome all
the Prisoners without Ransom, and again employed Cineas to Negotiate a Peace
with 'em, being now more desirous of their Alliance than ever: But whether the
Romans believed their sending home so many Prisoners, too great an Obligation
from an Enemy, or too great a Reward for barely not doing Ill, they wou^d not
accept of 'em Gratis, but immediately releas^d as many of the Tarentines and
Samnites: and wou^d admit of no Debate of Alliance or Peace with Pyrrhus, till
he had withdrawn his Forces from Italy and Sail^d back to Epirus in the same
Ships that brought him over. The King was much confounded at this, being very
unwilling to continue this War, and much more to quit it Dishonourably; but in
a short time after he was relieved by an Expedition into Sicily, he begin
entreated by the Inhabitants, to expel the Carthag^uians, and clear the Island
of Tyrants. This proved an Honorable Pretense of drawing off his Forces, and
leaving Italy; therefore sending Cineas before, and putting a Garrison into
Tarentum, tho much against their Wills, he embark^d for Sicily with an Army of
30000 Foot, and 2500 Horse, after he had been in Italy two Years and Four
Months.

III. The Absence of Pyrrhus gave the Romans much Respite, or at least Leisure
enough to punish the Samnites, Tarentines, Lucani and Brutii, whom they warr^d
against with good Success; they having little Hopes, but the Return of Pyrrhus,
with whom they were very Urgent, letting him to understand, That they were shut
up in their Towns, which could hardly be maintained without his Assistance.
Pyrrhus, tho he had been successful enought, within two Years, was glad to have
so specious a Pretense of leaving Sicily, when his Carriage there had been so
displeasing to many, that in a short time he must have left it with no other
Pretense than Necessity and Self-Preservation. About the time of his Return,
there happened such a dreadful Plague in Rome, that Cornelius Rufinus, the last
year's Consul, was created Dictator for the Ceremony of Driving a Nail into the
Temple of Jupiter, Dic. (...) U. C. 477.
which they, by Tradition, believed would assuage the Distemper: and this was
the third Dictator created upon this Account. The Consuls for the following
year were Curious Dentatus, and Cornelius Lentulus; the former of which raising
new Levies, was opposed by the People, who refused to list themselves. Curious,
resolving to go through with his Designs, commanded the Names of every Tribe to
be put into a Box; and the Lot falling upon the Pollian Tribe, the first that
was drawn of that Tribe was cited: and not answering, he sold his Goods; and,
upon his appealing to the Tribunes, he sold the Man too, saying, The
Commonwealth stood in no need of such a Member as refused all Obedience The.
Tribunes at that time, did not assist the Fellow; and ever after hatt if any
refused to still himself in a just Muster when commanded, it became a Custom to
make a Slave of him.

Pyrrhus, by this time, had with some Difficulty and Danger got from Sicily to
Tarentum with an Army of 20000 Foot and 3000 Horse, where increasing his Army
by new Levies, he marched into Samnium, where the Romans had gathered together
a powerful Army Pyrrhus divided his Forces into two Part whereof, one he sent
into Lucania to hinder Lentulus from joining with his Colleague Curious Dentatus,
against whom he directed his March, then advantage^^ ^ly posted nigh
Beneventum. Pyrrhus hastening to attact him there before the other could
arrive, with the (...) of his Men and the fiercest of his Elephants, marched in
the time toward the Roman Camp, hoping to surprise 'em; but passing through
Woods his Lights failed him, and his Men lost their way. Whereupon a Council of
War being called, while they were in debate, and at the break of day his
Approach was discovered by the Romans as they marched down the Hills, which put
their whole Camp into much Disorder and Fear; but recovering themselves, Curious
drew out his Troops in haste, and falling in with the Vantguard of Pyrrhus, put
him to flight, killing many Men, and taking some Elephants. This Success very
much discouraged the rest of Pyrrhus's Troops, and Curious descending into the
Plain, joined Battle with the whole Army. In one Wing he repulsed the Enemy, in
the other, by the Violence of the Elephants, he was born back to his Trenches;
where calling forth those who guarded 'em, they from the high Places so plied
the Beasts with Darts and fired Pitch and Hemp, that they ran back upon their
Friends, bearing down, and breaking all their Ranks, so that the Victory fell
to the Romans, Pyrrhus having lost 23000 Men, according to Eutropius.

Pyrrhus's Camp was also taken, which was not only admired, but likewise proved
of very great Use afterward: for anciently the Romans and the Nations about
'em were wont to pitch their Tents without Order, after the manner of Booths,
in the midst of their several Battalions; but Pyrrhus measuring out his ground,
encamp^d his whole Army within a Trench. By his Example the Romans received
great Light and Experience as to Warlike Affairs, and afterward adding such
things as they found necessary, they attained to the most absolute Skill in
Encamping, in succeeding times. Curious Dentatus obtained a most splendid
Triumph for this Victory, being graced with four Elephants, 1300 Prisoners of
several Nations, with several Implements of the Tarentine Luxury, and Rarities.
A few days after, his Colleague triumphed over the Samnites and Lucani: and this
year was remarkable for the Censorship of Fabricius and Aemilius, who removed
Rufinus, and who had been twice Consul and once Dictator, out of the Senate,
for having ten pound of Silver Plate for the Use of his Table: and in this
Lustrum 271224 Free Citizens were cess'd or poll'd. As for Pyrrhus, he bore his
Defeat with an undaunted Mind, and receiving Letters from Greece and Asia, he
called the Epirots and Tarentines together, telling them that Assistance would
soon come; which Report, kept the Romans in their Camp: and so taking this
Advantage, the Night following he passed undisturb^d into Epirus with 8000 Foot
and 500 Horse, first leaving a Garrison in Tarentum, which was more to preserve
his own Reputation than for any other Use. Thus in about six Years ended the
Wars with the famous Pyrrhus, a Person esteem^d the ablest Commander of all the
Kings in that time, both for Military Experience and Personal Valor: but he
knew better how to Conquer than how to Keep; and from him the Romans did not
only improve the Art of Encamping, but likewise learned to avoid Plains, and
better to sustain the Shock of a disciplined Cavalry, which before they had
despised.

IV. The Roman Name, which before had been famous, was now become formidable,
after the Overthrow of so great a Man as Pyrrhus, which made way for farther
Conquests, and the Establishment of the Roman Empire. In the second year after
Pyrrhus's Retreat, Ptolemy Philadelphus, King of Egypt, sent Ambassadors to
congratulate the Roman Success, U. C. 480.
and to enter into an Alliance with 'em. The Romans, to show him the greater
Respect, likewise sent Ambassadors to Egypt, where they were most courteously
received, and sent home laden with Gifts and Presents. The following year, the
Taremines not being able to remove the Garrison Pyrrhus had left under Milo,
desired Aid of the Carthaginians; and with them giving Battle to the Romans,
were overthrown. Milo sensible how unable he was to resist, by leave from the
Consul Papirius, departed with his Men, and quitted the Castle, which the
Romans possessing, easily became Masters of the City, the Walls whereof they
demolished. Peace and Liberty were granted to all the Citizens; and this year
the two Consuls triumphed, having finished both the Tarentine and Samnite Wars
in the year 481. The latter of these had, with some Intermissions, continued
seventy one years; and over these the Romans triumphed thirty times, namely,
Consuls twenty six, Dictator twice, and Pro-Consuls as many.

Now the Romans grew much too powerful for their Neighbors, for the greatest
Part of Italy was now conquered, an Accession being made not only of the
Tarentines and Samnites, but of the Lucanians also, and not long before, of the
He^rurians. After this, the Campanian Legion, who had treacherously seized upon
Rhegium, and kept it to themselves, were besieged, and upon Surrender, put to
death by fifty at a time. Soon after, the Inhabitants of Apollonia in Illyricum
sending Ambassadors to Rome, some extravagant and unruly Noblemen fell upon 'em
and beat 'em but the Romans were so just as to deliver 'em up to the
Apolloniates. In the same year, the Picentes were subdued, and Colonies were
sent to Ariminum in the Country of the Piceni, and to Beneventum in that of the
Samnites. About the same time was Silver first coined in Rome, whereas Brass
had only been in use till now, their Riches being increased by their Conquests,
U. C. 484.
and large Quantities of Silver were found in a Castle of the Samnites. A year
after, the Sabines, who some years past had been made Denizons of Rome,
received now also the Power of Voting in Elections. About four years after
that, the Number of the Quaestors were increased from four to eight; and in the
same year the Reduction of the Umbri and Sallentini, Quae. increased.
together with the City of Brundusium, U. C. 489.
completed the Conquest of all Ioaly.

Now were the Roman Dominions much larger than ever, containing the whole Body
of old Italy and the several Italian Nations, being about 500 Miles long, and
130 broad, which comprehended about one ha^f of that Country which now goes by
the Name of Italy, as was formely observed. Just at the same time began the
first Punick or Carthaginian War, in the 489th Year of the City, A. M. ^740, in
the 4th Year of the 128th Olympiad, 244 since the beginning of the Consular
State, 125 since the Destruction of the City by the Gauls, 65. since the
beginning of the Macedonian Empire by Alexander the Great, and 263 before our
Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. IX.
From the Beginning of the first Punick War, to the Beginning of the second;
the Romans now growing powerful by Sea as well as by Land.
Containing the Space of 47 Years.
I. THE Carthaginians made up a very large and powerful Commonwealth, U. C.
489.
commanding most of that part of Africa which now goes by the general Name of
Barbary; their Dominions extending about 2000 Miles in length, all bordering
upon the Sea; having besides the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica, and the
greatest part of Sicily, with other lesser Isles. The Occasion of the Romans
War with this Nation, was, their joining with Hiero King of Syracuse against
the Mamertines, and for besieging Messana, which obliged that People to send to
Rome for Succor. The Romans had not forgot the Carthaginians assisting the
Tarentines against them not long before; and because the former Carriage of the
Mamertines was not easily justified, they made that their Pretense of their
declaring War against the Carthaginians. And Appi^^ Claudius, one of the
Consuls, was immediately sent over to Sicily with an Army and a small Fleet.
With much Danger and Difficulty he passed the Streights between Italy and
Sicily, but with that Success, that the raised the Siege of Messana in a short
time, and after that defeated both Hiero and the Carthaginians in two several
Battles. Appius returned to Rome with a noble Triumph, which was the first that
ever was obtained upon the Account of Foreign Actions. Notwithstanding the
great Wasting of the People by continual Wars, 292224 Free Citizens were cess'd
this Year; and in this Year D. funius Brutus first brought in the Custom of
having Fencing Maches performed by Gladiators at Funerals, a Custom very much
in use afterward.

The following Year, both the Consuls were ordered for Sicily, with all their
Le^^ons. And they managed the War so successfully, (...) going to invest
Syracuse it self, Hiero was affrighted into Obedience, perceiving that the
Romans most probably would be Conquerours; and so he made Peace upon these
Terms, To restore all their Prisoners without Ransom, and to pay a hundred
Talents of Silver. The Romans more readily embraced the Alliance, because the
Carthaginians being Masters at Sea, they could not safely supply the Armies
with Provisions and Necessaries, expecting that he should chiefly take care
about that affair. Valerius, one of this Year's Consuls, from Messana had the
Surname of Messala, who also having taken Catana, carried from thence a new
Sun-Dial to Rome, Papirius Curs^r having 30 Years before set up the first that
ever was in this City. This, though not perfect, the People made use for 99
Years, till M. Philippus the Censor set up a perfect one by it; and about that
time, Scipio Nasica being Censor, first made the equal Division of the Day into
Hours, by Water dropping out of one Vessel into another. This Year the City
being much afflicted with a Pestilence, a Dictator was created for the Ceremony
of Driving a Nail into Jupiter's Temple: Dic. live. U. C. 490.
This was Fulvius Maximus, who made Marcius Philippus his Master of the Horse;
and he was the fourth Dictator created upon this Account.

The Romans, by the Alliance with Hiero, found themselves so eased of the
Burden of the War, that the following Year they sent but two Legions to Sicily;
at which time Agrigentum was invested by the Romans, and Annibal, the
Carthaginian Admiral who came to relieve it, was overthrown by Posthumous and
Mamilius the Consuls at land; so after a long Siege it was taken. The news of
this was very grateful to the Citizens of Rome, who now began to think of
nothing less than the clearing of Sicily, and the Conquests of that Island; and
to that they directed all their Counsels. On Land indeed they seemed
sufficiently prosperous, for the two succeeding Consuls manag^d the War with
good Success; but the Carthaginians without Controversy being entire Masters
at Sea, by that means procured the Maritime Towns to revolt to them: so that
the War was not only balanced between the two Interests, but Italy was also
grievously infested with the Carthaginian Fleet, while Africa was out of all
Danger. The Considerations caused 'em diligently to apply themselves to Sea
Affairs, of which they were wholly ignorant before; therefore they found it a
Matter of extraordinary Difficulty as well to build Vessels as to make use of
'em; for Italy had been as free from Shipwrights as from Seamen. Having
thoroughly observed a Carthaginian Vessel or two driven a Shore, they set about
100 Vessels of five Oars of a side, and 20 of three, which they fitted out as
well as they could, after an odd way teaching their Men to Row upon Dry Land;
well knowing that their Courages must supply all other Defects.

Thus meanly rigged out, in the fourth Year of this War the Consuls Cornelius
and Duilius boldly ventured themselves aboard, and more boldly ventured to
engage an Enemy, who for many Ages had been the Inheritors of the Dominion of
the Sea both by their Power and their Skill; a thing much admired by all
Historians. Cornelius the Admiral parting from the rest of his Company with 17
Galleys to reduce Lipara, was surpised by at greater number of the
Carthaginians, and taken with the rest of his Fleet. But his Colleague Duilius
was much more successful, first defeating 50 Sail of the Enemy, then falling
upon the Rest of their Fleet, by the Help of a new invented Engine to grapple
with their Vessels, by which they could board 'em and fight as on Land, he
obtained a Signal Victory over 'em, taking 50 of their Vessels; then pursuing
it, raised the Siege of Aegesta, and took Macella by Storm. These Successes
were so unexpected by the Senate, that they decreed Duilius unusual Honors;
for besides his obtaining the Glory of the first Naval Triumph, he was ever
after attended from Supper with Music and Flambeaus. Annibal on the other
side, to secure himself from Punishment, with all speed sent one of his Friends
to Carthage before the Battle was known here, who gave an Account to the
Senate, that the Romans were under Sail with a great Fleet, and he wanted
Instructions about engaging 'em. The Senate, upon this gave Orders to Fight
without Delay, to whom the Messenger replied, That he had already fought, and
was overthrown: By which means he prevented their condemning an Action they had
but just before approved of.

This Year the Romans had but small Success by Land; for, a Breach between the
Legions and the Auxiliaries occasioned a Separation; which Advantage Amilcar
the General of the Carthaginian Forces so far improved, as to cut off 4000 of
'em. But the Advantages gained by Sea so far animated the Romans, that the
following Year they invaded the Island; of Sardin^^ and Corsica, and with so
good Success, that Hanno the Carthaginian General there, was slain, and his
Army cut off by Cornelius Scipio the Consul. This Victory was followed by
another over Annibal, whom they surpised at Sea, newly recruited from
Carthage; for which the unfortunate Admiral was crucified by his own Soldiers
that outlived the Defeat. The next Year many Towns were lost and gain^d in
Sicily on both sides; but above all, a noble Action of Calpurnius Flemma, a
Tribune of the Army, was most remarkable; for Attilius Calatinus the Consul
having carelessly brought his Army into such a desperate Place, as there was no
hopes of escaping, Calpurnius, with 300 choice Men, possessed themselves of an
Eminence just by, and with incredible Courage so diverted the whole Body of the
Carthaginians, that the Consuls Army had Opportunity of passing with little
opposition. Calpurnius was the only Person that survived of the ^00, being
miserably wounded, and covered with dead Bodies. The next Year, Attilius
Regulus the Consul subdued the Islands Lipara and Melita, the latter famous for
the Shipwreck of St. Paul, and since called Malta: Dic. lv. U. C. 496.
in which Year certain Prodigies in Rome, or the Belief of such, occasioned the
creating of a Dictator, for the celebrating the Latin Holidays, which was
Ogulneius Gallus, his Master of the Horse being Letorius Plancianus; and there
was the second Dictator created upon this Account.

II. Now had this War continued Eight Years; U. C. 497.
when the Romans, finding themselves so strong by Sea as well as by Land,
resolved to remove the Seat of the War into Africa; and accordingly put to Sea
with a Fleet of 330 Sail, under the Command of the Consuls Regulus and Manlius.
The Carthaginians, being sensible how necessary it was to keep the War from
their own Walls, opposed 'em with a Fleet of 350 Sail, and a threefold Battle
was fought on the same Day, in which the Romans, by the Help of their Grapling
Engines, and their undaunted Courages, became Conquerours, taking 54 Ships with
all their Men, and sinking 30, losing themselves but 24 without their Men. In
pursuance of this Victory, they made a Descent upon Africa, whose nighest Part
was about 200 Miles from Sicily, and shortly after had Clupea surrendered to
'em, a City seated upon the Promontory Hermaea. This done, they Marched into
the Country, laying waste all before 'em, which they did without Opposition;
but soon after they received Instructions from the Senate, that Regulus should
remain in Africa, in Character of Pro-Consul, with 40 Ships, 15000 Foot, and
500 Horse, and Manlius should return to Rome with the remaining Forces. Regulus
encamping upon the River Bagrada, was forced to engage a Monstrous Serpent of
Miraculous Bigness, which, with the great Trouble of his Army, and by the Help
of Battering Engines, he ^lew, sending its Skin to Rome, which was 120 Foot
long, according to Livy and Gellius.

The Carthaginians, finding the Romans so successful, opposed Regulus with a
considerable Army; but fighting in a Place where their Horse and Elephants
could do but little Service, were soon defeated, and Tunetum or Tunis in a
short space was taken by Regulus. But the Carthaginians having procured
Xantippus, a brave Lacedaemonian, for their General, soon after gave Regulus a
dreadful Overthrow, he himself being taken Prisoner, and most of his Army cut
off, the rest escaping to Clupea. But Xantippus met with more Barbarous and
Ungrateful Usage than Regulus; for the Carthaginians pretending to conduct him
home Honorably, commanded the Seamen to throw him and his Companions
overboard, least so great a Victory should be ascribed to the Laced^emonians,
as Appian relates it. The Romans were Besieged in Clupea, till their Enemies
perceiving the small probability of reducing 'em, broke up the Siege, and made
all Preparations for the opposing the Succors sent under Aemilius Paulus and
Fabius Nobilior, the following Years Consuls. These Consuls putting to Sea with
350 Sail, were met with by the Carthaginians, night her own Coasts, whom they
entirely defeated, taking 30 Ships and sinking 104, with the loss only of Nine
of their own. After this, the Consuls took in the Roman Garrison from Clupea,
and set Sail again for Sicily, expecting to have several Towns there
surrendered to 'em upon the News of this Victory; but before they could make
the Shore, there arose such a dreadful Storm, that most of their Ships were
swallowed up, or split upon Rocks; so that the Shore was filled with dead
Bodies and broken Pieces of Ships. Both the Consuls perished, and those few
that escaped, Hiero kindly received; and furnishing 'em with Clothes and other
Necessaries, convey^d ^em safe to Messana.

Karthalo the Carthaginian immediately taking Advantage of this great
Misfortune, besieged Agrigentum, and soon after took it, and demolished the
Fortifications of it. The Romans nothing discouraged at the great Losses
sustained by the Tempest, immediately set about Building 220 Vessels, which
they prosecuted with that extraordinary Diligence and Expedition, that in three
Months time they were both Built and Launched. On the other side, Asdrubal the
Carthaginian, with his Veterane Troops and Levies arrived at Sicily, with a
Fleet of 200 Sail Old and New. The Consuls, Attilius and Cornelius being
ordered for Sicily this Year, managed the War so prosperously, as to take
several Towns; after which they returned. Their Successors Servilius and
Sempronius, in the following Spring, passed into Sicily with the whole Fleet,
and from thence to Africa, where, Coasting about, they Landed in many Places,
but performed nothing very Memorable. At last they touched upon the Island of
the Lotophagi, called Meninx, nigh the lesser Syrtis; where being ignorant of
these Coasts, they fell upon certain Quicksands; but getting off with much
difficulty, they returned to Panormus in Sicily in a flying Posture. Then
sailing for Rome, through the Straights, very unadvisedly, they were taken in a
Storm, and 150 of the Ships lost. This same Year the Censors calling over the
Senate, turned out 13 Members for Misdemeanors, and performing the Lustrum,
297797 Free Citizens were Poll^d.

Though the Senate and People of Rome were extremely vigorous in all great
Attempts, being pushed on by an extraordinary Desire of Glory; yet the Losses
at Sea had now been so great and numerous, that they were constrained to omit
Naval Preparations, and place all their Hopes in their Landforces. Caecilius
and Metellus were sent into Sicily with the Legions, and 60 Transport Vessels,
only for Necssearies; and they did not only yield the Dominion of the Sea to
the Carthaginians, but fear^d 'em also at Land, by reason of their great
Preparations, but especially for their Elephants, which had oftentimes much
annoy^d 'em. Asdrubal, the Punick General, understanding their Fears, and that
one of the Consuls was now returned into Italy with half the Army, with great
Assurance and Confidence ravaged all the Country about Panormus, and with the
more Carelessness and Security, because Metellus kept himself within the Walls.
But the Consul taking an Opportunity, so well placed his Men against the
Elephants, that when Asdrubal came nigh the Town, he gave him a dreadful
Overthrow, killing 20000 Men, and taking 26 Elephants, for which he had a noble
Triumph. The Carthaginians immediately lost all Sicily except Lilybaeum and
Drepanum, to the former of which Places Asdrubal escaped; but being Condemned
at Carthage, he was taken and put to Death as soon as he return^d; the Unhappy
Fate of many Carthaginian Generals.

III. The Carthaginians now finding themselves great U. C. (...).
Losers, and wearied out with a Tedious War, which had now continu^d 14 Years,
began to solicit for Peace, and sent to the Senate to Treat about it: With the
Ambassadors, Regulus also was sent, who had been Five Years Prisoner, and was
now Bound with an Oath to return to Carthage, in case there was no Peace nor
Exchange of Prisoners made. Regulus, contrary to the Expectation of all, openly
in the Senate, discovered the Weakness of the Carthaginians, and advised the
Romans to make no Peace; showing withal, both how honorable and profitable it
might be to the State to prosecute the War. The Senate seemed well satisfied
with the Advice, if it were to be follow^d without Prejudice to the Adviser,
whom they Pity^d as well as Admired, and could not determine any thing to the
Ruin of a Person who had deserv^d so well at their hands. Upon that Account
they desired him to stay; but he, with an Undeunted Resolution, told ^em, That
he knew that Death and the extremest Tortures were preparing for him at
Carthage, but still he could not comply with their Requests, who might have
better used their Commands, had he been still his Countries Servant, as he was
Africk' s Slave, and upon that account not capable of living as became a
Citizen of Rome: yet however he had so much of the True Spirit of a Roman, that
he could do nothing that was base or dishonorable; and that he less feared the
Tortures of a cruel Rack, than the Shame of an infamous Action, for the former
only touched the Body, whereas the latter pierced the Mind.

All Means were used to persuade Regulus to stay, both by his Friends and
others, which he avoided as much as possible, refusing to speak with his Wife,
and shunning the Embraces and Kisses of his little Children: And when the
Negotiation was at an end, he returned to Carthage, there ending his Days in
great Torments. For, first they cut off his Eyelids, keeping him in a dark ^
Dungeon for a while, then brought him out in the midst of the Day, with his
Face turned full against the Sun: At last he was put into a Chest or Barrel,
stuck with Nails with the Points inward, and so narrow, that he could have no
Ease, where he died with the Extremity of the Pain. When the Senate heard of
the Barbarous Usage of Regulus, in great Rage they delivered up some Prisoners
of the Highest Note and Quality to Marcia his Wife, who shut 'em up in an
Armory stuck round with Iron Spikes, designing to torment them after the same
manner that her Husband had been, and keeping 'em five days together without
Meat: in which time, Bostar the Carthaginian, with Pain and Hunger, died, but
Hamilcar, being a stronger Man, was kept in, together with the dead Body of
Bostar, five days longer, having only so much Sustenance allowed him as might
serve to prolong his Life in Misery. At last, the Magistrates being informed of
this, began to relent, and strictly forbid any more of such Usuage, commanding
that Bostar's Ashes should be sent home, and the rest of the Prisoners should
be used more moderately: Which was done, to let the Enemy know, that the Romans
were too generous to insult over the Miseries of unhappy Men, or to countenance
any cruel Actions, though they had been incited by the highest Provocations, and
all the Sentiments of a most just Retaliation.

The following Year, because the Landforces were very fearful of the Enemies
Elephants, and pursued their Affairs with small Vigor, the Romans provided
another Fleet, and Besieged Lilybaeum by Sea and Land, a Town standing upon the
Southern Promontory of Sicily, over against Africa. The Romans were very
unsuccessful in this Expedition, losing most of their Ships in a short time,
partly by the Mismanagement of the Consul Claudius Pulcher, and partly by other
Misfortunes; so that the whole Fleet was soon reduced to an inconsiderable
number. Lilybaeum was still closely invested by Land; but the small Successes
of the present Consuls, and other Losses, occasioned the creating of a Dictator
to Command the Forces in Sicily: Dic. lvi. U. C. 504.
This was Attilius Calatinus, who appointed Caecilius Metellus, who had
Triumphed over the Carthaginians, for his Master of the Horse, and was the
first Dictator that ever led an Army out of Italy; but nothing memorable was
acted by him in Sicily before the time of his Office expired. The Romans now
began to feel the Weight and Charge of the War more than ever; and they found
that the City was not only drein'd of Money, but of Men too; for in the next
Lustrum there were but 251222 Free Citizens Poll'd.

For Seven Years did the Romans abstain from any Sea-Preparations, in which
time another Dictator was created in the Consuls Absence for holding the
Comitia for a New Election, Dic. lvii. U. C. 50.
which was Coruncanius Nepos, and his Master of the Horse was Fulvius Flaccus.
At this time Amilcar, the Carthaginian Admiral, extremely infested the Coasts
of Italy; which made the Romans resolve once more to try their Fortune at Sea:
and accordingly they fitted out a considerable Navy out of their private
Purses, the Treasury being now exhausted. With this they gave the Carthaginians
a notable Overthrow nigh the Aegatian Is^es, taking and sinking 120 of their
Ships, according to the most modest Computation. This great Loss brought 'em to
a Peace, which, after two Consultations, was concluded upon these Articles;
First, That the Carthaginians should lay down 1000 Talents of Silver, and 2200
more within 10 Years time: Secondly, That they should quit Sicily, with all the
Isles thereabouts: Thirdly, That they should never make War upon the
Syracusians, or their Allies, nor come with any Vessels of War within the Roman
Dominions: and Fourthly, That they should deliver up all their Prisoners
without Ransom, as also the Deserters. Thus ended the first Punick, or
Carthaginian War, by the Greek Writers called the Sicilian War, after it had
continued 24 Years, in the 51^th Year of the City, 23 Years before the Second,
and 239 before our Savior's Nativity; wherein the Romans are said to have lost
700 Vessels, and the Carthaginians no more than 500.

IV. All Affairs now seemed to succeed prosperously with the Romans, U. C. 51^.
Tribes increased the last time.
and in the same Year that this long War was ended, Two New Tribes were added
to the rest, namely, the Veline and Quirine, which now made up the Number 35,
which Number was never after exceeded. At this time the Romans began to grow
more polite, a little applying their Minds to something of Study and Learning,
particularly Poetry; and the Year after this War, U. C. 514. First Trajedies
and Comedies in Rome.
the first Tragedies and Comedies were made by Livius Andronicus, a Grecian by
Birth, one Year before Ennius the Poet was Born, about 160 after the Deaths of
Sophocles and Euripides, and 62 after that of Menander. He drew the Minds of
the People from the Use of the Satyr, which had immediately succeeded the old
Stage Plays, called Ludi Fescennini, spoken of in the Sixth Chapter of this
Book; which Satyr was a sort of a Dramatick Poem, full of Jests and Raillery,
wholly different from the Satyrs of Lucilius and Horace afterward. Naevius was
the first Poet that followed his example, five Years after, the Year before
which were celebrated the great Secular Games the third time, Ludi Saculares.
which were also called Ludi magni, and Ludi Terentini, and were of two sorts:
the Greater, celebrated every 120 Years, and first instituted in the 298th Year
of the City; and the Lesser, celebrated every 100 Year, and first instituted
about the 305th Year of the City, after the Banishment of the Decemviri: But
these now celebrated were of the former sort. There were also other Games
called Ludi Tarentini, which were very different from the Ludi Seculares, which
I mention that Learners may avoid Confusion.

But to return to the Roman Affairs; the Carthaginians, soon after their Peace
with the Romans, fell into a Bloody War between themselves and their Mercenary
Soldiers, which proceeded both from their Want of Pay, and their Want of
Employment; and this, with much Difficulty and Loss, was ended by Amilcar,
after more than Three Years. During which time, several of the Romans who
traded into Africa, were secured by the Carthaginians, lest they should furnish
their Enemies with Provisions. But when Ambassadors were sent to Carthage to
complain of this Usage, they kindly dismissed all that were in Custody; which
so affected the Romans, that they generously sent 'em all their Prisoners
without Ransom, and for a short Space there seemed to be an extraordinary
Friendship between these two Nations. But soon after their Troubles were ended,
the Sardinians inviting over the Romans to that Island, they sailed thither,
which much offended the Carthaginians, who thought themselves to have the
greatest Right to it; so they prepared to send Forces thither. The Romans took
an Occasion from thence to proclaim War against 'em, complaining, That these
Preparations were designed more against them, than the Sardinians. This so
terrified the Carthaginians, who found themselves in no Condition to begin a
new War, that they were forced to yield to Necessity, and not only quit all
Sardinia, but further, to pay the Romans 1200 Talents. This, though submitted to
at present, proved afterward the Occasion of a more bloody and dangerous War
than the former. In the sixth Year after the Carthaginian War, the Romans being
in perfect Peace with all their Neighbors, the Temple of Ianus was shut the
second time, Dic. lviii. U. C. 522.
it being open 437 Years. In the following Year was the first Divorce in Rome;
and two Years after a Dictator was created for holding the Comitia, and this
was C. Duilius, his Master of the Horse being Aurelius Cotta.

For five Years successively the Temple of Ianus continued shut, and in the
sixth was opened by a War with the Illyrians, a People nigh Greece, who
inhabited that Country which is now called Dalmatia: for Teuta Queen of that
Nation, elevated by her Prosperity in Peace, gave her Subjects Commission to
rob all they met with at Sea; some of which happened to be Merchants of Italy,
whom they used very Barbarously. Upon Intelligence of this, the Romans
dispatched two Ambassadors, Caius and Lucius Coruncanus, to Illyricum, to
demand Satisfaction. Teuta told 'em, That she would take care that no public
Injury should be offered to the Romans; but she thought it was never the Custom
of Princes to hinder their Subjects from making what private Advantage they
could from the Sea. But Lucius smartly told her, That the Romans had learned a
better Custom, which was, to punish Private Injuries with a Public Revenge,
and to relieve the Distressed; and they, by the help of the God's, would take
care to reform her Princely Customs. The Queen took this Freedom so heinously,
that, contrary to the Law of Nations, she sent after the Ambassadors, and slew
Lucius. This so enraged the Romans, that War was immediately Proclaimed against
her, and the two Consuls sent to Illyricum, Fulvius with a Fleet, and
Posthumous with a Land Army. Fulvius had Corcyra surrendered to him at his
first Appearance before it, and soon after took Apollonia; then the Armies
joining, the Consuls relieved Dyrrhachium, which was Invested by the Illyrians.
Soon after most of the Illyrick Towns were surrendered to the Consuls; whereupon
the Queen retired with a few Followers to Rhizon, a strong Town, and the Spring
after, sent to Rome to beg Peace; which was granted upon these Terms: First, To
pay a yearly Tribute: Secondly, To quit all Illyricum, except a very few
Places: And Thirdly, Not to Sail beyond the River Lissus with more than two
Barks, and those unarmed. Thus ended the first Illyrian War, in less than two
Years time.

V. These Wars in Illyricum still Enlarged the Roman Dominions, and their
generous Behavior, gain^d 'em as much Love as their Valor had got 'em
Reputation in those Parts, particularly among the Athenians and Corinthians;
the latter of which passed a Decree in Honor of 'em, which made 'em free of
the Isthmian Games, one of the Four Solemn Exercises of Greece. Praet.
increased. U. C. 527.
And this same Year were the Praetors increased to Four, one being sent to the
Province of Sicily, and another to that of Sardinia. In the mean time Domestic
Disturbances about the Division of Lands taken from the Gauls, awakened that
Nation, who, concluding, that the Romans Fought more out of Covetousness than
Glory, began that War, which the Latin Historians called Bellum Gallicum
Cisalpinum. These fierce People, now joined in Confederacy, sent ^ver the Alps
for other Gauls, called Gessatae, nigh the River Rhosne, who came over with a
Prodigious Force, and joining with the rest, made an Irruption into Hetruria,
with an Army of 50000 Foot and 20000 Horse. The Romans, to oppose 'em, made the
greatest Preparations that had been known, all Italy being up in Arms, to the
number of Seven or Eight hundred thousand Men, which were placed in several
Parts, to be in readiness upon all Occasions: And the Consuls themselves led a
particular Army of 50^00 Foot, and 4200 Horse.

The Gauls now entering Hetruria, U. C. 529.
wasted all with Fire and Sword till they came to Clusium, about three Days
Journey from Rome; where they were blocked up by the Romans, the Praetor on
their Back, and the Consuls before, possessing themselves of all the Passes:
Insomuch that they were forced to form Two Fronts, and Fight very
disadvantageously, both by reason of their Nakedness and the Unfitness of their
Arms. But the Vanity of the Gessatae proved the most injurious to 'em, for they
throwing off all their Clothes, would needs fight naked, and begin the first
Charge; and these being easily broken, so discouraged the rest, that all fled.
The Gauls were miserably slaughtered, 40000 of 'em being killed, and 10000
taken Prisoners; among the rest, Concolitanus, a King of the Gessatae. The
Consuls obtained a most Splendid Triumph for this Victory, scarce any being
more remarkable for the Number of the Prisoners, or the Variety and Value of
the Spoils. The next Year great Inroads were made into the Territories of the
Gauls, they being several times overthrown: At which time the Consuls being
abroad, a Dictator was created to hold the Comitia for a new Election; Dic.
lix. U. C. 350.
which was Caecilius Metellus, and Fabius Buteo his Master of the Horse, or
Lieutenant.

The Gauls were now so harassed and weakened, that they sent Ambassadors to Rome
to beg Peace on any Terms; but Claudius Marcellus, and Cornelius Scipio put a
stop to that Affair, and stirred up the Multitude to continue the War.
Whereupon the Gauls, now grown desperate, resolved to make their last Efforts,
and procured ^0000 Auxiliaries from the Gessatae. The Consuls Marched into the
Country of the Insubres, and opened the Campaign with the Siege of Acerrae;
whereupon the Gauls invested Clastidium, a Confederate Town of the Romans.
Marcellus, with two Thirds of his Cavalry, and a small Detachment of
Light-armed Footmen, Marched both Night and Day toward the Enemy; and
notwithstanding the great Inequality of the Numbers, and the extraordinary
Fatigues of the long Marches, he fell upon 'em, and after a Bloody Battle
overthrew 'em. Marcellus with his own Hands killed Virdomarus King of the
Gessatae, U. C. 532.
and dedicated the third Opima Spolia, or Royal Spoils to Jupiter Feretrius,
obtaining likewise a Noble Triumph. Those that escaped fled to Mediolanum, now
called Milan, the Chief City of the Insubrian Gauls, which being shortly after
taken, the Gallick War was ended, after Six Years Continuance, to the
considerable Enlargement of the Roman Dominions, Colonies being planted not
long after at Cremona, and at Placentia.

About this time, a Multitude of Libertini or Freed Slaves, which lived
dispersed among all the Tribes, gave great Disturbances to the City, which
occasioned the Censors at the next Lustrum to confine all these to four Tribes,
U. C. 534.
namely, Esquilina, Palatina, Suburrana, and Collina; at which time were also
170213 Free Citizens cess'd. In the same Censorship C. Flaminius, one of the
Censors, built a Cirque, and Paved the Highway as far as Ariminum, 130 Miles,
both which great Works were afterward called by his Name. Within a Year after,
the Illyrians revolting, were reduced by Aemilius and Livius the Consuls, though
with some Difficulty and Trouble. But the greatest Concern the Romans had now,
was the successful Progress of the Carthaginians in Spain, who now had gained a
great Part of that Country, and more than all, had taken Saguntus a Town in
Alliance with R^m^, after they were desir^d to desist. This caus^d the Romans
to send their Ambassadors to Carthage, to require their General Hannibal to be
delivered up; and if that were not granted, to denounce War. The Ambassadors
finding the Carthaginians very little inclined to give any Satisfaction, the
Senior of 'em holding out the Skirt of his Robe, told the Senate, Here we bring
you War or Peace; choose which you please. The Chief of the other answer^d,
Deliver which you will: the Roman replying, War, the other accepted of it. And
thus began the Second Punick or Carthaginian War, 23 Years after the First, in
the 536th Year of the City, A. M. 3787, in the Third Year of the 140th
Olympiad, 291 Years since the beginning of the Consular State, 172 since the
Destruction of the City by the Gauls, 112 since the Beginning of the Macedonian
Empire by Alexander, and 216 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. X.
From the Beginning of the Second Punick War, to the Finishing of it by Scipio
Africanus; when the Romans became perfect in the Arts of War.
Containing the Space of 17 Years.
I. THE War being broke out a Second Time between these two Rival Nations, U.
C. 536.
the Romans and Carthaginians, the latter committed the Management of it to
Hannibal, Amilcar's Son, now in Spain, a Person of wonderful Abilities as to
War, both for Conduct and Valor, of a hardy, laborious, and indefatigable
Body, as well as a fierce, daring, and undaunted Mind. This General had Sworn
himself a Mortal Enemy to the Romans; and having overrun all Spain to the
Pyrenaean Mountains, he resolved to run any Danger, or Hazard, so he might
procure the Ruin of the Roman State; therefore leaving Hanno with a sufficient
Force to guard that Country, he crossed the Pyrenaean Mountains into Gaul, with
an Army of 50000 Foot, and 9000 Horse, of different Nations and Languages. From
whence he shortly passed the Rhosne with great Danger and Difficulty, the River
there being swift and spacious, and its Banks covered with many and dangerous
Enemies. In Ten days March from thence, he arriv^d at the Foot of the Alps,
over which he resolved to pass into Italy, notwithstanding the Lateness of the
Season, the Fears of his Men, his Ignorance of the Ways, the Labor of the
March, and all the numerous Perils and Hazards that attended so vast an
Enterprise.

It was now in the midst of Winter, and every thing appeared strange and
dreadful, the prodigious Height of the Mountains, Capp^d with Snows; the rude
misshapen Cottages on the sides of Craggy steep Rocks; the Cattle, Sheep, and
Horses, parch^d and stiff with Cold; the People Barbarous, and with long
shagg'd Hair like Savages, and nothing to be seen but a general Scene of
Deformity and Horror. The Soldiers in this March, besides their Fears, were
extremely afflicted with the Greatness of the Colds, and grievously harassed by
the narrow Defiles, the slippery Passages, and the craggy Rocks, but more
especially by the Inhabitants, who, from their lurking Places fell often upon
'em with great Slaughter; and sometimes by their unusual Shouts and Outcries,
which were redoubled by the Echo's between the Rocks and Valleys, their Horses
were so affrighted, as they frequently overthrew themselves, Men and Carriages,
down these narrow Precipices, who falling from one Rock to another, made a
dreadful Rumbling, as if it were the Fall of some Castle or great Building.
Nevertheless, after Nine Days painful March through these untrodden Paths,
Hannibal at last gain^d the Top of these vast Mountains, where he refresh^d his
Men, and encourag^d their fainting Minds by a distant Prospect of Italy,
telling ^em, That now, like hardy Soldiers, they had mounted not only the Walls
of Italy, but those of Rome too.

After two Days Respite among these dismal Places, the Army moved forward, and
were forced to encounter with new Difficulties; for Prodigious Quantities of
Snow being lately fallen, as many Men were lost in the depth of that, as had
been before by the Enemies Encounters. And now a sort of Despair appeared in
almost every Man's Face but Hannibal's, who still remained steady and unshaken,
inciting 'em forward till they arriv^d at a Place, which was a Rocky Precipice,
where the Earth had lately fallen away to the depth of 1000 Foot; so that it
was impossible to pass with Elephants or Horses. Whereupon he endeavored to
bring his Men through other unknown Ways; but finding the Snow had made 'em
impassable, he was forc^d to betake himself to the levelling the Rock. In order
to that, great Numbers of huge Trees were felled, and a mighty Pile made
against it and set on fire; when the Rock was red-hot, they softened, and
putrefy'd it with Vinegar, as Livy relates it, and then with wonderful Labor
cleav'd it, lessening the Descent by such moderate Turnings, that not only the
Beasts of Burden, but the Elephants also, might safely pass. Four Days
indefatigable Toil was employed about this Rock, the Beasts the mean while
being almost stary'd, having had very little Sustenance all that time. But
coming lower, certain Valleys afforded Pasture, where the Cattle were
refreshed, and Rest allowed the weary Soldiers. From thence Hannibal descended
into the Plains, having been 15 Days in passing the Alps, it being now the 5th
Month after his setting out from New Carthage, which was a City built by
Asdrubal in Spain. At his arrival in the Country of the Insubres, he found his
Army reduced to about 18000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, according to Polybius, having
lost most of 'em upon the Alps.

Scipio the Consul hearing of Hannibal^s March, hastened to meet him, before
his Men were well refresh^d. Both Armies met at Ticinum (now Pavia) in which
Battle the Consul being Wounded, was sav^d by the great Valor of his young
Son, afterward called Africanus, and in a few Hours was defeated, especially
by the means of the Numidian Cavalry, who unexpectedly fell upon his Rear. Soon
after this Defeat, Sempronius, the other Consul, out of Sicily, joyn^d Scipio
at the River Trebia. Sempronius having been successful in some Skirmishes,
resolv^d to give the Enemy Battle, before too many of the Gauls were joyn^d
him, though Scipio was much against it, who was now laid up of his Wounds.
Hannibal knowing the Gauls to be all at his Devotion, and finding his own Men
fresh and vigorous, endeavored at nothing more than a Battle. Upon the nigh
Approach of these Armies Hannibal conveyed 1000 choice Horse into a private
Place, and another Party he sent to brave the Romans before they could provide
against the Extremity of the Weather by Meat or Drink; so that engaging with
Cold and Hunger, passing the River up to the Armpits, and being unexpectedly
charged both in Front and Rear, they were entirely defeated, though not without
great Slaughter of the Enemy, through whose Ranks 10000 desperately broke, and
escaped to Placentia, 26000 being either slain, taken or drowned in the River.
The Carthaginians having done what they were able in pursuing, retir^d to their
Camp so stupify'd with Cold, that they were scarcely sensible of their Victory;
for Rain mixed with Snow, and intolerable Cold, killed many of their Men, and
almost all their Beasts and Elephants. Thus Hannibal was now as successful in
his Battles, as before he had been daring in his Marches, the Romans never
having met with a more formidable Enemy, or a more expert General.

II. The Loss of these two Battles caused the Romans to be more diligent in the
Preparations for the U. C. 537.
next Campaign; for the Managing of which, C. Flaminius and Servilius Geminus
were chosen Consuls: The former of these had a good Faculty of Speaking, but no
great Skill in War. Hannibal having all this while kept in the Country of the
Gauls, where he had recruited and strengthened his Army now resolved to change
the Seat of the War, and march into Hetruria; and after some Consultation about
the Way thither, he fixed upon that of the Fens, as short and unexpected to the
Enemy, though far more difficult to pass. Here they found a miserable Passage,
being forc^d to march three or four Days and Nights through nothing but Water,
without any Sleep or Rest, which sorely distressed his Men; many of the Beasts
were left dead in the Mud, and the Hoofs came off the Horses Feet. Hannibal
himself riding upon an Elephant, which was the only one left alive, escaped
with his Life, but got intolerable Pains in his Eyes, and lost one of them
entirely. Being at last arrived upon dry ground, and understanding Flaminius's
fiery Temper, the better to entrap him, he passed by his Camp, and marched
farther into the Country, wasting it with Fire and Sword. This enraged
Flaminius, who thought himself slighted and despised by the Enemy; and when he
was advised by some To use great Caution, and not rashly pursue, especially by
reason of the Enemies Cavalry, but above all things to stay for the Conjunction
of his Collegue's Forces, he could by no means bear their Words; but rising
with all his Troops, he began his March, as if nothing had been more certain
than the Victory, his Army being followed with a greater number of Rabble laden
with Chains, Bonds, and the like, for the Prisoners and Booty.

Hannibal was now at a Lake called Thrasymene, nigh which were certain
Mountains, and between them and the Lake was a narrow Passage leading to a
Valley just by encompassed with a Ridge of Hills. These Hills Hannibal made
choice of, placing and disposing his Men round about, so that when Flaminius
followed him into the Valley, he was immediately hemm^d in, and attacked on all
sides, to the cutting off of his whole Army, and the loss of his own Life; and
this was done almost before they could see who engag^d 'em, by reason of a Mist
which was risen from the Lake. About 15000 of the Romans fell in the Valley,
and 6000 escaped to a Village, where they were forc^d to yield themselves
Prisoners. Hannibal gathering all his Prisoners together, to the number of
15000, kept the Romans, but dismissed the Latins without Ransom; and he sought
also for the Consul^s Body to bury it, but could not find it. Servilius the
other Consul, who lay at Ariminum, having Intelligence of Hannibal's March into
Hetruria, with all speed detached a Party of 4000 Men, commanded by Centinius,
to join Flaminius, if possible, before the Battle. Hannibal hearing of this
Supply, immediately after his Victory, detach^d out a sufficient Party under
Maharbal, who cut off one half of the Romans, and forc^d the rest to a Hill,
where they yielded themselves Prisoners.

The Romans were now in a great Consternation at these vast Losses, and upon
mature Deliberation, they found it necessary to have a General with absolute
Authority; whereupon they resolved upon a Dictator, which was Fabius Maximus, a
Person of extraordinary Wisdom and Experience, Dic. lx. U. C. 537.
in whom was a happy Mixture of Caution and Boldness. He made choice of
Minutius Rufus for his Master of the Horse, who was of a Temper more hot and
violent than himself. Having made what Preparations he was able, he set forward
to meet Hannibal, with little Intention to fight him, but rather to wait his
Motions, straiten his Quarters, and cut off his Provisions, which he knew would
be the most effectual way to ruin him, in a Country so far from his own. He
always encamped on the highest Grounds, free from the Insults of the Enemies
Cavalry, still keeping pace with 'em; when they march^d he follow^d ^em; when
they encamped he did the same, but at such a distance as not to be forc^d to
engage; by which means he gave them no Rest, but kept 'em in a continual
Alarm. This cautious way of proceeding, which got him the Name of Cunctator,
made Most Men suspect his Courage, except Hannibal himself, who was extremely
troubled and enraged at it, using all possible Artifices to make Fabius and his
Actions become despicable; sometimes by braving him in his Camp, and other
times by wasting the Country round him. Soon after, Hannibal designing for
Casinum, was by a mistake Conducted to Casilinum nigh Campania, where entering a
Valley environed with Mountains, Fabius detach^d 4000 Choice Men who possess^d
themselves of the Entrance, and with another Party cut off 800 of his Rear,
putting his whole Army into some disorder. Hannibal finding himself blocked up,
and in a dangerous Condition, one Night he ordered small Fagots and lighted
Torches to be tied to the Horns of 2000 Oxen, which by their tossing their
Horns and scattering the Fires, so frighted the Party that guarded the
Entrance, that they quitted their Posts; and by this Stratagem, Hannibal drew
off his Army, and escaped, though with considerable Damage to his Rear.

This Action, though excellently well managed by Fabiu's procured many Complaints
against him, and Hannibal to improve their Hatred, ravag^d the Country about,
but carefully spared Fabius^s Lands, to render him suspected of a secret
Correspondence with him. These Suspicions, and Fabius's want of Courage, as his
Men believ^d, proved so prejudicial to him, that in his Absence soon after,
Minutius his Master of the Horse, having skirmish'd with some Success, procured
so much Favor from the Multitude, that his Power was made equal with the
Dictator's; which was a thing beyond all Example. Minutius was so exalted with
his late Successes and this new Honor, that he resolved, contrary to all the
Persuasions of Fabius, to engage Hannibal with his Part of his Army, which he
did; where he was cunningly drawn in by Hannibal to a disadvantageous Place,
and was in great danger of being entirely defeated, when Fabius, who had been a
careful Observer of this Action from an Eminence in his Camp, came in, and
falling upon the Enemy with extraordinary Skill and Courage, soon forced 'em to
retreat, and saved Minutius. Hannibal, after this Battle, told his Friends,
That he thought the Cloud which had so long hovered upon the Mountains would
some time break upon 'em with a Storm. As for Minutius, he was so far convinced
of his former Rashness, that he confessed his Error to Fabius, whom he now
called his Father, and renouncing his new Power again, subjected his Office
freely to the Dictatorship.

Soon after Fabius's time was expir^d, Dic. lxi. U. C. 538.
a Dictator was created for holding the Comitia for a new Election of Consuls,
which was Veturius Philo, and Pomponius Matho was his Master of the Horse. The
new Consuls were Aemilius Paulus and Terentius Varro, the former a prudent
experienc^d Person, the latter a hot, rash, and inconsiderate Man. These had
gathered together an Army of 80000 Foot and 6000 Horse, which gave great Hopes
to the People, but rais^d as great Fears in some of the wiser sort, especially
Fabius, who with all the powerful Arguments imaginable advised Aemilius, To
beware of the Policy of Hannibal, and the Rashness of Varro. Both Armies met at
a Village in Apulia called Cannae, where Varro resolved to engage contrary to
Aemilius's Advice, the Enemy being about 40000 Foot and 20000 Horse. This
Battle was fought with dreadful Fury on both sides, and Hannibal had placed his
Men with all possible Skill and Art, so that the Romans were not only forced to
fight with Wind, Dust, and Sun, but pressing forwards, were in a little time
almost surrounded. In short, the Abilities of the Punick General at this time
were more apparent than ever, who more over-match'd them in Skill than they
exceeded him in Numbers, making a most miserable Slaughter of the Romans, till
quite wearied out, he commanded his Soldiers to give over. Aemilius was found
desperately wounded by Lentulus a Colonel, who offered him his Horse to fly;
but the Consul with weeping Eyes desired him to make use of it himself, and go
tell Fabius that he had followed his Directions to the last, but Fate had
conquered him: and then falling among the dead Bodies, he expir^d. In this
Battle the Romans lost 50000 Men. Polybius says, 70000, 2 Quaestors, 21
Tribunes, 80 of Senatorian Order, and so many Equites or Knights, that it is
said that three Bushels of their Rings were sent to Carthage; the Enemy having
lost but 5700 Men.

Never was any thing so terrible and dreadful to Rome as the News of this fatal
Defeat; never was the City so sadly filled with Terror and Tumult; and never
was a more universal Mourning and Lamentation throughout all the Streets, than
at this time. The Citizens were all in an Uproar and Consternation, and the
Senators themselves in great Trouble and Confusion, being extremely disturbed
in their Debates by the dismal Outcries of miserable Women tearing their Hair
and beating their Breasts after a sad and deplorable manner. A Dictater upon
this was created, which was M. Iunius, his Master of the Horse being T.
Sempronius, Dic. lxii. U. C. 538.
and Order was immediately given to keep all the Women from coming abroad into
the Streets, the Senators themselves going from House to House to comfort and
appease 'em what they could. Great Care was likewise taken to set strict Guards
at the Gates, to keep all Persons from abandoning the City; and to make all
People see, That there could be no possible Mean^s of preserving themselves,
but by bravely defending the Walls. In a short time Varro arriv^d at Rome with
the weak and tattered Relicts of his Army; and though he had been the principal
Cause of this Defeat, yet the Romans, out of an extraordinary Greatness of
Mind, went out to meet him in Multitudes, and the Senate returned him Thanks,
for that he had not despaired of the Commonwealth. Notwithstanding the vast
Losses sustained by Hannibal, and the Revolt of a great part of Italy
immediately after this last Defeat, the Romans would never so much as mention
Peace; Whereas, as Livy says, No Nation under Heaven but would have fainted,
and have suffered themselves to have been overwhelmed and crushed with the
weight of so mighty a Disaster.

III. Thus far was Hannibal extraordinary successful; and had he made the best
use of this his last Victory by marching directly to Rome, he might in all
Probability have put an end to the War and Roman State at once; but this great
Soldier, as Maharbal Captain of his Horse told him, knew perfectly how to gain
a Victory, but not how to use and improve it. For his careless manner of
proceeding that Summer, gave the Romans an Opportunity of Recovering themselves
when they were almost reduced to a despairing Condition: And now they were
inspired with new Courage, and new Resolutions of prosecuting the War without
Fainting; making all possible Preparations for another Campaign, arming of
several thousands of Slaves, and filling up the Senate, which wanted 177
Persons: This last was done by Fabius Buteo a Dictator, Dic. lxiii. U. C. 539.
created for that purpose, without any Master of the Horse, and that before the
last Dictator was out of Office who was then abroad. But that which proved most
fatal to Hannibal, was, his Wintering in Capua, a most wealthy and luxurious
City, which among many other Places had surrender^d it self to him since his
last Victory. He^^^e utterly spoil^d an excellent and hardy Army, which now was
so enfeebled and enervated by their immoderate Use of the Pleasures and
Effeminateness of that Place, that ever after his Men became impatient of
Labor and the ancient Military Discipline; So that Capua became a Cannae to
Hannibal^s Soldiers. And now Hannibal's Fortune began to change; for in the
next Campaign, he was worsted in a Sally out of Nola by Marcellus the Praetor,
and repulsed at Casilinum after he had brought the Place to great Extremities;
and not long after Marcellus gave him a considerable Repulse nigh Nola, which
gave the Romans mighty Hopes of farther Successes.

In Spain the Scipio's manag^d the War with great Success, overthrowing Hanno
and gaining much Ground, and likewise defeating Asdrubal, who but just before
had been ordered by the Senate of Carthage to go for Italy and join Hannibal;
which Design by this means was broke. In Sicily and Sardinia, though several
Attempts were made by the Carthaginians, and some Revolts happened, yet Affairs
succeeded prosperously especially in Sardinia, where a Battle was fought, and
12000 Carthaginians, killed, and many taken Prisoners, among whom were
Asdrubal, Hanno, and Mago, all Persons of the highest Quality. Rome now had the
Misfortune of having Enemies on all sides of her, and in all Parts of her
Dominions and Territories, so that the Vigor and Diligence of her Inhabitants
was certainly very admirable in sending Recruits and Supplies into Spain,
Sicily, and Sardinia, those distant Countries, with the same Care as against
Hannibal himself. But what is a greater Instance of the Roman Courage and
Magnanimity, is their proclaiming War with Philip King of Macedon in Greece,
not long after their dreadful Defeat at Cannae, for his making a League with
Hannibal, and their venturing to invade his Dominion, which they did with good
Success. About this time, Claudius Centho was created Dictator for holding the
(...) in the Consul's Absence for a new Election, Dic. lxiv. U. C. 541.
and his Master of the Horse was Fulvius Flaccus.

The Affairs of Sicily were in a little time altered by the Death of Hiero King
of Syracuse, and the Murder of his Grandson Hieronymus not long after, which
caused great Factions in that City. The prevailing Faction proving Enemies to
Rome, Marcellus was sent thither, who besieg^d the great City of Syracuse by
Sea and Land, but could not storm it with all his Power, being perpetually
hindered by the great Skill and Inventions of that excellent Mathematician
Archimed^s, who contrived such Engines as wou^d cast Stones of prodigious Bulk
upon the Romans, and vast Beams upon their Ships, and dismount all their
Bat-Battering Engines. He also set the Roman Ships upon one end, or overturned
them, or hois'd 'em up into the Air, and after all the Men were fallen out, let
'em fall upon the Walls; by which means he became so formidable to the Romans,
that Marcellus was forced to remove to a farther Distance, Jeering his own
Engineers, and calling Archimedes, Briareus. After some considerable Actions in
Sicily, and after Three Years Siege, Marcellus found means to surprise the City
on a great Festival of theirs, by reason of an Ill-guarded Tower, and so became
Master of it. Marcellus could not forbear his Tears at the Destruction of such
a glorious and Magnificent City, which he endeavored, but could not prevent;
but above all, the Death of Archimedes was the greatest Trouble to him; for he
had given strict Command to his Men to preserve him. But this great Artist was
at that time so extremely Busy about his Mathematical Speculations, that he
took no Notice of the Noise and Uproar in the City, and so was killed by a
Common Soldier before he suspected any Danger. His Body was honorably buried
by Marcellus's Order, and vast Plunder was obtained by the Soldiers, besides
many rich Works and great Rareties sent to Rome, the City being full of People,
and 22 Miles in Compass.

The Wars in Italy were managed the same time with various Success, U. C. 542.
Hannibal had Tarentum betrayed to him, the Castle still holding out; and the
Romans invested Capua, straitning it so much, that they were forced to send to
Hannibal for Relief. He made no great haste to relieve 'em, being very desirous
to take the Castle first; but then considering how great a Disgrace the loss of
such a Place as Capua would be, he broke up the Siege of Tarentum, and directed
his March thither. Hannibal attacked the Romans in their Trenches; and though he
was assisted both by the Inhabitants and his own Garrison, he was repelled with
considerable Loss. Finding the Relief of the Place extreme hazardous, he
resolved to fall upon Rome it self, expecting that the very Name of such an
Enterprise would oblige 'em to raise the Siege; for which Reason he Marched
directly that way. His Designs being heard of at Rome, the Citizens were
variously inclined as to their Way of Security, some thinking all the Forces in
Italy were to be sent for; but Fabius would by no means hear of rising from
before Capua: therefore a middle Way was taken, which was, to send for Fulvius
the Proconsul from the Siege with 15000 Foot and 1000 Horse for the Defense of
Rome; which was speedily effected, Hannibal being now encamped about eight
Miles from the City.

Hannibal in a short time decamped, and advanced to the River Arno, three Miles
from Rome, from whence with a Party of 2000 Horse he went to take a View of the
City. Flaccus, much offended that he should take such Liberty without
Opposition, sent out a considerable Body of Horse, which falling upon him,
forced him to retreat. The next Day, and the Day following, Hannibal on one
side, and Flaccus with the Consuls on the other, drew out all their Forces for
a General Battle; but on both those Days there fell such great Storms of Hail
and Rain, that the Armies could not join; but after they had retired to their
Camps, the Weather proved fair and calm. This struck the Carthaginians with a
Religious Awe, and made Hannibal to say, That one while his Mind, another time
his Fortune, would not suffer him to become Master of that mighty City.
Whereupon he decamped, and Marched to the River Turia, from thence to the Lake
of Feronia, where he plunder^d a Temple of that Goddess, proceeding in this
outrageous Manner through the Countries of the Lucani and Brutii; which Cruelty
lost him much Credit, and did him as much Injury. Flaccus returned to the Siege
of Capua, which soon after was surrendered, the Heads of the Revolt being put
to death, and the common sort sold. This City, being situated in so good a
Soil, was reserved for the Use of all sorts of Plowmen, Laborers and
Artificers, without any Show of Government of its own as it had formerly. This
happened in the 7th Year of this War, and 54^d of the City.

In Spain, the War had been carried on all this time with great Vigor, the
Romans being generally Conquerours, killing in one Battle 3^000 Men; but in
this last Year, Claudius Nero the Governor of Spain was much imposed upon by
the Treachery of Asdrubal, and another Governor was ordered to succeed him,
both the Scipio's having been slain not long before in Spain. A Comitia was
held for the creating a Proconsul for Spain, but none appeared to stand for
that Office, well perceiving the Hazards and Difficulties of such a War, which
caus^d a great Concern and Sadness among the (...) Whereupon young Scipio, a
Noble Youth, (...) 24 Years of Age, bravely stood up, and professed ^^^self
Candidate, having the Year before been (...), though under Age, by the great
Favor and C^^^ence of the People. This Scipio was Son to the Consul slain in
Spain, a Person of rare and wonderful Abilities for his Age, of extraordinary
Courage and Valor, and of as eminent Prudence and Virtue; which excellent
Accomplishments made him joyfully accepted of by the Votes of all; but after he
was chosen, they began to have some Concern upon the Account of his Youth;
which he apprehending, called 'em together, and with such a noble Spirit and
great Resolution promised 'em Success, that they departed abundantly satisfied
with their Choice.

The following Year after Scipio's Voyage to Spain, Valerius Laevinus, who had
done good Service against Philip of Macedon, was made Consul a second time, and
sent into Sicily; where taking the City Agrigentum, he soon reduced the whole
Island, which was the first time the Romans became Masters of all Sicily; and
this fell out in the 8th Year of this War, and 544th of the City. Dic. lxv. U.
C. 544.
In the time of Laevinus's Consulship, a Dictator was created for holding the
Comitia for a new Election, both he and his Colleague Marcellus being abroad:
this was Fulvius Flaccus, and his Master of the Horse was Licinius Crassus. In
this Election Fabius Maximus was chosen Consul a Fifth time, in which Year
Tarentum was Betrayed into his hands, the Success of this Campaign proving very
doubtful and various; and in this same Year was a Lustration, where were found
but 137108 Free Citizens; by which Account it appears, what great Losses the
Romans had sustained by these Dreadful Wars. Marcellus for this Year sometimes
won and sometimes lost with Hannibal; and the following was made Consul a Fifth
time, when, going against Hannibal, he was slain in an Ambuscade; a Valiant
Soldier, who was called the Sword, as Fabius (...) Buckler, of Rome. His
Colleague Crispinus also (...) a Wound, which in a little time kill^d him, (...)
nominated a Dictator for holding the Comiti^^^ new Election, Dic. lxvi. U. C.
546.
which was Manlius Torquatus, his Master of the Horse being C. Servilius.

The following Year, Asdrubal was ordered to leave Spain and go for Italy to
the Assistance of his Brother Hannibal. Whereupon Livius the Consul was ordered
to meet and oppose him, whilst his Colleague Nero observed the Motions of
Hannibal: but Nero having met with some Success against Hannibal, made a choice
Detachment of 6000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and with great Secrecy and as great
Expedition, March^d toward his Colleague. Having joined him, they surrounded
Asdrubal, who by the Treachery of his Guides had led him into a dangerous
Place, and cut him and his whole Army in pieces. Nero immediately return^d to
his Camp, and before Hannibal knew of his Departure, cast his Brother's Head in
his Camp; by which, to his great Grief, he knew of his Defeat. At the finishing
of this Consulship, a Dictator was created for the holding of the Comitia for a
new Election, the Consuls being both in the Field, Dic. lxvii. U. C. 547.
which was Livius Salinator, his Master of the Horse being Caecilius Metellus.
The Year after this, Scipio, after the obtaining many great Victories, and the
performing many noble Exploits in Spain, wholly reduced that Country to the
Obedience of Rome; having taken or driven out all the Carthaginian Commanders,
and gained as much Reputation by his Mild, Sweet, and Generous Temper, as he
did by his Courageous and Valiant Acts. This happened Five Years after his
undertaking this Charge, and Twelve after the Beginning of this War.

IV. The Romans now found themselves in a much better Condition than they were
at the Beginning of U. C. 548.
these Wars, especially by the happy Reduction of two such considerable
Provinces as Spain and Sicily, which had been great Diversions to ^em; but
still Hannibal, in the Bowels of Italy, was a severe Curb, and a grievous
Burden to ^em; upon which, Scipio, at his Return, being made Consul at 29 Years
of Age, greatly desired to be sent into Africa, as the most effectual Means to
finish the War; declaring to the Senate, That he doubted not but to manage
Affairs so, as that the Carthaginians should be forc^d to recall Hannibal out
of Italy for the Defense of his own Country. Fabius most earnestly and with
some Heat, opposed this, and thereupon a considerable Difference arose; but at
length Sicily was granted him for his Province, and Leave given him to pass
over into Africa, if he saw it convenient for the Commonwealth. All the first
Year he spent in Sicily, in providing Necessaries for his Expedition; at the
end of which, a Dictator was created for holding the Comitia for a new Election
of Consuls, Dic. lxviii. U. C. 549.
namely, Caecilius M^tellus, his Master of the Horse being Veturius Philo: The
next Lustrum being soon after, 215000 Free Citizens were Cess^d, which was
77892 more than at the last; a happy Increase for Five Years time. This same
Year, which was the 14th of this War, Scipio arrived at Africa with a brave
Fleet, where Masanissa King of Numidia, who had joined with him in Spain, came
in to his Assistance.

Scipio was not long in Africa without Employment, for in a short time Hanno
oppos^d him, and was slain himself with 3000 of his Men; which so encouraged
Scipio, that he immediately Invested Utica: but Syphax King of Numidia, who had
dispossessed Masanissa of his Kingdom, Marching with the Carthaginians to
relieve the Place, Scipio broke up the Siege, and departed to his Winter
Quarters. But in the Winter he again Invested Utica; and understanding that the
Enemy was encamped not far off, he sent his ablest Soldiers, in the Habits of
Slaves, with his Commissioners, to view their Camp. This done, he suddenly set
Fire to their Coverings of Mats, Reeds, dry Boughs and the like; which they not
suspecting, but thinking it came by Accident, were cut in pieces in the midst
of the Hurry and Confusion, to the Numberof 40000 Men, 6000 being taken
Prisoners. Not long after he gave them another great Overthrow, which so
terrified the Carthaginians, that they were oblig^d to recall their great
Champion Hannibal out of Italy, who himself likewise had been in declining
condition for a considerable time. An Embassage was immediately dispatched to
Rome, with a Design to obtain a Ces^ation of Arms till Hannibal could safely
retire from Italy: But their Aim being sufficiently understood, their Message
was slighted, and came to no Effect.

During these Endeavors, Syphax, finding his Kingdom would probably return to
Masanissa, the True Inheritor, had gathered together a Numerous Army of
Unexperienced Strangers, and with them Marched against Scipio, but was soon
defeated, and himself taken Prisoner. Masanissa, the better to regain his
Kingdom, Marched with all speed to Cirta the Chief City, and by showing them
the King in Bonds, procured the Gates to be opened, every one striving to gain
the Favor of him, who, as they perceived, would be their King. Among the rest,
Queen Sophonisba, Syphax^s Wife, a Woman of incomparable Beauty, who very
earnestly and humbly besought him, That she might not be delivered up into the
hands of the Romans. Her Powerful Charms so recommended her Suit, that young
Masanissa forthwith granted it; and the more effectually to perform his
Promise, Married her himself that Day. This Action was much disapprov^d of by
Scipio at his Arrival soon after, letting him to understand, That the Romans
had a Title to her Head, as being their Captive, one of their greatest Enemies,
and the Principal Cause of all Syphax' s Treachery. Upon this therefore,
Masanissa, in desperate Passion, sent her a Bowl of Poison; at the receiving of
which she only said, That if her Husband had no better Token to send to his new
Wife, she must accept of that; adding, That her Death had been more honorable,
if her Marriage had been farther from it; and so boldly drank it often. Scipio,
the better to comfort the Melancholy Prince, had him immediately Proclaim^d
King of Numidia, with the greatest Pomp and Solemnity that could be expected,
having now settled him in his Throne without any farther Opposition.

V. Hannibal had now made his greatest and utmost Efforts in Italy, and had
performed more than any other Commander, when he was recalled by his
Superiors; and with great Concern and Reluctance was forced to quit that
Country, after he had spent 15 Years in it with various Fortune. He complained
much of his Senate, and of Himself: of his Senate, because they had so badly
supply^d him with Money and other Necessaries, when he had been so long in an
Enemies Country: of Himself, for giving the Romans time to recover themselves,
after he had so often overthrown 'em. It is said likewise, that before he
Embarked, he built an Arch nigh the Temple of Juno Lacinia, where, in Punick
and Greek Letters, he wrote the Sum of his great Exploits. Then putting to Sea
in a Melancholy Temper, having lost both his Brothers, Asdrubal and Mago, and a
great many of his best Men, he Landed in a few Days at Leptis; from whence he
Marched to Adrumetum, and next to Zama, five Days Journey from Carthage. A
General Satisfaction was in Rome for his Departure; for never was a General
more dreaded by ^em: and much about that time a Dictator was created for
holding the Comitia for a new Election of Consuls, Dic. lxix. U. C. 551.
Sulpicius Galba being the Person, and Servilius Geminus his Master of the
Horse.

Hannibal now lying encamped near Zama, and Scipio not far from him, the former
beginning to consider the declining Estate of his Country, desir^d a Meeting
with Scipio to Treat of a Peace, which was granted. In a large Plain between
the Two Armies, the Two Greatest Generals in the World came to an Enterview;
but receiving mutually no satisfaction, especially for that Scipio had
upbraided the Carthaginians with a late Breach of Truce and Violation of
Ambassadors, they returned to decide the Controversy by the Sword. Never was
a more Memorable Battle fought, whether we regard the Generals, the Armies, the
Two States that Contended, or the Importance of the Victory. Both the Generals
shew^d admirable Skill in placing their Men, and choosing their Ground, as well
as extraordinary Courage in Charging and Falling on, letting their Soldiers to
understand, That this Battle must show whether Rome or Carthage should give
Laws to the World. Hannibal, though he behaved himself most gallantly, and with
all the true Management of such an Expert Commander, was at last overcome by
Scipio, who slew 20000, and took as many Prisoners. Whereupon Hannibal
persuaded his Countrymen to beg Peace, and Ambassadors were immediately
dispatched to Rome for that Purpose; Dic. lxx. U. C. 552.
a little before whose Arrival, a Dictator was created for holding the Comitia
for Election of Consuls; and this was C. Servilius, his Master of the Horse
being Ailius Paetus.

The Power of concluding Peace was by the People decreed to Scipio and Ten
others, and was at last agreed to upon these Articles; First, That the
Carthaginians should enjoy all their Territories in Africa; but that the Romans
should hold Spain, with all the Islands in the Mediterranean: Secondly, That
all Rebels and Deserters should be delivered up to the Romans: Thirdly, That
the Carthaginians should deliver up all the beak'd Ships, except Ten Triremes,
with all their Tamed Elephants, and Tame no more: Fourthly, That it should be
unlawful for 'em to make War in Africa, or elsewhere without Leave from Rome:
Fifthly, That they should r estore all to Masanissa, and enter into Alliance
with him: Sixthly, That they should give Money and Corn to the Roman Troops,
till the Return of the Ambassadors: And Seventhly, That they should Pay 10000
Talents of Silver in 50 Years time, and give 100 Hostages for the Performance
of all. Thus ended the Second Punick, or Carthaginian War, in the 1^th Year of
it, to the great Satisfaction of Rome, and the greater Renown of Scipio, who,
besides a most Splendid Triumph, obtain^d the Honorable Surname of Africanus.
It was Seven Years shorter, though far more Bloody and Dangerous than the First
Punick War, and ended in the 55^d Year of the City, A. M. 3804, in the 4th Year
of the 144th Olympiad, 308 Years since the Beginning of the Consular State, 189
since the Burning of the City by the Gauls, 129 since the Beginning of the
Macedonian Empire by Alexander, and 199 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. XI.
From the End of the Second Punick War, to the End of the Third, and the
Destruction of Carthage; when Rome got free from all her Rival States.
Containing the Space of 55 Years.
I. THese Wars, U. C. 553.
though they had been very dangerous, almost to the Ruin of the Roman State,
ended much to the Advantage of it, both as to its Honor and Dominion, as well
as its Experience and Knowledge. The Romans began more and more to know the Use
of Riches, and Arts and Learning daily increased as they became more acquainted
with the Gr^ecians. For much about this time flourished Ennius, Licinius
Tegula, and Caecilius, all Dramatick Poets; the Romans being much delighted
with such Spectacles, as well as those more cruel ones of Gladiators, Fightings
with wild Beasts, etc. The finishing of these late Wars much eased the Romans,
but still they were employed abroad; for immediately after began, or rather
went on, the Macedonian War against King Philip, the first Occasion being given
soon after the great Battle of Cannae, upon his entrance into an Alliance with
Hannibal, as was said before. But now the Romans having a good Opportunity, and
not without Provocation as well by his Breach of Faith with the Aetolians and
other Roman Allies in those Parts, as by his Supplies long before sent to
Hannibal, and at the earnest Request of the Athenians, as well as the
Complaints of Attalus King of Pergamus and the Rhodians, proclaim^d War against
him anew.

This Philip King of Macedon was one of Alexander's Successors, being the Tenth
King after him, and a Powerful Prince in Greece. Against him Sulpicius Galba
the Consul was sent, who by Himself and his Lieutenant, put him to the worst
diverse times, and had almost taken him Prisoner. By the Assistance of Attalus
and the Rhodians, the Consul raised the Siege of Athens; whereupon the
Aetolians, before backward enough by reason of their Magistrates, and the
Athenians now newly encourag^d, invaded Philip's Dominions, but being too
slothful and careless, were easily repulsed by him. This same Year obtained
Furius the Praetor a great Victory over the Gauls, who had lately revolted and
invested Cremona, killing 30000 Men, and with them Amilcar a Carthaginian
Captain. For this Action, after much Dispute in the Senate, he Triumph^d, though
against the Custom, and without Precedent; for none ever obtain^d this Honor,
who had gotten a Victory with another's Army, as he had done with Aurelius
Cotta's the Consul, in his Absence, who therefore took the Matter very
hainously. The Year following, Bebius the Praetor entering unadvisedly into the
Territories of the Insubrian Gauls, was surrounded, and lost above 6600 of his
Men; in this Year there was but small Action in Macedonia.

In the third Year of the Macedonian War, Quintus Flaminius the Consul was sent
thither, who using great Expedition and Diligence, beat Philip out of the
Streights, where he had been very advantageously posted; and by Sea his Brother
Lucius, with Attalus, regained several Confederate Towns, and Invested Corinth
it self, but with no Success. The latter end of this Year, by reason of the
great Business of the Commonwealth, Pr^^^. increased, U. C. 556.
the Praetors in Rome were increased from Four to Six; and now the time coming
for the Election of Consuls, and it being usual for them to take the Provinces
from their Predecessors, the Tribunes rightly objected, That this Custom
hindered the Progress of the Wars, and so procured Quintius's Government and
Place to be continued to him, who being just upon taking the Castle of Opus,
Messengers came from Philip about a Treaty. Several times they met, as they
formerly had done at the Streights, the Ambassadors of Attalus, the Rhodians
and Athenians being present, but all came to no Effect. Philip soon after
delivering up Argos into the hands of Nabis Tyrant of Lacedaemon, who used the
Inhabitants with great Cruelty and intolerable Exactions. But Quintius,
managing his Affairs with good Success, at last followed Philip into Thessaly,
and gave him a great Overthrow at Cynocephalae, killing 8000, and taking 5000
Prisoners; so that he was forced to beg Peace, which was granted upon Terms
moderate, enough: one of the Articles was, That he should pay 1000 Talents,
half at present, and the other half in the space of ten Years.

About this same time, two great Victories were obtain^d over the Gauls; and
the Slaves in Hetraria breaking into a dangerous Rebellion, were quell^d stand
chastis'd by Attilius the Praetor. And now the Romans, out of a Principle of
Generokty, resolv^d to restore Liberty to the Cities of Greece which they had
taken in this War; and for that Reason, ten Men of the chiefest Quality were
sent over thither, Flaminius being the principal. These Commissioners went to
the great Solemnity of the Isthmian Games, were was a general Meeting of all
Greece to behold those Shows; and there, in the Name of the Senate and People
of Rome, they publicly proclaimed Liberty to all the Cities and People of
Greece. This was the most surprising and most joyful thing in the World to
these People, who scarce so much as imagined, much less expected, the Favor.
Many Speeches were made in Praise of the Roman Greatness and Generosity,
particularly, That at last, there was a People in the World, born for the
Safety of all others, that crossed Seas and made Wars at their own Cost and
Peril, to relieve the Oppressed, to establish Laws, and cause them to be
observed, and to maintain the public Security throughout the whole Earth. And
this was the end of the first Macedonian War, which happened five Years after
it was last proclaimed, and twenty after it first began.

II. The Year following after the War, U. C. 559.
some Disturbances were raised in the City concerning the Oppian Law; a Law
preferr^d by Oppius, tribune of the People, soon after the Defeat at Cannae,
forbidding women to were Gold or Purple, and some other Ornaments. This Law the
present Tribunes endeavoring to abrogates, Affairs being chang^d and the
Occasion removed, were violently oppos^d by Porcius Cato the Consul, a Famous
Moralest, who publicly and severely inveighed against the Females; but by
reason of the tribunes answering him out of his own Book, but chiefly by means
of the Women's tumultuous filling the streets and the Assemblies with their
importunate Cries, it was at last annul'd. Cato then betook himself to Spain
his own Province, where using Severity to himself as well as his Soldiers, he
restored the Roman Discipline, in those Parts, and reduced many of the Spanish
Nations who had lately revolted. The Romans had still Wars with the Gauls, who
were joined with their Neighbors the Ligurians: but they were not much
burdensome to the State, nor such as hinder^d the Progress of Learning in the
City. For about this time Plautus had many Plays acted at Rome with great
Applause; and he it was that brought Comedy to its Perfection in this City,
being a Person of a great Genius, and a complete Master of the Latin Tongue,
which, though it was not arrived to its utmost Purity, had even then a masculine
Strength and Energy which was very excellent. The Romans were not without some
Wars in Greece; for Nabis, lately mention^d, still oppos^d 'em, but was forc^d
to submit in no long time: And about this time, Antiochus. King of Syria, by
his Encroachments upon the Roman Allies, gave an Occasion to the Romans to fall
out with him; and this he did partly through his own Ambition and Hatred to
Rome, and partly by the Persuasions of Hannibal, who had been lately forced
thither by the Ingratitude of his own Countrymen. These Matters occasioned
Ambassies on both sides, but to no great Effect, till at last Antiochus
proceeded so far into Greece it self, the Aetolians treacherously joining with
them, that the Romans after suitable Preparations, proclaimed War against him,
which was five Years after the finishing the Macedonian War.

Antiochus as well as Philip was one of Alexander's U. C. 53^.
Successors though of another Kingdom, and sirnam'd Magnus, being a very potent
Prince, and Master of great Dominions, therefore the greater Preparations were
made against him, and Acilius the Consul was sent into Greece to manage the
War. Acilius easily recovered those Places which Antiochus had possess^d
himself of in Thessaly; then following that King to the Straigh^^ of
Thermopylae, whither he had retired, he forced him out of his advantageous
Post, and gave him such an Overthrow, that he immediately abandon^d all Greece,
the Aetolians being left to the Mercy of the Conquerours. While Acilius
performed these Acts in Greece, his Colleague Nasica got a notable Victory over
the Boian Gauls in Italy, which entirely broke all their Power, Lucius Scipio
and Laelius Nepos, being Consuls for the following Year, came according to
Custom to divide the Provinces by Lot. Both were extremely desirous to have
Greece, and Laelius being in great Favor, offered to leave it to the
Determination of the Senate, which Scipio was persuaded to assent to by his
Brother Africanus. The Matter was wholly new, and the Senate expected many
Speeches and Arguments on both sides, when Africanus standing up, told the
Fathers, That if they would decree Greece for his Brother's Province, he
himself would be his Legatus or Lieutenant, at which there needed no other
Argument; for it was immediately voted with Universal Consent and Applause, and
Power given to Scipio to pass into Asia, if he saw it convenient.

In the mean time Antiochus lay at Ephesus in Asia, secure, as he imagined, of
the Romans; but Hannibal who had advised him to invade Italy, told him, He
rather admired they were not there already than, doubted of their coming, and
procured the Forces to be sent for out of the further Provinces, and all the
Ships that were ready, to secure the Passage of the Hellespont, where the
Consul most probably would pass. Pergamus, the Chief City of Eumenes the Friend
of the Romans, was likewise invested, but the Siege was soon and Antiochus sent
to Aemilius the Roman Admiral, now on those Coasts, about a Peace, but he
disowned all Power of concluding it without the Consul. Soon after, the
Rhodians defeated his Admiral at Sea, which rais^d; was Hannibal, a Man out of
his proper Element; and after that in a Fight with Aemilius, Eumenes and the
Rhodians, he entirely lost the Command at Sea. Antiochus affrighted at this ill
Fortune imprudently abandoned Lysimachia, which might have kept the Consul in
Action a Year longer; and, adding one piece of Indiscretion to another,
suffered the Scipio's to pass the Hellespont into Asia without Opposition. This
was the first time that the Romans got Footing in Asia, which so startled
Antiochus, that he offer^d to quit all Places in Europe and such Asia as were
Friends of Rome, to pay half the Charges the Romans were at in this War; and
rather than not obtain Peace, to part with a Portion of his own Kingdom.

The Ambassadors who carried these Proposals, used their utmost Endeavors to
procure the Favor of Africanus, offering him the Restitution of his Son who
had been taken Prisoner, and many other great and honorable Advantages, if it
could be effected. But Africanus wou^d promise nothing more than only private
Offices of Kindness, modestly letting 'em to know, That since Antiochus was now
in such a declining state, Peace was not probably to be purchased at so easy a
Rate as formerly, Whereupon Antiochus made what Provision he could for a
Battle; and Africanus falling sick soon after, to comfort him, and to gain his
Favor, he sent him his Son without Ransom, upon which the other, in way of
Requital, advised him not to engage with his Brother till he could return to
the Camp. Antiochus therefore; having received this Message, declined fighting
what he could, till Scipio the Consul pressed so hard upon him nigh Magnesia,
that he was forced to draw out his Men to the Number of 70000 Foot and 12000
Horse. Scipio opposed him with a much less Army, but in a few Hours time
entirely defeated him, where his own Chariots armed with Sithes, being driven
back upon his own Men, contributed much to his Overthrow. Antioc^us now was
glad to procure Peace of the Romans upon their own Terms, and Ambassadors were
dispatched accordingly, where Africanus told 'em, That the Romans were never
wont to insult over their conquered Enemies, and therefore nothing should be
required of him more than formerly. The Terms were, To pay 15000 Talents of
Eubaea for the Expenses of the War; to quit all their Possessions in Europe,
and likewise all Asia on this side Mount Taurus; to deliver up Hannibal and
other Incendiaries; and to give 20 Hostages for securing the Peace. Thus ended
the War with Antiochus the Great, much to the Advantage of Rome, within two
Years time or less, twelve Years after the second Punick War, Lucius Scipio
having gained the Surname of Asiaticus, as his Brother had of Africanus.

III. The Romans had now but little Employment U. C. 565.
abroad besides chastising the Aetolians in Greece, which was soon effected by
Manlius Scipio's Colleague; and by the same Consul an Expedition was undertaken
against the Gallo Graecians or Galatians in Asia with good Success; but Luxury
and Idleness was first brought into Rome by his Army out of Asia The same Year
the Census being performed, 258328 Free Citizens were cess'd. In the third Year
after the ending of the War with Antiochus, Scipio Africanus was maliciously
accused of defrauding the Treasury of the Booty taken in the War and of too
nigh a Correspondence with Antiochus, and of Matters of the like Nature. Some
write that his Accusers were incited to it by Cato, who hated him for his being
frequently saluted King in Spain by the Inhabitants there, and occasioned him
to have a Day set him by the Tribunes to answer it before the People. The Day
of Hearing being come, and the Tribunes having taken their Places in the
Rostra, this great Man entered the Assembly with a mighty Train of Friends and
Clients, all the People having their Eyes, fixed upon him with Admiration.
Silence being made, he with an undaunted Bravery put on his Triumphal Crown and
with the Voice of a Conqueror cried, This very Day, O Romans! I did overcome
the fierce Hannibal, and vanquish the powerful Carthaginians, therefore let us
lay aside private Contests, and go as many as can to the Capitol, to Thank the
Gods for giving me the Will and Power of d^ing such eminent Services for my
Country. Whereupon going up to the Capitol, the Whole Assembly follow^d him, as
also to all the Temples in the City, insomuch that the very Viat^rs and Clerks
left the Tribunes alone, who from Accusers were turned Admirers.

Shortly after, the Tribunes accused him in the Senate House, and desired he
might be brought to his Answer. Scipio boldly rising up, produced his Books of
Accounts, and ^ore 'em in pieces before 'em all, disdaining to give an Account
for so small a Matter, in comparison of those vast Sums be himself had brought
into the Treasury. The next Day of Appearance he absented himself, and his
Brother declaring his Indisposition, he was excus^d, and another Day appointed;
before which time, he withdrew himself to Linternum a Sea-Town of Campania, and
there liv^d a Retir^d Life. In his Absence the Tribunes were very violent
against him; yet, through the Interposition of Gracchus, one of 'em, he was not
Condemned. His Brother Asiaticus was shortly after called to an Account about
Matters of the same nature, but by Gracchus's means likewise escaped Public
Punishment. The Year following, many Scandalous Abuses of the Feasts of Bacchus
were strictly inquired into and reformed. Three Years after which, the Great
Africanus died, who, according to Val. Maximus, ordered, U. C. 571.
Ingrata Patria ne ossa quidem mea habes to be engraven on his Tomb, My
Ungrateful Country shall have none of my Remains. This same Year was Remarkable
for the Death of Two other Famous Men, Philopoemen, Captain of the Achaeans in
Greece, and Hannibal; the latter of which had fled to several Places to escape
falling into the hands of the Romans, and at last to Prusias King of Bithynia,
who, out of Fear, was about delivering him up, when Hannibal took Poison,
which, it is said, he carried about him in his Ring, first Invoking the Gods of
Hospitality as Witnesses of the Violated Faith of King Prusias, and upbraiding
the present Romans with degenerating from their Ancestors, who had honorably
prevented the Murder of their Mortal Enemy Pyrrhus, whereas these had basely
sent to Prusias to Murder his Guest and Friend.

The Romans were for about 12 Years after this chiefly employed in Wars with
their Neighbors the Ligurians and Istrians, with the Sardinians and Corsicans,
and likewise with the Celtiberians in Spain, all which they reduced to
Subjection. In which space of time the Works of Numa Pompilius, the Second King
of Rome, after they had been Buried in a Stone Chest 535 Years, U. C. 583.
were taken up and Burnt by Order of Senate; and in a Lustration not long
after, 273244. Free Citizens were Cess'd. About Two Years after this, Pers^us
King of Macedon, the Son of Philip, invited by his Father^s Preparations before
his Death, and pleased with his own Strength and Imaginary Successes, renounced
the League made with the Romans, and so began the Second Macedonian War, 25
Years after the finishing of the First, and 18 after that with Antiochus. Upon
this, Quintus Marcius and others were sent into Greece to secure and establish
the Confederates in their Fidelity; which made Perseus begin to reflect upon
what he had done* and understanding the Motions and Preparations of the Romans,
he applied himself to Marcius about a Treaty for Peace, relying upon the
Ancient Friendship between their two Families. The Ambassadors were well
satisfied with this Opportunity, and to divert him from Action, granted him
Truce till he might send to Rome; for without this, he might have began the War
much to the Disadvantage of the Romans, who had neither Army nor Commander yet
arriv^d in Grecce.

The Senate denied him Peace, and Attilius the Consul was sent to seize upon
Larissa the Chief City of Thessaly: Whereupon Perseus drew all his Forces
together, having gathered together a greater Army than any of his Predecessors
were Masters of since Alexander the Great. He took in some Towns upon his
Frontiers, and Licinius the Consul led such a raw undisciplined Army into
Macedonia, and through such difficult and almost Impassable Places, that had
Perseus made his Advantage of this Opportunity, he might easily have destroyed
it. After this, he sent to Licinius, offering, to observe the Articles to which
his Father Philip had submitted, by paying the Tribute, and leaving the Cities
to their Liberty; but could not obtain Peace to be granted him upon these
Terms. Soon after, Thebes, and Aleartus were taken by Lucretius the Praetor^
and the Consul having had the Advantage in another Skirmish, possessed himself
of some Towns, and took up his Winter Quarters; mean while Appius Claudius lost
many Men in Illyricum. The Year following, Hostilius the Consul; who was to
manage this War; perform^d but little of moment, besides reducing his Men to
that Ancient Discipline which his Predecessor had too much neglected. Marcius
Philippus succeeding him, at his first Entrance into his Province might have
easily been defeated, had he met with a Prudent and Expert Enemy, the Ways
being so difficult and dangerous to pass, that his Soldiers could scarce hold
their Weapons in their Hands, by reason of their Weariness. And after he had
entered the Plains, he might as easily have been blocked up and starv^d, had
not Perseus, struck with a groundless Fear, retreated to Pydna, and left all
the Passes open to him. Yet Marcius acted nothing of Consequence, leaving all
to be perform^d by his Successor Aemilius Paulus, who had been Consul 17 Years
before, and was a very Experienc^d Commander.

Aemilius very skilfully managed the War, and caus^d the Eclipse of the Moon to
be foretold to his Soldiers, lest they should be discourag^d by it, which much
terrified the Enemy that knew nothing of the Natural Cause. He kept his Men
from Fighting when they were fatigu^d, though the Officers were desirous to
Engage: but the Armies lying Encamp^d on each side the River Enipeus, a Peast,
by chance, passing over from the Roman side, was seized on, and being rescu^d,
by degrees drew both Armies to an Engagement, wherein Pers^us lost the Day, and
with it his Kingdom. He flying into the Isle of Crete, when all abandon^d him,
surrender^d himself into the Hands of Cn. Octavius. Aemilius severely Chastis'd
the Epirots, who had joyn^d, with Perse^s, Plundering and Demolishing about 70
of their Towns, whereby such a great Booty was gain^d, that each Footman had
200 Denarii (above 7 English Pounds) and every Horseman twice as much. But the
Soldiers having gain^d little or no Plunder in M^c^donia, nor any of the King^s
Treasure, deny^d their General a Triumph, which he obtain^d notwithstanding,
and that a most Splendid one too, such as Rome scare ever saw before, Preseus
himself and his Two Sons being Led in Great State and Magnificence before his
Triumphal Chariot. And the same Year Cn. Octavius, the Praetor at Sea,
Triumphed, and L. Anicius, before whose Chariot was Led Gentius King of the
Illyrians, who being a Confederate of Perseus, was oblig^d to yield himself
Prisoner. Thus ended the Second Macedonian War in three Years time, and with it
the Macedonian Kingdom, after it had continu^d 156 Years after Alexander^s
Death, and several Hundreds of Years before; A^milius, by this Conquest,
bringing 200 Millions of Sesterces into the Treasure, according to Paterculus.

IV. Now the Roman Grandeur began to display it self through all Countries and
Nations; U. C. 586.
many Kings and Potentates became humble Suppliants to the Senate, being all at
their Disposal; and Learning now flourish^d much more than ever, being much
forwarded by the Romans Converse and Familiarity with the Graecians, whom they
had lately conquered; and much encourag^d by Scipio and Laelius, the two noble
Patrons of Eloquence, Poetry, and all Arts, and the worthiest and most
accomplished Gentlemen in Rome. The former of these was Aemilius the Consul^s
Son, adopted by the Son of Africanus; and the other was Son to Laelius, who
formerly did great Service in Africa. In this time flourished the famous
Comedian Terence, who Writ with extraordinary Correctness and Accuracy, and
help^d to bring the Roman Tongue to a great Perfection, as to Purity and
Propriety, his first Play being acted one Year after the Conquest of Macedonia
and Perseus. And not only the Learning, Riches, and Dominions of Rome were
encreas^d, but likewise the Inhabitants, for in a Lustration about this time,
there were^ 312081 Free Citizens Cessed. For 17 or 18 Years the Romans were
employed in more inferior Wars, such as those with the Ligurians, Corsicans,
Dalmatians, and Spaniards, and likewise the Macedenians, being all in the
nature of Revolts, which though they often created much Trouble to the State,
U. C. 604.
yet they were not so memorable as to deserve a particular Account in this
Volume.

These Wars were scarcely finished, when the Romans found a Pretense to begin
the Third Carthaginian War, which was their being in Arms against Masanissa, a
Roman Ally, though they had sufficient Justice on their side. The Roman
Ambassadors who were sent to Carthage, finding the City very Rich and
Flourishing from their Fifty years Peace, at their Return insisted much on the
Danger which threatened Rome from that State; especially Cato, who never came
into the Senate, but after his Speaking to any Public Business, concluded with
Delenda est Carthago; Carthage is to be Destroyed. He was often oppos^d by
Scipio Nasica, who urged, That upon the Removal of so powerful a Rival,
Security would cause the Ruin and Dissolution of the Roman Commonwealth, as it
afterward proved: But Cato's Reason's drawn from the present Danger, so
Overruled Scipio's Forecast, that the Senate, now having a Pretense of an Open
Breach of Articles, Ordered War to be Proclaimed against the Carthaginians, and
both the Consuls were sent, with a full Resolution utterly to destroy Carthage.
The Carthaginians, affrighted at the Romans Preparations, immediately Condemned
those who had broken the League, and most humbly offered any reasonable
Satisfaction. Answer was returned to 'em, That they should enjoy all as
formerly, provided they sent 300 Hostages of the Chief of the City within 30
days to Sicily, and did what the Consuls should f^rther Command 'em. The
Carthagini^ns, desiring nothing more than Peace, sent their Children within the
limited time; and the Consuls Landing at Utica soon after, they sent their
Commissioners to wait upon them and know their Pleasure. Censorinus the Consul,
commending their Diligence, demanded all their Arms, which, without any Fraud,
were delivered up. Now the Carthaginians imploring Mercy, with many Tears, and
all possible Submission, desired to know their last Doom; the Consuls told 'em,
That they were Commanded to quit their City, which they had special Orders to
Level with the Ground, and build another any where in their own Territories, so
it were but 10 Miles from the Sea. This severe Command they receiv^d with all
the Concern and Rage of a Despairing People, and resolved to suffer the
Greatest Extremities rather than abandon, or yield to the Ruin of their Ancient
Seat and Habitation.

The Consuls were very backward in beginning the War, not doubting but easily
to become Masters of the City, now in this Naked and Defenseless Condition, but
they found it far otherwise; for the Inhabitants acting by a desperate Rage and
Fury, both Men and Women fell to Working Night and Day in the Defense of the
City, and making of Arms: And where Iron and Brass were wanting, they made use
of Gold and Silver, the Women freely cutting off the Hair of their Heads to
supply the place of Tow or Flax. Asdrubal, who had lately been Condemn^d upon
the Account of the Romans, was now made their General, and Governor of the
City, where he had already a good Army; and such Preparations were made, that
when the Consuls came before the City, they found such notable Resistance as
much discourag^d them, and as much increased the Resolution of the Besieged.
The Consuls engaged several times to their Disadvantage, and might have been
great Losers had not the Army been secured and brought off by the great Wisdom
and Courage of Scipio Aemilianus, formerly mentioned, who drew over Pharneas
Master of the Carthaginian Horse to his side; which action gained him great
Fame and Honor. This Year dy^d Masanissa, 90 Years old, leaving his Kingdom
and a young Son to Scipio^s Discretion: And the same Year dy^d Cato in Rome, in
the 85th Year of his Age, who did not live to see the too much desired Ruin of
Carthage.

Little was performed by the Consuls in the following Year, for they only
invested Clupea and Hippo, without taking of either: But at Rome all Men's eyes
were fixed upon Scipio, looking upon him as the Person destined to end the War;
and whereas he sought only for the Aedileship, the People bestowed the
Consulship upon him, dispensing with his Age and other usual Qualifications.
Scipio soon let 'em know, that their Honors were not ill bestowed; for having
restored Discipline, which had been too much neglected by the foregoing
Consuls, he soon after took that part of Carthage called Megara, and drove the
Inhabitants into the Citadel or Byrsa. Then securing the Isthmus which led to
the City, he cut off all Provisions from out the Country, and blocked up the
Haven; but the Besieged, with Miraculous and Incredible Industry, cut out a New
Passage into the Sea, whereby, at certain times, they could receive Necessaries
from the Army without. Scipio therefore, in the beginning of the Winter, set
upon their Forces lying in the Field, of which he killed ^0000, and took 10000
Prisoners; by which means the Besieged could have no Relief from abroad, so
that they were now in a sad and despairing Condition.

In the Beginning of the next Spring, he took the Wall leading to the Haven
Citho, and soon after the Forum it self, where was a most miserable and
deplorable Spectacle of slaughtered People; for some hewn in pieces by the
Sword, others half killed by the Fall of Houses, or Fires; some half buried in
the Earth and trampled on, and others torn Limb from Limb, lay mangled in vast
Heaps after a sad and lamentable manner. Still the Citadel held out, till at
last it was desired by some, That all that would come forth should have their
Lives; which being granted to all but Revolters, above 50000 yielded, and were
saved, as did afterward Asdrubal himself. He was much reviled for it by the
Revolters, who finding their Condition Desperate, set Fire to the Temple, and
burnt themselves with it; whose Example was followed by Asdrubal's Wife, who,
in a desperate Fury threw her self and her two Children into the midst of the
Flames. Then was this Magnificent City laid in Ashes, being 24 Miles in
compass, and so large, that the Burning of it continued 17 Days together. The
Senate at Rome received this long expected News with extraordinary Joy and
Satisfaction, and dispatched Men of their own Order, whom they joined with
Scipio for the disposing of the Country. These ordered, that none of Carthage
should be left; and that it might never be Rebuilt, they denounced heavy
Curses on any that should offer to do it. All the Cities which assisted in this
War were order^d to be demolished, and the Lands given to the Friends of the
Roman People; and the rest of the Towns were to be Tributaries, and Governed
Yearly by a Praetor appointed for that purpose, all the Captives and Prisoners
being Sold, except some of the Principal.

This was the fatal end of one of the most Renowned Cities in the World, both
for Command and Riches, 708 Years after it was first Built, having been Rival
to Rome above 100 Years: And this was the End of the Third and last
Carthaginian War, which was finished in the 4th Year after it began, to the
great Enlargement of the Dominions, Power, and Riches of the Roman State. This
happen^d in the 60^th Year of the City, A. M. 3859, in the 3d Year of the 15^th
Olympiad, 363 Years since the Beginning of the Consular State, 184 since the
Beginning of the Macedonian Empire by Alexander, 119 since the first Contest
between the Romans and Carthaginians, and 144 before our Saviour' s Nativity.

CHAP. XII.
From the Destruction of Carthage to the End of the Sedition of the Gracchi;
which much shook the Government, and was the first Step toward the Ruin of the
Consular State.
Containing the Space of 23 Years.
I. NOW Rome began to Pride her self to a higher degree than ever, U. C. 608.
having got free from her Enemies that she most feared and most hated, her
Dominions being extended to a large Circumference, and the Commonwealth
increased to a noble Height of Glory, but to a more dangerous Degree of
Security in respect of Neighbors, which in not many Years proved the
Dissolution of the present Government. However, the Power and Conquests of the
State still daily increased, and this same Year Corinth, one of the noblest
Cities in Greece, sustained the same Fate with Carthage, being levelled with
the Ground. The Occasion was given by the Achaeans themselves, who not only
affronted the Roman Ambassadors sent to dissolve the Confederacy, and to leave
the Cities to the Government of their own peculiar Laws, but likewise joined
with others in a War against the Lacedaemonians the Allies of Rome. Upon these
Grounds the Senate decreed War against 'em, and Metellus now in Macedonia
undertook it; who drawing down his Army through Thessaly into Baeotia,
overthrew Critolaus, then took Thebes and Megara, about which time Mummius the
Consul succeeded him in his Province. And this Mummius overthrew Dieus the
Achaean General, after which he entered Corinth and demolished it, because
there the Ambassadors had been Affronted. And (...) Scipio, who destroyed
Carthage, like the former (...) had the Surname of Africanus, and Metellus for
reducing Macedonia that of Macedonicus; so Mummius, for his Success this Year,
obtain^d the Surname of Achaicus, because he reduced those Parts, and all
Greece, with Epirus, into the Form of a Province, called afterward by the
general Name of Achaia.

It was now 74 Years since the Romans entered Spain in a Hostile manner, U. C.
609.
and many and frequent Struglings had been made by that People, especially
since the Departure of Scipio Africanus the Elder: At this time was Viriatus up
in Arms, who from a Shepherd became a Robber, and from a Robber a General over
a Numerous Party of such as himself, which created the Romans much Trouble for
some time. And Fabius the Brother of Scipio the Younger, after some Success
against him, was, at last, reduced to such Extremities, that he was obliged to
accept of Peace upon equal Terms, which Coepio the following Years Consul
refused to stand to, receiving new Orders from the Senate to prosecute the War.
Coepio attempted to destroy Viriatus by Surprise, but he escaped, and soon
after sending his Ambassadors to Treat of a Peace, Coepio so wrought upon 'em,
that they Murdered him in his Bed at their Return, to their own Shame, and the
Consul's great Dishonor. But the most difficult and dangerous part of this War
was at Numantia, a Town of no great Bigness, but Peopled with Inhabitants of
extraordinary Valor. Before Viriatus's Death they had foiled Q. Pompeius the
Consul several times, and likewise his Successor Mancianus, who were
constrain^d to make dishonorable Treaties with 'em, but afterward sufficient
Pretenses were found to break ^em, Mancianus being delivered up bound to the
Enemy. After this Brutus defeated many Thousands of the Lusitanians, and
overthrew the Gallaecians; but Lepidus the Pro-Consul was far less successful,
for setting upon the Vaccaei, a harmless and quiet People of the hithermost
Spain, he was entirely defeated by 'em.

These Misfortunes so terrified the Roman Soldiers, that they were ready to
tremble at the sight of a Spaniard; and this obliged the Citizens of Rome to
choose Scipio Africanus Consul a second time, as the chief Hope and Bulwark of
their Country. Scipio at first restored Discipline, the want of which had been
the Cause of all their former ill Success; but coming to engage, he found the
Courage of the Enemy so extraordinary, that he resolved to fight no more, but
lay a close Siege to Numantia, which he did with all possible Care and
Diligence. At last the Besieged were so straightened, that they offer^d to yield
upon reasonable Terms, or to Fight if they might have Battle given 'em,
notwithstanding the great Inequality of their Numbers: But neither of these
being allowed 'em, they all drank strong Liquors purposely to Inflame
themselves, and then fell upon the Besiegers, with such a desperate Fury, that
the Romans had all fled, had any other General but Scipio Commanded 'em. The
Besieged finding there was no avoiding being made Prisoners, Fired the City
over their own Heads, scarce a Man being left to be led in Triumph. This Famous
City, seated in Gallaecia, had for 14 Years together withstood 40000 Romans
with only 4000 Men, often putting ^em to great Loss and Shame: And that it
might be no longer a Trouble to 'em, Scipio destroyed it, after a Siege of
Fifteen Months; 13. Years after he had destroyed Carthage, Mutius Scaevols and
Calpurnius Piso, both Learned Men, being Consuls. Scipio gain^d a great Name
both by destroying Carthage and Numantia, the former being a Terror, and the
latter a Reproach to the Romans. All Spain was now brought to a more entire
Subjection than ever, being not many Years before divided into the three
Provinces of Terraconensis, E^e^ica, and Lusitanica, two Praetors being yearly
sent thither for its better Government. At this time flourished Lucilius the
Famous Satyrist, the first, at least of Note of that kind in Rome; and this
same Year was a Servile War in Sicily, but the Slaves were in a short time
entirely broken and dispersed.

II. The Romans now began daily to degenerate from their ancient Modesty, U. C.
621.
Plainness, and Severity of Life; addicting themselves more and more to
Pleasure and Luxury: For the Asian Expeditions and Triumphs having brought in
Excess and Riot, and the Ruin of Carthage taken away all Fear; Idleness and
Security, as well as Avarice and Ambition, by degrees stole in upon 'em, and
almost a General Corruption began to mix with the State. For though after this
time many a Powerful People were subdued, Arts and Learning daily increased and
flourished, and Great Glory was obtained abroad, yet it was often stained and
fully'd with inglorious Factions, Seditious Jealousies and Contentions at Home,
sometimes to the shedding of one another Blood; of which, that of Tiberius
Gracchus was the first Remarkable Instance. This Person, being the Elder
Africanus's Grandson, and of a stirring and active Spirit, had a share in
Mancinus^s dishonorable Treaty in Spain, for which being Reflected on by the
Senate (who, not without In^ustice, had broke it) and thereby both Shamed and
Affrighted, he endeavour^d to make himself Popular, by restraining the In^ust
Oppressions of the Nobility, which were now far more notorious than formerly:
And therefore procuring himself to be chosen Tribune, he preferred a Law,
forbidding any Man to possess above ^00 Acres of the Public Lands, and
ordering the Overplus to be divided among the Poor. For it was customary for
the Romans to divide those Lands which were taken from their Enemies among
their own Citizens, if Arable; if not, they Farm^d 'em out by the Censors to
the Italians, or the ordinary sort of Romans, upon condition, that if they
Plow^d 'em; they should Pay the Tenth part of the Corn, and the Fifth of other
Fruits; but if they did not Plow them, they paid a certain Rent. But
Corruptions daily increasing in the State, the poor Husbandmen were, by
degrees, thrust out of their Ancient Possessions by the great Oppressions and
Licentiousness of the Rich, who, by Purchasing, and other Methods, got these
Lands all into their own Hands; so that the Public, by this Means, was
defrauded of its Revenues, and the Poor of their Livelyhoods.

For the Reformation of these Abuses, Gracchus took great care; and whereas the
Lex Licinia and Sempronia were formerly Enacted for restraining the Avarice of
the Rich, he strengthened the former by adding, least the Law should be
wrested, That one half should be given to the Children, and the rest divided
among such Poor as had nothing; And least any should go about to enlarge their
Portions by Purchase, Triumviri, or Three Men, were Yearly appointed to Judge
what Lands were Public, and what were Private. These Matters, though at first
carried on with sufficient Moderation, extremely disgusted the Nobility and
Richer sort, who, by Virtue of this Law, were to part with much of their
Estates; and for that Reason they frequently insinuated to the People, That
Gracchus had introduced this Law with a Design only to disturb the Government,
and to put all things into Confusion. But Gracchus being a Person of great
Abilities and Eloquence, easily wiped off those Aspersions, and in a Public
Speech told the People, That while the Savage Beasts and Destroyers of Mankind
wanted not their Places of Repose and Refuge, those Men who exposed their Lives
for their Countries were forbidden all Enjoyments but the open Air and
Sunshine. That their Commanders before the Battles ridiculously Exhorted 'em
to Fight for their Temples and Altars, and their Ancestors Seats! when they had
none of these to defend o^ care for. They had the Honor indeed of gaining
large and rich Dominions, but had not the Profit of enjoying the smallest and
meanest Possessions: and likewise had the Honor of being styled Lords of the
Universe, but had not the Command of one Foot of Land.

This Speech, and some others of his, had great Effects upon the common People,
who, before, were forward enough in promoting a Law so very advantageous to
themselves; but Gracchus meeting with much Opposition on one side, as well as
Encouragement on the other, began now to proceed with greater Heat and
Violence; and being opposed by Octavius, one of his Colleagues, he so managed
him both by Cunning and Violence, as he was forced to quit his Office; into
whose Place he chose Mummius, one of his own Faction. This Action of his being
without all Precedent, much alienated the Minds of many of the Multitude; and
his own Party, who judged he used too Great a Freedom with the Sacrosanct
Office of the Tribuneship. Gracchus perceiving this, first made a very
plausible Defense; and the more to ingratiate himself with the People, he
offer^d to prefer a Law for distributing the Money of Attalus King of Pergamus,
which he had lately left, together with his Kingdom, to the People of Rome.
This caused Greater Disturbances among the Senate and Nobility than before, and
all Things were carry^d on with more violent Feuds than ever; so that
Gracchus's Death began now to be thought on and designed, as the surest Means
to quiet all Disturbances, and to compose all Differences.

The Senate being assembled to consult the most proper Method in this Juncture,
and all being of Opinion that M^tius Scaevola the Consul should defend the
Commonwealth by Arms, he refused to act any thing by Force. Whereupon Scipio
Nasica, Gracchus's Kinsman, taking up his Gown under his Left-arm, held up his
Right Hand in great Passion, crying, Since the Consul regards not the Safety of
the Commonwealth, let every Man that will defend the Dignity and Authority of
the Laws, follow me! Upon this, he went directly up to the Capitol, being
accompanied with most of the Senate, many Equites, and some Commoners, armed
with Clubs, Staves, and such like Weapons; who knocking down all that resisted,
opened their Way into the Capitol, where Gracchus was speaking to the People,
and endeavoring to be chosen Tribune for the following Year. In which Place
they fell upon both him and his Hearers, of whom they killed 300, and with
them, himself with a piece of a Seat, as he was endeavoring to save himself by
Flight. This was the first Insurrection among the Romans, that ended with
Effusion of Blood, since the Abrogation of Kingly Government; for all former
Seditions though many of 'em were very great and lasting, were constantly ended
by the two Parties yielding to one another, and submitting all to the Good of
the Public; for then Riches and Private Interest were not understood among the
Romans.

At this time there were some Risings at Athens and at Delos, being as Sparks
of that Fire kindled by the Slaves in Sicily the Year before, which with some
Trouble were extinguished; neither was Italy it self altogether free from them.
But a greater War ensu^d about the Kingdom of Asia; for Attalus King of
Pergamus or Asia, by his last Will had left the People of Rome his Heir, as was
before observed: But after his Decease, Aristonicus, his Bastard-Brother,
seized on the Kingdom as his own Inheritance and Right. Licinius Crassus the
Consul was first sent against him, but was unfortunately overthrown in the
first Battle; and being taken Prisoner, struck one of the Soldiers on the Eye,
on purpose to provoke him to kill him, which he did. He thus miscarrying, though
with the Assistance of several Kings, his Successor Perp^nna hasted into Asia,
set upon Aristonicus unawares, before he was recover^d of his Security
contracted by his Victory, first overthrew him in Battle, then besieged him in
Stratonice, where by Famine he forced him to a Surrender, shortly after which
he died himself at Pergamus. The Remainder of the War was finished by Aquilius
the following Year's Consul, who having settled the Province with sufficient
Oppression of the People, led Aristonicus in Triumph, though he had been taken by
another; and afterward, by Order of the Senate, he was strangled in Prison,
about 4 Years after the Death of Tiberius Gracchus, a little before which tiem
a Lustrum being performed, 330^23 Free Citizens were cess'd.

III. The Civil Dissentions occasioned by Gracchus, U. C. 625.
did not die with him; his Law for the Division of the Lands being still in
Force, of which the People were so fond, that many Disturbances were raised
upon that Account. Now Gracchus had a younger Brother called Caius, who with
Flaccus, and Papirius, had been made Triumvirs for dividing the Grounds. He
with his Colleagues undertook the Patronage of this Law and performing his
Office with great Vigor, such Trouble arose about the Divisions, the
Reckonings, the Accounts, and Removals, that the Italians finding themselves
Severely press^d upon, betook themselves to Scipio Africanus for Ease. Scipio
did not altogether reject their Suit, nor yet would he make any Objections
against the Law it self; so he only moved in Senate, That the Executive Power
of it might be taken from the Triumviri, and lodged in some others. The Senate
most willingly agreed to this, and conferred it on Sempronius T^ditanus the
Consul; but he finding the Work troublesome and ungrateful, retired from the
City, under Pretense of the War in Illyricum: There being none at present to
fly to in this Juncture, the People were much incens^d at Scipio, accounting
him ungrateful, and a Favourer of the Italians more than themselves^ which ill
Opinions of him were increased by his Approving of the Senior Gracchus's Death,
and his Reprimanding the Multitude for being dissatisfied with it. But such was
his Fortune, that being one Night retired to his Chamber, to meditate of
something to speak to the People the next Day, in the Morning he was found dead
in his Bed, not without Suspicion of Treachery from his Wife and Mother-in-Law,
the latter of which was Mother to the Gracchi. Nevertheless, being then in no
favor with the People, little enquiry was made after his Death, though he was
a Person of extraordinary Merits, and had been justly esteemed the Bulwark of
the State.

The Owners of the Land still made Delays in the Division, and some believed
that the Partakers of the Dividends should likewise have the Freedom of the
City; which, however liked of by others, was highly displeasing to the Senate.
While the People were variously discoursing of these Matters, Caius obtained
the Tribune-ship, and bearing a great Enmity to the Senate, he found a fair
Opportunity to show it. He preferred several Laws, among the rest, one for
dividing the public Corn to every Man Monthly; in which Laws he shew^d himself
rather more stirring and active, and more dextrous than his Brother. Then
procuring his Office to be continu^d to him another Year, he began more
strictly to inspect into the late Corruptions of the Senate; such as their
taking Bribes; their selling of Offices, and such like unjust Proceedings:
Whereupon he found Means to transferr the power of judging corrupt Officers,
from the Senators to the Equites or Knights, which gave the latter an
extraordinary Authority, and made a remarkable Change and Alteration in the
whole Government.

These Equites were first instituted by Romulus, Equites.
and though they were originally in the Commonwealth, yet they had no
particular Authority, Rank or Order, till this Law of Gracchus, by which it was
enacted, That these Iudgments^ should be peculiar to them. So that whereas at
first, there were only two Orders or Ranks, namely, Patritian, and Plebeian,
which through the Encroachments of the People, were afterward distinguished
only into Senatorian and Plebeian. By this Law, and especially by the
Procurement of Cicero, afterward the Equites became a distinct Order. Thus now
the Roman Citizens consisted of three Ranks or Orders, namely, the Senatorian,
which included all the Patritians, and such of the Plebeians, as could rise to
be Senators; the Plebeian, which still continued the same as formerly; and the
Equestrian, which before had always been included in the Plebeian, and had been
only distinguished by their Way of Service. Gracchus took the fairest
Opportunity that he could expect for preferring this Law; for the Senators were
become odious of late, because for Money they had acquitted Cotta, Salinator
and Aquilius; Persons capitally guilty of Corruption. But the Great Power of
these Equites became extremely burdensome to the State, till by Degrees, their
Authority came to be diminished. The Equites alone, were wont to Farm the
public Revenues and Customs from the Censors, and from thence had the Name of
Publicans. Publican^s.
These were the principal of the Equestrian Order, the Ornaments of the City,
and the Strength of the State, who made up so many Companys, as there were
Provinces subject to the payment of Toll, Tribute, Custom or Impost:

Caius grew more and more in favor with the Commons, and was invested with a
larger Authority than ordinary, which he managed with extraordinary Prudence
and Cunning, being a Master of much Eloquence, and many other Accomplishments.
And the more to gratify the Commons, he took special Care about the Highways,
making 'em extraordinary handsome and pleasant, as well as useful and
convenient; erecting likewise pillars of Stone at the end of each Mile to
signify the Distances from Place to Place: For Caius fi^ding the Senators to
be his Enemies, he endeavored still more to ingratiate himself with the People
by other new Laws. Particularly, he proposed that a Colony of Roman Citizens
might be sent to the People of Tarentum, and that all the Latins should enjoy
the same Privileges with the Citizens of Rome. But the Senate dreading the
Effects of Caius's Power, forbid the Latins to come near the City, at such
time as they knew his Laws would be proposed; and the better to satisfy and
please the People, they gave Leave to the sending of 12 Colonies. Caius thus
frustrated of his Designs, departed into Africa, with Flaccus his Colleague,
intending to plant a Colony where Carthage stood, calling it Iunonia; but there
he also met with a Disappointment, the Bound Marks of the intended City being
continually removed in the Night time by Wolves, as some Authors relate it;
whereupon the Augurs and South-sayers pronounced the Design unlawful.

Caius having been twice Tribune, stood for it a third time, and had many
Votes, but his Colleagues, offended at his violent Carriage at this time,
procured Minucius Rufus to be chosen into his Place, who began to abrogate many
of his Laws; wherein he was seconded by Opimius the Consul, who was a professed
Enemy to Caius, and endeavored to find some colorable Pretense to put him to
Death. Whereupon Ca^us, at the Instigation of his Friends, especially Fulvius,
resolved presently to raise Forces; and at an Assembly in the Capitol, he and
many of his Friends went thither privately armed. It happened that one Antilius
a Sergeant, coming down from the Capitol, cry^d out to Fulvius and his Friends,
Ye factious Citizens, make way for honest Men! whereupon they immediately slew
him. This Murder caus^d a great Disturbance in the Assembly, and Caius himself
was very angry with those of his Party, for giving his Enemies so much
Advantage against him, and endeavour^d to excuse himself but could not be heard
by reason of the Tumult; so together with his Friends and Confederates, he
retir^d home, the Consul keeping strict Watch all Night in the City. The next
day, Antilius's Corpse was brought upon a Bier through the Forum, and exposed to
open view just before the Senate House, with design to stir up the People to a
Revenge. The Senate invested Opimius with an extraordinary Power, and all the
Equites were ordered to be in Arms, which forced Caius and all his Friends to
betake themselves to Mount Aventine, where they fortified themselves offering
Liberty to all Slaves that should come in to them.

The Consul press^d hard upon Caius, and Proclamation was made, that whoever
should bring the Head either of Caius or Fulvius, should receive their Weight
in Gold for a Reward. Caius finding himself in no Condition for a long Defense,
in a short time fled into a Grove beyond Tiber, and procured his Servant to
kill him, who immediately after killed himself, and fell down dead upon his
Master. One Septimuleius, carried his Head to Opimius, and it is said, that to
make it weigh the heavier, he took out the Brains and filled the Skull with
Lead. Fulvius flying to a Friend's House, was betrayed and slain; and by the
Severity of Opimius, no less than 3000 Persons of this Party were put to Death.
Thus fell Caius Gracchus, above 10 Years after his Brother Tiberius Gracchus,
and fix after he began to act much in the Commonwealth. These Gracchi had so
far changed the Constitutions of the Commonwealth, and the public peace was
now so broken, particularly by the Disunion of Patrons and Clients, that the
Roman State became very unsettled, and more liable to any new Revolution than
ever; and though Reformation might be their Design, yet it might well be
feared, that Ruin would be the Effect of such Disturbances in a Commonwealth
now so corrupted with the Greatness of their Riches, as well as the Greatness
of their Power. Caius's Death happened in the 631 Year of the City, in the 4th.
Year of the 164th. Olympi^d, 386 Years since the beginning of the Consular
State, 207 since the setting up the Macedonian Empire, and 121 before our
Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. XIII.
From the End of the Seditions of the Gracchi, to the End of the First Civil
War in Italy, and to the Perpetual Dictatorship of Sylla; which was the second
great Step to the Ruin of the Consular State.
Containing the Space of 41 Years.
I. THE Distempers and Disturbances of the Commonwealth were for the present
asswag'd by U. C. 631.
the Death of Caius Gracchus; and soon after, a Law was made that any one might
sell his Land, which the Senior Gracchus had forbidden; by which means the
Poor, partly by Purchase, and partly by Constraint, were again dispossessed.
After that, the Law for Division of Lands was fully abrogated by Borcus, and
the Grounds left to their ancient Owners, with a Proviso to pay a Tribute to
the People out of 'em. But not long after, the Tribute was likewise all taken
away, and so nothing was left remaining for the Poor. During these Domestic
Troubles, the Sardinians rebell^d, and were reduced by Aurelius, and the
Fregellans were punished with the Loss of their City by Opimius the Praetor.
About which time Africa was infected with a most prodigious Plague, destroying
vast Numbers of Men, Cattle and Fowl, occasioned by an infinite Number of
Locusts, which having overspread the Ground, and destroyed the Corn, Fruits,
and even Trees themselves, at length were driven by a Wind into the
Mediterranean Sea, and there putrefying, corrupted the Air after a most
wonderful manner. Two Years after this, Metellus the Consul subdued the Islands
Beleares near Spain, and restrained all the Piracies which were there
maintained.

At the same time was carried on that War called Bellum Allobrogicum, U. C. 634.
the War with the Allobroges, a People inhabiting about the Countries, now
called Dau^hine and Savoy. This War was occasioned first by the Salies, a
People of Gaul beyond the Alps, who invading the Massilians, Allies of Rome,
were chastised by Fulvius, and subdued by Sextus Calvinus. Teutomalus their
King flying out of the Battle, was receiv^d and protected by the Allobroges,
who likewise invaded the Hedui, Allies also of Rome, and drew into Confederacy
the Arverni. The Allobroges were first overthrown by Domitius Aenobarbus, who
kill^d 20000 of 'em, and took 3000 Prisoners, which great Victory, was owing
chiefly to his Elephants. After him, Fabius Maximus, Grandson to Paulus
Aemilius, and adopted into the Fabian Family, defeated 'em with the Arverni and
Ruteni, in a most bloody Battle, where 120000 were reported to be slain; and
moreover, taking one of their Kings Prisoners, he obtained the Surname of
Allobrogicus. About which time Gallia Narbonensis was reduced into a Province,
in the Year 636. Not long after, the Scordisci a people of Gaulish Original,
inhabiting Thrace, defeated the Roman Army under Cato the Consul, yet were
afterward driven back into their own Country by Didius the Praetor, and the
Consul Drusus; and after this they gave occasion of a glorious Triumph to
Minutius, of which Honor Metellus also had a Share. Soon after these Wars, in
a Lustration, 394336 free Citizens were poll'd in Rome, which Number was very
little different from that in the Lustrum five years before.

II. Rome had not very much Action abroad for a while, U. C. 643.
but in no long time began a considerable War in Numidia, called the Iugurthine
War. It was occasion^d by Iugurth, Grandson to the famous Masanissa, the
Romans old Friend, who murdered his Cousin Hiempsal to get his Kingdom, and
attempted to do the same to his Brother Adherbal, but he made his escape, and
fled to the Romans for Succor. Whereupon Iugurth being sensible how much
Avarice and Injustice had crept into the City, he sent his Ambassadors with
large Presents to Rome, which had such Effects upon the Senate, that they
decreed him half the Kingdom, and sent ten Commissioners to divide it between
him and Adherbal. The Commissioners thinking they might lawfully imitate their
Masters in the Senate, were also bribed to bestow the most rich and populous
Part upon Iugurth; but he still unsatisfied, fell suddenly upon Adherbal,
besieg^d him in Cirta, and getting him into his Hands, likewise murdered him.
For this, War was decreed against Iugurth, and committed to the Management of
Calpurnius Bestia the Consul, who shortly after invaded Numidia with great
Vigor and Diligence, and took in some Towns, but he was soon stop^d in his
Career, being overcome by the Golden Weapons of Iugurth, so that a Treaty of
Peace was soon set on Foot. The Senate were a little moved at this, and at the
Power of Scaurus, who accompanying the Consul as his Friend and Counselor, was
likewise guilty of the same Crime; and therefore the People got Cassius
Longinus the Praetor, to go and procure Iugurth to come to Rome upon the
public Faith of the State, that by that means they might discover all such as
had been guilty of Bribery.

Cessius with no great Difficulty persuaded Iugurtha to make Trial of the
Clemency of Rome, and to throw himself upon the Peoples Mercy; whereupon he
came to Rome in a pitiful and mourning Habit. But coming into the Assembly,
Baebius the Tribune bad him hold his Peace, he being also bribed to deferr the
Business, and delude the people. At the same time was one Massiva in Rome
Iugurth's Cousin-Germain, who had fled from Africa formerly. This Person was
persuaded by Albinus the Consul to beg the Kingdom of the Senate; but Iugurth
having some Intelligence of the Design, procured him to be assassinated and
conveyed the Murderer away to Numidia. Hereupon, within a few days he was
commanded to be gone, and being out of the City, he looked upon it, with his
Hands lift up, crying, O Rome, that would be sold thy Self, were there but a
Chapman for thee! So extremely were the Inhabitants degenerated from their
former Fidelity, Modesty and Abstinence, which afterward brought upon 'em the
greatest Miseries that ever befell any State. Albinus followed him with an
Army, which after he himself had been sometime there, he left with his Brother
Aulus, who in the Consuls absence, by Virtue of some Compact, withdrew from
Suthul, where the Chief Treasure of the Kingdom lay, when he was just upon
investing it. The Centurions were likewise so corrupted, that when Albinus
returned, Iugurth was suffer^d to break into the Camp, whence beating out the
Army, he either forc^d, or by former Agreement, brought Albinus to submit upon
most dishonorable Terms.

In this Condition did Metellus the following Consul find Affairs, and the
whole Army was almost ruined for want of Discipline, to the great Dishonor of
the Roman State, and the grievous Vexation of the honester sort in the City.
Metellus having with much difficulty brought his Soldiers into good Order,
within the space of two years overthrew Iugurth several times, forced him out
of several Towns, and pursued him beyond her own Frontiers, which constrain^d
him to submit and beg Peace; but he in a short time broke the Conditions of it,
and so the former Hostility returned. At this time, one C. Marius was Legatus,
or Lieutenant to M^tellus, a Person of Frugality, Policy, and Military
Experience, and of vast Courage in War; a Contemner of Pleasure, but very
ambitious of Honor, which made him extremely desirous to gain the Consulship.
To obtain this, he privately blamed Metellus, to the Merchants of Utica,
avowing That he was able with half the Army to take Jugurth Prisoner, and that
within few Days. By these and the like detracting Discourses, he procur^d many
Complaints to be written to Rome against Metellus, and getting leave to go
thither, obtain^d the Consulship, and had likewise the management of the War
committed to him. Notwithstanding, the People were so grateful to Metellus,
that at his return, being satisfied as to his Behavior, they both granted him
a Triumph, and bestowed upon him the Surname of Numidicus, as an additional
Honor.

Marius showed himself a very expert Warrior, and in a short time took the City
Capsa, a place very rich and strong; and after this, another called Mulucha.
`fugurth now finding himself too weak to oppose him any longer, procured
Bocchus, King of Mauritania, and his Father-in-Law, to join with him, who, by
the Assistance of his Numerous Cavalry much harrass'd the Roman Army. Marius
had Invested Cirta, and Bocchus approaching to raise the Siege, partly by the
Number of his Horse, reported to be 60000, and partly by the violent Heats and
great Dusts, the Romans were sorely distressed, and the Fight continu^d
dangerous and terrible to them for three Days; at the end of which, a Tempest
of Rain falling, spoiled the Enemies Weapons, and reliev^d Marius's Men, almost
famished with Thirst; and now the Course of Fortune changing, the Two Kings
were entirely defeated. In another Battle, Marius, it is said, kill^d 90000,
after which Bocchus began to repent of his Enterprise, and sent to Rome to
enter into a League, which he could not procure; nevertheless he obtained
Pardon for his Crime. Not long after Marius took Iugurth in an Ambuscade,
whither he had drawn him by specious Pretenses, and delivered him up to Sylla
his Quaestor, who had brought over some Forces from Italy; and under Marius he
learnt that Skill in War, which he afterward employed against him. Iugurth,
with his Two Sons, were led in Triumph by Marius; and shortly after, by Order
of Senate, he was put to Death, and so the Iugurthine War ended, after it had
continued about Seven Years.

III. At the same time a War was carried on against the Cimbri, a Vagabond
People of Cimbrica Chersonesus, now called Denmark, who, joining with the
Teutones, a Nation of the Germans, made dreadful Irruptions into several Parts
of the Roman Dominions, particularly Gaul and Spain, where they had overthrown
several Consuls, in the last Battle killing 80000 Romans, after which they
resolved to pass the Alps into Italy. Rome began now to be in a great
Consternation, and Marius having just vanquished Iugurtha, U. C. 650.
they made him Consul a ^d time, as the only Man thought able to Manage* so
Threatening a War, and to preserve the State. While they continued in Spain,
Marius Marched against their Friends the Tolosans in Gaul, where King Copilus
was taken by Sylla his Lieutenant. Being made Consul again the following Year,
he declined Fighting till the Enemies Force was weakened by Delays. The next
Year, in his Fourth Consulship, the Enemy, in Three several Parties were just
upon passing the Alps into Italy, and as he attended their Motions, it happened
that his Army was extremely afflicted with Thirst, the Teutones and Ambrones
lying between them and the Water, which Necessity brought him to an Engagement
with 'em; and, in Two Days time, he, by his excellent Conduct, utterly
destroyed 'em, taking Theutobocchus their King Prisoner. The Cimbri escaped
him, and fled over into Italy, notwithstanding the Winter-Season, and the Alps
covered with Snow, being in vain opposed by Catulus, both at the Alps, and at
the River Athesis, nigh Verona. The Year following Marius was again made
Consul, and joining with Catulus, was challeng^d by the Enemy to give Battle.
Whereupon he fell upon their numerous Army, and gave 'em a most dreadful
Overthrow; their Wives all the while making a wonderful Resistance from the
Chariots, and when they saw all things in a desperate Condition, they, in a
great Fury, first killed all their Children, and after that themselves. About
140000 were slain in this Battle, and 60000 taken Prisoners, which ended this
War, after it had continued 12 Years, Marius the Fifth time, and Aquilius Nepos
being Consuls: The former was then esteemed the Preserver of his Country, and
contented himself with one Triumph, when he might have had more; and his
Colleague had now also finished the Second Servile War in Sicily, which had
lasted almost Four Years.

Notwithstanding these Dangers abroad, the City was not without Domestic
Troubles, which were occasioned by Saturninus, one of Marius's Friends, who
having been Quaestor at Ostia, during a Famine, was turned out of his Place by
the Senate, to revenge which usage, he procured the Tribune-ship. But after his
Year was expir^d, Metellus Numidicus, formerly mentioned, being Censor,
endeavored to remove him from the Senate, but was hinder^d by his Colleague*
This so enrag^d him, that he stood again for the Tribun^-ship; and Nine of the
Ten Tribunes being chosen by the Assistance of Marius, he Murder^d Nonius his
Competitor, and so obtained the Place. Now being once again in Power, he
preferr^d a Law for the Division of such Lands as Marius had recover^d in Gaul,
and compelled the Senate to Swear to it, which Oath Numidicus refusing he set
him a day to Answer it before the People, but for fear of him and Marius
together, Numidicus fled to Smyrna in Asia. Saturninus procuring the
Tribuneship a Third time, and finding Memmius Candidate for the Consulship, he
also caused him to be Murdered, to make way for Glaucius the Praetor, one of
his own Party. These base and ungenerous Practices raised several Troubles and
Commotions in the City, and the Senate resolv^d to make him Answer it;
whereupon Marius, now a Sixth time Consul, perceiving him in a declining
Condition, very politickly withdrew himself from his Friendship. The Consuls
were now, as in some other Dangerous Times, Invested with an unusual and
Dictatorian sort of Power, the manner of conferring of which was by a Vote of
the Senate, in these or the like Words, Videant Consules ne quid detrimenti
Respublic^ accipiat. Marius therefore with his Colleague, set upon Saturninus in
the Public Assembly, and forc^d him and his Followers into the Capitol, where,
for want of Water, they were constrained to yield; after Marius had given 'em
his Faith for their Safety. Saturninus and Glaucius much relied upon Marius,
not scrupling to give out, U. C. 654.
That they were but the Actors and Instruments of his Designs. But
notwithstanding this Security, they were all cut in Pieces by the Equites in
the Fo^rum, who broke in among 'em; and Numidicus, especially by his Sons
Industry, was recall^d, with the General Applause of the People.

The Wars abroad, and the Dissentions and Cor^uptions at home, did not hinder
Learning, for that ^till flourished more than ever, and Poetry was come almost
to its highest pitch in Rome; for a little before ^his, flourished the Famous
Lucretius, an admirable Po^t in his kind, and in many particulars scarce
inferi^ur to Virgil. Now for the space of seven or eight Years, there was no
great Action abroad, nor any o^en Sedition at home; but however there was great
Dissatisfaction among those of the Senatorian Order, by reason of the Power of
Judicature, given to the Equites by C. Gracchus's Laws, which proved an
extraordinary Grievance to ^em. The Commonwealth too was bought and sold; the
Publicans, who Farm^d the Public Revenues, being as they were Equites, both
Judges and Parties. Upon these accounts, Drusus the Tribune, a very eminent and
well-designing Person, endeavored to restore the Fathers to their Ancient
Privileges and Authority, and yet not offend the Equites; and therefore the
Senate being now reduc^d to a small Number, he preferred a Law, that as many
Equites should be added to them, and that the Power of Judicature should be
committed equally to all that should be then of this Body. This gave great
Offense to both Parties; and Caepio also, one of Drusu^'s Colleagues, opposed
him, and coming into the Senate, there accused some of the Highest Rank of
Illegal Endeavors to gain Offices. Drusus, to withstand his Designs, again
proposed the Agrarian Law; and that the Allies and Confederates of Italy, the
present Possessors, might take it amiss, he gave 'em hopes of the Freedom of
the City. A great Concourse of Strangers was occasioned upon this account, and
as great a Contention rais^d; where Philippus the Consul, for opposing the Law
for dividing the Lands, was Disgracefully buffeted by one of the Strangers, and
violent Disturbances followed. Drusus disappointed in this Particular, still
endeavored to perform his Promise to the Italians; but going home, accompanied
with a Great Multitude of People, he was Stabbed in the Court of his own House,
having Breath enough to say, That the Commonwealth could never find a Person
more true to her Interest than he.

IV. These Troubles did not end with Drusus's Death, U. C. 663.
for soon after, a very Dangerous War broke out upon this account with most of
the Italians, called the Social, or Italian War. These People had, for some
time, taken it very hainously, that they were denied the Freedom of the City,
which had been partly Promised 'em in the time of the Gracchi. But now Drusus's
Death, who had very much heightened their Expectations, enraged 'em more than
eve^, especially when the Equites, immediately after, had, by-force of Arms,
procured a Law for Banishing all the Great Persons who were not for their
Interest. The Italians also thought that they had sufficient Reason to expect
this Privilege from that City, whose Subsistence and Empire had been so much
maintain^d by their Valor, they commonly sending out double the Number of
Troops to those of Rome. Upon these Grounds they resolved to procure that by
Force and Violence, which could not be obtained by Entreaties and Civil Means,
and thereupon they joined together in a close Confederacy, and privately sent
Messages and Hostages to each other; namely, the Lucanians, Apulians, Marsi,
Peligni, with many others, and especially the old Enemies of Rome, the
Samnites, who made their Preparations, with equal Diligence and Secrecy.

These private Transactions being discovered at Rome, though late enough, Spies
were immediately sent out into all Quarters, to make what further Discoveries
they could. One of which happening to see a young Man of Asculum carry^d into
another City for an Hostage, thereupon acquainted Servilius the Pro-Consul,
who, going to Asculum, and reprimanding the Citizens of that Place, was set
upon and Slain, together with all the Romans. Their Designs being now wholly
discovered, for their greater Security they all broke out into open Rebellion:
However first, they thought it most convenient to send to Rome to complain; but
their Messengers could not be Admitted without Satisfaction and Repentance for
what they had already done. Whereupon the War was committed to both the
Consuls, together with Mari^s and Sylla, and several others^ there is who had
Pro-Consular Authority, the Forces on either side amounting to about 100 000
fighting Men. The War was very dangerous and destructive; and R^tilius the
Consul in a short time lost his Life, falling into an Ambuscade laid by the
Marsi; and the Romans. received many terrible Blows, so that they were
constrained to List many who had been Slaves. The Bodies of the Consul, and
several others, being carry^d into the City, so discouraged the People, that
the Senate made a Decree, that henceforward the Bodies of the Slain should be
Buried where they Died, which, as a Prudent Example, was likewise followed by
the Enemy: After the Death of Rutilius, his Army was committed to Marius his
Lieutenant, and Capio, who acted in Conjunction with him. Caepio was Slain not
long after in an Ambuscade laid by Popedius, one of the Italian Generals; so
Marius had his Desire of Commanding alone, and did excellent Service, as
likewise did Sylla the same Year.

For the following Year, Pompeius Strabo, Father to Pompey the Great, and
Porcius Cato, were made Consuls, and now the Senate thought fit to give the
Freedom of the City to such of the Italians as had not Revolted, which much
establish^d those who were somewhat wavering in their Minds, and abated the
Courages of the other already engaged: Yet these were not chosen into any of
the 35 Triben, but were plac^d by themselves behind all, so that in Voting,
they could not hinder the rest, which afterward caus^d some Disturbance. Cato
the Consul did very good Service this Campaign, which swelled him with such an
Opinion of himself, that he boasted himself equal to Marius, for which he was
Slain by Marius's Son, in the midst of a Battle against the Marsi. His Colleague
Pompey overthrew the Picentes and Asculani; and having long Besieged Asculum,
he defeated the Enemy which Sallied out upon him; he likewise killed 18000 of
the M^rsi, taking 3000 Prisoners. And at last possessing himself of Asculum, he
caused all the Officers and Principal Men in the City, to be first Scourged,
and then Beheaded. Sylla also performed many great Actions, overthrowing the
Samnites, and Storming Two of their Camps, which success so elevated him, that
he immediately stood for the Consul-ship, and obtain^d it, having the Honor
likewise of Finishing this dangerous War, nigh Three years after it was begun;
a War so destructive, that it consumed above ^00000 of the Youth of Italy,
according to Paterculus. This War was ended with a Disturbance in the City
about Usury, and the unexpected Privileges of the Conquered Italians, who had
the Freedom of the City given 'em, just as the others had a short time before,
and so all things were happily quieted.

V. But Quiet and Peace was too great a Happiness for Rome at this time, U. C.
666.
for the Social War was scarce finished, when Two others broke out, one the
Cause of the other. This first was with Mithridates, King of Pontus in Asia
Minor, a Prince famous for his Knowledge and Learning, mighty in Riches and
Power, of a boundless Ambition, and a Former of vast Designs. This King, by
several Actions, had gain^d the Enmity of Ronie, particularly by procuring
Tigranes King of Armenia, to Declare against the Roman State, and by his
overrunning his Neighbors, the Bithynians, Phrygians, Mysias, Lycians,
Pamphylians, and other Allies of Rome. And which was more Provoking than all
the rest, he had taken Q. Oppius, and Aquilius, the latter of which he killed,
by pouring Melted Gold down his Throat, continually upbraiding the Romans with
Avarice and Corruption. Upon all these Accounts, the Romans Proclaimed War
against him; and Sylla, and Pompeius Rufus being Consuls, it fell to the
former's share to Undertake it. But Sylla having not yet quite finished the
Social War, Marius stirred by the Desire either of Profit or of Honor,
persuaded Sulpicius, Tribune of the People, of prefer a Law for transferring
the Management of this War from Sylla to him. He made what Parties he could,
and drew the People of Italy to his Side, who had lately been made free of the
City, by promising em equal Privileges with those in the 35 Tribes, which as
yet they wanted; so that Matters were carried on with Violent Heats and
Contentions; and Pompey's Son, and Son-in-Law to Sylla, was killed in the midst
of these Tumults and Disturbances.

Sylla hearing of these dangerous Commotions, hastened to the City, easily
persuading his Army to stand by him in all Exigencies; for they were very
unwilling to have any other go on that Expedition, from which they promised
themselves such Great Advantages. His Colleague Pompey joined with him; and tho
Marius, and Sulpicius the Tribune, made all possible Opposition, yet, after
some Difficulty and Bloodshed, they enter d the City, and Marius with his
Accomplices were forced to betake themselves to flight; and thus began the
other War, which was the first Civil War of any Note among the Romans, as the
Troubles of the Gracchi were the first in which there had been any Bloodshed
of Note. Sylla did no Injury to the Citizens in General, but Reversed all that
Sulpicius had done, regulated the Senate, procured Marius, Sulpicius, and Ten
other Leading Men, to be Declared open Enemies to their Country, made it Lawful
for any Person to kill them, and set their Goods to Public Sale. Shortly after
this, he departed upon his Expedition against Mithridates, who now had very
much extended his Conquests, even to the subduing a Great Part of Greece it
self. Sulpicius was in a short time taken and put to Death; but Marius hid
himself in the Fens of Minturnum, where, being discovered, a Gaul was sent to
kill him, but he was so dashed and amazed at the Nobleness of his Presence,
that he could not perform his Order: So that Marius being conveyed out of that
Place, escaped into Africa, where he was joined by cethegus and other, who had
fled into Numidia, expecting a convenient Opportunity to Invade their own
Country. Pompeius Rufus the Consul, to secure Italy, was at the same time
appointed to Receive and Command the Army of Pompeius Strabo, who had done
great Service in the Social War, and had so far gained the Affection of his
Men, that they finding they were like to part with their Old General, stood up
and slew the Counsul himself; so that now there were great Dangers and
Disturbances in all Parts.

Cornelius Cinna, and C. Octavius, were made Consuls for the following Year:
Cinna, corrupted, as some are of Opinion, immediately declared himself for the
New Citizens, and recall d Marius, with the rest of the Exiles; which Actions
were so violently opposed by his Colleague Octavius, that Cinna was by Force,
driven from the City, and Merula put in his Place. Cinna, upon this, going
about to the Italian People, by giving 'em fresh Hopes of equal Privileges with
the Romans, and pretending, That all his Troubles and Sufferings were purely
for their Sakes, obtained great Sums of Money. Marius also coming over to him
shortly, they, together, raised a Considerable Army, and Cinna Marched directly
to Rome, and sat down before it, to the Great Surprise and Terror of the
Inhabitants. Marius at the same time Marched against Ostia, and took it by
Force; but Cinna before Rome, finding he was not like to carry the Place, broke
up the Siege, and Invested Ariminum, which he soon after Stormed. Marius, after
the taking of (...), advanced with his whole Army, and pos^ed himself upon the
Hill Ianiculum, joining to Rome; which again put the Inhabitants into a Great
Consternation, especially for that he was soon after joined by Cinna. The
Consuls, finding they could not recall Sylla from Countries so far distant,
sent to Metellus, then lying with an Army in Samnium; but he differing with
them about some Conditions, shortly after joined himself with Marius: At which
time the City was nigh being betrayed by Ap. Claudius, a Tribune of the Army,
who was invested with the Command of the Janiculum; but though He and Cinna Broke
in, they were repelled by Octavius, and Pompeius Strabo the Proconsul, who was
shortly after killed with a Thunderbolt.

Marius, after this, took in several. Towns about Rome where Provisions lay,
and Cinna, by the fair Promises of Liberty, drew great Numbers of Slaves out of
the City; which the Senate perceiving, dispatched Ambassadors to Cinna and
Marius, desiring them to come into the City peaceably, and spare their own
Countrymen. Cinna refused to admit of any Address made to him as a Private
Man, so that they were forced to treat with him as Consul, and desired him to
swear that he would shed no Blood. Oinna absolutely refused to take such an
Oath; but promised, that knowingly and willingly he would not be the Cause of
any Man's Death: Marius stood by him, and said nothing, but gave sufficient
Testimony by the Sourness of his Countenance, and the Sternness of his Looks,
that he would shortly fill the City with Massacres. But the better to dissemble
his Rage, he at last broke Silence, telling the Ambassadors, that he was then
in Exile, and banished his Country by course of Law; that if his Presence were
necessary, they must repeal the former Act of his Banishment by a new Decree,
that he might be received as a religious Observer of the Laws, and might enter
the City free from Fear or Oppression. Upon this all Matters were adjusted, and
the Law for banishing Marius, and his Associates, abrogated.

Upon their Entrance into the City, great Plunderings and miserable Slaughters
began in all Places. Octavius the Consul, though he had the Oath of Cinna and
Marius, yet refusing to fly from his Charge, was killed, and his Head set upon
the Rostra, to which was added that of M. Antonius, Grandfather to the
triumvir with Augustus, an excellent Orator, who by the Charms of his Eloquence
defended himself a a considerable time against the Rage of the Soldiers, and
several others. Dreadful Tumults and Out-crys were in all Places; and none were
spared either for the Dignity of their Worths, or their Ages. The dead Bodies,
being barbarously mangled, and abominably abused, were left to be torn in
Pieces, and devoured by Dogs and Fowls, none daring to bury 'em. All Sylla's
Friends were slaughtered without Mercy, his House demolished, his Goods set to
Sale, and he himself judged and declared an Enemy to Rome. Merula, though he
never sought the Consulship, and Catullus, having their Days set 'em to answer
for their Lives, destroyed themselves. Cinna and Marius having thus satiated
themselves with the blood of others, made themselves Consuls for the following
Year; but Marius died about a Month after, in the 70th. Year of his Age, within
less than two Years after the breaking out of this Civil War, being a noble
Soldier, and a brave ominander, but much more serviceable to his Country in the
Time of War than in Peace, and the only Person who had the Honor of the
Consulship seven times.

VI. In the Time of these unhappy Troubles at home, Sylla performed many noble
Exploits against Mithridates, who not long before her Arrival had commanded in
one Day 80000, some say 150000 Romans and Italians in Asia, to be murdered in
cold Blood. Sylla first over-threw Archelaus his General nigh Athens so
effectually, that of his 120000 Men scarce 10000 were left; then he gave him
another great Defeat, recovered Greece, Maccdonia, Ionia, Asia, and other
Countries, which Mithridates had got into his hands, and withal took his Fleet
from him; insomuch that Mithridates was very willingly to come to a Treaty,
which Sylla notwithstanding Mithridates's high Provocation before, was not much
averse to, being in want of Money, and very desirous to return to Italy, and to
revenge himself of those who had declared him an Enemy to Rome. The principal
Articles of the Peace were that Mithridates should pay the Charges of the War,
and that for the future he should be content with his Fathers Kingdom; which
were ratified in less than Three Years after the Beginning of the War. Sylla
severely fined Asia for its Revolt, and fetling Affairs according to the
present Occasion, he returned for Italy. He took Athens in his Way, from whence
he carried the famous Library of Apellicon the Teian, in which were most of the
Books of Aristotle and Theophrastus, then not vulgarly known. He soon after
wrote to the Senate at Rome, recounting all his great Services he had done for
the State, and how ungratefully he had been used by Marius's Party, telling
them plainly, that he was coming to revenge both himself and the Public, by
punishing the Authors of those Injuries, though the rest he would spare,
whether they were old or new Citizens.

The Senate extremely dreaded the effects of Sylla's Return, well knowing it
would be fatal to many, and even to some who had unwillingly joined with
Mariu^; therefore they sent to treat with him, offering all their Endeavors
for his Satisfaction, if he would quickly make known his Demands. And that
there might be the less Bloodshed, they ordered Cinna to discontinue his
Levies; but he finding there was no Way of supporting his Interest, but by
Arms, only returned 'em a plausible Answer, and proceeded to raise Soldiers,
designing to make himself and his Colleague Carbo Consuls for the following Year
that there might be no Necessity of returning to Rome for a new E^ection. He
sent over part of his Troops into Dalmatia, there to meet Syll^, but those
behind were driven back to Italy by a Storm, after which they absolutely
refused to fight against their own Countrymen, so that all the rest, who as
yet had not put to Sea, refused to go on Board. Hereupon Cinna going to speak
with 'em; one of his Officers who made way before him, struck one of 'em; at
which the Soldier struck him again, and being apprehended for this Crime, a
great Tumult and Mutiny arose among the rest of the Men, wherein Cinna himself
was run through; and thus perished in his fourth Consulship, a Person worthier
to have died by the Command of the Conqueror, than by the Fury of the Soldiers.
Carbo continued Consul by himself for the remaining Part of the Year.

Sylla before this time had received the Senate's Proposals, U. C. 670.
and returned for Answer, That be would never be reconciled to such wicked
Persons as Cinna and Carbo, who besides many pernicious Practices against their
Country's Good, had procured War to be decreed against him who had done it so
much Service. But if the People of Rome would grue 'em Indemnity, be should not
oppose it; yet be thought all such as came over to him to be far more safe,
since he had so considerable an Army at his Devotion. This sufficiently
declaring his Intentions; he also demanding Restitution of his Estate, his
ancient Dignity and Honors; but the Messengers coming to Brundusium, and there
hearing of Cinna's Death, and the Disturbances of the Commonwealth, returned
back to him. Sylla then cros'd the Sea with a Fleet of 1600 Ships and ^0000
Men, and landed at Brundusium, where he was joined by M^tellus Pius, who had
retired from Rome for fear of Marius and Cinan, and likewise by Pompey,
afterward surnamed the Great, who from this time became Sylla's great
Favorite. Besides these, came also Cethegus, who having before joined with
Cinna, now begged Pardon, and was received into Favor. Norba^ts and Scipio,
the present Consuls, together with Carbo, made all necessary Preparations for
Resistance; and the first Trial at Arms was at Canusium, where Norbanus lost
6000 Men, and fled to Capua. His Colleague Scipio shortly after, throughout
Treachery of his Army, fell, with his Son, into the Hands of Sylla, who civilly
dismissed them both. After this, Sylla sent to Norbanus to treat of Peace; but
not being thought serious perhaps, had no Answer^return'd him.

Italy now began to feel all the Desolations and Miseries of a Civil War, Sylla
making great Devastations on one side, and Carbo on the other, who getting into
Rome, procured Metellus, and the rest who joined with Sylla, to be declared
Enemies to the State. Both Parties diligently sent up and down to the Italian
Cities, laboring by all possible Ways and Methods to procure Forces; and thus
was the rest of the Summer spent in which time the Capitol was burnt down, none
knowing by what means it was done; this happened about 430 Years after it was
first built. The following Year, Carbo a third Time, and young Marius, the Son
of the former, were made Consuls; the latter at 27 Years of Age. In the
beginning of the Campaign, Carbo's Lieutenant Carinus was overthrown by
Metellus, and Marius himself by Sylla. Marius was driven into Praeneste, where
being closely besieged, and almost despairing of Relief, he in a great Rage
wrote to Brutus, then Praetor at Rome, to use some Pretense to call the Senate,
and then to kill the principal of 'em who were his Enemies; which Order was
executed with great Cruelty; so that whatsoever Side were Conquerors, Rome was
still a miserable Sufferer. Metellus having by this time overthrown Carbo once
more, and Pompey defeated Marcius, another of that Party, Sylla marched
directly to Rome, which Place he easily entered, great Numbers of the opposite
Faction being fled into the Country.

The Inhabitants of Rome were extremely terrify^d at Sylla's Entrance; but he
only put the Goods of the Persons that fled to Sale, wishing the People not to
be dejected, for he was obliged to act as he did. Then leaving a sufficient
Garrison in the City, he departed to Clusium, where he and his Officers several
times overthrew- Carbo's Armies. Carbo, being now upon the defensive, sent
eight Legions to Praeneste to relieve his Colleague Marius; but they were met by
Pompey in a narrow Passage, where he ^lew many of 'em, and dispersed the Rest.
Soon after, Carbo being joined with Norbanus, engaged with Metellus, and had
10000 of his Men slain, and 6000 yielded; whereupon great Numbers went over to
Sylla's Party, which presently became Masters of all Gaul on that side the
Alps. Norbanus fled to Rhodes, where fearing to be delivered up, he killed
himself; and Carbo fled to Africa, tho he had 30000 Men at Clusium, besides
other Forces, all which soon after were broken and dispersed by Pompey. But
Carinus, and Marcius, with other Commanders, by the Assistance of the Samnite
Troops endeavored to force the Trenches at Praeneste, and relieve Marius; but
finding it impracticable, they advanced to Rome, where meeting with Sylla, a
most bloody Battle was sought at the very Gates, in which many thousands were
slain on both sides. But Sylla at last obtained the Victory, and Carinus and
Marcius were taken, and their Heads sent to Praeneste to be shown to the
Inhabitants, at which sorrowful Sight, they surrendered to Lucullus, and Marius
killed himself, whose Head was set up in the Pleading-Place at Rome. All his
Faction in Praeneste, with the Natives and Samnites were put to Death without
Mercy; only the Romans escaped with their Lives, and this rich City was
plundered. Norba a little after was taken, and the Inhabitants setting the Town
on Fire, all destroyed themselves, some one way, and some another: So now all
Italy came under the Power of Sylla.

Sylla, having been thus successful against his Enemies at home, sent Pompey
into Africa against Carbo, and gave him Charge to pass from thence into Sicily
against others of that Party. Pompey in a short time drove Carbo into Sicily,
and thence into Corcyra, where he took him, and caus^d his Head to be cut off,
and sent to Sylla. But Rome in the mean time now severely felt the dreadful
Effects of Civil Contests; for Sylla calling the People together, told them,
That he would put 'em into a better Condition, if they were obedient to his
Commands* but as for his Enemies, be was resolved to prosecute them with all
sorts of Miseries and Calamities; which he did with more Severity than any
before him, killing and butchering many thousands after a most barbarous and
inhumane Manner. Eight Thousand were put to Death together in the Villa Publica
a large House in the Campus Martius; Men were slain in the Embraces of their
Wives, Children in the Arms of their Mothers, and Liberty was given to the
Soldiers to kill all they met, without distinction till Furfidius a little
stopped the Current of his Rage, by putting him in mind that he ought to leave
some to reign over Sylla, then published Tables of Proscription for
particularly Persons, these being the first ever known in Rome, wherein were
proscribed 80 Senators, and 1600 Equites, to which he afterward added more,
promising great Rewards to the Discoverers, and threatening Death to the
Concealers of them. Of these Out-law^d Persons some were slain in their Houses,
others in the Streets, and others prostrate at his Feet, begging their Lives;
and those that fled, their Goods were seiz^d on. Marius, Brother to Sylla's
great Enemy, had his Eyes first pulled out, then his Hands and Legs cut off at
several times, that he might die with the greater Torment. ^. Julius Caesar, a
young Man of wonderful promising Abilities, who had married Cinna's Daughter,
very hardly escaped the common Miseries of these Times, of whom Sylla was wont
to say, after a Prophetic Manner, That in Caesar were many Marius' s.

Rome was not the only Sufferer in these dreadful Calamities; for this
Proscription was carry^d throughout all the Cities of Italy, where the
merciless Effusion of Blood was such, that neither the Temples of the Gods, nor
all the Sanctuaries could afford. Protection to any Man. Both the Consuls being
now destroyed, Sylla withdrew himself from the City; and ordered the Senate to
create an Inter-Rex, which they most willingly did, naming Valerius Flaccus. He
wrote to him to ask the People, that since Affairs were yet much unsettled, a
Dictator might be created, and that not for any limited Time, but till all
public Evils and Grievances should be redressed, not forgetting to mention
himself. This the People were constrained to yield to, he having then all the
Power in his own Hands; and so this Office, which had been intermitted for 120
Years, was conferred on him without any Limitation of Time. And thus ended the
first Civil War in Italy, though not in all other Places, about 6 Years after it
began, and four after the first Marius's Death, in the 672d. Year of the City,
in the 3d. Year of the 174th Olympiad, 427 Years since the Beginning of the
Consular State, 248 since the setting up of the Macedonian Empire, and 80
before our Saviours's Nativity

CHAP. XIV.
From the Perpetual Dictatorship of Sylla, to the first Triumvirate, namely,
that of Caesar, Pompey and Cra^sus; which proved the Ruin of the Consular
State, and the first Step to the setting up the Imperial.
Containing the Space of 22 Years.
THE Government of Rome was now for some space chang^d to a Monarchy, Dic.
lxxi. Perpetual U. C. 672.
Sylla's Power being unlimited as to Time, and tho^ to keep up a Show of a
Commonwealth, he permitted Consuls to be made, yet he plainly reign^d alone,
having 24 Lictors with their Fasces and Axes, and a great Guard constantly to
attend his Person, as the Kings in former times had, and repealing old Laws and
enacting new at his pleasure. He regulated the Consulship, ordering that none
should be capable of it without first passing through other Offices. He removed
that Plague to the Senate, the Tribuneship, by making those who, bore it
incapable of any other Trust. He added 300 of the Equites to the Senate, and
likewise 10000 of the Slaves of the Proscribed to the People, making 'em Free,
and calling 'em Cornelii according to his own Name; and he assigned great
quantities of Land to 23 Legions, the better to secure and bind 'em to his
Interest. This was the first Year of Sylla's Reign in which the War broke out
again with Mithridates, about three Years after the first, occasioned by Murena
who^ Sylla had left behind him in Asia. This Person being extraordinary
ambitious of a Triumph, found an Opportunity of making a Breach with
Mithridates, contrary to the Senate's Designs; but as it proved, he only
procur^d himself an Overthrow, and Mithridates a Peace not long after, which
finished the second War with that Prince, having lasted above two Years.

In the second Year of Sylla's Office he again made Consuls, but joined himself
with Caecilius Metellus, he being one, which Course the Emperors afterward
imitated. The Year after, when the People design^d him Consul again, he
declin^d it, and chose two others; and then, to the great Surprise and Wonder
of all Men, he laid down his Dictatorship, in the third Year of his Office; and
what was more Surprising though he had done so many cruel and wicked Acts, he
like a Man perfectly Just and Innocent, freely offer^d to give an Account of
all his Management and Proceedings. Yet we find none accused him but one young
Man, whose scurrilous Language to him made him say, that such course Usage for
the future wou^d keep any Man from laying down an Office of such Supreme
Authority; which Julius Caesar afterward seemed to have been aware of. Not
long after he retired himself into the Country, where following nothing but his
Pleasure, he died in a short time at Puteoli, his body being putrefied, and all
turned into Lice. This was the End of Cornelius Sylla, and as his Life was very
pernicious to his Co^ntry, so was his Death extremely troublesome to it, the
two Consuls and their Factions falling about the Honors designed for him at
his Funeral. Catullus prevailing against his Colleague Lepidus, his Body was
carried in great Pomp and State through the City, and was the first in Rome
that was burnt, to prevent being treated as Marius before had been, whose Bones
Sylla himself had ordered to be dug up and thrown away.

After this, the Consuls fell into greater Dissentions about the Lands given
away by Sylla, which Lepidus was for returning to the former Possessors. The
Senate being very fearful of another War, made 'em both swear Not to deside the
Controversy by the Sword. But Lepidus resolved not to return out of his
Province, 'till the new Election of Consuls was over, and then to begin a War,
thinking himself discharged from his Oath when he was out of his Office.
Hereupon the Senate sent for him, and at his return, he offered to bring his
Troops into the City, but being opposed by Catullus and Pompey, a Battle
in^u^d, wherein he was overthrown, and fleeing to Sardinia, he died the same
Year with Sylla. This was not the end of all these Troubles, for a more
dangerous War was still depending in Spain against Q. Sertorius, an admirable
expert Commander of Ci^^^a's Faction, who had driven out all Sylla's Party from
Spain, and had chosen 300 of his Friends, whom he called a Senate, in
Opposition to that at Rome. Sertorius having joined with the Cel^iberians, had
before been Successful against Metellus, and now being re-inforc'd with part
of Lepidus's Army brought over by Perpenna, he designed no less than the
Invasion of Italy. The Senate apprehensive of this threatening Danger, sent
Pompey against him, who for his great Exploits in Africa and Sicily had already
triumphed, though scarce 26 Years of Age, and neither Consul nor Praetor. Pompey
in Imitation of Hannibal, passed the Alps, though a contrary way, but with no
Success against Sertorius either then or in the next Spring: and though Perpenna
and Herculeus were several times worsted by Metellus, yet Sertorius by his
extraordinary Management reduced Pompey to great Extremities, insomuch he was
obliged to send to Rome for Supplies; which after he had received, he attack^d
several Places subject to Sertorius, yet performed no thing of Consequence this
Year.

The following Year, Pompey and Metellus being much strengthn'd, made
Incursions into several Parts, and with more Success than formerly; yet no
considerable Battle was fought. And indeed there needed none, since Sertorius
fell away insensibly, by disobliging his chief Soldiers in preferring the
Celtiberians for his Guard; but more especially by his degenerating into a lazy
and debauched, as well as cruel Temper, putting many to Death with little
Reason or Justice. And now Perpenna fearing it might fall to his Lot to be
destroyed amongst the rest, resolved to prevent it, and thereupon inviting him
to a Sumptuous Feast, first made him and his Companions very drunk, and then
murdered him; which was a very inglorious End for so great a Soldier, who had
stoutly and bravely resisted all that had been sent against him, and had been
admired by the Spaniards as another Hannibal. Perpenna with much difficulty
obtained his Command from his Army, but not long after was overthrown in
Battle, and taken Prisoner by Pompey. He offered to disclose to Pompey in
private some Matters of the highest Consequence, if he would spare his Life;
but Pompey with great Policy and Discretion commanded him to be Executed
immediately, and his Papers all to be burnt, least his Accusations should bring
the State into further Troubles, of which it had felt too severely already.
Thus ended all the Civil Wars, in the 68th. Year of the City, 1^ Years after
they first began, and 9 after it ended in Italy, in the Consulship of Terentius
Varro and Cassius Varus* the former being a Person of wonderful Knowledge, and
one of the most Learned Men that ever Rome produced, in whose time Learning was
in many respects at the highest Pitch in the State.

II. But the Year before, U. C. 680.
a third War broke out with Mithridates, who now had joined himself with
Tigranes King of Armenia, and gather^d together an Army of diverse Countries
consisting of 140000 Foot 16000 Horse, by which he in a short time Possessed
himself of all Bithynia, which Nicomedes the late King had given by his Will to
the Romans. Lucinius Lucullus and Aurelius Cotta being Consuls, the former, a
brave General, was sent against Mithridates. He found the King before C^zicus a
City of Propontis, where he placed his Men with so much skill as to besiege the
Besieger, and reduced Mithridates to such Extremities, that, through Famine he
was forced, first to send away his Cavalry and sick Men into Bithynia, whereof
15000 were intercepted, and then to retire himself with the rest that could
escape the great Slaughter which the Romans made in their Flight. During the
time of this double Siege, Eumachus one of Mithridates's Commanders, made
Inrodes into Phrygia, subdued Pisidia and Isauria, and endeavored to do the
like to Cilicia, 'till he was Repuls^d by Deiotarus one of the Governors of
Galatia. But Lucullus improved his Success by Land by gaining many Victories at
Sea, where he took several of Mithridates's Commanders, and closely pursued the
King himself. Mithridates flying with more Speed than Discretion, had been Cast
away, but that he was received into a Pirate's Vessel, to which he was glad to
commit himself in so great a Danger, and at length after many Difficulties, got
into his own Kingdom, whither Lucullus pursued him, having taken in all
Bithynia and Paphlagonia in in his Way; and this was his first Years Expedition.

Mithridates made all possible Preparations for Resistance, sending to Tigranes
and others for Aid; and within the space of a Year he got together 40000 Foot
and 4000 Horse, with which he once or twice gained some Advantage over the
Romans; and struck some Terror into the Soldier. But Lucullus found Means to
cut off^ most of his Cavalry, which, with the Loss of a Battle soon after, so
terrified him that he quitted his Kingdom, and fled into Armenia to Tigranes,
who entertained him like a King, but refused to admit him to his Presence. All
Pontus, except a few Places, yielded to Lucullus in a Short space; and Machares
King of Bosphorus sent this General a Crown of Gold, by which he purchased the
Title of his Friend and Allie. This was the fourth Year of his Expedition, in
which Year also was happily finished the War with Spartacus the Gladiator in
Italy. This Person with seventy four of his Companions having broken out of
their Fencing School at Capua, fled away; and wandering through all the Country
round, and vastly increasing in their Numbers, commenced a dangerous War in
Italy. They at last had gathered together an Army of about 70000 Men, most
Vagabonds and such kind of People, and all pretenders to Liberty, and had
besides overthrown many of the Roman Commanders, and two of their Consuls; till
at last they were Conquered and despers'd by Licinius Crassus the Prooon^ul in
Apulia a Person of great Nobility and Riches, and after many Troubles and
Calamities in Italy, the War was ended in the third Year by him. About the same
time a Lustrum being perform^d in Rome, 450000 Free Citizens were Poll'd, the
City still increasing in Bulk and People, and the Inhabitants in Learning and
Politeness, as well as Corruption and Factions.

Lucullus, U. C. 684.
having still the Management of the War, against Mithridates, followed him into
Armenia, sending to Tigranes King of that Country, to demand him. Tigranes was
a very powerful Monarch, having lately Conquered several Nations and Kings,
which made him so intolerably Proud, that when he rode abroad he would have
four of his Subdu^d Kings run by his side like Lacqueys, and when he sat on his
Throne, to stand before him with folded Hands in token of Subjection. Tigranes
being now abroad in reducing Phoenicia, Lucullus's Messenger found Opportunity
to draw over many to his side, who had been much dissatisfied at his proud and
insulting Carriage. Tigranes at his return refused to deliver up Mithridates,
and likewise to acknowledge Lucullus as a General, because he had not given him
the Title of King of Kings. Whereupon Lucullus suddenly pass^d the River
Euphrates with two Legions and about 3000 Horse, which did not a little
surprise Tigranes, who first hang^d the Messenger of the News as a Disturber of
the Peace, and soon after sent Mithrobarzanes with 2000 Horse* to Incommode his
Passage, leaving Mancaeus to cover the City Tigranocerta which he had lately
built, and went himself to Levy Forces. While he was drawing together a vast
Army of 250000 Foot, and ^0000 Horse against the Romans, Mithrobazanes was
repell^d, and Mancaeus driven from the Cover of the City, and the Place
immediately Invested. Mithridates upon this advis^d him not to hazard all in a
Battle, but rather to starve the Romans; but he slighted this Motion, and
contemn^d the Smallness of their Numbers, saying, That if the Romans were all
Ambassadors they were a great many, but if Soldiers, very few, pretending to
overrun 'em with great Facility. But Lucullus posting himself upon a Hill,
sent his Cavalry to provoke and draw out the Enemy so as he might break their
Ranks; and then setting upon the Carriage Beasts, so successfully caused 'em to
drive their Foot among their Horse, that great Confusion followed and a
dreadful Slaughter continued all the day; and Tigranocerta was surrendered by
means of certain dissatisfied Greeks in the Place.

After these Defeats, another great Army was raised, and committed to the
Conduct of Mithridates. They both endeavored to them in Lucullus, but were
disappointed in their Design by his extraordinary Vigilance; and thus both
Sides continued with little Action, till want of Provisions constrained 'em to
remove, Tigranes Marching farther into his Kingdom, and Mithridates, into his,
with Lucullus not far behind him. Fabius, who had been left in Pon^us by
Lucullus, was overthrown by Mithridates, and after him Triarius, who
imprudently Engaged with him, and lost ^000 of his Men. Soon after, Mithridates
taking with him all the Necessaries he could carry, and destroying the rest,
Marched into the Lesser Armenia, Lucullus wou^d gladly have followed him, and
might have put an End to the War, but that now Acilius Glabrio this Years
Consul, by Glabinus the Tribunes Procurement, was appointed to carry it on in
his Place. This being known in the Army, Lucullus was lighted by his Men, and
Mithridates and Tigranes began to be more Successful than formerly. In a short
time, Glabrio arrived at his Province, and sent about to give Notice That the
Senate being displeased with Lucullus for prolongging the War, had disbanded
his Army, and would Confiscate the Estates of such as should disobey its Order.
Upon which all his Army abandoned him except some few poor Men, who had no
great Cause to fear any loss of Estates; and Lucullus being out of his Command,
Mithridates recovered almost all his Kingdom, and did much Damage to
Capp^clocia, Glabrio not so much as coming to his Army, but lying idle in
Bithynia. This happened in the seventh Year after Lucullus had undertaken the War.

III. U. ^. 65^.
About this time, Pompey began to come into great Esteem among the Romans,
having now a new Occasion of showing his great Abilities in War, which was
this: The Pirates, who had been first employ^d by Mithridates, finding their
Profit so great, had now got together many thousands of several Nations, making
choice of Cilicia for their Rendezvous; and seeing that the War continued, they
thought it more Wisdom to damnify others, than lose their own Estates. They
were now grown so Numerous and Powerful, that there was no secure passing the
Seas nor dwelling upon the Coasts; for they not only took and robbed Ships by
Sea, but also whole Provinces on the Land. They had likewise defeated several.
Romans Praetors, and were grown so impudent, that they landed in Italy it self,
carried away several Women of Quality, and more than that, two Armies with
their Ensigns. These great Affronts very much enraged the People of Rome, and a
Law was preferred by Gabinius the Tribune, That some Person should be created
Admiral with full Power against the Pirate for three Years, who should have
large Forces and many Lieutenants. This Law did not please the Senate, who now
began to grow jealous of Pompey^s Power; for to him was the Affair committed,
and he had full Power given him over all Persons upon the Sea, and fifty Miles
distant, whether Kings or others, to oblige them to assist him in his
Enterprise. The Senate also permitted him to choose fifteen Lieutenants out of
their Body, to take 200 Ships, and raise what Men he could: But he obtained
greater Advantage of the People, namely 500 Ships, 120000 Foot, and 5000 Horse,
6000 Attick Talents, and the Power of appointing 25 Vice-gerants out of the
Senate, and Two Quaestors; so difficult it appeared to destroy such numerous
Fleets as the Pirates had, in a Sea that had so many Places of Retreat and
Refuge.

Pompey with great Skill and Judgment distributed his Lieutenants through the
several Bays, Havens, Streights, and Windings of the Mediterranean Sea,
furnishing them with convenient Shipping and Forces* that so the Pirates being
rous^d out of their lurking Holes by some, might be received by others, and
chased by the next, and none might be obliged to sail too far. While he
himself, like a King of so many Kings, sailed up and down observing, visiting,
directing, instructing, and overseeing with that singular Art and Diligence,
that in forty Days he scoured all the Seas about Africa, Sardinia, Corsica and
Sicily* and all the Pirates that escaped, flocked to Cilicia, as their Common
Receptacle. He soon follow^ d 'em with 60 Galleys; and though they had prepar^ d
themselves to give him Battle, yet upon the sight of his Fleet, they submitted
to his Mercy; and so much had the Greatness of his Name terrify^ d them, that
in forty Days more, he reduced Cilicia to the Roman Obedience. Such of these
Piratesas remained, being above 20000, he was unwilling to kill, and to let ^em
return to their old Habitations was not safe: Therefore he remov^ d ^em to
Places farther distant from the Sea, where he gave ^em Land and Houses,
furnishing their Seats with new Inhabitants. Thus after the taking of nigh 400
Ships, and 120 Forts, and the killing of 10000 Men, he finished the War in
three or four Months, using the Conquered with more Glemency than Q. Metellus
did those in Crete, which he subdu^d, and thereby obtained besides a Triumph,
the Surname of Creticus.

This Expedition still added much to Pompey's Reputation; and it was scarce at
an End, when Manlius the Tribune preferr^ d a Law, That all the Armies the
Romans had in any Place, together with the Government of all Asia, and the
Management of the War against Mithridates and Tigranes, might be committed to
him alone. This he did to curry Favor with so great a Man as Pompey, whom he
had displeased not long before by a Law of his, which gave equal Privileges to
freed Slaves with their Masters that made 'em so. The Nobility were extremely
dissatisfied at this new Law, not only for the manifest Injury done to Lucullus
and Glabrio; by removing them from their Places but also out of a high
jealousy of Pompey's growing Greatness, as being in a manner absolute Monarch
of the Roman Empire, by having these Provinces added to, his former, with the
same Power of Peace and War; and which was more than all the rest, a
Jurisdiction over all Armies whatsoever; which Things had never before been
conferred up^ any one single Person.

But the Commons were ^ry hot for the Law, being much incited by Cicero (...)
renowned Orator, now Praetor, who in a Public A^. sembly made a noble Oration
in Commendation of Pompey, showing not only how very convenient it was for the
Good of the Commonwealth to have a General with so large a Power; but likewise
how absolutely necessary it was to choose him above all other Men in the World,
as being incomparably eminent for those four great Accomplishments requir d in
an Absolute Soldier, Conduct, Courage, Authority and Success, which had all
been abundantly apparent in those numerous and wonderful Exploits he had
already performed in so many Parts of the World. This had so good an Effect,
that when the Law came to the Scrutiny, it pass^ d with little Opposition; and
C. Julius Caesar, lately Quaestor, is said to have likewise favour^ d it,
chiefly with Design that afterward the People might be the more inclined to
commit the like extraordinary Power to himself.

Pompey having made what Preparations he thought convenient, U. C. 688.
in a short time undertook his Expedition, in which he propos^ d great Honor
and Renown to himself. Yet he first sent to Mithridates, offering him good and
reasonable Terms, which the other refused in Expectation of the Assistance of
Phraaes King of Parthia; but hearing that a League was made between him and the
Romans, he shortly after sent to desire a Peace. Pompey commanded him to lay
down his Arms, and deliver up all Deserters; which occasioned such a dangerous
Disturbance and Mutiny in Mithridates's Army, that he immediately receded,
saying, He only sent to make an Espial, and evading the Articles by swearing,
that he would never be reconcil^ d to the Romans, because of their insatiable
Avarice. Pompey marching into Galatia, there met with Lucullus, and a violent
Contest was raised between 'em. The latter affirmed the War to be already
finished; and that the Commissioners from Rome were to decide it; and when
Pompey would not harken to this, he upbraided him with an unjust Ambition,
Pompey retorting the Charge of immoderate Desire of Gain upon Lucullus.
Lucullus still gave out Commands in his own Name, but Pompey, by his Edicts,
forbad 'em, nulled all his Acts, and at last drew away the greater Part of his
Army. Yet Lucullus at his Return was received with great Honor by the Senate,
carrying with him among his great Booty, many valuable Books; with which he
furnished a Library, that always stood open, to Greeks especially. He much
advanced the Roman Luxury as to Buildings, Furniture of Houses and excessive
Feast, and also was the first that brought the Cherry-Tree out of Pontus into
Italy.

Mitrhidates had now gathered together a very considerable and numerous Army;
and Pompey finding how he had wasted all the Country to hinder the Subsistence
of his Army, marched into the lesser Arm^nia, subject to Mithridates, who
fearing he might become Master of that Country, follow^ d him thither. Here
Mithridates was in hopes to starve him, but was disappointed with considerable
Loss, and to his great Surprise was surrounded by Pompey with an Intrenchment
of above eighteen Miles Circuit. Whereupon hearing that Marcius was joined
Pompey, he betook himself to Flight, having first killed all such as were sick
and useless about him. But Pompey pursu^ d him so close, that before he could
pass the River Euphrates, he forced him to an Engagement in the Night.

The Moon being very low, and on the Backs of the Romans, so lengthened their
Shadows, that the Enemies thinking ^em nigher than really they were, shot most
of their Arrows without doing Execution. Here Mithridates lost many Thousands
of Men; but he himself broke through with 800 Horse, of which only 300 stayed
with him. Then sorrowfully wandering through the Woods with his Horse in his
Hands, he accidentally met with some Mercenaries, and about 3000 Foot, by whose
Assistance he was conveyed into a Castle where he had laid up much Treasure.
From hence he sent to Tigranes, who now refused to receive him, alleging that
his Son upon his Account had rebell^ d against him. Whereupon Mithridates fled
to Colchis, which he had formerly conquered, and Pompey followed him, thinking
he would not have stirred thence; but he immediately passed into Scythia, where
partly by Force, and partly by Persuasions, he oblig^ d the Princes of that
County, to be of his Party, bestowing his Daughters in Marriage upon some of
'em, having still vast Designs in his Mind, even of passing through Thrace,
Maced^nia, Pannonia, and so over the Alps into Italy it self.

Pompey, in a short time left Colchis; and getting clear of the Ambuscades,
laid for him by the Albanians and Iberians, directed his March to Armenia
against Tigranes, who now resolv^ d not to fight, upon the Account of the
Rebellion of his three Sons he had by Mithridates's Daughter, two of which he
had executed, and the third after an Overthrow had fled to Pompey. Tigranes's
Ambassadors coming to desire a Peace, this Son so far prevailed, that they
could not be heard shortly after Pompey, invested the City Artaxata, which
Tigranes immediately surrendered, and shortly after came himself into Pompey's
Camp, making him Mediator between him and his Son who would not so much as rise
up to his Father, or show him any Respect whatsoever. But Pompey received him
with extraordinary Civility, allowing him the greatest Part of his former
Dominions, and his Son the rest; but took away all his Conquests, and fined him
6000 Talents of Silver for the Charge of the War. Tigranes was by these
Articles obliged to quit many conquer^d Territories, particularly all Syria and
Phoenicia and Euphrates to the Sea; but his Son was still very refractory,
refusing Obedience, and threatening the Death of his Father, for which he was
shut up in Prison by Pompey, and reserv^d for a Triumph; and not long
afterward he was put to Death. Tigranes being now reconciled to the Romans,
paid more than his Fine, and made Presents to every Officer and Soldier, for
which he was esteemed a Friend and Allie of the Romans. Pompey restored
Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, giving him also Gordiena and Sophena with Cabala a
City of Cilicia, and other Places; after which with some Opposition, he
constrained the Albanians and Iberians to beg Peace.

Thus prosperous was this great Commander, U. C. 68^.
who still designed larger and more glorious Conquests; and therefore passing
over the vast Mount Taurus, he marched against Darius the Median, and Anti^chus
King of Syria, for molesting the Roman Allies, or assisting their Enemies.
Whereupon Phraates King of Parthia, who had been called into Gordiena, by
Tigranes's Son, terriy^d at his great Exploits, sent to beg Peace of him, which
he granted not, but sent Afraneus into into Gordiena to expel his Forces, and
restore that Country to Tigranes. Phraates upon this invading Armenia, Tigranes
sent to Pompey for Succor, who being unwilling to commence a War with Phraates
without positive Orders from Rome, sent three Commissioners to make an
Accommodation. But for Anti^chus, to whom Lucullus had granted Syria for his
Inheritance, he first intended to betake himself to the Assistance of Phraates;
but upon mature Deliberation, he resolved to yield himself to Pompey^S
Generosity. But Pompey having now possessed himself of all his Country without
Resistance, refus^d to grant him what he expected, and what he knew he was
unable to keep from the Incursions of the Jews and Arabians on both sides of
him. And the better to excuse himself, told him, That since the Romans had been
at such Charges and Pains to conquer Tigranes, it would be unreasonable that
the Reward should fall to another. Therefore he only allowed him that Part of
Syria, called Comagena; and in a short Time after, extending his Conquests
farther over the Ituraeans and Arabians, he reduced all Syria into a Roman
Province.

The Time that Pompey was proceeding in these Successful Expeditions,
Mithridates sent to him to desire Peace; but being ordered to come to him
himself he refused it, and proceeded in his Preparations for War: After which
many of his Places revolted, and many of his Friends, with one of his Sons,
were executed upon that Account. Yet still he designed to pass into Europe,
there to join with the Gauls, and invade Italy; but the Unwillingness of his
Soldiers to this difficult Expedition, and the Rebellious Designs of his Son
Pharnaces, caus^d his Army^s Revolt, and his Ruin, his Son being shortly after
faulted King. Mithridates, now under Confinement, seeing this from an
Upper-Room, sent to his Son to ask leave to depart, but in vain, who bidding
his Father Die, he cried out with many bitter Imprecations, That he might one
Day hear the same. Words from his own Children! Then coming down to his Wives,
Daughters, and Concubines, he gave 'em all Poison, and fearing to be delivered
up to the Romans, he took some himself; but having much used his Body to
Antidotes, particularly to that Sort which still goes by his Name, the Poison
would not operate, whereupon he wounded himself; but that not dispatching him
soon enough, he called to one Bitaeus a Gaul, who got in through the broken
Wall, and by his Hands he died. Thus fell Mithridates, a Man, who sometimes in
Fortune, and at all times in Courage was of the highest Rank, in Direction a
skilful Commander, in Execution a great Soldier, and in Hatred to the Romans a
second Hannibal, having made longer Opposition than he. And thus ended the
Mithridatick War after twenty five Years, and eleven since it last broke out; a
War, which in the Beginning happened to be dangerous to the Roman State, as
creating other Mischiefs, but in the End proved very glorious and advantageous
to it, by the Addition not only of all Mithridates's Dominions, but likewise of
many other rich Countries in Asia.

Pompey, when the News of Mithridates's Death was brought to him, was near
Jericho, marching toward Jerusalem against Aristobulus King of Judea, who had
deposed his elder Brother Hyrcanus, and usurped his Kingdom Hyrcanus complain d
of his Brother to Pompey at Damascus, who likewise came thither to vindicate
himself. Pompey treated 'em both very civilly, promising 'em to come into their
Country, and settle Matters between 'em, after he had dispatched some other
necessary Affairs. Having therefore in a short Time settled the Affair of
Syria, and reduc^d Pont^^: into a Roman Province, he returned to Judea, being
much incensed against Aristobulus. He first cited him to appear before him, and
deliver up all his fortified Places, which he did with much Regreet and Anger,
withdrawing himself to Jerusalem, to make Preparations for a War. Pompey
suspecting his Designs, immediately march^d after him, which Aristobulus
understanding, went out to meet him; and though the City was enter^d without
Opposition, his Soldiers fortified the Temple and held it out against Pompey,
which caus^d Aristobulus to be taken into Custody. The Temple being very strong
by Situation, made a vigorous Defense; but after three Month's Siege, was with
much Difficulty and Labor taken, and 12000 of the Jews cut in Pieces, the
Priests not neglecting to offer Sacrifices all that Time. Pompey, without any
Fear, entered the Holy of Holies with many Followers, looking on these things
which were unlawful for any but the Priests to behold, however he show, so
much Veneration for the Place, that he forbore touching any Thing that was
there. He restored Hyrcanus to his Priesthood and Government, but with a
Command never to wear a Diadem, and took Aristobulus with him, making all Judea
tributary to Rome. This happened in the third Year of his Expedition, and 61
Years before our Savior's Nativity.

IV. While Pompey thus proceed in his noble Exploits abroad, Rome it self was
in great Hazard, and very nigh its Ruin, occasioned by one of the most
dangerous Conspiracies that had been ever known in the City. It was begun and
carried on by Sergius Catiline, a Patrician by Descent, but of a very
pro^^igate Life; a Person daring in his Attempts, crasty in his Designs, greedy
of other Men s Properties, pr^digal of his own; one who had been accused of
debauching a Vestal Virgin, and suspected of murdering his Son for the Love of
another Woman. This Person having contracted vast. Debts by the Looseness of
his Life, grew desperate, and sought for nothing but Power and Authority, and,
if it were possible, the Sovereignty over all; but his Designs being suspected,
he twice received a Repulse in standing for the Consulship. This last time it
was carried from him by Cicero, whom he therefore scurrilously abused as an
Upstart and Foreigner, as being but of the Equestrian Order, and born in
Apulia; and offered to kill him in the Comitia. The missing of his Designs,
drove him into the utmost Rage and Fury, and brought him into that Plot, in
which he had formerly been engag^d with Piso, for the Destruction of his
Country. Aurelius Cotta and Manlius Torquatus, who before had missed of the
Consulship for want of competent Bribes, also joined with him, and afresh
plotted the Ruin of the Consuls and Senate, the Burning of the City, and the
Overthrow of the State, as likewise did Lentulus, Cethegus, and many other
inferior Persons of debauched and infamous Lives. Cethegus and Lentulus were
both Praetors, and the Latter, who formerly had been Consul, was moved to this
Design by a vain Confidence he had in the Sibylline Oracles, which he said
portended, That the Soveraig^ Power should be in the Hands of three Gornel^^,
namely, Sylla, Cinna, and Himself.

This Conspiracy was carry^d on with the greatest Secrecy imaginable, their
Numbers daily increasing, among which were several Women, who by prostituting
themselves had been maintained after a prodigious Rate; but afterward, Decay
of Beauty l^miting their Gains. though not their Luxury, had greatly run them in
Debt, notwithstanding all their Care of concealing this horrid Design, it was
discovered by the Means of Q. Curious, one of the Plotters, a degraded Senator,
who neither could contain the Secrets he had heard, not the Crimes he had
committed; but imprudently relating all to one Fulvia his Courtesan, she
discovered it to Cicero who was now Consul. Cicero by examining of these two,
found out the whole Matter, how often, and where they met, and what Designs
they had in Hand particularly his own Destruction to be brought about by
Vasgunt^ius a Senator, and Cornelius a Knight, under Pretense of a Friendly
Visit. Cicero with great Diligence and Care appointed Guards in several Parts
of the City, and immediately after called the Senate to the Temple of Concord
to consult what was best to be done in this Time of Danger. Great Rewards were
promised to any who should make any farther Discovery of this black Conspiracy,
and the whole City was in a great Consternation, all in a Hurry, all in a Fear,
not knowing whom to trust, or where to be secure, either in War, or Peace; but
every one measuring his Danger by his Fears.

The Senate, being now assembled, Catiline, to show how well he could
dissemble, or to justify himself, went boldly thither; but none of the
Senators would come near him, the Place where he sat being wholly void.
Whereupon Cicero, either dreading his Presence, or incensed at his Boldness;
stood up, and made a severe invective Speech against him, openly manifesting
his Crimes, which were both numerous and notorious, and saying, Did that most
honorable Person Scipio Nasica, slay his own Kinsman Tib. Gracchus for a
slight Disturbance of the City; and shall we, Consuls, tamely suffer a Person
endeavoring to lay the World desolate with Slaughter and Destruction? He
farther commanded him to leave the Town, concluding with wishing Confusion and
Destruction to him and all his Accomplices. Upon his sitting down, Catiline,
well prepared, with all manner of Artifice and Dissimulation, with a dejected
Countenance, and suppliant Tone, besought the Fathers not ^ver-rashly to
credit^ vain Reports concerning him; nor to believe that a Person of his Rank,
whose own and whose Ancestors Services had been so remarkably beneficial, stood
in need of a ruined Commonwealth; concluding with many scurrilous Reflections
upon Cicero; which not being hearkened to by the Senate, he left the House in a
great Rage, breathing out Ruin and Destruction to all his Enemies. He left the
City late at Night with ^00 Armed Men, and Lictors with Axes and Fasces before
him like a Magistrate, and retired into Hetruria, gathering together Soldiers
all the Way, intending to return to the City, which he had ordered Lentulus and
Cethegus to lay in Ashes at an appointed Time.

In the mean time the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, now in Town, were also
persuaded to stir up the Gauls against the Commonwealth; but declaring their
Designs to ^abius^ Sanga their Patron, it came shortly to Cicero's Fiar, and so
was prevented. The Day after Catiline's Departure, Cicero summoned the People,
and made a second Oration to 'em, where he congratulated the People and
Commonwealth for being freed from so infamous a Person* and encouraged 'em, by
representing the Forces of that Rebel as both small and inconsiderable. Upon
this the Senate judged Catiline an Enemy to the State, and likewise Manlius who
had joined him in Hetruria, Lentulus also was deprived of his Office of
Praetor, by whom the Ambassadors had been persuaded over, who confessed that
they had often heard him make his Conjectures from the Sibyllime Oracles.
Cicero shortly after summon^d the People again, and made another Oration to
'em, wherein he reported the Particulars of the Discovery, with the Arraignment
and Conviction of many of the Conspirators. Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius,
Cassius, and several others being now secured, Cicero called the Senate, and
propounded to the Fathers to consider what was to be done with the Prisoners*
But while the Senate was sitting, great Disturbances arose in the City; for the
Slaves and Dependent^ of Lentulus and Cethegus had gather^d together a great
Number of Artificers and Rabble, who endeavour^d to break in upon the backside
of the Praetor's House and res^^e the Prisoners. Upon Notice of this, Cicero
left the Senate House, and appointing a Watch and sufficient Guards, return^d
asking the Opinions of the Senators.

Now a great Debate arose concerning the Punishment of the Prisoners* Silanus,
design^d Consul for the next Year, being first asked his opinion, according to
Custom, was for putting 'em to Death, as were several others, till Nero
diswaded in, and Julius Caesar standing up, in a plausible Speech pleaded much
for Mercy, and disapproved of Death as an irregular Way of proceeding, speaking
to this effect: If any Punishment might be found to equalize their Faults, then
I should approve your Design; but if the Vastness of their Crimes surpasses all
our Inventions, we ought to make use of such (...) the Law provides* Though I
must confess that all the Tortures is the Wor'd are inferior to their
Offenses* yet most Men still remember what comes last, and in the Sufferings of
the most Impious, forget the Fact, and discourse of nothing but the Punishment,
if more severe than ordinary, and since the Porcian Law only punishes Capital
Offenders with Exile, we ought not to bring in Innovations* for certainly their
Wisdom and Virtue was greater, who raised so vast an Empire from such small
Beginnings, than ours who can hardly preserve what they so bravely won.
Caesar's Advice was likely enough to have, taken, till P^rcius Cato, Grandson
to the great Moralist, stood up, and with some Heat opposed him, saying, That
he had never pardoned in himself the least Error of his own. Thoughts, and
therefore could not easily forgive the Misdemeanors of a turbulent Passion and
Ambition in others. That among the Ancient Romans Manlius Torquatus had caused
his own Son to be put to Death only for fighting the Enemy contrary to his
Command; And if that valiant Youth was so severely chastis'd for his overhasty
Courage, shall the present Generation hesitate what to decree against the most
bloody of Parricides* and the greater Monsters of Mankind!

Cicero after these Speeches, made one himself, which was his fourth upon this
Occasion, wherein he with a cunning sort of Mildness and Ambiguity inclined to
Cato' s Side, telling them, That his Earnestness did not proceed from any
Malice or Anger but from a singular Tenderness and Compassion: That they ought
to consider that it was not T. Grachus, who required a second Tribuneship, nor
C. Gracohus, who claimed the Public Lands, nor yet Saturninus, who show
Memmius, that was to be called in Question; but Burners of the City, Murderers
of the People, and Assistants of Catiline himself: and likewise that this
Mischief was already diffus^d over all Italy, and beyond the Alps, and
therefore impossible be crushed with Forbearance and Delays. By Cicero' s
Speech the Senate were induc^d to put 'em all to Death, which the Consul saw
Executed before the House arose; but (...) Mildness and Peculiar Management in
this Affair, made several suspect he himself had some Hand in the Conspiracy.
As for Catiline himself, he was shortly after overtaken by C. Antonius, Cicero'
s Colleague, nigh the Alps, as he was passing into Gaul to complete his Levies;
where engaging most obstinately he was slain, but his Men desperately sought it
out to the last; and scarce any of 'em remain^d to be taken, or were found out
of their Places when dead. Thus was this most dangerous Conspiracy quashed,
chiefly by the Vigilance and Diligence of Cicero the Consul. Public Thanks
were given him for his great Care and Pains; and, at the Instance of Cato, he
was first of all others styled Father of his Country, and that with loud
Acclamations of the People, who said, That though indeed they were indebted to
several Commanders of that Age, for Riches, Spoils, and Power; yet it was to
Cicero alone that they owed the Safety and Security of all these Blessings.

V. After these Disturbances were over, U. C. 692.
the Affairs of Rome were in a much more quiet Posture; but neither Catiline's
Defeat nor Death was sufficient to settle the City in a firm and lasting Peace,
but still she lay exposed to the sinister Designs which some more Ambitious
Senators than the rest were always forming against her Liberty: Nor could their
Inclinations of that kind meet with Greater Temptations, since the Gaining of
this only City must carry with it so Great a Part of the World. And now it was
that Caesar began to make a Greater Appearance in Rome than ever, being this
Year made Praetor. He had before gone through the two Offices of Questor and
Aedile, in the latter of which, by his Magnificence in Shows and Buildings, he
had acquitted himself with much Reputation, having also the Advantage of being
descended from one of the most Illustrious Families in Rome. He afterward
stood for the High Priesthood, and, by his Great Liberality, carried it from
two of the most Powerful Men in Rome, and his Seniors; and scarce any Man in
the City was more Remarkable, either for the Freeness of his Presents, or the
Largeness of his Bribes. He was now also arrived to a very high degree in
Learning, as well as an Admirable Skill in Eloquence, having already disputed
the Prize with the most famous Orators, and scarce anything appeared impossible
for his Great Genius to undertake. Little was performed by him during this Time
of his Praetorship, besides composing some Disturbances occasioned by one
Clodius, a young Man of a Noble Family, but of a Scandalous Life, who being in
Love with Caesar's Wife Pompeia, had, in a Woman^s Habit entered his House in
the time of a particular Festival, when only. Women were permitted to be
present. This brought Clodius into much Trouble and Danger, for Profaning
those Sacred Institutions, and caused Caesar to put away his Wife privately;
who, being Asked the Reason, said, He did not believe her Guilty, but Caesar's
Wife ought to preserve her self from the Suspicion, as well as the Guilt of the
Crime.

The Violent Heats, and the Parties, with the Factions and Divisions, upon this
and other Occasions, sufficiently showed, that the State was ready for a
Change, and liable to become a Prey to Men of the Greatest Power and Ambition.
This Caesar well knew, and thought of nothing so much as the Greatness of
Pompey, and of surpassing, or at least equalizing him in the Honor of his
Exploits. Therefore upon the expiring of his Praetorship, he procured the
Government of Spain; but having contracted extraordinary Debts by his too
Bountiful Way of Living, he was retarded in his Journey by the Prosecution of
his Creditors. Whereupon he was forced to apply himself to Crassus, a Person of
vast Riches, of Great Wit and Eloquence, and of no contemptible Valor; who
being wrought upon by the Importunities of his Wife Tertulla, one who no less
Loved Caesar, than Clodius did Pompeia, became Security for 830 Talents. It was
in this Government that Caesar viewing the Statue of Alexander at Gades, Wept,
to think, That he had done none nothing Great and Memorable, at an Age wherein
that Prince had Conquered the World. And he gave indeed sufficient Marks of his
Bravery and Desire of Glory; for instead of spending his Time in bare
Administration of Justice, he pierced with his Arms farther into the Country,
subduing several Nations before untouched, and collected together so vast a
Treasure to himself, in the Name of the Commonwealth, as enabled him
afterward to imitate that Alexander, whom he so justly admired.

Shortly after Caesar's Departure for Spain, Pompey, after a Five Years
Expedition, returned to Rome, covered with Glories for his mighty Exploits, and
Great Conquests: He had, upon his Arrival in Italy, sent back his Troops, to
prevent such Suspicions as might arise from his appearing at the Head of an
Army, so that he obtained the Honor of Triumph with a General Applause; and
with so much more Splendour and Magnificence, in regard that he now Triumphed
over another Third Part of the World, after his receiving the same Honor for
the Conquest of Two Part of it before. The Triumph lasted Two Days, and yet
they were much straightened for time, and therein were exposed the Names of 15
Conquered Kingdoms, and 860 Cities, with the Re-peopling of 39, and 1000
Castles. Among the Prisoners led in Triumph, appeared the Son of Tigranes King
of Armenia, with his Wife and Daughter; as also Zozima, the Wife of King
Tigranes himself, and Aristobulus K. of Judea; the^ter of King Mithridates,
with her Five Sons, and some Ladies of Scythia. There were likewise the
Hostages of the Albaniaus and Iberians, with those of the King of Comagena;
besides a vast Number of Trophies, answering directly to each particular Battle
wherein he was Conqueror. The Gold, Silver and Jewels that made up Part of this
Public Pomp, amounted to the value of 20000 Talents, which is 3740000 Pounds
of our Money: He made it appear by an Account plainly stated, that he had
advanced and improved the whole Revenue of the Commonwealth 12000 Talents,
being above one Third Part, by this Expedition, without mentioning those large
Sums he had distributed among his Men, whereof the meanest Soldier's share was
nigh Forty Pounds.

Pmpey, though he had obtained vast Honor of the Senate, yet was much feared and
hated by many, as appeared by the great Opposition he met with shortly after,
in his demanding a Confirmation of all that he had transacted in Asia, and
certain Lands for a Reward for his Soldiers: He had already prevailed by his
Credit in the Election of both the Consuls, Metellus Certicus and Afranius, but
in a short Time found himself mistaken in his Choice: For Afranius, being
wholly given to his Pleasure, never acquired much Authority in the Senate; and
Metellus cancell^d all former Obligations, upon the Account of the Disgrace
that was done to his Sister Mutia, whom Pompey had put away upon Suspicion of
her too great Familiarity with Caesar. Cato, on the other side, set all his
Power against the Interests of Pompey, and Lucullus did the like, desiring, and
obtaining of the Senate, that those Decrees of his which Pompey had formerly
repeal^d might be in Force, and that those made in reference to the Conquer^d
Countries might be nulled, and withal stopped his intended Law for rewarding
his Soldiers. Pompey, upon this Usage, apply^d himself to the Tribunes, (which
Office he and Caesar had restored after Sylla had put it down) one of which, by
Name Flavius, proposed the Law for the Reward of the Soldiers. Metellus the
Consul opposed it very sharply, till the Contest rising even to Blows and
Bloodshed, the Tribune caused Metellus to be sent to Prison; and when the whole
Body of the Senate offered to make themselves Prisoners with him, Flavius
placed his Tribunal at the Prison-Door, and forbad 'em Entrance. Upon which the
Fathers caused the Walls to be broken down in another Place; and the Constancy
of the Senate began to shake the Resolution of the People, who always Judg^d of
Things by their Outward Appearances. This Pompey quickly perceiv^d, and desired
the Tribunes to Accommodate the Matter, pretending Commission from Metellus for
his so doing; now, too late Repenting his Inconsiderate leaving his Army, and
exposing himself to his Enemy^s Hatred.

At the same time Caesar returned from Spain, the Election of now Consuls being
at Hand: Caesar had good Intelligence of all these Disturbances, and the
Reasons of Pompey's Dissatisfaction, so that he now resolv^d either to Improve
his own Authority with the Senate, or find a good Opportunity of quitting their
Interest: His Services in Spain had sufficiently deserv^d a Triumph, wherefore
he desired it of the Senate, declaring at the same time his Design also of
standing for the Consulship. Now these Desires were inconsistent; for the Law
forbad Entrance into the City to any one who desir^d a Triumph; and requir^d
also, that whoever su^d for the Consulship, should do it in his proper Person.
Caesar therefore Wrote to the Senate, desiring that these Formalities might be
dispensed withal; but Cato stood up for the Maintaining the Laws to their
utmost Rigor, and his Opinion prevail^d, so that Caesar chose to decline his
Triumph, and went to Rome and stood for the Consulship, which Honor he very
eagerly pursued. And well understanding Pompey's Credit, and his Quarrel to the
Senate, this he thought a fit Conjucture to engage himself into his Interests.
Pompey on the other side was no less pleased to gain a Man of such
extraordinary Merit, especially when Caesar promised him to confirm all his
Acts, if he could procure him to be elected, whereupon a close Agreement was
made between 'em. After this, Caesar made it his Business to bring his Friend
Crassus into the League, who finding his own Interest was weak separately, was
easily persuaded to join with 'em, and a former Breach between him and Pompey
was who^ly accommodated. These three made a firm Combination, or Conspiracy,
That nothing should be done in the Commonwealth against any of their
Interests, or Approbations, which they most solemnly confirmed with mutual
Oaths and Promises. This was the first Great Triumvirate, which proved the
Overthrow of the Consuler and Popular State, being a Combination of three of
the Greatest Men in Rome, either for Valor, Authority, or Riches, Pompey being
then about 47 Years of Age, and Caesar 40.

Thus Rome lost her Liberty, after she had flourished many Years in a wonderful
Grandeur, occasioned wholly by the numerous Abuses, and notorious Corruptions
in her Government and Inhabitants, which shortly after plunged her into greater
Miseries than ever she felt before. This Remarkable Union happened in the 694th
Year of the City, A. M. 394^, in the First Year of the 180th Olympiad, 449
Years since the Beginning of the Consular State, 330 since the Burning of Rome
by the Gauls, 270 since the Beginning of the Macedonian Empire by Alexander the
Great, 86 since the Destruction of Carthage, and ^8 before our Saviour' s
Nativity, the Roman Dominions containing now all Italy, all Cisalpine-Gaul, and
Part of the Other, all Spain and Africa, all Greece and Illyricum, all the
Kingdoms in Asia Minor, with Armenia, Mesopotamia, Media, Syria and Iudaea, and
many Islands besides.

The End of the Second Book.
THE Roman History. BOOK III.
The Mixed State of ROME, From the Beginning of the First Triumvirate, to the
perfect Settlement of the Empire.
Containing the Space of 33 Years.
CHAP. I.
From the Beginning of the First Triumvirate, to the Death of Crassus, one of
the Combination; which broke, and divided that Party.
Containing the Space of 7 Years.
I. THE State of Rome was now arrived to an extraordinary Height, U. C. 694.
The First Triumvirate.
whether we consider the Extent and Fruitfulness of its Dominions, the Strength
and Power of its Arms, the Fame and Valor of its Commanders, the Abundance and
Largeness of its Revenues, the Compass and Magnificence of its City, and the
Numbers and Riches, as well as Learning and Politeness of its Inhabitants; but
still it wanted considerably of that Glory and Grandeur, as to Dominions, and
much more of that Quiet and Sereneness as to Settlement, it had not long after
in Augustus's Reign. For now the State was full of Factions and Divisions,
Briberies and Corruptions, and likewise Feuds and Jealousies, since the joining
of three such potent Men, as Caesar, Pompey and Crassus, which caused many to
fear the Downfall of their Ancient Liberties; and that their Fears were not
groundless, sufficiently appeared by the Event. The first Effect of this
Triumvirate was the Promoting of Caesar to the Consulship, Pompey and Crassus
employing all their Interest therein: He had two Competitors, Lucerius and
Bibulus; the former, a Covetous, tho Rich Man, was taken off by large Promises,
and Bribed to procure what Voices he could for Caesar. The Senators, resolving
to have Bibulus one of the Consuls, made Great Collections among themselves,
and gave as much on their side. Even Cato as rigid as he was, was persuaded
that the Law which forbad all manner of Bribery on these Occasions, ought, in
such a case, to be dispenc^d withal, when the Interest of the Commonwealth so
much required it; so by that means Bibulus was at last chosen Consul with
Caesar.

The first thing Caesar did in this Office, U. C. ^95.
was his Confirming all Pompey's Acts, according to Agreement, and from that
time he wholly applied himself to Gain the Favor of the Commons: And the
better to effect it, he preferr^d a Law for dividing certain Lands in C^mpania,
among such of the poor Citizens as had three Children or more. This Proposal
much pleased the Commons, and Caesar had taken the most proper Methods to make
it pass; for the Law was drawn up in Terms so very just and reasonable, that no
Man could ^^nd fault with it. He declared to the Senators, That he would do
nothing without their Authority, nor propose any of his Friends for
Commissioners, or any Man who might be liable to Suspicion; but that they
should be all Persons of known Reputation and Abilities. This plausible and
cautious Way of proceeding hardly left any room for Contradiction; but still
the Senate, that they might hinder the Law, and yet not seem to oppose it,
adjourn^d the Affair from Day to Day: till at last Cato plainly and publicly
declared, That these Changes in State were not to be permitted; after whom all
the Senate likewise declared themselves to be of the same Opinion. Whereupon
Caesar immediately had recourse to the People, much complaining to them of the
Injustice and Stubbornness of the Senate, taking also Pompey and Crassus along
with him, whose Opinions he publicly asked concerning this Law. They both
approved of it; and Pompey further declared, That if such as opposed it should
come with their Swords in their Hands, he would meet their Swords, and bring a
Buckler with him besides: Whereupon a Day was appointed for the Publication of
this Law.

At the appointed Day, the People gathered together in great Numbers, and in
spite of all Opposition, drove Cato and Bibulus himself with Stones and Clubs
from off the Place; the Consuls Axes were broken in pieces, and the People
approving the Ordinance, declared they would have all the Senators swear to the
Observation of it. Almost all took this Oath, except Cato, Metellus and
Favonius, and they too, at last, after much Opposition, took it, to save their
Fines, and likewise their Lives: for Caesar had caused the People to make it
Capital for any one to refuse it. Caesar made little use of the Senate after
that, and from that time his Colleague Bibulus never durst appear in Public,
but kept himself at home for the remaining part of the Year. This forceable way
of proceeding extremely alarmed the Senate, every Body laughing at their
Idleness and Negligence; and at the Head of those Acts, where the Names of the
Consuls us^d to be inscribed, some unknown Person, instead of Caesar and
Bibulus, Wrote Caius Caesar and Julius Caesar, to show that Caesar Governed
alone. Caesar having freed himself from his Colleague, began chiefly to apply
himself to the Equites or Knights, who much courted him; and having Farmed the
Customs, desired an Abatement of the Rent. The Senate refused to remit any
thing, but he shortly after procured the People to abate a third Part. By this
and other Ways of gratifying the Common sort, he persuaded 'em to decree the
Province of Gaul to him for Five Years, with Four Legions, for he desired
nothing so much as performing Great Exploits; and the remaining part of the
Year he spent in endeavoring to establish his Interest for the time to come.
Therefore knowing how considerable a Person Pompey was, to bind him the more
strongly, he gave him his Daughter Iulia in Marriage, a very virtuous and
beautiful Lady. He likewise took care that his two Friends, Gabinius and Piso,
should be pricked for the following Year's Consuls; the latter of which had
lately given him his Daughter Calpurnia. Clodius he procured to be one of the
Tribunes, notwithstanding his former Affront, because he knew him to be an
Enemy to Cicero, whose Oration against Caesar, in pleading for C. Antonius, had
gained him the Hatred of the Triumvirate. And having settled Affairs thus, and
finished his Consulship, he departed for Gaul, with some Precipitation, in
regard he was threatened to be called to Account for his Conduct in his
Consulship; and though some of the Tribunes prevented his public Censure, they
could not secure his Quaestor from Condemnation.

In Caesar's absence, Pompey and Crassus were not idle, and the former had
filled the City with Soldiers; and since both the Consuls were of that Party,
the Senate's Authority was much weakn'd. But Clodius bestirred himself more
than any; a Man so ambitious of the Tribureship, that he procur^d himself to be
adopted by a Plebeian, because he was incapable of holding of it before. Cicero
immediately perceived that his Ruin was aimed at; and his chiefest Hope was in
Pompey, who had always shown himself his Friend; but Pompey had now sacrificed
all to the Interests of Caesar and Crassus, and had lately been extremely
offended with Cicero for his eternal Itch he had to be Jesting. Pompey
nevertheless assured him of his Protection, and Caesar had offer^d to make him
his Lieutenant in his Gallick Expedition, to which Employment he had a strong
Inclination; but Pompey advised him not to leave Rome, and Clodius found some
Artifice to delude him with false Hopes of Reconciliation, that he might be
confounded and born down, before he was sufficiently sensible of his Danger. In
short, all the World conspired to deceive him, and that Piercing Judgment and
Quickness of Apprehension he us^d so much to value himself upon, which became
altogether unserviceable to him now, and he could find no Way to avoid the Blow
when it came. Clodius, by his Distributions of Com among the Poor, daily grew
higher in the Favor of the People, and afterward preferred a Law to forbid
Water and Fire to any who had put to Death any Roman Citizen unheard, which
amounted to as much as Banishment.

Now all Persons saw the Danger which threatened Cicero; all his former
Constancy forsook him, and he went up and down the City, soliciting his Cause,
in Mourning Robes, long Beard, and unregarded Hair, attended by 20000 Equites,
supplicating in his behalf; besides many young Noblemen, whom he had taught the
Rules of Eloquence, among which were the very Sons of Crassus. But Clodius
still followed with a Party of Soldiers, insulting and jearing him with the
Poorness of his Spirit, till they almost came to throwing of Stones at each
other. But the Respect to the Sacrosanct-Office hinder^d Cicero's Side from
returning the Injuries; yet nevertheless the Senators design^d to order a
General Mourning, but the Consuls stopp^d that Debate, and Clodius summoned 'em
all to appear before the People, where Piso only said, He took no delight in
Cruelty, but Gabinius immediately condemned what Cicero had done as to
Catiline's Conspiracy. Cicero's last Retreat was Pompey's Favor who was able
enough to have done him Service, but he would have nothing to do in the Matter;
and when Cicero came to prefer his Cause to him, he slipped out at a Backdoor
to avoid seeing him. He found himself now reduc^d to the last Necessity of
taking up Arms for his Defense, which he might have done successfully enough;
but not being able to bear the Bloodshed of his Countrymen, he resolved, upon
the Advice of Cato and the rest of his Friends, to withdraw himself: So he left
Rome in the Nighttime, and went to Sicily. After his Retreat, Clodius caused
him to be banished by the Votes of the People 400 Miles from Italy, demolishing
his Villages and his House, on the Plot whereof he built a Temple to Liberty,
and set his Goods to Sale. Cato was shortly after by Clodius's Means sent away,
under Pretense of doing him Honor, against Ptolemy, King of Cyprus; Lucullus
had retired himself from the City, and Crassus minded only his private Affairs;
So that now the greatest part of the Government of the City seemed to lie
between Pompey and Clodius.

II. During these Transactions in the City, U. C. 666.
Caesar was extraordinary busy and diligent in his Expedition, by which he
proposed vast Ends and Advantages to himself, having not only Cisalpine Gaul
allotted him, but the other also, which comprehended all that Space of Land
which is now called France, with a great Part of the Low Countries, and some of
Germany. His first Enterprise was against the Helv^tians, who had wholly
abandoned their Country, burnt down their Towns and Houses, destroyed their
Provisions, and were marching into Gaul through his Province, to the number of
above 300000 of all sorts. Caesar upon Intelligence of this, hastened to Geneva,
and broke down the Bridge there; which caused 'em to send to him, and desire to
pass that way without Molestation. But Caesar resolving not to grant 'em
Passage, delay^d Answering till he could gather all his Troops together, in
which Space he threw up a large Intrenchment from the Lake of Geneva, to Mount
Iura, 19 Miles long, which forced 'em to turn aside, and enter Gaul by the Way
of Sequania. Caesar followed 'em with great Diligence, and defeating a
considerable Party of 'em, they sent a second time to desire a Treaty; but that
breaking off, upon the account of great Demands on both Sides, 4000 of Caesar's
Cavalry were repulsed by pressing too forward upon 'em. But they dearly paid
for this Advantage, for Caesar, after observing their Motions awhile, easily
drew 'em to a general Battle, wherein they were entirely defeated, and not
above 110000 remained of their whole Number, their Wives and Children
desperately fighting among the Carriages till they were cut in pieces. Caesar
crowned his Victory with a more glorious Action, by gathering all who had
escaped, and sending of 'em all in safety into their own Countries.

Caesar resolving not to continue without Action while the Season permitted,
immediately turned his Forces against Ariovistus, King of the Germans, who had
seized on the best Part of Sequania, and used the Inhabitants with intolerable
Severities and Oppressions. The Sequanians being Roman Allies, humbly begg^d
Assistance of Caesar as a Man of undoubted Renown and Valor, who first sent to
Ariovistus without Success, and at last came to a personal Enterview, where
Ariovistus's haughty Language, and the Treachery of some of his Troops, brought
both Armies to a Battle shortly after. Upon the nigh Approach of Caesar,
Ariovistus, was much disheartened; for seeing the Romans come fearlesly to
engage the Germans, whom he imagen'd they could never withstand, it was so
unexpected a thing, that he admired at Caesar's Courage, and found his own Army
seized with a kind of Consternation. But what added most to their Fears, was a
superstitious Fancy raised by their Augurs; which when Caesar understood, he
immediately attacked 'em even in their Trenches, and upon the Hill where they
were posted, till he so provoked 'em, that they came down with great Fury to
the Engagement. But they were all put to the Rout, and he closely pursu^d 'em
for several Miles together, as far as the River Rhine, covering all the way
with Spoils and dead Bodies, to the number of 80000, as some relate it.
Ariovistus himself escaped in a little Boat with a small Retinue, two of his
Wives and as many Daughters being taken Prisoners by Caesar's. These two great
Wars were dispatched by Caesar in his first Year^s Expedition, which he managed
with extraordinary Skill and Dexterity.

In the beginning of the next Spring, Caesar was alarmed by a great Confederacy
against the Romans of all the Belgae, who inhabited a third Part of Gaul, and
were esteemed the most powerful People in the whole Country. He hearing that
they had rais^d above 280000 Men, directed his March to^em with all Speed; and
bravely attacking 'em, just as they were plundering his Allies, the Gauls, he
defeated and put to slight a mighty Number of em; insomuch that the Marshes and
deep Rivers became passable to the Romans, by the prodigious Number of the Dead
Bodies, as Plutarch relates it. But among Several Reveral Revolters, all that
lived nigh the Ocean, yielded without Fighting; Wherefore he led his Army
against the Nervians, the most savage and warlike People in those Parts. These
inhabited a thick woody Country, where bestowing their Children and all their
Goods, in some close and convenient Place in their Forest, they set upon Caesar
with 60000 Men, before he thought of engaging, or had time to encamp himself.
They fell on with such uncommon Fury, that they broke the Roman Cavalry, then
surrounding the twelfth and seventh Legions, they kill^d all the Officers; and
if Caesar himself had not hastily caught up a Buckler and rushed through his
Men into the midst of the Enemy, and his tenth Legion run in to his Assistance
and broke the Enemies Ranks, they had all been cut off. But though by the
Encouragement of Caesar's extraordinary Valor, they fought beyond their
Strength, yet all they could do was not sufficient to make the Nervians, fly,
who obstinately stood their Ground till they were all cut in pieces, not in of
'em being sav^d. This was Caesar's second Years Expedition, and the Renown of
his Victories made him formidable even in Germany, so that several Nations,
beyond the Rhine sent and submitted themselves to him.

Upon the News of Caesar's last Exploits at Rome, the Senate decreed a solemn
Festival for 15 Days, which was a greater Honor than any had received before
him. Not long before which, violent Stirs and and Commotions had been rais^d in
the City upon the account of Clodius, who, after he had freed himself from his
Enemies, began to prove an intolerable Plague and Vexation to many of the
Nobility; and even to Pompey himself; so that now he found it very much for his
Interest to get Cicero reall'd from his Banishment. Whereupon he employ^d Milo,
one of the Tribunes and of great Courage, for that purpose; and using his
Interest with many others, the Matter was at last propounded to the Senate,
where it was generally agreed to. But Clodius opposed it with the utmost
Violence; and when the Matter was propos^d to the Body of the People, and
promoted as much as possible by Milo and his Colleague Sextius Clodius, assisted
by a Party of Gladiators, suddenly set upon the Multitude, raising the greatest
Disorders imaginable: Many of the People were killed, the Tribunes were
wounded, and Quintus, Cicero's Brother, was almost overwhelmed with Dead
Bodies, and the rest all fled. After a day or two, Milo seized upon Clodius,
and carried him before the Praetor: Whereupon a great Contest arose, and
Clodius's Party by the Assistance of Pompey's Gladiators, after some Bloodshed
were beaten off. Pompey immediately mediately possessing himself of the Forum,
put the people upon giving their Suffrages, who with universal Consent and
Applause voted Cicero's Restitution. The Senate likewise decreed Honors to
such Cities as had entertained him, and that his House and Villages should be
rebuilt at the Public Charge. So Cicero, after 16 Months Banishment, returned
in great Pomp and Glory, sufficiently revenging himself upon Piso, Gabinius and
others, by his Writings afterward. He returned in the second Year of Caesar's
Wars in Gaul.

The following Year, Caesar designing for Italy himself, sent out Servius
Galba, one of his Lieutenants, with the twelfth Legion and part of the Cavalry,
against the Antuates, Veragres, and Seduni, Nations seated from the River
Rhosine, as high as the Alps, in order to clear a Passage, and secure all
manner of Traffic in those Parts. Galba in a short time defeated a very great
Party, who had been so bold as to attack him in his Camp. Caesar not long after
returning, found that the Ven^ti and several other Nations of that part of Gaul
called Celtica, had revolted, he turn^d a great Part of his Forces against
them: And these caus^d him extraordinary Trouble and many Difficulties, by
reason of their Naval Strength, by which means they continually shifted
themselves and removed from Place to Place. But at last Caesar having procured
a Fleet* attacked the Veneti at Sea, and there overthrew 'em; Crassus, one of
his Lieutenants, the mean time subdued the Sontiates with the greatest part of
Aquitain, as Sabinus, another of ^em, did the Unelli, and all the Maritime
Parts. Toward the latter End of the Campaign, Caesar marched against the
Morini, a People nigh Calais, and the Mcnapii also which two Nations were still
up in Arms. But the Season being too far advanced* the Rains and foul Weather
secur^d 'em in the Forests and Marshes, and caused Caesar to put his Men all
into their Winter Quarters, which ended his third Years Expedition in Gaul.

III. As Caesar's Conquests established his Reputation in Rome, U. C. 698.
so his Humanity, and other excellent Qualities, absolutely gained him the
Hearts and Affections of his Soldiers. He had now got great store of Wealth, by
which he not only discharged his Debts, but likewise made many great Friends by
his Magnificent Presents, especially to the Ladies, corrupting also the
Aediles, Praetors and Consuls themselves. In this Winter, he passed into Italy
to Luca, where he took up his Head. Quarters, where there was so great a
Concourse of People to pay him their Respects, that 200 Senators were present
together, and so many Praetors and Pro-consuls, that 120 Bundles of Rods were
seen there at a time. Here the Triumvirate took new Measures, and Caesar
fearing he might be recalled from Gaul, procured Pompey and Crassus to
endeavor at the Consulship the following Year, and so continue him in his
Employment for five Years longer. This Design was so displeasing to the Senate
and the Dissentions so violent concerning it, that they went into Mourning as
in public Calamities; saying, That the Proceedings of the Triumvirate were
dangerous to the Quiet and Liberty of Rome. Cato with great Eagerness set up
Domitius to stand against 'em; but Pompey, resolving to remove all Obstacles,
sent some Armed Men against Domitius as he was going to the Election, who
killed the Slave that carried the Light before 'em, and dispersed all their
Company, Cato himself receiving a Wound on the Arm, and Domitius hardly
escaping: And thus by Force and Violence both Pompey and Crassus obtain^d the
Consulship. The People shortly after being ready to give Cato the Praetor-ship,
Pompey pretended strange Prodigies in Heaven, and dismissed the Assembly: Then
corrupting the Tribes with Money, he procur^d 'em to choose Antias and Vatinius,
Praetors. Then by the Assistance of Trebonius the Tribune, the Cons^^^ procured
Laws which continued Caesar in his Government in Gaul for five Years longer,
and assigned Syria and the Parthian War to Crassus, and Africa and Spain to
Pompey, with four Legions, whereof he lent two to Caesar for the Gallick Wars.

Caesar was now proceeding in his Fourth Year's Expedition, which was employ^d
against several Nations of Germany, U. C. 699.
who, to the Number of 430000 of all sorts, being driven out of their own
Country, by the Suevi, the most powerful of all the Germans, had pass^d the
Rhme into Gaul, and forc^d the M^napii from their Habitations. Caesar well
knowing the Levity of the Gauls, and their Readiness to cast off their Yoke,
resolv^d to though ^ehinder the Germans settling on this of the Rhine. And
perceived that the Gauls had begun to treat with 'em, he dissembled it, and
anticipating the usual Time of taking the Field, he marched directly to the
Germans, who being amazed at his extraordinary Diligence, sent Ambassadors to
him concerning a Treaty. He gave 'em a patient Hearing, and favorable Answers,
but still continu^d his March toward 'em. At last the Articles were agreed
upon, provided Caesar would stay three Days, but he wou^d allow 'em but one;
during which time his Cavalry going out to Forage, met with a Party of German
Horse, who fell furiously upon 'em, and put 'em to flight, pursuing 'em to
their very Camp. The Germans sending their principal Officers the next day to
excuse the Fact. Caesar detain^d 'em Prisoners, and advancing with his whole
Army toward the Enemy, surpriz^d ^em, and cut 'em all in Pieces; after which,
with great Skill and Industry he laid a Bridge over the Rhine, march^d into
Germany, reliev^d the Ubii, granted a Peace to such as were willing to depose
Hostages, burnt and destroy^d the rest, and at the end of 18 Days returned into
Gaul, breaking down the Bridge behind him.

Caesar finding he had time this Year to undertake a new Expedition, and led on
by the Greatness of his Courage, and his Desire of Glory, resolved to cross
Seas into Britain; an Enterprise so very hazardous, that few but Caesar would
have ventured upon it. His Pretense was the Britains sending continual Supplies
into Gaul against the Romans; and in order to his Design, he made strict
Enquiries of the Merchants that Traded thither, what kind of People they were,
how they made War, under what Laws they lived, and which were their best Ports.
After which he sent Voluseus to view the Coasts, in the mean time sending for
the Ships he had employed against the Veneti, and making all other necessary
Preparations. Upon the News of which, several of the British People sent their
Ambassadors with Tokens of Submission, whom he sent back with good Words, and
with them Cornio, the better to discover the Country under that Pretense. But
Cornio, not daring to trust the Inhabitants, continued but five Days upon the
Coast, and then returned to make Report of what he had discovered. Caesar
leaving all things in Gaul in a peaceable Posture, and Sulpicius Rufus to guard
the Ports, put to Sea with two Legions and part of his Cavalry after Midnight,
and made the British Coasts the next Morning, where he found the Shores covered
with Men to oppose his Landing; and finding it impracticable there, he failed
eight Miles further. There the Romans met with great Opposition, and were in
danger of being driven back, till the Standard Bearer of the tenth Legion
bold^y leaped ashore; and being well supported by Caesar's Diligence, all the
Army landed, and the Britains fled.

The Britains were so terrified at the Romans Success, that they sent to desire
a Peace, which was granted 'em, and some Hostages delivered. But a great Storm
arising at that time, miserably shattered the Transport-Ships lying at Anchor;
and this, with Caesar's want of Provisions, so incourag^d the Britains, that
instead of sending him the rest of their Hostages, they marched with a
powerful Army against him; who meeting with one of the Legions abroad, had
almost defeated 'em, but Caesar came in with timely Assistance, and brought 'em
off safely. In these Extremities Caesar lost no time in re^itting his Ships,
procuring of Provisions, and securing his Camp; and being afresh attacked by
the Britains, he overthrew 'em, and burnt many of their Towns, which obliged
'em again to desire a Peace. Upon which he required a double number of
Hostages, and finding the Season far advanced, he again put to Sea, and
returned to Gaul, where he safely landed, only two Ships that had on board 300
Men landing a little lower, were set upon by the Morini, who not long before
had been reconciled to Caesar. They were soon relieved, and Labietnus was sent
to chastise the Revolters; who being reduced, he and Cotta harrass'd the
Country of the Menapians, who had hid themselves in the Woods. After which the
Roman Army was sent to their Winter Quarters in B^lgium, which finish^d
Caesar's fourth Years Expedition.

Caesar being very ambitious of enlarging the Roman Dominions as well as
increasing his own Reputation, resolv^d upon a second Expedition into Britain
the next Spring, and made all necessary Preparations for it, the Natives having
given him a fair Pretense by breaking their Articles with him. At the appointed
Time he embark^d with five Legions and 2000 Horse at l^cius or Calais, and
landed in Britain without Opposition, where he shortly after forced one of
their Camps with good success. About which time News was brought him that his
whole Navy was extremely indamag'd with a Storm, and some of his Ships lost;
which made him retire back toward the Seacoast, where with vast Labor and
Industry he repair^d most of 'em in ten Days time, and wrote to Labienus to
build more. After that he marched against Cassivelaun the General of all the
British Forces, and after several Motions, and a bloody Battle, defeated him,
which so terrified the Enemy, that they dared not appear in any Body against
him after that. Whereupon Caesar advanc^d still further, and pass^d the Thames
in spite of all Opposition, his Men wading up to the Neck in the Water.
Cassivelaun, notwithstanding his reputed Valor kept himself to the Woods and
Forests; and finding that several Towns were surrendered to Caesar, and
particularly his own; he also sent to him for a Treaty, who received his
Submission, took Hostages, and impos^d a certain Tribute upon Britain: Then
finding the Season far advanc^d, and apprehending the Danger of some Tumults in
Gaul, he crossed the Sea again, bringing back his Army with much Glory and
Renown; where with appeasing some Disturbances in those Parts, and relieving ^.
Cicero, Brother to the Orator and one of his Lieutenants, who was besieged by
the Eburones, he finished his fifth Year's Expedition.

The next Year Caesar perceived that many of the States of Gaul were disposed
to a general Insurrection, in a great measure upon the account of an imperfect
Settlement of Affairs the last Year; whereupon he re-inforc'd his Army with
three Roman Legions, and as many Auxiliaries as he could well procure. He
pursued his Business with great Vigor, and open^d the Campaign sooner than
ordinary, thereby to break, or at least to weaken their Union. He soon subdued
and reduced several Nations of the Gauls, as the Nervii first, and shortly
after the Senones, Carnutes, and the Menapians; while his Lieutenant Labienus
reduced all the People about Triers. After this he built a Bridge and passed
the Rhine a second time, by reason that several of the Germans had entered into
a Confederacy with the Gauls; where after he had made some Attempts upon the
Su^vi with little Success, upon the account of their flying into Woods and
impassable Places, he turned his Arms against the Eburones. But while he was
ravaging their Territories, the Sigambri crossing the Rhine suddenly, set upon
Cicero's Camp, killed many, and caused a great Consternation among his Men, but
at last were forced to retire at the News of Caesar's Approach, who after that
fell a-fresh upon the Country of the Eburones; then called a Council in Gaul
for the Punishment of all Revolters, and providing his Army with all
Necessaries, drew it into their Winter Quarters; and so ended Caesar's sixth
Year's Expedition, in the 701st Year of the City.

IV. U. C. 700.
During these great Actions in Gaul Pompey and Crassus, upon the expiring of
the Time of their Consulships, began to take care about their several
Governments that were allotted 'em. Crassus was extremely elevated with the
Thoughts of his Expedition into Syria and Parthia, promising himself greater
Success and Glory that even Pompey himself: Therefore he was very forward and
diligent in his Preparations. The Tribunes hindered the raising of Men as much
as they could, and labored to repeal the Laws made for their Expeditions.
Pompey, was well enough satisfied sending his Lieutenants into his Provinces,
being unwilling to leave the City, as he pretended, because of the general
Charge of Provisions committed to him; an Honor which Cicero, in Recompense
for his Ressitution, had procured him from the Senate, that so he might have
Authority all over the Roman Empire. But Crassus betook himself to Force; which
when the Tribunes saw themselves unable to withstand, they desisted, but loaded
him with horrible and unheard of Curses and Imprecations; and many exclaim^d
against it as an unworthy Thing to injure the Parthians who deserved no Ill at
the Romans Hands, but were now in Peace with 'em. But Crassus heeding no
Reproaches in this case, after he had got all things in a Readiness, set
forward to his Province.

Pompey the mean time kept himself wholly to the City, still contriving how to
make himself more great and powerful in his Country: But the Fame of Ceasars
Conquests, which daily fill^d the City, began to prove very ungrateful to him,
who feared nothing so much as a Rival in point of Glory; and therefore he set
himself to do all that was in his power to diminish the Reputation of Caesar,
obliging the Magistrates not to publish any Letters they received, till he had
forestalled the Credit of 'em, by spreading self and disadvantageous Reports.
This gave great cause of Trouble to many discreet and wise Persons, who foresaw
the Miseries that would follow from a Rupture between two such Extraordinary
Persons; and what still augmented their Fears was the Death of Pompey's Wife
Iulia, Daughter to Caesar, which happened at the same time. Pompey most
passionately loved her, and her Wit and Virtue had always a great Ascendant
over the Dispositions both of Caesar and Pompey: The people of Rome gave
sufficient Testimony of the Respect they bore her by public Demonstrations of
their Sorrow; and when Pompey would have carried her Body to one of his Houses
nigh Alba, the people would not suffer it, but bore it into the Field of Mars,
where they buried it with the greatest Magnificence imaginable. From this
Moment Pompey resolved to pursue nothing but his own particular Advancement;
and, for the restoring himself to the Favor of the People, he caused a stately
Theater to be built which he dedicated by Plays and other magnificent Shows,
which were no ways pleasing to Cicero, as appears from one of his Epistles.

While Pompey was managing his Affairs at home, and Caesar in the midst of
Gaul, Crassus was pursuing his Expedition with all Vigor. In his Journey he
marched through Jerusalem, where he ri^led the Temple of a great Treasure, to
the value of 10000 Talents, which Pompey to his great Reputation had spared. He
spent many Days in weighing the Treasure of the Idol Goddess in Hierapolis or
Ed^sia, in Syria; and in his whole Passage he showed more of Covetousness than
Valor, listing many Men, and then discharging 'em again for Money. He likewise
neglected his Opportunities of falling upon the Parthians unprovided, despiss^d
the Friendship of the Armenian King, who gave him leave to pass through his
Country to Parbia, and took no care about the refreshing of his Men some City
till he had certain News of the Enemy, and neglected to pass down the River
Selucia, as he was advi^'d, where he might have been supply^d with Provisions
by Water. This latter Counsel he rejected by means of the cunning Insinuations
of Abgarus the Osroenian, who having formerly been a Friend and Alley of the
Romans, was now in the Interests of the Parthians, and feeding Crassus with
Money to gild over his Treachery, gave 'em Notice of all that passed in the
Roman Camp. He likewise persuaded Crassus to lay aside all Thoughts of Selucias
and C^esiphon, and march directly against Surenas, the Parthian General. This
Advice he followed, and thereby first losing his Son, a very hopeful Youth, he
himself was circumvented by Surenas, under Pretense of a Treaty, and either
slain by his Enemies, or kill^d by some of his own Men, to prevent his falling
into their Hands. His Men were miserably slaughter^d to the Number of 10000
besides 10000 taken, and his Head carry^d to Orodes, King of Parthia, who
caused melted Gold to be poured into his Month, crying, Now satisfy thy self
with Gold, of which thou always have been so insatiably greedy.

Thus fell Crassus in the second Year after his setting out, one of the richest
Men in all the Roman Empire, and by this, one of the Heads of the Triumvirate
was cut off. This laid the foundation of the following Civil War between the
other two; for while he lived, he was a Check to ^em both and balanced their
Interests; but after this, an open Field was left for their Ambition and
Emulation to work in. This happen^d in the 701^ ^ear of the City, nigh seven
Years after the beginning of the Triumvirate, and 51 before our Savior's
Nativity, A. M. 3952*

CHAP. II.
From the Death of Crassus, to the Death of Pompey; which made way for Caesar's
Absolute Authority, and was the second step to the Imperial State.
Containing above Five Years Space.
I. THE same Year that Crassus was slain, U. C. 701.
most violent Disturbances and Dissentions were raised in the City, Factions
daily increasing, nothing managed with the ancient Equity and Moderation, and
all Offices purchased with Bribes and Money, or else gained by Swords and
Clubs. The Consuls, finding themselves debarred by the Power of the Triumvirate
from waging War and leading Armies as formerly, made it their sole Business to
enrich themselves out of the Public Revenues, or from the Bribes as well as
the Sallaries depending upon their Offices. Pompey connived at all this, hoping
that the Infirmities of the State would occasion him to be created Dictator;
and for that reason he retired himself for a while, that his Friends might have
a fair Opportunity of insinuating the Necessity of his Presence, as well as
Authority, for the preserving of the Peace of the City. At the time for the new
Election of Magistrates, there was such a violent Contention among the
Candidates that for Eight entire Months none could be Elected. And what still
heightened these Mischiefs was the Death of Clodius, kill^d by his Great Enemy
Milo, who met him by Accident by his Country House. The Body was immediately
brought to Rome, and ex^os'd all Bloody to the People, which caus^d great
Disturbances among the Multitude, who immediately ran furiously to Milo's House
to set it on Fire; but he being well provided to receive 'em, repulsed and
killed several of the Assailants. Upon which they returned to the Body, where
they pulled all the Magistrates Seats in pieces, made a Funeral Pile of 'em,
and set Fire to it with so much Rage, that all the stately Building where the
Senate used to Assemble, was burnt with Clodius's Body. After this the
Mutineers dispersed themselves all over the City, where, under pretense of
searching for Milo's Friends, they committed the most insupportable Violences
imaginable; so that the whole City was filled with Murders and Quarrels, till
no Body durst walk the Streets unarmed.

These fatal Mischiefs turned all Men's Eyes upon Pompey, as the fittest Person
to redress all; but while they were consulting about creating him Dictator,
Cat^ by many Persuasions, procured the Senate to make him Consul alone, that
so, if occasion were, he might be afterward accountable for any Male
Administration. This was soon after done, having the Authority of a Dictator
conferred on him under a Gentler Name; a thing never known in Rome before, but
upon some extraordinary Occasion, and for some few Days, when Commission was
sometimes given to the Consuls, to take care that the Commonwealth receive no
Damage. New Troops were allotted to Pompey, 1000 Talents allowed yearly for
their Pay, and the Government of Spain was continu^d to him for Four Years
longer, which he Administered by his Deputies. Milo was shortly after Accused by
Appius, Clodius's Brother, and though Cicero himself undertook to defend him, yet
it happened, that by his Fear of Pompey's Soldiers, who surrounded him as he
was Pleading, he was put out in his Speech; and so M^lo, for his Insolence, was
Banished: And when Cic^ro afterward sent him his Oration in Writing, the
Excellency of it made him Answer, That it was happy for him that Cicero was out
in his Harangue, for otherwise he should not have lived so well at Marseilles
as now be did; for that was the Place of his Exile. Pompey having hitherto
executed the Office of a Dictator, took Scipio Metellus for his Colleague, whose
Daughter Cornelia he had lately Married, a Lady of no less Accomplishments than
Beauty. This considerably strengthened Pompey's Interests, who therefore now
thought it no ways difficult to overthrow the Fortunes of Caesar, waiting only
till Affairs were somewhat more ripe for Execution: But Caesar, by his Great
Policy and Inudstry, by his noble Exploits abroad, and his bountiful Presents
at home, still secured himself a sufficient Party in the City. He caused a New
Forum to be set up at Rome, the Place whereof cost him 100000 Sesterces: He
gave also to the People certain Plays, and a Public Feast, in Acknowledgement
of the Honors done to his Daughter Iulia, being likewise a particular
Incourager of Learning. At this time, among many other Learned Men flourish^d
Salust, a most excellent Historian, both for matter and style.

Caesar had now almost completed his Conquests in Gaul, U. C. 702.
when the Troubles in Rome, and his Absence, occasioned many of the Nations to
endeavor once more the Recovery of their Liberty, pursuing their Designs with
Greater Vigor than ever, choosing Vercingetorix for their General. Caesar
resolving to lose no time, forced his way over the Mountains, through vast deep
Snows, and after some various Success against the Enemies numerous Armies, he
overthrew Vercingetorix, who, upon that, retir^d to Alesia, a City of the
Mandubii, shutting himself up with no less than 80000 Men, and made all
necessary Provisions for a Siege. Caesar, not withstanding the Hazard of such
an Attempt, shortly after invested the Place, and here he showed an admirable
Skill and indefatigable Industry, in his vast and prodigious Works he raised
against this Place, both to defend himself, and distress the Town, well knowing
the great Numbers of the Succors that were Marching to relieve it. For though
the City, by the extraordinary Height of its Walls, and the Multitude of its
Defendents, appear^d to be impregnable, he encountered with Greater
Difficulties without, being in a short time besieged himself by 250000 of the
choicest of the Gauls. Yet by means of his double and treble Trenches, his
mighty Lines of Contravallation, and his wonderful Management and Vigilance, he
repulsed the Relievers, and soon after he became Master of the Town, to his
Great Honor and Reputation, all other Places submitting without delay. And
thus ended Caesar's seventh Year's Expedition in these Parts, which, as it was
the most hazardous and dangerous, so it was the most honorable and glorious
that ever he undertook.

The Gauls, notwithstanding their Great Losses, and the irresistible Power of
Caesar's Arms, resolved to try their Fortune once more, and many of their
Nations joined again in Confederacy. Caesar having Intelligence of their
Designs, began his March from Bibracte, and made great Devastations throughout
the Territories of the Bituriges in Aquitain, and subdued several of the People
about those Parts. C. Fabius, one of his Lieutenants, also reduced some Parties
of 'em in the mean time, and Caninius, another of his Lieutenants, defeated
likewise several other Parties; after which Caesar joined him, and invested
Uxellodunum a City of the Cadurci, a Place very strong by Situation; yet he
obtain^d it with little or no Bloodshed, by turning the course of the Springs
that supply^d the Place with Water. After this, the rest of the Places in
Aquitain submitted, and going to Narbone, he then dispos^d his Men into their
Winter Quarters, in such a Manner, that they proved very useful to him
afterward in the Civil Wars. And this finished Caesar's Eighth and last Years
Expedition in Gaul, and all the Parts thereabouts, after a long, and almost
uninterupted Course of many* Glorious Conquests and noble Victories, to the
mighty Increase of his own Honor and Renown, and the great Enlargement of the
Roman Dominions and Riches, as well as the Terror of their Name and Authority.

II. Now the Jealousies between Caesar and Pompey began to be more conspicuous
than ever, and well might a Rupture be expected, when two Persons, the Greatest
that ever Rome produced, were become Rivals in Glory; especially when their
Tempers were such, that the latter could not endure an Equal, nor the former a
Superior. Caesar had now raised himself to an extraordinary Height both as to
Riches and Reputation; then the Grandeur of his Mein, his unbounded Generosity,
and his Noble Actions, had entirely engaged the Affections of his Soldiers to
him, who all loved him almost to Adoration. Again, a great many of the Senators
stood oblig^d to him for considerable Sums of Money, which he had lent 'em
without Interest; he entertain^d, with Magnificence, all such as served under
him, even to the very Slaves; and his Army was a Refuge to all manner of
Criminals, and such as were much in Debt, a great many of which he discharged
at his own Expense; but for some whose Debts were larger than ordinary, he used
to say, That one Civil War would make all even. All this was done at Gaul's
Expense, which might occasion this Observation, That Caesar Conquered the Gauls
with the Romans Steel, and the Romans with the Gallick Gold. Pompey had
observed, that Caesar in his Consulship had rendered himself very distastful to
the Senate, therefore he made it his Business by his outward Carriage and fair
Demeanor to gain their Favor, which he did with good success. Caesar was aware
of this, and for that reason endeavored vigorously for the Consulship in his
Absence, and likewise to procure his Government to be prolong^d, trying all
Ways and Methods to keep his Army till he could get to be chosen Consul. But he
soon found that this Affair did not succeed according to his Wish, being
chiefly hindered by Marcus Marcellus, one of the present Consuls and his Great
Enemy. Tho he was sufficiently sensible of Pompey's Jealousy, he resolved to
endeavor once more to preserve his Friendship, therefore offer^d him his Niece
Octavia, and demanded Pompey's Daughter for himself; but Pompey thought fit to
make choice of an Alliance with Scipio, whom he joined with him in the Consular
Dignity for the last Five Months.

The first Public Appearance of the Division began from Pompey's two Laws,
published in his Consulship, the first being to enquire into the Miscarriages
of Officers for Twenty Years last past, and the latter to forbid all Absent
Persons to demand any Public Employment; both which were design^d against
Caesar. But still no great Violence was used, but all was managed with extreme
Artifice and Cunning till the Election of the New Consuls, who were Aemilius
Paulus and Calidius Marcellus, a Kinsman of Marcus. Now every one with great
Impatience expected to find how the Consuls would declare themselves; the first
had been well secured by a large Present of 1500 Talents from Caesar, but
Calidius was Caesar's Enemy, and being carried on by the same Spirit with his
Kinsman Marcus, followed also his Methods. Curio was likewise one of the
Tribunes, a Person of the highest Fame for his Eloquence and Pleadings, and of
great Parts and Resolution, but now much burthen^d with Debts both for himself
and others, and particularly for Marcus Antonius, one of his Colleagues. Curio
had been one of the most violent against Caesar's Interest; but Caesar, who
well knew all his unhappy Circumstances, quickly found a Way to bring him over,
by furnishing him with Means to quit himself of those Encumbrances. Curio,
after this, made use of Practices very refin^d, forbearing to declare himself
of Caesar^s Party, the better to penetrate the Designs of the other Party, and
after that, sought an Opportunity to break with Pompey. In order to which, he
demanded to have the Charge of the Highways conferr^d upon him, although he knew
it wou^d be deny^d him; and upon refusal, he showed his Resentment; and soon
after, when Marcellus the Consul propos^d with great Earnestness, the recalling
Caesar from his Government, Curio applauded his Wisdom, adding withal, That it
was but Justice that Pompey and Caesar should be both called from their
Governments together. All apprehended the Meaning of this Proposal, and
Pompey's Friends began to be very troublesome to Curio, particularly Appius,
one of the Censors, who threatened to expel him the Senate, and propos^d it in
one of the Assemblies. Curio submitted to any Thing decreed against himself in
particular, but wou^d yield to nothing where Caesar's Interest was struck at,
and the Consul Aemilius secur^d him from the Affront offered him by Appius.

Curio resolving not to be discouraged, made the same Proposal to the People as
he had done to the Senate, which was received with the greatest Applause
imaginable; and as a further Testimony of their Satisfaction, they gave Power
to Caesar to demand the Consulship without removing out of his Province. This
caused Pompey to leave the City, under pretense of going to his Government, but
he really went no further than a Country House of his, where falling sick, he
Wrote to the Senate, That he was ready to resign all his Employments when
Caesar did the like, which he would confirm upon his Return to Rome. Curio
immediately took this Advantage, and told him, It was his Duty to begin what he
proposed, and he would engage that his Example should be followed by Caesar.
The Matter was then publicly debated, but ended only in an Order, that two
Legions should be drawn out of Caesar's and Pompey's Army to be sent against
the Parthians; and this was only to weaken Caesar's Army, for Pompey likewise
demanded the Legion which he had formerly lent him. Caesar immediately
apprehended the Reason of this Order, and Pompey's Designs, nevertheless he
made no Opposition, but surrender^d two Legions, Generously Giving each Man
Five and twenty Crowns. Cic^ro at this time return^d to Rome from his
Government of Cilicia, where he pretended, for his Great Exploits, to have
Merited the Honor of a Triumph. His Absence had hindered him from joining with
either Party, and his present Pretensions obliged him to be a Mediator between
both, but no Proposals of Accommodation would be hearkened to; for Appius
returning from Caesar's Army, published abroad, That, his Soldiers had no
Esteem for him, and that they would certainly come over to the Senates Party,
whenever they recovered this side of the Alps. This Relation gave Pompey great
Confidence, so that Cicero could not be heard: And when he afterward asked
Pompey what Forces he had to oppose Caesar, his Answer was, That he need but
stamp with his Foot, and an Army would start out of the Earth. Many of the
Senators began to talk very meanly of Caesar, and Cato himself scornfully
declared, That he would bring him to an Account for his Actions, and that he
should be treated as Milo had been before him.

Caesar often Writ to the Senate, to desire to be continued in his Government
as Pompey had been, or be recalled both at the same time, or else be permitted
to stand for the Consulship by Proxy. These Proposals being rejected, he
re-pass'd the Alps with his third Legion, and Marched to Ravenna, from whence
he Writ a Letter to the New Consuls, Cornelius Lentulus and Cl^dius Marcellus,
wherein, after an honorable Mention made of his own Exploits, he signified,
That he was ready to resign all his Power, in case Pompey did the like;
otherwise they might reasonably expect, that he could not be wholly insensible
of the Injury that would be done him, as well as his Country. Great Debates and
violent Dissentions were raised about this Letter; but after a long time spent,
a Decree was at last issued out, That Caesar should disband his Forces within
such a time, and if he refused Obedience, he should be declar^d an Enemy to the
Commonwealth. And though this Decree was much opposed by many, yet immediately
after followed another, published only in cases of Extremity, That the Consuls
and other Magistrates should take care that the Commonwealth received no
Damage; and Pompey was ordered to Command what Troops were in a Readiness. From
that Moment a Successor was ordered to Caesar, which was Domit^^, and all were
up in Arms in Rome. Caesar received a speedy Account of this from Curio Anthony
and Longinus, who fled to him in Slaves Habits, in which Condition he showed
'em to his Army, telling his Men, That the Senate had dealt basely and
ungratefully by him, who had done 'em so many eminent Services, as well as
unjustly and inhumanely by his Friends, whose Persons were sacred by their
Office, but were now forced to conceal themselves under the mean Habits of
Slavery, to shun the Fury of his Enemies; and all for maintaining those
undoubted Rights, which even raging Sylla durst never violate. In fine, tearing
his Robes, and falling into Tears, he conjur^d all his Soldiers, That they
would defend his Honor and Reputation, after their serving nine Years under
him with so much Glory and Renown. The Soldiers all with loud Acclamations
answered him, That they were ready to rev^nge all Injuries done to their
General; and Thus began the famous Civil War, about four Years after the Death
of Crassus.

III. Among the many Warlike Qualities of Caesar, U. C. 705.
his Diligence in preventing any Enemy, and pursuing a Victory, was the most
admirable; and here he found it most necessary, since he had to deal with a
Commander far more expert than any he had hitherto been engaged with; therefore
his utmost Skill and Policy was to be made use of at this Juncture. He first
sent a choice Party of Men, arm^d only with Swords, to put themselves as
secretly as possible into Ariminum, the first City of his Province. He himself
spent his time at Ravenna, in seeing the Combat of the Gladiators, and when
Night came, sat down at the Table with his Friends, but soon rose again,
desiring 'em, to make themselves Welcome, and he would be with 'em in a moment;
but he had secretly ordered some Mules to be put into his Chariot, in which
Equipage he set forwards toward Ariminum, with some few of his particular
Friends he had order^d to follow him several Ways, and one Legion, which was
all he had there. It was a troublesome Journey, but they resolved to undergo
it; so sometimes on Foot, and sometimes in his Chariot; Caesar arriv^d upon the
Banks of the Rubicon, a little River which parted Cisalpine Gaul from the rest
of Italy. Here he began to have some Remorse, and all the Misfortunes of the
succeeding War presented themselves to his melancholy Mind, which put him upon
considering, what Posterity would think of this Passage. Sometimes he had
thoughts of going back, and turning himself to Asinius Pollio, It Is now in our
Power, says he, to return, but if we pass this fatal River, our only Retreat
must be to our Arms. Some Authors say, That just by the Place where he stood,
of a sudden there appeared a Man of extraordinary Stature, who made excellent
Music with a Reed he played upon; which uncommon Sight drew many of the
Soldiers to him, among the rest, a Trumpeter, from whom this Man snatched his
Trumpet, and sounding a Charge with a more violent Blast than ordinary, threw
himself into the Water, and passed over to the other side. Caesar, without
Further Consideration passed the River, crying, Let us go where the Gods so
loudly call, and the Fury of our Enemies drive us! From thence he marched
directly to Ariminum, and possess^d himself of it without Resistance: so, with
6000 Men only he began that famous War, sending orders to the rest of his
Troops to follow with all possible Diligence.

This unexpected Enterprise gave most dreadful Apprehensions to the City of
Rome, every one imagining Caesar at the Gates with all his Army; and it was an
odd Confusion to see the Country People running to the City for Safety, and the
Citizens flying into* the Country for Security. Pompey himself was amaz^d, and
Cicero under great Difficulties, as appeared by his Epistles upon this
Occasion; but what was the greatest Trouble to Pompey, was the biting and
reflecting Words of many of his own Party, some laying Indiscretion to his
charge, others Injustice; and Favonius, a crack-brain^d Philosopher, and a
pretended Imitator of Cato, bad him stamp with his Foot and produce his Armies
as he had promis^d. At last Pompey told 'em, That they should not want an Army
if they would follow him; That it was neither their Houses nor their Provinces
that could inspire 'em with the Love of Virtue and of Liberty, but Men of
Honor might find it in all Retreats; and that their following him would be the
only Way to put 'em in a Condition of returning to their Houses with Glory. The
consideration of the present Danger, made 'em resolve to quit the City; so the
Consuls, and almost all the Senate with great Precipitation followed him to
Capua, where were the two Legions which Caesar had sent from Gaul, Pompey with
all Diligence put his Affairs in order, and resolved to retire toward
Brundusium. He left L. Domitius in Corfinium, and Cicero to Command in Capua.
who received his commission with some Reluctance, Pompey^s Affairs seemed to be
in a better Posture by Labienus's leaving Caesar, and coming over to him, which
he did upon some Discontent, expecting to have been made equal with Caesar.
Caesar seemed little to value that, but either through Policy or Generosity,
sent all his Money and Equipage after him. Still Pompey thought it most
convenient to send to Caesar with Proposals of Accommodation, which he did by
Lucius Caesar his Kinsman, and Roscius the Praetor. But the Demands on both
sides could not be agreed upon, for Pompey's Business was only to gain Time,
having his chief Reliance upon the Forces of the East, which were absolutely in
his Interest, Caesar too, depending upon the Valor and Affections of his
Soldiers, had no Design of quitting his Arms, but only to make it appear as
fairly as he could, that he had taken 'em up with Justice.

Caesar now, without losing any further Time, seized upon the Towns of Picenum,
which lay in his Way, and in a very short time became Master of all that
Province. This Progress redoubled the Fears at Rome, and Lentulus, who was come
back to seize the public Treasure, was oblig^d to betake himself to Flight. In
the mean time the twelfth Legion came to join Caesar, who marched to Asculum,
which Lentulus had possessed himself of with ten Cohorts; but upon Caesar's
Approach, retreated in Confusion, a great part of his Soldiers deserting him,
as they had done Curio not long before. Caesar marched directly after Pompey,
not offering to attack Rome, as knowing it would fall of Course to the
Conqueror; and the first Place that made any Resistance was Corfinium, the
Metropolis of the Country of the Peligni, which was possessed by Domitius, who
had lately rais^d 20 Cohorts out of those Parts. Now as this was the first Town
that durst make head against Caesar, all Persons with great impatience expected
the Success of the Enterprise. Caesar made his Approaches with two Legions, and
was engaged by five Cohorts, who defended a Bridge about three Miles from the
City; but were soon driven back to the Gates of Corfinium, which thereupon was
immediately invested. Domitius prepar^d himself for a vigorous Defense, and
wrote to Pompey, That now he had a fair Opportunity to hem in Caesar, if he
would come up; That it would not be for his Reputation to leave so many
Senators and Knights which were now besieged, as well as so many Soldiers, to
the Mercy of the Enemy. Pompey's Answer was, That he was not then in a
Condition to hazard all in a Battle; what Domitius had engaged himself in
Corfinium contrary to his Opinion, and theref^re he ought to think of making as
fair and speedy a Retreat as was possible. Upon this Refusal it was that
Cicero, became so angry with Pompey, as appears from one of his Epistles to
Atti^us.

Domitius concealed Pompey's Answer, giving out that Pompey would bring speedy
Relief: but at the same time consulted with his Friends how to make a private
Retreat; which being at last discovered, his Men seized on him, and sent to
Caesar, offering to deliver him up, and surrender the Place. Caesar, concluded
the Offer ought not to be rejected, but however kept his Men from entering that
Night, to prevent all Violences. Lentulus being in the Town, came out to him,
and humbly begg^d Pardon, putting him in mind of their Ancient Friendship, and
acknowledging the many Favors he had formerly received at his Hands. Caesar
interrupting him, told him, That he came not from his Province to injure any
Man, but for his own Security, and the Restoration of the Tribunes Office, and
the Liberty of Rome. Lentulus sufficiently encouraged by this Answer, desired
leave to return into the Town to give the like Encouragement to others who were
now desperate as to their Fortunes; and the next day Caesar sent to the
Senators and Knights who were in Town, with their Children, and the Officers of
the Garrison to come forth. All these he protected from the Insolence of the
Soldiers, and having a little insisted upon the Point of Ingratitude, he gave
'em all their Liberty to go where they pleased; and to show that he as little
sought after Money as the Lives of his Enemies, he restor^d to Domitius 6000
Sesterces, which he had deposited in the Bank at Corfinium, though he was
satisfy^d that it was public Money, and given out by Pompey to pay Soldiers.
He caused Domitius's Men to take the Military Oath to himself, and after seven
Days respite at Corfinium, he marched through the Confines of the Marrucini,
Tarentini, and Larinates, and then enter^d Apuli^.

Pompey having Intelligence of what passed at Corfinium, immediately retreated
to Brundusium, where the Consuls strait embark^d for Dyrrachium in Epirus with
thirty Cohorts, Pompey continuing in the Town with twenty others. Caesar
shortly after arrived before the Place, and having taken Magius an Engineer of
Pompey's, freely set him at Liberty, with Orders to tell his General, That it
might be for the Common Interest of 'em both, as well as the Good of the
Republic, for them two have an Enterview, and not to trust Matters to a third
Person. Magius brought him no Answer back, which caus^d Caesar to endeavor the
Blocking up the Entry of the Port. To this purpose he ordered a Bank or Dam to
be raised on each Side the Haven, where it was narrowest, and the Water shallow
enough; but where it was too deep, he caused several Vessels to be fastn'd
together thirty Footsquare, moored with Anchors at each corner, and placed them
over against the Entry of the Haven, with Design to Form a sort of a Stacade or
Chain: The first, Bridge of these Vessels was cover^d with Earth and green
Turf, that the Defendents might have firm Footing to sight upon, and the two
Sides were furnished with Hurdles in the nature of Parapets, and every fourth
Float carried a Tower two Stories high, to defend the Works from Attacks and
from Fire. It was easy to judge for what Design all this great Labor and
Pains was undertaken, therefore Pompey endeavour^d to ruin the Works and to
that purpose made use of several Merchant-Ships that were then in the Haven;
upon which he rais^d Towers of three Stories high, furnished with Engines and
all sorts of Darts. These he sent against Caesar's Vessels, hoping to separate
em, and hinder the Continuation of the Work, which occasioned daily some little
Skirmishes with Darts and Arrows.

Caesar was still forward enough to come to an Accommodation, and sent to have
an Enterview with Pompey, but Answer was return^d, That the Consuls being
absent no Prop^sitions of that kind could be received. From this time he set
his Thoughts wholly upon the War, half his Business being already completed,
by reasons the Vessels which transported the Consuls were returned from
Dyrrachium, which Opportunity Pompey thought fit to make use of for withdrawing
himself; and to secure his Retreat, he caus^d all the Gates of the City to be
walled up, and several Houses to be demolished in the cross Streets. The
Avenues of the Port were cut off by certain Pits, fill^d with Stakes, and
covered with Hurdles and Earth, two only being left free, and those strongly
defended with Palisado^s and Joysts, planted after the manner of Fraize. After
these Precautions, he caus^d his Soldiers to embark with all imaginable
Silence, leaving only some Archers and Slingers upon the Walls, who were
ordered to make their Retreat in small Boats on purpose, as Soon as his
Soldiers were got on Board. The Inhabitants of the Town, provok^d by the Ruin
of their Houses, advis^d Caesar of their Retreat, who immediately put his
Troops into Order, and order^d Ladders to be planted at the same Moment that
Pompey should give the Signal to his Archers, who, notwithstanding, secured
their Retreat by certain private Paths which they were acquainted with: So that
Pompey got all his Troops on Board, and immediately weigh^d Anchor: Caesar's
Men got over the Walls, and had fallen into the Pits prepared for 'em, had not
timely Warning from the Inhabitants prevented it. This was a considerable stop
to 'em, but not so great but they had time enough, with some small Vessels, to
seize upon two of Pompey's Ships, which through have, had run themselves
a-ground, while the rest made what Sail they could, and fav^d themselves. Thus
did Pompey with great Skill and Diligence make his escape; and thus did Caesar
in sixty Days time, become Master of all Italy with-little or no Bloodshed.

IV. Caesar finding he could not follow Pompey for want of Shipping, resolved
to pass over into Spain, to drive out Pompey's Troops, all old Soldiers, under
the Command of Afranius and Petreius; but first he designed for Rome, to settle
there some Sort of Government. He likewise sent a considerable Force into
Sicily and Sardinia. the one kept by Cato, and the other by Aurelius Cotta, but
both were abandon^d by them upon the Arrival of Caesar's Troops. Caesar in his
Journey to Rome, gave Cicero a Visit but could not persuade him to go thither
with him, though much Civility passed between em. Upon his arrival at Rome, he
composed a Body of such Senators as he found there, and called them the Senate;
and when they were assembled, made 'em a plausible Speech in Justification of
all his Actions; then he propos^d the sending of Ambassadors to Pompey, but
finding none to undertake that Office, he began to consider about furnishing
himself with Money, and his Recourse was to the public Treasury which, he
wou^d have had opened; but Metellus the Tribune boldly opposed him in that
alleging, That the Money was Sacred, that the Laws forbad it, and horrible
Imprecations had been denounced against such as touched it upon any Occasion
but the Gallick War. To which Caesar reply^d, That Arms and Laws seldom agreed
well together, and that he had removed the former Reasons by reducing all Gaul
to the Roman Obedience; and immediately went to the Doors of the Treasury, but
the Keys could not be found, whereupon Caesar sent to the People to break open
the Locks; and when Metellus had still the Boldness to dispute it with him, in
a great Rage he laid his Hand upon his Sword, threatening to kill him, with
these words; Know, young Man, that it is harder for me to say this than to do
it: Which so terrified Metellus, that he retired. Caesar took out 3000 pound
weight of Gold out of the Treasury, and ever after that, had the Treasury at
his Command in all his Wars.

After this Caesar departed from Rome upon his Spanish Expedition, and knowing
all Pompey's Circumstances, said with his usual Confidence, That he went to
find an Army without a General, and then he would come back to find a General
without an Army. He received News in Provence, that the People of Marseilles
had resolved to refuse him Entrance, that Domitius had got thither with seven
Galleys fill^d with Slaves, Libertines, and Peasants that belonged to his
Lands, and that the Marsiillians had called down all the Inhabitants of the
neighboring Mountains to their Assistance. When Caesar sent to 'em to submit,
they returned for Answer, That they resolved to take part with neither Casar
nor Pompey, to both whom they had equal Obligations. Caesar incensed at their
Proceedings, immediately besieged the Town with three Legions, and ordered
twelve Ships of War to be bu^lt at Arles, which were completed in a Month, and
brought before Marseilles. Caesar finding the Siege, like to be very tedious,
left D. Brutus to command the Ships, and C. Trebonius to carry on the Siege,
and so departed for Spain with all speed, where Fabius, whom he had sent
before, joined him with three Legions, which, together with his own Forces,
made a noble Army. Upon a Report in that Country, That Pompey was coming by Way
of Mauritania to Command his Troops in Person, Caesar used extreme Diligence;
and to assure himself of his Men, he Borrowed Money of all his Officers, which
he Distributed among his Soldiers, by that means engaging his Officers by their
own Interests, and his Soldiers by his Liberality. Afranius and Petreius were
then posted nigh the City Ilerda in Catalonia, with sufficient Forces. Caesar
advanced toward 'em, and Encamped along the River Segre, over which Fabius had
laid two Bridges; but endeavoring to get between the River Herd and the
Enemies Camp, a Bloody Contest ensued, which continued for many Hours, in which
Caesar's Men were much surpriz^d with the Enemies irregular Way of Fighting,
fearing to be hemmed in; till by Caesar's Encouraging 'em, they pressed forward
into a dangerous Place, which they still Maintained for Five Hours, and then
retreated in Good Order. Both Parties attributed to themselves the Honor of
the Victory; Caesar for driving the Enemy before him, and Afranius for keeping
the Post for which they Fought.

Afranius had Greater Appearance of Advantage shortly after; for the continual
Rains carried away Caesar's two Bridges, and hindered the River from being
fordable any where; Which reduced him to Great Streights, not being able to get
Provisions, nor to join a Supply of Forces that came to him from Gaul, nor yet
to rebuild his Bridges, by reason of the Violence of the Stream, and the
Opposition he met with from the Enemy, who lay on the other side of the River.
The News of this gave such great Hopes to Pompey's Party at Rome, that they
went in Great Numbers to Afranius's Wife, to Congratulate her Husbands Good
Fortune; and several of the Senators, who were Neuters before, went over to
Pompey, and among them, Cicero himself, though he took an Opportunity of
leaving him again shortly after. But all these Great Hopes vanish^d by means of
Caesar's extraordinary Diligence, who caus^d slight Boats, covered with
Leather, to be made, and while the Enemy were diverted, by endeavoring to
Intercept some Gauls who were coming to join him, he carried the Boats in
Wagons twenty Miles distant from his Camp, put 'em upon the River, and with a
wonderful Quickness and Dexterity caused his Legions to pass the River; by
which means he rebuilt the Bridges. Thus he reestablished his Passage* got
Provisions, joined the Forces which came to his Assistance, by his Great Skill
astonished the Enemy, and Gained so much Reputation, as, together with the News
of Brutus's Beating the Marseillians by Sea, gained him five considerable
Towns, and made several others Capitulate. Caesar, who spared no Pains to
distress his Enemies, threw up diverse Intrenchments and Ditches in order to cut
off the Water from their Camp, and to make the Segre Fordable. Afranius and
Petreius dreading the success of this Enterprise, after several Motions of both
Armies, resolved to reach Octog^sa, situated on the Iberus, where they had sent
a Party before to lay a Bridge over. In order to this Design they Decamped at
Midnight; but Caesar sent his Cavalry after 'em, and obliged 'em to Ford the
River before they could come at their Bridge; then leaving his Baggage in his
Camp, he suddenly cross^d the River with his Infantry, and pursued em so close,
that they could neither reach their intended Place, nor return to their former
Camp. By which means he reduced 'em to such extremities of Hunger and Drought,
that they were all obliged to yield to his Mercy without any Bloodshed.

Caesar, to show his kind and Generous Temper, dismissed 'em all, and satisfied
'em with incredible Courtesies, such as were never practiced elsewere toward
Enemies. And in a short time after he became Master of all Spain, sending back
his Enemies laden with Shame and Obligations to publish his extraordinary
Clemency and Valor, while he himself departed for Marseilles, which was then
just upon the point of yielding. Upon Caesar's arrival they capitulated: During
which time Domitius made his escape by Sea; Caesar pardoned the Inhabitants,
more upon the account of their Name and Antiquity, as he told 'em, than for any
other Merit, and leaving two Legions in Garrison, he departed for Rome. Upon
his arrival there, he was received with Great Satisfaction by most People, Dic.
lxxi. U. C. 706.
and made Dictator by M. Lepidus the Praetor; but finding this Office not well
liked of, he laid it down after holding of it 11 Days, and caused himself to be
chosen Consul with Servilius Isauricus. His Design was now to procure himself
as many Friends as possible; in pursuance of which Purpose he preferred several
favorable Laws; the first was concerning the Borrowing of Money for the War,
which, as it usually happens, having ruined almost all Credit, and rendered a
great many Men incapable of Payment, Caesar ordered, that an Estimate should be
made of Inheritances, at the same Value they bore before the War, and that
Creditors should take them according to his Estimation; by which means he took
away the Fears of a General Bankrupcy, and supported the Credit of the Debtors.
Besides, he brought over to his Party all such as expected to be favored in
this General Valuation, which was the principal Design of the Law. The other
Law was, for the calling home those who had been condemned during Pompey's
presiding in the passing Sentences of Justice. Caesar likewise made several
other Ordinances, and after having quitted the Name and Dignity of Dictator,
departed for Brundusium to go against Pompey, before which time he received the
bad News of the Defeat and Death of Curio, whom he had sent against Va^us,
Pompey's Lieutenant in Africa.

V. Pompey, after his Departure from Italy into Epirus and Greece, had made all
possible Preparations for Resistance, drawing over all the East to his
Interest; and during the time of Caesar's being at Rome, and in Spain, had
gathered together very powerful Armies both by Sea and Land. His Land Forces
consisted of 9 Italian Legions effective, besides the two which Scipio his
Brother-inlaw brought him; and the Auxiliaries from the Eastern Countries of
7000 Horse, ^000 Archers, and 8 Cohorts of Slingers: These Troops were
distributed into Dyrrachium and Apollonia, and over all that Coast, to oppose
the coming down of Caesar. And more than this, he had prepared a noble Fleet of
500 large Ships, besides Galleys, Brigantines, and other lesser Vessels; all
which were commanded in chief by Bibulus, who executed the Office of Admiral:
Besides these Forces, Pompey had drawn great Sums of Money out of Asia and
Greece; and to recompense himself in some measure for the loss of Spain, had
caused Dalabella and Caius Antonius, who Commanded for Caesar on the Coast of
Illyricum, to be attacked, and with that Success, that the former was driven
out, and the latter taken. These Advantages, which daily kept up the Reputation
of Pompey^s Party, still engag^d more Persons of Consideration to come and join
themselves with him, so that he found he had in his Camp above 200 Senators,
whereof he composed a Body, and they Assembled themselves in the Form of a
Senate. With these M. Brutus had joyn^d himself, not for any Respect to Pompey,
whom he hated; but that severe Virtue, of which he made Profession, and the
Example of his Uncle, and Father-in-Law Cato, had ingag^d him in that Party,
which he thought had the most Justice on its side. In one of their Assemblies,
by the Politic Advice of Cato, it was determined, That no Roman Citizen
should, be put to Death out of Battle, and that no Town subject to the Roman
Empire should be Plundered. In effect, this Laudable Decree drew the Good
Wishes of the People upon the Honorable Authors of it, and gained the
Reputation of great Justice and Humanity to their Designs, and likewise was the
Occasion that the Fortune of Caesar hung, for a long time, doubtful, and was
afterward made use of to justify his Death.

Notwithstanding these Disadvantages on Caesar's side, he proceeded with an
uncommon Vigor, and undaunted Courage, and rendezvouzing at Brundusium, he,
without any Delay, shipped off 5 of his 12 Legions, which amounted to no more
than 20000 Foot and 6000 Horse at this time; the rest were obliged to stay
behind for want of Shipping. Caesar very much encouraged his Men, telling 'em
what glorious Actions they were going to undertake; and in spite of the Rigor
of the Season, upon the 4th of January he weighed Anchor. This much surprised
the Officers of Pompey's Fleet, to find him venture so boldly through the
Dangers both of the Weather and their Navies. But Caesar timed it so well, that
he made his Passage in one Day, and landed his Men at a place called Pharsalus,
not daring to venture into any known Port, which he believed to be possessed by
the Enemy. Having once got to Land, he sent back all the Ships to transport the
rest of his Legions under the Command of Calenus, but in their Passage, 30 of
'em fell into the hands of Bibulus, Pompey's Admiral, who, sensible of his
former Neglect, in a great Passion, set 'em all on Fire, destroying both Owners
and Seamen, hoping by this Example to terrify the rest; and for the future he
took more than ordinary Care in guarding the Coasts. In the mean time Caesar
took possession of Oricum and Apollonia, which, at the sight of his Troops,
surrendered themselves; by which means he cut off all Communication of Land
from Bibulus as long as he staid to intercept his Fleet. Caesar still took care
to justify his Actions, and for that reason he sent Rufus, whom he had twice
taken Prisoner, to Pompey, once more to offer a Treaty, and to refer all to the
Senate and People of Rome; which proved of no effect, for the People of Rome
were too much of Caepom Pompey was now in Macedonia, where Rufus joined him,
and fearing least Ceasar should become Master of Dyrrachium, where all his
Ammunition lay, he Marched with his whole Army to save that Place Upon his
arrival at the City, the Laziness and Desertion of many of his new-raised
Troops, made him cause all his Soldiers to Swear, That they would never abandon
their General, but follow him through all his Fortunes; which Oath was likewise
taken by all the Officers. He encamped by the River Apsus, and Caesar had
posted his Army not far of, on the other side of the River, to cover Apollonia;
and both remained in this manner for some time, impatiently expecting the
Succors that were to come up. But the Absence of Caesar's Legions at
Brundusium was a severe Vexation to him, whose Passage was chiefly obstructed
by Bibul^s at Sea; and Bibul^s himself was in as ill a Condition, by being
hindered of the Conveniences of Land by Caesar's Troops. At last Bibulus dying
of a Sickness at Sea, and leaving no Commander in Chief to succeed him, much
less Care was taken than before. Caesar was sensible of this favorable
Opportunity, but was almost despairing that his Troops were not arrived as soon
as he expected 'em, for he had written several times. At last, his great
Impatience drove him upon an Action which nothing could excuse but the
extraordinary Confidence he always had in his good Fortune, which was this: He
disguised himself in the Habit of a Slave, and with all imaginable Secrecy, put
himself on Board a Fisher-man's Bark, at the Mouth of the River Apsus, with a
Design to pass to Brundusium, where his Forces lay. They rowed off in the
beginning of the Night, but a stiff Gale (...) Wind, at the Mouth of the River,
made the Water ^^ry rough, and the Master and Rowers made several Attempts to
get out to Sea, but the Winds increasing, he ordered 'em to desist. Caesar
finding his Design like to be fruitless, on a sudden discovered himself, Fear
nothing said he, for thou carriest Caesar and all his Fortune: the Mariners,
encouraged by the Presence of so Great a Man, made fresh Endeavors, and got
into the Sea, but the Waves ran so high, that they were at last forced to
return to Land. Caesar's Soldiers, at his Arrival, ran to him in great
Multitudes, and told him with a great Tenderness and Affection, That he had
reflected upon their Courages, by going to seek out New Forces, when they were
sure to Conquer without, whilst he was pleased to head 'em.

In a short time after, Caesar received the good News of the safe Arrival of
most of his Troops under the Command of Mark Anthony and Calenus, at Apollonia,
which consisted of 3 Veteran Legions, one new-raised, and 800 Horse. They were
closely pursued by Caponius, Admiral of the Rhodian Squadron, 16 of whose
Vessels perished by the sudden Turning of the Wind, and the Badness of the
Weather. But 2 of Caesar's Ships behind there, were taken by the Enemy, and the
Soldiers of one put to the Sword; but those of the other, being old Soldiers,
by bravely defending themselves, escaped. The nigh Distance of Caesar's and
Pompey's Armies, had occasioned several Parlies as well as Skirmishes; and here
the last Propositions of Accommodation were made. Pompey protested, That be
would never endure that the World should say, that his Life and Return was a
Favor bestowed upon him by Caesar; and Labienus cried out, That nothing could
make a Composition but Caesar' s Head. These Treaties therefore being
successless, Caesar decamped to join Anthony, and Pompey did the like to hinder
his Design. He had no River to pass as Caesar had, but went and posted himself
in a Place which he thought most convenient for an Ambuscade, which he had laid
for Anthony; but he being advis^d of it by the Greeks of the Country,
entrenched himself in an advantageous Post, where he staid for Caesar, who soon
after arrived; and Pompey fearing to be hemmed in between the two Armies,
retreated to Asparagus nigh Dyrrachium, leaving Anthony the liberty of joining
Caesar, which he did the same day. Thus these two great Men, Caesar and Pompey,
at the Head of all their Troops, were in a Readiness to dispute the Empire of
the World, and, what was still more valuable to them, the Pre-eminence of all
that Glory and Renown which they had gained by their Arms, one in the West, and
the other in the East: And as these Actions were perhaps more Remarkable than
any before 'em in the Roman Story, especially as to matter of Conduct, so it
may be convenient to be somewhat more particular in relating of 'em.

VI. Great Skill and excellent Management was used by both Generals; and Caesar
resolving not to be out-brav'd by the Rival of his Honor, Marched directly
toward Pompey at Asparagus; and after three Days March he came in ^ight of the
Enemy's Camp, and fortified his own, from whence the next Day he drew out his
Troops to offer him Battle. Pompey stirred not, and from that Moment, Caesar
perceived he must take other Measures. And the next day he decamped to go
toward Dyrrachium, with design either of reducing Pompey to shut himself up in
the Town, or to cut off his Passage to such a very useful Place, which last in
part succeeded. Pompey at first believed that Caesar was obliged to draw off
for want of Provisions, but understanding his Design by Spies and others, the
next Day began to March, hoping to prevent Caesar by a shorter Way than he was
forced to take. Which Caesar being aware of, encouraged his Soldiers what he
could, and left 'em but a small Part of the Night for Rest, and arrived the
next Morning under the Walls of Dyrrachium, when they began to discover the Van
of Pompey's Army, who immediately secured a Hill called Petra, which commanded
the Sea, under which was a small shelter for Ships, where few Winds could annoy
'em. Both Parties entrenched themselves in the Posts they had taken; and Pompey
caused part of his Ships to come under his Camp and immediately sent into Asia
and other Parts for Provisions and Ammunition. Caesar perceiving then tha^ the
War was like to continue long, and finding the Want of Corn, caused Magazines
to be made in all Parts not in the Enemy's Hands; and notwithstanding all his
Diligence and Care, the Disadvantages he labored under caused his Army to be
but ill furnished at last.

The Inconveniences that were like to follow from hence, put Caesar upon a new
Design: All round Pompey's Camp were certain little Hills high and steep, of
which Caesar possessed himself, and built Towers upon 'em in the nature of
Redoubts; then causing Lines of Communication to be drawn from Hill to Hill,
and other Works, he endeavored to block up Pompey by that Circumvallation.
This was done chiefly to diminish the mighty Reputation that Pompey had gained
among Foreign Nations, when all the World should know that he was invested by
Caesar, and dared not hazard a Battle. But Pompey resolved to run the hazard of
any Scandal rather than a Battle at this time, or to quit either Dyrrachium or
the Sea; so that both Parties at present were employed in Designs and
Stratagems. Caesar's Men daily carried on their Works to straighten the Enemy,
and those of Pompey did the same to enlarge themselves, they having the
Advantage as to Numbers; besides, theirs being the innermost Circumvallation,
was not extended so far as Caesar's. Though Pompey declined coming to a Battle,
yet he severely galled Caesar's Men with his Archers and Slingers, which oblig
d 'em to make certain Blinds with Clothes and Skins for their Defense against
the Arrows; and no Day passed without some Encounter or other, particularly
when Caesar's ninth Legion was too far advanced, Caesar brought it off safely
when Pompey before believed it impossible. It was very remarkable to find
Caesar besieging an Enemy stronger than himself, and supplied with all
Provisions by Sea, while he himself was reduced to extreme Necessity for want
of Corn. Yet his Soldiers bore all with admirable Constancy, remembering what
great Honors they had often gained after such Miseries as these. They made use
of Beans and Barley, and a Root called Chara, which they mingled with Milk,
some of which they often threw among Pompey's Soldiers, telling 'em, That they
would rather eat the Barks of Trees, than let Pompey escape, now they had got
him in their Power. Pompey was extremely surpised at this, and said, That ^e
did not expect to have had Wild Beasts to deal withal.

But afterward when Summer came on, there was a great Change; for Pompey's
Army could hardly be kept alive, being most distressed for want of Water, which
Caesar by Dams and other Methods had turned another Way. On the contrary,
Caesar's Army was in very good Health, well furnished with Water and all
Provisions, except Wheat; of which also they had fair hopes, Harvest being so
nigh. After this, followed several Skirmishes, and one Night Pompey,
understanding Caesar was absent a little way, attacked his Works, but was
beaten off with considerable loss, and forced to retreat into his old Trenches.
In this Encounter one Sceva a Centurion behaved himself with a wonderful
Bravery, killing two Officers after he had been wounded in the Eye, Shoulder
and Thigh, as Appian relates it, and receiving 230 Shots upon his Buckler.
Caesar greatly rewarded him and many others, and encouraged by this good
Success, drew out his Men every day and offered Battle to Pompey within view of
his Lines; and though Pompey drew out also in Battalia, yet he always kept his
Troops under Defense of his Ramparts, where Caesar did not think fit to attack
kim. Caesar had now by means of his Officers drawn several Provinces of Greece
to his Party, and understanding that Scipio was come into Macedonia, he sent to
him to procure an Accommodation between him and Pompey, which he might easily
bring about, as having the command of an Army. But Caesar finding this not to
succeed, applied himself more closely to block up Pompey, and with the utmost
Art and Diligence, which brought him to a more dangerous Condition than ever;
for his Horses had consumed all their Barley, and likewise all the Leaves of
the Trees, so that there remained no more Subsistence for 'em, and they were
now scarce able to go on their Legs for want of Forage; all which gave very
great Hopes to Caesar and his Soldiers.

These Troubles and Inconveniences which encompassed Pompey, made him resolve
to break through, especially after he had been informed of the Condition of
Caesar's Fortifications by Roscillus and Aegus, two Brothers of considerable
Note, who deserted Caesar, and came over to him. To carry on this Design, he
gave Orders to his light Harnass'd Men and Archers to defend themselves with
Bavins and Faggots of Osiers; then drawing out 60 Cohorts, he put 'em on Board
his Ships, and attacked Caesar's Works by the Sea, which had been too little
regarded, and not well completed. This was done with such Effect, that all the
Centurions of the first Cohort were cut off except one; and though Caesar and his
Officers used the utmost Endeavor to hinder Pompey's Designs, yet by means of
his great Conduct and Forecast, he got out of his Fortifications, and encamped
in another Place by the Sea, where he had both the Convenience of all Forage,
and of his Shipping besides. Caesar perceiving the Loss he had sustained, and
that the Course of the War had not succeeded according to his Expectation,
resolved to change it, and sit down close by Pompey. In that Enterprise he
designed to cut off a Legion of the Enemy which was posted by a Wood; but this
Action brought on a general Battle, where his Men were all entangled within the
Intrenchments of the old Camps lately abandoned; and likewise so surpised and
overpowered by Pompey's Forces, that in spite of all Caesar's Endeavors,
they fled with great Precipitation and Loss. The greatest part perished in the
Trenches, and on the River Banks, pressed to Death by their Fellows. Pompey
pursued his Victory to the very Camp of Caesar, but durst not attack it, being
both surpised with the Suddenness of the Victory, and the Fear of Ambuscades:
And this was his great Error in this Case; for Caesar himself confessed, That
he had been lost without Redress, could Pompey have known how to make use of
the Victory.

This Advantage gained by Pompey, caused him to be saluted Imperator; Labienus
begging the Prisoners, caused 'em all to be slain; and Pompey's Party had such
Assurance, that not thinking any more of further Engagements and Dangers, they
carried themselves as undoubted Conquerors, which they reported in all Places,
not considering the many Circumstances that occasioned this Success. But Caesar
being driven from his former Purposes, resolved to change the whole Course of
the War; and assembling his Men together, with a fearless Mind spoke to 'em
after this manner: We have no reason to be dejected or discouraged at our late
Insuccess, but have much more to be thankful to Fortune for the long and
uninterrupted Course of her Favors, in those many and glorious Conquests in
Gaul and Britain, and those happy and more successful Victories in Italy and
Spain. If after all these renowned Exploits and noble Acts, one little
Disorder, one Error of Inadvertency, or indeed of Destiny it self, has deprived
us of the Success we might reasonably have expected, we ought to correct all by
the Greatness of our Souls, and the Magnanimity of our Courages. After his
Speech he cashier d some Ensigns, but he needed to make no other Examples, for
his Soldiers offered to punish themselves by any Labor or Danger, crying out
with great Impatience, To Arms, let us be revenged or die! But Caesar thought
it not convenient to put 'em to the Trial, till their Minds were settled,
therefore resolved to make a fair Retreat to Apollonia, which he did with that
Diligence, that Pompey could not overtake him, only some of his Cavalry came up
with Caesar's Rear, but were repulsed with Loss. Caesar caused his Baggage to
march before, and his Advantage of being eight Hours before Pompey, oblig d
Pompey in four Days to give over his Pursuit, and betake himself to other
Resolutions.

Caesar was constrained to go to Apollonia to dispose of his sick and wounded
Men, and to muster his Army; but fearing lest Pompey should surprise Domitius,
one of his Lieutenants now in Macedonia, with three Legions, he hastened with
his utmost Diligence to join him. Pompey, perceiving which way he directed his
March, was in as great a Fear for Scipio, now in Thessaly with the Syrian
Legions, and immediately set forward. So each General marched with all the
Diligence imaginable, both to secure their Friends and surprise their Enemies.
Pompey had the Advantage of the Shortness of the Way, and Domitius very
narrowly escaped him, who coming to Aeginium upon the Frontiers of Thessaly,
there happily joined Caesar. Caesar seeing all his Forces together, marched
directly to Gomphi, the first Town in the Way from Epirus to Thessaly. The
Inhabitants, who before had promised Caesar Obedience, now changed their Minds,
as many others had done, upon the Report of his being beaten, being persuaded
to it by the Praetors of Thessaly then in the City; and after having sent to
Scipio and Pompey for Succor, caused the Gates to be shut against Caesar.
Scipio was now at Larissa in Thessaly, and Pompey was not arrived in this
Province, which caused Caesar to Attack Gomphi; he ordered Ladders, great
Baskets filled with Earth, and Hurdles to be got ready with all Speed; and
after having represented to his Soldiers the great Advantages of forcing a
Place so very rich and well furnished, he caused an Assault to be made, which
was carried on and supported with such Fury and Bravery, that notwithstanding
the extraordinary Height of the Walls, the Town was taken in few Hours time.
Caesar lest it to be plundered, and, without stopping, marched his Army to
Metropolis, which yielded to him upon the sight of the Prisoners of Gomphi:
This Conduct of his brought over all the Towns in Thessaly to his Subjection,
except Larissa, which Scipio had possessed himself of.

Pompey arrived at Thessaly within a few Days after the Taking of Gomphi, and
advanced near Pharsalia, whither Scipio went and joined him with his Troops. He
was received by his Son-in-Law Pompey with great Magnificence, making him
Partaker both of his Honor and Authority, and ordering the Trumpets to sound
every Morning at Scipio's Tent as well as his own. Caesar was all the time
giving Orders for the Subsistence of his Army, and with great Skill making
Remarks upon the Inclinations of his Soldiers; and finding them hearty and
vigorous, caused 'em to advance as far as the Plains of Pharsalia where Pompey
was now encamped. The Approach of these two noble Armies, in which were all the
chosen Roman Legions, whose Valor was to decide the Fate of that great Empire;
the Hatred and Ambition of the Generals, animated by the Prize as well as the
Glory of such a Conquest; together with the small Appearance of an
Accommodation, made it out of doubt that nothing but a general Battle could
determine this famous Quarrel. Pompey being the stronger of the two, his Party
did not question the Victory, and fell into great Controversies who should be
successively Consuls, who should have Caesar's Priesthood, and who should have
his Lands, Goods, and Moneys, and likewise how all Dignities and Magistracies
should be disposed of, with a great many Things of the like Nature: In short,
every one set his Thoughts upon sharing the Fruits of the Victory, without
considering how to gain it. But Caesar was far otherwise employed, using all
the Care and Skill imaginable to encourage and perfect his Men: He every day
sent out Parties, and exercised the lusty young Men of his Legions to mingle
themselves among the Cavalry, and contend even with the Horses for Swiftness;
so though Pompey much surpassed in the Number of Horse, yet Caesar's being so well
and skilfully assisted by these light-armed Foot, were not at all afraid of
'em, and in one Rencounter they defeated a great Number of 'em.

Caesar, now finding his Soldiers vigorous and desirous of Action, drew out of
his Camp, and offered Pompey Battle. But that General had no such Design at
present, either suspecting his Troops, or dreading the Loss of his Reputation;
and therefore endeavored to waste Caesar's Army with Fatigue and want of
Provisions. He drew indeed sometimes out of his Camp, but always kept himself
under his Trenches, at the Foot of the advanced Ground where he was posted.
Caesar could not attack him in that Place without great Disadvantage, so that
he resolved to decamp the next Day, that by frequent Motions he might weary out
Pompey's Men, who were not so hardened to Toil and Labor as his. Upon the
taking down of the Tents, Advice came that Pompey's Army was in Battalia, and
far enough from his Trenches; whereupon Caesar caused all his Troops to halt,
and with extreme Joy told 'em, That now was the happy and long-wish'd-for
Moment, in which they might gain themselves immortal Honor. After which he
drew up his Troops in order, and advanced with 'em toward the Place of Battle.
Pompey on the other side was extremely troubled with melancholy thoughts and
presaging dreams, but now was no longer able to hold out against the
Importunities and Murmurings of his Officers, and therefore at present did what
he could to encourage 'em, particularly by telling 'em, That the Strength of
his Cavalry, who had promised him to Attack the Enemy's Flanks before they
could discharge one Dart, was alone sufficient to gain the Victory. Labienus
seconded his Speech, adding withal, That this was not the Army that Caesar
performed such Exploits in Gaul and Germany with, which were all gone home,
killed with Diseases, or destroyed at the last Battle at Dyrrachium. After
which Labienus took a solemn Oath not to return into his Camp but with Victory;
which Oath Pompey himself took, and the rest after him, not imagining that any
thing could be spoken vainly by so skillful a Commander.

Pompey's Army consisted of 45000 Foot, according to Plutarch, and 7000 Horse;
Caesar's but of 22000 Foot, and not much above 1000 Horse; but Appian with some
reason excepts the Auxiliaries, which he supposes to have been great on both
Sides; though all agree that Pompey's Forces were double the Number to Caesar's.
Pompey left seven Cohorts to guard his Camp, and drew up all his Men in three
Lines, every Legion making three Battalions, and each Battalion was drawn up in
half Cohorts, that is, 200 Men in Rank, and eight in File. The Syrian Legions
were placed in the middle, under the command of Scipio; the Spaniards, whom
Pompey most relied upon, on the Right, under Domitius Aenobarbus; and on the
Left was Pompey himself, with the two Legions Caesar had restored at the
beginning of the War, under Lentulus. The rest were in the same Order between
Scipio's Legions and the Wings; only the Auxiliary Troops, at least such as
fought in Order, composed the Body of Reserve; for the others, they were drawn
out without Order upon the Left, with the Archers, Slingers, and all the
Cavalry, the Right being fortified by a River. Caesar left two Cohorts to guard
his Camp, and drew up in three Lines also, in the same Order with Pompey; the
tenth Legion was upon the Right, and the ninth upon the Left, almost joined to
the eighth. The rest of the Cohorts being drawn up between these Legions, were
on the Center, where Domitius Calvinus commanded, Sylla having the Right Wing,
and Anthony the Left. Caesar put himself at the Head of the tenth Legion, whose
Valor he had often experienced, and with design to be opposite to Pompey, who
intended to fall suddenly upon the Flanks of Caesar's Troops; but he soon
perceived it by the Order of his Battle, and thereupon he drew six Cohorts out
of all his Troops, of which he composed a Body of Reserve. He exactly
instructed them in their Duty; and above all, gave them to understand, That all
the Hopes of Victory depended upon their Valor and Conduct alone. Lastly, he
placed his Cavalry so as to cover the Right of the tenth Legion, ordering over
and above his third Line not to march, till they received a Signal from him.

Now it was that the Fate of the vast Empire of Rome was to be decided by the
greatest Generals, the bravest Officers, and the stoutest Soldiers in the
World, each Man almost being inspired with the Desire of conquering Gloriously
or dying Honorably. As the Armies approached, the two Generals went from Rank
to Rank encouraging their Soldiers: Pompey represented to his Men, The Justice
and Merit of his Cause; the Advantage of their Numbers, strengthened by the
Assistance of so many Illustrious Senators; and the Glory lately obtained at
the Battle of Dyrrachium. Caesar was contented only to demonstrate, That he had
endeavored by all possible Means to obtain an honorable Peace; and if his
Enemies had pleased, they might have spared the Blood of so many brave Men. So
seeing the Impatience of his Soldiers to fall on, he gave the Signal of Battle;
the Word on Pompey's side was, Hercules the Invincible; that on Caesar's, Venus
the Victorious. There was now only so much Space between the two Armies as was
just sufficient for the Place of Battle; but Pompey ordered his Men to receive
the first Shock without moving from their Places. Caesar's Soldiers seeing
that, like Men of Skill, of their own accord made a Halt in the midst of their
Carrier; and after taking a little Breath, ran furiously upon the Enemy, first
discharging their Javelins, then drawing their Swords, as Caesar had given 'em
Orders. Pompey's Men received the Charge without the least Disorder, and
falling on with their Javelins and Swords, a cruel and bloody Battle ensued,
which for some time seemed equal. Then Pompey ordered his Cavalry to charge,
which with the multitude of Archers and Slingers, soon obliged Caesar's Men to
give ground, and got themselves upon the Flank of his Army, as they first
designed. Whereupon Caesar immediately ordered the six Cohorts to advance,
which were his Body of Reserve, to charge upon the Faces of the Enemy with
their Pikes ported. This Contrivance disordered those nice and esseminate
Knights; and the fear of spoiling their Faces, put 'em into such Confusion,
that upon the Rallying of Caesar's Cavalry, they were all broke in a Moment,
and the Slingers and Archers being thus abandoned, were all cut to pieces.
Caesar industriously following that Advantage, advanced and charged Pompey's
Troops upon the Flank, which Charge they stood with great Resolution, and the
Allies bravely defended themselves, when Caesar gave the Signal for his third
Line to advance, which fresh Troops pouring in upon Pompey's, wearied out, and
attacked on all Sides, easily broke 'em. The Flight began among the Strangers,
though Pompey's Right Wing still valiantly maintained their Ground; but Caesar
causing his Men to cry out, Kill the Strangers, but save the Romans, the Romans
laid down their Arms, and received Quarter, but a miserable Slaughter was made
among the Strangers, who fled with all speed.

Caesar, now finding the Victory certain, and Pompey retreated to his Trenches,
cried out to his Men, That they ought to pursue the Victory, and take the
Enemies Camp. It was now Noonday, and though they were wearied out with the
Extremity of the Heat, yet upon seeing their General march a-foot at the Head
of 'em, they followed him with great Resolution, and falling on with fresh
Courage, the Enemy all fled to the Mountains not far off. Pompey himself was so
extremely disheartened and confounded, that here he could perform nothing
worthy of his great Courage or Reputation, but getting on Horseback, he fled
to Larissa, and from thence to the Sea. Caesar found throughout the Camp much
rich Furniture in the Tents, Tables spread with fine Linen, and Cubbords
covered with Plate, which sufficiently showed the Luxury and Assurance of the
Enemy. Caesar earnestly desired his Soldiers, Not to amuse themselves with
Plunder, but to complete this glorious Victory; and by means of the great
Respect they bore him, he prevailed. So a Trench was immediately thrown up
about the Mountain where the Enemy was retreated, who, wanting Water, were
forced to quit it, and retire to Larissa. Caesar immediately followed 'em with
four Legions, and after six Miles March, drew up in Battalia, which caused the
Enemy to betake themselves to a high Hill, at the Foot of which ran a River.
Now, Night approaching, Caesar's Men were almost spent, and ready to faint with
the incessant* Toil of the whole Day; yet still by his obliging Persuasions, he
prevailed with 'em to cut off the Convenience of Water from the Enemy by a
Trench. This immediately forced 'em to a Capitulation, only some Senators made
their Escape in the Dark. The next Morning Caesar ordered all the Enemy to come
down into the Plain and lay down their Arms, which they obeyed, and falling
upon their Knees before him, in the most suppliant Posture, begged for Mercy,
which he granted 'em with all the Clemency and Kindness imaginable, and
commanded his Soldiers not to offer 'em the least Incivility, nor plunder their
Baggage. Thus Caesar, by his wonderful Skill and Courage, and by the
indefatigable Industry of his Soldiers, obtained the most complete, though not
the most bloody, Victory that ever General in the World did, 15000 of the Enemy
being slain in Battle, and 24000 surrendered, he himself losing a very
inconsiderable Number.

In the mean time, the great Pompey, who just before had been the glorious
Commander of Kings, and all the Greatness and Magnificence of Rome, now found
himself reduced to seek Retreat with some few of his Friends in a poor
Fisherman's Cabin: From whence he went aboard another Vessel, and made forward
every Day as much as he could; but the ungrateful Sound of his Defeat still
flew before him, which so dejected and confounded him, that he could not think
of any thing that might be serviceable to him. His Assurance of Victory made
his Defeat most intolerable, leaving him naked and disarmed of all Relief: And
his Misfortunes had so infaturated his Mind, that he could not so much as use
those Advantages he had still by Sea, where he had a powerful and victorious
Fleet. He sailed first to Amphipolis, then to Lesbos, where he took his Wife,
who bitterly complained of the ill Destiny which allid her to Crassus first,
and afterward to Pompey, only to cause the Ruin of two such Illustrious
Families. Pompey from thence directed his Course to Egypt, where King Ptolemy,
a Minor, was in War with his Sister Cleopatra, whose Father Pompey had settled
in his Kingdom. Pompey sent to him, That in regard of the ancient Hospitality
and Amity between him and his Father, he desired a Retreat of him in
Alexandria, and that by his Wealth and Power he would support him, now fallen
into the utmost Misery and Calamity. The Message was well enough received, but
such as were Protectors of the King, and Guardians of the Kingdom now in his
Minority, either induced by the Fear of the Armies being gained by Pompey, many
of 'em having been his Soldiers, or else despising the lowness of his Fortune,
gave a civil Answer openly to the Messengers, and desired him to come to the
King: But secretly plotting among themselves, sent Achillas, a principal
Commander and of great Boldness, together with Septimius a Roman Tribune, to
kill him. They met him with much Civility, and Pompey knowing Septimius to have
led a Company under him in his War against the Pirates, went aboard a little
Bark, with a few of his Soldiers, and there was barbarously and treacherously
murdered by Achillas and Septimius, his Wife and Friends flying with what sail
they could make. His Head being cut off, they left the Body on the Shore, which
was carefully taken up by Philip his Freed-Man, who gathering up some Pieces of
a Broken Boat for a Pile, was surpiz'd by an old Roman Soldier of Pompey's,
residing in Egypt: Who art thou, said he, that art making these sad
Preparations for the great Pompey' s Funeral? Philip answered him, One of his
Freed-Men. Ab, replied he, thou shall not have all this Honor to thy self, but
suffer me to partake in an Action so Just and Sacred; that among all the
Miseries of my Exile, I may please my self in having the Honor to touch the
Body, and assist at the Funeral of the greatest and noblest Soldier that Rome
ever produced. After which they gave him the last Rites, the Sadness of which
Ceremony was very peculiar.

Such was the End, and such the Funeral of Pompey the Great, who after his
escaping so many memorable and eminent Dangers, where he might have fallen with
the Honor agreeable to the Greatness of his Character, came at last to lose
his Life miserably by the Hands of three or four Villains; he being now in the
58th Year of his Age. This happened near two Years after his Breach with
Caesar, and this cut off the second Head of the Triumvirate, and made way for
Caesar's Absolute Power soon after; and this happened in the 706th Year of the
City, A. M. 3957, about 12 Years after the beginning of the Triumvirate, and 46
before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. III.
From the Death of Pompey, to the Death of Caesar; which finished the Power of
the first Triumvirate, but still kept down the Consular State.
Containing the space of nigh four Years.
I. THUS Successful was Caesar in all his Actions, U. C. 706
especially in the last, which Advantage heresolv'd to pursue to the utmost;
and knowing that all his Enemies Hopes were lodged in the Person of Pompey, he
followed him with his usual Diligence: And as though Fortune was resolved never
to forsake him, Cassius retreating into Asia with a Fleet of 60 Sail, fell in
among Caesar's little Barks he had provided for his Troops; and though he might
easily have ruined Caesar, yet Caesar's Presence and Behavior so over-awed
him, that he immediately surrendered himself with all his Navy. Caesar shortly
after arrived at Alexandria with two Legions and 800 Horse, in ten Galleys of
Rhodes, and a few Ships of Asia, ordering the rest of his Men to follow. Though
these Forces were very inconsiderable, the Legions being reduced to 3200 Men,
yet the Confidence he had in his Victories, and the high Reputation they had
gained him, made him believe that he should meet with Obedience wherever he
could find Men. Upon his landing at Alexandria, he was entertained with the
News of the Death of Pompey, whose Head was presented to him, and his Ring
which he used for his Signet. This mournful Spectacle immediately revived the
Thoughts of his former Friendship, which with the sad Imagination of the fatal
Misfortunes that attend the greatest Men, drew Tears from his Eyes, and made
him turn away his Face with Horror, keeping the Ring, and sending away the
Messenger in a Moment. He afterward to show his Respect to this great Man,
caused a magnificent Sepulcher to be built by the Place where he was murdered,
with a Temple which he called The Temple of Wrath.

Caesar upon his entry into Alexandria, having his Axes and Fasces carried
before him as Consul, the Multitude were much offended, as they were at his
Landing, crying out, That the King's Authority was diminished; which occasioned
Caesar to give Orders for other Legions, which were enrolled for Pompey's
Service, to be brought to him out of Asia. In the mean time, as an Argument of
his Confidence, he made great Entertainments, and assisted at the Conferences
of Philosophers, who were in great Numbers within that City. But Photinus the
Eunuch, who came to Alexandria with the young King, daily gave him fresh Marks
of his Dissatisfaction and Intention of making use of Arms; till at length the
Insolence of this Person, and probably the Reputation of the admirable Beauty
of Cleopatra, caused him to declare publicly, That the Controversy between
the King and his Sister belonged to the Cognizance of the People of Rome, and
consequently to himself as Consul, and the rather, because old Problemy by his
Will had left his eldest Son and Daughter Heirs, and the People of Rome
Executors. Upon this Account he intended to make up all Differences between
'em, and sent to 'em to have 'em rather to plead their Causes before him than
to decide the Controversy by the Sword.

At this time Photinus had the Administration of the Kindgdom, and he disdained
to come to Caesar's Proposals, but thereupon procured Acbillas to march
directly to Alexandria at the Head of 22000 stout Men, many of 'em being
Romans. This forced Caesar to take great Care, after he had secured the King's
Person, to secure himself in the Town, not being strong enough to stand 'em in
the Field, and to cause his own Quarters to be strongly fortified, where,
nevertheless, he was shortly after attacked by Achillas. Caesar's Soldiers
bravely repulsed the Enemy, whose chief Design was to get Possession of the 50
Ships and 22 Galleys which were in the Haven, which obliged Caesar, after a
long and doubtful Fight, to possess himself of the Pharos, a Tower of wonderful
Structure in an Islet just by, and to set Fire to those Vessels; the Flames
whereof being driven by the Wind upon some Houses nigh the Port, burnt 'em
down, and among 'em unhappily consumed one of the best Libraries in the World,
belonging to the Kings of Egypt, and consisting, as some Authors report, of
700000 Volumes. The Port made Caesar Master by Sea, though he was close shut up
by Land, and the People of the Town were generally against him. In the mean
time the young Princess Cleopatra came to Caesar with much Danger and
Difficulty; she embarked in a Shallp with only Apollodorus, one of her
Domestics, with whom she arrived that Night under the Castle of Alexandria,
and there Appollodorus binding her up in a Packet of those Necessaries which he
brought along with him, took her upon his Back, and by that means deceiving the
Egyptian Guards, carried her to Caesar. Caesar was too sensible of the Charms
of Beauty, not to be touched with those of Cleopatra, who was now in the Prime
of her Youth, and one of those sprightly Beauties whereof every Feature had its
particular Grace: All which, joined with an admirable Wit, and a Voice so soft
and bewitching, that even that Perfection alone, without the help of her Eyes,
which were the finest in the World, enslaved the Hearts of all who heard her;
nor could Caesar refuse her his, but at first sight showed himself of her
Interest. Ptolemy her Brother quickly found it, and Caesar's Uneasiness in his
Love, made the Inhabitants more Turbulent; but he soon quelled all, and as
Consul and Tutor to the young Princess, in a general Assembly he read the Will
of Ptolemy their Father, and promised to put it in Execution.

In the mean time Photinus was slain in the City by a Tumult, and Ganymedes the
Eunuch, under pretense of assisting Arsione, King Ptolemy's youngest Sister,
and by declaring her Queen, had caused Achilles to be slain, and procured
himself to be made General of the Army, who assuming the said Authority,
continued the Siege with much Vigor, reduced Caesar to great Extremities by
spoiling all his fresh Water, which he soon remedied by his extraordinary
Diligence, and digging abundance of Wells. Caesar began now to expect his
Succors with Impatience, and being informed that the 24th Legion was arrived
on the Confines of Africa, but could not come up by reason of the Winds, he
embark^d with his whole Fleet, but with only his Mariners, and set forward to
meet it. The Enemy knowing that he was without Soldiers, atrack'd him; but he
soon worsted 'em, joined his Legion, and returned to Alexandria. This first
Fight astonished the Alexandrians, nevertheless they resitted, and came against
Caesar with a stronger Fleet than before, but were again routed, and forc^d to
fly under the Peer of Pharos. Caesar was only Master of the Tower, and making
an Attack upon the Peer with some little Success, was nevertheless at last
repuls^d with so much Disorder, that not being able to hinder his Soldiers from
throwing themselves on Board his Ship, he sav^d himself by swimming, but with
so much Presence of Mind, that he lost none of his Papers, which he held out of
the Water with one Hand, to preserve 'em from wetting, nor yet his Coat Armor,
which he carried in his Teeth.

The Alexandrians, finding they were not able by Force to drive out Caesar, had
recourse to their old Arts of Dissimulation, demanding their King from him,
pretending, That they were weary of the Command of Ganymedes and a Girl, and
that were desirous of making Peace with the Romans under the Authority of their
lawful Prince. Caesar was sensible of their perfidious Temper, but finding the
War might be more honorable, and not much more dangerous, presently deliver^d
him, who, as he expected, employed all his Forces against him. But at this time
Mithridates of Pergamus, a Man of noble Birth, of brave Spirit, and great
Fidelity to Caesar, came with an Army to Caesar's Assistance. He first took
Pelusium by the Way, and went to pass the River Nile at a Place called Delta.
Which Ptolemy being informed of, went in Person to oppose him, and Caesar did
the same to assist Mithridates, who before the Arrival of either, had already
beaten Ptolemy's Men in one Rencounter. Caesar also defeated others before he
could join Mithridates; after which he attack^d a small Fort between his Camp
and that of Ptolemy, which he took, and the next day attack^d their very Camp,
which he forc^d, and the King endeavoring to save himself by Water, was
drowned. After this Victory, Caesar met with no Opposition in all Egypt, and
the City of Alexandria was the first that submitted; so he made his Entry as
Conqueror, and pardoned the Citizens in favor of Cleopatra, whom he
established Queen with her younger Brother Ptolemy, according to the Intent of
their Father's Will, driving out Arsione and Ganymedes. The rest of the Days he
staid in Egypt, he dedicated to the Love he had for this beautiful Princess,
and the Rejoycings for his Victory. He spent much of his time in her Company,
and some Authors report that he went up the Nile with her in a magnificent
Galley, and that he had gone as far as A^thiopia, if his Army had not refused
to follow him; but however, he afterward gave such public as well as private
Testimonies of his A^^ection, that he left her with Child of a Son, whom he
called Caesario.

II. About the beginning of the Alexandrian War, Caesar had great Honors voted
him by the Senate at Rome, who were now most of ^em gather^d together: He was
made Consul for five Years together; Dictator for a whole Year, and had the
Power of Tribune for his Life; and tho^ he was out of Italy, he took the
Dictatorship, Dic lxxiii Annual. U. C. 707.
and made Marc Anthony his Master of the Horse, who as yet had not been
Praetor^ Anthony at his six Months end, was forc^d to lay down his Office, and
was made Consul, the Augurs crying it was unlawful for any Master of the Hor^e
to hold that Office above six Months. But the principal Cause was his
exercising too great an Authority in that Place; which with the outrageous
Carriage of Trebellius and Dolabella, both Tribunes, rais^d great Commotions
and Disturbances in the City. Caesar's Presence was now much wanted, and he
might have been far sooner at Rome, if Cleopa^ra had not held him fast by her
Charms in Egypt, which Hold she was at last forc^d to let go after nine
Months, and give way to a greater Violence, which hurry^d him out of her
Embraces. This proceeded from Pharnaces, the Son of the great Mithridates, who
had formerly been left King of ^osphorus, and being ambitious of Recovering of
his Father's Dominions, he seized Colchis with little trouble, and all Armenia
in the Absence of Deict^^us the Tetrarch of that Kingdom, besides some other
Places. Caesar being then employ^d in Egypt, and hoping to reduce him by
others, had sent (...) Calvinius against him, with orders to receive all the
Forces that were in Asia. Domitius joined with Deiotarus and Ariobarzanes,
marched strait against Pharnaces, then at Nicopolis, which Place he had lately
taken. Pharnaces affrighted at his Enemy, desired a Truce, which Domitius
contemned, and resolving to fight, was considerably worsted in the Engagement.

Pharnaces, elevated with this Success, took in the rest of the Cities of
Pon^us, and marched into Bithynia, hoping to meet with his Father's Fortune,
but was stopped in his Career by the Revolt of Asander, whom he had left in his
Kingdom in Chief. He designed to march against him, but was diverted by the
News of Caesar^ s coming, who upon these Occasions thought it not honorable to
make any longer Stay in Egypt. Pharnaces was much more terrified at the Name
of Caesar than his Army, and as he approached, sent often to him about a Peace,
laboring by all Ways to evade the present Danger, alleging Caesar' s
pardoning of Deiotarus, who had been a greater Enemy to him than he, not
doubting, but early to renew the War after his Departure. Caesar, sufficiently
apprehensive of his Designs, gave good Words to the Messengers, the first and
second time, but at the third time, he objected, among other Crimes, His
Ingratitude to Pompey his Benefactor; adding, That be received no less
Satisfaction in pardoning of all private Injuries, than in revenging such as
had been offered to the Republic. And thereupon using all Expedition, on one
and the same Day he went and fought the Enemy, who (...) distressed him with
their Horses and Charious that bore Scythes, but the Veteran Troops obtain^d
the Victory in a few Hours; and Pharnaces himself flying, and endeavoring to
break into Bosphorus, was repuls^d and slain by Asander; the just End of a
Person so rebellious to his Father, and so ungrateful to his Friends. This
Victory being so sudden and effectual, made Caesar say, That Pompey was very
happy in gaining so much Glory against this Enemy at so easy a Rate. And in
writing to Anicius at Rome, he expressed the Celerity of this Expedition in
three Words, Veni, Vidi, Vici: I came, I viewed, I vanquished. Caesar settled
Affairs in these Parts as well as his time would permit him; and after his
bestowing the Government of Armenia upon Ariobarzanes, that of Iudaea upon
Hyrcanus and Antipater, and that of Bosphorus upon Mithridates, he embarked and
went into Italy with a Diligence which put all the World into Admiration.

III. Upon Caesar's Arrival in Italy, U. C. 708.
Cicero, and a great many others of Pompey's Party went out to meet him, and
were received by him with the same Civility as if they had always been of his
Interest. This courteous and obliging Behavior so far gained him the Favor of
the People of Rome, so that he easily appeased the Dissentions there, and the
time of his Dictatorship being expired, he was chosen Consul with Aemilius
Lepidus. He could not find time to make any long stay at Rome, for the Remains
of Pompey's Party had rallied themselves in Africa under Scipio and Cato, and
Iuba King of Mauritania, which made him hasten thither, after he had appeased
some Mutinies among his own Soldiers, who insolently demanded their Rewards and
their Discharge; but upon Caesar's Presence, and his telling 'em, They should
not partake of the Honor of the African Expedition, they submitted, so as to
offer themselves to be decimated. Caesar, after his usual Diligence, landed in
Africa with a small Party, but the re^^ soon after follow^d; he was in some
Distress for want of Necessaries for a little time, but that he conquer^d with
great Constancy. After many Movements, and several Skirmishes and smaller
Battles between both Parties, in which Caesar was sometimes in great Danger,
Caesar resolved to come to a decisive Ba^tel if it were possible. In order to
this Design, he invested the City Tapsus, supposing that Scipio would attempt
to relieve it, in which he was not mistaken; for Scipio joining with King Iuba,
and encamping near Caesar, they shortly after came to a gen^^^l Battle, in
which Caesar gave a final Defeat to all the Enemy's Forces, with little or no
loss on his side, and became Master of all their Bag and Baggage. Taplus,
Adrumentum and Zama immediately surrender^d, Cato fled to Utica, and Iuba and
Petreius killed one another in Despair, and all Iuba's Kingdom submitted to the
Government of Rome. Sitius, one of Caesar's Lieutenants, shortly after
encountered Afranius and Sylla, as they were going for Spain, defeated their
Forces and took 'em Prisoners, after which they were both kill^d in a Mutiny.
Scipio himself and several Senators being embark^d for Spain, were driven upon
Sitius's Fleet, where they all were slain by their Enemies, or by themselves.

Of the Generals of P^mpey's Party, Cato was only remaining, who had retreated
to Utica, where he had establish^d a kind of Senate, composed of 300 Romans. He
was at first resolved to hold out the Town, but finding the Minds of the
Inhabi^ants much divided, he quitted that Design for another more agreeable to
his Character and Philosophical Opinions. He desired his Friends, some to save
themselves by Sea, and others to rely upon Caesar's Goodness, and embracing
them with a more than ordinary Tenderness that Night, his Discourses to 'em
being about Morality, where he defended that Maxim, That the Virtuous were only
happy and free, but wicked Men were always miserable and Slaves. His Sons,
suspecting his Intentions, at Supper took his Sword from him, which he missed
not when he arose, but lying down in his Bed read Plato's Dialogue called
Phaedo, concerning the Immortality of the Soul. Then missing his Sword, he was
very angry and dissatisfied till it was brought him; then feeling the Point, he
laid it by him, saying, I am Master of my self. He then took his Book again,
which he had read twice over, and fell into a sound Sleep; but just as Day
began to appear, he took his Sword, and thrust himself through the Breast,
which not despatching him, he staggering fell upon his Bed, and at the same
time threw down a Table upon which he had drawn some Geometrical Figures. At
the Noise of this his Slaves came in, and with their Cries also brought his
Sons and Friends, who found him weltring in his Blood, and his Bowels out of
his Body: His Eyes were yet open, which caused his Physician to ease him upon
his Bed; then putting up his Bowels, which were yet unhurt, he closed up the
Wound. Upon this, Cato recover^d his Spirits, and being transported with Fury,
thrust back the Physician, rent open his Wound again, and tearing his Bowels,
expired before their Eyes. Thus died Cato, a Person of singular Justice,
Severity, and Magnanimity; upon the hearing of whose Death, Caesar said, Cato
has e^vy^d me the Glory of saving his Life, and therefore do I envy his Death;
designing, as was thought, to have conquer^d him by his Kindness and
Generosity: His Death completely finished Caesar's War in Africa.

Africa being entirely reduced to Subjection, Caesar returned to Rome to
triumph for all his Victories; and first to obtain the Favor of the People, he
gave 'em to understand, That his last Victory had gain^d the Commonwealth of
Rome a Country so large and rich, that it could yearly furnish the City with
200000* Bushels of Corn, and 3000000 Pounds of Oil. After this, he ordered the
Preparations for his Triumph upon four successive Days; the first designed for
the Triumph over Gaul, showed in a great many Tables the Names of 300 Nations
and 800 Cities, conquered by the Death of a Million of Foes, whom he had
defeated in several Battles. The second Triumph was over Egypt. The third
showed the Defeat of Pharnaces in Asia. And the fourth that of King Iuba in
Africa; which Triumphs were over Foreigners, not Romans. Here was the utmost
Show of Magnificence, and all the Roman Soldiers followed their great General
crowned with Laurels, and in that Equipage he went to the Capitol, the Steps
whereof he mounted upon his Knees, forty Elephants being ranged on each Side,
carrying great Candlesticks, filled with Flambeaus. The Silver Vessels, and
Statues of Goldsmith's Work, which were used in these Triumphs, amounted to
65000 Talents, which is above twelve Millions of our Money, besides 1822 Crowns
of Gold, weighing^ 15033 l. which were Presents that the Princes and Cities had
made him after his Victories, according to the Customs of those Times. Out of
these Sums he paid his Soldiers, besides what he had promis^d them in the
beginning of the Civil Wars. To every one 150 Pounds of our Money, as much more
to the Centurions, and twice as much as that to the Tribunes and Commanders of
the Cavalry; and for their Retreat after the Wars, he gave them Inheritances in
several Places separated from Italy. The People also were sensible of his
Bounty, for he distributed to each particular Person ten Bushels of Corn, and
ten Pounds of Oil, and added 100 Denarii to the 300 he had promised 'em before.
Atfer this he nobly entertained the whole People at 22000 several Tables, and
that nothing might be wanting to the Pomp and Magnificence of these Feasts, he
caused 2000 Gladiators to fight before the People, and made Representations of
Sea and Land-Fights of four or five Thousand Men of a side, besides all sorts
of Plays and Shows. These Entertainments drew so many People to Rome, that the
greatest part of 'em were forced to lie in the open Air, and a great many were
stif^ed in the Press; among the rest, two Senators.

Many great Honors were after this conferred upon Caesar, among which, was
that of Master of Manners; as if the Name of Censor was too mean, for three
Years; all joining to show their great Forwardness in preferring him, some out
of Love and Respect, others out of Fear and Flattery: And indeed many began to
dread the Severities of Marius and Sylla; but Caesar's extraordinary Civility
to both Parties, and the Greatness of his Nature, in a great measure freed 'em
from any such Fears. He began now to settle the Commonwealth, and make many
new Laws: He committed the Power of Judicature to the Senators and Equites
alone; and both by Laws, and his own Care, he restrained the profuse Way of
Living of rich Persons. And because the City was manifestly exhausted, by
reason of Multitudes quitting it, he proposed Rewards to all such as had many
Children. Then considering that by his long Command in Gaul, he himself had
Opportunity of establishing an extraordinary Power, by a Law he ordained, That
no Praetor should Command above a Year in his Province, nor a Consul above two
Years after the Expiring of his Office. Moreover, to show that nothing should
escape his Care, he undertook to regulate the Roman Year, which was at this
time very much confounded; and though Numa, the second King of Rome, had bestowed
much Pains about it, yet still the Reckoning according to Lunar Months, and the
odd eleven Days and a quarter, caused a great many Inconveniences. Whereupon
Caesar, after his consulting the most able Astronomers, being also himself very
well instructed in that Science, whereof he had written, regulated the Year
according to the Course of the Sun, allotting to each Year 365 Days, and adding
one Day more every fourth Year, which was called the Bissextile; and this is
the Method which we to this Day follow, and goes still by the Name of the
Julian Account and the Old Style, whereas the New Style is called the Gregorian
Account. In this same Year flourished Catullus the Poet, one of the principal
Epigrammatists of all the Romans.

IV. While Caesar was thus employed in the Affairs of the Commonwealth, the
two Sons of Pompey had fortified themselves in Spain; and as the People still
passionately affected the Memory of their Father, they soon gathered together a
powerful Army; they also had very good Officers, and among the rest Labienus,
which obliged Caesar to go in Person to oppose their Proceedings; though not
without some Unwillingness, by reason that his beloved Mistress Cleopatra was
now at Rome. He was now just made Consul again, Dic. lxxiv Annual. U. C. 709.
and likewise Dictator for another Year; and Lepidus, who was Consul with him,
he chose for his Master of the Horse. Caesar proceeded in his Expedition with
his wonted Vigor and Celerity, and arrived in Spain before the Enemy so much
as imagined it. Cneius, the eldest of the two Pompey's, had laid Siege to the
City of Ulla, and Sextus the younger Brother was in Corduba with a strong
Garrison. Caesar, to raise the Siege, and to give some Jealousy to Cneius,
advanced toward Corduba, which occasioned him to raise the Siege before Ulla,
and come and oppose Caesar; but Caesar finding he could not draw him to a
Battle, went and invested Attegna, a Place of great Importance, and full of
Provisions. This Siege lasted some considerable time, and the Pompeys
endeavored to throw in Succors into the Town, but in vain, till at last it
was constrained to eapitulate. Caesar being Master of this, several other
Places submitted to him; and the Pompeys marching up and down, and fearing the
rest should revolt, were resolved to come to a general Battle, their Army being
now encamped in the Plains of Munda, and Caesar's not far distant.

Both Generals were equally impatient to come to an Engagement, so that Cneius
drew up his Men by Break of Day, well posting himself upon a Hill, and the
Exactness of their Order showed his Troops to great Advantage, especially his
Cavalry, who were very well armed. Caesar with great Art drew up his Troops
likewise, and after he had advanced a little Distance from his Trenches, made a
Halt, expecting the Enemy to come down from the Hill. This Delay made Caesar's
Soldiers begin to murmur, and so encouraged those of Cneius, that they advanced
upon the declining part of the Hill; so both sides gave a Shout, and the Battle
began. This was extraordinary Sharp and Dreadful on both sides, those on
Caesar's side were extremely incited by the Hopes of putting an End to all
their Labors by this Battle, and those on Pompey's side fought out of
Necessity and Desperation, most of 'em expecting no Pardon, as having their
Lives formerly given 'em, when they had been overthrown with Afranius and
Petreius. The first Shock was managed on both sides with so much Courage, that
Caesar's Men, who had been almost always used to Conquer, found here a Stop put
to their Fierceness; the Battle continued for many Hours very obstinate, and
Caesar was never in so great Danger as now; he threw himself several times with
great Rage and Fury amongst the midst of the Enemy, crying out to his Men, and
asking 'em, If they were not ashamed to deliver him into the Hands of Boys? So
well did he encourage them by his Speeches, but much more by a thousand brave
and noble Actions which he performed himself; that at last with much Difficulty
and a long Time, he overthrew the Enemy, and killed 30000 upon the Spot. This
Battle was so fierce and dangerous, that Caesar often said, That all other
Places he fought for his Glory, but at Munda for his Life.

All his Ensigns were taken, and Varus and Labienius slain in the Battle.
Cneius with 150 Horse escaped to Carteia, from whence, thinking to save himself
by Sea, he was forced by Didius, Caesar's Lieutenant, to return to Land, and
being besieged within a Tower, was attacked so vigorously, that he was forsaken
by his People, and slain in a Cave where he had hid himself. But his Brother
Sextus escaping from Corduba, so well concealed himself, that Caesar could not
find him. All Spain immediately submitted to Caesar, and he exacted great
Contributions from all the Enemies Cities, under Pretense of punishing their
Rebellion. After which he returned to Rome with great Joy and Satisfaction,
that he had at last brought under Submission that Commonwealth which gave Laws
to the greatest part of the World. He entered Rome in Triumph, but this Triumph
was by no means attended with any joyful Acclamations of the People, who were
much concerned to see the Memory of their beloved Pompey insulted over, and the
Race almost extirpated of one of the greatest Men in Rome. But Caesar did it
the rather upon the Account of bringing the Roman Dominions into Peace and
Subjection, and the perfect finishing the Civil War; which, though it continued
not much above four Years, had been so destructive to the Roman People, that at
a Census just before Caesar's last Expedition, there were found but one hundred
and fifty thousand Heads of Families in Rome, whereas in that Lustrum before,
there were three hundred and twenty thousand.

V. Caesar had now raised himself far above all Romans, and above all Mortals
in that Age, by his wonderful Acts, having subdued and conquered the best Parts
of the World, in almost as short a time as others could reasonably travel those
Countries. And now the Senate again began to conferr new Honors upon him, and
those greater than ever: They made him Dictator in perpetuum, Dic. lxxv.
Perpetual U. C. 709.
Consul for Ten Years, subjected all Magistrates, even Plebeian, to his Power;
and ordained that he alone should command the Armies, and raise Money, which
made him Sovereign Prince or King in effect. Among other Titles he had that of
Deliverer given him, and so was entered in the Fasti, and a Temple erected to
Liberty; but above all, Imperator.
that of Imperator, not in that sense as Generals were wont to have it given
'em by their Soldiers after some worthy Exploit, but as it signified the
greatest Authority in the Commonwealth. From this Julius was derived the Name
of Imperator or Emperor, as likewise that of Caesar to his Successors* and
this was the first beginning of the Imperial State of Rome, though it was not
perfectly settled till some Years after. Caesar was likewise made Censor for his
Life time, so that now most of the Magistracies seemed to center in him. As for
the Consulship, he divested himself of that for a certain time, and created
Fabius and Trebonius Consuls for the rest of the Year, of whom it happened that
Fabius died the last Day of his Magistracy, and Caesar substituted Canivius for
the remaining Hours; whereupon Cicero jestingly writ in one of his Epistles,
That during the Consulship of Canivius, not a Man dined; yet no Harm was
committed in that time, for he was wonderfully vigilant, and never slept
throughout his whole Consulship. From this time forward the Consulship
grewcheaper, and few held it a whole Year, especially, when all its Authority
and ancient Dignity, was, in a manner, swallowed up by the Imperial Power soon
after.

Thus Caesar had ordered the Consulship, but for other Magistrates he pretended
he would not concern himself with 'em but leave 'em to the People to be named,
according to the ancient Custom; but it proved only a Pretense, for he made
them himself, and sent 'em into the Provinces without the ancient Way of
Sortition. In other Magistrates the same Number was observed; only the Praetors
upon the account of the Largeness of the Roman Dominions were increased to
sixteen, 16 Praetors. 40 Quaestors
and the Quaestors to forty. Besides he had no other Way to gratify those to
whom he had made large Promises, and this caused him to admit many into the
Senate without Distinction, whether the Person was a Soldier or a Libertine by
Original; so that the Number of the Senate, 900 Senaors.
by this means, arose to nine hundred. Many he also brought into the Ranks of
Patritians, Consulares, and of those who had born other Offices; which became a
Custom to those who were afterward Emperors. To his Friends he gave much away
both in Money and Lands, which was very pleasing to them who made their
Designs; but others took it very hainously, and testify^d their Resentments,
either by Words or Libels. The Management of public Money was now translated
from the Quaestors to the Aediles, and afterward returned no more to 'em, but
at length was committed to Persons of Praetorian Dignity. 6 Aediles.
Six Aediles were also made, of which two were Patritians, called Curules, and
four Plebeians.

For the following Year Caesar entered upon the Consulship again with Anthony,
U. C. 710.
who was likewise his Master of the Horse; and now he more closely applied
himself to the Business of the Commonwealth than ever. He first took care to
pardon all such as had been in Arms against him, and greatly taxed the Cruelty
of Sylla, and thereby obtained as great a Name for Clemency, as before he had
for Valor. Then, to show his generous Temper, he caused Pompey's Statues to be
set up again, to show that he esteemed a great Soul and a magnanimous Spirit
even in his greatest Enemy; which occasioned Cicero to observe in his Writing,
That Caesar by restoring Pompey's Statues secured his own. In this second
Julian Year, his Colleague Anthony procured by a Law, that the Month Quintilis
should in honor of his Name, be afterward called July; and many other Laws
were made. In the mean time, as he was no ways beloved by those who were
greatest in the Senate; though his Ordinances had no other Design than the
public Good, they forbore not to vili^ie him by their Raileries. Now, though
Caesar had Information of their several Discourses, he bore it all with so
great a Moderation, that when some other People had yet the Boldness to violate
his Reputation by Libels, he never so much as inquired after them. All his
Designs showed the Greatness of his Soul; he made a Proposition for adorning of
the City of Rome with a magnificent Temple consecrated to Mars, and with a
Theater, and likewise the building of a new Curia or Parish to be called Iulia.
He rebuilt Carthage and Corinth, sending Colonies to both Cities: He undertook
to level several Mountains in Italy, to drein the Pontine Marshes near Rome,
and to empty the Lakes, Works of prodigious Charge; and likewise designed to
dig through the Isthmus of Peloponnesus by Corinth. After these, he designed an
Expedition against the Parthians, to revenge the death of Crassus, and they
being conquered, to enter through Hircania, along the Banks of the Caspian Sea
into Scythia, to open himself a Way through Germany into Gaul, and so return to
Rome: But all these vast Designs soon came to an End, enjoying his Sovereign
Authority but five Months.

Caesar's good Fortune, which had appeared by so many Victories, his Merit and
great Abilities, supported by the Affection of the People, and the Love of his
Soldiers, had now raised him to a Degree above all other Romans. But as it
usually happens in Commonwealths, where overy one valuing himself upon his own
Merit, looks upon absolute Command as a Right which he one Day in his Turn may
pretend to; so it was now, for that his extraordinary Advancement daily brought
upon him the Jealousy of the Senators. In the mean time, in an extravagant
manner they continually flattered his Vanity with new Honors, preferring him
in his Life time in some sort among the Gods, and declaring his Person Sacred
and Inviolable. They gave him the Title of Father of his Country, stamped Money
with his Image, ordered public Sacrifices on his Birthday, and his Statue to
be set up in all Cities and in all the Temples at Rome. Some Authors have
reported, that he procured these Honors by his Authority, others, that they
were freely bestowed upon him. However his accepting of all that was offered
him, caused him much Hatred from many, which was discovered more plainly one
Day when the Senate had decreed him some new Honors, and came all in a Body to
the Temple of Venus, where he was, to acquaint him with their Decree; and he,
whether out of a Mistake or Design, rose not up, but received 'em sitting;
which Neglect much offended the Senators, and caused 'em to talk very freely
and publicly about it, particularly saying, That he plainly affected the Title
of King: He had indeed the Power in effect, but only wanted the Name, which was
odious to the Romans. Caesar, who well knew the Effects of that Aversion, very
cautiously defended himself from that Odium; and one Day, when some People
called him Lord and King, he made Answer, That he was Caesar. Nevertheless, he
often let some Discourses fall, which much promoted the Belief People had of
his Ambition; particularly, That a Republic was nothing but a mere Name and
Notion, and that Sylla had discovered great Ignorance in laying down the Office
of Dictator.

Caesar shortly after gave a fresh Occasion of Suspicion to the People, by his
displacing the Tribunes for imprisoning some Persons who had put Diadems upon
his Statues. And by another Instance soon after he still more plainly perceived
the Affections of the People, at the Celebration of the Feasts called
Lupercalia, where he himself assisted at the Show, seated upon a Tribunal in a
Chair of Gold, and his Triumphal Ornaments. Anthony passing through the People,
who opened to make him way, went up to the Tribunal, and presented a Crown to
Caesar; some clapped their Hands as if they approved of it, but when Caesar put
the Crown back, there was a general Applause: Anthony offered it a second time,
but still with as little Marks of Satisfaction from the People; Caesar again
refused it, which was followed with loud Acclamations on all sides. Caesar, who
had laid this Design before, now plainly understood their Sentiments, and
thereupon rising, commanded the Crown to be carried to the Capitol;
nevertheless he was so concerned, and so little Master of his Disorder, that he
said that Night to his Friends, That he would freely offer his Throat to any
Man that would cut it. And though he had a thousand Testimonies of the Hatred he
lay under, he so abandoned himself to his Designs, that from this Moment he
neglected all manner of Means of securing himself against his Enemies. When he
was advised by some not to trust Brutus too far, he opened his Breast, saying,
Do you believe that Brutus cares for such poor Pillage as this? He was
sometimes heard to say, That he had rather die once by Treason, that to be so
miserable as always to live in fear of it. And at another time, That the
Republic had more Interest in his Preservation than himself; that he had
gained Glory and Power enough, but after his Death, the Commonwealth would be
more harassed with Civil Wars then ever it had been. And one Day being at
Supper with Lepidus, as his Friends disputed among themselves what Death was
easiest, he replied to 'em, That which is most sudden and least foreseen. He
disbanded his Company of Spanish Guards, and contented himself with the
Protection of his Friends, which Proceeding of his much facilitated an
Enterprise upon his Life soon after.

The Design upon Caesar's Life was carried on with extraordinary Caution and
Secrecy, though above threescore Senators entered into this Conspiracy, the
Principal whereof was Brutus, whose Life Caesar had saved after the Battle of
Pharsalia, and Cassius, both Praetors at this time: The Name of Brutus had been
famous in Rome ever since. Brutus the first Consul, under the Foot of whose
Statue was found written, Would to Heaven thou were alive, and certain Billets
were thrown into the Praetor's Tribunal, in these Words, Brutus, thou art
asleep, and not a true Brutus. Cassius was Author of most of these things, and
he hated Caesar upon several Accounts, particularly for his naming Brutus the
eldest Praetor, when he was above him in Age, and for his hindering him from
giving a Public Show to the People. His Behavior toward Caesar gave him
sufficient Reasons to suspect him; and when his Friends advised him to beware
of Anthony and Dolabella, he told 'em, That it was not those persum'd and plump
Sparks that (...) distrusted, but those pale and meagre Gentlemen. Nevertheless
he still prepared for his Expedition against the Parthians, and caused sixteen
Legions to march, and 10000 Horse for his Passage into Asia. He designed to
depart four Days after, when the Conspirators spread a Report, That according
to the Sybill's Oracles, the Parthians could not be overcome but by a King; and
upon this Pretense Cotta was to propose the giving him that Title to the
Senate. Cassius took this Occasion to go and visit Brutus, demanding of him, If
be would be at the Senate House when Caesar' s Friends were to propose the
declaring of him King? Brutus told him, that he would be absent at that time.
But, replied Cassius, suppose you are called thither? Then, answered Brutus, I
should think it my Duty to speak, oppose, yea and die too, rather than part
with the Liberty of Rome. Ah, replied Cassius, what generous Roman would suffer
you to die for his Liberty? You are ignorant, Brutus, who you are, if you
imagine that those Billets thrown into the Tribunal came from less than the
most Illustrious and Bravest Men of Rome. From other Praetors they demand
Games, Shows, and Plays, but from you, whose very Name is a Terror to Tyrants,
they cry for the Ruin and Downfall of Arbitrary Power, being ready to expose
themselves to the utmost Hazards, in expectation of your auspicious Aid. After
this Conversation they parted; and Brutus for some time after appeared much
discomposed in his Thoughts, which occasioned his Wife Porcia, being in Bed
with him, earnestly to enquire the Reason of his Trouble. Brutus fearing she
would disclose the Secret if urged to it by Torture, Porcia immediately wounded
her self on the Thigh, and with a Masculine Courage let him see, That she
feared no Torments, nor could act any Thing below Cato' s Daughter; by which
means she learned the whole Design, and became one of the Conspiracy. The Name
of Brutus, whose Person was much esteemed, engaged a great many in the
Conspiracy; so they resolved to put their Design in Execution upon the very
Ides of March, and in the Hall of the Senate.

A great many Prodigies and Dreams foretold this Misfortune to Caesar, and
Spurina, a famous Augur, told him, That great Dangers threatened him upon the
Ides of March. He dreamt the same Night, that he was carried above the Clouds,
and that he shook Hands with Jove; and his Wife Calpurnia also dreamt, that her
Husband was assassinated in her Arms, the Doors of the Chamber opening at the
same time of their own Accord with much Noise. This last Accident somewhat
confounded him, and his Wife by her Prayers and Tears, prevailed so, that he
would not go abroad that Day. But another Brutus, called Decimus, who was one
of the Conspirators, though of the Number of his intimate Friends, caused him to
change his Resolution, telling him, He was much expected at the Senate, and it
would be a great Shame for him not to venture out of Doors, but when it should
please Calpurnia to dream favorably: So Decimus carried him almost by Force
out of his Lodgings, and as if every thing seemed to contribute to his
Destruction, a Slave, who came to give him Advice of the Conspiracy, could not
get up to him by reason of the Crowd of People that surrounded him. Artimedorus
his Host and Friend, having given him a Letter to the same purpose, he mingled
it without reading of it, among other Papers that were given him: And Lena, who
was one of the Conspirators, entertaining him a considerable time in private as
he came out of his Litter; the others, who believed themselves discovered,
thought already of killing themselves with the Daggers which they had under
their Robes, when Lena quitting Caesar, and kissing his Hand, gave them to
understand, that he thanked him for some Favor which he came to obtain.

The Assembly of the Senate was at this time held in a Place which Pompey had
built for that Purpose, and from thence was called the Court or Hall of Pompey,
where was to be seen his Statue in Marble, raised upon a Pedestal. Caesar, as
he was entering, met Spurina, and smiling told him, The Ides of March were come;
Yes, replied the Augur, but they are not past. As soon as he had taken his
Place, the Conspirators moved toward him under Pretense of saluting him, and
Tullius Cymber approached to ask Pardon for his Brother who was then in Exile:
Caesar deferred the Matter, and put back Cymber, who pressed upon him so far as
to take hold on both sides of his Robe; and when Caesar cried out, That this
was Violence, Casca, who stood behind him, gave him the first Stab with a
Poniard nigh the Shoulder, but the Weapon glancing, the Wound was not Mortal.
Caesar struck Casca through the Arm with his Dagger, crying out, Vile Traitor,
what do you mean? Casca, on the other side, called his Brother, and Caesar
would have raised himself, but he received a mortal Wound in his Breast; and
all the Conspirators charged upon him together with so much Fury, that many of
'em were wounded themselves. He nevertheless made great Resistance, rushing and
leaping among 'em like a Lion, till perceiving Brutus with his Dagger in his
Hand, he struggled no more, but cried, What, my Son Brutus, and thou too? Then
covering his Face with his Robe, and drawing his Skirts down to his Knees, that
he might fall decently, he sunk down at the Foot of Pompey's Statue, having
received three and twenty Wounds, and the rest of the Senate looking on with
Wonder and Amazement, not being able to assist him.

Thus fell the great Julius Caesur in the 56th Year of his Age, in the Court of
Pompey, and at the Feet of Pompey's Statue; a Person of the greatest Soul, the
most magnanimous Spirit, and of the most wonderful Accomplishments and
Abilities, that Rome, or perhaps, the World ever saw; whether we consider him
in his Care and Vigilance, in his Valor and Conduct, or in his Knowledge and
Learning; all which noble Qualities made him beloved and reverenced by the
People, honored and adored by his Friends, and esteemed and admired even by
his Enemies. And setting aside his Ambition, which was the Fault of the Times
as well as his Temper, he was never much or justly taxed with any great Vice
but that of Women. His Death put an end to the first Triumvirate, or rather the
Power occasioned by the first Triumvirate, but did not re-establish the
Consular Authority, nor restore the Liberty of the Commonwealth, but
occasion^d its Ruin shortly after, with as great Miseries as Rome ever
suffered. It happened in the 710th Year of the City, A. M. 3961, about 16 Years
after the beginning of the Triumvirate, and 42 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. IV.
From the Death of Caesar, to the Defeats and Deaths of Brutus and Cassius, by
the second Triumvirate, Octavius, Anthony, and Lepidus; which ruined all the
Remains of the Commonwealth.
Containing the space of above two Years.
I. UPon the Death of Caesar, U. C. 710.
so great a Confusion and Disorder happened among the Senate and People of Rome,
that the Conspirators soon perceived that their Fact was not like to meet with
the general Approbation which some expected. All the Senators, who were not
Accomplices, fled with such Haste and Precipitation from the Assembly, that
some of 'em were in Danger of their Lives as they pressed out of Doors; and the
People, alarmed at the News, left all their several Employments, ran
tumultuously about all parts of the City, some for Information, some for
Safety, and others for Plunder. Which Disturbances caused the Conspirators all
to retire to the Capitol, to which they were guarded by a considerable Number
of Gladiators belonging to Decimus Brutus: What they gave out to justify
themselves to the People was Liberty; but that Pretense was not much regarded
by them, for they had been so used to submit of late, and were so changed from
their ancient jealous and vigorous Temper, that they much more dreaded the
Effects of Poverty than Subjection. Anthony now Consul, and Lepidus, were
extremely enraged at Caesar's Death, and were resolved to revenge it to the
utmost; therefore the latter immediately got to a Legion of his just by, and
led 'em into the Campus Martius, where Anthony, as Consul, commanded 'em. This
much surpised the Conspirators, and put 'em upon sending Deputies to Anthony
and Lepidus, desiring 'em, To consider the sad Consequences of a Division at
this time; that no Hatred to Caesar's Person had put them upon that Design, but
only their hearty Loves to their Country, which had already been so drained by
Civil Wars, that any new Disunion must carry off the miserable Remainder; that
they believed them also too generous to let any particular Hatred transport
them to the Prejudice of the Public. Anthony began to consider, that Decimus,
who was now Governor of the Hith^r Gaul, might fall upon him with a powerful
Army, therefore he resolved to gain what Time he could, and endeavor to get
over Decimus's Soldiers; and for that reason returned Answer, That though their
Honors and their Oaths had engaged 'em to revenge Caesar' s Death, and though
they thought it more honorable to live without Reproach among a few good Men,
than to draw upon themselves the Miseries due to Falsehood; yet they were not
obstinate, but were content to have the Senate assembled, that they might be
governed by so many illustrious and discerning Persons: Which Answer was
received with much Satisfaction.

The Senate was immediately called, where a great many Debates arose, and
several Opinions were urged, which at last terminated in this, That they had
but two things to choose, either to declare Caesar a Tyrant, or that his
Murderers stood in need of Pardon. Anthony industriously opposed the former,
urging, That if the Memory of Caesar were condemned, all his Orders ought to be
cancelled; and that would be in Effect to proclaim so many Illustrious Men as
he had raised, unworthy of their Honors; which, besides drawing upon
themselves the Contempt of other Nations, would infallibly turn to the
Confusion of the Commonwealth. After many violent Heats and Disturbances in
the House, and great Tumults at the Doors, the Senate at last passed an Act of
Oblivion for all what was past, and ratified Caesar's Ordinances; with this
Reason entered, Because it was requisite for the Good of the Commonwealth.
This Act of Oblivion brought Matters to a more peaceable Posture; but Anthony
finding the People much discontented, resolved to pursue his Revenge upon the
Conspirators, though he was seemingly reconcil^d to 'em. The next Day therefore
he ordered Caesar's Will to be publicly read before the Body of the People,
which he knew would have a considerable Influence upon 'em; which Danger the
Conspirators had been so sensible of, that they used their utmost Endeavors to
hinder its being read. In the Will it appeared that Octavius the Grandson of
Iulia, Caesar's Sister, was adopted to take upon him his Name, and constituted
Heir of three parts in four of all his Estate, and Pinarius and Pedius of the
other fourth Part. To the Roman People he left the Gardens which he had on the
other side of the Tiber, and to every Citizen, in particular, a certain Sum of
Money. Among his second Heirs, who were to inherit in case of Mortality he
substituted Decimus Brutus, one of the Conspirators. Several others also who
had dipped their hands in his Blood, were named for Guardians for his Son, in
case he had left one. These Tokens of Caesar's Goodness, and his great
Affection for the People, began to move the Multitude extremely; but Brutus's
being an Heir provoked the Indignation of the whole Assembly.

Immediately after this, Caesar's Body was brought forth with extraordinary
Pomp and Solemnity, being born by some of the most. Illustrious of the Senate:
It was set down in the middle of the Forum, with a Guard of Soldiers; in which
Place was erected a little Temple of gilded Wood according to the Model of that
of Venus; and in this Temple was a Bed of Ivory, magnificently adorned with
Curtains of Gold and Purple Trophies, and the Robe that he wore when he was
assassinated. All the People ran hastily to see this Sight, weeping and
lamenting afresh, and those who bore Arms made deep Complaints, as if they
demanded Vengeance. Anthony ascending the Place, began Caesar's Funeral Oration
in this manner; Romans, though I alone present myself to celebrate the Memory of
this great Man, whose Body you see thus mangled here before ye, yet I can read
in each Man's Look the Affections of his Mind, and the Thoughts of his Heart,
which give nobler Praises than my Tongue can express: So that when I shall
recount to you the Extent of his glorious Actions, the Variety of his noble
Virtues, and the Number of the deserved Honors which the Senate and you have
conferred upon him, I shall not be so much the Publisher of my own Sentiments,
as the Interpreter of Yours. Then he mentioned all his Titles of Honor, his
Dictatorship, his several Consulships, with the most deserving Name of Father
of his Country; from whence he proceeded to his Virtues, praising his generous
Courage, his exquisite Learning, his free Spirit, and above all, his unbounded
Clemency. After which he repeated the Oath which the People of Rome had made to
Caesar, by which they swore, That his Person should be sacred and Inviolable,
and called the Gods to witness that they would defend it with the hazard of
their Lives. But observing some Alteration in several of the Senators, he
concluded with saying, That what had been done ought rather to be forgotten,
since it was the Crime of some Infernal Spirits, Enemies to Rome, rather then
Men; and nothing ought further to be thought of, than the honoring the Memory
of this illustrious Hero, and placing him among the Immortal Gods.

At the End of this Oration, one of the principal Attendants, as if some Fury
had possessed him, tore off Caesar's Robe from the Trophy, and showed it to the
People, crying out, That it was the Spoil of a Person beloved of the Gods, and
reverenced by the World even to Adoration. This and several other things he
spoke in a most moving Tone, using many great Outcries and strange Postures of
Sorrow, which extremely stirr^d up the People's Compassion. At the same time
was exposed Caesar's Image in Wax, which moved it self by Springs, and showed
the several Wounds which he had received upon his Face and in his Body, and
this Sight transported the People even to Madness, and made 'em cry out, That
they would inflect the most cruel Punishments, and execute the most dreadful
Revenges upon the Heads of all his Murderers. Upon the lighting of the Pile,
all the old Soldiers who had served under him, with an unexpressible Grief,
threw into the Fire all their Coronets, Pikes, Bracelets, and other Tokens of
Honors which he had given 'em. A great many Ladies of Quality also threw in
their Children's Robes and Ornaments, with every thing they had of Value about
'em. The People ran and tore up the Benches and Seats of the Magistrates just
by, and after that with flaming Brands from the Pile, ran desperately to set
Fire to the Conspirators Houses; and meeting with one Cinna, whom they mistook
for another of that Name, they immediately tore him in a thousand Pieces. The
Conspirators themselves being of the greatest Families, and well guarded, with
no great Trouble repulsed the People; but nevertheless so great was the Rage
and Threats of the People, that they thought it much more safe to retire from
the City. All the Strangers in Rome mourned after their Customs, and more
particularly the Jews, who watched several Nights at Caesar's Pile. At last
Divine Honors were given him, and an Altar erected in the Place of his
Burning, where Octavius Caesar, afterward called Augustus, caused a Temple to
be built, and a Pillar of Jasper, twenty Foot high, with this Inscription, To
the Father of his Country.

At the same time that Caesar was killed, his Heir and Adopted Son Octavius,
afterward called Augustus, was at Apollonia in Greece, who upon the first News
of the Murder, notwithstanding the earnest Advice of his Friends to secure
himself there, returned to Rome with all speed, with a full Resolution to
revenge his Death; not questioning but to find Anthony both a Friend and
Assistant in this Design. But Anthony now was so much changed, and so busily
employed in his Projects of raising and advancing himself, that he could
hearken but little to such a Proposal; and when Octavius publicly declared
himself Caesar's Heir, and demanded his Money of Anthony, or at least some part
of it, he received him with great Coldness, and Contempt of his Youth, refusing
to give him any upon several Pretenses. Yet neither Anthony's Repulses, nor his
Friends Advices to the contrary, could stop Octavius from pursuing his Designs,
who was now about eighteen Years old, of a great Wit, a lofty Mind, and of a
most insinuating Conversation, and had a Face so Comely and Graceful, that it
acquired him a Veneration from all Men. That he might be certain to gain the
People's Hearts, he sold all his Inheritance to pay off the Legacies given 'em
by his Uncle Caesar's Will, which procured him much Love, and Caesar's old
Soldiers flocked to him in considerable Numbers, whom he accepted of out of
Fear to Anthony, who daily became more Suspicious both to the Senate and
People. Octavius managed his Affairs with so much Skill and Dexterity, that
those who before admired at his Boldness of opposing Anthony, were now as much
surpised at his extraordinary Address and Authority. Anthony, on the other
side, being sensible of the passionate Affection the People had for Pompey, to
curry Favor, proposed the promoting Sextus his only surviving Son; that in
requital of his Father's Estate confiscated, he might have an Allowance out of
the Public, and the same Command of the Seas and Navy that his Father formerly
had. This was received with great Applause, and strait enacted; so Pompey was
called back into Sicily, where he afterward managed a sharp War against
Octavius.

Anthony was still Restless, and resolved, if it were possible, to procure some
Province to be assigned him, that he might get the greater Authority; and the
Difference daily increasing between him and Octavius, he desired to command the
six Legions which lay in Macedonia, and obtained them by deceiving the Senate
with a false Rumor, that the Getae hearing of Caesar's Death, had invaded that
Province: And because the Senate showed great Unwillingness to this Demand, and
more Jealousy of his Power, he endeavor d to satisfy 'em, by preferring a
Law against any Man's being Dictator for the future, and making it Death for
any to offer at it. These Legions he designed to bring over into Italy to awe
and command all; and the better to effect this, he preferred another Law for
changing of Provinces, and by that procured Macedonia for his Brother C.
Antonius, which had been assigned to M. Brutus, and the Hither Gaul for
himself, which had been allotted to Decimus Brutus. The Senate would by no
means admit of this Demand, but sent to D. Brutus to strengthen himself against
the Pretensions of Anthony; which caused Anthony to betake himself to the
People, where partly by Force, and partly by Bribes, he obtained it. But still
he was not altogether so Successful as he expected; for his daily Quarrels with
Octavius, and his little Care of revenging Caesar's Death, gained him the
Hatred of his Soldiers; so that when he had brought over his Legions, two of
'em went over to Octavius, who now was very busy in going through all Italy,
and gathering together Soldiers out of the Colonies which his Uncle had
planted. At length Anthony with a considerable Army marched into Gaul, from
whence he commanded Decimus Brutus to depart, who gave Way to him for some
time; but at last retreated to Mutina, where Anthony soon after straightly
besieged him: And thus a new War broke out in about three quarters of a Year
after Caesar's Death.

II. About this time new Consuls were made, U. C. 711.
which were Hirtius and Pansa, both great Friends of Julius Caesar, as well as
Intimates of Cicero, the former of which served under Caesar, and gave the
Relation of the Wars of Egypt and Africa, which is annexed to his
Commentaries. Upon their Assembling the Senate, Anthony was declared Enemy to
the State, but especially by Cicero's Means, who now had made many ingenious
and severe Invectives against him, which, in Imitation of Demosthenes, he
published under the Name of Philippicks. This proved of great Advantage toward
the Bringing in, and Preferring young Octavius; for though the Senate, as being
generally of Pompey's Faction, had little or no Esteem for him, yet they
resolved to make Use of him for his Army's sake, and upon that Account erected
him a Statue, made him a Senator, though at this Age, decreed that he should be
considered as ten Years older in respect of Public Preferment, and likewise
gave him equal Power and Authority with the Consuls themselves, whom they sent
with all speed to relieve Decimus now besieged by Anthony. Though the Senate had
obliged Octavius by these Honors, yet their promoting and giving Provinces to
all the Conspirators, much more displeased him; and a Letter from Anthony,
upbraiding him with advancing and assisting Caesar' s Murderers, gave him great
Scruples; but concealing his Designs with a Prudence surpassing his Age, he
marched with the Consuls. The Consuls in a short time took Bononia, and Anthony
shortly after meeting Pansa, overthrew him; but returning carelessly to his
Camp, was worsted by Hirtius. Not many Days after, a general Battle was fought
nigh Mutina, wherein Anthony with much Difficulty, and great Bloodshed, was
defeated, and fled to Lepidus, who then commanded in the further Gaul. Both the
Consuls died of their Wounds, Pansa first advising Octavius to join with
Anthony; and Decimus being at this time spared, though not pardoned, by Octavius,
thought of getting to Brutus and Cassius, now in Greece; but his Soldiers, not
pleased with the Journey, went over part to Octavius, and part to Anthony; and
himself, endeavoring with a few Attendants to pass through Gaul, was taken and
betrayed at Aquileia by Sequanus Governor of the Country, who sent his Head to
Anthony. This was the End of one of the chief Conspirators, which was attended
with the Deaths of Trebonius and Basilius much about the same time; the former,
excluding Dolabella from Pergamus and Smyrna, by reason the Senate had declared
him an Enemy, was taken by him, and after grievous Torments, had his Head cut
off, which the Soldiers kicked about after a most contemptuous manner; and the
latter was murdered by his own Slaves, whom before he had used very severely.

Octavius gained much reputation in these Wars, but the Senate now finding
little or no Occasion for him, slighted him extremely, and decreed all the
Honor that he had gained, to Decimus, whom he had relieved; besides, they gave
him many detracting and reproachful Words, and denied him a Triumph when he
demanded it. From this Moment he resolved to join with Anthony and Lepidus,
sending back all the Prisoners taken at the Battle of Mutina without Ransom;
for since the Senators were most against his Uncle, he could not revenge his
Death without some new Assistance; and at the same time that he wrote to these
two, he sent 400 of his Soldiers into the City, in the Name of his Army, to
demand the Consulship for him. The Senate was as ready to deny him as the other
two were to join with him, which caused Octavius to send for Anthony and
Lepidus into Italy. The News of their Approach, and at the Head of seventeen
Legions, so terrified and startled the Senate, that they immediately declared
Octavius Consul with Pedius; but upon the sudden Arrival of some new Troops,
they as soon repealed their Decree again; and never was the Senate of Rome so
distracted between different Interests, and so guilty of Irresolution as at
this time. These new Troops not answering their Expectations, the Senate again
decreed him Consul, and moreover advanc^d him above all Example: They decreed
that after his Consulship he should take Place of all Consuls, and though
formerly they were displeased with his levying Forces, as being a private Man,
now they desir^d him to increase his Army, and ordered him the Legions of
Decimus. The City was likewise committed to his Care, and Power given him to
act what he pleased, though without the Prescript of the Laws, which he retained
to his Death. So that Octavius now with no great Difficulty procured Laws to
condemn Brutus and Cassius, with their several Accomplices, and likewise to
cancel those Decrees made against Dolabella, and other of his Friends.

In a short time after Octavius's Consulship, Anthony and Lepidus arrived in
Italy, where Octavius met 'em nigh Mutina, and after three Day Conference,
entered into a strict Combination with them; in which it was agreed, That
Octavius should quit his Consulship, and leave the Title to Ventidius, Anthony'
s great Friend: That the Supreme Authority should be divided between these
three, which they should keep for the space of five Years under the Name of
Triumviri, and in Quality of the Reformers of the Commonwealth: That they
should cause that Authority to be confirmed by the Roman People: That Anthony
should have all Gaul, except Narbon, which Lepidus was to have with Spain; and
Octavius should have Africa with Sicily and Sardinia: Italy and the Eastern
Provinces were for a while to remain in Common. In this manner did these Men
divide the World between 'em, as if it had been their Inheritance. They further
agreed, That all their Enemies should be destroyed; and in this the Case of
Cicero caused the greatest Controversy; for Anthony, his implacable Enemy,
would consent to nothing till his Death was determined: Lepidus was content
with it, but Octavius would willingly have preserved him, upon the Account of
former Friendship; yet at last he consented, and for that Reason Lepidus
permitted his Brother Paulus, and Anthony his Uncle Lucius, to be likewise
proscribed. Lastly, it was agreed, That Lepidus should be made Consul for the
following Year, and guard Rome and Italy, while the other two managed the War
against Brutus and Cassius, who now were strongly possessed of Greece and Syria,
and had lately taken Dolabella in Laodicea, and beheaded him. In this manner
was concluded the Second Triumvirate, the Consequences whereof were so
dreadful, and which in effect gave the last Blow to the Liberty of the Roman
Commonwealth. It was concluded on above a Year and a half after Julius
Caesar's Death, and was introduced, as some Authors report, with many strange
Presages and frightful Prodigies.

III. Now was the City of Rome in a very miserable and deplorable Condition,
The Second Triumvirate.
for the first Thing done by the Triumviri, after establishment of their
Authority, was a dreadful Proscription of 300 of the Senatorian, and about 2000
of the Equestrian Rank; and nothing but Cries and Lamentations were heard
through all the City, and Murders committed in all Places by the Soldiers. No
Man dared refuse Entrance to any of 'em, who searched the most secret Places;
and Rome at this time appeared like a City wholly exposed to Waste and Pillage.
Great Numbers of uncondemn'd Persons perished in this Confusion; some by Malice
or Mistake, and others for concealing or defending their Friends: In short, all
the most Tragic Fury that either Revenge or Interest could produce, and all
the most generous Kindness that Love or fidelity could inspire, were to be seen
in diverse Accidents relating to this Proscription. Though the Pretense was the
revenging of Caesar's Death, yet many suffered upon the Account of their great
Estates, others out of Malice and old Resentments, and some for their
convenient Houses and Gardens. Among those of greatest Note was the famous
Varro, who now living to see and feel a second Tricipitina, as he calls it in
his Writings, yet with much Difficulty escaped with his Life. But Cicero was
the Man most aimed at by Anthony, which caused him to get on board a Ship with
all speed; but not being able to endure the Sea, he returned to Land, saying,
That he would die in his own Country which he had so often preserved. Being
weary both of his Flight and his Life, he came to a small Village a little
above a Mile from the Sea. Here his Servants terrified by several Prodigies,
partly by Persuasion, and partly by Force, put him again into his Litter, and
were carrying him back to the Sea. But Cicero perceiving those that came to
apprehend him, ordered his Litter to be set down, and quietly laid out his Neck
to Popilius Lena, the Tribune, whom formerly by his Eloquence he had saved from
Condemnation. Lena cut off his Head and Hands, which he presented to Anthony,
who could not forbear insulting over those poor Members, and crying out, That
his Revenge was completed, and he had no further Occasion for the
Proscription. But his Wife Fulvia's Hatred could not be confined to Words, for
she pierced his Tongue several times with a golden Bodkin after a most spiteful
Manner; and Anthony ordered his Head and Hands to be set up upon the Rostrum,
where the People could not without Horror behold those sad Remains of a Man who
had so often Triumphed there by the Force and Charms of his Eloquence. Thus
fell the great Cicero in the sixty third Year of his Age, A Man, as Julius
Caesar observes, that obtained a Laurel as much above all Triumphs, as the
Enlargement of the Bounds of the Roman Wit, was above that of the Bounds of the
Roman Empire.

About the same time, Quintus, Cicero's Brother, was slain, together with all
his Sons; but Cicero's Sons escaped, for he had some time before sent 'em to
Athens to be there educated. Still the City was filled with Slaughters, and the
ordinary Price of the Head of a Proscrib^d Person brought to the Triumviri, was
100000 Sesterces, if done by a Free man, and haif as much if done by a Slave,
with the Freedom of the City. This corrupted a great many, who forgetting both
Duty and Natural Affection, betrayed those whose Preservation they ought
principally to have endeavored. Though many rare and admirable Examples of the
Love of Wives to their Husbands, and of Slaves to their Masters, appeared, yet
those of Children to their Parents were less common. However, Oppius's Act may
stand for many, who, Aeneas-like, carried out his old and decrepid Father upon
his Back, and conveyed him to the Sea, sometimes leading, and other times
carrying him, till they both escaped into Sicily; from whence afterward upon
his Return, the People out of a just sense of his Piety, made him Aedile, in
which Office wanting Money to set out the usual Games, the Workmen did all
without Wages, and the Spectators enriched him by their Voluntary
Contributions. As many as could escape the Cruelty of the Proscription, fled
either into Macedonia to Brutus, or into Africa to Cornificius, but the
greatest Number went to young Pompey in Sicily, who was now very Powerful,
especially by Sea. His Generosity was at this time a very great Succor to many
Illustrious Persons; he sent Brigantines and other small Vessels to all the
Coasts of Italy, to receive such as made their Escape, and treated them with
much Kindness and Civility.

The Triumviri having almost satisfied their Revenge, began now to think of
Money, which they very much wanted to carry on the War against Brutus and
Cassius: For this reason they drew up a List of 1400 of the richest Ladies of
Rome, Mothers, Daughters, or any Relations of their Enemies; these Alliances
were far enough fetched, for Riches alone was sufficient to make 'em guilty in
this Case. These Ladies assembling themselves, first went to the Female
Relations of the Triumviri, and after that to the Palace of these Magistrates,
where, after several Repulses, one of 'em was permitted to speak, upon
Condition that the rest would be silent: This was Hortensia, the Daughter of
Hortensius, who alone had been able to dispute with Cicero for Eloquence, My
Lords, said she, these unhappy Ladies, which you see here imploring your
Justice and Bounty, would never have presumed to appear in this Place, had they
not first made use of all possible Means, which either their native Modesty
might allow, or their best Understandings could inform 'em. Though it be contrary
to the Rules of Decency prescribed to our Sex, which we have hitherto most
strictly observed; yet the Loss of our Fathers, of our Children, of our
Brothers, and of our Husbands, is sufficient to excuse us; nay, and to
vindicate ^s too, when their unhappy Deaths are made a Pretense for our further
Misfortunes. You pretend ye have been affrented, but what have the Women done
that they must be impoverished? if they are as blameable as the rest, why do
you not proscribe 'em too? In the mean time none of our Sex have ever declared
you your Country's Enemies: We have neither plundered your Goods, nor suborned
your Soldiers: We have raised no Troops against you, nor oppose those Honors
and Offices to which you pretend. We pretend not to govern the Republic, nor
is it our Ambition which has drawn the present Miseries and Misfortunes on our
Heads; Empire, Dignities and Honors were never designed for our Sex. We, alas,
have done nothing to affront you, nothing to offend you, or so much as move you
to this sever^ Treatment; a Treatment which neither Caesar nor Pompey ever
proposed in their Wars, nor Marius nor Cinna ever thought of in their
Cruelties; no, not Sylla himself* who first set up Tyranny in Rome; yet, after
all, you a^dorn your selves with the glorious Title of Reformers o^ the State.
This Discourse appeared so Bold and Dangerous to the Triumviri, that they
immediately sent their Ushers to cause the Ladies to retire; bu^ perceiving the
Multitude began to cry out against such Violence, they adjourned the Affair
till the nex^ Day, and for the Satisfaction of the People, re^trench'd the
Number of the Ladies to 400, but a^ the same time taxed above 100000 Men, as
well Ci^tizens as Strangers. At last the Triumviri went into the Senate to
declare that the Proscription was at an end. Lepidus excused himself for what
had passed, assuring the Senators of a more moderate Conduct: But Octavius more
politickly said, He would still reserve to himself the Liberty of Punishing
such as were guilty. After this, Anthony and Octavius with all Diligence
marched against Brutus and Cassius.

IV. The Conspirators had now made a considerable Progress in the East, U. C.
712.
and Cassius having got all Syria into his Power, thought of making an
Expedition into Egypt against Cleopatra, who had made great Preparations to
assist Caesar and his Party. But Cassius was immediately recalled by Brutus,
upon the News that Anthony and Caesar were now upon their March with forty
Legions; of which eight had already passed the Ionian Sea. Brutus in his Letter
told him, That their powerful Armies were not designed for their particular
Advancement, but the Liberty of their Country; therefore they ought not so much
to aim at the Glory of new Conquests, as the Destroying those who sought the
Ruin of that Liberty. Cassius therefore leaving Syria to his Brother's Son with
one single Legion, he sent a considerable Party into Cappadocia, which slew
Ariobar^^nes as one who had conspired against him, and there raised vast Sums
of Money. After many se^ere Exactions, he came himself into the Lesser Asia,
and meeting Brutus at Smyrna, they there consulted about the present War.
Brutus moved to have the Armies pass over into Greece and Macedonia, and there
meet Octavius and Anthony; but Cassius so far prevailed, as to have the
Rhodians and Lycians first reduced, who had refused to pay any Contributions,
and were very powerful at Sea. Both were sensible ^ow Dangerous it was to have
any Enemies behind (...), therefore this Expedition was immediately put ^n
Execution, and in a short time completed, and extraordinary Contributions were
raised by that Means. The Rhodians were severely plunder^d, and scarce any
thing but their Lives left 'em; but the Inhabitants of Xanthus made such an
obstinate Resistance, that scarce any were left alive, for they burnt their
City and destroyed themselves with it. After the reducing of these Places,
Brutus and Cassius met at Sardis, from whence, after several Consultations,
they resolved to march against Anthony and Octavius.

Here it was that Brutus is reported to have seen a Ghost in his Tent after
Midnight. He ever employed the greatest part of the Night in dispatching of
Affairs, and in Reading; and one Night being thus employed according to his
Custom, there was a general Silence through all the Camp, especially about his
Tent, when of a sudden he heard an unusual Noise at the Door, which opened of
it self at the same time. Brutus casting his Eye toward the Place, perceived
the frightful Figure of a hideous Spectre, of a proportion much more than
Natural, which presented it self before him: He had notwithstanding the Courage
to speak to it, demanding, Art thou a God, or art thou Man, and for what Reason
came thou hither? I am, replied the Spirit, thy Evil Genius, Brutus, and thou
shall see me again near Philippi. Brutus very boldly answered, Well I will see
thee; and immediately it disappeared. He presently called up his Slaves, who
all told him, That they had neither seen nor heard any thing. He continu^d
walking all the rest of the Night, and early in the Morning went to give an
Account of what hapened to Cassius, who, being an Epicurean, told him, That all
this proceeded from the Weakness of his Senses, and the Strength of his
Imagination at that time. As for the rest, continued he, Let us not believe
that there are any such Spirits here, that have either Voice, humane Shape, or
Power over us; though I could wish there were, that we might not only rely upon
the Greatness of our Forces, but likewise upon the Assistance of those Immortal
Beings, who could not but be favorable to a Cause so Just and Sacred as ours
is. This Discourse satisfied Brutus, and soon after they passed over into
Thrace, and so to Philippi, a City between that Country and Macedonia, nigh
which the Forces of the Triumviri were posted.

It was with extraordinary Fear and Terror that all Persons stood waiting the
Success of these two powerful Armies, which were to decide the Fate and Fortune
of the Roman Empire. The Conspirators Forces consisted of 19 Legions, and 20000
Horse, and the Triumviri of the same Number of Legions, but much better
completed, and of 13000 Horse. Brutus and Cassius encamped on a high and
convenient Ground nigh the Sea, where they were supplied with Provisions in
abundance. The other Party was much straightened for want of Necessaries, having
only Macedonia and Thessaly open to 'em, for Pompey had cut off all
Communication from Africa, and Marcus and Aenobarbus from Italy, by their
several Navies. This made Anthony extremely desirous of coming to a Battle,
which Cassius being sensible of, refused to engage, though Brutus was very
forward, saying, That he was impatient to put an End to the Miseries of Mankind
by a glorious Victory, or a noble Death. At last Anthony with great Labor and
Industry, made a Way through a large Fen, and Cassius threw up Works against
him, which with the Soldiers Forwardness, caused a general Battle, though much
against Cassius's Will, who declared, That he was forced, in the same manner as
Pompey was, to expose the Liberty of the Roman People to the Hazard of a
Battle. In the Morning just before the Battle, Cassius asked Brutus's Opinion
of what they ought to do if they were unsuccessful, and Brutus replied, That he
had formerly in his Writings condemned the Death of Cato, and maintained that
such a manner of avoiding Disgraces, was an insolent Attempt against Heaven
that sent 'em; but he had now alter^d his Opinion, since he was not Master of
his Life, having already sacrificed it to his Country, he was resolved to
change it for a Happier, if Fortune proved his Enemy. Cassius embracing him,
told him, Now we may venture against the Enemy; for either we will be
Conquerors our selves, or will have no Cause to fear those that are so.

The Forces of the Triumviri were commanded by Anthony alone, Octavius being
now sick; and both Armies being drawn up, Brutus's Party in a short time
attacked that of Octavius with little Order, but with so much Fury, that at the
first Onset they overthrew all that opposed, and pressing forward with great
Slaughter, they entered the very Camp of Octavius, who had just retreated to
Anthony's. Anthony was very hotly engaged with Cassius, but in a short time
found means to open a Passage through the Lines, and charging Cassius's Troops
upon the Flank, overthrew 'em with great Slaughter; then pursuing the Victory,
he soon became Master of his Camp, which Skill and Diligence he had learnt from
Julius Caesar. Cassius retired to a Hill not far off, expecting the Event of
the Battle on his Partner's side, and by reason of the greatness of the Dust he
could not discern whose Cavalry it was that made toward him at a distance: He
therefore sent Titinius to make the Discovery. Titinius was received with great
Joy by 'em, who were bringing Tidings of Victory, but stayed so long, that
Cassius fearing Brutus had been routed, and his Friend taken Prisoner, cried
out, Alas, to preserve the Remainders of a miserable Life, I have ruined my
best Friend: At these Words he retired into his Tent, and killed himself, or
caused his freed Man to do it. Titinius arrived immediately after with the
Cavalry, all rejoicing, but their Joy was suddenly dashed, and Titinius first
accusing himself of Folly and Laziness, in a great Rage, slew himself upon the
Body of his Friend.

Brutus was extremely sorrowful for the Death of his Companion, whom he called
the last of the Romans, causing his Body privately to be removed and buried out
of Sight, lest his Army should be too much dejected. In the mean time he told
his Friends, That he thought Cassius very happy in being beyond the reach of
those Misfortunes which remained for them to suffer. He for some little time
kept from Fighting, epxecting to starve his Enemies, who were now in extreme
want of Provisions, their Fleet being lately defeated; but at last, being
forced to it by the Fear of a general Desertion, and the Eagerness of his
Soldiers, he drew 'em up in Battalia. It is reported, that the Spectre which he
had seen before, appeared to him again the Night before his great Battle, but
now said nothing. Whatever melancholy Apprehensions he had upon him, he
encouraged his Men as much as possible, promising 'em the Liberty of Plundering
the two Cities of Lacedemon and Thessalonica; and when the Battle began, the
Eagerness of both Parties, made 'em throw aside their missive Weapons, and
betake themselves immediately to their Swords, fighting with great Fury, till
after much time, and more Bloodshed, Brutus's Party was born down by main
Force, and entirely defeated. Brutus himself fled to a Hill hard by, and there
remained all Night, and when in the Morning he saw no Way of escaping, he began
to cry out, O unhappy Virtue, I follow thee as a solid Good, but thou art only
a mere Notion, a vain empty Name, or at best a Slave of Fortune. Yet shortly
after he told some of his Friends, That he looked upon himself much Happier
than any of his Conquerors, since he should enjoy that Reputation which always
follows Virtue, and which Tyranny and Injustice could never deserve. Then going
aside with a particular Friend called Strato, he with all Earnestness begged of
him, To show him the last Office of his Friendship; and seeing him very
unwilling to perform so hard a Duty, he called for a Slave. Ah! then cried
Strato, It shall never be said, that the great Brutus, in his last Extremity,
stood in need of a Slave for want of a Friend; so turning away his Head, he
presented the Sword's Point to Brutus, who threw himself upon it, and
immediately expired.

This was the End of these two memorable Persons, Brutus and Cassius, and as
some write, they themselves died by the same Weapons with which they killed
Caesar, who had given 'em their Lives after the Battle of Pharsalia, and after
that, had laden 'em with his greatest Favors; which Favors some make use of
to aggravate the Ingratitude, and others to magnify the Justice of the Act.
All such as knew themselves guilty of Julius Caesar's Death, slew themselves
with their own Hands; but the rest rallying themselves, sent Deputies to Caesar
and Anthony for an honorable Composition, which the two Generals frankly
allowed of. By this famous Overthrow the Triumviri established their Authority
so far as to give the last Blow to the Liberty of the Commonwealth; for the
Opposition they met from Pompey was inconsiderable in respect of this, in which
they were to dispute for one Half of the Roman Dominions. This happened above two
Years after Julius Caesar's Death, and about half a Year after the second
Triumvirate, in the 712th Year of the City, and 40 before our Savior's
Nativity.

CHAP. V.
From the Deaths of Brutus and Cassius, to the Banishment of Lepidus; which
varied the Course of the second Triumvirate's Power.
Containing the space of six Years.
I. As the last Efforts and Struggles of a dying Commonwealth are generally the
most violent, U. C. 712.
so were these of Rome the greatest that ever she had for the maintaining her
Liberty. For in the Sedition of the Gracchi, and in the Wars of Marius and
Sylla, Rome and Italy were only Sufferers; and though in the Dissentions of
Caesar and Pompey the Troubles were more General, yet several of the Senators
and People thought they might well enough stand Neuters out of their Respect to
the Commonwealth, which Name in Appearance was still reverenced: Whereas in
these last Wars the Mask was wholly laid aside, and all things were carried on
in such an open Manner, that there was an absolute Necessity of Declaring for
Liberty or against it. But now all Pretense of Liberty was utterly ruined by
the Defeats of Brutus and Cassius; and from that Moment the Triumviri began to
act as Sovereigns, and to divide the Roman Dominions between 'em as their own
by Right of Conquest, though Lepidus was not much considered by the other two,
as either having no Share in this last Battle, or little Interest among the
Soldiers. The following Days after the Victory, were employed by the Triumviri
in punishing their Enemies; Anthony sacrific^d Hortensius to the Memory of his
Brother Caius; Livius Brutus, the Father of that Livia who was afterward
married to Octavius, kill^d himself in his Tent; and Quintilius Varus, adorned
with all the Marks of those Honors he had born, caused himself to be slain by
his freed Man. Octavius upon this Occasion, appeared more Cruel than was
agreeable to his natural Temper; he sent the Head of Brutus to Rome to be
thrown at the Feet of his Uncle's Statue; his Ashes were sent to his Wife
Porcia, Cato's Daughter, who according to her Father's and Husband's Example,
it is said, killed her self, by swallowing down hot Coals and Ashes. Octavius
forced a Senator and his Son to draw Lots for their Lives, but they both
refused it; the Father voluntarily gave up himself to Execution, and the Son
stabbed himself before his Face. To another that begged of him to have the
Rites of Burial, he said, That that would s^on be at the Disposal of the
Ravens. These bitter Words and rigorous Punishments rendered him both odious as
well as terrible to all the Prisoners who were brought before him.

After the Triumviri had satisfied their Revenge, they thought upon
establishing their Authority. Anthony undertook to go into Asia to raise Money
for the Soldiers Rewards in those Provinces that were Tributary to the Romans;
and Octavius took upon him to lead the old Troops into Italy, to put them in
Possession of the Lands that were promised 'em. Anthony first visited Greece,
as being the Country where Flattery was managed with the greatest Delicacy in
the World, was familiarly present at the Conferences of the Philosophers at
Athens, and made great Presents to that City. Then leaving Marcus Censorius to
command in Greece, he passed over into Asia with all his Troops. There all the
Princes of the East who acknowledged the Roman Power, came to make their Court
to him, and the fairest Princesses strove to gain his Favor, either by the
Charms of their Beauty, or the Magnificence of their Presents. This Crowd of
Sovereigns that daily waited in his Antichamber, with their Praises and
Submissions, did most agreeably sooth his voluptous and ambitious Temper. He
pardoned all those of Brutus's Party that surrendered themselves to him, except
Petronius and Quintus; the first was charged with being one of the
Conspirators, and the other with betraying Dolabella in Laodicea. But then he
took away the Estates of several wealthy Citizens to enrich his Flatterers and
Buffoons; and assembling the Deputies of all the Subjects and Allies of the
Romans in those Parts, in a set Speech he insisted upon his Necessities and
their Duties, and so squeezed out of the Inhabitants almost all that Money
which had been left 'em by Brutus and Cassius. After which he went a Progress
all over the Country, where he frequently gave extraordinary Demonstrations of
Generosity and Goodnature. He pardoned Lucius, Brother to Cassius, and several
other of his Enemies in those Parts; but he spared none that had a Hand in
Caesar's Death, or were of the Number of the Conspirators, so that never any
Man's Death was more severely revenged than his. Anthony then made himself
Sovereign Judge of the Differences between the Kings of those Countries, as in
Cappadocia between Ariarathes and Sysenes, for whom the Beauty of his Mother
Glaphyra was so powerful as to carry the Crown from his Competitor.

But among all those Sovereigns in the East which depended upon the Romans,
none were of such Note as Cleopatra Queen of A^gypt, whose Conduct in these
last Wars had given her good Reason to fear Anthony: For though ^he had assisted
Dolabella, yet at the same time S^rapion her Lieutenant in Cyprus, fought for
Cassius. This she knew had not at all been pleasing to the Triumviri,
considering what she owed to the Memory of Julius Caesar; especially since the
Love of that great Man had been sufficiently known to all the World. Upon which
she resolved to meet Anthony, and try how much her Wit and Beauty could plead
for her, since Reason could do so little; as if she had been resolved to
conquer and triumph over the Romans in the Persons of their Generals. For
besides the Addresses of Julius Caesar, she had received those of Pompey's
eldest Son; so that never Beauty was ever signalized with more illustrious
Conquests. She had such a high Opinion of her Charms, that she questioned not
but to revive that Flame in Anthony's Heart, of which formerly he had given her
a Testimony in Egypt, when he had some Command there. But above all, it was
her Wit that most supported this Assurance; for though her Person was admirable,
and the Brightness of her Eyes not to be withstood, yet there were some at Rome
that did not yield to her in the least for Beauty; but none could compare with
her for her agreeable Wit and her charming Conversation, which never failed
both to please and to persuade. These Perfections, besides her wonderful
Accomplishments in Tongues and Learning, made her resolve to go in Person to
Anthony in Cilicia, who had sent Dellius to cite her to give an Account of her
late Conduct.

Never did any Princess appear in a more singular and magnificent Manner than
Cleopatra; arriving at the Mouth of the River Cydnus, she embarked in a Vessel
whose Stern was of Gold, the Sails of purple Silk, the Oars of Silver, which
gently kept time to a Consort of excellent Music. The Queen was laid under a
Canopy of rich Cloth of Gold, adorned like Venus rising out of the Sea, with
lovely Children about her like Cupids, fanning her, and her Women habited like
Nereids and Graces, leaning negligently on the Sides and Shrouds of the Vessel:
The Sweets that were burning perfumed the Banks of the River, which were
covered with an infinite Number of People, who ran thither with such Eagerness,
that Anthony, who was mounted on a Throne to make a Show of Majesty, was left
alone, while the Multitude flocked to the River with extraordinary Delight and
Wonder. Anthony in civility desired her to Land and sup with him, but she
immediately desired his Company first, which he would not deny for fear of
appearing ill bred. He was extremely surpised at the Neatness and Magnificence
of the Entertainment, and with the ingenious Placing of the Lights, and many
other peculiar Contrivances. The next Day he in his Turn would Treat her, an
endeavored to out-go her in Sumptuousness, but he soon perceived he was far
short of it; whereupon he turned all into Mirth and Railery, which she joined
with, and carried on with all the Delicacy and Dexterity imaginable; till at
last, taking a more serious Air in her Discourses, she told him, That she came
not thither to clear her self, but to be recompensed for the great Services she
had done to him and Caesar in assisting Dolabella, in Commanding a Fleet in
Person in spite of Cassius and his Commanders, with many other things, which
she related with that Artifice and Cunning, and that Wit and Pleasantry, that
Anthony could no longer defend his Heart; but from that Moment entertained a
Passion for her, which was the Cause of all the future Misfortunes of his Life.
He was so stricken with her, that he left all his former Business and
Honorable Employments, and presently followed her into Egypt, where, first
sacrificing to her her Sister Arsione, he lived with her all the following Year
in all the Ease and Softness to which his vicious Temper could prompt him, and
all the Delights and Pleasures sures with which that luxurious Nation could
furnish him.

II. While Anthony remained thus idle in Egypt, U. C. 713.
Octavius was extremely busy about settling the Affairs of Italy, and dividing
the Lands for satisfying the old Soldiers. This he found very difficult, and
not a little dangerous, by reason it exasperated so many against him; for it
was absolutely necessary for him to give up the several Towns allotted for
their Recompense, or else to satisfy his Soldiers with a proportionable
Quantity of Money, but that could not be raised since the Treasury was so much
exhausted. Almost all the Inhabitants of the Towns concerned in this Matter,
came in great Multitudes to Rome; and vast Numbers of Women with Children in
their Arms, whose tender Years and Inncence drew every one's Compassion, daily
filled the Temples and Public Places with their Lamentations. The People of
Rome talked very freely and boldly upon this Account, whose Complaints and
Murmurings Octavius bore with all the Discretion and Cunning imaginable; first
borrowing what Money he could, but finding not that sufficient, he at last
broke through all Difficulties, and gave his Soldiers Places and Lands for
their Inheritance, as he first designed. The City of Cremona was one that
suffered most in this Distribution, for being so much of Brutus's Party, and
Mantua by reason of her Neighborhood had more than her Share in these
Misfortunes, in which the Muses Darling, the greatest Wit and best Poet that
ever Italy produced, had like to have perished. This was the great Virgil, who
was a Party concerned in this public Calamity, for defending the Possession of
his small Estate from Arrius the Centurion, and very narrowly escaped Death by
swimming cross a River. And it is probable that this Adventure most of all
contributed to his further Reputation and Advancement, since these Troubles
were the Subject of that excellent Eclogue which was the first of his
Bucolicks, he being now about 28 Years of Age.

The many Disorders raised upon these Occasions, and the frequent Dangers in
which Octavius was involved, gave Anthony's Wife Fulvia a fair Occasion of
endeavoring to bring about her Designs. Her principal Concern was the bringing
back of her Husband, which she believed nothing but a War could effect; and
therefore she resolved to prosecute those Methods to which her Rage and
Jealousy did then prompt her. Lucius the Brother of Anthony was then Consul,
and to him she principlally applied her self, who out of Respect to her who had
been so great a Friend to him, and out of a Distaste to many of Octavius's
Proceedings, readily complied with her. Many plausible Pretenses were made use
of to make a Breaeh with Octavius, and such could never be wanting in such
unsettl'd and troublesome Times as those. Rome was now in great Misery, and
Italy no less; Provisions were extreme Dear by reason of Pompey's stopping all
the Passages by Sea from Abroad, and at Home the Troops consumed all the
Increase of the Land, and besides committed a thousand Disorders in the Cities,
so that all Trading was ruined, and the Shops of most People shut up. Lucius
made great use of these Mischiefs, and Octavius used all means to quiet the
Soldiers, and pacify the Country People, who were driven from their
Possessions: He heard their Complaints, and promised to do 'em Justice, which
much incensed Anthony's Soldiers, who were also still more and more stirred up
by the Arti^ices of Fulvia. Caesar openly complained of her, declaring, She
wholly acted against the true Interest and Sentiments of her Husband; but she
hearkened to none but her Friend Manius, who persuaded her, That nothing but a
War could force Anthony from Cleopatra' s Arms, and bring him into Italy; and
for Lucius, he had no other Sentiments but what were influenced by these two.

These Disturbances began in Words, Declarations, Manifesto's, and such like;
but soon came to an open Breach, notwithstanding all the Care and Caution of
the most Prudent of both Parties. Many ominent Persons were engaged in this
War; and in regard that Lucius had declared against the Triumvirate, most of
the ancient Owners of the Lands repaired to him, and the new Possessors to
Octavius and to Salvidienus, then coming out of Gaul with a great Power. Lucius
marched to oppose him, but was diverted by Agrippa, one of Octavius's great
Friends, and a valiant Soldier. Notwithstanding the great Caution of Ventidius
and Asinius, two of Anthony's Commanders, Lucius was so hemmed in, and reduced
to such Straits between Caesar and Agrippa, that he was constrained to retreat
to Perusia, a strong City of Hetruria, where he was closely besieged by
Octavius and his Party. Ventidius and Asinius attempted to relieve the Town,
but Octavius was so well posted that they could not effect it, so that Lucius
was in a short time reduced to great Extremities for want of Provisions for so
numerous a Garrison. He made several bold and desperate Sallies, but with no
proportionable Success; till finding his Soldiers reduced to the utmost
Miseries of Famine, he at last came out in Person, and giving himself up into
Octavius's Hands, with great Earnes^ness interceded for his poor Soldiers, and
begged, That his Punishment might atone for their Crimes. Octavius received him
very Honorably and with much Generosity, and all Lucius's Soldiers were
pardoned at the Desire of Octavius's own Men, who could but pity the Miseries
of their old Companions and Countrymen. The Town was designed to be plundered,
but one of the chief Inhabitants called Macedonicus, in a great Rage set Fire
to his House, which consumed both himself and the whole City. Ventidius and the
rest made no Resistance; so that this dangerous War was ended in a few Months
time, Pompey making but small Advantage of it; and Octavius returned to Rome,
where he entered in Triumphant Robes, and crowned with Laurel. Public Feasts
were also celebrated, and it was ordained, That whenever any General hereafter
should merit the Honor of Triumph, and be crowned, Caesar should have a Share
in his Honor.

III. During this last War, and while Octavius was settling his own Affairs
with all the Skill and Wisdom of a most able Politician, Anthony was
ingloriously passing away his Time at Alexandria in the bewitching Company of
Cleopatra, and there fixed by the Charms of that Queen; regarding nothing but
the Enjoyment of those Pleasures she every Day presented him with, in some new
and delightful Shape. Never had Woman that exquisite Art of refining and
heightning of Pleasures by the Charms of Novelty, that she had; she introduced
'em in the most serious Business, and even the most inconsiderable Trifles when
managed by her Skill, received such an Air as made 'em the most agreeable
Diversions: So that whether they played, or treated, or hunted, the Queen still
made one, and was the Soul of all, by her ingenious intermingling some lively
Piece of Wit, or by her unparall'd Grace in relating some pleasant Adventure.
Among the several sorts of Diversions, Cleopatra had invented a Society, which
she called, The inimitable Life, and those who made the most sumptuons
Entertainments, carried away the Prize; which Treats were prodigiously
Expensive, as appears by several Examples out of Plutarch and others. By all
this Variety of Pleasures and Delights did Cleopatra charm this great Man,
insensibly carrying him from one Diversion to another, and entirely gaining the
Affections of his Soul; so that Anthony had almost forgot the great Reputation
and Glory he had formerly gained by his Arms, neglected the Toils and Fatigues
of War, and was just ready to let his former Glory be swallowed and lost in the
more softer Delights of Love.

In these Circumstances was Anthony when he received News that his Brother had
been overthrown by Octavius; that his Wife and all his Friends had quitted
Italy; that Octavius had made himself Master of Gaul, which belonged to him,
and had got all the Legions into his Hands which quartered there. From another
Part he received Advice, That the Parthians, under Command of Pacorus their
King's Son, assisted by Labienus and Barzapharnes, had made themselves Masters
of Syria: That they had likewise marched as far as Ierusulem, which they
sacked, and carried away Hir^anus the High Priest and Herod's Brother,
Prisoners, Herod himself having fled to the Mountains of Iudaea. These
Successes, so highly disadvantageous to Anthony's Affairs, now began to rouse
him from the Lethargy of his Softness, and to make him consider how much his
Actions were like to disgrace the glorious Name of Conqueror; whereupon he
gathered together 200 Ships, and a considerable Army, which he had ready in
those Parts. His Design was immediately to march against the Parthians, but the
earnest Instances of his Wife Fulvia, and his Friends, obliged him to turn
toward Italy. He went from Alexandria to Tire, from whence passing by the
Isles of Cyprus and Rhod^^, he arrived at Ath^ns, where he met Fulvia. He much
blamed her and his Brother Lucius for occasioning the late Disorders, and here
he understood that Octavius had lately married Scribonia the Sister of Libo,
Pompey's Father-in-Law. This Octavius did to gain an Alliance with Pompey, for
the Sake of his Shipping, not forgetting the least thing that might make for
his Advantage; and he managed all things with that Secresfie, Skill, and
Industry, that the most piercing Judgments could by no means penetrate into the
Bottom of this exquisite Politician's Designs.

Anthony suspecting Octavius's Conduct, advanced toward Italy, without showing
the least Concern for Fulvia, whom he left Sick at Sycion; which last Neglect
and Scorn finished what his I^fidelity had begun, she dying soon after. Anthony
crossing the Ionian Sea, was there met by Domitius, who delivered up all his
Fleet and Force to him; from whence they sailed to Brundusium, where they were
forbidden Entrance by a Carison placed there by Octavius. This made such a
Breach between 'em, that Anthony immediately blocked up the Place, and likewise
procured Pompey from Sicily to invade Italy. Octavius marched directly to
Brundus^^m, where the old Soldiers being unwilling to fight against Anthony,
the Army endeavored all Ways to reconcile these two great Men, which Cocceius,
Friend to both, at length with much Labor effected; and Pollio on Anthony's
side, and Mec^^nas on Octavius's, both eminent Persons, as Delegates, made up
this dangerous Breach. All Offenses and Affronts were mutually to be forgiven,
and a Marriage was proposed between Anthony and Octavius's half-Sister Octavia,
and Widow of Marcellus, a Lady of most extraordinary Beauty, and as
extraordinary Virtues and Accomplishments. Though Cleopatra had so large a Share
in Anthony's Heart, yet he could not without Baseness refuse a Lady of
Octavia's admirable Qualities; and to avoid all present Inconveniences, he
married her. Then a new Division of the Roman Empire was made between these
Commanders, the Bounds of their Dominions being Codropolis, a Town of
Illyricum, all from that place Westward being to obey Octavius, and all
Eastward, Anthony. Africa was left to Lepidus, whose Authority declined daily,
and who having offended Octavius, had been confined by him to that Province.

According to this Division, Anthony sent Ventidius into Asia against the
Parthians; but the Troubles at Home seemed much greater to both Anthony and
Octavius, who were now entertained with the sad and lamentable Complaints of
poor People, ready to starve for want of Provisions, which Pompey hindered from
coming either from the East or West, by means of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica,
which he had in his Power, and from Africa by his navy also, which was then
most powerful at Sea. Octavius, by reason of some former Affronts, would not be
brought to any Accommodation with Pompey, notwithstanding the continual Cries
and Prayers of the Multitude, whose Rage and Fury at last came to that height,
that he was nigh being stoned by 'em, and Anthony too, by coming in to his
Assistance. At last both he and Pompey were so far persuaded as to come to an
Enterview; but the latter demanding large Privileges for the proscribed
Persons, and to be admitted into the Power and Place of Lepidus, the Treaty was
ineffectual. Yet the pressing Necessities and frequent Mutinies of the People
brought 'em together a second Time, where, among some other Articles it was
concluded, That Pompey should retain all the Islands he had already, and
Peloponnesus over and above; that he should have the Privilege of demanding the
Consulship in his Absence, and of discharging that Office by any of his
Friends: That he should leave the Sea open, and pay the People what Corn was
due out of Sicily; And that the Proscribed Persons, except such as were guilty
of Caesar' s Death, should have all their Liberty to return. And so a Peace was
concluded to the great Joy and Satisfaction of all People, which they testified
by many public Games and Pastimes.

IV. U. C. 714.
All Civil Wars were now for a while at an End, and Octavius and Anthony were
about taking the Field against Foreigners; but before that time they named the
Consuls for the four following Years, Anthony and Libo for the first, Octavius
and Pompey for the second, Domitius and Sosi^s for the third, and Anthony and
Octavius for the fourth, by which time it was hoped and discoursed that they
would restore the Liberty of the Commonwealth. Octavius, to keep his Soldiers
in Military Discipline, sent one Part of his Forces into Illyricum, and led the
rest into Gaul, where there were some Disturbances. Anthony departed for the
East against the Parthians, which War Ventidius had managed with good Success,
having got several Victories, killed several of their principal Commanders, and
repelled 'em in Media and Mesopotamia, being the only General that could
revenge Crassi^s's Death, or that triumphed over that Nation. Anthony there
settled the Affairs of Syria, and made Peace with Antiochus King of Comogena,
who had assisted the Parthians; and he got the several Kings which he had
established in those Parts, to be confirmed by Ordinance of the Senate, which
were Darius in Pontus, Pharnaces in Idumaea, Herod in Iudaea, Amyntas in
Pisidia, and Polemon in Cilicia. The City of Athens he chose to pass the Winter
in with Octavia, in which place he entirely gave himself over to his Pleasures
and Diversions, quitting all the Tokens and Marks of his Authority to live like
a private Person; and in his Court there was no Business discoursed of but only
Learning and Philosophy.

As for Pompey, he seemed for a while to be satisfied; but as the Treaty
between him and Octavius only regulated their Pretensions, not their Ambitions,
a Breach was soon made again; the Pretenses of which was, That Anthony, who was
obliged by Articles to quit Peloponnesus, would not do it till Pompey had
satisfied him for such Moneys as were due to him from the Inhabitants. Pompey
would by no Means hearken to this, but immediately fitted out a new Fleet, and
provided himself of Forces, perhaps giving Credit to Menodorus, who told him,
That the present Settlement of Affairs was no true Peace, but rather a
Cessation of Arms. He then renewed his Cruisings and Pyracies, which likewise
renewed the former Miseries and Grievances, and made the People cry out, That
the Matter was only changed from three Tyrants to four. But Metrodorus in a
short time revolted to Caesar, bringing in with him Corsica, Sardinia, and
three Legions; and soon after Octavius put to Sea to invade Sicily, but was
beaten back by Pompey, and was in great Danger of his Life; and afterward his
Ships lying at Anchor, were extremely shattered, and most of his Men cast away.
These Misfortunes obliged Octavius to forti^y the Coasts of Italy, lest Pompey
should attempt an Invasion, and sent to Anthony for his Assistance: Though he
seemed entirely taken up with such important Affairs, he found some more
agreeable in another place; and Livia the Wife of Tiberius was the Subject of
'em. The Beauty of this Woman, joined with her refined and dextrous Wit, made a
great Impression upon his Heart, which was much alienated from Scribonia, whom
he divorced for her insupportable Temper; and either by his Entreaties or
Authority, he obliged Tiberius to yield him Livia, whom he married, though then
big with Child, the Priests all allowing of it.

Anthony was now arrived at Brundusium with 300 Sail, U. C. 716.
giving out, He came to assist Octavius in this War. Octavius having not long
before received the News of Agrippa's quelling the Gauls, and having gathered
together a noble Fleet, could willingly have dispensed with Anthony's Civility.
He thought he was already too powerful, and therefore sought all Arts and
Pretenses to excuse his going to meet Anthony; which Proceedings did not a
little displease him, as having been jealous of Octavius for a long time.
Anthony had then particular need of Soldiers to employ against the Parthians;
and willing to spare the Charge of a Fleet, he designed Octavius should take
that, and furnish him with Landforces. Whereupon Octavia generously offered to
go to her Brother, and clear all Misunderstandings, and reconcile all
Differences that were like to arise, which Anthony willingly agreed to. Caesar
received her with a Courtesy suitable to the great Affection he had for her,
but yet was so backward in answering her Requests, that she publicly addressed
her self to his two great Friends Agrippa and Mecoenas, who had a profound
Respect for her, both for her great Merits and high Birth. My Lords, said she,
you see here Octavia, a Woman of the greatest Quality of the World, now ready
to be made the most miserable of all her Sex, if your great Care and Wisdom
prevent not these Misfortunes. The whole Roman People have fixed their Eyes on
me, me the Sister of Caesar and Wife of Anthony; if my ill Destiny should bring
these two to Arms, you have the Chance of Fortune on your side, but I must fall
whoever gains, and be reduced to the fatal Necessity of losing a Husband or a
Brother. This moving Argument, joined with the Affection Octavius had for his
Sister, brought him to an Enterview with Anthony, where extraordinary Civility
was shown to each other, all little Differences were accommodated, and an
Exchange made as Anthony desired; and because the time of the Triumvirate set
by the Senate was almost expired, they prolonged their Power for five Years
more, without ever regarding the Suffrages of the Senate or People. After this,
Anthony departed once more for Syria, leaving Octavius in Italy, Octavius
deferring his Expedition into Sicily till the following Year.

Octavius determined to invade Sicily from three several Quarters; Lepidus, who
had now joined him, was to make a Descent from Africa, Taurus from Tarentum,
and he himself from Puteoli. Pompey was resolved to oppose each of these
Commanders, but at this time there needed not that Care; for Octavius's Fleet
was a second time shattered and disabl'd by a Storm, which so swelled Pompey
with Vanity, that he styled himself Neptune's Son. However Octavius would not
give over his Enterprise; for the same Summer having recruited his Forces, and
refitted his Navy, he sent it out under the command of Agrippa, who first
overthrew Pompey's Fleet, then was again worsted himself; yet after that landed
21 Legions, and 2000 Horse, besides 5000 Lightarm'd Men. No great or memorable
Action happened on Land; but Pompey sent to his Enemy to know if he would fight
by Sea, much fearing the Landforces. Octavius accepted of his Offer, and in a
general Battle, in which Agrippa performed great Acts, finally defeated him,
having sunk 28 of his Vessels. The rest were either taken or broken, seventeen
only escaped; and at the sight of this great Overthrow, all Pompey's
Landforces surrendered themselves to Octavius, so that with his seventeen
Vessels, he fled to Anthony in Syria, from whom he expected Protection, in
requital of what he had formerly given to his Mother Iulia. Messana still held
out for Pompey, but the Garrison at last yielded to Lepidus, and that brought
all Sicily into subjection.

This Victory, though so advantageous to Octavius, proved the Ruin of Lepidus,
who now having got 22 Legions under his Command, and a strong Body of Cavalry,
pleased himself with the ambitious Thoughts of getting all Sicily into his
Hands, to which he pretended a Right, as first invaded by him. Whereupon
Octavius sent to him to complain of his Proceedings; to whom Lepidus fiercely
replied, That Caesar had taken upon him all the Authority of the Triumvirate,
when he had as much Right to it as himself. At this Octavius with great
Boldness went alone to Lepidus's Camp, with no other Assistance than that of
his own Merit, and the Authority he had gained by his Victories. The Soldiers
of Pompey looked upon him with great Respect, and drew round about him; which
Lepidus perceiving, he hastened thither and made some of his Men charge
Octavius, who presently received a Hurt by a Dart. Yet Octavius with a great
Presence of Mind, went directly to the Place where the Eagles of the Legions
were planted, and taking one of 'em, he advanced it in the Air; whereupon all
the Legionary Soldiers ran in Crowds, and saluted him as their General. Lepidus
being thus abandoned by his Soldiers, quitted all the Marks of his Authority
which he could no longer keep, took deep Mourning and came and threw himself at
Octavius's Feet. Octavius was much moved at this mortifying Spectacle, to see a
Triumvir, who had disposed of the Lives of many noble Persons, reduced to beg
his own; but he despised him too much to take his Life; and though his Soldiers
would have killed him, he saved him, but turned him out of all his Authority
and Power, except that of Pontifex Maximus, and banished him to Cyrcaeum.

Thus fell one Head of the Triumvirate, and their Authority without any
Competitor, came wholly into the Hands of Octavius and Anthony; which Authority
became almost indisputable by the Death of Pompey, who was shortly after slain
by Anthony's Order in Phrygia, having first made several Commotions in those
Parts. So that all Civil Wars were for a while ended in the Roman State, which
fell out in the 718th Year of the City, and the 7th of the Second Triumvirate,
about 8 Years after Julius Caesar's Death, and 34 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. VI.
From the Banishment of Lepidus, to the Death of Anthony; which made Way for
Octavius's Absolute Authority, and was the last Step to the Imperial State.
Containing the space of six Years.
I. ROME now began to take Breath after so many Domestic Broils, U. C. 718.
and Octavius was received at the City with a general Joy, the Senators met him
at the Gates, and conducted him to the Capitol, followed by all the People,
crowned with Garlands of Flowers; where after he had given Thanks to the Gods,
they waited on him to his Palace. Octavius now thought of nothing so much as
the gaining the Hearts and Inclinations of the People, and he much endeavored
to restore the public Peace of the City, which had of late been much disturbed
by Thieves and Robbers. For that End he ordered Sabinus, with his Troops, to
pursue and bring to Punishment all such as might be found in Italy and Sicily,
and likewise established at Rome some Companies for the Guard of the City. This
and many other things he executed with such great Diligence and Dexterity, that
the Romans began to have an extraordinary Veneration for a Man who had such a
surprising Understanding at so small an Age. Some Cities of Italy proceeded
even to the erecting Altars to him, especially after one generous Act he did.
He had among Pompey's Papers a great Number of Letters and Memoirs of the chief
Senators, enough to occasion many new Disturbances. These he brought into the
Forum, and before all the People threw 'em into the Fire, protesting, That he
there sacrificed all his private Resentments to the Good of the Commonwealth,
and designed to give up his Authority as soon as Anthony should return from the
Parthian Expedition. The People applauded him beyond Example, and to show that
they ever desired to obey him, they chose him Tribune for his Life; and by this
they likewise thought to oblige him to quit the odious Dignity of Triumvir.
Octavius willingly accepted of the perpetual Tribuneship, but deferred the
Suppression of the Triumvirate till Anthony's Return, and sent Bibulus to
communicate his Design to him; and after he had disposed of the Government of
the Provinces, he marched against the Illyrians.

It was believed, that the Death of Pompey would have established a Peace
through all the World; U. C. 719.
especially since Anthony and Octavius might in the Extent and Riches of the
Roman Empire, have found all that could be desired for the satisfying their
Ambition: But the secret Hatred between these two, which broke out upon all
public Occasions, now began to raise new Commotions in the Roman State. The
Passion of Anthony for Cleopatra, and the extravagant Presents of whole
Provinces which he made her, served Octavius for a plausible Pretense to renew
the War, and free himself from a Competitor so formidable both for his Valor,
and his Reputation among the Soldiers. Anthony had now called Cleopatra into
Syria, and there gave her all Phoenicia, Coelo-Syria, and Cyprus, with a great
part of Cilicia, Arabia, and Iudaea; which much displeased the Roman People,
who daily published scurrilous Discourses of Anthony's Prodigality. Anthony
being informed of these Libels by his Friends from Rome, immediately published
an Apology, wherein he affirmed, That the Grandeur of the Roman Empire was
never so conspicuous for the Conquests made, as for the Liberality practiced in
bestowing the conquered Provinces: That true Nobility was enlarged and
multiplied by the numerous Posterity that Sovereign Princes left in several
Parts of the World; and that was the Motive that induced Hercules, from whom he
derived his Birth, not to subject himself to the single Tie of one Wife, but to
leave the Foundation of several illustrious Races in all Parts, where he
extended his glorious Conquests. These false Reasonings which were designed to
justify his Passion, proved more injurious to him, and made him appear odious
to the Romans, who made Profession of a much stricter Morality.

Anthony besides had marched against the Parthians with a mighty Power, which
made the East tremble, but with very ill Success; for at the Beginning the
Enemy slew one of his Lieutenants, and entirely defeated two Legions, and even
he himself was reduced to such Extremities, that he often despaired of his own
Safety. At last after the Loss of the fourth Part of his Troops, and all his
Baggage, he saved himself in Armenia, by the Advice of a Roman who had been
Prisoner among the Part^ians ever since the Death of Crassus. Though Anthony in
this War behaved himself with his usual Bravery, yet the great Loss and
shameful Retreat of such a General as he, who in all probability was once able
to have conquered his Enemies, extremely diminished his former Reputation: And
what was still more disadvantageous to him, was the general Belief that these
Misfortunes were owing to his Passion for Cleopatra, which had caused him to
take no Measures aright, but such as should hasten his Return to her. But what
principally enraged the Romans was, the taking Artabazus, King of Armenia, whom
Anthony led in Triumph into Alexandria. This Rome could by no means bear, that
a Roman General should impart such a peculiar Honor to a Foreign Nation, and
that she should be deprived of the Glory of insulting over vanquished Kings,
which for so many Years she had enjoyed. All these Faults of Anthony, Caesar
made Advantage of, and above all exaggerated the little Value he had for his
Country: And when he found the People sufficiently exasperated against him, he
resolved to send Octavia to her Husband, that he might have a plausible
Pretense to declare War against him, if he should Offer her the Affront of
sending her back without seeing her.

Anthony was now at Leucopolis, between Tire and Sidon, where he stayed with an
Impatience he was not able to conceal, frequently leaving the Table to run to
the Seaside himself, to see if the Queen were coming. At last she came with
great Quantity of Clothing for her Soldiers, and a vast Sum of Money; at
least Anthony gave her the Honor of it when he distributed it. Almost at the
same time Niger arrived from Octavia, who staid at Athens, from whence she sent
her Husband word that she had brought him Clothes and Arms, Horses and Presents
for his Officers, and 2000 chosen Soldiers well armed. This was very unwelcom
News to Cleopatra, who fearing she could not prevail against so powerful a
Rival when she appeared, immediately feigned a deep Melancholy, abstaining from
Food to make her self lean; and when she was near Anthony, she beheld him with
languishing Eyes, and a despairing Countenance like one besides her self with
Love; She let fall Tears in his Presence, and turned away her Face, as if she
desired to hide from him those Marks of her Grief. These Artifices, together
with the smooth and cunning Flatteries of Cleopatra's Friends, prevailed so
much upon Anthony's Weakness, that they quite turned his Thoughts in favor of
his Mistress. He broke off his honorable Enterprise against the Parthians,
notwithstanding all the Instances of the King of Media, who offered to join
with him, and oppose that People with his Cavalry accustomed to their Way of
Fighting. He only contented himself to make a Match between one of his Sons he
had by Cleopatra and a Daughter of that King; and after he had sent to Octavius
to return to Rome, he waited on Cleopatra to Egypt.

Here Anthony began to show himself more luxurious and extravagant than ever,
erecting a stately Throne of Silver in the most public Place in Alexandria,
upon which were two Seats of Gold, one for himself and the other for Cleopatra.
There Anthony dressed like Bacchus, and Cleopatra like Isis, were seated; and
in the presence of all the People he declared her Queen of Egypt, Cyprus,
Lydia, and Lower Syria, associating with her Caesaria, the Son she had by
Julius Caesar. To the Children he had by her he gave the Title of King of
Kings; and for their Dominions, to Alexander the eldest he allotted Armenia,
Media, and Parthia, which he pretended he would conquer in a little time; and
to Ptolemy the younger, Phoenicia, Upper Syria, and Cilicia; and all things
were performed with the greatest Pomp^ and Solemnity imaginable. Anthony was
still carried away with new Pleasures and Delights by Cleopatra, and the
Delicacy and Profuseness of their Treats still daily increased, till at last
the Queen promised him upon a Wager to give him a Treat of 60000 Pound value of
our Money. In this Treat was served up a golden Cup with a very strong
dissolving Vinegar, in which Cleopatra put one of her Pendants, which was a
Pearl of an inestimable value, and immediately drank it off. Plancus, who was
to judge of the Wager, immediately secured the other Pendant which she was then
taking off, and gave judgment that she had already won the Wager; and Anthony
himself was extremely troubled for the Loss of such a Jewel. The remaining
Pearl, after the Death of Cleopatra, came into the Hands of Caesar, who caused
it to be cut asunder, and made it into two Pendants for the Image of Venus,
which he thought gloriously adorned with half of this prodigal Queen's Supper.

II. Octavius was now much provoked by Anthony's Actions, U. C. 720.
especially at his affronting his Sister, and made Report of all his Practices
to the Senate, who began to have a far less Esteem for Anthony than ever.
Octavia used her utmost Endeavors to reconcile these two, alleging, That her
Interest ought not to oblige Caesar to declare himself Anthony's Enemy, since
it would be a shameful thing to have it reported in future Ages, that the Love
of one Woman, and the Jealousy of another, had caused the two Governors of
the greatest Empire of the World to plunge it into the Miseries of a Civil War.
Her great Generosity, her mild Behavior, together with the Love and respect to
her Husband, still further incensed the People against Anthony, for his ill
Usage of a Lady of that extraordinary Merit. Octavius at last resolved to
declare War against Anthony, but deferred for a while, being employed all this
Year against several People of Illyricum; at which same time Anthony also left
Egypt and went into Media, where he entered into a League with that King.

The following Year Octavius chiefly employed in Preparations against Anthony,
who was now so sensible of Octavius's Designs, that he sent to Rome to complain
of Octavius's Conduct; alleging, That he had seized upon Sicily, without
affording him a Share; that he had dispossessed Lepidus, and kept all his
Governments to himself; and that he had divided all Italy among his own
Soldiers, and reserved nothing for his in Asia. Octavius made Answer to these
Accusations, That Lepidus' s Conduct had obliged him to remove him; that as for
the Conquests he had made, Anthony should have a Share, when he had divided
Armenia which he had conquered; and as for Anthony' s Soldiers, that it was not
likely that they would value a few pitiful Lands in Italy, after they had
conquered all Media and the Empire of the Parthians by the mighty Exploits they
had done in following their General. Anthony was so enraged at this Jeer, that
he ordered Canidius, who commanded his Army, to march without intermission with
16 Legions to pass over into Europe, and he himself with Cleopatra came to
Ephesus, where his Lieutenants had gathered together 800 Vessels, of which
Cleopatra furnished 200 with 20000 Talents, and Privisions for all his Forces.
Anthony, by the Advice of Domitius, resolved to send back Cleopatra into Egypt
till the War was ended; but she fearing lest Octavia should take an Advantage
of her Absence, and make her Peace, by large Presents gained Canidius to
represent to Anthony a great Number of Inconveniences that her Departure would
occasion; particularly, the depriving him of the Assistance of the Egyptians,
who were the best Part of his Navy. These Counsels, and her own cunning
Insinuations, so far prevailed upon Anthony's deprav^d Temper, that he
consented to her Stay.

Anthony and Cleopatra went both to Samos, where, for Preparation for so great
an Enterprise, they began with all the Diversions and Pleasures that could be
invented. Never were any Man's Cares so pleasantly divided as Anthony's; on one
side all the Kings, Princes and Potentates from Egypt to the Euxine Sea, and
from Armenia to Illyricum, had Orders to send Arms, Provisions and Soldiers to
Samos; on the other, all the Comedians, Dancers, Musicians, and Buffoons were
obliged to repair to this Isle: So that frequently when a Ship was thought to
come laden with Soldiers, Arms and Ammunition, it proved to be full of Players,
Scenes and Machines; and while all the rest of the World was in extreme Misery
and Desolation, Joy and all kind of Pleasure reigned here, as if they had all
made choice of this Place to retire to. But how Magnificent soever their
Entertainments were, Anthony's Fear and Jealousy had so fowr'd his Temper,
that he began to suspect Cleopatra her helf, and would eat nothing without a
Taster. But Cleopatra by her dextrous Management, by several Instances soon let
him see, That he could have no Guard against her Address, were not her Heart
interess'd in his Preservation; which made Anthony leave off his troublesome
Precautions, which he found useless against the Arts of a Woman, who could so
skilfully mingle inevitable Snares of Death among her Pleasures. Every City of
Anthony's Empire had a Share in his Sacrifices, and sent an Ox thither to be
offered, and the Kings who accompanied him, contended who should make the
noblest Entertainments, so that it gave Occasion to one to ask, What Rejoycings
they would make for a Victory, who made such magnificent Treats before a
dangerous War?

The Stay Anthony made at Samos was very favorable to Octavius, who could make
but small Provision for War, by reason of the Discontents of all the Italian
Cities, occasioned by the severe Impositions laid upon 'em, and augmented by
the News of Anthony's Approach with such formidable Forces. But when they saw
that Anthony's Preparations served chiefly to fill the Public Places and
Theaters of Samos, Octavius found Means to appease 'em, and to put himself in a
Posture of Disputing the Empire with Forces equal to his Enemies. Still Anthony
began to grow more odious to the Roman People; for having brought Cleopatra to
Athens, and there honoring her beyond any Mortal before her, he sent to Rome
with Orders to Octavia to leave his House, with all her Children. Octavia
readily obeyed these unjust Orders, without Murmuring, only lamenting her hard
Fate, because she was made to serve for a Pretense to a War, whose Consequences
must needs be fatal to her. Several of Anthony's Friends not being able any
longer to bear with his Disorders, abandoned him, and Octavius having got
Anthony's Will into his Hands, found new Matter to complain of to the Senate
and People, which was Anthony's ordering, That if he died in Rome, his Body
should be carried in funeral Pomp through the principal Places of the City, and
then sent into Egypt to Cleopatra. To this a Report was added, That Anthony
designed to give Rome to Cleopatra, if his Arms were prosperous, and to
transferr the Seat of the Empire into Egypt; so that notwithstanding all the
Care of the more prudent Sort, and all their Endeavors to reconcile these two
great Men, it plainly appeared, that nothing but the Sword could decide the
present Controversy.

III. As soon as Octavius found himself in a good Condition to carry on the
War, U. C. 722.
he publicly proclaimed it against Cleopatra, and divested Anthony of his
Authority, which he had in a manner already parted with in favor of that
Princess. The Decree implied besides, That Anthony was now no longer Master of
his own Will, since Cleopatra, with her Philtres had taken away the use of his
Reason; so that he was not to be esteemed as a Person engaged in this War,
which was only managed by Mardion her Eunuch, and Iras and Charmia her Women,
who were all his Governors. All Anthony's Followers were invited over with
great Promises of Rewards, but not declared Enemies, partly to prevent their
growing Desperate, and partly to render Anthony more inexcusable in making War
against his Country, only for the sake of an Egyptian Woman. The Forces of
these two Generals were answerable to the Empire they contended for, one
drawing all the East, and the other the West to his Party. All the several
Kings of Asia that were Allies of the Romans, followed the Fortune of Anthony;
some by their Persons, and others by their Troops alone; all which, with
Anthony's Forces, composed an Army of 100000 Foot and 12000 Horse, and his
Fleet consisted of 500 Ships of War, whereof many were of the largest Bulk.
Octavius in his Party had no Foreign Princes, and his Army amounted to no more
than 80000 Foot, but was as strong in Cavalry as his Enemy's: In his Fleet were
250 Vessels, but all Light, better Manned, and more convenient than Anthony's.
This Year, by reason of Anthony's recalling his Troops out of Media from the
Protection of that Country, the Parthians became Masters of it, and Armenia was
likewise lost.

The two great Men being now in readiness for Action, U. C. 723.
they first began to show their Hatred by reflecting Letters; and when Octavius
reproached Anthony with his Love to Cleopatra, and the Prodigality of his
Feasts, he, on the other side, put him in mind of the famous Feasts of the
twelve Gods, where he and his other Guests represented the Deities they adored.
To which he added, His prepostrous Match with Livia, and his infamous Divorce
of Scribonia, for not bearing the Insolence of that new Mistress; and all the
Roman Ladies that Octavius had any great Familiarity with, were brought upon
the Stage. He proceeded likewise to tax Octavius with Cowardice at the Battles
of Mutina and Sicily; whereupon Octavius wrote to him, That it was childish to
fight any longer with the Pen, but if he would approach at the Head of his
Army, he should have Ports in Italy to land without Molestation; that he would
draw his Troops so far from the Sea, that Anthony should want no room for
Encamping, and putting his Men in Battalia. To make return to this Bravade,
Anthony, though he were much the older, challenged Octavius to fight a single
Combat, or if he pleased, he would give him Battle in the Plains of Pharsalia,
where the great Caesar and Pompey had formerly decided their famous
Differences. Anthony was now at Actium, a Town on the Coasts of Epirus, at the
Entrance of the Gulf of Ambracia; and while he lay there without Action,
Octavius passed over from Brundusium, and surpised Toryne, a City nigh Actium.
This Exploit amazed Anthony's Soldiers, because his Legions were not yet
arriv^d; but Cleopatra, to re-assure 'em, made slight of it, and in a jesting
Way said, what Damage is it for Octavius to take the Scummer? alluding to the
Word Toryne, which signifies a Scummer; as if the Danger had been no greater
than the taking of a Dinner.

Anthony had brought all his Ships into the Gulf, whither Octavius the next Day
after the taking of Toryne came forward, and offered him Battle. Anthony's
Vessels were very ill Manned, however he drew 'em into a fighting Posture, with
their Oars a-peek, as if he intended to bear down upon the Enemy; but Octavius
durst not engage him in that narrow Passage, and therefore stood off to Sea;
the other refused to follow, but as he perfectly knew the Country thereabouts,
he cut off the Water from Octavius's Camp on every side, which much distressed
his Army. But the Success of Agrippa in taking Leucadia, Petras, and Corinth,
about this time, much revived the Soldiers, and likewise occasioned Amyntas,
Deiotarus, and Demitius to go over to Octavius. To the latter of these,
Anthony, according to his natural Generosity, sent his People and all his
Equipage, which so sensibly touch^d Domitius, who was Sick already, that he was
not able to outlive the Grief of abandoning a Man who thus by Kindness only had
revenged his Perfidiousness. In the mean time Canidius arrived with the
Legions, who now began to change his Mind concerning Cleopatra, desiring
Anthony, To send her back, and go himself into Macedonia, where he might fight
by Land with so much more Advantage, because Dicomes, King of the Getes, had
promised him a powerful Assistance: He farther told Anthony, That it would be a
renouncing both Sense and Reason to put a Victory to the Hazard of the Seas and
Winds, which they were certain of at Land, by the Valor and Experience of
their General, who, to this Day, had kept up the Title of Invincible; and by
the Hearts and Courages of their Soldiers, who had been tried in so many great
Dangers. Anthony was much inclined to follow this Advice, but Cleopatra, whose
Words were Oracles, biased him the other Way, and obliged him against his Will
to hazard both his Empire and Life in a Sea Fight; and this, only that she
might escape with more ease, if Anthony should lose the Day.

Anthony had now resolved to fight by Sea, and while he was putting his Fleet
in Order of Battle, a brave old Soldier, all covered with Scars, spoke thus to
him aloud, My noble General, do you despise this good Sword, and this old Arm,
which all my Wounds could never yet weaken, that you should put your Confidence
in brittle Boats and rotten Wood? Leave the Water to the Egyptians and
Phoenicians, People born and nursed up in that Element, but leave us Romans to
the firm Land, where we may boldly meet Death, and fall like Men. Anthony
answered nothing, only by the Motion of his Head seemed to encourage him, though
he himself was not well satisfied; for when his Officers proposed taking away
the Sails, he opposed it, alleging, That he would have none of the Enemy
escape. That Day, and the three following, the Sea was so rough they could not
engage, but on the fifth, the two Fleets advanced toward each other in good
Order. Anthony in his Brigantine went about encouraging his Men with the
Remembrance of the many Victories they had gained under his Conduct, telling
'em besides, That the Largeness of their Vessels gave 'em Opportunity of
fighting as firmly, and with as much Assurance as on dry Land; and that this
Day as he expected the Empire of the World from their Valor, so they might
expect Rewards answerable to so noble a Conquest. Octavius on his Side gave no
less Hopes to his Soldiers, especially since they seemed fearful of the Enemies
Fleet; and among other things, said, The Enemies Vessels are laden indeed, but
not Manned; and if they exceed us in Multitudes of Men, we surpass them in
Number of Soldiers. Be therefore now, as ye, have ever been, Conquerors; to
speak more were to detain you from Victory, only call to Mind your ancient
Valcur; and remember that I am Caesar, and you Romans.

It was both a noble and a terrible Sight, to see the Shore on one side
overspread with 200000 fighting Men, and the Sea covered on the other with an
incredible Number of Vessels filled with Soldiers. Nor was the Battle less
remarkable, which began on both Sides with great Courage and Bravery, and so
continued for a considerable Time; when Cleopatra, wearied with Expectation, or
overcome with Fear, unexpectedly tacked about, and fled toward Peloponnesus
with sixty Sail. And what was still more surprising, Anthony himself, who had
formerly shown so many eminent Marks of his Valor, now forgot the Care of his
Honor and Safety, and fled after her, playing the Part of a cowardly Soldier,
while each of his Soldiers performed the Office of a courageous General. Thus
Anthony abandoned his Men that so generously exposed their Lives for his
Interest; and getting into Cleopatra's Galley, he sat for a long Time by
himself in a confused Melancholy Posture, without so much as seeing the Queen,
though he had followed her without any apparent Reason but the Thoughts of her
Absence. The Battle, notwithstanding, continued with great Obstinacy till five
in the Evening, when Anthony's Forces were partly constrained by the great
Conduct of Agrippa, and partly persuaded by the obliging Promises of Octavius,
to submit; and herein Octavius's Clemency did much efface the Memorry of the
Battle of Philippi, and the cruel Proscriptions of the Triumvirate. The
Consequence of this Victory was very advantageous to Octavius, for all
Anthony's Landforces, though very firm and resolute for some time, were in a
little time after very willing to accept of such Conditions as Octavius
offered, and upon that all yielded to him, Octavius generously sparing all but
a very small Number, who in a more particular Manner were his declared Enemies.

Anthony now was carried away with melancholy Reflections and dispairing
Thoughts, and through Shame or Anger refused to see Cleopatra for several Days
together; till arriving at Tenarus, her Women so bestirred themselves, that
they brought 'em to see one another, and to eat together. Here News was brought
him by several of his Friends of the Defeat of his Fleet; but not suspecting
the Revolt of his Army, he wrote to Canidius to retreat through Macedonia, and
return to Asia, and took what Care he could for the safety of his Friends that
were about him, offering 'em what Money he had, and commanding 'em to leave
him. After this he retired to Africa, from whence he sent Cleopatra into
Egypt, and remained almost alone, without any other Company than Aristocrates
and Lucilius; one a Greek, and the other a Roman, both excellent Orators. Here
Anthony heard of the Revolt of his Landforces, which put him into such a
violent Rage and Despair, that he attempted to kill himself; but was hindered
from that fatal Resolution by the Prayers and Remonstrances of his Friends, who
persuaded him to return to Alexandria, where he found Cleopatra about an
Enterprise that well showed the Greatness of her Spirit. This Queen had drawn
her Galleys upon Carriages for 100 Mile, over that Neck of Land which joins
Asia to Africa, to the Red Sea; where she designed to embark her self with all
her Treasure, and her choicest Friends, and plant her self in some remote part
of the World. But the Arabians soon forced her to abandon that Design, and
thereupon she applied her self to fortify the Avenues of her Kingdom, which
were of very difficult Access. Anthony's Behavior was very different, showing
nothing but a shameful Weakness: He shunned all Company, and built a House near
the Pharos, where he shut himself up without either Friends or Domestics, to
imitate Timon, as he said, since he had no less Reason to hate Mankind than
that Athenian, being betrayed by those whom he had most obliged. But he could
not long force his natural Temper, and therefore, as Debauching is a great
Relief to People of his Humor, he quitted his Cell in a little Time, and
applied himself wholly to Feasting and Luxury, and many sorts of Extravagancies.

IV. Octavius was now in Italy, U. C. 724.
whither he was recalled by Agrippa's Letters, after he had passed one part of
the Winter in Athens, and the other at Samos. The Occasion of his Return into
Italy was the Mutiny of his Soldiers which he had sent to Brundusium after the
Victory, who, after their usual Custom, had demanded their Rewards and their
Discharge. Octavius stayed at Brundusium but a short Time, only while he
appeased his Soldiers, and gave all necessary Orders; after which with his
Fleet he sailed into Syria, while his Army marched along the Coasts of Africa
to attack Egypt on the other side. All the Kings of Asia, Allies to the
Romans, came to assure him of their Obedience; and none appeared more forward
than Herod King of Iudaea, who went as far as Rhodes to lay his Crown at
Octavius's Feet, and offered him both his Person and his Troops. This Prince
was one of Anthony's greatest Friends, and for that Reason he had so little
Hopes of the Success of his Voyage, that in pursuance of his Natural Bent to
Cruelty, he left Order with two of his Confidents to put his Wife Mariamne to
Death, whom he passionately loved, in case he should miscarry. This Secret was
revealed to Mariamne by one of his Instruments; and Herod being reproached with
it at his Return, caused the Death of this unfortunate Princess, who for her
admirable Beauty, and her noble Race from that of the Maccabees, deserved a
better Fate. Octavius, to give a famous Instance of his Clemency, pardoned
Herod, gave him his Crown, and received him into Favor; but would not spare
Alexas the Syrian, who had been Anthony's greatest Flatterer, and afterward a
most perfidious Traitor to him.

Anthony and Cleopatra seeing themselves abandoned by all their Allies,
resolved at last to send Euphronius, their Children's Tutor, to make some
Proposals to Octavius. Cleopatra privately sent a Golden Crown and Scepter,
with a Royal Seat, to Octavius, asking the Kingdom of Egypt for her Children;
and Anthony only desired he might live as a Private Man at Athens, if Octavius
was not willing he should tarry still in Egypt. He absolutely rejected
Anthony's Propositions, but sent to Cleopatra, That there was no manner of
Favor which she might not reasonably expect, if she would either put Anthony
to Death, or Banish ^im. With this Answer Euphronius returned, and with him
Thyreus, a Freed-Man of Octavius's, a Person very Cunning, and fit to manage
any Intrigue; who coming with a Message from a young Emperor, to an ambitious
Princess, possessed with a mighty Opinion of her own Charms, had no difficult
Access to her. But these secret Conferences between Cleopatra and him, and the
Honors she did him, threw Anthony into such a furious Passion of Jealousy,
that he immediately ordered him to be cruelly Scourged, and in that Condition
sent him to Octavius with Letters, That he had chastis'd Thyreus for insulting
over him at a Time when his bad Fortune had put him into an ill Humor; but if
this Proceeding offended him, be had his Freed-Man Hipparchus by him, whom he
might use after the same manner, and so be upon equal Terms: Which was a
pleasant Way of being revenged upon Hipparchus, the first of Anthony's
Freed-Men that went over to Coesar. Cleopatra omitted nothing to clear
Anthony's Mind of Jealousy and Suspicion; she redoubled her Fondness and
Caresses, and when her Birthday came, she kept it as was suitable to their
deplorable Condition; but Anthony's was observed with great Splendour and
Magnificence, so that all the Guests were enriched by the noble Presents she
made upon his Account.

In the mean time Octavius, having gathered all his Forces together, surpised
the City of Pelusium, which was surrendered to him by Seleucus; and it was
immediately reported, That this Governor had done it by Cleopatra's Order; but
she, to clear her self, delivered up his Wife and Children into Anthony's
Hands. Near the Temple of Isis she had built a stately Building, designed for a
Sepulcher. Into this Place she removed all her Treasure, as Gold, Silver,
Jewels and other such valuable things, and filled it besides with Torches,
Faggots, Tow, and other combustible Matter; so that Octavius was much afraid
lest out of Despair she should burn her self in it with all those ^ast Riches.
Therefore while he was marching toward Alexandria he omitted no Occasion of
giving her Assurance of his Respect and kind Usage. The nigh Approach of so
formidable a Rival, began once more to rouse up Anthony, and revived all those
Sparks of Greatness and Generosity in his Breast that seemed to have been
wholly extinct. Anthony now knew that he had no Hopes but of dying like a
Roman, and this he fully resolved upon: So he rallied all the Troops he had,
made a brave Sally upon Octavius's Horse, and beat 'em into their Camp, which
he put into Disorder; nor did Anthony ever show more Courage and Conduct than
now. Upon this Victory, Anthony entered Alexandria as in Triumph, and went all
Armed to Cleopatra, to bring her the good News of his Success, presenting one
of his Knights to her, who had behaved himself bravely in the Fight. The Queen
rewarded his Valor with an Armor of Gold, but that very Night, this
ungrateful Wretch went over to Octavius, which dangerous Example much troubled
Anthony. He tried to provoke Octavius's Temper, and challenged him to a single
Combat; but was coldly answered, That Anthony had Ways enough to die without
seeking that.

Anthony now finding his Affairs in a dangerous Condition, resolved to make the
last Push both by Sea and Land, with a full Design to conquer honorably or die
bravely. He ordered his People to treat him cheerfully, and fill him his Wine
plentifully; Perhaps, said he, this may be the last Service you can do, for to
Morrow you may have another Master, while I lie extended upon the Ground,
despised by all Mankind. Finding his Friends much moved at this sorrowful
Discourse, he added, However I will not do you so great an Injury as to lead ye
where Death is more certain than Victory. At the dead of Night, when the whole
City was in a deep Silence, on a sudden was heard a dreadful Noise of Voices,
Instruments and Cries, like those of Bacchanals, which passed through
Alexandria, and went out of the Gate that looked toward the Enemies Camp, as
Plutarch relates it. At break of Day, Anthony posted those few Troops he had
remaining, upon the rising Ground nigh the Town, from whence he sent Orders to
his Galleys to engage the Enemy. They advanced in Order of Battle; but as soon
as Anthony's Ships approached the other, the Soldiers all held down their Arms
and saluted Octavius's; who returning the Salute, both Fleets joined and stood
over against the City. All his Cavalry seeing this, left him, and went over to
Octavius's Camp, his Infantry being forced presently to yield.

This unfortunate General, abandoned thus by his Men, and finding he could not
die with Glory in the Field, returned back to Alexandria, overcome with a
dreadful Rage and Fury, running and crying out, That Cleopatra had betrayed
him, when he had ruined all his Fortunes for her Sake alone! The Queen hearing
of this, in a great Fright retired to her Monument, secured the Doors, and let
down the Port-cullis; and then made a Report be spread, that she was dead,
which was soon brought to Anthony: This sad and sudden News recalled all that
Love and Tenderness he had for this Princess; O wretched Anthony, cried he,
What have thou here in this World, when Fate has snatched the only Thing for
which thou could endure to live? Then retiring to his Cabinet, he laid aside
his Armor, and renewed his Complaints; O Cleopatra, said he, our Separation is
not my greatest Grief, for we shall meet again; but what afflicts me most, is,
that I, who have commanded so many gallant Men, should be outdone by a Woman
in Courage. Immediately he called Eros, the most faithful of his Free'd-Men,
whom he had engaged by Oath to kill him when he should think it necessary, and
now bad him perform his Promise. Eros drew out his Sword, as if he designed to
perform that fatal Duty; and turning aside, gave himself a Wound, which threw
him dead at his Master's Feet. Dear Eros, cried he, I thank thee for teaching
me to do what I ought my self; and upon that he thrust himself into the Belly,
and fell backwards upon his Bed. Though the Wound was Mortal, yet the Blood
stopping, he came to himself, and most earnestly begged of his Friends to
dispatch him; but they all fled from him, leaving him in a miserable Condition,
tossing and struggling with the Anguish of his Pain, whilst Diomedes came to
carry him to Cleopatra.

Anthony understanding Cleopatra yet lived, begged and entreated in the most
moving Manner in the World to be carried to her; and with much difficulty and
pain they lifted him up to the Door of the Monument. Cleopatra, having only her
two Women, durst not open the Door, but let down Cords from the Window. All the
People of Alexandria were present at this sad Spectacle, and nothing appeared
so lamentable as to see this great Man, renowned for so many Conquests and
Victories, bathed in his Blood, and just expiring, holding out his Hands to
Cleopatra, and faintly endeavoring to raise himself; and to see this famous
Queen striving, with her Body just out of the Window, with the feeble
Assistance of her Women, to pull him up, the People all the time seeming to
assist her with their Cries and Tears. When after much Pain she had drawn him
up, she embraced him, and laid him gently upon her Bed, tearing all her
Clothes in a most violent Passion, beating her Face and Breast, and calling
Anthony her Lord, her Husband, her Emperor! and though her own Misfortunes were
very great and astonishing, yet she forgot them all at the sight of this
deplorable Object. Anthony begged of her to moderate her Grief and Transports,
and asked for some Wine, either because he was thirsty, or because he thought
it would soon end him. After he had drank, he exhorted Cleopatra to endeavor
to save her Life if she could do it with Honor, and for that End Proculus
would be her best Friend in Caesar' s Camp; that she would not too deeply
reflect upon the cruel Turn of Fortune which he felt in his last Days, but
rather think what Glory and Renown he had lived in, famous for so many noble
Victories; Triumphs and Dignities; and that after he had been the first Man of
the World, and the most illustrious of all the Romans, he was at last overcome
by a Roman.

At the finishing of this Discourse, Anthony expired, in the 53d. Year of his
Age; a Person of as great Spirit and Valor as any among the Romans, since the
Death of Julius Caesar; yet softn'd, overcome, and entirely ruined by a Woman.
His Death put an End to all the Civil Wars, and gave Octavius Opportunity to
make his Fortunes as he pleased; and from this Period many Historians date his
Reign; others three Years after; and some from Julius Caesar's Death. This
happened in the 724th Year of the City, the 3d of the 187th Olympiad, and the
13th of the Second Triumvirate, about 14 Years after Julius Caesar's Death, and
28 before our Savior's Nativity.

CHAP. VII.
From the Death of Anthony, to the perfect Settlement of the Empire by
Octavius; which finished all Disturbances, and brought Rome to its utmost Glory.
Containing the space of about three Years.
I. Octavius showed great Satisfaction at his Success and Fortune, U. C. 724.
yet when Anthony's bloody Sword was brought to him, the Sight of it obliged
him to retire into his Tent, where he could not refrain from Tears, when he
reflected upon the deplorable End of a Person so eminent both for Birth and
Valor, and one with whom he had contracted so strict a Friendship and
Alliance. He called his Friends in, to whom he declared, That he had
contributed nothing to the Overthrow of Anthony through any Hatred or Ambition;
showing 'em the Copies of the Letters he had writ to him, which contained
nothing but just and reasonable Proposals, and Anthony's Answers full of
Passion and Disdain. After this he sent Proculus to employ his utmost Address
to seize upon Cleopatra, extremely desiring to save her Treasure, but more
especially to grace his Triumph with this Queen, who had so long triumphed over
the Roman Commanders. Cleopatra refused Proculus Entrance, but through the Door
demanded Egypt for her Children; which caused Proculus, after observing the
Avenues of the Monument, to return to Octavius, who the same Instant sent
Gallus with him to make her new Propositions. While Gallus was discoursing with
Cleopatra below, Proculus with two others entered by the Window at which
Anthony had been drawn up; which one of her Women perceiving, presently
shreek'd out, Wretched Princess, thou art taken alive! Upon which Cleopatra
turned quick, and drew out her Dagger to stab her self; but Proculus caught
hold of her, saying, Madam, will you at once injure your self and Caesar, in
depriving him of the most illustrious Testimony he can give of his Generosity;
and make the best and gentlest Prince in the World pass for Cruel and
Barbarous? Whereupon he disarmed her, searched her lest any Poison should be
concealed about her; and after he had secured her, he returned to Octavius with
this joyful News.

Octavius was extremely satisfied to find this haughty Queen at his Disposal,
who before had lifted the Crown of Egypt above the Empire of the Romans. He
first commanded Epaphroditus to Guard her with the greatest Care, and yet to
serve her like a Queen; after which he made his Entrance into Alexandria after
a solemn and pompous Manner. The Majesty of Octavius followed by so many armed
Soldiers, who breathed nothing but Destruction, drove the Egyptians into great
Fears and Apprehensions, imploring his Mercy upon their Knees. Octavius told
'em, He pardoned 'em for the sake of their illustrious Founder Alexander, for
the extraordinary Beauty of the City, and for his great Esteem he had for
Arrius their Fellow-Citizen and Philosopher. Several Kings, Princes, and Roman
Senators begged of him the Body of Anthony, to pay their last Respects to him,
but he would not deprive Cleopatra of a Satisfaction so dear to her; and more
than that, he took Care to furnish her with what was needful for the Pomp of
the Funeral, which she solemnized with extraordinary magnificence. Octavius
took further Care that nothing should occasion the Encrese of Cleopatra's
Afflictions; but the Greatness of her Soul, and the Nobleness of her Courage,
made the Loss of her Liberty insupportable to her. Her excessive Melancholy,
and the many Blows she had given her Breasts, put her into a slow Fever, which
gave her great Hopes of ending her Sorrows, and her Life in a short time. She
had besides resolved to abstain from Eating, if her Physician had not
discovered this Secret she had trusted him with to Octavius, who immediately
threatened to put her Children all to Death, if she persisted in her Obstinacy:
This was the only thing she could be sensible of, and the Thoughts of this
caused her to comply, and receive whatever they prescribed her.

After this, Octavius resolved to visit Cleopatra, and by his Civilities give
her fresh Assurance of his Favor. He found her upon a plain Bed, and as soon
as she perceived him, she rose in her Shift to throw her self at his Feet, with
her Hair in disorder, her Face torn, her Breasts bruised, her Eyes red with
weeping, and her Voice weak and trembling; all which Accidents could not deface
the Brightness of her Eyes, nor the Charming Air of her Face. Octavius civilly
lifted her up, and sat down by her; and immediately she entered upon the
justifying her Conduct; but when her Art and Skill failed her against manifest
Proofs, she turned her Discourse into humble Supplications, and delivered him
an Inventory of all her Treasure and Jewels. Seleucus her Treasurer accusing
her of concealing several things, Cleopatra, in a great Rage threw her self out
of her Bed, dragged him by the Hair, and beat him severely; which some think
was only a Pretense of showing* Octavius her beautiful Shape and Body, which
she had too great a Confidence in. However Octavius only smiled at this Action,
and led the Queen to her Bed. O Caesar, cried she, after the Honor of Visiting
me in this miserable Condition, is it not cruel and barbarous, that a vile
Slave should accuse me of laying aside a few Trifles; alas, not to adorn my
self, but to present 'em to Livia and Octavia, that their generous Intercession
may in some measure procure your Favor? This Discourse gave great Satisfaction
to Octavius, imagining it implied a Desire she had of living; and thereupon he
assured her, She might keep her Jewels, and that he would use her more
generously than she could reasonably hope for; and so retired; much satisfied
with his Success, having, as he supposed, over-reached her.

Cleopatra being soon after informed by Dolabella, one of Octavius's
Favorites, and her Admirer, that Octavius had resolved within three Days to
send her and her Children away, earnestly begged of Octavius to suffer her
first to pay her last Oblations to the Memory of Anthony, which he granted her.
Whereupon she was carried to the stately Sepulcher where Anthony was laid; and
only attended by her two Women, she fell upon her Knees, embraced his Tomb with
extreme Grief and Passion; and after a Flood of Tears, she cried, My dearest
Lord, I was a Queen and wore no Chains when I first placed thee in this
Monument, but now I pay my Duties, I Am Fortune's Slave; my servile Body is
reserved to grace the Triumph of thy Foes, on which I dare not so much as print
the Marks of my Grief. These Tears, these Pangs of Grief are the last Tokens of
the Love and Duty of thy Cleopatra, who now must be forced far from thee: No
Chance could separate us while living, but our cruel Destiny will part us in
our Deaths; and as by a strange Turn of Fate Egypt has afforded thee a Tomb,
so Rome will me, the only Courtesy I shall receive from thy Country: Yet I
hope the Heavenly Powers that guard your happy Abode, (for ours bave betrayed
us) will stemm the Conqueror's Pride, and suffer him not to triumph over thee
in my Person. Hide me therefore here, and receive me into thy Tomb; for among
all my bitter Griefs and heavy Afflictions, none ever pressed my Soul so hard
as living thus long without thee.

Upon the finishing of these sad Lamentations, she crowned the Tomb with
Garlands and Flowers, embracing it as if she designed to grow to it, till her
Women took her from thence to a Bath; after which she attired her self after a
most gorgeous Manner, and eat as sumptuously as she could. After Dinner she
cleared the Room of all except Iras and Charmia; and having procured an Asp to
be secretly brought in among Figs, Grapes, and Flowers, she applied it to her
Arm; just before which she sent a Letter to Octavius, wherein she most
passionately complained of her hard Fate, and very earnestly beseech'd him,
That it might be permitted her to be buried in the same Tomb with Anthony.
Octavius in all haste sent some Messengers, who found her dead upon a Golden
Bed, adorned with her Royal Robes, in Posture of one asleep, with Iras also
dead at her Feet, and Charmia just breathing, and placing her Diadem right. One
of the Messengers very angrily asked, Is this well done, Charmia? Extremely
well, replied she, and becoming a Princess descended from so noble a Race of
Monarchs; at which she expired at her Mistresses Feet. Octavius was extremely
troubled at Cleopatra's Death, as being deprived of the noblest Ornament of his
Triumph: However, he could not but admire the Greatness of her Courage, who
notwithstanding the Weakness of her Sex, preferred Death before the Loss of her
Liberty, or the Appearing below her Quality. He ordered her a Magnificent
Funeral, laying her Body by Anthony's, according to her Desire; and her Women
were interred with considerable Pomp in Memory of their Fidelity. She was then
thirty eight Years of Age, having reigned twenty two, twelve whereof she passed
with Anthony; and her Death put an End to the Egyptian Kingdom, which had
flourished for many Ages. Her Son Caesario which she had by Julius Caesar was
shortly after slain by Octavius's Orders, who was told by Arrius the
Philosopher, That many Caesar' s were of dangerous Consequence. Egypt was now
entirely reduced into a Province, and Octavius caused his Soldiers to cleanse
the Channels of the Nile, which much improved the Fertility of the Soil: And
since this Kingdom much enlarged the Roman Dominions, especially as to Riches,
and his entire Victories brought Peace to the Roman State, at his Return he was
received at Rome with an universal Joy and Satisfaction, as a Person who had
put an End to the Miseries and Calamities in the greatest Part of the World. He
triumphed three Days; for Illyrium, for the Battle of Actium, and the Conquest
of Egypt, with extraordinary Splendour and Magnificence; all which were
attended with a happy shutting of the Temple of Ianus, which had stood open 205
Years.

II. Octavius Caesar now finding himself Lord and Governor of the Roman
Empire, U. C. 725.
partly by the Authority with which the People had at several Times invested
him, and partly by the Ruin of his Enemies; after this resolved to exercise
all the Clemency of a sweet tempered Prince, and all the Cunning of an
exquisite Politician. To assure himself of Anthony's Adherents was his first
and principal Care, to which End he publicly reported, that he had burnt all
Anthony's Letters and Papers without reading them; well knowing, that as long
as any thought themselves suspected Adversaries, they would never show
themselves real Friends. To the Senators and Magistrates he made sumptuous
Feasts and Treats; to the Plebeians and Common Sort he exhibited magnificent
Shows and Plays; and both he entertained with such Variety of Pleasures, as
might reasonably banish their Sorrows for the old Proscription, and remove
their Fears of a new. With great Wisdom and Dexterity he regulated many Abuses
and Corruptions in the State; and though he would not give up the least part of
his Authority, yet he exercised it with that Discretion and Moderation, that
the Commonwealth was more happy under his Government than when it enjoyed all
its Privileges. He allowed the People all their due Liberties, only retrenched
the Liberty of making Factions and Dissentions in the State; and to the Senate
he restored their ancient Splendor, but banished their late Corruption: He
contended himself with a moderate Power, which would not afford him the Freedom
of doing Ill; but he made it Absolute, when it imposed upon others the
Necessity of doing Well. So that the People were not less Free, but in Matters
of Sedition; nor the Senate less Powerful, but in Matters of Injustice; and the
Romans seemed to have lost nothing of the Happiness that Liberty might produce,
but only the Misfortunes it might occasion.

Octavius having established so good an Order, found himself extremely
embarrass'd with various Thoughts and Opinions, and long considered with
himself, whether he ought to retain the Government of the Empire, or restore
the People to their first Liberty. The eminent Examples of Sylla and Julius
Caesar, put him to many Doubts and Scruples, when he considered that the
former, who had voluntarily quitted his Authority, died peaceably in the midst
of his Enemies; and the latter, for retaining of it, was assassinated by his
most intimate Friends. But then he considered on the other side, that the
Commonwealth had been so extremely harrass'd and broken by violent Factions
and Civil Wars, that the Yoke would prove their greatest Relief, especially as
he would manage it. He found likewise that the People of Rome had lost much of
their ancient Vigor and Desire of Liberty, and the Senate as much of its
ancient Firmness and Resolution; and that there were such numerous Corruptions
and such dangerous distempers in the State, that nothing but a Change could
cure or correct 'em. As he considered that both Senate and People never wanted
a Head so much as at present, the Advantage of which they were in this short
time sensible of, so these Considerations gave him great Hopes, and almost as
great Resolutions. However, this most wary Prince thought it highly necessary
for his own Security to consult his two intimate Friends Agrippa and Mecoenas,
the former most famous for his Courage and Valor, and the latter for his great
natural Endowments. Octavius taking these two into his Closet, asked their
Advice, telling 'em among other things, That they were his Friends, therefore
he had made 'em his Judges, as Men that were able to speak Soundly, and willing
to speak Freely: That he knew 'em to have a greater Care of his Honor than his
Profit, but more of the Commonwealth than of both.

Agrippa returned the first Answer to this purpose: You may well admire, my
generous Lord, that I, who am certain of an uncommon Promotion under your
Empire, should advise you to a private Retirement; but since I esteem your
Honor above my own Profit, and the Public Good before my particular
Preferrment, I am sure You will pardon me. You have now gloriously finished the
Civil Wars, and brought an honorable Peace to your Country; but what will the
Advantage be, without a Restoration of that Liberty for which those Wars were
begun? Or what Benefit can the People reap from so noble a Victory, if it be
used only as an Instrument for their greater Slavery? A Word so odious to the
Roman Nation, that whenever that has seemed to have been aimed at by any
Person, no Virtues could shield him, no Merits protect him, no Services secure
him from the Rage of the People; no, not those of your great Father Julius: And
can you hope to escape? But say, That the Divine Power should so protect you as
to outlive such Dangers, would you also outlive your Glories? Are you willing
that Posterity should brand you with Tyranny, and perhaps with Baseness, in
curbing and putting a Stop to the Fame and Grandeur of your Country? A Country
which has gained all its Renown and Reputation, and owes all its great and
glorious Acts to a Government quite contrary to what you seem inclined to; and
a Government under which other Nations have generally been most prosperous and
flourishing. Therefore your Generosity should lead you to set your Country
free, and since you are already Master of the World's Forces, and without Rival
in the Empire, and have both Senate and People at your Mercy; to do it now
would strike all Detraction dumb, and make future Ages stand amazed at the
Greatness of your Temper.

Mecoenas on the other side declared his Thoughts after this Manner: Be not
deceived, most noble Prince, with the specious Show of Words and Names; but
since just Heaven has ordained you a Father, as well as a Master of your
Country, rather hearken to her real Wants and Necessities, than to the
fallacious Clamours of the Rabble, who like Children cry for what would prove
their Ruin. Our Republic is a Ship fraught with Multitudes of various
Nations, and destitute of a Pilot, which for many Years has been miserably
tossed and shattered, and is now ready to be cast away, without your relieving
Hand to save it. In former times indeed this thriving Empire did not seem to
want a Monarch; but is is now grown too vast and unwieldy, to subsist without
one. Formerly the Strictness of the Roman Discipline and Morality, and the
Fears of rival Nations kept the Commonwealth from sinking: Yet in those pure
Times, what Commotions in State, what Revolutions in Government, what Divisions
and Distractions were occasioned by the Tribunes Rage and Peoples Madness?
Camillus, Rome's second Founder, and Scipio, that Scourge of Carthage, were
disgraced, and the great Coriolanus banished, only because their Worth alone
had lifted 'em above the ordinary Pitch of Subjects But then to mention all the
numerous Troubles and dreadful Miseries of these latter Times, were to revive
our Sorrows, which you in a great Measure have allayed; and since by your Means
your Country has recovered some of her Spirits, it is your Duty to establish
her in perfect Health, which can be no Ways done but by retaining the Empire.
And this Advice is not only for the good of your Country, but also for the
Security of your Person: for the resigning of your Authority would be the
Parting with your Safety. Pompey was contemned after the Disbanding of his Army
at Brundusium; and though your Uncle Julius fell, it was not for retaining his
Power, but for grasping of it too strongly, which you know better how to
manage. In the gaining of an Empire there is no Medium between the Death of an
Enemy, and the Life of a Prince; and since you have already gone so far, you
must either resolve to be Greatest in the State, or Least among the People, to
be Caesar or Nothing,

Octavius thanked 'em both for their friendly Advice, and after some dubious
Expressions, declared himself rather inclined to Mecoena's Opinion; withal
telling them, That he was but the Instrument of the Destinies, to put their
Wills in Execution; and since they had already shown themselves so favorable
to him, he had all the Reason to hope that his Friends would not be backward in
their Councels, or any other necessary Assistance. Upon which Mecoenas
proceeded to give him many wise Instructions and Directions, how to manage his
Affairs to the best Advantage, both as to his Countries Happiness and his own
Security, as may be seen at large in Dion Cassius. Among a great many other
things he told him, That his virtuous Behavior would be a greater Security to
him than all his Forces: That if the People found him modest and unblamable in
his Life, not exacting Money from others while be abounded in Riches, not
pinching others while be was luxurious, nor punishing others while he was loose
and licentious, they would certainly love and honor him as a true Father and
Preserver of his Country. But this he told him as his principal Rule by which
he ought to guide himself; Always to preserve the Love of his Subjects, and if
he would do exactly as he himself would expect from his Prince, if he were a
Subject, then he should not fail of being prosperous in his Designs, happy in
his Life, and famous in History. He concluded all with telling him, That if in
taking upon him the Sovereign Power, he feared the Name of Kingdom as odious,
he might omit that, and manage all under the Title of Caesar: If he thought not
that sufficient, they would give him that of Imperator, and would adorn him
with some other venerable Note of Honor; so that he might enjoy all the
Privileges of a Kingdom without the envious Name of King, which the Romans
could not endure. All these Things confirmed Caesar in his former Opinions; and
from this time he began to pursue his Designs with more Care and Diligence than
ever.

III. The Romans were now arrived to their utmost Height as to polite Learning,
and an exquisite Taste of Things, as appears from their several Writings: For
besides Virgil, formerly mentioned, at this time flourished the two greats
Wits, Ovid and Horace, the pleasantest and perfectest Poets in their Kinds; and
likewise Livy, the Prince of all the Roman Historians; all which had a great
Share in Octavius's Familiarity, as well as Mecoenas's. Octavius was a great
Promoter of all sorts of Learning, and having brought a General Peace to the
Roman Empire, he had a fairer Opportunity both of encouraging that, and of
following his other Designs. He had an admirable Faculty of discerning and
penetrating into the Humors and Ambitions of the principal Men; in which he
was much assisted by the Letters found in Anthony's Coffers, which he carefully
preserved, and secretly made use of as he found Occasion. As for Words and
Libels, he took little or no Notice of, having learnt that both from his Uncle
Julius and Mecoenas, Never to be concerned at what was spoken against him. And
this Maxim he found much to his Advantage; for by this he not only understood
the Minds and Affections of the People more easily, but perceived that as long
as the common Sort retained this Liberty of Speech, they were the less sensible
of the Loss of Liberty in State.

Octavius was now in his fifth Consulship, and by the Advice of Mecoenas, he
took upon him the Title of Imperator, not in that Sense it was anciently wont
to be given for Victories obtained, but in respect of the chief Command or
Authority, as it had been decreed to his Uncle Julius. And the great Industry
of Agrippa was no less serviceable to him than the wise Counsels of Mecoenas;
and notwithstanding he had at first advised him to contrary Methods, he now
proved as useful an Assistant as the other. Shortly after he was made Censor,
and Agrippa with him; and among other things belonging to his Office, he took
great Care to purge and reform the Senate, into which many Equites and unworthy
Plebeians had crept, during the late Civil Wars; and then increased their
Number to a Thousand, 1000 Senators.
which his Uncle had brought to nine Hundred. All this he did with great
Moderation and Discretion, always showing much Respect to that venerable
Assembly; and though he continually diminished their Power and Authority, he
still preserved their ancient Glory and Dignity, well knowing that Iulius's
Contempt of the Senate, did most of all forward his Ruin; he put two Persons;
namely Cluilius and Furnius into the Rank of Consulares, because they had been
designed for Consuls, though prevented by others. He also ranked certain Families
among the Patritians, because most of those had perished in the late Wars. One
great and public Way of bridling the Nobility was his publishing an Edict,
forbidding any Senator to Travel out of Italy without his Leave; a thing very
strictly observed by his Successors: For he well knew that the Presence and
Authority of Persons of that honorable Rank might raise great Commotions in an
unsettled State. Yet not wholly to imprison 'em, he gave 'em Liberty to visit
Sicily, and Gallia Narbonensis, Provinces adjoining to the Continent of Italy,
altogether unfurnished for Wars, and by reason of their Variety of Pleasures,
more likely to weaken their Minds than to arm their Bodies.

In the following Year, Octavius having entered upon his sixth Consulship, U.
C. 726.
together with Agrippa his Colleague, made a Lustrum, which was many Years after
the last Celebration of one, and in this four Millions and 63 Thousand Polls of
Romans, in which Number must be reckond all Women, Children, Servants, and
Slaves; a Number almost incredible, if compared with the present Cities of the
World, but the less, if we consider the prodigious bigness of the City and
Suburbs, which good Authors affirm to have been fifty Miles in Compass at this
time. Octavius at that time likewise celebrated Games, which had been Decreed
in Memory of his Victory at Actium, and it was ordered that they should be
renewed every fifty Year, four Colleges of Priests, taking care of 'em; namely,
the Pontifices, Augurs, Septemviri, and Quindecemviri by Courses. He caused
many other delightful Games and Exercises to be made, all at his own Cost and
Charges, using all possible Methods to divert the People from fixing their
Minds upon his Actions, and their ancient Freedom. He ordered that two Persons
of Praetorian Rank should Yearly over-see the Treasury, and gave to the People
four times as much Corn as they were wont to have; to some Senators he gave
Money, some of this Rank being so poor, that they could not bear Offices
belonging to their Dignity. All Engagements and Debts to the Exchequer he made
void that stood good before the Battle at Actium, except what concerned
Buildings. He suffered no Sacrifice to be offered to Egyptian Gods within the
Pomaerium, and took great Care about settling Religion, and repairing of the
Temples. And because many unjust Things had been ordained during the late
Seditions and Civil Wars, especially in the last Triumvirate, he made 'em all
void by one Edict, and caused 'em to cease from his sixth Consulship. Thus
Octavius more and more settled the Peace of the City, and gained the Hearts and
Affections of the People.

IV. Octavius now entering upon his seventh Consulship, U. C. 727.
and finding all Matters ripe for his Purpose, he went to the Senate House,
after he had prepared all the Senators who were for his Interest, and in a
studied Speech spoke to this Effect. When I consider with my self the immense
Greatness, and boundless extent of the Roman Empire, I am stricken with
Surprise, nay and Amazement, to imagine that any Mortal dare undertake the sole
Administration of so vast a State. What Nation have not either begged Peace at
our Gates, or felt the Fury of our Arms at their own? And what Countries have
not we conquered and brought to Subjection; making the Rising and Setting of
the Sun, the Bounds of our Dominions? Therefore it must proceed from a wild and
extravagant Opinion of their own Abilities, when any pretended to bare that
Burden which none but the immortal Gods could sustain. As for my own Part, who
may with Modesty affirm, that I have put an End to all domestic Wars, and have
brought Peace to the City, I dare not presume to attempt it. Though I am invited
to it by all the powerful Charms of commanding the greatest People upon Earth,
and the most glorious Empire next Heaven, and also enticed by the fairest
Opportunity of establishing my self that ever Roman had; yet I freely divest my
self of all that Power and Authority, which my Arms have gained, and you have
given me: An Action which I presume is no less glorious than just, far
exceeding the Conquests of Gaul, of Britain, and of Egypt; an Action no less
hardy than those bold Performances of Coecles, of Scaevola, of Curtius, of
Regulus, and of the Decii. And further to show you, that the true Spirit of the
ancient Romans is not extinct in me; I do not only restore to you all your
former Laws and Privileges, and such Things as I have been entrusted with, but
likewise all that I have further acquired since my first Authority; and may
this Action prove auspicious and fortunate to my Country.

Octavius enlarged much upon the Particulars, and upon the finishing his
Speech, the Minds of the Senators were variously affected. Many knew his
Design, and therefore agreed with his Intentions; the rest either suspected his
Aim, or believed his Words. Of these some admired his Policy in concealing his
Purposes; others were concerned at his Design, some at his Cunning, and others
at his Refusal of the Government. Many hated the popular Form of Government as
dangerous in these Times, and approved of the Change, being well satisfied with
Octavius's Administration. Most of the rest being worn and wearied out with
their many vain Strugglings for their Liberty, and very desirous of Ease and
Rest, chose rather the Present Estate with Security, than to strive to recover
the Old with Danger. So that the Product of their several Affections were the
same; for those who wished he was reduced to a private Condition, were very
fearful of what might follow; and such as desired he might retain his Power,
were as sorry for the Loss of their Hopes. Neither could they who did not
believe him, reprehend him; for some wanted the Will, and others the Courage to
do it. No Man, whether he bebeliev'd his Speech or not, durst commend it,
because a great many were displeased with it, and as many afraid of it.
Wherefore having often interrupted him whilst speaking, soon after he had done,
they unanimously besought him with many Words and Entreaties, That he alone
would take upon him the Administration of the they Government; and after many
Arguments and Persuasions, they compelled him, as it were, to accept of the
Sovereignty. And that his Person might be more safely preserved, they
immediately decreed the Pay of his Guard to be double to that of all other
Soldiers.

Thus Octavius Caesar by his Artifice of pretending to lay down all his Power
and Authority, got it confirmed to him both by Senate and People. Yet that he
might seem to be Popular, he refused to govern all the Provinces, or to have a
perpetual Power over such as he should take care of: Therefore the weaker and
inward Provinces, being in a more peaceable Posture, he left to the Senate; the
most powerful and outward Provinces, and those most exposed to Enemies, he kept
to himself, saying, Than he desired that the Fathers might enjoy their Power
with all Ease and Safety, while ^e himself should undergo all the Labor and
Danger* But by this politic Contrivance he render^d the Senate useless, and of
no effect, and by this he engrossed all the Soldiers and Militia to himself. To
the Senate and People were left Afri^k and Numidia, Lybia called Cyrenai^a,
Asia Mi^or, Greece with Epirus, Dalmatia, Macedonia, Crete, Sicily, Sardinia*
and that part of Spain called Boetica. Caesar kept* the rest of Spain, all Gaul
and Germany, as also Syria, Phoenicia, Egypt, etc. which were Frontier
Provinces. Over these Provinces he assumed the Government but from ten Years,
well remembering how dangerous the Word Perpetual had been to his Uncle Julius;
and adding, That as soon as ^e could quiet them, he would quit his Power. After
this he set over the Provinces of both sorts Men of Patritian Dignity, but over
Egypt one of the Eq^estrain Rank only, and with the lowest Title of all other
Governors, fearing lest a Person of the highest Rank presuming upon the Wealth
and Situation of that Country, should prove dangerous to the Roman State. He
allotted Africa and Asia to Senators, and the rest of the Provinces to
Praetorians; but forbidding either to take upon 'em this Employment within five
Years after they had born Offices in the City. They held their Government but
for a Year; and as soon as Successors were sent 'em, they were immediately to
depart the Provinces, and not to fail of being at Rome within three Months.

As soon as Octavius had but made his Oration about resigning his Command, and
distributing the Provinces, many Honors were conferred on him, as that Laurel
should be planted before his Gates in the Palatium, and upon those Trees Oaken
Garlands to be hung, as for one who was a perpetual Conqueror of Enemies, and
Preserver of Citizens. The House of the Emperor also was for the future called
the Palatium or Palace, Palatium.
not by any Decree, but because Octavius lived on the Palatium or Palatine
Hill, and there was his Praetorium: His House also received some Dignity from
the Mount it self, because Romulus lived there; therefore afterward, if the
Emperors were removed elsewhere, yet the House were still called Palatia or
Palaces. Immediately after the Provinces were divided, and all Public Affairs
settled, it was debated in the Senate, whether Octavius ought to have the Title
of Romulus, because he had founded the Empire; but the more venerable Name of
AUGUSTUS, Augustus.
propounded by Munacius Plan^us, at length seemed most agreeable for sacred
Place^ and Temples consecrated by Augurs were termed Augusta by the Romans.
Caesar, though he much desired that of Romulus, yet perceiving he should be
suspected of affecting the Title of King, declined it, and was sirnam'd
Augustus, intimating something in him more than Mortal; and this he accepted
of, a Title expressing more Dignity and Reverence, than Authority. And Things
are called Augusta, which are most worthy of Honor, and most Sacred; wherefore
the Greeks express it by (...), or Venerable. From this Day forward began the
Sovereign Power and Authority to be in the Hands of one Man, and by a Law
called Lex Regia, all the Power of the People and Senate was transferred upon
Augustus. When his ten Years were expired, ten more were added, and after that
as many more, so that he had his Authority still continued for his Life; for
which Cause his Successors, though they had the Power settled on 'em for the Term
of Life, yet at the End of every ten Years, solemnized at it were the Renewing
of it.

Thus Augustus Caesar became Supreme Governor of the Roman People, neither by
Inheritance, nor Usurpation, nor Conquest, nor Election, yet by means of 'em
all. This great Change of Government happened in the 727th Year of the City, A.
M. 3978, in the second Year of the 188th Olympiad, 482 Years since the
Beginning of the Consular State, 303 since the Beginning of the Macedonian
Empire, 33 since the Beginning of the Mixed State, 17 since the Death of Julius
Caesar, and 25 before our Savior's Nativity.

Here ended the greatest Commonwealth in the World, and at the same time began
the greatest Monarchy; a Monarchy so well fixed, and firmly settled, that nor
all the tyrannical Carriage of those Monsters of Men that succeeded Augustus,
could shake it; a Monarchy, which if it be considered with others, as to its
Power and Riches, together with its Extent and Continuance, there is scarce any
room left for Comparison; and a Monarchy which the Romans, for many Years,
believed Indissoluble and Immortal. The Roman Dominions were now almost brought
to their utmost Extent, containing in Europe, Italy, both the Gauls, Spain,
Greece, Illyricum, Dacia, Panonia, with some part of Britain and Germany; In
Asia, all those Provinces which went under the Name of Asia Minor, Armenia,
Syria, Iudaea, with part of Mesopotamia and Media; and in Africa, Egypt,
Africa, Numidia, Mauritania and Lybia; besides many Islands, and some Parts of
other Provinces. All which comprehended the greatest, and far the best Part of
Europe, with very large Parts of Asia and Africa, being no less than between 3
and 4000 Miles in length, and about half as much in breadth. As to the yearly
Revenues of the Empire, by a moderate Computation, it has been reckoned at ^igh
forty Millions of our Money, whereof Gaul paid five, and that without being
extremely burdensome to the People. But what still makes it seem greater, is
what Vespasian told the Senate at his coming to the Empire, that he wanted
40000000 of Sestercium's to settle the Commonwealth, which amounts to
312000000 of our Money.

As for the Romans themselves, they had now nothing so elevated a Temper,
either for the Greatness of Genius, or the Force of the Soul, as in some Time
in the Republic; but had something more Polite and Sociable; and never were
more glorious, or at least, more pleasant Times than now, all Wars and Contests
ceasing, all Arts and Sciences flourishing, and all Riches and Pleasures
increasing. In short, Augustus made the World happy, and was happy in the
World; he had nothing to desire of the Public, nor the Public of him: And
considering the many Evils he occasioned before he came to the Empire, and the
great Good he did after he was Emperor, it was said with good Reason, That he
should never have been born, or never have died. But for his Actions
afterward, and his further settlement of the Empire, I must leave to the other
Volume of this History.

FINIS.
An INDEX of the principal Things, relating more particularly to the Ancient
Magistrates, Laws, Buildings, Customs, etc. of Rome.
A.
ACtio Iuris, Page 113. Aedilis, 185. Aedilis Cur^^lis, 148* 149, 366. Agraria
Lex, 96. Aprilis, 23. Augustus, 49.
C.
Candidatus, 80. Capitol, 37, 49, 264. Celer, 11. Censor, 124, 152, 365.
Census, 41, 42. Centuria, 41. Classus, 41. Client, 9. Cloacae, 37. Comitia
Centuriata, 42. Comitia Curiata, 9* Comitia Tributa, 102. Consul, 59, 60, 65,
147, 152, 292, 314, 365. Curia, 8.
D.
December, 24. Decemviri, 11^. Decuria, 9. Dictator, 74, 75, 76, 151, 204, 207,
267, 355, 365, 380. Duumviri, 28.
E.
Equites, 242, 243.
F.
Februarius, 241, 242. Fecial, 21, 31, 32.
I.
Ianuarius, 23. Ianus, 21. Imperator, 365. Interrex, 18. Iugum, 106. Julian
Year, 361, 362. July, 24, 367. June, 24* Jupiter Feretrius, 12. Jupiter
Indiges, 3. Ius Civil, 113. Ius Honorarium, 113.
L.
Legatus, 115. Legio, 14. Lictor, 11. Ludi Fescennini, 150, 192. Ludi
Seculares, 192. Ludi Terentini, 193. Lustrum, 42, 124.
M.
Magister Equitum, 75, 355. Maia, 24. Mancipium, 43. Manipulares, 6. Mars, 23.
Mercedonius, 23. Months, 23, 24.
N.
November, 24. Nundina, 16.
O.
October, 24. Opima Spolia, 12, 126, 196. Ovatio, 71.
P.
Pagus, 22. Palatium, 449. Patres Conscripti, 10. Patres minorum Gentium, 35.
Patritius, 9. Patronus, 9. Pecunia, 44. Plebeius, 9. Plebiscitum, 113.
Pomaerium, 7. Pompilian Year, 23, 24. Pontifex, 21. Praefectus Vrbis, 10.
Praetor, 147, 148, 160, 195, 219, 366. Principalis Constitutio, 113.
Publicanus, 243.
Q.
Quadrata, 14. Quaestor, 65, 129, 366. Quintilis, 24, 367. Quirinus, 17.
Quirites, 14.
R.
Rex, 8. Rex Sacrorum, 53. Rostra, 160.
S.
Salius, 21. Satirus, 192. Senatus, 10, 14, 35, 366. Senatus Consultum, 113.
September, 24. Sextilis, 24. Slaves, 43.
T.
Tarpeia Rupes, 13. Tribus, 8, 15, 41, 70, 143, 151, 161, 165, 167, 192.
Tribuni Militum, 123, 128, 131, 147. Tribuni Plebis, 83, 84, 87, 89, 90, 106,
268, 292, 355. Tribunus Celerum, 11. Triumphus, 71. Triumvirate First, 293,
295. Triumvirate Second, 384, 385. Triumviri Capit^les, 169. Twelve Tables,
112.
V.
Vestal Virgins, 21, 35. Vindicta, 63.
AN INDEX Of the Principal MEN and MATTERS IN THIS HISTORY.
A.
ACtium: See Battle. Aemilius Paulus, his Actions in the Second Macedonian War,
Page 228, 229 Aeneas, his Arrival and Settlement in Italy, 3 Afranius and
Petreus, their War against Julius Caesar, and their Losses, 329, 330. Their
Deaths, 358 Agrippa, Menenius: See Menenius. Agrippa, Vipsanius, beats young
Pompey, 410. And Anthony' s Forces at Actium, 424. His Speech to Octavius about
his laying down the Empire, 440, 441 Allobrogick War, 251, 252 Ancus Marcius,
the fourth King of Rome, his Reign, 30, to 34 Annibal the Carthaginian general:
See Hannibal. Annibal the Carthaginian Admiral, his ill Successes, and Death,
184, 185 Anthony: See Antonius, Marcus. Antiochian War, or the War with
Antiochus King of Syria, 221 to 224 Antonius, Caius, the Consul, defeats
Cataline, 288 Antonius, Marcus, his management, in relation to Julius Caesar' s
Death, 375 to 378. His Attempts of raising himself, 379, 380, 381. Is beaten at
Mutina, 382. He joins in the second Triumvirate, 384, 385. His Acts against
B^utus and Cassius, 391, 392. His Eastern Journey, 396, 397. Falls in love with
Cleopatra, 399. His luxurious and prodigal Life with her, 403, 404, 416 to 419.
His Marriage with Octavia, 405. His ill Success against the Parthians, 414.
Falls out with Octavius, 417, etc. He challenges Octavius twice, 421, 429. Is
beaten by him at Actium, 424, 425. Treats with Octavius, 427. His Despair,
Death, and Character, 430, 431, 432 Antonius, Lucius, his Brother, raises a War
against Octavius, and is worsted, 401, 402, 403 Appius, one of the Decemvirate,
his ambitius Design, 111, 112. His Tyranny, Lust, and Death, 116 to 119
Archimedes, his famous Works and Death, 209 Aristobulus, King of Judaea,
conquered by Pompey, 282, 283 Augustus Caesar: See Octavius. Authors: See
Writers.
B.
Battles, the principal were, at Actium, 423, 424, 425. At Allia, 137. At
Cannae, 205, 206. At Dyrrachium, 339, 340. At Munda, 363, 364. At Pha^salia,
343 to 348. At Philippi, 392, 393. At Trebia, 200, 201. At Thrasymene, 202. At
Regillus. 76, 77. At Zama, 216, 217 Brutus, Decimus, one of the Conspirators
with M. Brutus against Julius Caesar, his Actions and Death, 381, 382 Brutus,
Lucius Junius, his Politic Designs, 49, 50. He everthrows the Kingdom of Rome,
52 to 55. Causes the Execution of his owns Sons, 62, 63. His Death. Brutus,
Marcus* joins with Pompey, 332. Together with Cassius, conspires against Julius
Caesar and kills him, 370 to 373. His and Cassius' s Success in the East, 389,
390. Sees a Ghost, and his Discourse with Cassius concerning it, 390, 391.
Another Discourse with him before the Battle at Philippi, 391, 392. Both their
Defeats and Deaths, 392, 393, 394
C.
Caesar: See both Julius and Octavius. Calpurnia, Wife to Julius Caesar, her
Dream, 372 Calpurnius Flemma, his great Valor, 185 Camillus, Furius, takes the
City of Veii, 132, 133. His extraordinary Generosity at Falerii, 134. His
Banishment, 135. He saves his Country, 141, 142. His after Acts both at home
and abroad, 142 to 149 Capitolinus: See Manlius Capitolinus. Carthaginian War:
See Punick- War. Cassius the Consul, his Ambitious Designs and Death, 95, 96
Cassius the Praetor, surrenders his Fleet to Julius Caesar, 350. For his other
Actions, See Brutus Marcus. Cataline, his Conspiracy against the State, 283,
284. Is repremanded by Cicero, and leaves the City, 285. Is defeated and slain,
288 Cato, Porcius, the Elder, his Behavior toward the Women, and his
Soldiers, 221. And toward Scipio Africanus, 225. His great Enmity to Carthage,
230 Cato, Porcius, the younger, his Grandson, his Management in Cataline' s
Conspiracy 287, 288. Opposes Pompey, 291. And Julius Caesar, 292. His Opinion
concerning Bribery, 296. He is sent from Rome by Clodius' s means, 300. His
nice Advice in Pompey' s Camp, 332, 333. His remarkable Death, 358, 359
Caudium, the dishonorable Treaty, and its Effects, 164, 165 Cicero, the
renowned Orator, procures Pompey his first great Authority, 277. His skilful
Management in Cataline' s Conspiracy, 284 to 288. His Banishment, 299, 300. His
Restoration, 303, 304. Pleads for Milo in vain, 314. Desires a Triumph without
success, 319, 320. Procures Anthony to be declared Enemy to the State, 381. His
Death by the second Triumvirate, and Character, 385, 386 Cimbrian War, 251, 252
Cincinnatus, Quintius is chosen Consul and Dictator both times from the Plow,
105, 106 Cinna the Consul, joins with Marius, and acts in the first Civil War,
259, etc. His Death, 263 Cisalpine-Gallick War, 195, 196 Civil War, the first
between Marius and Sylla, 258 to 271. The second between Julius Caesar and
Pompey, 321 to 348. Continued by Cato and Pompey' s Sons, 357 to 364. The third
between the second Triumvirate and Brutus and Cassius, 389 to 394. The fourth
between Octavius Caesar and M. Anthony, 420 to 432 Clelia, her great Bravery,
68, 69 Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, her Enterview with Julius Caesar, 352. The
Favors she received from him, 355. Her Character and famous Enterview with M.
Anthony, 397, 398, 399. Her Management of him, 403, 404, 415. Her Prodigality,
416, 417. Her great Designs, 425, 426. Treats with Octavius, 427. She retires
to the Temple of Isis, 428. Her Carriage toward Octavius, 434, 435. Her
Lamentations over Anthony' s Tomb, and Death, 436, 437 Clodius, his Attempts
upon Julius Caesar' s Wife, 289. His Tribuneship, 298, 299, 300. The
Disturbances raised by him, 303, 304. His Death by Milo, 358, 359 Coecles,
Horatius, his extraordinary Valor, 67 Commanders: See Generals. Coriolanus,
Marcius, his great Valor, 86, 87. His Behavior exasperates the People, 88.
His Trial and Banishment, 89, 90. Turns against his Country with great Success,
91, 92, 93. Is persuaded by his Mother to desist, and is afterward slain, 94
Corvus, or Corvinus: see Valerius Corvus. Crassus, his suppression of
Spartacus, 272. He joins in the first Triumvirate, 293. Gains the Consulship
with Pompey by Force, 305. His Eastern Expedition, Overthrow, and Death, 311,
312 Curiatii: see Horatii and Curiatii. Curio, his serviceable Assistance to
Julius Caesar, 318, 319. His Death, 331 Curious Dentatus, overthrows Pyrrhus,
177, 178 Cursor: see Papirius Cursor. Curtius, his incredible Bravery. 150
D.
Decimus Brutus: see Brutus, Decimus. Decius Mus, his dying for his Country,
158 Decius Mus, his Son, his same Practice, 168 Dentatus: see Curious Dentatus
and Siccius Dentatus. Drusus, his unfortunate Attempts, and Death, 254
F.
Fabii, their Generosity, Valor, and Destruction, 98, 99 Fabius Maximus, his
cautious Proceedings against Hannibal, 203, 204, 205 Fabricius, his great
steadiness and Generosity, 173, 174, 175 Flemma: see Calpurnius Flemma. Fulvia,
M. Anthony' s Wife, her Hatred to Cicero, 386. Raises a Civil War against
Octavius, 401. Her Death, 405
G.
Generals or Commanders, the principal were Romulus, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus
Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus, Coriolanus, Cincinnatus, Camillus, Manlius,
Papirius Cursor, and Curious Dentatus, among the Ancient Romans. Among the later
were Fabius Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio the Greater, Scipio the Less, Aemilius
Paulus, Marius, Sylla, Sertorius, Lucullus, Pompey, Julius Caesar, and M.
Anthony. Gracchus, the Elder, or Tiberius, his Laws, Seditious Attempts, and
Death, 237 to 240 Gracchus the Younger, or Caius, his many Attempts and
Alterations in the State, and Death, 241 to 246 Gauls, their principal Wars
with the Romans, 135 to 142
H.
Hannibal, the Carthaginian General, his March over the Alps, 199, 200. Beats
the Romans at Ticenum and at Trebia, 200, 201. At Thrasymene, 202, 203. And at
Cannae, 205, 206. He declines, 207 to 213. Is entirely beaten by Scipio, 216,
217. His after Acts, 222, 223. His Death and Reflections upon the Romans, 226
Herod, King of Judaea, his Submission to Octavius, and cruelty to his Wife,
426, 427 Hersilia, her generous Behavior, 14 Horatii and Curiatii, their
Combat for their Country, 27, 28 Horatius Coecles: See Coecles, Horatius.
Hortensia, her Behavior and Speech to the Second Triumvirate 387, 388
I.
Janus, its Temple built and shut the first time by Numa Pompilius, 21. A
second time, 193. The third time by Octavius, 437, 438 Illyrian War, 193, 194
Italian War: See Social War. Jugurthine War, 248 to 251 Julius Caesar, his
danger in Sylla' s Proscription, 266. He favors Pompey' s first great
Authority, 277. His Behavior in relation to Cataline' s Conspiracy, 286, 287.
His Rise and Acts in Spain, 288, 289, 290. He quits his Triumph, and joins with
Pompey and Crassus in the first Triumvirate, 292, 293. His Consulship, 296,
297, 298. His Expeditions against the Gauls, Germans, Britains, etc. 300 to
304. and 306 to 310 and 315, 316. Falls out with Pompey and the Senate, and
becomes Master of all Italy, 320 to 327. His Expedition against Afranius and
Petreus in Spain, 328 to 331. Against Pompey in Illyricum, 333 to 341. And in
Thessaly, 342 to 348. His Wars in Egypt, and Love to Cleopatra, 351 to 355.
Against Pharnaces in Asia, 356, 357. Against Cato and others in Africa, 357,
358, 359. His magnificent Triumph, 360, 361. He regulates the Roman Year, 361,
362. His Expedition against Pompey' s Sons in, Spain, 362, 363, 364. His great
Honors and Acts at Rome, 365 to 370. His Death and Character, 371 to 374. His
remarkable Funeral, 377, 378, 379
L.
Lepidus joins in the second Triumvirate with Octavius and M. Anthony, 384,
385. He is confined to Africa by Octavius, 406. And after that banished by him,
411 Lucius Junius Brutus: See Brutus, Lucius Junius. Lucretia, Her Rape and
voluntary Death, 51, 52 Lucullus, his Acts and Success against Mithridates,
271, etc. Is stopped in his Progress by the Senate, 274. Falls out with Pompey,
278
M.
Macedonian War, the first, 218 to 221. The second, 226 to 229 Maelius, his
popular Designs, and Death, 125, 126 Manlius Capitolinus, his Valor in saving
the Capitol, 141. His Designs, Trial, and Execution, 143, 144 Manlius
Torquatus, his Combat with a Gaul, 151. His severe Justice, 158 Marcellus, his
Success against Hannibal, 207. His Acts in Sicily, 208, 209. His Death, 212
Mariamne, Wife to King Herod, her Death, 426, 427 Marius, his first Rise and
Acts against Jugurth King of Numidia, 250, 251. Against the Cimbrians, 251,
252. In the Social War, 156. Occasions the first Civil War, and his Danger,
257, 258, 259. His Acts and Cruelties in this War, with his Death, 259, 260,
261 Marius the Younger, his Son, his ill Success in the first Civil War, with
his Death, 264, 265 Masanissa, his remarkable Passion, 215 Mecaenas, his Speech
and Advice to Octavius in relation to the holding, the Empire, 441, 442, 443
Menenius Agrippa, his skilful Management of the Seditious Commons, 81, 82
Metullus Numidicus, his Acts against King Jugurth, 249, 250. His Troubles and
Recovery, 252, 253 Milo the Tribune opposes Clodius, 303, 304. At last kills
him, 313. And is banished, 314 Mithridatick War, the first, 257, 262. The
second, 268. The third, 271 to 274. and 277 to 281. Mithridates his Death, 281,
282 Mutius Scaevola: See Scaevola, Mutius. Mus: See Decius Mus.
N.
Naevius, his Augury, 38 Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome, his
backwardness to accept of the Kingdom, 19, 20. His Reign, 21 to 24 Numantia,
its Siege, 235, 236
O.
Octavia, Sister to Augustus Caesar, her Worth and Marriage to M. Anthony, 405.
Reconciles her Husband and Brother, 409. Her generous Speech in relation to
both Parties, 417. Her Compliance, 419, 420 Octavius Caesar, declares himself
Heir to Julius Caesar, with his Success, 379, 380, 381. Marches against M.
Anthony, 381, 382. Falls out with the Senate, 383. Ioins with Anthony and
Lepidus in the second Triumvirate, 384, 385. Marches against Brutus and
Cassius, and by Anthony's Assistance overthrows 'em, 393, 394, 395. His
Cruelties after their Deaths, 396. His troublesome Division of Lands, 400. His
War with Lucius Antonius, and Success, 401, 402, 403. And with young Pompey,
408, 410. His Marriage with Livia, 408. Is chosen perpetual Tribune, 413. Falls
out with Anthony, 417, etc. Proclaims War against him, 420. Beats him at
Actium, 424, 425. Visits Cleopatra, 434, 435. Reduces Egypt, and shuts the
Temple of Janus, 437, 438. His grand Consultation with Agrippa and Mecaenas,
439 to 443. His Ordinances, 444, 445, 446. His Speech to the Senate, 446, 447.
His establishment of the Roman Empire, and his taking the Title of Augustus,
448, 449, 450
P.
Papirius Cursor, his Acts against the Samnites, 163, 165, 166 Paulus Aemilius:
See Aemilius Paulus. Perusian War, 401, 402, 403 Petreus: See Afranius. Pompey
the Great, his Acts in the first Civil War, 164, 165. In Africa, 265. Against
Sertorius in Spain, 269, 270. Against the Pirates, 275, 276. Against
Mithridates, Tigranes, and many other Eastern Kings, 278 to 283. His
magnificent Triumph, 290, 291. Is opposed by the Senate, 292. And joins in the
first Triumvirate, 293. Assists Julius Caesar in his Consulship, 297. Procures
Cicero' s Restoration, 303, 304. Gains the Consulship with Crassus by Force,
305. His sole Consulship, 314. Falls out with Julius Caesar, 320. Abandons
Rome, 323. And also Italy, 326, 327. His Wars with Julius Caesar, 332 to 347.
His Misfortunes, Death, and Funeral, 347 to 350 Pompey, Sextus, his Son, joins
with his elder Brother Cneius against Julius Caesar, 362, 363, 364. Has great
Authority procured him by M. Anthony, 380. Relieves many proscribed Persons,
387. He severely molests Italy, and comes to a Treaty with Octavius Caesar,
405, 406. His Wars with him after that, and Death, 408 to 411 Pontius Cominius,
his bold Attempt, 140 Poplicola, Valerius, his several Acts and Death, 61 to 70
Porcia, Daughter to Cato the younger, her Courage, 371. Her strange Death, 396
Porsena, King of Hetruria, besieges Rome, and shows great Generosity to the
Romans, 66 to 69 Proscription, the first by Sylla, and its Effects, 266, 267.
The second by the second Triumvirate, and its Effects, 385 to 389 Punick, or
Carthaginian War, the first, 181 to 191. The second, 198 to 217. The third, 230
to 233 Pyrrhus, King if Epirus, his Successes against the Romans, and Civility,
171 to 176. He is at last worsted, and abandons Italy, 177, 178, 179
Q.
Quintius Cincinnatus: See Cincinnatus, Quintius. Quintus Flaminius, his
Success against King Philip in the first Macedonian War, 219, 220
R.
Regulus, his Acts against the Carthaginians, and Defeat, 186. His
extraordinary Bravery and Death, 189, 190 Remus, falls out with his Brother
Romulus, and is slain, 6, 7 Romulus, his Birth, 5. Re-inthrones his
Grandfather Numitor, 6. Founds the City of Rome, 7. His Reign, 8 to 18
S.
Saturninus, his Sedition and Death, 252, 253 Scaevola, Mutius, his
extraordinary Courage and Boldness, 67, 68 Sceva, his great Valor, 338 Scipio
Africanus, his first Rise, 211. His great Success in Spain, 213. And in Africa,
214, 215. Where he at last overthrows Hannibal, 216, 217. Goes Lieutenant under
his Brother into Asia, 223, 224. His noble Carriage to his Accusers, with his
Retirement, and Death, 225, 226 Scipio Africanus the Younger, or Aemilianus,
his Encouragement of Learning, 229. His Acts against Carthage in the third
Punick War, 231, 232, 233. And in Spain, 236. His Death, 241, 242 Scipio
Asiaticus, Brother to the Senior Africanus, his Success against King Antiochus,
223, 224. His Disgrace, 226 Sedititions, the principal besides those which
caused a Separation, were, that about Marriages, 121. That concerning Honors
and Dignities, 145, 146, 147. That of the elder Gracchus, 237 to 240. That of
the younger Gracchus, 241 to 246. That of Saturninus, 252, 253. That of Drusus,
254 Separations, between the Patritians and Plebeians, the first, 80. The
second, 119. The third, 169 Sertorius, his valiant Acts in Spain, and Death,
269, 270 Servius Tullius, the sixth King of Rome, he obtains the Kingdom by
Policy, 39, 40. His Reign, 41 to 46 Sextus, Son to the last Tarquin, his
Stratagem, 48, 49. Ravishes Lucretia, 51, 52 Sibyl' s Books, the Story, 49, 50
Siccius Dentatus, his bold Speech, 108. His great Valor and Death, 116 Sieges,
the principal are, of Alesia, 315, 316. Of Alexandria, 352, 353. Of Brundusium,
325, 326, 327. Of the Capitol, 139 to 142. Of Carthage, 231, 232, 233. Of
Numantia, 235, 236. Of Syracuse, 208, 209. Of Veii, 130 to 133. Social War, or
the Italian War, 254 to 257 Sophonisba, her tragical Story, 215 Sparticus, his
Rebellion and Suppression, 272 Sylla, his first Skill in War, 251. His Acts in
the Social War, 256, 257. Against Mithridates, 261, 262. In the first Civil
War, 263, 264, 265. His great Cruelties, 266. His perpetual Dictator-ship, 267,
268. His Death, 269 Syracuse, its Siege, 208, 209
T.
Tarpeia, betrays the Capitol, and is slain, 13 Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth
King of Rome, his first settlement in the City, 33. His Reign, 41 to 46
Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh and last King of Rome, he murders his Prince,
and obtains the Kingdom by Force, 45, 46. His Reign, 46 to 54. His Banishment
54, 55. His first Effort to regain his Kingdom, 60, 61. His second, 64. His
third, 65, etc. His fourth and last, 73, etc. His Death, 78 Tatius, King of the
Sabines, his War against Rome, 13. Is made King of Rome with Romulus, 14 his
Death, 15 Tigranes, King of Armenia, his Pride, and ill Success against the
Romans, 273, 274. Refuses to receive Mithridates after his Defeat,, and makes a
Peace with the Romans, 279, 280 Torquatus: See Manlius Torquatus. Tullus
Hostilius, the third King of Rome, his Reign, 25 to 30
V.
Valerius Corvus, his remarkable Combat with a Gaul, 153 Valiant Men, besides
Generals, the most remarkable were the Horatii and Curiatii, Coecles, Scaevola,
the Fabii, Siccius Dentatus, Curtius, Manlius Torquatus, Valerius Corvus,
Calpurnius Flemma, and Scaeva. Veii, besieged and taken after ten Years, 130 to
133 Ventidius, his Success against the Parthians, 407 Veturia, Mother to
Coriolanus, her generous Care for her Country, and Success, 93, 94. Virginia,
her tragical Story, 116, 117, 118
W.
Wars, the most remarkable by Name were the Allobrogick, Antiochian, Cimbrian,
Cisalpine-Gallick, Civil, Gallick, Illyrian, Jugurthine, Macedonian,
Mithridatick, Perusian, Punick or Carthaginian, Pyrrhian, Social or Italian.
Writers and Learned Men mentioned in this Book are Livius, Androni^us, Ennius,
and Naevius, 192. Plautus, 221. Terence, Scipio, and Lelius, 229. Lucillius,
236. Lucretius, 253. Varro, 271. Salust, 315. Virgil, 400, 401. Livy, Horace,
and Ovid, 443. In other places see Cicero, Caesar, Cato, etc.
X.
Xantippus, overthrows the Romans, and is murdered, 186
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed.
THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. Done into English.

The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the
Manners, Religion, and Government of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon,
Ambassador there in the Year 1693. Adorned with Figures.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Richlieu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8vo.

Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a faithful and particular
Account of the Transactions of the Court of France, relating to the Public
Interest of Europe. With Historical and Political Reflections on the ancient
and present State of that Kingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor.

A New Voyage to the Levant; Containing an Account of the most Remarkable
Curiosities in Germany, France, Italy, Malta and Turkey. With Historical
Observations relating to the present and ancient State of those Countries. By
the Sieur du Mont. Done into English, and adorned with Figures.

A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
useful Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Misson,
Gent. Done into English, and adorned with Figures. In two Volumes. 8vo.

The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbert, Late Minister and Secretary of
State to Lewis XIV* the present French King. Done into English from a French
Copy, printed at Cologn this present Year 1695.

Now in the Press, and will be speedily Published.
THE Complea^ Horseman: Discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
and Vices of Horses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their Diseases; and
the True Method both of their Preservation and Cure. With Reflections on the
Regular and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. Together with the Art of
Shooing, and a Description of several Kinds of Shoes, adapted to the various
Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation of those that are good; and the
Best Method of Breeding Colts; with Directions to be observed in Backing 'em,
and Making their Mouths, etc. By the Sieur de Solleysell, one of the Heads of
the Royal Academy at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Reviewed and methodically
Augmented; Done into English, and Adorned with Figures. Folio.

ADVERTISEMENT.
(...). Or a View of all Religions in the World; with the several
Church-Governments, from the Creation till these times. Also a Discovery of the
known Heresies in all Ages and Places: And choice Observations and Reflections
throughout the whole. The Sixth Edition Enlarged and Perfected, by Alexander
Ross. To which are annexed the Lives, Actions, and Ends of certain notorious
Heretics; with their Effigies in Copper Plates.

Quarle's Emblems (the Curs being all new Engraved, and curiously done) will be
published about the latter end of February instant.

The Elements of Euclid Explained: In a New but most Easy Method; together
with the Use of every Proposition through all parts of the Mathematics.
Written in French by that excellent Mathematician, F. C. Francis Milliet de
Chales, of the Society of Jesus. Now made English, and a Multitude of Errors
Corrected, which had escaped in the Original.

These three Books are Printed for, and Sold by M. Gilliflower in
Westminster Hall; and W. Freeman at the Bible in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar.

A New Description of Paris; containing a particular Account of all the
Churches, Palaces, Monasteris, Colleges, Hospitals, Libraries, Cabinets of
Rarities, Accademies of the Vertuosi, Paintings, Medals, Statues, and other
Sculptures, Monuments, and Public Inscriptions; with all other remarkable
Matters in that great and famous City. Translated out of French. The Second
Edition; to which is added a Map of Paris.

Country Conversations: Being an Account of some Discourses which happened in a
Visit to the Country last Summer, on diverse Subjects; chiefly of the modern
Comedies, of Drinking, of Translated Verses, of Painting and Painters, of Poets
and Poetry.

Letters of Religion and Virtue to several Gentlemen and Ladies, to excite
Piety and Devotion; with some short Reflections on diverse Subjects.

A Guide to the Devout Christian. In Three Parts.

A Guide to Repentance: Or the Character and Behavior of the Devout Christian
in Retirement. Both these by I. Inett M. A.

Thesaur^m Mathematice: Or, The Treasury of the Mathematics; containing
variety of useful Practices in Arithmetic, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy,
Geography, Navigation, and Surveying. As also the Mensuration of Board, Glass,
Tiling, Paving, Timber, Stone, and Irregular Solids. Likewise it teaches the
Art of Gauging, Dialling, Fortification, Military Orders, and Gunnery; Explains
the Logarithms, Sines, Tangents and Secants; shows their Use in Arithmetic,
etc. To which is annexed a Table of 10000 Logarithms, Log-Sines and
Log-Tangents. Illustrated with several Mathematical Sculptures on Copper
Plates: By John Tailor, Gen^.

A New Method of Fortification; by Monsieur Vauhan, Engineer-General of France:
Made English; with Cutts: The Second Edition; To which are added exact Draughts
of Dunkirk, Maestricht, Charleror, Aeth, and Mayence.

Xenophon's History of the Affairs of Greece: In Seven Books. Being a
Continuation of the Peloponesian War, from the time where Th^cidi^es ends, to
the Battle at Montinica. As also his Life of Cyrus the Great. Translated from
the Greek by F. Digby, late of Queen's-Colledge, and Mr. John Norris, Fellow of
All Souls College, Oxford. In Two Volumes, 8vo.

Printed for M. Gillyflower, and VV. Freeman.


