THE DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS in PARLIAMENT assembled. Concerning
his MAJESTY'S several Messages about the MILITIA.

Iovis, 5. Maij, 1642.

Ordered by the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published.

JOHN BROWN, Cleric. Parliament.

LONDON, Imprinted for Math. Rhodes, in the Year. 1642.

Die Iovis 5. Maii 1641.
THE Lords and Commons holding it necessary for the peace and safety of this
Kingdom* to settle the Militia thereof, did for that purpose prepare an
Ordinance of Parliament, and with all humility did present the same to His
Majesty for His Royal assent, Who notwithstanding the faithful advice of His
Parliament, and the several reasons offered by them of the necessity thereof,
for the securing of His Majesty's Person, and the peace and safety of his
people, did refuse to give his consent, and thereupon they were necessitated,
in discharge of the trust reposed in them as the representative body of the
Kingdom, to make an Ordinance by Authority of both Houses, to settle the
Militia, warranted thereunto by the fundamental Laws of the Land: his Majesty
taking notice thereof, did by several Messages invite them to settle the same
by Act of Parliament, affirming in His Majesty's Message sent in Answer to the
Petition of both Houses presented to His Majesty at York, March 26. That he
always thought it necessary the same should be settled, and that he never
denied the thing, only denied the way; and for the matter of it, took
exceptions only to the Preface, as a thing not standing with His honor to
consent to, and that Himself was excluded in the execution, and for a time
unlimited: Whereupon the Lords and Commons being desirous to give His Majesty
all satisfaction that might be, even to the least tittle of form, and
circumstance; and when His Majesty was pleased to offer them a Bill ready
drawn, did for no other cause then to manifest their hearty affection to
comply with His Majesty's desires and obtain his consent, entertain the same;
and in the mean time no way declining their Ordinance, and to express their
earnest zeal to correspond with His Majesty's desire (in all things that might
consist with the peace and safety of the Kingdom, and the trust reposed in
them) did pass that Bill, and therein omitted the preamble inserted before the
Ordinance, limited the time to less then two years, and confined the
authority of the Lievtenants to these three particulars, namely Rebellion,
Insurrection, and foreign Invasion, and returned the same to his Majesty for
His royal assent. But all these expressions of affection and loyalty, all
those desires and earnest endeavors to comply with His Majesty, has (to their
great grief and sorrow) produced no better effect then an absolute denial,
even of that which His Majesty by His former Messages, as we conceive, had
Promised; the advice of evil and wicked Counsels, receiving still more credit
with Him, then that of His great Counsel of Parliament, in a matter of so high
importance, that the safety of His Kingdom, and the peace of his people
depends upon it. But now what must be the exceptions to this Bill? not any
sure, that was to the Ordinance; for a care was taken to give satisfaction in
all these particulars. Then the exception was because that the disposing and
execution thereof was referred to both Houses of Parliament, and His Majesty
excluded: and now that by the Bill, the Power and execution is assertained, and
reduced to particulars, and the Law of the Realm made the Rule thereof, His
Majesty will not trust the Persons. The power is too great, too unlimited to
trust them with. But what is that power? Is it any other, but in express
terms to suppress Rebellion, Insurrection, and foreign invasion? And who
are those Persons? are they not such as were nominated by the great Counsel of
the Kingdom, and assented to by his Majesty. And is it too great a power to
trust those persons with the suppression of Rebellion, Insurrection, and
foreign Invasion? surely the most wicked of them that advised his Majesty to
this Answer cannot suggest, but that it is necessary for the safety of his
Majesty's Royal Person and the peace of the Kingdom, such a power should be
put in some hands. And there is no pretense of exception to the persons. His
Majesty for the space of above fifteen years together, thought not a power
far exceeding this to be too great to entrust particular persons with, to
whose will the Lives and Liberties of his people by Martial Laws were made
subject, for such was the power given to Lord Lievtenants, and Deputy
Lievtenants in every County of this Kingdom, and that without the consent of
his people, or authority of Law. But now in case of extreme necessity, upon
the advice of both Houses of Parliament for no longer space then two years, a
lesser power, and that for the safety of King and people, is thought too great
to trust particular persons with, though named by both Houses of Parliament,
and approved of by his Majesty himself. And surely if there be a necessity
to settle the Militia (which his Majesty was pleased to confess) the persons
cannot be entrusted with less power then this to have it all effectual. And
the Presidents of former Ages when there hapened a necessity to raise such a
power, never straightened that power to a narrower compass, witness the
Commissions of Array in several Kings Reigns, and often issued out by the
consent and the authority of Parliament. The Lords and Commons therefore
entrusted with the safety of the Kingdom, and peace of the People, (which they
call God to witness is their only aim) finding themselves denied these their
so necessary, and just demands, and that they can never be discharged before
God or Man, if they should suffer the safety of the Kingdom and peace of the
people to be exposed to the malice of the malignant party at home, or the fury
of enemies from abroad. And knowing no other way to encounter the imminent and
approaching danger, but by putting the people into a sit posture of defense,
do resolve to put their said Ordinance in present execution, and do require
all persons in authority by virtue of the said Ordinance forthwith to put the
same in execution, and all others to obey it, according to the fundamental
laws of the Kingdom in such cases, as they tender the upholding of the true
Protestant Religion, the safety of his Majesty's Person, and his Royal
Posterity, the peace of the Kingdom, and the being of this Commonwealth.

FINIS.

