A NARRATIVE OF THE Cause and Manner OF THE Imprisonment OF THE LORDS: NOW
Close Prisoners in the Tower Of LONDON

PSALM. 37, Fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way,
because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass. For yet a little
while and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall diligently consider his
place, and it shall not be.

Amsterdam, 1677.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Cause and Manner of the Imprisonment of the LORDS, Now
Close Prisoners in the Tower of London, etc
SIR,
IN your last you commanded me to give you an enact account of the opening and
proceeding of the Parliament: You know you may freely command me to serve you
in any thing I am able, but you likevise know that I am no Courtier nor Member
of Parliament, and therefore I Wonder you should apply your self to me on this
occasion, since you have so many Friends, as well at White Hall, as in both
Houses, which could give you a more particular Relation. But lest you should
think I say this to excuse my self from serving you, I shall, as well as I
can, give you an account, both of what I my self have observed in this matter,
and what I have received from common Fame.

ON Thursday, the 15th. of February, the Parliament (as they call themselves)
or the Convention, (as I hear others generally call them) Met: And at the same
time a vast number of People, filled Westminster Hall, the Court of Requests,
the Painted Chamber, the Lobbies, and all places near the Parliament House;
that the like was never before seen upon the Meeting of This, or any Other
Parliament in our Memory. I being one of the Number, was more than ordinarily
curious to find out and observe the temper of that great Body of People, and
what it was they did desire or expect; and upon the strictest Enquiry I could
make, I found that (except a few Persons who were engaged thereto by their
Interest or Dependence) they did earnestly desire and expect, they should
declare themselves to be No Parliament.

When the King was come, the Commons were sent for up to the Lords House. Where
I made a shift to crowd in and hear. The King and my Lord Chancellor made each
of them a Speech worthy your Consideration; Copies whereof I have hear sent
you. As soon as the Speeches were made, and the Commons withdrawn, a Bill was
offered to be Read: But the Duke of Buckingham desired to be heard first; who
after a most ingenious and modest Preface, told their Lordships, That in his
Opinion, the Question before their Lordships, was not what they were to do,
but, Whether they could do any thing as a Parliament. It being very clear to
him, that the Parliament was Dissolved; For which Opinion he gave his Reasons;
which because they are the Sum of all that was said, to prove the Dissolution,
I shall give you as good and as brief an account of them as I can. He spoke to
this purpose, Viz.

That the last Prorogation being for 15 Months, was contrary to two Printed
Statutes, the 4th. and 36th. of Ed. 3 (which he proved to be in force at this
time) that require Annual Parliaments, and being so, was illegal; and that they
could not meet by virtue of an illegal Prorogation, and therefore were
Dissolved; For there being no legal Day for their Meeting, they could never
Meet, unless it were by chance; and an accidental Meeting of the King, Lords,
and 500 Commons could not make a Parliament, nor could the Kings Proclamation
help the matter. For a Proclamation was not of more force than a Prorogation,
and if a thing were illegal when first commanded, it could not be made legal by
a second Command. And he said, No body could pretend, that the Kings
Proclamation could make that a legal Parliament, which was not so before. And
having answered all Objections of the Kings power to dispense with some Laws,
and such other as seemed to carry any color of making the Prorogation legal,
and having showed the great Inconveniences that did arise from the long
Sitting of Parliaments; how the very Nature of this House of Commons was
changed; for now they did not look upon themselves as a Assembly that are to
return to their own Homes, and become private men again (as by the Laws of the
Land, and the ancient Constitution of Parliaments they ought to be) but they
look upon themselves as a standing Senate, and a number of men picked out to be
Legislators for the rest of their whole Lives. He told their Lordships, The
matter was now brought to this Dilemma; Either the Kings of England were bound
by those Statutes mentioned of Ed. 3. Or else the whole Government of England,
by Parliaments and by Law, is absolutely at an End. For if the kings of England
have Power by an Order of theirs, to invalidate an Act made for the
Maintenance of Magna Charta, they have also Power by another Order of theirs
to invalidate Magna Charta it self. And if they have Power by an Order of
theirs to invalidate an Act made for the maintenance of the Statute De
tallagio non concedendo, they have Power also when they please, by an Order of
theirs to invalidate the Statute it self De Tallagio non concedendo, and then
they may not only without the help of a Parliament raise what Money they
please, but also take away any man's Estate when they please, deprive every one
of his Liberty or Life as they please. This he told their Lordships, was a
Power which no Judge nor Lawyer will pretend the kings of England have, and yet
this Power must be allowed them, or else they that were met there that day,
could not act as a Parliament. For they were then met by virtue of the last
Prorogation, and that prorogation is an Order of the king's point blank
contrary to the two Acts of Edw. 3. for the Acts say, That a Parliament shall
be holden once within a year; And the Prorogation says, A Parliament shall
not be held within a year, but some months after: And this I conceive is a
plain contradiction, and consequently the Prorogation is void. He further
added, That noting could be more dangerous to a king or a people, than that
Laws should be made by an Assembly, of which there can be a doubt, whether they
have power to make Laws or no? And said, It would be unexcusable in them,
because there is for it so easy a Remedy; a Remedy which the Law requiers, and
the Nation longs for. The Calling of a New Parliament. And he showed the great
Advantages that would acrue to the King, their Lordships, and the People, by
frequent and successive New Parliaments. That without this, all they could do
would be in vain: the Nation might languish a while, but must perish at last,
they should become a burden to themselves, and a prey to their neighbors; and
therefore moved, That their Lordships would humbly address themselves to the
king to Call a New Parliament; that so they might unanimously (before it be
too late) use their utmost endeavors for his Majesty's service, and for the
honor, the safety, the welfare and the glory of the English Nation.

No sooner had the Duke ended his Speech, but the Lord Fretchvil moved to have
him called to the Bar, and the^e proceeded against as should be thought fit.
The Lord Salisbury said, That was to take away the Freedom of Parliament. And
maintained the Duke in his assertion with great Reason. After him the Lord
Alisbury argued against the Dissolution, and against the Duke's being called to
the Bar. The Lord Arundel of Trerice seconded the Lord Frechvil's motion. The
Lord Halifax said, The Parliament was not in his Opinion Dissolved, but that it
was so far from a Crime in the Duke to move it, that it deserved Commendation,
because this was a proper place for the motion, and the Determination of it
would be of advantage, which way soever the House should determine it. The Lord
Berkshire spoke against calling to the Bar, and made a jest of it. The Lord
Shaftsbury said, The calling the Duke to the Bar were to take away all liberty
of speech in Parliament; he very judiciously opened the state of the case with
relation to the Dissolution: He showed, That by the common law there ought to
be Annual Parliaments; That diverse Statutes had provided for Annual
Parliaments; That we have right to our laws, and These are the laws that
preserve our Rights; That these are the only laws by which the King is bound to
call any Parliament; That the King is bound by his Oath to keep the laws, and
that it is a great crime in any to endeavor to make him break his Oath: That
it is dangerous to remove Old Landmarks That many Inconveniences have ever been
the conseqences of long Parliaments: And after many Arguments and answering all
Objections to the contrary, he concluded the Prorogation was illegal. The
Marquess of Winchester said, The Parliament was not Dissolved, but thought the
Duke, who moved the business, deserved thanks. The Marquess of Dorchester
carried on the debate of the Dissolution, and argued against it.

After this (which was about an hour) the debate of the Dissolution was
continued about four hours, the Lord Chancellor undertaking to answer the
Arguments which were or should be urged for it. This the Lords understood to be
an implied lience to show the reasons of their opinion, and accordingly a good
number of Lords urged unanswerable Reasons to prove the Prorogation illegal,
and that they could not by law Sit, and Act, as a Parliament: And all this
while there was no reflection upon any of the Lords for their opinnion; for the
Commons were still sitting, and upon debate of that matter; and the Court,
Church, and Popish Lords could not tell what would be the Issue of the Question
amongst them. But as soon as they had notice that the Commons were up, and had
not suffered any Question to be put upon it, but had run the Debate upon a
Question that had no ground either in law or Reason, which they had not
determined neither, but had adjorned to the next day; They from this took right
measures to conclude, that the major part of the Commons were unwilling to part
with their Seats, and thereupon took confidence to show them, that they had the
major part of the Lords too: and having so in both Houses, they need not fear
to do whatsover they had a mind to; and therefore without offering any
colorable answer to the reasons and arguments that had been urged, they put
this question, Whether this debate should be laid aside? and it was carried in
the Affirmative. As soon as this Question was carried, the lord Treasurer
moved; that it might be considered what to do with those lords that had
asserted; That the Parliament was dissolved: The Duke of Ormond moved, that
the Duke of Buckes might be questioned; The lord Treasurer moved, That the Earl
of Salisbury, of Shaftsbury, and the lord Wharton might be questioned. The
motion of these Lords (as I think I have been told) was seconded by the Duke
of York, and some of the lords called upon them to withdraw, but they continved
in their places as others of the lords declared they ought to do. The Debate
continued (...) hours, whether they should be questioned, diverse lords urging,
That it was against the Privilege of Speech, to which every Peer had right, to
question them.

And the Lord Privy Seal, made along, and most ingenious, and judicious Speech
to that purpose. He said, It was an Essential Privilege of all Courts, that
every one of the Members of any of them, should have Liberty to propose and
debate any matter, that concerned themselves as a Court, or their own
Jurisdiction; And this liberty is not only grounded upon the Law of England,
but Reason has so clearly declared it to all Men, that it is allowed for Law in
All Countries, much more ought to be allowed for Law in England, where we boast
our selves to be a Free People; and much more to every Member of the House of
Lords, which is a constitutive part of the Legislative Power. And indeed
nothing is more plainly provided for in the Law of England than this: Ask the
Judges, and they will tell you, They are not Questionable for their Opinion
delivered in Court, tho overruled by their Brethren as contrary to Law. And
shall not a Member of the high Court of Parliament have as much Liberty as the
Judges of every Inferior Court in England claims? He said, There were many
Records and Acts of Parliament, which did declare it to be the right of the
Peers To Propose and Debate any thing which they thought to be for the Good of
the King and Kingdom. And by the standing known Rules of the House, if any
Motion be made that gives Offense, the Proposer ought immediately to be
questioned, or not at all; and no Man is to Answer for any thing that has been
Debated, and a Question put upon it; for by entering into the Debate, they
allow it to be Disputable, and give License to the Lords to speak their
Opinions of either side. And should they Invade this Liberty, and break these
Rules (as in Questioning these Lords they should do) they should not Act is a
Parliament, but as an Arbitrary Assembly; and there could be no Safety for any
Member of Parliament; For whatsoever was Proposed by a^y (...) (...) the Major
Vote went against him, he and those of his Opinion might be questioned, and
then no New law could be made, nor Inconvenient one altered or abrogated; For
no law can be made or altered, but it must be proposed by some body, and none
could dare to propose it, lest the House should not be of his Opinion, and then
he could not be secure. He added, That this was the Case of every Lord there;
For, suppose the Major Vote had been, That the Parliament was Dissolved, he
believed they would not have been willing it should have been accounted an
offense in them that had maintained that it was not: For if so, they did
thereby allow that a New Parliament might question them for their Opinions,
tho they had now the Major Vote; and yet the reason will be the same if not
gre^^er, than for the punishing these great Lords; For if we are in an Error,
we have assumed a Power Illegal, that was not in us of Right: But they have
only Doubted, that they and we want that Authority which in our Opinion we
have. But, said he, (...) is not what their Opinion was, or what they said is
to be considered: but, Whether we do not Violate our own Privileges in the
highest measure in the World by Questioning these Lords? And whether if they
should be forced to withdraw by the Major part of the House, we do not at the
same time Vote our own Privilege of Speech out of doors? And whether if we
loose this Privilege of Speech, we shall not thereby become Useless and
Insignificant? And whether by Judging those four Lords, and only four, when
diverse others were in the same Condition with them, as having maintained the
same thing, we shall not show our selves Partial and Unjust? And whether this
kind of Proceeding will not reflect much upon the Honor of the House, and
subject us to Censure both at home and abroad, where ever the story of it shall
be related? These things, said he, are worthy your Consideration before you
Question these Lords. But this and much more which was said by his Lordship,
and a great many other of the Protestant Temporal Lords, could not prevail with
the Court-Lords, Bishops, and Papists. For these last seeing their great Head
so set upon it, were resolved to follow him, though contrary to their senses,
(This is not strange in them whose Religion teaches them to believe and act
against sense:) their Promises, and their Declarations before they came into
the House. The two former knew who had the disposal of Preferments, and
Rewards, and therefore minded not what was said, but who spoke; and had learnt
the Wisdom my lord Chancellor mentioned in his Speech, Viz. To enjoy what they
could at present, without regard to to the future. And yet they durst not
Venture to execute their design upon those Lords that night, because they knew
not with what Spirit the Commons might be moved next morning upon the Debate,
Whether it was a Prorogation or an Adjournment, which they had appointed then
to be considered. And therefore they move to Adjourn the Debate of Questioning
those Lords till the next morning. This was opposed by the Four Lords, and many
other Noble Peers, but they were all answered by the Vote.

This Sir, was all the Transaction of that day, saving that the Lord Shaftsbury
willing it should appear upon their Books, what their Accusation was, and that
they might know what to Answer to the next morning, Desired their Charge might
be written, which was done accordingly in these Words. VIZ. For Proposing to
the House, and Asserting, and Maintaining, that this Parliament is Dissolved.

The next morning being Friday the 16, about too a Clock the Debate was again
Resumed, and was raised high, and continued about three hours, in which time
'twas urged in the behalf of the four Lords, that three several times, Viz. 1.
Hen. 7. 1 Q. Mary 1 Q. Eliz. the very same debate was in Parliament; It was
then doubted whether the Writs were good (in form) by which they were summoned,
and yet no man questioned for moving and debating it. The Religion established
had been several times altered by Parliament, yet none ever questioned for
proposing and debating it; And the ^arliament being Reassumed before the day
to which 'twas prorogued, in the year 1666, It was moved to consider whether
they could Act as a Parliament and the proposer never questioned. And nothing
could be more proper then such debats, for should there be a doubt whether they
had Authority to Act as a Parliament, and yet Acts be made (and the Question
undetermind) those that doubted, might dispute those Acts and overthrow them,
if it should happen that the Judges, should be of opinion, that they had not a
Legal Authority. And therefore 'twas a great hardship, that the Judges were not
suffered to give their opinion in the point, when the Duke of Bucks, required
it: It was likewise said, That those that had sat and made Acts as a
Parliament had after ward been declared no Parliament (in futrue parliaments)
and their Acts nulled, as 39. Hen. 6.

And then it was not thought a crime to propose the consideration of their
Authority, tho the King had summoned and jontly acted with them as a
Parliament, yet that was a greater questioning of the Kings Prerogative then
this: For as yet the King had not joined with them to Act as a Parliament.

Now the debate had ended much sooner then it did (as most men think) by a Vote
against the Lords (the only way of Answering their unanswerable Arguments) but
for two Reasons, one was the same that had occasioned it to be adjorned, the
night before; They were willing to see what was done by the Commons, And here
by the way of digression, let me acquaint you, how the matter was managed
amongst them: The first day it was moved in the House of Commons, that they
could not Act by virtue of the last prorogation, and of that opinion were many
of the best and wisest amongst them: But the Speaker, Indigents Courtiers, and
some Contry Gentlemen (as they have higher to pretended to be) were Impatient
at it, and used all their Art to avoid the debate, as foreseeing should a
fayrer debate be admitted, they could not answer the Arguments might be urged,
therefore, as I told you, they run it off upon a strange senseless Question,
Whether it were a Prorogation or an Adjornment (the House generally agreeing,
that it could not be a Prorogation and legal) which question they also adjorned
till the next morning and from thence till the Monday following; And when it
came then to be debated, the same party that had put off the debate (by that
trick) before, spoiled even that debate too, by moving to have Liberty of
speech to debate it. And after this had been long disputed, and 168 that were
for a Vote to pass, that they should have Liberty of Speech, and were also of
opinion, That the last prorogation was illegal, could not get the Speaker to
put the Question, but the major part of the House joined with him, And put
another Question by which they concluded themselves to be a House and to sit by
virtue of the Prorogation. The Question was, Whether they should appoint New
Committes? which was carried in the Affirmative.

But to return to the Lords, I am next to tell you the other Reason that they
suffered the Debate of questioning those Four Lords to continue so long, since
it seems as if they were resolved not to be convinced by any Reason could be
urged for their Defense. And the World judges this to be the Reason, viz. That
they thought four such Lords as had so great Reputation for Wisdom, Interest
and Courage, suffering on this account, would give too great a Credit to the
thing they had proposed, and their enduring Imprisonment rather than Recant
their Opinions, would make the World examine it too narrowly; and so the
Question, which they endeavored to smother, would grow more public, and the
People would be made sensible, that what those Lords urged was only to assert
the Rights and Liberties of the People of England in having frequent New
Parliaments, and Freedom of Speech in Parliament. And therefore though they had
singled those Four out of all the rest of the Lords that had maintained the
same thing: Yet some of the Court Lords not out of love to any of the Four, but
to avoid this Rock, and to prevent having so strong a Testimony of their
Illegal Proceedings, as the Interest and Reputation of those Four Lords would
give, did labor, if possible, to single out the Duke of Bucks, and the Lord
Shaftsbury from the other two, nay some seemed to desire the Duke of Bucks
alone might be Questioned, as being the first mover in this matter, which he
perceiving withdrew and went away, and immediately after the Vote passed for
all their with wrawing; and though the Duke's going gave some disappointment to
their Design, yet still they pursued it, by endeavoring, if it were possible,
to separate my Lord Shaftsbury from the other two: But in this also they were
disappointed, for my Lord of Sailsbury being called in first, soon showed them
by his prudent and g^llant Resolution, that all endeavors of theirs to divide
him from so good a Cause, and truly Noble Company, were but in vain. And the
Lord Wharton tho in so great an Age, and under Circumstances as might some what
have excused him, yet bore it with so much Honor and Resolution, as wholly
frustrated their design of that kind, for though my Lord Salisbury was not
called to the (...), but to his place in the House, and there told by my ^^rd
Chancellor, That the House did observe, that he did (...), that the Prorogation
is Illegal, at which the House had (...) great Offense, and looked upon it, not
only as an offense to the House, but also to the King, and therefore required
him to ask pardon of the King and the House. This his Lordship refusing to do,
(after he was again withdrawn) the House judged this to be a Contempt, and that
he should kneel at the Bar as a Delinquent, and be committed to the Tower
during the pleasure of the King and the House.

Next my Lord of Shaftsbury was called, not to his Place, but to the Bar; and
not only required to ask pardon, but to make his acknowledgment in these very
words, Viz. I do acknovvledge my endeavoring to maintain this Parliament is
Dissolved, was an ill advised Action, for which I humbly beg Pardon of the
King, and this most honorable House. Which his Lordship refusing to do, the
House judged it a Contempt, and that he should kneel at the Bar as a
Delinquent, and be committed to the Tower during the pleasure of the King and
the House. The Earl of Shaftsbury and Earl of Salisbury both desiring they
might have their own Cooks.

The (...) was called, not to the Bar, but to his Place in the (...) and the
same words said by the Lord Chancellor to him, as before to my Lord of
Salisbury, but he also refusing to make his acknowledgment was likewise called
to the Bar, and committed to the Tower.

By which different manner of proceedings, It is manifest, that they would
gladly have lessened the Testimony of those Lord had they not been persons that
knew not how to consult their particular conveniences before their own Honor
and the Public Interest.

Next morning, the House sitting, the Duke of Buckingham came in and took his
Place, but was immediately called upon to withdraw, He earnestly pressed to be
first heard, but that not being suffered, he withdrew, and was immediately
ordered to be brought to the Bar by the Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod, which
accordingly was done, where he spoke to this purpose:

My Lords, Yesterday when I went away I was ill, and besides, I thought I
had sufficiently tired your Lordships with my Discourse; but since I hear you
have committed the Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Shaftsbury, and my Lord Wharton
to the Tower, I am come hither to pray your Lordships to Discharge them, or if
not, to Send me to bear them Company, for I conceive they have done nothing,
but what I have done as much, they only Arguing for what I first moved. After
which the Lord Chancellor spoke to the Duke of Bucks as follows: My Lord, I am
to tell you in what Condition your Affairs stand here, My Lords find you highly
guilty in Asserting, That this Parliament is Dissolved, and very active in
maintaining it, and therefore have Ordered, that you make this acknowledgment
at the Bar, which I shall read to you, viz. I do acknovvledge that my
endeavoring to maintain, That this Parliament is Dissolved, was an ill
advised Action, for which I humbly beg the Pardon of the Kings Majesty, and of
this most honorable House. To which the Duke replied; That if he had been
unmannerly in his Behavior, or if he had let fall any foolish or undecent
expression, he was ready to ask Pardon; But there were two things for which
he never could ask Pardon; The first was for Thinking (for that no man can
help.) The next was for declaring to their Lordships what he did Think to be
for his Majesty's Service, their Lordships Henour, and the Good and Safety of
the People of England: For if I should not do this, I were not an honest Man,
nor worthy to sit in this House as a Peer of the Realm. Upon which his
refusal, the Lord Chancellor pronounced this Sentence upon him: That for his
Contempt to his Majesty and this House, he shall stand committed to the Tovver
of London, during the pleasure of the King, and this House: Then the Duke of
Bucks desired, That he might have his own Cook and Butler, and so withdrew.

And immediately upon the Motion of the Lord Treasurer, and the Duke of York,
this further Order was made.

Whereas George Duke of Bucks, James Earl of Salisbury, Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury, and Philip Lord Wharton, stand committed Prisoners to the Tower of
London by Order of this House; It is this Day further Ordered by, etc. That the
said Lords remaining Prisoners, be kept severally apart, and that they be not
suffered to meet together unless it be at Church; and that no Persons be
suffered to Visit them, without the leave of this House, except their necessary
Servants and Attendants: For which this shall be a sufficient Warrant.

To the Constable of the Tovver of London, etc.


Thus, Sir, I have given you (according to my best Information) an exact
account of the Opening of this Sessions, and particularly of the Proceedings
against those truly Noble LORDS, who durst speak what they knew to be Right,
and for their Countries Good, though it was never so unpleasing to a Faction
they knew to be but too too prevalent; nor would they desert their Country, and
Recant what they had so bravely Asserted and Maintained, though they could not
but foresee, That the Alies of the Nevy Tripple League, (Viz.) Bishops, Court
and Popish Lords, who had already broke through the Ancient Rules and Practice
of Parliament, and all the Laws of England, would (according to the New Court
Word) go Thorovv-Stitch, and stick at nothing to remove them out of the way,
who had so bravely showed them the Illegality of all their Proceedings, and the
unavoidable Mischiefs, if not utter Ruin they would bring upon themselves, and
the whole Kingdom, if they did continue to Act as a Parliament, when they were
so plainly Dissolved by Law.

The strangeness of these Proceedings is become the public Discourse of the
Town; and it is Observable, That the very Courtiers themselves confess, That
this Treatment of the LORDS is Prodigiously strange and Unpresidented, and that
it has too much made good what was so often told to the Members of both
Houses, before their last Meeting, both in Discourses and Printed Papers, That
if they would Presume to Sit upon such an Iellgal Foundation, they should be
forced to do all manner of arbitrary things to support themselves.

Others say, that this their very first Act is such that (supposing they had
been a Parliament) they had by it destroyed their own very Being; for by taking
away Freedom of Debates, they not only take away the Right of the House of
Peers, but the Privilege of the Commons also, and utterly destroy the very
Essentials of Parliament; nay, by consequence the Rights and Liberties of all
other Courts, Councils and Societies whatever. For nothing can be transacted in
any public Assembly, but it must first be Proposed and Debated, and who will
ever propose or debate any thing though of never so great Use and Benefit to
the Public, if this Liberty be denied?

For, if the Major part may Imprison the Minor, only for proposing and
debating, then it will follow, that if an Assembly or Court consist of a
Hundred Persons, Fifty one may Imprison Forty nine for maintaining an Opinion
contrary to theirs; And of those Fifity one, Twenty six may Imprison Twenty
five by the same reason; And so the Major number may Imprison the Minor, till
they come to Two; and of those two, let but the Stronger Imprison the Weaker,
and then according to this Rule, neither Law, Right or Reason is to be heeded,
but only Number; and all Government must unavoidably dissolve it self into
absolute Force and Tyranny.

From which Wretched State, I pray GOD for ever Keep this KINGDOM And it is
generally said, that the manner of the Imprisonment of these four Lords is as
Notorious as the Imprisonment it self; for they are denied the Liberty of
having their Friends to Visit them; a thing which the Law of England allows as
a Right to Fellons, Murderers, nay to Persons Convicted of High Treason. For
the Law of England knows no such thing as Close Imprisonment in any Case what
ever, but that of Spies taken in War, or Traitors taken before the rest can be
apprehended: And even in those Cases the Close Imprisonment ought to continue
but for a few Days: But here Lord are thus committed for insisting upon Law,
Reason, and the Rights of the Nation, and that in the presence of the King and
all the Peers of England.

Men further say, That their being Committed during the pleasure of the King
and the House, is all one as being committed during Life; For if the King and
House will not Release them, they cannot be Released. But such Commitments
directly tend to the utter Subversion of the Laws and Liberties of Englishmen;
For the Law of England knows no such thing as Imprisonment during the Kings
Pleasure or for Life; But only in a few particular Cases, provided for by
express Statutes. But these Lords are not Committed for transgressing any
Statutes, but for bravely standing for, and claiming to themselves and the
whole Kingdom, the Benefit of diverse Statutes. So that many here do believe,
That the Commitment of these four Worthy Lords was designed, not only as a
Punishment to them, for so bravely opposing the present Current, but as the
only fit Means to carry on the Designs of the New Tripple-League; Such as,

Under pretense of Securing the Protestant Religion, by Act of Parliament, To
declare it Lawful for our Kings to be Papists; As is done in a Bill the Lords
lately sent down to the Commons: and I do not hear of any one Bishop but did
readily agree to it: And such as, The Lords assuming to themselves an Original
Jurisdiction over the Commons of ENGLAND. As they lately did in the Case of Dr.
Carry, against whom they acted as Arbitrarily, and laid as excessive a Fine as
ever the High Commission Court and Star Chamber did in such a Case, as will
appear by the Order for his Commitment, a true Copy where of taken out of the
Lords Journal, I have here sent you.

Die Jovis, primo Martij, 1676.
WHereas Dr. Nicholas Carry being on Tuesday brought to the Bar, and there
required by this House to Discover his knowledge concerning the Author of a
Book or Paper Entitled, The Grand Question concerning the Prorogation of this
Parliament for a Year and three Months, Stated and Discussed: And whose Servant
that Person is who delivered the said Book or Paper to him? He the said
Nicholas Carry refused to discover his knowledge thereof. Upon consideration had
thereof, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, do Order and
Adjudge the said Nicholas Carry, for his said Contempt committed in the Face of
this Court, be, and he is hereby Fined to the King's Majesty, the Sum of One
thousand Pounds; and further, That he the said N. Carry, shall be and remain a
Close Prisoner in the Tovver of London, not to be Delivered thence till he have
paid his Fine.

In this Order and Judgment it may plainly be seen what they would be at; It is
not the Liberty of those four Lords only, but of all the People of England that
is struck at by some men, and they are kept in Prison for the better carrying
on of that Design. Our Laws are the Banks and Buttresses of our Liberties, and
our only Fence against Arbitrary Power; And if they be taken away, no man is
secure a moment. Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and diverse other the
known Laws and Statutes of this Realm, do expressly say, That no man shall be
taken, imprisoned or disceized of his Freehold, or any otherwise destroyed,
without due process of Law, and Judgment of his Peers. And by the Common Law
of England, No man is obliged to answer Questions against himself. But if
notwithstanding, this present Convention of Lords may lawfully send for any
man, and if he will not answer Questions against himself, may judge it a
Contempt, and without any legal Process or Judgment of his Peers may Fine him
more than he is worth, and Imprison him till he has paid that Fine, Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, and all the Laws made to secure our Liberites
and Properties are become Useless and Insignificant things: And every Man in
England enjoys his Liberty and Estate, not of Right or by Law, but at the Will
and Pleasure of these Lords.

Hence it is men stick not openly to say, It is not the Duke of Buckingham, the
Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Shaftsbury, the Lord Wharton, and Doctor Carry
only; but all the Laws, Rights and Liberties of England are Imprisoned with
them, And there is not any one Lord, Gentleman, Citizen, or Person whatsoever
in England, But, by the same Rule, may be Imprisoned the next hour. So that
their Case extends it self to the whole People of England, and what they suffer
they suffer as their Martyrs.

I Pray God deliver the King and Kingdom from the Calamitous Consequences that
these things seem to Usher in, and bring deserved shame upon such Actions and
Principles as for the Advantage of particular Persons, or little Factions tend
to the Ruin of the People and Government.

So Prays, Sir, Your Affectionate and humble Servant. J. E.

The Publisher to the Reader.
SIR,
WHilst the Alies of our New Tripple League are thus securing the Protestant
Religion, and the Rights and Liberties of the Nation, the French King, (that
great Enemy of the Protestant Religion, Liberty and Property, the Disturber of
Christendom, who (for his Pride and Lust, which he calls his Glory) has
already destroyed at least Seven hundred thousand Men, and Burnt and laid
Desolate whole Courtries) goes on Triumphant both by Sea and Land; having
already 165 Ships of War, and about 40 more upon Stocks; which certainly will
be the best Navy in the World; He has lately beat the Dutch Fleet in the
West Indies, and is like speedily to be Master of Sicily; He has thus Early in
the Year taken Valenci^ns and Cambray; and just now there is certain News come,
he (...) so Worsted the Prince of Orang's Army, that its thought all the
Spanish Netherlands must speedily fall into his hands without much Opposition.
How dreadful an Aspect this has upon England, you and all men may judge.

I do not think it at all strange of find some men but little concerned for the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the keeping out of Popery, and
others as little for the Maintenance of the Laws, Rights and Liberties of the
Nation, in opposition to Arbitrary Power; but I hope there are none so
rechlesly stupid, as to be unconcerned when they see themselves like to lose
not only the Protestant Religion, and all the Rights and Liberties of the
Nation, with all their own Estates and Possession, but the Land and Soil of the
Nation it self: And this seems to be our present Case, for the wisest men here
do think matters are brought to this narrow Issue, That either we must speedily
have a New Parliament, or certainly become a French Conquest. For France is
now become so prodigiously Powerful, that the most United Wisdom, Riches and
Strength of this Nation will scarcely be able to preserve it out of their
ravenous Hands. And I Appeal to all Mankind, whether we be like to find the
like Wisdom and Faithfulness in a Gonvention of Men imposing themselves upon us
as a Parliament, (the far greatest part of which consists either of French or
Court-Pentioners Indigent or Out-lawed persons, Children, Fools or such as are
Super-annuated) as in a Parliament freely chosen by the whole Nation to
preserve it from so eminent a Danger? And whether such a Parliament would not
have much more the Command of the Hearts and Affections, the Purse and Persons
of the whole People, than its possible for this Convention to have during the
continuance of which as a Parliament; And consequently the Kings Great Council,
the French has arrived to this excessive Greatness, and poor England to this
miserable State. Therefore it seems to be the indispensable Duty of every
Englishman to use his utmost Endeavor to move his Majesty not only to
Discharge these Four Worthy Lords, but to answer their Great Request, by
Galling a New Parliament before it be too late to provide for the Safety of
the King and Kingdom.

FINIS.

