A DECLARATION OF The Lords and Commons in Parliament: DIRECTED TO THE
HIGH-SHERIFFE of the County of ESSEX, and all other Sheriffs in general,
within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales: Concerning His Majesty's
Proclamation about the MILITIA.
Die Sabbati 18 Junii, 1642.
WHereas ROBERT SMITH Esquire, now high Sheriff of the County of Essex, has
lately received a Writ, bearing date the 27 of May, in the Eighteenth Year of
His now Majesty's Reign; Thereby commanding him to Publish a Proclamation,
whereby all His Majesty's Subjects belonging to the Trained Bands, or Militia
of this Kingdom are forbidden to Rise, March, Muster or Exercise, by virtue of
any Order or Ordinance of one, or both Houses of Parliament, without Consent or
Warrant from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the Laws: And
whereas the said High Sheriff has now addressed himself to both Houses of
Parliament, for advice and directions therein; Conceiving the said Proclamation
to be contrariant, and repugnant to the Ordinance and Judgment of both Houses
of Parliament concerning the Militia; It is therefore declared by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, (they intending nothing by the said Ordinance, but the
Protection and security of His Majesty's Person, the Defense of the Kingdom
against foreign Invasion, and the preservation of the public Peace against
intestine Rebellions, and Insurrections here at home, the maintenance of the
Privileges and Authority of Parliament, according to the Protestation:) That
the said Writ is Illegal; For that by the Constitution and Policy of this
Kingdom, the King by His Proclamation cannot declare the Law, contrary to the
Constitution of any of the inferior Courts of Justice, much less against the
high Court of Parliament: And likewise, for that this Writ forbids that to be
done, which they are obliged unto by their duty to God, their Allegiance to His
Majesty, and the Trust reposed in them by the Commonwealth, (The Law having
entrusted them to provide for the good and safety thereof;) And that the said
High Sheriff has done nothing in for bearing to publish the said Proclamation,
but according to his duty, and in obedience to the Order of both Houses; And he
is hereby required, not to publish the said Proclamation, or any other
Proclamations or Declarations of the like nature, that concern the Parliament,
without first acquainting the said Houses. And it is further declared, That the
said High Sheriff, and other Sherifts of other Counties, within this Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, for their obedience to the Orders and
Ordinances of Parliament; Or that have, or hereafter shall do any thing in the
Execution thereof, shall be protected by the Power and Authority of both the
said Houses.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. June 20, 1642.


