Die Mercurii, 1 Septembr. 1647.
A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Concerning
Soldiers that resort to Westminster for Arrears.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into their serious
consideration the great inconvenience and danger which daily does or may accrue
by the resort of diverse persons to the doors of both Houses, under pretense of
Arrears to them due, the greatest part of them being persons evil-affected to
the Parliament and Kingdom, and their coming thither being for the most part
(though under other pretenses) to disturb them in their proceedings; And
likewise remembering the effectual course by them taken by their late
Instructions bearing date 28 May last, for the determining of all Accounts, so
that there can be no color of any such resort as aforesaid, except it be of
such who are unwilling the truth of their Accounts should appear; Do hereby
Order and Declare, That henceforth no person or persons shall presume to resort
thither under any such pretense; both Houses having formerly Ordered, That the
Committee for the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or other Committees authorized
for that purpose, shall present Rolls of such Accounts so determined to both
Houses, and not otherwise, where those persons concerned herein shall receive
such further assurance and satisfaction as both Houses shall find to be just:
And in case after the publication hereof, any person shall presume contrary to
this Declaration, The Guards attending on either or both Houses, are hereby
required to seize upon them, and keep them in safe custody; And if upon
Examination by the Committee of Complaints, it be found that there is any
Arrear due to any such persons, every such sum of Money shall be and is forfeit
for his or their Contempt, and such further punishment upon others, as both
Houses shall appoint.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 23. 1647.


