Die Veneris 21. April. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parsliament, That in regard of
the late contempt of Fellows, Officers, and Members of Colleges in Oxford to
the authority of Parliament, The Visitors do send a new Summons for all
Fellows, Officers, ^^d Members of the several Colleges and Halls, and if they
do not ^^peare, or appearing shall not submit to the authority of Parliament
the Visitation: That then the Visitors shall have power to suspend ^^r the
present, And to certify the same to the Committee of Lords ^^d Commons for
Reformation of the University of Oxford, who upon the certificate thereof
shall have power to remove, and deprive ^^em from their places in their
respective Colleges and Halls: and to ^^pell them from the University: And
upon certificate thereof from the ^^id Committee, the Heads of Houses in their
respective Colleges, and Halls, with the Visitours, shall put others in their
places.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Order above
written be forthwith printed: And that the Vi^^tours of the University of
Oxford do publish the same in the Vniver^^tie of Oxford.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Bursers and
Treasurers of the Colleges in Oxford shall re^aine and keep such moneys as
they have received without making any dividend, until they shall receive Order
from the Committee of ^ords and Commons for Reformation of the University of
Oxford: ^^d that from henceforth all Tenants, and such others as are to pay
(...) money, or other duties to any College in the University of Ox^^rd,
shall pay the same to the Heads of Houses appointed by authority of Parliament
respectively, or to those whom they shall appoint ^o receive the same, and to
no other. And that the Acquittance or Acquitances of such Heads of Houses, or
of such as they shall appoint to receive the same, shall be a sufficient
warrant and discharge to the several Tenants for the payment thereof
accordingly: Notwithstanding any condition in their Leases to the contrary.

(...)


