Eclectical Chiliasm; OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning the State of THINGS FROM THE
Beginning of the MILLENNIUM To the end of the WORLD.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by C. Brom at the Gun, at the West
End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

TO Sir Thomas Barnardidiston Baronet
THIS Discourse is humbly Dedicated

by T. F.

TO THE READER.
I Have here attempted an Exposition of the Prophetic Visions, contained in
the Twentieth and One and Twentieth Chapters of the Revelation. A Book which on
pretense of its Mysteriousness is too much neglected. This as well as the rest
of the Bible was undoubtedly Written for our Learning; and to encourage our
Industry and Study, a Blessing is promised to them that Read, and Hear, and
Keep the Words of this Prophecy, and the things which are Written therein,
Chap. 1. 3. which supposes that the Knowledge of these Mysteries is
attainable. I am far from pretending to understand all the Visions of this
Obscure and Mysterious Book. Nay, I dare not boast of an intimate and thorough
Acquaintance with those I have undertaken to explain. Yet I hope I am not a
perfect Stranger to them, nor wholly mistaken in the meaning of any One Vision.
I know they are differently interpreted by the Learned Hammond, Grotius, and
other Modern Expositors. But their way of interpreting has been solidly evinced
to be none of the best, by the Learned Author of the Mystery of Godliness, so
that my hopes are not much shaken with the Authority of these great Men. As to
what concerns the Subject of the following Discourse, the Millennium is by them
made to begin at Constantine, which is sufficiently confuted by the State of
things from that Epoch to the end of the Thousand Years. And consequently all
Interpretations pursuant to that Hypothesis fall to the ground. Besides, how
unsatisfactory is their Exposition of Gog and Magog, and what little affinity
between the Vision and the Event that is applied to it? For Gog and Magog come
from the Four Quarters of the Earth, and perish in their attempt against the
Camp of the Saints and the beloved City. But the Turks came only from the North
Parts, succeeded in their Enterprise against the Christians, took
Constantinople, and have been in Possession of it very near Two Hundred and
Fifty Years. But I decline this invidious Argument, and for the Readers better
satisfaction shall acquaint him with the grounds on which I proceed.

The Hypothesis to which my Interpretation is framed, is that of the Learned
Mr. Mede, which has been fully vindicated by Dr. Hen. More in his Book even now
mentioned. The Visions I dispose agreeably to the Order of Time in which they
are fulfilled. And having framed my Exposition according to the most obvious
sense of the words, I consider whether the supposed Event has been foretold by
any Prophetic Writer. And upon Enquiry I find a most wonderful agreement
between these Visions, and several Prophecies in the Old Testament. And if any
of them seem to relate to things already past, and to have received their
accomplishment, this does not hinder the accommodation of them to the
Millennial Reign; For the same Prophecy may very well respect different and far
distant events, of which several Instances might be given. But I am persuaded
most of these Prophecies were never yet fulfilled, particularly those
concerning the peaceable State of Christ's Kingdom, the Return and
Incorporation of the Twelve Tribes, the Army of Gog, and that we are yet to
expect the. Accomplishment of them in the last Times of the World. But I am not
much concerned what become of this Opinion.

For if this support from the Predictions of the Prophets fail, the whole
Fabric of my Exposition will stand unshaken, being grounded upon the manifest
meaning of the Visions, confirmed and strengthened by express Texts of the New
Testament and very probable Reasons.

Eclectical Chiliasm; OR, A Discourse concerning the State of Things from the
Beginning of the Millennium to the end of the World.
The Introduction.
THE most Judicious Expositor of the Revelation is the eminently Learned Mr.
Joseph Mede of Pious Memory, to whose Labors next to Divine Assistance, the
slender knowledge I have in Prophetic Mysteries is chiefly owing. His Method
of interpreting the Apocalyptick Visions is grounded on his Scheme of
Synchronisms, that most happy discovery and only safe Rule of Interpretation;
and must be acknowledged to be the most natural and unconstrained, most
agreeable to the style of the Prophets, and likewise to History and Event. His
large Commentary on the Apocalypse ends with Chapter 14. On the rest he has only
published some short Specimens or Essays, intending as the Writer of his Life
tells us, to go over them again, and then to perfect his thoughts, and as fully
to enlarge himself upon them as he had done upon the foregoing Chapters.
Besides, his Essay on Chapter 20. etc. contains some peculiar Sentiments, which
even among his greatest Friends and Admirers have not found equal acceptance
with the rest of his elaborate Commentary. The defense of these Notions is very
pleasing and surprising. How learnedly does he expound the Prophecy of St.
Peter concerning the Day of Christ's second coming, in favor of his Opinion of
the Conflagration and Renovation of the World? His conceit of the great Day of
Judgment and of the Reign of the Saints on Earth is not without some fair
probabilities. How ingenious is his Conjecture of Gog and Magog? And there is
an agreeable Beauty of thought in his distinction of the state of the New
Jerusalem, and the state of the Nations which shall walk in the light thereof.
And yet I do not find that he has made many Proselytes to his persuasion
concerning these Points. As touching the Visions relating to these Mysteries
they are in my opinion capable of a more satisfactory Exposition, which is here
attemped. I shall discourse them in the same order they are accomplished.

To the Millennial state belong,

First, The binding and confinement of Satan.

Secondly, The Resurrection and Reign of the Saints.

Thirdly, The new Heavens and the new Earth.

Fourthly, The new Jerusalem.

The thousand years expired' Gog and Magog invade the Camp of the Saints.

And to this Expedition succeeds, the general Judgment and End of the World.

CHAP. I. Of Satan 's Confinement.
THE preparation to the Millennial happiness is the binding the Devil and
shutting him up in the bottomless pit. chapter 20. 1, 2, 3. I saw an Angel come
down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great Chain in
his Hand. And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil
and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless
pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the
Nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled. All which
signifies no more than the close restraint of the Devil, and the retrenchment
of that liberty which hitherto for wise ends God is pleased to indulge him. Now
he is permitted to go to and fro in the Earth and to walk up and down in it,
Job 1. 7. to practice his Infernal devices and arts of deceit. But then he
shall be confined to the aerie Regions his proper Territories; or his walk on
the Earth shall be limited to a narrower compass, viz, the nations not
converted to the Faith of Christ. It Is said ver. 7. 8. that the Devil being
loosed out of Prison, goes to deceive the nations in the four quarters of the
Earth, and to gather them together to Battle, which seems to imply, that the
Heathen nations during the term of his confinement shall not be exposed to his
deceitful practices. Which if true, promises to the Pagan World a great freedom
from the miseries and calamities of war. But whatever liberty the Devil may
have in other parts, he shall be wholly excluded the Nations walking in the
light of the new Jerusalem. To which exclusion will be consequent a great
increase of of Peace, Truth and Piety in the kingdom of Christ.

1. As for wars and public quarrels, Satan without question has a principal
Hand in them. The great battle at Armageddon is undertaken at the instigation
of unclean Spirits, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, to gather them
to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, Rev. 16. 14. And no sooner is
the Devil let loose, but we find him at his old Employment, gathering the
Nations to battle against the Saints chapter 20. 7, 8. Hence, without contradicting
St. James, come Wars and Fightings, Quarrels and Dissensions. For even the
lusts and passions of Men, to which the Apostle intitles them, are excited and
enraged by the Devil, the professed enemy to Peace and Unity. Peace as is
observed by a learned Man, is the peculiar character of Man, as he is
distinguished from Brutes. And the great design of the Gospel is to promote
this disposition, and to inspire the World with a Spirit of universal love and
Charity. When therefore the Devil shall be under close restraint, and Men left
to the Bent of their own inclinations, and the Conduct of Religion, there will
doubtless be greater Friendship and Concord in the World both among particular
Persons and public Societies. And such a peaceable State the Prophets foretell
as the peculiar happiness of the Kingdom of Christ. For thus it was prophesied
by Isaiah, that under his government Men shall beat their Swords into
plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; that Nation shall not lift up
Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. Isa. 2. 4. And we
meet with the same Prophecy in Micah with this addition, They shall sit every
Man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid.
Chap. 4. 3, 4. Hitherto has been a perfect Reverse of all this. Men have beat
their Plowshares in Swords, and their pruning Hooks into Spears. The Art of War
was never more studied. And very frequent interruptions have been given to Men's
security by rumors of Wars, and hostile Invasions which has furnished the Jews
with a very plausible Objection against the truth of our Blessed Saviors
pretenses. But these glorious Prophecies concern the Reign of Christ under the
Millennial state, and shall then have their accomplishment. When Satan that
grand Incendiary whose business and delight it is to disturb the peace of
mankind, shall be Chained up; then the Peace of God, that Divine grace of
peaceableness to which we are called by the preaching of the Gospel, shall more
universally bear Rule in the Hearts of Men, and tune the World to a blessed
Harmony.

This peace in the state will be attended with peace in the Church, which shall
enjoy a happy Calm, free on the one hand from the violences of Persecution, and
on the other from the disturbances of false Teachers. The Names of Persecutors
are distinguished in story by peculiar Marks and Characters of Infamy. But the
grand Persecutor, the Devil, is not so commonly taken notice of. It Is certain
from Scripture that he is concerned, as Principal, in all the Persecutions that
have been raised against the Church of Christ. Thus the Christians of the
Church of Smyrna who suffered Imprisonment in the cause of Religion, are said
to be cast into Prison by the Devil, Rev. 2. 20. And chapter 12. 4. We find the red
Dragon waiting the delivery of the Starry-crowned Woman with an intention to
devour her Child, that is the Devil instigating the Heathen Emperors to
extinguish and destroy the Apostolic Church, and to suppress Christianity at
its First appearance. And when the Woman fled into the Wilderness, the Dragon
pursues her, and by the assistance of the Beast with seven Heads and Ten Horns,
to whom he committed his Power and authority, makes War with the remnant of her
seed that refused to receive the Mark of the Beast, viz, the sincere professors
of the Gospel. The inhuman Cruelties exercised by these Persecutors, whether
Heathen or Christian or rather Antichristian, show whose Agents they were, and
by what Spirit they were acted. 'Twas the red Dragon that inspired them with
such Bloody and barbarous minds, and prompted them to those outrages and
violences so contrary to that kindness and compassion, which is one of the
prime and essential inclinations of Mankind. And therefore when this cruel
Fiend, who thus depraves the mild Tempers of Men, and inflames their minds to
such cruelty and fierceness, shall be confined to the bottomless pit; and human
nature left to the conduct of its own inclinations, cultivatad and improved
with the mild and merciful principles of Christian Religion, the Church shall
no longer be assaulted with storms of Persecution, but be Blessed with a most
profound tranquillity. And What thus with great reason is inferred from the
premises, may with greater certainty be deduced from the predictions of the
Prophets. For this state of Freedom from Sufferings Isaiah Prophesies of. chapter
25. 8. He will swallow up Death in Victory, and the Lord God will wipe away
Tears from off all Faces. With which agrees St. John's description of the state
of the new Jerusalem. Rev. 21. 4. God shall wipe away all Tears from their
Eyes; and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor crying neither
shall there be any more pain for the former things are passed away. Which does
not Signify that Men shall be immortal, and no longer obnoxious to Sicknesses
and bodily Pains, but only that the Church shall enjoy a happy security from
the calamities and sufferings of former times. Secondly, The Peace of the
Church is not a little disturbed by the intemperate Zeal of false Teachers. By
whom these Seducers that divide the Church into Sects and Parties are sent out
and employed, we learn from our Saviors explication of the Parable of the
Tares, Matt 13. 37, 38, 39. He that sows the good seed is the Son of Man. The
field is the World, the good seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the
tares are the Children of the wicked One. The enemy that sowed them is the
Devil. Whence it appears that it is the Devil that sows these tares of Heretics
and Schismatics that overrun the field of the Church, and infuses into their
minds false and corrupt doctrines. And thus that Flood of Arrianism that well
nigh overwhelmed the Primitive Church is said to have proceeded out of the
mouth of the old Serpent, Rev. 12. 15. And the Corruption of the Christian
faith in the latter times is attributed to the Devil by the Apostle, Tim. 4. 1.
In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits and doctrines of Devils, that is doctrines Suggested by Evil Spirits.
So that when the Devil shall be restrained from sowing his tares, and
corrupting the minds of Men with false notions of things; there will doubtless
follow greater consent in matters of Religion, Truth will prevail and Flourish,
and bear down all opposite Errors, which will find no patrons to maintain and
propagate them. This Conclusion is grounded not only on reason, but Prophecy.
For this Zechary prophesied should come to pass in the days of the Messiah. chapter
13. 2. It shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of hosts, that I will
cut off the names of the Idols out of the land, and they shall no more be
remembered: And also I will cause the prophets, viz, that speak lies, and the
unclean Spirit to pass out of the Land. Satan has had his Ministers, false
Teachers, in every age of the Church, but the time will come when these lying
Prophets shall cease and be removed out of it. They shall have no place in the
new Jerusalem. For out of it shall be excluded them that make a lie. Rev. 21.
27. And such are false Apostles, those deceitful workers that transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and with fair speeches deceive the
Hearts of the Simple.

II. A great increase of Piety will follow this confinement of Satan. The
design of the Gospel is to restrain Men from all impiety, and to oblige them to
the practice of universal goodness. And considering the nature of the laws the
Gospel prescribes, their agreeableness to the best reason of mankind, and their
tendency to promote both our eternal and temporal happiness, it is strange Men's
actions are not more conformable to them. It is true human nature by the Fall
of our first Parents is very much corrupted, and tainted with evil
Inclinations. And this inbred Corruption does at once indispose us to Goodness,
and betray us to many sinful practices agreeable to our depraved appetites. But
I cannot think Men would arrive at such heights of wickedness and villainy as
we see many do, unless they were pusht forward by the Instigation of some
wicked Spirits, who as the Scripture tells us work in, act and inspire the
Children of disobedience, great and notorious Sinners over whom they have a
more immediate influence and power. Ephesians. 2. 2. Nor is the Devil wanting to
ensnare and allure even good Men into forbidden courses. Hence he has the
title of the Tempter, because he makes it his great business and employment to
seduce Men to Sin. So that the greatest part of the wickedness that is
committed in the World is owing to the Temptations of evil Spirits, who by
presenting to Men the oppertunities and occasions of sin, and infusing into
them evil motions excite and actuate that Corruption which is inherent in our
nature. When therefore the Devil shall be shut up in the Abyss, and restrained
from tempting Men, without doubt immorality and wickedness will decline, and
there will be a general and more exact conformity to the dictates of Reason and
the laws of Religion. And this flourishing state of Religion is clear from
express texts of Scripture. For thus Righteousness is said to dwell in the new
Heavens and new Earth 2 Pet. 3. 13. And St. John says that nothing that
defiles shall enter into the new Jerusalem. Rev, 21. 27. Which plainly
signifies a great increase of Piety and Virtue in the Millennial State of the
Church.

CHAP. II. Of the Resurrection and Reign of the Saints.
I Saw Thrones and they sat upon them; and judgment was given unto them; And I
saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not Worshipped the Beast neither his Image, neither
had received his Mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived
and reigned with Christ a Thousand years. Rev 20. 4. But the rest of the dead
lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first
Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection:
On such the second Death has no power. ver, 5. 6. Here are two things to be
considered. 1 The judgment given to them that sat on Thrones. 2 The Living of
the Beheaded and their reigning with Christ, The meaning of the First is clear
from a parallel place Dan. 7. 22. Judgment was given to the Saints of the most
High. That both the One and the Other belong to the same thing is evident,
because they begin from the same Term, viz, the destruction of the fourth
Beast, That in Daniel, when the Beast (then ruling in the wicked Horn) was
slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame, ver 11, 21, 22.
This in the Apocalypse, when the Beast and the false Prophet (the wicked Horn
in Daniel) were taken and both cast alive into a lake of Fire burning with
Brimstone, Rev. 19. 20, 21, etc. vid Mede Ep. 15, They therefore whom St. John
saw sitting on Thrones are the Saints of the most High, that is the Jews, the
holy People as they are called Dan. 8. 24. 12. 7. And to them Judgment was
given i. e. Dominion or Empire. For so it follows in the place even now, cited,
The Saints possessed the Kingdom, chapter 7. 22. When the Course of the four
Monarchies is finished by the destruction of the Fourth Beast, the times of the
Gentiles are fulfilled. And from thenceforth the ^^ngdom and Dominion and
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People of
the Saints of the most High, Daniel 7. 27. And thus of the new Jerusalem it is
said, That the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor into it Rev.
21. 24. Of this see a more full and particular account in the fourth chapter.

As for the other part of this vision, I find no Key to it in the Prophets. In
defect whereof I think it safest to attend to the plain literal sense of the
words. And if it be interpreted by this Rule, the thing signified must be the
Resurrection and Reign of the Martyrs.

The Resurrection of the dead is a fundamental Article of Christian Faith,
built on clear and express texts of Scripture. But in what order the dead shall
be raised is no where expressly declared. This only we learn from St. Paul that
the Good and the Wicked shall not arise at the same Instant, but that the
Righteous will have the Precedence. 1 Cor. 15. 23. Every Man in his own order.
Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his Coming.
Agreeable to this is that of the same Apostle 1 These 4. 13. The Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel
and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Now a
Resurrection of the Martyrs prior to the general Resurrection is very
consistent with these assertions of the Apostle, which do not deny the
Resurrection of some particular Persons before the Coming of Christ to
judgment, but only declare that Such of the Righteous whom Christ at his coming
shall find in the state of the dead shall have the Precedence of the wicked,
and be first restored to life. St. Matthew tells us, that at our Saviors
Resurrection the graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept
arose and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. ch 27. 52, 53. And
why may not the Privilege of a more early Resurrection be indulged the Martyrs
in recompense of their Sufferings? The invincible Courage and Resolution of the
Primitive Christians proceeded in a great measure from the hope and expectation
of it. And perhaps the Revelation of such a distinguishing Favor was designed
on purpose for the encouragement and support of their Constancy under those
Persecutions wherewith God thought fit to exercise the Faith and Patience of
the first Christians.

That the Martyrs after their Resurrection shall Reign on Earth is an opinion
which has no countenance from Scripture. All St. John here says is, that the
Beheaded lived again and reigned with Christ a Thousand Years, which does not
at all favor this Conceit, but rather supposes the contrary. The Dominion
Christ was invested with at his Ascension, he is to possess to the end of the
World. There is no new Kingdom to be erected for him upon Earth, nor will he
descend from Heaven where he now reigns until the time appointed by God for the
judgment of the World. Then he will arise from his Imperial Seat at his Fathers
right Hand, and come down into these lower Regions in order to the holding his
general Assizes. And this is the Concluding act, and will put an end to his
glorious Reign. Now if the Martyrs shall be admitted to a participation of
Christ's Kingdom, where should they reign but in Heaven, where Christ's Throne
is, where he reigns in Person and from whence he administers all the affairs of
the World. There is nothing of Paradox in this Supposition to them who believe
the Principles and Doctrines of Christianity, which teach that the bodies of
good Men being raised out of the dust, and fashioned like unto Christ's glorious
Body, shall be translated from this Earth to the Mansions prepared for them in
the Heavens. And So far is this Hypothesis of the Millennial Reign from
contradicting any text of Scripture, that it seems to have a good foundation in
it.

1 One principal act of Regality is the power of judging Now St. Paul tells us
that the Saints shall judge the World 1 Cor. 6. 2. Which to be understood of the
last and final judgment the following verse does clearly evince. Know ye not
that we shall judge Angels? That is, such of them as for their Rebellion
against God were condemned to Hell, and are reserved in Chains unto the
Judgment of the great day, Jude ver. 6. Which is the only judgment to which
they are destined. The judgment therefore of the World by the Saints is no
other than that at the last day. But who are the Saints to whom this authority
and power is committed? Not the Righteous in general, for they as well as the
wicked must appear before the judgment seat is Christ to give an account If
their actions. But perhaps when their Trial is finished, and the Sentence of
Absolution pronounced, they shall be translated into the Air, and being placed
on Thrones around the Tribunal of Christ, shall bear a part as Assessors in the
ensuing judgment of Devils and wicked men. But our Saviors description of the
Process of the last judgment intimates the contrary. For the sheep and the
goats receive their different Sentences, whilst they are standing the one at
the Right, the other on the left Hand of the Judge. Matt 25. 34. Then shall the
King say unto them on his right Hand Come ye Blessed of my Father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World, But to them on the
left Depart ye Cursed into everlasting Fire. ver, 41. Whence it appears that
the Assumption of the Righteous into the Clouds of Heaven 1 These. 4. 17. must
Succeed the trial of the wicked, and consequently they cannot be concerned in
judging them. The Saints therefore by whom the World of the ungodly shall be
judged, and in all probability the Martyrs who reigning with Christ in his
Kingdom, will join with him in the exercise of his judiciary authority, and give
their suffrages to the Sentence which he will pass upon the wicked. This
Solemnity it is true is transacted after the Thousand years allotted for the
Martyrs Reign are expired, which seems to exclude them from bearing any part in
this Regal act of judging the World. But there is no necessity of concluding
their reign with this term, which may very well be extended to the end of
Christ's Mediatorial Kingdom. But because the intermediate space from this
period to the final judgment is but short Rev 20. 3. therefore the duration of
their Reign is expressed by the complete number of a Thousand years, the odd
years that follow not being brought into the account.

2. Besides the glorious Angels, we read of Myriads of Saints that accompany
Christ in his triumphant progress from Heaven, Jude, ver 14. 1 These. 3. 13. To
understand this of Angels is without reason to depart from the letter of
Scripture against the generally received rule of Interpretation. But to apply
it to the Souls of just Men is much more absurd. For these are disposed in
Paradise or Abraham's Bosom till the Resurrection. Then being reunited to their
Bodies they appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, and being finally
absolved attend the judge in his return to Heaven. And are now first of all
admitted into the immediate presence of God, where there is fullness of joy and
perfection of happiness. To send good Men directly to Heaven when they die, and
to fetch them from thence at the last day to be judged, that after judgment
they may return to their former happy seats with the greater Solemnity, is such
an odd preposterous method of proceeding as no considering Man will easily
admit, much less believe agreeable to the infinite wisdom of Almighty God.
Whereas if a first and particular Resurrection be supposed, a good account may
be given of the forementioned texts. For then the Saints that come with Christ
will be those holy Persons who for their constancy in Suffering Death for the
sake of God, were Honored with the peculiar favor of a more early admission
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus this opinion of the Millennial Reign of the
Martyrs is not without some fair appearance of probability, and is very
agreeable to the Gospel Economy.

If a figurative Interpretation were to be admitted, the Living of the Beheaded
and their reigning with Christ a Thousand years would signify the Rising of
the Church from a dead estate, and its enjoyment of peace and tranquillity, to
which sense most, that I meet with, incline, But this notion of a Metaphorical
Resurrection is encumbred with several difficulties which I cannot overcome,
For First, every one that has part in this first Resurrection is pronounced
Blessed and holy and secure from the Power of the second Death, that is, the
miseries of the other World. But shall every member of the Church in the
Millennial State be eternally blessed? Secondly, The state of the Church before
the Millennium shall be very quiet and peaceable in reference to oppression and
persecution. For the Beasts Power of making war with the Saints is contemporary
with the mournful Prophecy of the two Witnesses, which ends with the sixth
Trumpet. And the last act of hostility committed by the Beast will be the
slaughter of the witnesses, who revive and are exalted on high before the
seventh Angel sounded. Rev. 11. 11, 12. And from that time to the final
destruction of the Beast under the seventh Vial, the Saints will live secure
from the violence of Persecution. To understand therefore the first
Resurrection of the rising of the Church from an oppressed and persecuted state
is not agreeable to the condition of the times immediately preceding. These and
some other reasons prevail with me to reject this opinion, and to interpret
this vision according to the proper meaning of the words,

CHAP. III. Of the New Heaven and the New Earth.
AND I saw a New Heaven and a New Earth, for the first Heaven and the first
Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea, Rev. 21. 1. The Vision of a
New World immediately following that of the general Judgment, seems to signify
the Production of a new and more glorious Earth, after the Destruction of the
old by Fire, for the Seat and Habitation of the Blessed. But this is a Mystery
past my understanding. All that is signified by it is a more flourishing and
prosperous State of things. In the Prophetic Style great Changes are expressed
by a New Heaven and a New Earth, which in the Language of the Hebrews signifies
a new World, and was used by them according to the present Notion of it among
us, to denote a new Face and Condition of Things. This new Creation God
foretold by the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 65. 17. Behold I create new Heavens and a
new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. What
follows in that Chapter does unfold the meaning of this Creation. Be you glad
and rejoice in that which I create, for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing
and her People a joy, verse. 18. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in my
People, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice
of crying, verse. 19. They shall build Houses and inhabit them, and they shall
plant Vineyards, and eat the fruit of them, verse. 21. The Wolf and the Lamb
shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Bullock, and Dust
shall be the Serpents Meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy
Mountain, says the Lord, verse. 25. This Mountain is the Church or Kingdom of
Christ, Isa. 22. And the joyful, secure, and peaceable condition of it, is that
New Heaven and Earth which God promises to create. This new World, this happy
State of the Church has not yet been seen. Nevertheless we according to this
promise look for New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2
Peter 3. 13. In the foregoing Verses St. Peter speaks of the melting of the
Elements, of the burning of the Earth, and the Dissolution of all things. And
then it follows, nevertheless we according to his Promise look for New Heavens
and a New Earth. Whence some have concluded that this New World must succeed
the Conflagration, which is a great mistake. For St. Peter's New Heaven and
Earth is no other than that promised, Isaiah 65. 17. And the New World in
Isaiah does clearly belong to the Kingdom of Christ, which must conclude with
the Resurrection and last Judgment, 1 Corinthians. 15. 25, 26, 28. He must Reign
till he has put all Enemies under his Feet. The last Enemy that shall be
destroyed is Death. And when all things shall be subdued unto him then shall
the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
God may be all in all. If therefore the New Heaven and New Earth must be before
the Conclusion and Surrender of Christ's Kingdom, then must it of necessity be
before the Conflagration of the World, which will not begin, 'till the Judgment
is concluded. And though there are no certain Characters in the Revelation, by
which the precise time of this Vision may be found out; yet from that place in
Isaiah it may be concluded to belong to the Kingdom of Christ, and particularly
to the last Scene of it under the Millennium, when the State of Things will be
vastly different from what they are or have hitherto been, as has been fully
proved in the first Chapter. And so great will be the prosperity of the
Millennial State, that there will be no longer need of Ships for War or Foreign
Commerce and Traffic, which the present condition of things requires, which I
take to be the meaning of what is added by St. John, and there was no more Sea.

CHAP. IV. Of the new Jerusalem.
And I John saw the holy City, the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband. And I heard a great voice
out of Heaven, saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and He will
dwell with them, and they shall be His People, and God himself shall be with
them and be their God. Rev 21. 2, 3, Concerning the New Jerusalem here are
three things to be inquired. What is meant, 1 By the New Jerusalem. 2 By its
coming down from Heaven. 3. By the walking of the Nations in the light of it,
ver. 21. These I take to be the most material Points, the resolution whereof
will give us a clear understanding of this Mystery.

1. By the New Jerusalem or the Lambs Wife ver, 9, 10. Is meant the People of
the Jews converted to the Faith of Christ. Upon the ruin of Babylon, the Elders
rejoice for the approaching solemnity of the Lambs Marriage. Rev 19. 7. Let us
be glad and rejoice for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has
made her self ready. Now the fall of Babylon and destruction of the
seven-headed Beast, or Roman Empire, is the very point of time prefixed for the
Conversion and Restoration of the Jewish Nation, That their blindness and
infidelity shall then be removed, we learn from St. Paul Romans 11. 25. I would
not that ye should be ignorant of this Mystery, that blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, And so all
Israel shall be saved. This coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, is of the
same Import and Significancy, with the fulfilling the times of the Gentiles,
which puts an end to the Miseries and dispersions of the Jews. Luke 21. 24. And
they shall fall by the Edge of the Sword, and shall be lead away captive into
all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. The times of the Gentiles are the times of
the four Monarchies, wherein the Gentiles have dominion. And when the time of
the fourth and last monarchy is expired and accomplished, the Jews will every
where embrace the Christian Religion, and be restored to their ancient Country
from which they have so long been banished. Now if the Restitution of the
Jewish Nation, and the Marriage of the Lamb are co-incident and happen at the
same time, what can we imagine the New Jerusalem, the Bride, the Lambs Wife to
be, but the Jews, once Gods peculiar people, to whom after so long a divorce he
will be graciously reconciled, and receive them again into favor. The
greatness of the happiness they will enjoy in their native Land, is here
represented by a most splendid and magnificent City, whose foundations are
garnished with all manner of precious stones verse. 19. Which had no need of the
Sun or Moon to shine upon it, being enlightened by the Glory of God, ver. 23. By
a Crystal River of Water of life proceeding from the Throne of God and of the
Lamb. Chap. 22. 1. And lastly by the Tree of life bearing twelve manner of
Fruits, yielding her Fruit every Month verse. 2. All which is nothing but a
Rhetorical description of the flourishing state of the Jews after their return
from Captivity. Which kind of descriptions were familiar to the Jews, and very
frequently occurr in Prophetic writings see. Isa. 54. 11, 12. 60. 19. Tob. 13.
16, 17.

11. By the descending of the New Jerusalem from God out of Heaven, I
understand the Restitution of the Jews by the immediate Power of God. That
Jesus is the Christ is demonstratively evident from their own Books, the
Writings of the old Testament. And yet in defiance of the most solid reasoning
and discourse they have obstinately persisted in their unbelief near seventeen
hundred years. So that their Infidelity seems incurable by any human Methods of
Conviction. But that which to Men is impossible, is possible to God, who by the
Power of his grace can reduce the most perverse and incorrigible Sinners. How
wonderfully and Suddenly was St. Paul converted, who of a bitter and virulent
Persecutor of Christians became a most active and zealous Preacher of the
Gospel? Whether the Conversion of the Jews shall be wrought after the same
manner viz, by a vision and voice from Heaven, I cannot tell. But whatever may
be the external and visible means, the Spirit of God will be the Principal
Agent in this business. Who by the internal Illumination of their minds, with
the light of Heavenly truth, will Scatter the clouds and mists of prejudice,
and convince them of their Error and wickedness in rejecting the Holy Jesus.
This their repentance Isaiah speaks of Chap. 59. 20. Which is much clearer from
St. Paul's application of this Prophecy, Rom 11. 26, 27. There shall come out
of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. For this is
my Covenant with them, when I shall take away their Sins. With this agrees that
of Zechary. In that day I will pour upon the house of Judah and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall Mourn for him, as one mourns for his
only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for
his first born Chap. 12. 10. And the same Divine Power that works this inward
change in the Jews, will incline the Hearts of the several Princes in whose
Countries they are dispersed to give them liberty of returning to the land of
Canaan, and to furnish them with all things needful. Surely the Isles shall
wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy Sons from far, their
Silver and their Gold with them. Isa 60. 9. Some are of Opinion that their
Captivity shall be perpetual. But besides that the abovementioned text Luke
21. 24. Which speaks of the dispersion of the Jews, and the desolation of
Jerusalem, Until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, implies the contrary;
There are several Prophecies that foretell their return. Particularly that of
Amos Chap. 9. 14, 15. And I will bring again the Captivity of my People Israel,
and they shall build the waste Cities and inhabit them; and they shall plant
vineyards, and drink the Wine thereof; they shall also make gardens and eat the
Fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their own land, and they shall no
more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them says the Lord. The
perpetuity of the Settlement here spoken of shows that it is to come, and
cannot belong to their reestablishment after the return from Babylon, which was
not of much above five hundred years continuance. But no where is the present
Captivity and future return of the Jews so clearly Prophesied of as in the Book
of Tobit Chap. 14. 4, 5. Our Brethren shall lie scattered in the Earth from
that good land, and Jerusalem shall be desolate, and the House of God in it
shall be burned, and shall be desolate for a time: And again God will have
mercy on them, and bring them again into the land where they shall build a
Temple, but not like to the first (...), till the sensons of the age be
fulfilled, which signifies the continuance of the second Temple till the
dissolution of the Jewish Polity. And again they shall go into a long and great
Captivity viz. the present, which words are wanting in the Greek and English
Versions, but are in the Hebrew Copy set out by Paulus Fagius; and afterward
they shall return from all places of their Captivity, and build up Jerusalem
gloriously, and the House of God shall be built in it for ever with a glorious
building, as the Prophets have spoken thereof.

III. The same of the Jews return being spread over the World, Christian
Princes pour in their treasures into the Holy Land, and contribute their
assistances toward the rebuilding Jerusalem and the rest of the waste and
desolate Cities. The Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light of
the New Jerusalem, and the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor
into it Rev 21. 24. Upon the return from Babylon, the building of the Temple
and City met with great opposition and obstructions from the envy and malice of
the adversaries of Judah. But now there will be no Rehums or Sanballats to
obstruct their proceedings, the work will be vigorously carried on by the
united forces and joint endeavors of Jews and Gentiles. This assistance of the
Gentiles Isaiah speaks of Chap. 60. 10, 11. The Sons of strangers shall build
up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee; for in my wrath I smote
thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. Therefore thy Gates, shall be
open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that Men may bring unto
thee the forces or wealth of the Gentiles, And again Chap. 61. 4, 5, 6. They
shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and
they shall repair the waste Cities, the desolations of many generations. And
strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks and the Sons of the Alien shall be
your Plowmen and your Vine-dressers. But ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord; Men shall call you the Ministers of our God; ye shall eat the riches of
the Gentiles, and in their Glory shall you boast your selves. But their
greatest Glory will be the profession and establishment of true Christian
Religion among them, with the knowledge whereof God will wonderfully inlighten
their minds, for a Pattern to all the Gentile Nations professing Christianity,
who shall now conform to the Standard of the Jewish Church. And this I take to
be the meaning of the Nations walking in the light of the New Jerusalem, and to
be the full accomplishment of these words in Isaiah, the Gentiles shall come to
thy light and Kings to the brightness of thy rising Chap. 60. 3.

CHAP. V. Of Gog and Magog 's attempt against the Camp of the Saints.
THE Jews being replanted in the promised land, shall enjoy an uninterrupted
course of prosperity for several ages. But when the Thousand years of Satan's
confinement are expired, he shall be loosed out of his Prison. And shall go out
to deceive the Nations which are in the four Quarters of the Earth, Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle, the number of whom is as the Sand of
the Sea. Rev 20. 7, 8. At whose instigation, They went up, says St. John, on
the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City. But this attempt ended in the total overthrow and destruction of
that numerous Army. For fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured
them verse. 9. A terrible Expedition this, and no less astonishing than the
issue. And that which increases the Wonder is the common opinion concerning the
Amplitude of Christ's Kingdom, which long ere this may be presumed to be arrived
at its full extent. For if all the Nations under Heaven have of a long time
received and professed the faith of Christ, as this opinion supposes it is very
strange that such a prodigious number of Christians from the four Quarters of
the Earth, should all on a sudden conspire to invade Judea and to destroy the
Jews, professing the same Religion, and whom their late reestablishment
proclaims to be in a more peculiar manner the favorites of Heaven.

The present limits of the Church no doubt will be greatly enlarged by the
accession of many Nations now sitting in darkness and the shadow of Death. And
this enlargement (whatever increase it may receive in the mean time, of which
there is little prospect) may reasonably be expected at the time of the Jews
Conversion, from which no less then from their Infidelity the Gentile world
will receive great advantages. If the fall of them be the riches of the World,
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fullness, Romans 11. 12. That is upon the coming in of the body of the Jewish
Nation to the Church of Christ, the Gospel will be farther propagated among the
Gentiles, which is all that can be concluded from that Text. It Is true there
are several places of Scripture which seem to extend the Kingdom of Christ over
all Nations of the Earth, and to foretell the reception of the Gospel by all
People in all places of the World. Thus it is foretold of Christ, that there
should be given him Dominion and Glory and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations
and Languages should serve him, and that all Dominions should serve and obey
him, Dan. 7. 14, 27. And thus of the stone cut out without Hands, by which all
agree is meant the Kingdom of Christ, it is said that it became a great
mountain and filled the whole Earth Dan. 2. 34, 35. But these and the like
Prophecies signify no more than the vast extent and largeness of the Christian
Church in opposition to the straitness of the Church of the Jews which was
confined within the narrow limits of a small Country. That these notes of
Universality All, Whole, are to be interpreted in a limited and restrained
sense, is evident from other Prophecies in this Book of Daniel concerning the
extent of the Grecian and Roman Empires. For thus it is foretold of the third
Kingdom that it should bear Rule over all the Earth Chap. 2. 39. And of the
fourth Kingdom, that it should devour the whole Earth. Dan. 7. 23. And yet
neither the Greeks nor Romans could pretend to an universal Conquest of the
whole World. There were several Nations never visited by the Roman Eagle, and
where the Name of Alexander was never heard of, although it is said he was so
vain as to weep for want of more Worlds to conquer. And thus a great part of
the World will never be actually subject to Christ, nor under the government of
his laws. For as the Greeks and Romans bearing Rule over and devouring all the
Earth, signifies no more than the greatness of their Conquests and the
largeness of their Dominions; So by the obedience of all Nations to Christ, and
his Kingdoms filling the whole Earth, can be meant no more than the worship and
acknowledgment of Christ by the greater part of the World. And it is observable
that Isaiah Prophesying of the establishment of the Mountain of the Lords House
on the top of the Mountains, and the exaltation of it above the Hills, and the
Confluence of all Nations unto it Chap. 2. 2. In the next verse the universal
is changed into a particular proposition. And many People shall go and say,
Come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God
of Jacob, Intimating the reception of the Gospel by a great part of mankind,
and the continuance of the rest of the World in the state of Heathenism. And
now the wonder of this Invasion ceases. For it is easy to imagine the Camp of
the Saints encompassed by an army of Infidels excited or provoked thereto by
the Devil. But there is some difficulty in conceiving how this army should be
drawn together from so remote and distant places of the World. For the Nations
of which it is composed are said to be in the four Quarters of the Earth. But
it has been observed by a learned Man, that (...) in many places of the New
Testament has a Critical signification, and does peculiarly refer to the Land
of Judea. And in this notion it is here to be understood, as signifying not the
whole World, but that Part or Portion of it, which by God was given to the
Posterity of Abraham, and which is here distinguished by a new Name, the Camp
of the Saints, in allusion to their incamping in the Wilderness. And then the
Nations in the four Quarters or corners of the Land will be some people seated
in the Countries not far distant from Judea, whom we may easily conceive
entering into a Confederacy against the Jews, and uniting their forces for the
destruction of these Saints of the most High. And thus the greatest
difficulties relating to this vision are removed. And the plain meaning and
signification of it appears to be the Invasion of Judea by some of the
neighboring Nations. Which event if it were foretold by the Prophets, there
can be no reason to question or doubt of the truth of this Exposition. Now
concerning this Invasion there are several Prophecies, but the most remarkable
and express is that in Ezekiel, between which and this vision there is an exact
and admirable agreement.

Ezekiel's Prophecy, Chap. 30.
In the latter days thou, viz. Gog shall come into the Land that is brought
back from the Sword, and is gathered out of many People, against the Mountains
of Israel. Invasurus montes Israelis, Junius, ver. 8. Thou shall ascend and
come like a Storm, thou shall be like a Cloud to cover the Land, thou and all
thy Bands and many People with thee, ver. 9. And it shall come to pass at the
same time, when Gog shall come against the Land of Israel, says the Lord God,
that my Fury shall come up in my Face. And I will plead against him with
Pestilence and with Blood, and I will Rain upon him and his Bands, and upon the
many People that are with him, an overflowing Rain, and great Hailstones, Fire
and Brimstone, verse. 18, 22.

St. John's Vision, Rev. 20.
And when the Thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
Prison ver. 7. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, Gog and Magog to gather
them together to Battle the number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea, verse 8.
And they went up and compassed about the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved
City, verse. 9.

And Fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them verse. 9.

And whereas it is objected that Gog in Ezekiel comes out of the North parts
verse. 15. whereas God and Magog in the Revelation are said to be Nations which
are in the four Quarters of the Earth, this seeming difference admits of an
easy Solution. For although Gog with the People of Magog came out of the North
parts, yet the rest of the people of which his army consists, come from other
parts. Some from Persia, some from Ethiopia and Lybia, and others from the
North Quarters of the lesser Asia, viz. Gomer and Togarmah verse. 5, 6. So that
here are several Nations in Confederacy against the Jews, and these lying
against the four Corners of their Land. But whereas God and Magog are chief in
this Expedition, therefore they only are mentioned by St. John. And for the
same Reason, the judgment of God against this Army is in Ezekiel denounced
particularly against Gog. So that here is no difference but a most exact
harmony and consent between the Prophet and the Divine.

But there is a farther Correspondence as to the time of this Invasion very
remarkable, and which abundantly confirms my Interpretation. This in the
Revelation is about a Thousand years after the Jews Conversion, and
repossession of their native Land. And that in Ezekiel succeeds the
Restoration of the Jewish Nation and their Subjection to Christ. For in the
seven and thirtieth Chapter is foretold the Return of the whole House of
Israel, verse. 11, 12. The Reunion of the two Kingdoms after this Return, verse.
21, 22. And the perpetual government of David or Christ over them verse. 25. And
then follows in the next Chapter, the Prophecy of Gogs invading the people of
Israel in the latter days or toward the End of the World Chap. 38. 16.

CHAP. VI. Of the general judgment and end of the World.
THE last vision is that of the general Judgment which is the concluding Scene,
and ends with the Conflagration of the World. And I saw a great White Throne,
and him that sat on it, from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and
there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened which is the
Book of Life, and the Dead were judged out of those things which were Written
in the Books according to their works. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were
in it, and Death and Hell delivered up the Dead which were in them: And they
were judged every Man according to his works. And Death and Hell were cast into
the lake of fire: this is the second Death. And whosoever was not found Written
in the Book of Life, was cast into the lake of Fire. Rev 20. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. What St. John here says of the dead standing before the Throne of God, and
their being judged according to their works, needs not much explication. The
right of judging belongs to none but God, nor is any besides a God qualified
for so mighty a performance. But we are assured from Scripture that this
judgment shall be administered by God Incarnate in the Person of Jesus Christ
who is ordained the Judge of quick and Dead, Act 10. 42. For the Father judges
no Man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, and that for this reason as
Our Savior himself tells us, because he is the Son of Man, that is truly and
really Man as well as God, John 5. 27. For of the three Persons in the Blessed
Trinity, the Son only is personally united to Human nature. And therefore being
God-man is the most proper Judge of Men who must be judged in their Bodies.

The consequents of this judgment are not so clear and obvious. For as for the
casting Death and Hell into the lake of Fire, with all whose names are not
found Written in the Book of Life; and the flying away of the Earth and the
Heaven from the face of him that sits on the Throne; these are somewhat obscure
expressions, and not so easily understood,

1. St. Paul tells us that the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death 1
Cor 15. 26. Which destruction is here expressed by casting Death and Hell or
Hades the place of separate Souls into the lake of Fire. And signifies that
there shall be no more separation of Soul and Body, but that Men arise to an
immortal and endless Life. But whether this immortality and endless duration be
common to all Men, or peculiar only to the Blessed is made matter of dispute.
That good Men shall live for ever in a State of unspeakable happiness, is a
privilege beyond the merit of the most perfect virtue. But eternal Life is a
gift very becoming the infinite Goodness of God to bestow. And no Man ever
Quarreled with God on this Score, for promising to reward the imperfect
Services of Men with Eternal Happiness. But by some it is thought very Hard,
and no way consistent with the laws of justice, to punish the sins of a short
life with an eternity of Torment, that Men who sin but a few years, must live
for ever in insupportable Misery, there being no proportion between Time and
Eternity. This indeed is a very great difficulty, and has enforced some Men to
put a period to the miseries of the Damned, as not knowing how to reconcile the
Divine Justice to the Eternity of Hell Torments.

Whatever is necessary for the preservation of Government, and securing
obedience to laws, must be allowed to be just and lawful, Which justifies the
severity of God in denouncing everlasting misery against impenitent sinners,
because nothing less would be a sufficient restraint upon most Men from
breaking the laws of God. For if the generality of Men despise these Terrors of
the Lord! what regard would they have for menaces less severe? But that God
should execute these threats according to the strictest sense of them, there is
no necessity. For tho Promises oblige to a performance, yet Threats do not
induce any obligation, nor does justice require the Execution of them. And
therefore God, if he pleases, may deal with Sinners more mercifully than he
has threatened. But whether he will show them favor, and abate any thing of
the utmost he has denounced, I cannot tell. This is most certain, that no Man
shall suffer beyond the just desert of his actions. But who dare say that God
cannot in justice inflict Eternal punishment? For any Man upon such a
presumption to harden himself against the clear and express threats of endless
Misery, is the height of madness. For if at last the Torments of a future state
are Eternal, how sad and deplorable will his Condition be? And if they prove
finite and end in his final destruction, yet what an amazing and insupportable
thought is this, for a Man to suffer the pains of Hell so long as the Divine
justice can inflict them, and at last with all sense of farther sufferings to
lose his Being for ever. This indeed is the mildest fate the Sinner can expect,
but a much more severe may be his doom.

II. This punishment of wicked Men is expressed by being cast into the lake of
Fire. Which some interpret, according to the literal sense, of Torment by real
fire. Others understand this to be a Metaphorical description of the unknown
miseries of the Damned. The truth seems divided between these two opinions. For
first, it is clear from St. Peter, that the Heavens and the Earth which are
now, are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment. 2 Ep. 3. 7. And
whatever operation this fire may have upon the Apostate Spirits, it will
doubtless affect the bodies of wicked Men with most painful impressions.

But secondly, This seems only the Prologue to a more tragical state which they
must enter upon when this Conflagration is ended, and of which a lake of fire
and Brimstone is only a representation. The miseries of Hell are described in
Scripture by the most sensible and painful things. And because the most
dreadful Idea of pain the mind can form, is the suffering by a raging and
devouring fire, therefore this Metaphor of fire is most frequently used. And as
for the lake of Fire and Brimstone so often mentioned in the Revelation, it
relates to the lake Asphaltites or the Dead Sea, the lasting Monument of those
showrs of Fire and Brimstone wherewith the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were
consumed. These and the like descriptions are lively Images and Representations
of Hell Torments, and signify them to be intolerable great, but they do not
express the true nature of them. This indeed is in a great measure unknown to
us, and the most affrighted imagination cannot reach the truth and terror of
them. For who can tell or conceive what evils and Miseries the wrath of God and
his vengeance on the ungodly comprehends.

III. By the Earth and the Heaven flying away from the face of him that sits on
the Throne, I understand the destruction of their present frame. I see no
reason from this or any other place of Scripture to conclude the utter
Abolition or Annihilation of the World. The matter and Substance of the Earth
and the rest of the Mosaic Creation will doubtless continue the same, but they
will receive a new form, or rather be rudis indigestaque moles, an indigested
heap without form or order. This Dissolution of things St. Peter speaks of, and
tells us that this wonderful Metamorphosis shall be effected by Fire, 2 Pet. 3.

Some are apt to fancy that this Conflagration of the World is in order to its
refining, and that the Heavens and Earth being purged by Fire, God will erect a
new World out of the old Materials for the seat and habitation of the Blessed.
But this is a mere Imagination and is directly contrary to Scripture, which
teaches us, that the Kingdom, which the Righteous must inherit was prepared for
them from the foundation of the World Matt. 25. 24. And as for the New Heavens
and the New Earth which St. John and St. Peter speak of, I have showed that
they do not signify the Creation of a New World after the day of Judgment, but
a New state of things in the old.

Others think this Conflagaation to be perpetual, and to be designed for the
punishment of the wicked who shall live and suffer in this Fire to Eternnl
Ages. This seems to have some foundation in Scripture, which speaks of the
condemnation of the wicked to everlasting Fire. But this fire to which wicked
Men will be condemned, is the same with that prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, which cannot be a Real One. For the evil Angels are spiritual
Substances, and have no sense of Material Impressinns If then the punishment of
the Devil and wicked Men be of the same kind, the means and instrument of their
Torment will not be Fire. And so this opinion of a burning World falls to the
ground The fire therefore at the day of judgment is not intended chiefly for
the punishment of ungodly Men though they, as I said before, will suffer by it,
but for the destruction or dissolution of the World, to which God will then put
an end and reduce it to its Primitive Chaos. And this dark, space out of which
the Earth and Heaven are fled away, I suppose to be that Blackness of Darkness
mentioned by St. Peter and St. Jude and which is said to be reserved for the
Damned. For thus of the Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, St. Jude, says verse. 6. that God has reserved them for
everlasting Chains, or to be bound in everlasting Chains under Darkness at the
Judgment of the great Day, Vid. Piscator in Loc. Mede Disc. 4. And the fate of
ungodly Men is the same, for to them is likewise reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever, verse. 13. And in this melancholy State of Darkness and
Horror, the Devil and his Angels, and all whose Names are not found written in
the Book of Life shall be tormented, and endure greater Miseries than the
mildest fears and jealousies of the most guilty minds can imagine.

Nisi in hisce talibus liberius paulo sentiendi, imo and errandi venia
concedatur, ad profunda illa and latentia veritatis adyta via nunquam patefacta
fuerit. Mede.

FINIS.
General Titles of Books Printed for Charles Brom.
GEographical Dictionary, Fol. L'Estrange's Divine Offices Fol. Bishop Wilkins
Real Character, Fol. Religious Conference between a Minister and Parishioner,
4to. Satan disrobed from his Disguise of Light, 4to. Case of the Quakers
relating to Oaths. Blomes History of the Bible with Cutts, 4to. L'Estrange, and
Browns Erasmus Colloquies, 8vo. Colberts last Will and Testament, 8vo.
Fundamental Charter of Presbytery 8vo. Sir Charles Cottons Planters, Manual,
8vo. -- Complete Gamester, 8vo. -- Scoffer Scoft, 8vo. -- Virgils Travistie,
8vo. -- Wonders of the Peake, 8vo. Centum Fabulae. The best Cutts in Octavo for
Common Prayers. Earbery against Deism, 8vo. Desdiers City and Republic of
Venice translated out of French by Fra. Terne Gent. 8vo. St. Evremonts Case of
the Duke and Duchess of Mazarine, 8vo. Scholars Guide from the Accidence to
the University, 8vo. Essay of Love and Marriage 12mo. Stitcht 6 d. Portuguese
Asia in 3 Vol. 8vo. Dr. Popes Select Novels, 8vo. Bishop Sprats Sermons, 8vo.
Plain Dealing Poulterer Stit. 8vo. 6 d. Fords short Catechism. Bish. Wilkins
Not. Religion, 8vo. Anatomy of the Elder Tree, 12mo. Reformed Monastery, or the
Love of Jesus, 12mo. Seven Love Letters from a Nun to a Cavalier. Sir P. Medows
Wars of Denmark, 12. Crumbs of Comfort 24. Godly Man's Companion 24. Guide to
Heaven 24. Guide of a Christian 24. Rule of Life 24. All the Pieces of the
Author of the Snake in the Grass. Bish. Kens Exposition on the Church
Catechism, or the Practice of Divine Love, 8 vo. Bish. Kens Manual of Prayers
for the use of the Scholars of Winchester College, and all other Devout
Christians. Bish. Kens Sermon at the Funeral of the Lady Mary. All L'Estranges
Tracts 4 to. Bromes Horace in English 8 vo. Bromes Songs 8 vo. Dr. Combers
Works. Dr. Combers Catechism. Christian Education of Children according to the
Maxims of the sacred Scripture, and the Introductions of the Fathers of the
Church, 8 vo.

