EDINBURGH, first May One thousand six hundred and seventy four Years.
THE WHICH DAY, the Lord Provost, Baillies, Council, and Deacons of Crafts,
being conveened in Council, together with many of the old Magistrates, and
Deacons, who were all warned personally, to the effect and for the special
affair aftermentioned, and calling upon the LORD for a blessing to their
endeavors, taking to their serious consideration, THAT FORASMUCHAS the Good
Town of Edinburgh being the chief and capital city of the kingdom, and the
place and seat where his Majesty's Parliaments and the Secret Council, and the
supreme courts and ordinary jurisdictions criminal and civil, do sit and are
holden; and, upon that occasion, the Estates of Parliament, Nobility and
Gentry, and other subjects, from all corners of the kingdom, must and do
frequently repair and do stay there for doing their affairs, and strangers from
other kingdoms, upon occasion of trade at Leith, do come and repair to the said
Town: LIKEAS, not only the public records and registers of the whole kingdom
are kept, but the rights, securities and writs of his Majesty's subjects, of
whatsoever quality, within the kingdom, concerning their lands and other
estates and interests of greatest importance, are brought, left and kept in the
said Town, in the Chambers, or in the hands of their advocates, clerks and
writers, for pursuit and defense of processes, and upon other occasions: AND
ALBEIT, upon the considerations foresaid, not only the citizens and
inhabitants, but his Majesty and the whole kingdom are concerned, that the said
Town be secured and preserved, as much as can be done by human providence, from
hazard, and in special from the danger and destructions of fire and burnings;
and, in order thereto, his Majesty's predecessors and Estates of Parliament
from time to time did make several good and excellent laws and acts of
parliament; and nevertheless the City is still obnoxious and subject to the
hazard of burning; and the reason is obvious, and inherent in the very
constitution and way of building of a great part of the same, and the front and
forepart of the most part of the houses, especially in the fore-street, being
built altogether with timber, and the vennals and closses being so narrow, and
the houses so thick and joined together, and there being many families lodged
in the several storeys of the respective tenements, so that when any house or
storey of the same, and especially upon the high street, does by negligence or
otherwise take fire, the whole tenement is in a short time destroyed; and the
dry timber being ready feuel to the fire, it does quickly increase, and is
carried to and does seize upon the neighbor adjoining tenements; as did appear
diverse times, when the Town, within these few years, was visited and afflicted
with great burnings, in diverse corners of the same, and most evidently in the
late burning upon the 14th April last; at which time a fire having been in a
low shop of a tenement in the fore-street, in the nightime, did in a very
short time become so dreadful and furious, that it did quickly destroy, not
only the said tenement, but seven other tenements, to the great loss and
prejudice, not only of the heritors but the inhabitants within the same, being
surprised in the night so suddenly and unexpectedly, that with great difficulty
and hazard they were saved, and did escape with their wives and children, with
the great and total loss of their goods and plenishing, and did threaten
destruction to the whole Town by the great violence and progress it had, if GOD
in his mercy and goodness had not set bounds to the same, and a tenement
entirely built with stone and lime had not made interruption. THEREFORE the
said Lord Provost, Baillies, Council, and Deacons of Craft ordinary and
extraordinary, together with the old Magistrates and the old Deacons of the
said burgh, by these presents, STATUTE AND ORDAIN, That when any house or
tenement are or shall be, at any time hereafter, ruinous or burnt in the roof
or uppermost storeys thereof, or that a considerable part of the same shall
happen to be ruinous or burnt, whether the same belong entirely to one heritor
or more or diverse heritors, or when any house or tenement shall be built from
the ground where there was no tenement formerly, within this burgh, Leith,
Canongate, or suburbs, viz. West-port, Potterrow or Pleasance, the same shall
be built in such a way as shall be most fit and suitable to the honor of the
kingdom, and for the ornament and security of the City, and of the inhabitants
thereof, and all others concerned. THAT IS TO SAY, That the front and
fore-parts, and other parts of the same, shall be built altogether with stone
and lime, and no part thereof, nor any fore-stairs of the same, shall be built
with timber: And it is desired and expected, That the heritors of such houses
as are built with timber may and will think it their interest and security,
that when they think it convenient, and they shall have occasion to repair the
same, that they be built with stone and lime. AND FURTHER, it is ORDAINED AND
DECLARED, That hereafter the vennals and closses within the said burgh shall
not, in any time coming, be obstructed or straightened with the putting out or
building of any fore-stairs where was none before the date of their presents,
seeing the said vennals are narrow, and are the King's common ways and passages
for the use of the lieges, and are not to be encroached upon by any fore-stair
or structure promoted or brought out beyond the buildings upon either side; and
where there has been any fore-stairs formerly built, it is ORDAINED, for the
preventing the hazard of sire, That where there is any occasion or necessity of
repairing the same, the said fore-stairs shall be built and repaired with stone
and lime, at least with plaster and tile, in the same manner and with the same
extent as they had formerly, and no further: And in case any person or persons
shall presume to contravene, or work or build contrary to the premises, it is
DECLARED, That the wrights and craftsmen that shall work or build otherwise
than is above ordained shall be severely punished and censured, and what shall
be wrought and built otherwise shall be demolished and taken down upon the
charges of the contravener. AND FURTHER STATUTE AND ORDAIN, That no craftsman
of this burgh, in any time coming, shall repair or build any houses or
tenements of land within the bounds foresaid, without first they acquaint the
Dean of Guild and his Council with the design of the said reparation or
building, to the end that a visit may be made upon the ground of the said
lands, that the heritors and others concerned may receive a warrant from the
Dean of Guild and his Council to repair or rebuild conform to the tenor of this
principal act in all points; certifying every mason, wright, or any other, that
does in the contrary, that they shall be liable in the penalty of one hundred
pound Scots money toties quoties they contravene their presents, by and attour
the punishment of their persons, at the discretion of the Magistrates. And the
said Lord Provost, Baillies, Council, and Deacons of Crafts, ordinary and
extraordinary, together with the old Magistrates and Council, by their
representing the body and community of the said burgh, and for their particular
interests, heritors within the said bounds, in sign and token of their consent
and hearty acquiescence to this present act, have subscribed their presents;
consenting to the registration hereof in the books of Council and Session,
Town-court or Council-books of Edinburgh, to remain therein ad futuram rei
memoriam: And constitutes (...) our procurators. Subscribed by us day and place
and year of GOD abovementioned. Sic subscribitur, James Currie Provost,
William Johnston Baillie, Ja. Justice Baillie, William Carmichall Baillie,
David Swinton Baillie, Robert Baird D G. James Sutherland Treasurer, John
Cuninghame, George Reid, John Smith, John Hall, George Drummond, Andrew Cheyne,
William White, Walter Borthwick, Thomas Robertson, Patrick Telfair, David Boid,
Cornelius Neilson, Thomas Broun, Thomas Campbell, James Broun, David Hunter,
John Calder, George Johnston, George Stirling, Alexander Reid, Patrick Clark,
Robert Newlands, Alexander Cowstane, Robert Mill, Alexander (...) Robert
Elliot, John Corse, John Smith, John Hamilton, Thomas Somervel, George Turnbul,
Lawr. Edmiston, Francis Burlex, John Penman, John Johnston, John Homilton,
James Abercromby, Thomas Fairholm, James Braden, William Stevenson, James
Graham, James Dick, John Watson. James Riddel, Thomas Kinkaid, Arthur Temple,
James Cleland, Walter Turnbull, Edward Clepian, John Somervel, Thomas M' Adam,
James Park, R. P. James Jamieson, James (...) Thomas Story, Patrick (...)
William Stevenson, William Hepburn, William Reid.

Follows a Consent subscribed by the Heritors.

WE under subscribing heritors and others, concerned in the houses and
tenements of lands within the City of Edinburgh and liberties thereof, taking
to consideration, That the Council of the said burgh, with consent of the old
Magistrates, and several neighbors of the same, has upon just and convincing
motives, and pregnant reasons, importing the public well, safety and security
of Edinburgh and liberties thereof, STATUTE and ORDAINED, That no houses nor
tenements of lands, which are or shall happen in any time coming to be ruinous
or burnt in the roof or uppermost storey thereof, or wheresoever a considerable
part is or hereafter shall happen to be burnt or ruinous, the same shall not be
rebuilt but with stone and lime, as the said act within written, of the date
the first May instant, subscribed by the said Council, old Magistrates,
Counselors and Deacons, containing several other useful clauses and articles
at length, bears; which act being read in our presence, and considered by us,
We do hereby cheerfully and heartily approve of the same, in all the heads,
articles, and points thereof, and INTERPONES our consent thereto, WITH THIS
ADDITION, That whenever the major part of the heritors of the houses,
tenements of land within the bounds foresaid, which are already built with
timber in the front and forepart thereof, shall think it convenient to build
it with stone and lime, in that case the rest of the heritors concerned in the
said houses and tenements shall be obliged to pay their proportion of the said
building with stone and lime so to be made, and that according to their
respective interests in the said tenements and houses: And in case the less or
minor part of the heritors shall not condescend to pay their proportions of the
said building with stone and lime as said is, then it shall be in the power of
the major part of the heritors to petition the Council of Edinburgh to cause
appretiate the value of the said houses and tenements at the sight of fifteen
sworn men to be appointed by them, that the same shall be paid to the less or
minor part of the heritors, and their parts of the said houses and tenements
shall in all time thereafter belong properly and irredeemably to the said major
part of the heritors; or that it shall be in the option of the said major part
of the heritors, who repair or rebuild as said is, to uplift the rents
belonging to the lesser part of the heritors, ay and while they be re-imbursed
of their proportionable part of the expense of the said building, according as
the same shall be taxed and modified by the Dean of Guild and his Council, or
by the Council of Edinburgh. AND DECLARES, That the major part of the heritors
are not to be reckoned according to the nunber of the persons heritors, but
according to their rents and interests in the said houses and tenements: And
further CONSENTS, That in all debates and differences that shall hereafter fall
out betwixt heritor and heritor, or betwixt heritor and neighbor, in the
matter of building allenarly, that the same shall be decided by the Dean of
Guild and his Council, or by the Council of Edinburgh, and oblige ourselves to
stand to their determination thereanent, without advocation or suspension AND
ALSO DECLARES That we consent, that the foresaid act, together with their
presents, be ratified by the act of the Secret Council. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we
have subscribed their presents with our hands, Edinburgh the fourth day of May
One thousand six hundred and seventy four years; and therefore humbly
supplicating that his Majesty's Privy Council might approve of the supplicants
procedure in passing the said act, and interponing their authority thereto.

THE LORDS of his Majesty's Privy Council having heard and considered the said
petition and act of the Town-council abovementioned, DO APPROVE AND ACCEPT of
the said Magistrates of Edinburgh their care and diligence in passing the said
act, wherein they have given evidence of their special care and zeal for the
safety and security of the said burgh of Edinburgh, for which they return the
said Magistrates their hearty thanks, and hereby INTERPONE their authority to
the said act, and ratify and approve the same in the haill heads, articles and
clauses thereof, AND ORDAIN the said act to be put in execution, conform to the
tenor of the samen, and to be observed and obeyed by all persons concerned.

Extracted by me, Al. Gibson Cls. Sti. Concilii. Extracted forth of the records
of the Town-council of Edinburgh by me GEORGE HOME.


