A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Existence and Providence OF GOD, From the Contemplation
of the Visible Structure of the Greater and the Lesser World.

In TWO PARTS.

The First, showing the Excellent Contrivance of the Heavens, Earth, Sea, etc.

The Second, the Wonderful Formation of the Body of Man.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. sometime Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John
Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, His GRACE THOMAS By Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, etc.
May it please your Grace,
HAving lately presented your Grace with a short Essay concerning the Causes
and Occasions of Atheism, I thereby in a manner obliged my self to dedicate
this following Treatise to your Venerable and Illustrious Name; for that was
but a Preparatory Introduction to this. It is certain your Grace has Right to
both, because you have showed your self a strenuous Asserter and Defender of
the True and Orthodox Faith concerning the Deity, and betimes exploded the
Vanity and Inconsistency of the Hobbian Creed relating to this Great Concern.
And not only before, but since your Arrival to the Metropolitan See, you have
signally owned and patronized this Cause which I undertake: and (on the
contrary) you have (as becomes your High Place) publicly discountenanced, and
given check to the Abettors of Atheism.

I profess my self to be one that abhors unnecessary Disputes, and loves a Free
and Ingenuous Latitude in Matters that are of an Indifferent nature. But when I
see the Grand Points of our Holy Religion shocked by Profane Assailants, when
I behold Impiety and Atheism lifting up their daring heads amongst us, I think
my self indispensably concerned (according to that Talent which the Divine
Goodness has been pleased in any measure to confer upon me) to grapple with
the Bold and Vaunting Adversaries, to make Opposition to their extravagant
Attempts, and to assert and defend that Cause which is the Basis of all
Religion, the Supporter of Kingdoms, and the Glory of our Lives. This is that
which I at present design, and humbly crave your Grace's Acceptance of what I
here offer.

But whilst I implore your Patronage, I will not apparently incur Your
Displeasure, (and at the same time Injure the whole Nation) by diverting and
detaining your Grace any longer: Wherefore I take my Leave of your Grace, and
am glad I have this farther Opportunity of publishing to the World that I am,

Your Grace's most bounden Servant, and dutiful Son, John Edwards.

The PREFACE.
I Could have presented the Reader with many more Observations on the
Particulars which I handle in the ensuing Discourse, especially on Animals, for
(besides what Remarks I have made my self) many Learned Enquirers not only of
Aristotle, Pliny, Aelian, Theophrastus, etc.
old, but Albertus Magnus, Gesner, Aldrovandus, Jonston, Willoughby, ^ay,
Lister, etc.
lately have given us a distinct and full Account of the Nature of them. But my
Business was to take notice only of the most eminent of them, and that so far
as they are evident Arguments of a Deity, i. e. of the Divine Wisdom in
contriving their Make and Structure. And on other Works of the Creation, I
could have expatiated much more than I have done; but it being not my Chief
Province, I did not think it would be expected of me, especially when that
which I have said is sufficient for my present purpose. Nor did I design a
particular Philosophical Account of all the things I treat of, because this is
to be found in the known Tractates of Physics. And as to the latter Part of my
Undertaking, I could have more largely insisted on the Parts of the Body, but
that had been to transcribe the Books of Anatomy. I reckoned it therefore
enough to give a Solution of the Main Phaenomena's in this Humane System, and
to bring all by rational Deduction to this Conclu^ion, that they are caused by
an Intelligent Mind.

If I cannot by this Attempt convince Atheists, (which perhaps is next to
blanching an Ethiopian) yet I hope I shall do something toward preventing the
Spreading of that pernicious Infection which they are the Authors of; I hope I
shall effect something toward checking the Progress of that Hellish Ferment
which works in the World at this day. It may be what I shall offer will be
serviceable to bridle the Insolence of those bold Men, and to make them recoil
and give back. It may be it will cripple and disable them, though they make a
shift to be upon their Feet. Perhaps it may give them a Mortification, though
they will not let us know so much. Or, if my Hopes fail me as to this, yet I
will not despair of Confirming, and Strengthening such who are really persuaded
of the Doctrine here treated of. I may be helpful to establish these Persons in
their Belief, though I cannot reclaim the Infidelity of others. But this is not
the height of what I aim at; for, besides what I have already suggested, my
Intention is that this Discourse should afford variety of matter to the
Religious for their Devout Contemplations. I have set the Greater and Lesser
World before them, and have so displayed the several parts of both, that they
may every where discern the Eternal Godhead. I have propounded those Visible
and Remarkable Topics whence pious Minds may infallibly deduce the Truth and
Reality of Providence, and the adorable Excellency of the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of God, and his other Divine Perfections and Properties which respect
Mankind. If I had not chiefly designed these Papers for such, I should not have
so often alleged the Holy Scriptures: which with the other sort of Men are in
no esteem, and are thought to have no Authority; no more than the Alcoran, or
some Legendary Tale. But all those that have a true Sense of Religion on their
Spirits, reverence and prize these Writings next to the Blessed Author of them;
and they know that it is proper to prove a God out of his Own Book. The Reader
may observe that I frequently make use of Scripture in setting forth Natural
things, those which appertain to the Heavens, Earth, Sea, etc. and the Body of
Man; because I would let the World see that this Holy Book is not only useful
as to Divine and Spiritual Matters, but even in respect of all sorts of Humane
Learning, which I have on another occasion amply proved. Having thus propounded
the Designs of my Undertaking, (and if I be successful in any of them, I shall
reckon it a great Happiness) I will enter upon the Work it self, by the
Assistance of Him whose Existence and Providence I am now to demonstrate.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
THE Argument of the following Discourse is suited to the Genius of those for
whom it is chiefly designed. God's Being and Providence are proved in General:
1. From the Harmony and Connection of the things in the World. Where is showed
wherein this Harmony consists, and how the Notion of Chance is baffled by it.
2. From their Excellent End and Designs, the chief of which is to be
serviceable to Man. Both Animate and Inanimate Creatures conspire in this,
being actuated by a Divine Director and Disposer. This ruins Monsieur Des
Cartes's Opinion, whereby he attempts the solving of all things by Mechanic
Principles. This also confounds his Denial of Final Causes in Natural
Philosophy. page 1.
CHAP. II.
The Author proceeds to a Particular Proof of the Divine Existence and
Providence from the Consideration of the Heavenly Bodies. The unrivaled Beauty
of the Sun. The Universal Usefulness and Benefit of it. Its Vast Dimensions.
The transcendent Swiftness of its Motion. Its Regular Course through the
Heavens. Where is largely discussed the Copernican Hypothesis concerning the
Earth's Motion, and is proved to be precarious; because, 1. It is grounded on
this Vnphilosophical Notion, that it is difficult and troublesome to the vast
Heavenly Bodies to be continually journeying and posting, and therefore the
Copernicans would free them of this great Trouble by laying it upon the Earth,
which they fancy can bear it better. 2. It confronts that Historical part of
the Bible, Jos. 10.13. Isaiah 38.8. In such a plain Narration of Matter of
Fact, and that of a Miracle, it is not to be supposed that Words are spoken any
otherwise than according to the Real Nature of the thing, and the Propriety of
Speech. 3. It proceeds upon an erroneous and mistaken Apprehension concerning
the Nature of the Earth, and the chief Inhabitant of it, Man: for both of them
are far greater than the Heavens in real worth and value. 4. We may as well
embrace the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which is an absolute Defiance to
our Senses, as this Opinion. Objections and Evasions framed from Custom, and
the moving in a Ship, answered. 5. If the Trembling of the Earth may be felt
(as all grant) then the Violent Whirling of it about must needs be more
sensible. Objections against this answered. Demonstrations which depend on the
Eyesight are fallible, and have been questioned by the best Artists. The
Modishness of the Copernican Notion tempts most Men to follow it. This is no
Temptation to the Author, who for the Reasons premised holds, that the Heavens
continually roll about the Earth, from that effectual Impulse which they at
first received from the Almighty Hand. p. 19.
CHAP. III.
The Oblique Course of the Sun, being the Cause of the Vicissitudes of Day and
Night, of Winter and Summer, which are so beneficial to Mankind, is an Argument
of the Divine Care and Providence. The Powerful Influence of the Moon evidences
the same. So do the Planetary Stars, and Fixed ones: which latter are eminent
for their Magnitude, Number, Beauty and Order, Regular Course, Use and
Influence; all which set forth the Wisdom and Goodness of the Beneficent
Creator. The Study of the Stars leads us to God. Astronomy Useful. p. 51.
CHAP. IV.
The things which are remarkable in the Space between the Heavens and the Earth
administer clear Proofs of a Deity; as the Air, the Winds, the Clouds, (where
the late Archaeologist is rebuked) the wonderful Ballancing of these latter:
their gentle falling down in Rain by degrees: the Usefulness of these Showers.
The Rainbow. Thunder and Lightning. Snow, Hail, Frost and Ice. p. 74.
CHAP. V.
The Frame of the Earth argues a Godhead. A particular Account of the Torrid
Zone, and of the two Temperate, and two Frigid Zones: especially the two latter
are showed to be Testimonies of Divine Providence. The present Position of the
Earth is the same that it was at first, whatever the Theorist (who confutes
himself) suggests to the contrary. Against him it is proved that the Shape of
the Earth at this day is not irregular and deformed; and that the Primitive
Earth was not destitute of Hills and Mountains. These are of considerable use.
The particular Advantages of them are recounted, and thence the Wise Disposal
of the Creator is inferred. p. 95.
CHAP. VI.
Vegetables are next considered, and their Different Parts enumerated, and
showed to be Arguments of a Divine Contriver. Their Fragrancy, Delightfulness,
Beauty. Their various Natures, Kinds, Properties. Their Usefulness in respect
of Food. Particular Instances of some Foreign Plants, viz. the Metla, the
Cocus-tree. They are serviceable for Physic. The Signature of some of them
declares their Properties, and is a Divine Impression. p. 117.
CHAP. VII.
God is to be found in the Subterraneous World. Where are Waters, Fires,
Metals, Minerals, to which latter belong Earths, Salts, Sulphurs, Stones both
Common and Precious. The Loadstone particularly considered, and the Author's
Opinion concerning it. He disapproves of the Total Dissolution of the Earth at
the Deluge, and gives his Reason for it. His Judgment touching Earthquakes and
Trepidations of the Earth. He invites the Reader to reflect with great
Seriousness upon the late Instance of this kind: and to that purpose offers
some Remarks upon it. Which he closes with a Devout Address to Heaven, to
supplicate the averting of the Manifestation of the Divine Displeasure in this
kind for the future. p. 137.
CHAP. VIII.
The Sea, with all its Treasures and Riches, is another Evidence of an
Omnipotent and All-wise Being. The several Sentiments of Writers concerning its
Ebbing and Flowing are examined. The Phenomenon is resolved into a
Supernatural Efficiency, and why. The Saltness of the Sea-Waters is in order to
the Preserving them from Putrefaction. The Sea is kept within its Bounds by an
Almighty Arm. God's Providence seen in making it both the Source and Receptacle
of all Waters. The Theorist's Conceit of the Primitive Earth's being without
Sea, refuted by Scripture and Reason. The great Usefulness of the Sea in
several respects. p. 162.
CHAP. IX.
The Wisdom and Power of God are discerned in the Formation of Living Creatures
that are Four-footed: which are distinguished according to their Hoofs, or
their having or not having Horns, or their Chewing or not Chewing the Cud.
Their Serviceableness in respect of Food, and Work or Labor. Instances of the
latter sort. Even Creeping and Grovelling Animals exalt their Creator. Fishes
(some of which are of a vaster Magnitude than any other kinds of Animals) show
the distinguishing Providence of God in the peculiar Structure of their Bodies,
in order to the Element they live in. Fowls are purposely shaped and contrived
for the particular use they were designed for. Their Food is sometimes
extraordinarily provided for them: and sometimes they are supported without it.
They are observable for their being Musical, for their imitating Man's Voice,
for their Beautiful Colors. Birds of Prey are generally solitary. The several
Incubations of these Creatures afford Matter of singular Remark. The wonderful
Make and Contrivance of their Nests speaks a Divine Architect. p. 182.
CHAP. X.
In the Smallness of Insects is displayed the Skill of the Divine Artificer. A
Fly is of a wonderful Make. The Omnipotent Deity is discernable in a Be, and
in a Silkworm. The Ant is more largely considered, viz. as to its
Indefatigable Industry and Sagacity: both which are celebrated by all sorts of
Ancient Writers. The admirable Artifice of the Spider in making and hanging her
Web, and catching her Prey. A Flea is the Workmanship of Divinity. Mites have
Organized Bodies. p. 202.
CHAP. XI.
It is from a Divine Author that all Animals are fashioned and contrived in
their Parts and Organs, in their Senses and Faculties, according to the
Employment, Use and End for which they are serviceable. The Natural Propension
in them to propagate their Kind is from God. So is their Sagacity. This latter
is voted for Reason by some Writers; who also attribute Speech to them. It is
proved that this is groundlesly asserted, and that Reason is the sole
Prerogative of those Beings that are capable of Religion. To those who object
the Uselesness, nay Hurtfulness of several Animals, (as if this were an
Argument against Providence) it is answered, 1. Though we are not able to
assign the Use of some Creatures, yet it does not follow thence that they are
useless. 2. The Creatures which seem most Vile are a Foil to the rest. 3. There
is some thing worthy of our Observation in every one of them. 4. Some of these
are Food for others. 5. Most of them are useful to Mankind in a Medical way.
The Author's Conjecture concerning the Benefit of Gnats, Fleas, Lice, Flies,
Spiders. Venomous Creatures carry an Antidote with them. 6. The most hurtful
Animals may be beneficial to Man as Crosses and Afflictions are, which are
welcome to the Virtuous. 7. That they generally do so little Harm, when they
are able to do so much, is a Manifestation of the Divine Care and Providence.
8. The Enjoyment of their Essence is from the Divine Bounty, which none ought
to repine at. 9. They are made use of by God sometimes to plague notorious
Offenders. Lastly, That any Creatures are Noxious, proceeds from the Sin of
Man, and the Curse which followed it: wherefore we have no reason to complain
of them, or to question the Goodness and Providence of God. The vast Numbers
and various Kinds of Insects are some proof of their Usefulness. All Creatures
are some ways Good, and made for some Use. Though we do not see their
Usefulness at present, after-Ages may discover it. p. 220.
CHAP. XII.
This Argument which has been used all along in this Discourse to prove a
Deity and Providence, was made use of in the Old Testament by Job, and by David
in several of his Divine Hymns, (which are distinctly Commented upon): by St.
Paul in the New Testament, by the Christian Writers of the succeeding Ages, by
Pagan Philosophers and Poets, whose memorable Testimonies are cited. The proper
Inferences from the whole are these; 1. We are obliged to own a Deity in the
visible Works of the Creation. 2. We have hence Encouragement to contemplate
the Creatures, and to study the Works of Nature. 3. By this Contemplation and
Study we should be induced not only to acknowledge but to worship, love and obey
the Omnipotent Creator, and to devote our whole Lives to his Service and
Honor. p. 246.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
THE Body of Man is more excellent and perfect than those of other Creatures,
as to its Stature, and several of its Organs and Vessels. This singular and
peculiar Workmanship is elegantly expressed in Psalm. Cxxxix. 14, 15, 16. which
Words are Commented upon. In the first Noble Cavity, viz. the Head, are
observable, the Skull with its Sutures and its Membranes, with which it is
lined; the Brain, the Face with its Forehead, Nostrils, Cheeks, Lips, Chin,
Mouth, to which latter belong the Palate, Uvula, Tongue, Teeth: The wonderful
Contexture, particular Use and Design of all which Parts are distinctly set
forth, and showed to be the Effect of stupendous Wisdom. Page 1.
CHAP. II.
The excellent Fabric of the Ear, and the several Parts and Organs which
contribute to the Sense of Hearing. The peculiar Structure of the Eyes; where a
large and full Account is given of their Humors, Coats, Muscles, of the
Eyebrows and Eyelids, and the Hair belonging to both. The transcendent
Usefulness and convenient Situation of this part of the Body. p. 26.
CHAP. III.
The Neck contains two Passages or Channels of a very admirable Contrivance,
viz. the Windpipe with its Larynx and Epiglottis, and the Throat or Gullet. The
second or middle Partition of the Body, viz. the Breast, is also showed to be
the Product of an omnipotent and intelligent Operator. The particular Use and
Serviceableness of the Lungs, and the peculiar Composure of them in order to
this. The proper Office of the Heart. Its Vessels for conveying of Blood. The
Circulation of this noble Liquor. The Swiftness of its Motion. The Situation of
the Heart. The useful Membrane which encloses it. The several Uses of the
Diaphragm. p. 42.
CHAP. IV.
The Frame of the third and lowest Region of the Body speaks a Divine Artist.
The convenient Position of the Stomach. Its wonderful Operation in the
Concocting of Food. The diverse Opinions of Writers concerning the Cause of it.
The Author's particular Sentiment. An Account of the Intestines, and of the
proper Uses of them. The several Passages and Conveyances of the Chyle. The
distinct Offices of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas. How this Lower Partition of
the Body is guarded and secured. The mutual and necessary Correspondence of the
Brain, Heart and Stomach, which are the principal Contents of the three Regions
of the Body. How by the Nerves and Animal Spirits conveyed in them, all Motion
and Sensation are performed in Humane Bodies. p. 58.
CHAP. V.
The several Kinds of Flesh, and how exactly fitted and placed in the Body
according to their several Uses and Purposes. Why the hinder part of the
Cranium is so strong and thick. The admirable Conformation and Contrivance of
the Vertebra of the Neck and Back. The particular Structure of the Hip-bones.
The Nature and Use of the Ribs. How smiting under the fifth Rib, 2 Samuel 2.23.
is to be understood. The peculiar Configuration of the Bones of the Hands. The
general Use of the Bones, together with the Marrow, of the whole Body. They are
numerous. The Nature and Serviceableness of the Gristles. A distinct
Enumeration of the several Sinks and Dreins which are made to carry off
excrementitious Humors. What is the immediate Matter of the Seed. What of the
Milk. The Author interposes his Opinion. The Lymphatick Vessels. The Pores of
the Skin. p. 81.
CHAP. VI.
The wonderful Formation of the Foetus in the Womb is an irrefragable Argument
of the Divine Wisdom and Power. It is so acknowledged by David, Solomon,
Hippocrates, Harvey, Glisson. Whether the Child all the time of its close
Confinement be nourished with Blood, or Chyle, by the Navel or by the Mouth. As
its living in the Womb, so its safe coming forth thence is the Effect of a
Divine Conduct and Providence. The Secret Parts are Proofs of a Wise and
Intelligent Creator. A Reflection on the whole. The Body of Man a Temple. The
great Variety of Workmanship in this Structure. St. Paul speaks like a Natural
Philosopher. Every thing in Humane Bodies shows wise Forecast and Design.
Though some of the Hypotheses proceeded on in this part of the Discourse should
prove faulty, yet the very Things themselves will always remain Arguments of
the Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness. The exact Symmetry of Man's Body proved
by several Learned Writers. The Exquisiteness of this Fabric is made use of as
an Argument for the Demonstration of a Deity by David, Job (whose observable
Words are paraphrased upon), Isaiah, the Great Apostle, the Christian Fathers,
Learned Jews, Gentile Philosophers and Physicians, several of the Moderns, as
Bartholine, Diemerbroek, Harvey, Glisson, Willis, Lower, Boil, Ray. p. 107.
CHAP. VII.
An Apology for Physicians: wherein there is given an Account why they commonly
lie under the Imputation of Irreligion and Atheism; viz. 1. From a Vulgar
Prejudice which has prevailed in the World, and that among Gentiles, Jews,
Christians. It had its first rise from that Averseness which was justly showed
to those who were only Pretenders to the Art, and abused this Noble Profession.
2. This Prejudice is partly nourished by the particular Deportment of the
Persons of this Faculty when they visit their Patients. 3. It may perhaps be
increased by observing how seldom (in respect of some others) they appear in
places of Public Devotion. 4. It may be occasioned by their Promiscuous
Converse. 5. They may by some be thought to have no Religion because they have
so much Philosophy. As for such of this Faculty as really favor Atheism in
their Speeches and Practices, this is not to be imputed to their particular Art
and Calling, for there are some very bad Men of all Professions. There are some
footsteps of Religion in the Prescriptions of Physicians. Galen was in his way
Devout. Modern Physicians have been Illustrious Examples of Christian Piety and
Devotion, and great Assertors and Patrons of our Holy Religion. A Physician as
such is disposed to be a Wise and Good Man. p. 133.
A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Existence and Providence of God, FROM THE Contemplation
of the Greater World.
CHAP. I.
The Argument of the following Discourse is suited to the Genius of those for
whom it is chiefly designed. God's Being and Providence are proved in General.
1. From the Harmony and Connection of the Things in the World. Where is showed
wherein this Harmony consists, and how the Notion of Chance is baffled by it.
2. From their Excellent End and Designs, the chief of which is to be
serviceable to Man. Both Animate and Inanimate Creatures conspire in this,
being actuated by a Divine Director and Disposer. This ruins Monsieur Des
Cartes's Opinion, whereby he attempts the solving of all Things by Mechanic
Principles. This also confounds his denial of Final Causes in Natural
Philosophy.

IT is certainly a great Proof of the Catholic Degeneracy of this present Age,
that the Minds of Men are generally averse to Religion and Virtue: but it is
yet a greater Evidence of this degenerate and vile Temper, that such Numbers of
them are backward to acknowledge the Divine Being Himself, and his Wise
Contriving and Managing of all things. Many Arguments have been made use of to
baffle this gross piece of Impious Folly, but still we find it is Rampant in
the World. Many Antidotes have been prescribed to expel this Poison, but yet we
see it is not rooted out, yea in some Places it grows more raging and
infectious. Even those who pretend to be the greatest Masters of Reason
industriously propagate this Contagion: that is as much as to say, the Men of
Wit confront and deny what all the Wise Heads in the World have acknowledged.
These latter, whilst they have been searching into the Works of Nature, have
been directly led to a Deity. For, as an Excellent Person says, Wisd. 13.5.
By the Greatness and Beauty of the Creatures, proportionably the Maker of them
is seen. The Works of the Creation show us the Creator Himself. These are
Nature's Bible, wherein we plainly read a God. Which occasioned Plotinus to
say, If the World could speak, and we could hear its Voice, it would certainly
utter these Words, God made me. This is the Subject of our present Undertaking.
And I make choice of this Argument before all others, because it is one of the
most Sensible nature, and therefore is fittest to be used when we deal with
those that are governed by Sense and outward Impressions only. This is an
Argument that they can feel and see, and have a bodily apprehension of, and
therefore there may be some Hopes of working upon them by it. The Wisdom and
Power of God are legible in the admirable Structure of the Universe. All
created Things bear the manifest Signatures of a Deity. The Existence of a
Divine Numen may be inferred from the Fabric and Contrivance of the World, and
all the Parts of it.

This is that grand Truth which I will insist upon: And, 1. More Generally, and
at large, I will prove that the Creation and Make of the World forcibly argue a
God. 2. I will instance in the Particular Works of the Creation.

First, To speak of the Works of the Creation in general, they are Arguments of
a Deity and a most wise Disposer of all Things, because, 1. They are so Exact
and Harmonious. 2. It appears that they are designed to some excellent Ends and
Purposes

First, We cannot but take notice of and admire their Exactness and Harmony.
(...).
The Works of God, says the excellent Philo, are so accurate that they cannot
possibly be found fault with, reproved or amended, because they are framed with
the most consummate Skill and Art. This mavelous Art and Wisdom in the Make
of every Creature, (even the least and meanest) in the Proportion, Beauty,
Distinction, and yet Fitness of their Parts and Organs, are so plain and
evident that they cannot possibly escape our Observation. This was the meaning
of Plato's Saying, that God does always act the Geometrician, that is, in all
his Works he keeps an exact Proportion and Harmony. Scan well the nature of
Things in the Universe, and you will see that there is a due Correspondence of
one Thing with another; all things are fit, suitable and agreeable: there is a
convenient and regular Subordination of one to another. The Clouds are
naturally in a Propension to fall upon the Earth and moisten it, and the Earth
naturally stands in need of these Clouds, and cannot bring forth its Fruits
without their Assistance; and therefore in time of Drought it seems with open
Mouth to call as 'twere for the Rain of Heaven, and afterward it gratefully
returns it in Vapors and Exhalations for the producing of Clouds again: These
Clouds and this Earth, with their Rain and Fruits, are absolutely necessary for
the use of Man and Beast, as appears from their impatient craving of these
Benefits when they are deprived of them. Thus God is said to hear the Heavens,
and they to hear the Earth, and the Earth to hear the Corn, Wine and Oil, and
they to hear his People, Hos. 2.21, 22. It fully, but briefly, expresses the
Mutual Agreement of the Works of the Creation among themselves, and the
Dependence of them all upon the Supreme Being. So the Difference of Sexes, or
the Constitution and Make of Male and Female in all Living Creatures, shows
that they have a respect to one another, that there is a Relative Tie and
Connection among them, viz. in order to the preserving of the Kind, and
increasing the Number of them, (Whence by the way we may infer that the Arabian
Bird which the Poets talk of, of which Sort they say there never is but one, is
a Fiction, for Nature designed the Propagation of the Species.) And in almost
innumerable other Instances it might be showed that there is this Natural
Dependence of one Thing upon another: Wheresoever we look we may espy this.
Hence we find that those profound Sages Pythagoras and Plato frequently
inculcate that all things are Linked together; there is an Affinity among
Beings in the World: All Things in Nature are akin to one another. And this
Heraclitus meant when he said after his obscure manner, (...), i.e. one and all
things in the World have a mutual Dependence, they are like the Body and the
Members: Their Perfection consists in their Relation to and Connection with one
another. This the Royal Philosopher often suggests, that the World is of one
piece. (...). Antonin.
All Things are tied together as 'twere by a Sacred Tie and Bond, so that
nothing is a Stranger to another: They are all coordinate, and adorn and
beautify the same World. Now this wonderful Sympathy and Cognation, this
Pulchritude and Consent of Things cannot be without an Eternal Mind. This
Excellent Order and Harmony of the World argue a Supreme Director. (...). De
Monarchia.
The Workman is known from the Work it self, as Philo says rightly; from the
Make of the World you may gather the Author of it: For (as he adds) no Exact
and Artificial Work is of Self-production. Wherefore from the Admirable
Artifice of the World's Composition, we may conclude that it was not from
Chance, not from a temerarious (but lucky) hit of Atoms.

What Beautiful and Stately Palace was ever known to be raised by Chance; and
how then can this Massy Fabric, this great Amphitheater of the World be
thought to have no other Rise? Which very Argument Plutarch long since used to
baffle those Men's fond Conceits who talked of Fortune in this Case. (...). De
Placit. Philosoph.
Nothing, says he, that is Fair and Goodly has a fortuitous Original, but is
wrought by some Art. He that sees an excellent Clock or Watch, made of so many
Wheels, etc. showing the Hour of the Day, and observes the orderly Motion of
it, will not say it was thus framed by Chance: How then can he have the Face to
say that the Sun which rules this Artificial Work is a Casual Product? Yea, how
can he be so impudent as to say that Man himself was but a By-blow? Shall an
Inanimate Machine be extolled as the effect of Art and Invention, and yet shall
the Artificer himself be voted to be from no such Principle? Surely Men of
Sense and Brains cannot but blush at such absurd Propositions. It was
incomparably spoken of Maximus Tyrius, (...). Dissertat. 3.
Be persuaded (says he) that this Universe is the Harmony of a Musical
Instrument, and that the Artificer of it is no other than God.

Though we should grant the World to have been Eternal, yet it is impossible
that that immense and eternal Matter should dispose it self into such beautiful
Order without some Intelligent Substance and Contriver. And therefore those who
are of Opinion that Aristotle held the World to be Eternal, yet confess that he
acknowledged it to be from God, and not by Chance. For it is unspeakably absurd
and ridiculous to say that mere Matter fell into this excellent Frame we behold
it in, and not from a knowing and designing Principle; for Casualty is without
Order, Rule or Certainty: Therefore the Fabric of the World must be from the
Wisdom of some Omnipotent Creator, or else we can give no account of the Order
and Graceful Disposition of Things, and of the Harmony of the World, which (as
Tota hujus mundi concordia ex discordibus constar. Not. Quaest. l. 7.
Seneca says truly) consists of discording and contrary Qualities. To this
purpose an ancient Christian Writer, speaking concerning God, has these Words,
(...), etc. Clem. Alex. Admonit. ad Gentes.
He has most fitly adorned the Universe, and has reduced the Discord of
Elements into Order and Concord, that the whole World might be Harmonious. And
the Permanency of this excellent Order shows its Author: Wherefore to that
Question, (...) Quaest. and Resp.
Whence does it appear that there is a God? Justin Martyr gives this Answer,
From the Consistency and lasting Order of Things in the World. The Laws and
Course of it have remained regular and constant for so many Ages: the Effects
are steady, methodical, and unalterable. This is that admirable (...).
Consequence and Proportion (as Philo calls it) which we may observe to be in
all Things, whereby they are indissolubly chained together, and continue with
an uninterrupted Series. The only account that can be given of this, is what
the same Author says, (...). De Plantat. Noe.
The Eternal Law of the Eternal God is the most firm and stable Basis of the
World, and all Things in it. Thus the Works of the Creation are a proof of the
Deity; their durable Harmony evince a God. Chance could not effect all these
great and wondrous Things, it could not produce such a Glorious Fabric,
neither can it uphold and sustain it: Wherefore we may infer that there is an
Omniscient Creator, a Wise Artificer.

Secondly, As the Admirable Order, so the Excellent End and Design of the Works
of the Creation demonstrate the Being of a God. Not only Men and Angels, which
are the Flower of the Creation, act for some End; but all other Creatures of a
lower Rank may be said to do so likewise: Even Things that are Inanimate and
void of Sense act for some Purpose. The Sun warms, and the Clouds moisten the
Earth, but not for themselves; and the Earth thus warmed and moistened produces
Herbs and Fruits, but not for it self, but for the several Animals which
inhabit on it, Man especially who rules over them. But this will not go down
with some, particularly the Theorist: Theory of the Earth, Book 2. chap. 11.
To say (says he) that the World was made for the sake of Man is absurd, and
better deserves to be censured for an Heresy in Religion, than many Opinions
that have been censured for such. And then in order to this he degrades and
defames Man in a most scandalous manner, (as if he were no Sharer in Humane
Nature himself) he makes him a very paultry Creature, a poor sorry Scrub; and
then at last he cries out (I wish he had forborne) Is this the great Creature
which God has made by the Might of his Power, and for the Honor of his
Majesty, (thus comparing the Almighty to Nebuchadnezzar) upon whom all Things
must wait, to whom all Things must be subservient? I delight not in quoting
such Passages as these, but there is a kind of necessity of doing so, that Men's
Minds may not be corrupted and debauched by such ill Language, which I hope may
be in part prevented by my cautioning against it.

And here, by the way, seeing I now have, and shall frequently afterward have
occasion to mention some Opinions of this Ingenious Gentleman, and to argue
against them; I do here once for all declare that nothing of this Nature is
done by me from a Principle of Contradiction, or a delight to oppose this or
any other Author's Assertions. No: I most solemnly profess and acknowledge that
I bear a due regard to the Wit and Invention of his Hypotheses, which are very
diverting and entertaining. But because I am verily persuaded that they are
defective as to Truth, I on that account offer a Refutation of them. But I
would not be thought to say any thing out of pique, or so much as an
Inclination to reflect with Contempt or Disgrace on any Man's Person or
Undertakings, and particularly those of the Ingenious and Learned Theorist. It
is wholly from a just and deep sense of their opposition to that great Standard
of Truth in this kind, viz. Moses's Writings, that I appear against them. And I
think it is a good and justifiable Employment to assert and defend the Mosaic
Verity: and whilst I am about this Work, I reckon I am in an Honorable Post.

That the World is made for Man, is no such daring Proposition as some pretend
it is. The Heavens above him, and the Earth beneath him, are for his Sake. Even
those former, the Heavenly Bodies, are made for him, or else you can never make
Sense of the Psalmist's Words, Psalm. 8.3, 4. When I consider thy Heavens, the
Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained, then I say,
What is Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest
him? Whence it is evident that these glorious Creatures (so bright, so
beautiful, so remarkable) were created and provided for the use and benefit of
Man, and that God shows how mindful he is of him, and how he delights to
visit him, i. e. to discover an extraordinary Kindness to him above all other
Creatures, by providing the World and all Things in it for him. It is true, the
Heavens are made for the Angels as well as Man; but yet we know that even these
excellent Beings (though they be of higher Nature that he) are Ministering
Spirits, and employed for the good of Mankind, especially of the choicest part
of them, the Heirs of Salvation. So that not only the Heavens, but the
Inhabitants thereof are for Man's sake. But it is enough for my present purpose
that the Sublunary World, and the Heavens (of which we are to treat) serve Man,
and were made for him. This the Stoics were great assertors of; and
particularly De not. Deor. lib. 2. and lib. de Officiis.
Tully, who was a Friend to that grave Sect, defends it. Man is as it were the
Center of the World in respect of Final Causes, says a Lord Bacon, Wisdom of
the Ancients.
profound Philosopher of our own. And though this be denied by Des Carts, and
some of late, (who would pretend to imitate him in that as well as in some
other Things) yet till there be assigned better Arguments for their Opinion
than we hitherto find, we have reason to hold fast our Proposition, that the
World was made for the Sake of Man. Even Inanimate Creatures are accommodated
to his use and service, and the whole Creation some way or other is for his
Good.

Yet it is certain that they have no Knowledge or Foresight, no Consultation or
Deliberation, and consequently can understand nothing of this End which they
are made and continually act for. Wherefore we must necessarily grant that
there is an Omniscient Principle that acts them, there is a wise and
understanding Being that directs and governs them. It must be ascribed to this,
and this alone, that irrational and dumb Creatures, yea such as have no
sensitive Perception, act so orderly, and with a tendency to an End: And this
they do not seldom, but constantly and perpetually. We see and observe that
there is an uninterrupted Course of the Sun and Moon, and other Heavenly Bodies
in order to our Welfare, which could not possibly be procured without them: And
we see and are convinced that other Senseless Creatures are directed to an End,
and miss it not: All Natural Agents (of what kind soever) have a regular and
fixed Tendency to what is profitable for the Universe. The short is, any Man
that is not wilfully blind may see that there is Design and Contrivance in the
World's Creation, and in all the Parts of it, and that there is an End pursued
even by those Beings which have no Sense or Reason: Whence we cannot but
conclude that seeing these are void of all Counsel, and consequently do not act
thus by any Counsel of their own; therefore they do it by another's. There is
some Intelligent Agent and Principle, there is some wise overruling Cause that
directs and governs them, and purposely produced them for such Ends and Uses.
Will not any understanding and considerate Man grant that this Director and
Governor is God; who as he is the Ruler, so was the Author and Architect of
the World? It was he that first endued them with such a Nature and Instinct,
whereby they tend to their particular Good and End, and also to the universal
Good of the World. Yea, those things which are contrary to one another,
conspire in one common End. We must be forced to give our Suffrage to what one
of the Ancients said, There is God, (...). Just. Mart. Quaest. and Resp. ad
Graec.
who has commodiously framed and ordered all the Parts of the Universe for the
advantage of the Whole: As they have their Existence from him, so they are
actuated by him. And it is utterly impossible to conceive that they can be able
to act as they do, i. e. for certain Ends and Purposes, unless there were an
higher Agent to direct them. The End and Contrivance of things undeniably prove
the Divinity, and confute blind Chance and Fortune, yea and Necessity too;
which latter is held by Spinosa, and accordingly Append. ad part. 1. Eth.
he asserts that God himself has no certain End or Design in what he does.

Thus whether you respect the Order and Beauty of the Creatures, or the End and
Design of them, it is evident that they are Arguments of a Deity. The whole
Frame of Nature cries out that there is a God: All the Creatures confess that
they are not of themselves, but from an Other. In vain has the French
Philosopher attempted to prove that we may give an account of all the
Phenomenon of the visible World from Matter and mere Mechanical Motion. I say,
in vain was this Attempt made, though I deny not that the Noble Author of it
has showed a great deal of Wit and Art in the Prosecution of it, and has said
more than any other Man ever did, or perhaps could in Defense of this
Hypothesis. But any Impartial Judge that has perused what the Learned Opera
Philosoph.
Dr. More has offered against it, will pronounce it to be a vain Enterprise,
and indeed utterly Unphilosophical. He has demonstrated that there is not any
necessary Causality in Matter, whereby such Effects are produced, that there is
no such immutable Law implanted in it, no such original and independent Power,
but that it is derived wholly from a higher Principle. By sundry Arguments he
irrefragably baffles the Notion of solving all Things by Mechanic Principles,
but by no Topic more effectually than that which I have propounded, viz. the
wise Contrivances in the Works of Nature. Mere Motion is no Designer, no
Contriver, therefore it cannot be the Cause of those Things which we daily see.
We must then rationally as well as necessarily infer an All-wise Being from the
Operations of the Creatures, for we see that they are directed to some End.

And as to what Des Carts says, that the Ends of the creating of things are
not known to us unless God be pleased to reveal them, I refer the Reader to the
Essay concerning the Notion of Nature.
Honorable Mr. Boil, who has professedly writ against this Doctrine, and has
with undeniable Demonstrations confounded it; that is, he has most clearly and
convincingly showed that the Ends and Designs of God in the Works of the
Creation are manifestly known, and in abundant Instances he shows that they are
most obvious and apparent. He denies not that in some of God's Works the Ends
designed are somewhat obscure, and seem to be beyond our reach; but then it is
as true that in most of them the Ends and Uses are manifest, and the exquisite
fitness of the Means is conspicuous. And (as he observes) by this way of
ordering and managing Things, the most wise Author of them does both gratify
our Understandings, and make us sensible at the same time of the Imperfection
of them. Indeed this must be said, that Cartesius's Opinion, viz. that the
Consideration of Final Causes, has nothing to do in Philosophy, is consistent
enough with his own Principles: for, if all that we see in the Bodies of
Animals, and elsewhere in the World, be merely Mechanical, then there is no
Contrivance, no Art, because he holds all to be the natural Result of Matter;
and consequently there is no End, and (which follows from that) there is no
Signature of Divine Wisdom in the framing of them. But this Conceit of his of
Mechanism has been justly exploded by all the great Masters of Reason who have
handled this Subject; and the excellent Person beforenamed has for ever
silenced that Opinion, if Convictive Arguments can silence it. Therefore Des
Cartes's denial of Final Causes falls to the Ground, because it has nothing to
support it now since that Foundation is removed. Mr. Boil has observed well
(not only like a Philosopher but a Christian) that this French Wit, by his
throwing aside Final Causes, has thereby deprived his Disciples of the chief
End of Natural Philosophy, which is to set forth the Praises of God, and to
admire his Goodness and Wisdom in the Fabric of the Universe. But if we will
truly Philosophize, we must by no means shut out the Consideration of the Ends
of the Creation, but we must with great diligence and study enquire into them,
and acquaint our selves with them: And then by seeing and observing the World
we shall learn to know a God, we shall be brought to acknowledge and adore an
infinitely wise Author who appointed all things their Ends, as well as gave
them their Beginning.

And now having thus spoken in General, I will descend to Particulars, and
consider the whole visible Structure and System of the World as to its several
Parts. Here we will contemplate, 1. The Heavens. 2. Those things which are
observable between the Heavens and the Earth. 3. The Earth. 4. The Sea. 5. The
Inhabitants that belong to these several Regions, Aerial, Terrestrial,
Aquatile. All these proclaim a God, an Omnipotent Supreme Being, a Wise and
Provident Governor.

CHAP. II.
The Author proceeds to a Particular Proof of the Divine Existence and
Providence from the Consideration of the Heavenly Bodies. The unrivaled Beauty
of the Sun. The Universal Usefulness and Benefit of it. Its vast Dimensions.
The trascendent Swiftness of its Motion. Its Regular Course through the
Heavens. Where is largely discussed the Copernican Hypothesis concerning the
Earth's Motion, and is proved to be precarious; because, 1. It is grounded on
this Vnphilosophical Notion, that it is difficult and troublesome to the vast
Heavenly Bodies to be continually journeying and posting, and therefore the
Copernicans would free them of this great Trouble, by laying it upon the Earth,
which they fancy can bear it better. 2. It confronts that Historical part of
the Bible, Jos. 10.13. Isa. 38.8. In such a plain Narration of Matter of Fact,
and that of a Miracle, it is not to be supposed that Words are spoken any
otherwise than according to the real Nature of the Thing, and the Propriety of
Speech. 3. It proceeds upon an erroneous and mistaken Apprehension concerning
the Nature of the Earth, and the chief Inhabitant of it, Man: For both of them
are far greater than the Heavens in real worth and value. 4. We may as well
embrace the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which is an absolute Defiance to
our Senses, as this Opinion. Objections and Evasions framed from Custom, and
the moving in a Ship answered. 5. If the Trembling of the Earth may be felt (as
all grant) then the violent Whirling of it about must needs be more sensible.
Objections against this answered. Demonstrations which depend on the Eyesight
are fallible, and have been questioned by the best Artists. The Modishness of
the Copernican Notion tempts most Men to follow it. This is no Temptation to
the Author, who, for the Reasons premised, holds that the Heavens continually
roll about the Earth, from that effectual Impulse which they at first received
from the Almighty Hand.

I Begin with the Heavens, that immense Space where the Sun and Stars are
placed, that vast Expansum which contains the Great and Glorious Luminaries of
the World (for I speak not any thing of Angels, the Blessed Inhabitants of this
upper part of the Creation; as afterward when I shall treat of Man I shall say
nothing of his Soul, because I have designed to discourse only of the visible
World.) These Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork, Psalm. 19.1. they tell aloud who was their Author, even the same who
is the Infinite and Bountiful Source of all Things. He framed this Molten
Looking-Glass (Job 37.18.) this Solid and Bright Mirror of his own Majesty,
that we might behold Him and his Perfections in it. And yet He stretched out
the Heavens like a Curtain, (Psalm. 104.2.) as a Vail to shroud as it were the
amazing Excellency of the Divine Glory from Mortal Eyes, although from thence
he distributes all the Tokens of his Liberality and Kindness to us. There is
nothing more evident than that the Heavenly Bodies were made for the good of
Mankind, i. e. to influence on the Earth, to shine, to give Rain from the
Clouds, to yield Heat and Moisture, etc. Which is expressed by their hearing
the Earth, in that forementioned Place Hos. 2.21. where God is likewise said
to hear them; for they do as it were by their natural Frame and Disposition
desire of God to be beneficial to the Earth, and the Inhabitants of it. And he
does hear (or as it is in the Hebrew) answer, and fulfill the natural
Inclinations of these Celestial Bodies, which have a tendency to Man's Good and
Advantage. And that the End and Use of them is to be serviceable to Mankind, is
clear from the first Institution and Appointment of them: God made two great
Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, the lesser Light to rule the Night:
He made the Stars also, Genesis 1.16. viz. to rule the Night. And what can we
imagine this Government of Day and Night to be for but to serve the Necessities
of Man?

Of these Celestial Bodies I will speak particularly, and first of the Sun,
that great and vast Source of Light, that glorious Eye of the World which
penetrates into the darkest Recesses on Earth, and lays them open and visible:
Though such is its Sovereign Majesty that it will let nothing be seen in the
Heavens but It self, it blots out all the Stars with its redundant and
unrivaled Luster; yea, such is its radiant Glory that it will not suffer us to
gaze upon it. That which is the Cause of seeing all things, will scarcely be
looked upon it self. This is the Prince of the Heavenly Luminaries, as Sol
siderum princeps, cujus luce omnia vestiuntur. Adv. Gent. l. 1. c. 18.
Arnobius speaks, by whom all Things are arrayed and decked with the Robes of
Light. This is emphatically called Job 31.26. and 36.32.
the Light, or the Fire, (for Vr signifies both) because it not only
illuminates but warms the World with its powerful Rays. Unto the former Quality
we are beholden for our Ability to see how to dispatch our Business and Work.
Our Bodily Eyes would be useless without this of the World, for they would
serve us to no purpose of Life: And the whole Earth would be but one dark
Dungeon. And it is not only for Necessity but Pleasure that this Light is given
us, for to it we owe the several beautiful Colors which ravish our Sight, for
these are the various Modifications of its Light and Splendor. From the latter
Quality with which this glorious Body is endued, the Earth receives all its
Fecundity and Fruitfulness, and all Animals their Vigor and Activity. For the
Sun is the grand Cherisher of all Things, the Common Parent of Life, the
Foster-Father of the World. Because of this transcendent Excellency the Pagans
ascribed Divine Nature to it. Yea, others (both Jews and Christians) though
they went not so high, yet were of Opinion that the Sun is an Intelligent
Being. This was the Apprehension of More Nevoch. l. 3. c. 29.
Maimonides, and of Problem^ de Creatione.
Manasseh ben Israel: And Cont. Cells. l. 5.
Origin long before these held the same. Which Extravagancy we can attribute to
nothing but their very high Esteem which they had of this glorious and
beneficial Gift of the Creator.

Next to its Beauty and Usefulness we might consider its stupendous Magnitude,
which calls for our Admiration, and commands us at the same time to admire with
a most profound reverence the Divine Immensity from whence it had its Original.
It is some thousand times greater than the Moon; and a hundred and forty,
others say a hundred and sixty, others say eightscore and odd times bigger than
the Earth, (for the Opinions of Authors are different about the Dimensions not
only of the Sun, but of the Moon, Stars, and Earth, their Computations varying
because their Hypotheses of the Heavenly System and the Distances of these
Bodies from one another are disagreeing;) but it is acknowledged by all that the
Body of the Sun is of a wonderfully vast Bigness; they all agree that it is
much above a hundred times larger than the whole Earth, and they unanimously
reject and explode Epicurus and that Philosopher of the Italian Sect, Laert. in
Epicuro and in Heraclito.
who held the Sun is no bigger than it appears to us to be.

Again, the admirable Motion and Course of this glorious Luminary require and
deserve our Contemplation: And here we shall plainly observe the Footsteps of
an Extraordinary and Divine Power. First, the Constancy of its Motion is matter
of Admiration: Whence it was (as In Cratylo.
Plato thought) that the Heavenly Bodies, and this more especially, were called
(...), as if their never-failing Course argued them to be Divine. And it
appears from (...) dicunt sidera (...) id est (...), quod semper in cursu sint.
Saturn. l. 1. c. 23.
Macrobius likewise that they had that Denomination from their incessant
Running; as if this were a stamp and impress of Divinity. Secondly, not only
the Perpetuity of the Sun's Motion, but the Swiftness of it is remarkable,
which is very elegantly expressed to us by the inspired Poet, Psalm. 19.5. He
rejoiceth as a strong Man to run a Race, he resembles some celebrated Athletick
that is famous for his Nimbleness of Feet, and always outruns those whom he
strives with, and wins the Prize from them. This Celestial Racer, as the
skilfullest Mathematicians inform us, runs 15 Degrees in an Hour; and seeing a
Degree in the Heavens is 15 German Miles, i. e. 60 Italian or English ones, we
may infer that he measures about 1000 Miles in an Hour. Though this Illustrious
Body be of that huge Bulk and Magnitude which I before mentioned, yet this is
its mavelous Speed and Career. Because of this great Celerity Wings are
attributed to the Sun, Mal. 4.2. (but applied in a Spiritual manner to the Sun
of Righteousness) he flies rather than runs. And in allusion to this is the
Psalmist's Expression, If I take the Wings of the Morning, Psalm. 139.9. i. e.
if I make as much haste as the Sun does when it sets out in the Morning, and
flies from the East to the West in a few Hours; or if I hasten as fast as the
Sunbeams do when at its rising they spread themselves over the Horizon. The
Rapid Motion of the Sun, the swift and sudden passage of its Light are its
Wings. The like manner of Expression is used by Lycophron, who speaking of
(...) Aurora, attributes Pegasus's Wings to it, (...),
It flew over a certain Promontory with the swift Wings of Pegasus. And for
this reason perhaps Pegasus is said by the Greeks to be the Son of Aurora.

But, Thirdly, The Regularity of the Sun's Motion is that which I shall chiefly
insist upon, and thence demonstrate that there is a higher Cause and Author
that gave it this orderly Progress. As it has a Monthly Motion through a
twelfth part of the Zodiac, and passes through the whole every Year; so it
every Day runs about the Earth. Though I know according to some late
Philosophers this Globe of the Earth is daily moved about its own Axis, as well
as yearly through the Zodiac. These Men have taken pity of this part of the
World which was thrust into the Center of it, and have set it up higher. And
the Sun, as if it were some malicious Spy and Betrayer of Secrets, is detruded
by them into the lowest part of the World, the Earth's former place. And
accordingly they tell us that the Earth turning round its own Axis in 24 Hours
from West to East, makes Day and Night; Day in that part which being turned
toward the Sun it receives the Rays thereof, Night in that part which is turned
from the Sun. And the Earth, besides this Diurnal Motion, has an Annual one,
they say; that is, in 12 Months time it goes round about the Sun: and hereby it
is that the Sun seems to be joined with or opposed to such and such Stars. But
though I dislike no modest and sober Assertions of Philosophic Heads, and I
reject no Hypothesis merely because it is New, (though I must needs say that
Pythagoras and one or two more of the Ancient Philosophers speak as if they had
believed such a thing) yet I find little reason to embrace this,
notwithstanding Copernicus has so many Disciples of late; yea though In his
Aurora.
Jacob Behmen (that this piece of Philosophy might be even Iure Divino) tells
us that he received the Doctrine of the Earth's turning round from the Spirit
by Revelation. I do not lay any stress (as some I find have done) on such
Passages of Scripture as that in Psalm. 104.5. He laid the Foundations of the
Earth, that it should not be moved for ever, and other Places which have
Expressions that denote the Stability and Fixedness of the Earth (though I must
needs say we ought to have regard to the very Phraseology of the Holy
Writings.) There is no absolute proof from these Texts, no more than there is
on the other side for the Rotation of the Earth, from such places of Scripture
that mention the moving of the Earth, or from the Etymology of the Hebrew word
Eretz Terra, which some derive from rutz currere. To which might be opposed the
Derivation of Vesta, which is one of the Names of the Earth, Ovid. Fast. l. 6.
Stat vi Terra sua; vi stando Vesta vocatur.
The Earth (which is the same with Vesta) has its Denomination from its
standing: Which by the way shows what was the Sentiment of the Ancients
concerning this matter; they verily thought and believed that the Earth stands
still. But, to pass this by, I am induced to disbelieve the Circular Motion of
the Earth after the rate that the Copernicans assert it, for these following
Reasons.

1. This supposes the Sun and the other Heavenly Bodies to be without Motion,
or to have a very inconsiderable one: For the grand Reason, you must know, why
they assert the rolling about of the Earth, is because they would free those
vaster Bodies of the Sun and Stars from this troublesome Motion. They would
save them the labor of such long Journeyings and Postings. It is more fitting
and reasonable, they say, that this Terrestrial Spot should be in perpetual
Agitation than that the huge and spacious Orbs of the Sun and Stars should
wheel constantly about. Yea, some of them have founded it upon a Culinary
Maxim, viz. That the Meat which is to be roasted turns round with and upon the
Spit (its Axis) before the Fire: But we do not see that the Fire turns round
about the Meat. Just so the Earth turns it self round to the Sun, to roast it
self, and who would expect any other thing? They are the very Words of a
Kepler. Epit. Astron. Copernic. l. 1.
great Astronomer. This is their Kitchin-Astronomy, and they talk more like
Cooks than Philosophers. If we would speak like these latter, we must confess
that this Rest (which they suppose) of those great Fiery Bodies is against the
very Nature of them, which is Active and Stirring, and tends to a
Circumgyration. Therefore it is an Unphilosophical Thought to imagine that the
vast Bodies of the Heavens stand still, seeing their very Nature is to be in
continual Motion. The Etherial part, and especially the Globes of Light are
made for Agitation, yea their Essence consists in it, for Fire is nothing else
but fine and subtle Matter in motion. Wherefore if we conceive aright of
Things, we shall apprehend it very reasonable to believe that the Celestial
Bodies are in perpetual Motion, and that they move not only about their Center,
but sally out into a Progressive Motion, and constantly remove from one Place
to another, at least in respect of the other Bodies that are about them, or are
in other Spheres or Orbits: For we do not now go upon the Notion which Des
Carts has of Local Motion, according to whom the Earth does not properly
move, but only its Vortex in which it swims; whilst the Earth it self is all
the time in perfect rest, because it changes not its Place, but continues in
the same Space it was in at first. But we deal not now with the Cartesians but
the Copernicans, who hold that the Heavens (properly speaking) stir not out of
their Place, but may be said to stand still; or however in comparison of the
Body of the Earth they may be said to have but an inconsiderable Motion: For
this is one Argument which is used by them for their Opinion, viz. That it is
not likely that such huge vast Bodies as these, and so many of them should be
set a moving, whenas the Earth is of a small Bulk in respect of them, and might
soon be turned about, and besides it is but one single Body. This has been the
constant reasoning (if I may so call it) of those that adhere to the Copernican
System. Galilaeus argues after this manner in his Dial. 2.
System of the World; and so Epit. Astron. Copern. lib. 4.
Kepler infers the Motion of the Earth from its Smallness, and the Greatness of
the Heavenly Bodies. Another Lansberg Progymnas.
great Mathematician uses this Comparison, The Earth is more easily moved
(says he) than the Celestial Luminaries, as a Mother with more ease can take
her Children and set them at the Fire to warm them, than she can remove the
Fire to them. Thus they all along fancy that it is a very troublesome thing for
these huge Globes to remove from place to place: They conceit that the
greatness of these Bodies makes them incapable of moving with ease.

But this is Unphilosophical, and therefore we may justly look upon the
Argument drawn from it as so too. What Man of unprejudiced Thoughts can
persuade himself that Geograph.
Varenius (who sums up in brief the Sense of all the Copernicans) discourses
closely when he says, It will appear that the Earth moves about its Axis, if
we consider the vast Magnitude of the Stars in respect of the Earth. The Sun is
above two hundred times bigger than the Earth, and the Fixed Stars are above a
thousand times bigger than it. Now, is it not more likely that the Earth moves
than that these vast Bodies move from Place to Place? I answer, No: the thing
is not at all likely, for the vaster these Bodies are, the more easy is their
Motion. This is plain, because where there are the more parts in Motion, there
the impulse is stronger and more vehement: And where there is this Vehemence
the Motion must needs be facile, it being put on with so much Strength and
Vigor; especially, if we remember that God impressed this Motion at the very
first, and so it is natural, and consequently is easy. This, I think,
sufficiently proves that they who argue from the Bigness of the Sun and other
Heavenly Bodies to the Stability and Rest of them, have no ground in Reason and
Philosophy. No: they talk after a popular manner, and because they see that
Bulky Persons do not stir about with that nimbleness which is observed in
others of a lesser Size, they think it is so with the Sun and Stars, or that
they are idle and lazy, and loath to bestir themselves. Or it may be they
proceed on that Vulgar Maxim, viz. That great Bodies move slowly. And because
that those of the Heavens are very great, they will not suffer them to move at
all; forgetting in the mean time that it is their very Nature to move, and that
their Make and Constitution prompt them to it.

Secondly, The Copernican Opinion seems to confront a higher Principle than
that of Reason. If we will speak like Men of Religion, and such as own the
Bible, we must acknowledge that their Assertion is against the plain History of
the Holy Book; for there we read that Jos. 10.13.
the Sun stood still in Joshua's time, and Isa. 38.8.
went back in King Hezekiah's. Now, this Relation is either true or false, (it
must be one of them): If it be the latter, then the Inspired Scripture is
false, which I take to be as great an Absurdity as any Man can be reduced to:
If it be the former, i. e. if the Relation be really true, then the Sun has a
Diurnal Motion about the Earth; for the Sun's standing still could not be a
strange and wonderful thing (as it is here represented) unless its general
course was to move. This any Man of Sense will grant. And so likewise the Sun's
going back does necessarily imply that it went forward before: And if it did
so, surely it moved. This I think no Man can deny, and consequently it is
evident that the Sun has a Progressive Motion, and goes from one part of the
Heavens to the other. If it be said (as it is suggested by some) that the Sun
only seemed to stand or to go backward, then farewell all Miracles, for they
may be only seeming Ones according to this Answer: Which is as much as to say,
There are no such things in Truth and Reality. If it be said (as I know it is)
that this manner of speaking is only in compliance with the Speech and Notion
of the Vulgar, I grant indeed that the Scripture speaks so very often, (as I
have Discourse concerning the Style of Scripture.
elsewhere showed from several Instances both in the Old and New Testament):
yea even when it makes mention of some of the Heavenly Bodies, the Expressions
are according to the Capacity and common Apprehension of Men, and not according
to the Accuracy of the Thing. So that I do not think that a Body of Natural
Philosophy, or a System of Astronomy, is to be composed out of the Bible; this
being designed for a far greater and higher Purpose: Yet this I say that
whenever the Scripture speaks after the foresaid manner, concerning these
things and several others, it does it in that manner that we may plainly see
that the Words are not to be taken strictly and properly, but only in a popular
way, as might be showed in abundant Instances. But it is not so here, for in
the forenamed Places we have Matter of Fact plainly and directly set down; we
are told what Prodigious Things happened in those Days, viz. that upon the
Request of Joshua the Sun stood still (as well as the Moon stayed): And that we
might not think that this is spoken popularly, and merely according to the
common Notion of Men, the very same words are repeated, and others are added to
convince us that they must be meant in the plain and proper Sense of them. So
the Sun stood still, yea in the midst of Heaven, and hastened not to go down
about a whole Day. All this is said to let us know that it was a Reality, and
not an Appearance; that what is here said is spoken properly, and not in
conformity to a received Opinion. And if it should be said that the Hebrew word
used in the former of these places is dum, which signifies to be silent, as
well as to stand still; any one that is not prejudiced may see that it is here
of the latter Signification: For in the next Verse gnamad stetit is the word,
and is applied to the Moon, and immediately after to the Sun: And the Seventy
translate it by (...). And so in the other place it is in plain and
intelligible Terms related that the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees
it was gone down: Than which there cannot be more perspicuous Terms to assure us
that the Sun it self really moved backward. Though vulgar Expressions are used
at other times by the Sacred Writers (which is readily acknowledged) yet in
such a Case as this, when there is a plain Narration of what happened, and when
it is a Supernatural and Extraordinary Occurrence, even a Miracle that is
spoken of, we cannot reasonably bring our selves to believe that they merely
conform to the Apprehensions of others, but we must needs be persuaded that
they speak according to the Nature of the Things themselves. The upshot then is
this, that the Sun moves round in a Diurnal Motion, or else we must hold that
the standing of it, and its going back were no Miracles. This to me is a very
considerable Argument, and I suppose will be thought so by those who reverence
the Holy Scriptures, and believe the Historical part of them to be true.

Thirdly, Men do not frame right Notions concerning this lower World and the
Nature of it, whilst they defend the other Hypothesis: For I find that they
have a very mean Opinion of this Terrestrial Habitation, such indeed as is both
unworthy of God, and of Themselves the chief Inhabitants of it. For tho the
Earth be a dull Sediment in respect of the Bodies of the Sun and Stars, and
though it be a shrivel'd Point in comparison of those vast Globes, yet this is
to be remembr'd that i^ far surpasses all those Celestial Regions, and whatever
is in them, because it is made the Seat of Man of whom God has so great a
Care, and to whom he bears so ineffable a Love. What are the Heavens in
comparison of this Glorious Creature? What is the Brightest Constellation in
respect of the Organized Fabric of Humane Bodies? What is the Sun if compared
with the Rational Soul of Man? God has signally honored and dignified the
Earth with making it the Receptacle and Dwelling Place of this his most Beloved
Favorite. I say most Beloved, for the Singularity of Divine Love was showed in
restoring Mankind, when the like Favor was denied to the Apostate Angels. The
very Glorified Saints above are but a Colony of this Earth, transplanted hence
to those Superior Habitations. Yea, the Angelical Spirits (next to their
attending on the Divine Majesty, and enjoying his more immediate Presence) were
made to be Servants to this Darling of his Love. He that considers this (and
whoever does not, reflects not on the Prerogative of his Nature) must be forced
to acknowledge that Man outshines all the World besides, and is crowned with
Glory and Honor above all other created Beings, and that the Place of his
Abode is a Palace, a Paradise: For it is made such by so Noble, so Divine an
Inhabitant dwelling there. He therefore forms a wrong Notion of this
Terrestrial World who does not prize it for the sake of the choicest Creature
in it, and because of the peculiar Privileges and Honors conferred upon it.
The Earth was purposely made by God to be the Residence of Man, who is the
Glory of the Creation; it was appointed to be the Scene of all Humane Actions,
to be the delightful Resort of Angels and Archangels, to be the happy Ground
on which the Holy JESUS (God and Man) was to tread, and to be the Stage whereon
the Blessed Millennium shall be celebrated. The Earth thus considered is not
inferior to the Sun, Moon and Stars; yea it far excels them: And though it be
much Lesser in Space and Quantity, yet in these forenamed respects it is far
Greater and Nobler than they. Therefore those who prefer these to that (in the
Latitude wherein I have represented it) esteem things by their Bulk and
Magnitude, and not by their real Worth. Of this number was our Countreyman
Gilbert, else he would not have said, De Magnete, l. 6. c. 3.
It is ridiculous that the Heavens should move for our sake, and for the sake
of the Earth which is so small a Globe. And yet observe the rashness of this
Writer, and of others who talk after this rate: Man is less than the Earth
(that I suppose they will not deny), why then is the Earth according to them
moved about for his sake? So they plainly confute themselves by this Argument
from the Bulk of the Bodies: Therefore let this be never mentioned again.

When we behold a King incircled with his whole Court, and attended on by
Officers and Guards, and a numerous Retinue, we cannot but acknowledge that all
these take up a great deal more room, and make a greater show than He does: Yet
they were all of them designed but to be his Attendants, and to be serviceable
to him, i. e. to his Royal Person and Government. Just so it is here, Man is
the King and Monarch of this Inferior World, Psalm. 8.6, etc.
God has made him to have Dominion over the Works of his Hands: He has put
all Things under his Feet: All Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the Beast of the Field:
The Fowl of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through
the Paths of the Seas. Thus God has placed him here to Rule and Govern; and
all the spacious Heavens round about him are but his Attendants and Ministers,
they are the Train of this Great Prince, whom God out of his Immense Bounty and
Philanthropy has made so in this Terrestrial World. And this Beloved of God,
this Minion of Heaven is fitly seated in the middle of the whole World, in the
Heart of the Universe, and is environed with Stars, and enclosed and protected
with a shining and flaming Guard. The Glorious Furniture of the Heavens is for
his Service as well as State and Royalty. Those vast Luminaries shine, those
lofty Flambeaus burn to give him light. Those Globes of Fire are to warm and
cheer him, and they all keep their constant Rounds for that very purpose. It is
true, they are larger and more splendid than Man, or whatever we see on the
Earth, yea than the Earth it self: But yet it is certain that they were all
made for the use of this Lower Region and Center of the World, they were
designed by God to be serviceable, yea tributary to it, and therefore they
continually move, and act, and are restless in their Service, whilst the Earth
stands unmovable to receive their Influence, and whilst Man sits still and is
waited upon by them.

I know it will be said that the Earth is of the same Make and Constitution
with the Moon and the other Planets, because they are Opake Bodies as this is,
and therefore this must be reckoned as one of them, and consequently deserves
not that Character which I have given it. But the Answer is easy, namely that
though we allow the Earth to have Affinity with the Planets in respect of its
Opacity, yet it follows not thence that they are equal to it in other regards.
If they could prove that Mercury and Venus, or the Moon it self are inhabited
by Mankind, then indeed they might have something to alledg to the purpose; but
this they are never able to do, and those who have attempted it have been
laughed at for their pains. The Voyage to the World in the Moon was a wild
Conceit; and it is a sign the Moon had an influence on the Author. There is but
one Stock of Mankind; and there is but one Earth that receives them and is the
Place of their Abode. This Dark Spot then (if you will so call it) is a
Peculiar, it is not to be likened to any other part of the Universe, for it is
the Only Habitation of the Sons of Men, who were so entirely beloved of God
that he himself became Man. Nay, it surpasses all the Planets in other
respects, for they are not stocked with Vegetables of all sorts, they are not
enriched with Metals and Minerals, they abound not with Animals of various
kinds. There are no such Things there as these which I have named: and he that
says the contrary let him prove it. There is therefore a great mistake in the
foresaid Allegation or Objection; for though our Earth may be said to be
another Moon if we speak of it as a dark and a solid Body, yet there is no
Likeness or Equality between them, if we consider the particular Honor done by
the Almighty to this part of the World, above all others besides, in making it
the Treasury of those things which I last mentioned, and also the
Dewlling Place of those choice Creatures who have the happy Privilege of being
loved and honored by him above all other Beings in the World. This is the
Notion I have of this Matter, and though I were not absolutely and infallibly
sure that it is true, yet I am certain it is very rational and accountable, and
I am sure no Man can disprove it: No, not he that has so publicly defamed and
libelled our Mother Earth, calling it mere Ruins and Rubbish, a broken and
confused Mass, an indigested Pile, a monstrous and deformed Lump, a little
dirty Planet, the Dirt and Scum of the Creation; for these are his cleanly
Expressions in his English Theory. This is not the Style of a Philosopher, nor
is it the Language of Truth, for in respect of the several things before-named
the Earth is the most excellent part of the visible and material Creation.

Fourthly, I would argue thus, Why do we check and gall (and not undeservedly)
the Romanists with this, that they deny their Senses in holding of
Transubstantiation? And why do we condemn the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
for being contradictory to the verdict of our Senses, if we hold that the Earth
turns round notwithstanding we have no notice of it in the least by our Senses?
Or, can we be wheeled and hurled about every minute as fast as we can imagine,
and yet have no Apprehension of it, not only not feeling the Earth move under
us, but not perceiving the Air at all moved, nor having any intimation of it by
our Sight, or any other Sense at any time of our whole Lives? This is not to be
believed, and why therefore do any take the Confidence to assert the Earth's
moving under them when they have no Sense of it? For this is certain that if
there be any such thing, it is the proper Object of Sensation. But if we admit
this which is so much against our Senses, we may as well embrace
Transubstantiation, which is a defiance to our Senses. If any Man
satisfactorily answers this, I shall be inclined to be a Copernican, and I
shall have a great Temptation to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I
mean upon this account of our Senses, though there are other Arguments which
are purely Theological that will for ever uphold the contrary belief in me. In
short, it is strange to me that such a considerable piece of Natural Philosophy
as this, the Object of which is Corporeal and Sensible, should have no proof
from any of the Senses. A Romanist with his Hoc est corpus may solve the
matter, but I do not see how this can be the Philosophy of one of the Reformed.

I know it is usually said that the Vertigo of the Earth is not felt, or
perceived by us, because we are used to it. Indeed if this Motion were slow and
gentle, this might pass for a good Solution: But when it is very swift and
rapid, fierce and violent, (as they suppose it to be) we cannot imagine that
Custom will wholly take away the Sense of it, and that we shall neither discern
it with our Eyes, nor with our Ears, nor with our Touch. That of the
Pythagoreans is as plausible, that the Heavenly Orbs make an Excellent Melody
and Harmonious Sound, but Men by their continual being used to it hear it not.
The Asserters of the Earth's Motion may in time persuade their Disciples that
there is such a thing as the Music of the Earth, as well as the Spheres.

But they tell us that we must not expect to be sensible of this Motion of the
Earth; for when a Man is in a Ship under Sail, suppose he be in a Cabin, or in
any place under Deck, he cannot discern whether the Ship moves. But this does
not reach our Case, for we are not cabin'd or shut up in the Earth. Besides, to
go on strait in a direct Line (as a Ship in its general Course) and to be
violently whirled about with the Earth, are two different things: For I suppose
they do not speak of a Ship in a Storm or Tempest, for then the Motion of it is
sufficiently discerned, though a Man were cooped up in his Cabin, or were
lodged in the Hold. And then, if we suppose a Man upon the Deck and looking
about him, whilst the Ship is under Sail; he can easily satisfy himself that
the Vessel moves, though there be no other Ships, or no Land in view: for if he
throws out into the Sea a Barrel, or any other thing that will swim upon the
Waters, he will discern by his Eye that the Ship moves, because that which he
cast into the Sea will speedily be out of his sight; and the faster he sails
the sooner will he lose the sight of it, whereby he certainly knows that the
Ship was in Motion. Therefore I conceive this Instance which they make use of
is not available to the End for which they produce it.

Again, I argue thus, the Motion of the Earth can be felt, or it cannot: If
they hold it cannot, they are confuted by Earthquakes, I do not mean those
that are accompanied with violent Eruptions of the enclosed Vapors, and a
downfall of some part of the Earth, which are more than a simple Motion, but I
mean the gentler Tremblings of the Earth, of which there are abundant Instances
in History, and we our selves have had one not long since; so that by too true
an Experiment we are taught that the Earth's Motion may be felt. If this were
not a thing that had been frequently experienced, I confess they might have
something to say, they might put us off with this, that it is not possible to
perceive the moving of the Earth: But now they cannot evade it thus; they must
be forced to acknowledge the Motion of it is sensible. If then they hold this, I
ask why this Motion also which they speak of is not perceived by us? Can a Man
persuade himself that the light Trepidation of this Element can be felt, and
yet the rapid Circumvolution of it cannot? Are we presently apprehensive of the
Earth's shaking never so little under us? And yet have we no apprehension at
all of our continual capering about the Sun?

But they will say it is another sort of Motion, and they say right: But then
they must remember that it is a Motion that is much more easily perceived than
the other, for that is but a Jogging of the Earth, whereas this is a fierce and
vehement Whirling it round about. Who therefore can deny that this is more
sensible than that? And if it be more sensible, what is the reason that
according to them we have no perception of it? Or, is a thing sensible, and yet
not the Object of Sense? Nay truly, if the Earth were hurled about in a Circle,
(as these Persons assert) we should feel it to our sorrow, for we should not be
able to keep our ground, but must necessarily be thrown off, and all Houses and
other Buildings would be thrown down, being forcibly shaked off from the
Circumference of the Earth, as things that are laid on a Wheel are flung off by
it when it turns round. This you will find demonstrated by Immortality of the
Soul, Book 3. chap. 13.
Dr. More.

It may be they will say there is a Difference between a Motion of a part of
the Earth (as in the usual Shakings of it) and of the whole (as in the present
Case): Yes, I grant a Difference, but it makes against them, for the the moving
of the whole Terrestrial Mass is a more sensible thing than the Motion of a
part of it only. Therefore if we feel this latter, we may feel the former, i.
e. we may feel it if there be any such thing: But it is evident there is no
such thing, because we have no Sense at all of it. For this and other Reasons I
take the Immobility of the Earth to be an unshaken Verity: I hold it a
consistent and rational System, that the Earth is the Steady Center of the
Material World, and that the Sun and Fixed Stars with their innate Light, and
the Planets with their borrowed one, wheel about this Beloved Spot, and as it
were dance round the Lord and Owner of it, who is the Glory of this Visible
World, and the Image of the Supreme Deity.

To conclude, having thus offered my Own Thoughts on this Controverted Point, I
commend the Reader to that Accomplished Mathematician and Astronomer Ricciolus,
who has in his Lib. 9. Sect. 4. cap. 16. usque ad finem Sect.
Almagestum Novum several Demonstrative Arguments against the Copernican
Hypothesis, which if they be well weighed will be found to have great Force in
them. However, this must be said that there is no certain Proof, there is no
Demonstration of the Contrary. For tho there is a Great and Celebrated
Experimenter in Philosophy, one whose profound Insight into all Mathematical
Secrets is well known to the World, and whose Integrity and Faithfulness in
discovering what he has found out are not to be questioned in the least,
though there is (I say) such an Excellent Person who has offered something to
demonstrate the Earth's Diurnal Circuit, for he found that there was a Mr. Hook
's Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth.
sensible Parallax of the Earth's Orb among the Fixed Stars, and particularly
that Fixed Star which is in the Dragon's Head; yet no Man knows better than
himself, that Demonstrations that depend upon Eyesight are fallible and
uncertain; witness the Disputes that have been between the Learned
Mathematicians about Parallaxes, and several other matters which are to be
judged by Sense. And this Gentleman himself declares that he was not fully
satisfied with the Observation which he made, because by reason of inconvenient
Weather and some other Causes he could not make it exactly. Therefore (with all
Deference and Respect paid to this Learned Gentleman and other Great
Philosophers of our own Nation) I look upon the Motion of the Earth as an
Ingenious Conjecture only: And so some of the most Judicious Writers have
granted it to be. But since several Persons of Eminency have appeared in its
behalf, and have espoused it as a true Hypothesis, it has been taken up for a
modish piece of Philosophy (for there is a Mode in Philosophy as well as in
Clothes or any thing else); and it h^th been thought ridiculous by some not to
conform to it. He is not reckoned a Virtuoso who makes not this one of the
Articles of his Philosophic Creed: I am verily persuaded that most become tame
Proselytes to this Opinion merely in Compliment to some considerable Persons
who vouch it. This is one of the chiefest Reasons why the Copernican Notion is
so prevalent. The other Doctrine, held by the Old Peripatetick Gentlemen and
others heretofore, is grown out of Fashion, and therefore is rejected. I speak
not this as if I were against any Ingenious Discovery or Invention be it never
so New (as I have already declared) or against any Philosophic Liberty justly
so called; but then I would have it bottomed on some good Foundation, something
that a Man can have some Notice of by Sense or some other plain way. But such
is not the Doctrine of the Earth's Circumrotation: Therefore it is (so far as I
have hitherto discerned) a precarious and groundless Opinion, and is the vain
result of Copernicus's Gigantick Attempt to raise up the Earth into the place
of the Heavens.

I will only add this one thing more, That seeing Copernicus's System begins to
be Vulgar and Common, I thence expect its Declination; for very few Opinions of
this Nature are long-lived when they come to be generally received. For the
Great and Ambitious Wits disdain what is Common, and much more that which is
Old, and accordingly will bethink themselves of some New System, or perhaps
will retrieve the Old One, which will seem New and Fresh at first, especially
from those Colors which they may give it. Thus the Opinions concerning the
Earth go round, when That stands still. For my part, I keep my Ground, and
presume to proceed upon the Ancient Hypothesis: Which yet is not altogether so
neither, for that Great Soul of Astronomy Tycho Brahe has maintained it,
making the Earth the Moveless Center of the World. About this moves the vast
Machin of the Heavens, being set into Motion by the Almighty Architect and
Framer of them. But especially the Motion of the Sun in so constant and regular
a Course, is to be taken notice of by us with Religious Admiration. If its
Revolution were stopped in any one part of Heaven, that side of the Earth which
is next to it would be scorched and burnt up, and the opposite side would be
all frozen, and by that means the whole Earth become useless; which may give us
some account of the great Blessing which we enjoy by the Circular Progress of
the Sun.

CHAP. III.
The Oblique Course of the Sun, being the cause of the Vicissitudes of Day and
Night, of Winter and Summer, which are so beneficial to Mankind is an Argument
of the Divine Care and Providence. The Powerful Influence of the Moon evidences
the same. So do the Planetary Stars, and Fixed Ones: Which latter are eminent
for their Magnitude, Number, Beauty and Order, Regular Course, Use, and
Influence, all which set forth the Wisdom and Goodness of the Beneficent
Creator. The Study of the Stars leads us to God. Astronomy Useful.

BUT more particularly and signally the Course of it in that Oblique Line which
it m^k^s is most remarkable, and is a Proof of a Wise Being who ordered it so
at first for the Good of the World. For I listen not here to what a D. Burnet,
Theoria Tellur.
Modern Author suggests, that the Heavens before the Deluge in Noah's time had
not the same Course they now have. As if the Eruption of the Flood had reached
to the Celestial Orbs, and had washed the Sun, Moon and Stars. We read that God
threatened to send a flood of Waters on the face of the Earth, Genesis 6.7, 13, 17.
but there is not a word of the Heavens being concerned in the Inundation. But
this Learned Writer tells us that not only the Earth but the Heavens are not
the same that they were at first, but that they have another Form and State;
and particularly he says that the Situation of the Earth in respect of the
Heavens is not what it was at the beginning. The Earth was not, says he,
Oblique to the Sun or the Axis of the Ecliptic, as it is now. But this is mere
surmise, because it is apparent that the present Situation of these Bodies is
most convenient and useful, and would well become the Paradisiacal State. For
it is this, and this only that causes an Inequality of Heat and Cold, from
which proceeds a Variety of Seasons. Hence are Spring and Autumn, when the Sun
touches the Equinoctial, and makes the Days and Nights of an equal length twice
a Year: Hence are Summer and Winter, when the Sun visits the Tropicks, and its
Rays either fall perpendicularly upon the Inhabitants, or when it is removed at
the greatest distance from them. This is the effect of the Oblique Posture of
the Sun to the Earth, whereby this latter is kept in good temper, and made
serviceable for the use of all Creatures that proceed from it or inhabit on it.
It is this Vicissitude of Seasons that makes the Earth pregnant and fruitful,
and gives Life and Increase to all Vegetables and Animals: Whereas a continual
Winter or Summer would be destructive to them. If the Motion of the Sun were
straight and direct through the Equator, Heat and Cold would be
disproportioned, they would be either too much or too little, and consequently
the generation and growth of all Fruits and of all living Creatures would be
hindered, and infinite Inconveniences would follow. (Of which I shall have
farther occasion to speak, when I come to treat distinctly of the Earth).

Wherefore we are obliged to take notice of the singular Care and Providence of
God in this present disposition and posture of the Heavens: We have reason to
applaud the Divine Wisdom in the Language of the Psalmist, Thou have made
Summer and Winter, Psalm. 74.17. This is a plain and sensible Demonstration of a
Divine Superintendency. There were some of old who fancied that the Gods Plut.
de Isid. and Osir.
subtracted their Influence in the cold part of the Year: And particularly it
was the Conceit of the Phrygians that God slept in Winter, but awaked in
Summer. This was the effect of their gross Ignorance and Inconsideration, for
it is certain that to an Intelligent and Considerate Man it will appear that
Winter has its Conveniences proper to it, and those no less than what the
Summer has: Both are requisite for the Good of Mankind, because thence
proceeds the Alternate Diversity of Seasons, which is of so great use. This
excellent Order and Succession of Times, which are distinguished by a constant
Variety, were alleged by the ^uid cum ordo temporum ac frugum stabili
varietate distingultur? nonne auctorem suum parentemque testatur? Ver ^^que cum
suis floribus, and aestas cum suis messibus, and autumni maturitas grata, and
hibernae olivitas necessaria, etc. Minur. Fell. in Octav.
Ancient Christians as an undeniable proof of a God. And the Gentile World was
forward to own and celebrate that Wise Benefactor: Horat.
Qui mare and terras, variisque mundum
Temperat horis.
Now, we cannot deny that these Different Seasons depend wholly upon that
Position and Motion of the Sun which I have been speaking of. If this Bright
Luminary should leave the Ecliptic, and make its Course in another Line
without Obliquity, these would presently cease, and thereupon this Lower World
would soon be in Disorder and Confusion. Wherefore a Dr. Brown, Vulg. Er. l. 6.
c. 5.
Wise and Observing Writer thought he had reason to spend a Chapter in setting
forth the Wisdom of God in the Site and Motion of the Sun.

The orderly Succession of Day and Night, which is from the Diurnal Motion of
this Lamp of Heaven, does no less argue the Divine Wisdom and Conduct. Once in
four and twenty Hours all People in the World, excepting a few toward the
Poles, have a Day and a Night. And this latter, which is the Shadowing of the
Earth, when the Sun is gone from us, is as useful and necessary as the former.
For (as a Dr. Brown, Cyrus 's Garden, chapter 4.
Great Naturalist speaks) were it not for Darkness and the Shadow of the Earth,
the Noblest part of the Creation had remained unseen, and the Stars in Heaven
as invisible as on the Fourth day when they were created above the Horizon with
the Sun, and when there was not an Eye to behold them. Again, Night is not only
for Rest and Cessation of Labor, which is absolutely requisite for Mankind and
other Creatures, (except those wild Ones, those Beasts of the Forest, Psalm.
104.20. who creep forth when it is dark, and lay them down in their Dens when
the Sun arises, and so turn Night into Day, and Day into Night); but for the
cooling and refreshing of the Air, and moistning the Earth, and for receiving
the proper Influences of the Moon and other Planets, and of the Fixed Stars,
which as they show themselves, so they exert their Vigor most strongly in the
Absence of the Sun. Wherefore the Royal Psalmist joins both these together, as
equal Instances of God's Power and Providence, The Day is thine, the Night also
is thine, Psalm. 74.16. And to the same purpose again, Psalm. 65.8. Thou make
the outgoings of the Morning and Evening to rejoice, i. e. both these do praise
and celebrate the Honor of their Maker, and do as 'twere rejoice in it. There
is not certainly a more convincing Argument of the wise Direction of an
Almighty Being than this Daily Progress of the Sun, in so much that he is said
to know his going down, Psalm. 104.19. i. e. by the guidance of an All-knowing
Actor he sets and rises in that place and at that time, where and when we see
he does.

By the same Superintendency its Monthly and Annual Motion is performed: By
this it takes up its several Mansions and Lodgings as it were in the Signs
through which it passes: By this it compleats its Course through its several
Stages in its Circuit about the World. Which is thus expressed by the Psalmist,
His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit to the ends of
it, Psalm. 19.6. He travels just so many Degrees toward the North, and as many
toward the South every Year, and is bounded on both sides by the Tropicks,
beyond which he never stirs. Therefore from this tekuphah, (which we render
Circuit) this stinted Revolution, the Jewish Masters call the Tropicks
Tekuphoth. Who is there that does not find himself as 'twere forced to believe
a God when he considers these things, which cannot possibly be without an
Intellectual Guide, without a Principle that acts from Wisdom and Counsel? Yea,
after all, if the Copernican Hypothesis should be true, i. e. if the Earth
rolls about on its Center, and so turns it self to the Sun in its various
Positions, yet still there are the same Effects of this that there were of the
other Revolution; the Good and Benefit of Mankind are promoted, and the Power
and Goodness of the Great Benefactor are declared.

Secondly, The Moon, though it be the lowest of all the Planets, and about 40
times less than the Earth, yet it is a Psalm. 89.37.
Faithful Witness in Heaven of those foresaid Perfections of the Deity. It is
but an Opake Body, it is but the Sun Reflex'd, it is no other than a (...).
Plut. de Orac. defect.
Celestial Earth, or an Earthly Star (as some Philosophers of old styled it.)
Though this is to be said, that it is not properly an Earth, i. e. it seems not
to be a Body wholly Dark, as is evident in the Eclipses which it is incident
to, for then we may discern its whole Body. Therefore it is not altogether
destitute of Light, it has an intrinsic Glimmering of its own. But because
this is very faint, the Lunar Body may be reckoned as Opake. But
notwithstanding this (which the more signally advances the wondrous Power of
the Creator) it has a mighty Influence on this Inferior World and all things
in it: So that we could no more be without this than without the Sun. And this
powerful Influx which is of such use, yea of absolute necessity to us, is
increased or diminished (either of which are requisite accordingly as there is
occasion) by its Different Postures and Figures in which it appears to us. For
in its going round our Earth (by Copernicus's leave) it turns it self variously
to the Sun, whence it is necessary that according to its various access to or
recess from that Luminary, more or less of its enlightened half be turned toward
us, and that it appear in diverse Phases and Shapes; by which means its Virtue
is communicated in a manner proportionable to our several needs: Especially
when this Lunar Body is in the Full, i. e. when all that part which is toward
us is replenished with Light, all Plants and Animals, the Air, the Earth, and
the whole Ocean (which is observed to swell at that Season) feel its Power and
Vigor. Whence as you read of the precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun, so
also of the precious Things put forth by the Moon, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Some of the
choicest and most valuable Products of Nature are from the particular Influence
of this Second-Hand Sun, which most officiously supplies the place of the
Other, and makes some amends for his absence, by being a Remedy (as Sidus in
tenebrarum remedium ab natura repertum. Not Hist. l. 2. c. 9.
Pliny speaks) against the Night's Darkness in several parts of the World: And
to that purpose it dispatcheth its Course through the Zodiac every Month
without fail.

Thirdly, The Stars, both Planetary and Fixed, attest a Divine Numen. The
former of these are distinguished from the latter by their particular Color,
Motion, Size, and Distance from us. Venus is clear and bright, and goes through
the Zodiac in a Year; and is less than the Earth 6 times: And yet is the
biggest next to the Sun and Moon, as to appearance. Mars is of a Fiery Hew, it
passes through the 12 Signs in the space of 2 Years; and is less than the Earth
13 times. Jupiter is fair and coruscant; is bigger than the Earth 14 times, and
is many Years making its Passage through the Zodiac. Mercury dispatcheth his
Revolution in a Year, and is 19 times lesser than the Earth; and is the least
Planet as to sight. Saturn is of a pale Color; this slow-paced Planet is 30
Years performing its Course, and is 22 times Larger than the Earth. Some of
these Planets as Venus and Mercury, are Pages or Lackeys to the Sun, and never
go far off from it: But the rest, as Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, are not so tied
to attendance on their Illustrious Master: They can go farther off, and ramble
six Signs from the Sun, and so be Opposite to it. And as there are these
Primary Planets, so there have been Secondary ones discovered of late, viz.
four about Jupiter, and two about Saturn, which have their peculiar Motion
about their Primary and Central Planets: And both of them are situated and
governed by Him that gave them their Nature. But as to the Situation of these
Planets with respect to the Earth, and as to their Motion and Magnitude, there
is a great disagreement between the Ptolomaeans and the Copernicans: And Tycho
differs from both these, and then comes Des Carts and disagrees with them all:
Therefore what has been said before as to any of these, must be submitted to
those that are able to judge of these Hypotheses.

Then as to the Fixed Stars, which in the Inspired Book are justly called the
Stars of God, Isa. 14.13. because of their Greatness and Height; for in the
Sacred Style God's Name is frequently used to express what is Great and
Excellent. And such are these Heavenly Bodies, which are so many Suns at a
distance from us; for those Fiery Globes are of the same Make with the Solar
Body: And if they were as near to us as this, they would appear not inferior
in Bulk and Brightness to it. These Vast Lights are so remote from us, that
Telescopes (which magnify the Planets after a great rate) make these seem no
bigger to us, or very inconsiderably. And this is one cause of their
Scintillation; they are so far off that their Rays are much more refracted than
those of the wandering Luminaries. They quake and tremble because of the
different Mediums they appear through: Though this Twinkling may arise also
from the greater Fulgor of these than that of the Planets, which causes a more
vehement Vibration on the Eye. The Least of these is far greater than the whole
Earth; and one of the Largest Size is a hundred times bigger: And so this Globe
of the Earth and its whole Vortex are inconsiderable, and shrink into nothing
if compared with those innumerable Orbs above us. This stupendous Magnitude
argues the Greatness, yea the Immensity and Incomprehensibleness of their
Maker. And if it be asked, Whence is that Fuel for those vast Fires, which
continually burn? Whence is it that they are not spent and exhausted? How are
those Flames fed? None can resolve these Questions but the Almighty Creator,
who bestowed upon them their Being; who made them thus Great and Wonderful,
that in them we might read his Existence, his Power, his Providence.

Nor is their Number less admirable; which exceeds our mean Arithmetic: And
therefore to tell the Stars is mentioned as an insuperable Task, Genesis 15.5. God
promised to make Abraham 's Seed as the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 26.4. which if
compared with Genesis 13.16. will be found to be of the same import with making
his Seed as the Dust of the Earth, which is innumerable. It is true, the
Constellations (a certain numer of Fixed Stars which are together, and seem to
make up several particular Figures or Representations) are but sixty four, viz.
twelve in the Zodiac, twenty nine in the Southern Hemisphere, and twenty three
in the Northern One. But if we speak of the Fixed Lights which belong not to
any Constellation, they are not so easily reducible: For though there are not
above one thousand and four hundred of these visible to the Eye, according to
the largest Accounts given us by Astronomers, (who likewise tell us that our
Northern Hemisphere is the most remarkable for them, for as there is more Earth
in this part of the World than in the other, so there are more Stars) yet it is
granted by all that there are more of them than are apparently seen; for by
reason of their unconceivably vast Distance from us, and because they are
Lesser than the rest, they are Invisible. But the Curious and Inquisitive
continually discover them, and when they have more perfect Glasses they will
discern more, and every day add to their Number, and yet acknowledge that their
full Number is not to be told, but by Him whose Prerogative it is to tell the
number of the Stars, Psalm. 147.4.

And He it was that gave them their transcendent Beauty which so ravishes the
Eyes of Beholders. For though that of the Apostle be true, One Star differs
from another Star in Glory, yet every one of them has its peculiar Luster, and
all of them together have a Common Glory. But the Theorist was not of this
Mind, for he tells us, Theory of the Earth, Book 2. chap. 11.
That they lie carelessy scattered; as if they had been sown in the Heaven like
Seed, by Handfuls; and not by a Skilful Hand neither. What a beautiful
Hemisphere would they have made, if they had been placed in Rank and Order; if
they had been all disposed into regular Figures, and the little ones set with
due regard to the greater? Thus he: And it is no wonder that he who finds fault
with the Earth's Deformity and Irregularity, finds the same in the Heavens: For
nothing of God's Creation (no not Man himself) pleases him. But this I will
say, though those Balls of Liquid Fire may seem to be set in the Heavens in a
careless manner, though they seem to be scattered and thrown about the spacious
Sky, yet without doubt there is Care and Exactness in the placing of them: They
are ranged in an excellent Order, though we apprehend it not, nor can we,
because we have but an imperfect view of them. As well the single Stars as the
several Constellations have a due and orderly Position, though the Numerousness
of them hinders our discerning of it. The Glorious Canopy of Heaven is set so
thick with Glittering Lights that we are not able to give an account of the
just Figure of them: And yet, because we cannot see them All, we are not able
to judge of the excellent Proportion of them. Yea, it is not to be doubted that
even those smaller Lights with which the Galaxy is so powdered and bespangled
are all marshalled according to their proper Stations, and are thereby rendered
very Beautiful, though we have not yet found out Engines to give us a
Conviction of it. This is the meaning of Job's words, chapter 26. v. 13. By his
Spirit he has garnished the Heavens; for the Stars are the Garnishing and
Adorning of them. And thence according to Varro and Pliny Coelum is qu.
Coelatum, finely wrought and engraven, exquisitly carved with artificial
Workmanship. Which occasioned that of Cicero, Quanquam ad mundi cohaerentiam
pertinent, tamen and spectaculum hominibus praebent: nulla enim est
insatiabilior species, nulla pulchrior. De Not. Deor.
Though the Stars (says he) be necessary parts of the World, and appertain to
its Consistency, yet this likewise is true that they were made to be looked and
gazed upon by Mankind, who cannot possibly entertain their Sight with a more
insatiable and beautiful Object. And Seneca says rightly, Ipse mundus quoties
per noctem ignes suos fudit, and tantum stellarum innumerabilium refulsit, quem
non intentum in se tenet? Le Benefic. l. 4. c. 22.
Who will not be ravished with the sight of this Glorious part of the World,
when in a clear Night it displays all its Glittering Fires, and shines with
such an innumerable Company of Stars? In every one of which the Image of the
Creator is plainly to be seen.

Again, Their Regular Course speaks their Author. That a few of them have
liberty to wander, yet so as not to transgress their Bounds, and that all the
rest are so Fixed that they move not from their Stations, is the product of an
unerring Wisdom and Providence. But when I say that these are thus Fixed, it is
not to be understood as if they were not in Motion; for they all move, and that
from place to place, but in an equal and steady Posture, and all at the same
Time, and so they keep the same Distance continually from one another: As, if a
great Number of Men should run all at the same time, but some behind and others
before, and the rest on this and that side, and observe a due and equal
Distance from one another; it may properly and in the strictest Sense be said
that they move Progressively, i. e. from place to place, though all the time
they are not farther off nor nearer to one another. That the Motion and
Revolution even of the Erratick Lights are exact and precise, constant and
unalterable, is evident from this that the very Minute of their Oppositions,
Conjunctions and other Aspects, as well as Eclipses, can be foretold a hundred
Years before they come to pass. And not only the Planets but the whole Host of
Heaven (as they are called) keep their Ranks, and observe an exact Order.
Manilius.
Nec quicquam in tanta magis est mirabile mole
Quam Ratio, and certis quod legibus omnia parent,
Nusquam turba nocet, nihil ullis partibus errat.
In which Words the Poet represents these Heavenly Bodies as endued with
Reason, because they are so exact in their Courses. But though this was too
high a Flight, and is Poetry rather than sober Philosophy, yet thus far we are
upon a true and solid Bottom, that it is the work of Reason and some
Intelligent Principle, that they all obey the Laws that are set them, that the
great Crowd of them is not prejudicial, that being so Numerous they do not
thrust one another out of their Ranks, and run into Disorder and Confusion.
Tanta dispositio, tanta in servandis ordinibus temporibusque constantia non
potuit aut olim sine provido artifice oriri, aut constare tot seculis sine
incola potente, aut in perpetuum gubernari sine perito and sciente rectore,
quod ratio ipsa declarat. Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 5.
Such an excellent ranging of them (as an Ancient Writer of the Church speaks)
such a constancy in observing their Orders and Seasons could not be at first
without a Provident Artist, or so long be preserved without a Powerful
Intelligence inhabiting as it were in them, or be perpetually governed without
a Skilful Ruler, as Reason it self declares. This was the Foundation, it is
probable, of the Harmony of the Heavenly Spheres held first by Pythagoras, then
by Plato, afterward by Macrobius, Boethius, and even our Venerable Bede. The
admirably Exact and Uniform Motion of these Bodies, the Constant Order which
they keep in their Revolutions and Periods, are the true Harmonick Music and
Concord of them. This is thus expressed by B. Ricciol. Almagest. Nov. Vol. 2.
a Great Artist, There is no one, though but meanly learned in Astronomy, that
will not acknowledge, upon his attentive considering the Order of the Heavenly
Bodies, a certain kind of Harmony in the Distances and Motions of the Planets.
And a Dr. Brown, Cyrus' s Garden, chapter 5.
Great Man, of a very inquisitive Brain, thought so, or else we should not have
had these remarkable Words from him, Could we satisfy our selves in the
Position of the Lights Above, and discover the Wisdom of that Order so
invariably maintained in the Fixed Stars of Heaven; could we have any light why
the Stellary part of the first Mass separated into this Order that the Girdle
of Orion should ever maintain its Line, and the two Stars in Charles's Wain
never leave pointing at the Pole Star, we might abate the Pythagorical Music
of the Spheres, the sevenfold Pipe of Pan, and the strange Cryptography of
Gaffarel in his Starry Book of Heaven.

Lastly, In the great Usefulness of the Stars we may see the Footsteps and
Impressions of the Beneficent Creator. As he gives the Sun for a Light by Day,
so he appoints the Ordinances not only of the Moon but of the Stars for a
Light by Night, Jer. 31.35. And these Ordinances shall not depart from before
him, ver. 36. they are of perpetual use for affording Light in the
Night-Seasons, and they are on other accounts unspeakably beneficial to
Mankind. The Fruitfulness of the Earth, the alternate Succession of the Seasons
of the Year, our Bodily Constitutions, and in part the Dispositions of our
Minds, our Health, our Life, depend upon the Influence and Virtue of the Stars.
Hist. of the World, Chap. 1. Sect. 11.
Sir W. Rawleigh has suggested very excellent things on this Subject. Our
Divine Poet expresses his Sentiments in this Matter thus, Mr. Herbert's Poems.
Of Providence.
And if an Herb have Power, what have the Stars!
Doubtless our Plagues and Plenty, Peace and Wars
Are there much surer than our Art is sure.
It is not to be doubted that the Ministry of these Heavenly Bodies is made use
of in the Government of this Inferior World. They act continually upon it, and
nothing is done without their Influence. God has set the Dominion of the
Heaven in the Earth, Job 38.33. Which is an irrefragable Text to prove that the
Celestial Bodies have a Virtue and Power on all Things Below: Both those which
are Animate and Inanimate do someways feel the Operation of them. Which proves
the First and Original Disposer of them to be a Rational and Intellectual
Agent. This is he that makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the Chambers of
the South, Job 9.9. This is he that made, and therefore (as himself says, Job
38.31, 32.) is able to bind the sweet Influences of the Pleiades, (the Seven
Stars whose Influence is felt in the Spring) and to loose the Bands of Orion,
(which is most predominant in the Winter, and produces Storms, etc.) and to
bring forth Mazaroth in his Season, (the same perhaps with Mazzaloth, Planetae,
2 Kings 23.5. for Lamed and Resh are often changed for one another: but the
Rabbis call the Twelve Signs by the name of Mazzaroth) and to guide Arcturus
with his Sons, i. e. the Constellation called Septem Triones, the Wain, the
Bear, together with the other Stars and Constellations of this Southern
Hemisphere; which are called his Sons. And in Amos 5.8. He that makes the
Seven Stars and Orion is the Periphrasis of God. And we are bid there to seek
him who does this, we are to worship God because of the Works of the Heavens.
His making them (and together with them constituting the Seasons of the Year)
invites us to acknowledge and seek him. The Heathens went too far, and wildly
asserted these Heavenly Bodies to be Gods: But then we rightly use them when we
argue a God from them. And this we may easily do because they set forth the
Wisdom of God, and the other Excellent Attributes belonging to him. This is the
work of Astronomy rightly improved: It points at the Creator, and conducts us
to him, as the Wise Men of old were led to our Savior by a Star. I speak not
of that vain Pretense to the knowledge of all sorts of future Events by
Inspection into the Stars, which some Impostors talk much of, and would make us
believe is a Real Science: This has been exploded by all the Wise and Sober
Heads in every Age. And it might be observed that those who have been most
addicted to this Judiciary way of consulting the Stars, and have confided in
it, have felt the Folly of it most signally. Their giving credit to it did
procure their Ruin, as we see in Julius Caesar, Pompey, Nero, Julian the
Apostate, and several others that might be named of a meaner Figure. Their fond
trusting to this Science (falsely so called) proved fatal to them, and rendered
their Ends unfortunate: But the Study of the Stars is not to be blamed, the
Astronomical Art is harmless and innocent, yea it is useful and advantageous:
For by help of this we climb the Heavens, and scale the Ethereal Battlements,
but with a Success different from that of the Ancient Giants; because they
fought the Gods (as the Poets talk), but we find out the True One by
contemplating the Starry Bodies. We come acquainted with the great Nomenclator
of the Stars, Psalm. 147.4.
He that calls them all by their Names, and enabled Adam (as a very Vossius de
Theol. Gentil. l. 2. c. 35.
Learned Man thinks) at the same time that he gave Names to the Creatures here
Below to do the same to these Above; by which Names they were wont to be called
by the Patriarchs, some of which remain in the Bible, as Gnas, Chesil, Chimah,
Job 5.9. Amos 5.8. but most of them are lost. We step from Orb to Orb, and
measure the vast Heavens, and rifle the several Vortices, and make new
Discoveries in those Celestial Regions, and thereby frame fresh Arguments of
Divine Wisdom in contriving the World; and we extort an acknowledgment of a
Deity even from the Irreligious, and such as are most averse to the Notion of a
God. For from our Enquiries that Assertion of the Learned Philo is made good,
(...). De Monarch.
Whatever is contained in the Heavens is made and fitted with the greatest
Reason and Congruity: There is nothing but what is founded on the most rational
Grounds. And we arrive to the Determination of that Wise Roman, Quid enim
potest esse tam apertum tamque perspicuum, quum coelum suspicimus, coelestiaque
contemplari sumus, quam esse ^liquod Numen praestantissimae mentis quo haec
reguntur? De Nar, ^eor. l. 1.
What can be more plain and evident, when we behold the Heavens, and all Things
belonging to them, than that there is a Numen of a most excellent Understanding
by whom these Things are ordered and governed? And a little after, he comes to
this Final Result, Esse igitur Deos ita perspicuum est, ut id qui neget vix eum
sanae mentis exist^^mem.
That there is therefore a God is so plain that for my part I look upon the Man
that denies it to be out of his Wits. For the Frame and Contrivance of the
Heavens (which is the Subject I have been insisting upon, and now am finishing)
are sufficient to persuade any Man of a sound Mind of the Existence of an
Invisible but Wise Being, who is the Author and Contriver of this excellent
System of the Upper World. So little reason had Alphonsus X. K. of Leon and
Castile, Author of the Astronomical Tables that bear his Name, to utter those
blasphemous Words, (as we find related by Lipsius and Spondanus, and others)
that he could have mended the Fabric of the World if he had assisted at the
Creation, especially he could have ordered things better in the Heavens. This
was that Alphonsus (as Mon. l. 1. c. 4.
Lipsius observes) who was deposed from his Throne, expelled his Kingdom, and
died hated of all Men. Hist. Hisp.
Mariana says he ran mad, being reproved by an Hermit for uttering the
forementioned Words; but whether that be true or no (as there may be some
Ground to question it) it is agreed that he was a most unhappy King, he was
dethroned by his own Son, and About A. D. 1284.
died of Grief and Melancholy. But though he thus impiously blasphemed the
Creation, yet he was not so sottish as to deny a God, the Artificer of all
these Works that we behold: Which yet our Atomical and Chance-Philosophers will
not be induced to assert or believe.

CHAP. IV.
The Things which are remarkable in the Space between the Heavens and the Earth
administer clear Proofs of a Deity; as the Air, the Winds, the Clouds (where
the late Archaeologist is rebuked) the wonderful Ballancing of these latter:
Their gentle falling down in Rain by degrees: the Usefulness of these Showers.
The Rainbow. Thunder and Lightning. Snow, Hail, Frost and Ice.

NOW let us go down from these Lofty Battlements of Heaven to behold the things
that are between this and the Earth. Let us descend from the Etherial to the
Aerial Region, where still we shall find every thing declaring a Divine and
Omnipotent Creator. The Air, the Clouds, the Winds, and all the Meteors preach
a Deity. The Air is the necessary but noble Instrument of Man's Subsistence in
the World. We breathe by it, and so it is the most necessary of all the
Elements, because without Respiration there is no Life. The (...).
Greek word which signifies to breathe has but two Letters, and those are the
first and last of the Greek Alphabet. The Air or Breath by which we breath is
our Alpha and Omega; we began our Life with it, and we end it without it: For
this is that whereby the Fuel of Life is at first kindled and afterward
maintained. This also was made to transmit to us the Light, Heat and Influences
of the Sun and Stars, and is the Medium and Conveyer of Colors to the Eye, and
of Sounds to the Ear, and is the Vehicle of all wholesome Smells, of all
fragrant and delightful Odours for the Refreshment of our Spirits. This is of
perpetual use to all Creatures whether Vegetative or Animal. And if we would
be Curious we might observe here the Elastick Power or Spring of this Element,
the native Self-Expansion of this vast Body, whereby it flies out and seeks to
be at Liberty upon the removal of all Circumambient Obstacles: Which a Noble
Philosopher of our Age has improved to very good purpose, and therein
discovered the Wonders of the Creation.

The Winds are the Stream and Current of this Element, and are caused by the
Condensation and Rarefaction of it, which are procured by a lesser or greater
degree of the Sun's Heat. But sometimes this Boisterous Meteor is bred by
Vapors and Exhalations rising out of the Earth or Waters, and then generally
it is most vehement and loud, it is most swift and rapid, on which latter
account we have mention of the Wings of the Wind, Psalm. 18.10. But both the
gentle Gales and stormy Blasts are useful at their several Seasons, viz. to
fan, clear and purge the Air, and to prevent the stagnating of it, to dispel
unwholesom and noxious Vapors, especially at Sea, and in very wet Soils; to
dry up excessive Moisture after great Rains, to qualify the scorching Heat of
the Summer, to cool those Regions which are most liable to the Sun's
perpendicular Rays (and accordingly it is well known that there are Briezes, i.
e. fresh Eastern Winds which constantly blow about Noon in the hottest
Countries, even under the Equator, and mitigate the excessive Heat). They are
welcome and refreshing to Trees and Plants and Fruit, both as they bring Rain
to water them, and fair Weather to ripen them. They are serviceable at Sea for
Ships, yea of such necessity that Navigation could not be performed without
them. And they are useful for several considerable Purposes at Land, for the
Needs of Man's Life. The Winds therefore may be reckoned as no contemptible
Instances of God's Care and Providence toward Mankind. Whence these are
attributed to Him alone by the Inspired Prophet, Jer. 10.1^.
He brings forth the Wind out of his Treasures; the Treasures of Sea and Land
that afford a plentiful stock of Exhalations, which being either rarefied by
Heat, or condensed by Cold, stir and move in that manner which we either feel
or hear. He makes the Weight for the Winds, as it is elegantly said of him Job
28.25. There is such a certain Order and Appointment concerning every one of
them, (whether they be the Cardinal Ones from the Four Quarters of the World,
or those that are Intermediate and Collateral) that they may be said to be
weighed and poized. They are always in such a Posture as he pleases, and their
Place and Motion together with the Effects of them are exactly determined.

Let us behold the Clouds, the visible and constant Witnesses of an Almighty
Power and Wisdom. They are moist Vapors drawn up and thickened into Water in
the middle Region of the Air: therefore they are called the Waters above the
Firmament, Genesis 1.7. i. e. above the great Expansum of the Lower Region of the
Air (for there is another Firmament mentioned, Genesis 1.17. the Firmament of the
Heaven, or Ether, where God placed the Stars). So that if we distinguish
between the Aerial and Ethereal Firmament, (which we ought to do) we shall
reconcile the Controversy which has been among Writers concerning the Rakiang,
the Expansum mentioned by Moses, which divided the Waters that are under it, i.
e. the Sea, from the Waters that are above it, i. e. the Clouds. The not
observing of this has occasioned that vile Notion which we find vented by the
Archaeologist, who tells us, Archa^olog. Philos. cap. 8.
That Moses makes Waters above the Heavens or Firmament, to comply with the
vulgar Conceit of the People, that God Almighty has a Storehouse of Rain
there, and so sends it down thence to them on the Earth. I am heartily sorry to
see such ill Words fall from the Pen of a Christian Writer. They not only
import that Moses willingly and designedly fosters the People in their
erroneous and false Apprehensions concerning God's Works, but they make a Mock
of a plain Truth, viz. that the Heavens or Clouds are the Receptacles or
Storehouses of Rain, and were appointed by the All-wise God to be so. The
Heaven is expressly called God's good Treasure (or rather Treasury) whence he
gives Rain, Deuteronomy. 28.12. And we read of the Treasures of Snow and Hail, Job
38.22. (We should rather translate it Treasuries, as the same Hebrew word is
rendered in Psalm. 135.7. where also it is applied to a Meteor, as it is here).
And what are these Treasuries and Storehouses of Rain, Snow and Hail, but the
Clouds, from whence these Meteors descend? And these Clouds (as any impartial
and considerate Man must needs grant) are the Waters that are above the
Firmament, or Aerial Heaven. So little reason had the foresaid Writer to look
upon these as the mere Imagination of the Vulgar, and to think that the
Inspired Penman makes mention of them in mere Compliance with the conceited
People. Whereas it is rational to believe that the Chapter wherein this Passage
occurs is a plain Narrative of what was done at the Creation, and therefore we
are to understand it in a Literal and Historical Sense. And we are told by
Tycho Brahe in Epist.
One who was as great a Judge in this Case as any that can be named, That
although Moses in this Chapter treating of the Creation of the World does not
unlock the Secrets of Astronomy, because he writes to a People that understood
not those things, yet he delivers nothing here but what may be granted by
Astronomers themselves. This was the Determination of that Noble Dane, that
Wise Philosopher and Mathematician, and it is a smart Rebuke to our New
Antiquary in Philosophy. We may then, notwithstanding what he has vainly
suggested, admire the Divine Providence in placing those Waters above the
Firmament, and we may reckon them as a singular Contrivance of the Omnipotent
and Merciful Creator. To supply which constantly he causes the Vapors to
ascend from the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 135.7. to be drawn up from all the
farthest parts of the World for this purpose.

And when they are mounted up into the Skies, he admirably poizeth them, so
that they fall when and where he pleases. A late Ingenious Philosopher tells
us of an Instrument whereby we may know the Weight ( i. e. the degrees of
Gravity and Levity) of the Air, Clouds and Winds. But we are certainly informed
from the Infallible Writings that this is effectually done by an Almighty Hand;
He not only makes the Weight for the Winds, but he weighs the Waters ( i. e.
the Clouds) by measure, Job 28.25. Accordingly you read of the Ballancing of
the Clouds, Job 37.16. which is reckoned as the wondrous Work of Him that is
perfect in Knowledge. Whence some of the Hebrew Doctors have thought the Word
Shamajim (the Heavens) was derived from Shaab obstupuit and majim aquae, to
express that particular Region Above where these Waters hang in that stupendous
manner. Though I do not take this to be the genuine Etymology of the Hebrew
Word, for it is most probable it had its Shamajim a Sham ibi and majim aquae.
Name only from the Waters ( i. e. the Clouds) being there; yet this Derivation
rightly suggests to us, that if we duly consider this Wonderful Ballancing of
these moving Bodies, we cannot but stand astonished at these Divine Staticks,
and admire the Hand which gives them that exact Libration. A great Naturalist
takes special Notice of this, and cries out, Quid mirabilius aquis in coelis
stantibus? Plin. Not. Hist. l. 31. c. 4.
What is more Wonderful than the Waters standing in the Air? He might have
said, so many Seas hanging in the Air? These he thought to be an Extraordinary
Work, and this we know to be a Divine one. The Clouds therefore are in a
Poetic way styled God's Paths, Psalm. 65.11. his Chariots, Psalm. 104.3. his
Chambers, ver. 13. because he acts and converses, and shows himself here,
because his Presence and Providence are signally discovered in them, and by
them. These are emphatically called the Waterspouts of Heaven, Psalm. 42.7.
because they pour out Water like Pipes or Spouts, for when those condensed
Vapors (being now turned into Clouds) become too ponderous for the Air to bear
them, they fall down in Rain. These Clouds therefore are fitly and elegantly
called dark Waters, Psalm. 18.11. because being thick and full of Water they
become black: and besides, from the gathering together and condensing of these
Clouds the Earth is shadowed and darkened. But this proves generally a
Comfortable Darkness, being in order to Rain, which soon restores Light again.

But this also is produced by the singular and extraordinary Direction of God:
for tho we grant that these vast Heaps of Water fall by their own Weight, or by
the Violence of Winds which thrust them downwards, yet it is from the
particular Care and Guidance of the Almighty that this is done: Which we find
taken notice of by Job, a Great and Skilful Observer of God's Works, Job 26.8.
He binds up the Waters in his thick Clouds, and the Cloud is not rent under
them. That the thick and heavy Clouds, so loaded with Waters, do not break
presently, but hang and hover between Heaven and Earth a considerable time (as
frequently we see them do) is very wonderful, and is to be ascribed to the
Divine Power and Wisdom. To which it is to be attributed also, that they fall
so lightly, and not all together. It is from this most wonderful Disposal that
these vast heavy Bodies do not fall down upon us at once, and all in a Heap,
and so crush us with their Load. This very thing Job's Friend (who by his
Discourse we may perceive was a Man of some Philosophy as well as great Piety)
particularly insists upon with the highest Admiration; Job 36.27. He makes
small the Drops of Water, which the LXX not minding so much the very Words as
the Sense, (as is common with them) render very finely (...) etc.
the Drops of Rain are numbered by him; he is so careful in distributing them
that he divides them out by Tale: so exact is he in measuring out the Rain,
that he uses as it were an Arithmetical Proportion. These Waters are with great
Accuracy dispensed to Mankind; they (as it immediately follows) pour down Rain
according to the Vapor thereof, according to God's disposing and parcelling
out of the Vapors which are the Matter of the Clouds, for here he does as it
were use an Arithmetic. Whence it is that they dissolve into Showers by
degrees, and gently distill upon the Ground in Drops, as a Gardener waters his
Garden. Not but that in some Places, as in the Southern Regions of the World,
(as Guinea, Brasil, Egypt, the Country of the Abyssines) the Rains fall in
greater Quantity: which is a great Argument of the Divine Providence; for those
Parts of the World want more Rain, and therefore the Drops are bigger and more
ponderous, and the Showers fall faster and thicker, and with much more Force:
but still they descend orderly and by degrees. And that we may be the more
apprehensive of this Benefit, God sometimes permits Examples of the contrary,
as those Fallings of Waters in the Indies which they call Spouts: The Clouds
fall down altogether, and like a violent Torrent. They are not Showers but
Floods of Rain that come down from the Skies. But this is rare and
extraordinary, and serves only to commend the constant Goodness of God in the
ordinary dispensing of Rain. Therefore it is said, He made a Decree for the
Rain, Job 28.26. It was a peculiar Appointment and Ordinance of Heaven, that
there should be this Admirable Filtration of the Clouds, which is a thing very
amazing and stupendous. It is no wonder then that it is reckoned among the
Great, Unsearchable, and Marvelous things which God does, Job 5.9, 10. and that
He himself calls upon us to admire him as the sole Author and Father of Rain,
Job 38.25, 26, 27, 28. and that this is owned to be the peculiar Work of the
Almighty Jehovah; Jer. 14.22. Are there any among the Vanities ( i. e. the
Idols) of the Gentiles that can cause Rain? or can the Heavens (of themselves)
give Showers? Art not thou he, O Lord God? The Old Jews expressed their
Sentiment concerning it thus, One of the Keys proper to God, and kept in his
own Hand, is that of Rain: thereby reckoning it a singular and immediate Gift
of the Almighty. And they used to join it with two other Keys, viz. of giving
Life, and of Raising from the Dead, which shows that they thought it peculiar
to God alone.

And then the known Usefulness of this Blessing is an Argument of its Author.
This is with great Elegancy set forth by the Inspired Poet; Psalm. 65.9. Thou
visitest the Earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the River
of God, ( i. e. the Clouds or Rain) which is full of Water: thou preparest them
Corn, when thou have so provided for it (by vouchsafing seasonable Showers:)
thou waterest the Ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the Furrows thereof:
thou make it soft with Showers; thou blessest the Springing thereof: thou
crownest the Year with thy Goodness, and thy Paths (the Clouds wherein God is
Poetically said to walk, Psalm. 18.9.) drop Fatness: They drop upon the Pastures
of the Wilderness, and the little Hills rejoice on every side. The Pastures are
clothed with Flocks: the Valleys also are covered over with Corn: they shout
for Joy, they also sing. This they do, thus they behave themselves, being as it
were drunk with the Bottles of Heaven, (as the Clouds are called Job 38.37.)
being abundantly satisfied with Deuteronomy. 11.14. Joel 2.23.
Ioresh and Malkosh, the former and the latter Rain: the first of which is
necessary after the Seed is sown; the second before Harvest to set it forward,
to fill the Ears. Wherefore St. Paul proves a God from the Clouds, Acts 14.17.
He left not himself without Witness, ( i. e. of his Divine Power and
Providence) in that he gave us Rain from Heaven, and (as the Consequent of
that) fruitful Seasons. For it is this Celestial Water that makes the Ground
fruitful: it has a peculiar Faculty to do it, and no other Water does the
like. Thence that Talmudick Saying, Rain is the Husband of the Earth, because
it impregnates it, and makes it fructify. Therefore Showers are rightly called
by Pliny, Cibus arborum imber. Not. Hist. l. 17. c. 2.
the Food of Plants, the Meat as well as the Drink of all Vegetables. But this
is effected by the Divine Blessing, and is a singular Testimony of God's Care
of the World. Thus from the Earth we prove there is a God in Heaven: even from
the Grounds and Fields refreshed with Rain, and thereby made fertile, we argue
a Divine Benefactor.

And now when I am speaking of the Clouds I must not forget the Rainbow, which
is a Party-colored Cloud, whose fine and gay Paintings are the various
Reflection and Refraction of the Sun's Beams in that watery Substance. This
gaudy Mixture of Light and Shade arises naturally from the Difference of the
Superficies of those Parts that constitute the Cloud, and therefore without
doubt it appeared before the Deluge, though we find it not mentioned till
afterward, when it was appointed to be set in the Skies as a Sign of a Genesis
19.13.
Covenant between God and Man: and ever since it has continued (and shall so
to the last Period of all things) a visible Token and Assurance of God's good
Will to Mankind. Wherefore as often as we view this Cloud, made so remarkable
by the Diversity of its Colors, the Variety of its Tinctures, let us thence be
confirmed in our Belief of a God, and look upon this Beautiful Spectacle as an
illustrious Symbol of the Divine Mercy and Beneficence. Or, to speak in the
Words of the Wise Son of Sirach; Look upon the Rainbow, and praise Him that
made it. Very beautiful it is in the Brightness thereof: It compasses the
Heaven with a glorious Circle, and the hands of the most High have bended it,
Ecclus. 43.12.

To the Clouds belong Thunder and Lightning, and therefore may pertinently be
spoken of here; for when a Cloud breaks asunder by reason of hot and dry,
sulphurous and nitrous Vapors enclosed and compassed about with cold ones,
and so set on Fire, and consequently extending themselves, and violently making
their way, the Noise caused by this Rupture is that which we call Thunder, and
the flashing out of the Fire is Lightning. Both which are comprehended in those
Words, Psalm. 29.7. The Voice of the Lord divides the Flames of Fire. And the
former of them is called the Voice of the Lord upon the Waters, ver. 3. This is
no other than his Thundering in the Clouds, which usually turn into Rain when
they are broken and scattered. And perhaps to this may refer ver. 10. The Lord
sits upon the Floods, i. e. upon the Clouds, which are justly styled Floods,
because of the abundance of Water contained in them. And as Thunder is bred by
Fire and Water in the Clouds, so the Effects of it are of the like Nature, for
Lightning and Rain generally accompany the Thunder. Wherefore we find this
particularly taken notice of by the Pious Observers of Providence: He makes
Lightnings for the Rain, Psalm. 135.7. He makes Lightnings with Rain, Jer.
10.13. And this is mentioned in Job 37.2, 5. and 38.25, 26. and not without
great Reason, for herein the Goodness and Mercy of God are seen, because Rain
is serviceable to connect and qualify the Thunder, and by its Moisture to
prevent the Hurt which otherwise might be done by the scorching Flashes which
attend it. Who is not sensible that Thunder is the more signal Operation of a
Divine Cause, and therefore is so frequently called God's Voice? as in Exodus
20.18. Psalm. 18.13. and 77.18. Ier. 10.13. Yea, no less than seven times in the
29 th Psalm it is called the Voice of the Lord: Which may not only signify a
Great and Loud Voice, (for the Voice or Noise of Thunder is such, especially in
some Regions of the World, as in some Parts of Africa, and in the Southern
Countries of Asia and America, where it is much more Terrible than it is among
us; yea, as a Dr. Woodward, Not. Hist. of the Earth, Part 4.
Learned Gentleman observes, it as much exceeds the Thunder of these Northern
Climes as the Heat there exceeds that of these) but it more particularly
denotes the Wonderful Author of it, viz. the Almighty Being.

Which was the very Apprehension of some Men of the deepest Philosophy among
the Gentiles. Even they acknowledged this Fierce Meteor to be the Effect of no
less than an Extraordinary and Divine Power. Plutarch informs us, that some of
the Best Philosophers made it the Matter of their Wonder and Astonishment, that
(...). Sympos. l. 4. quaest. 2.
Flames should proceed from watery Clouds, and that such a Harsh Noise should be
the Product of that Soft Matter. I find a Great Natural Philosopher taking
notice of the Ignis sua natura in verticem surgit, and si nihil illi prohibeat,
ascendet: fulmen autem cadit eadem necessitate, qua excutitur. Senec. Not.
Quaest. l. 2. c. 58.
falling down of the Lightning from Heaven as a Wonderful thing, because Fire
naturally ascends. It seems he did not think that the Motion of it downwards is
sufficiently solved by the Violence of the Rupture, for else he would not have
imputed it to a Nihil itaque dubii relinquitur quin Divina illi virtus insit.
Ibid.
Divine Virtue, as he does. And more fully and expressly in another place he
declares his Mind thus, Mira fulminis, si intueri velis, opera sunt, nec
quicquam dubii relinquentia quin Divina insit illis and subtilis potentia. Not.
Quaest. l. 2. c. 31.
The Effects of Thunder, if you consider them well, are of that Wonderful
Nature that we cannot possibly doubt but that there is a Divine Subtle Power
in them. And then he proceeds particularly to reckon up the Strange Phenomenon
of this sort of Meteor; which indeed are very Surprising and Amazing, and would
be thought altogether incredible if several Other Writers of good note had not
attested the same, and if at this very day we had not Instances of the Truth
and Reality of them. This Naturalist adds further, that Thunder is made partly
to Scare and Affright the World: This Terrible Noise, says he, was for this
purpose, viz. U^ supra nos aliquid timeremus. Lib. 2. cap. 42.
That we might stand in awe of something above us. Horace confesses that he
felt this in himself, he acknowledges that this Voice from Heaven made him
disown Epicurus's Notions, and repent of all his Atheistical Principles and
Practices: See Lib. 1. Ode 34. It is a very Remarkable Example, and I heartily
wish that the Wild Sparks of this Age, who are very well pleased with other
Parts of this Author's Writings, and are ambitious to imitate him, would
seriously read and consider of this, and thence (with their Brother Poet and
Pagan) be induced to assert a God and Providence in the World. It is not to be
denied that sometimes by this Dreadful Sound God is pleased to rouse and alarm
the careless Part of Mankind, and sometimes to give Proof of his Judicial and
Avenging Power. Moreover, by this is discovered his Goodness to Mankind, for
this Violent Shaking of the Air is of great Use to us, because it corrects or
dispels its noxious Qualities, and renders it pure and wholesome. By means of
this are conveyed to us Showers of Rain, which most seasonably cool that
Element as fast as the Fulgurations heat and inflame it.

Then, as for the Colder Meteors, they have their proper Use for which they are
generated. Snow is a dissolved Cloud that is somewhat condensed in its coming
down, and therefore falls in light Flakes, like the scattered Pieces of a
Fleece; whence it is said, He gives Snow like Wool, Psalm. 147.16. To which it
is compared because of the Configuration of its Parts, and because of its
Whiteness and Softness; nay, I must add, because of its Warmth. This last is
thus expressed in few words by Theophrastus, (...). De Plant. l. 2. c. 2.
The Snow produces a Fermentation in the Earth by shutting in the Heat upon it,
which the Earth takes into it self, and is thereby made strong and hearty. The
Husbandman who inters his Seed in hopes of its rising again, delights to
behold this Winding Sheet upon it; he rejoices to see it thus buried in
Woollen, because he knows that this is a Safeguard to it, and shelters it from
the Winter-Winds and Storms: This keeps both the Earth and the Grain warm, and
preserves the Blade fresh and verdant; and afterward when it dissolves, it
kindly moistens them, and is a Preparative to a farther Fermentation.

Hail is such another dissolved Cloud as Snow, but much more thickened and
hardened by the lower Region of the Air as it comes down through it. The
Treasures of this Congealed Rain (for so I may call it) are mentioned by God
himself, Job 38.22. which he says he has reserved against the time of
Trouble, against the day of Battle and War, ver. 23. Then this Weapon is
brought forth, and is of singular Use to punish Offenders; and accordingly we
read that Armies have been defeated by it, Josh. 10.11. Isa. 30.30.

Frost and Ice are other Cold and Watery Impressions which God owns himself the
Author of; Job 37.10. By the Breath of God ( i. e. by a Cold Sharp Wind which
He sends) Frost is given, and the Breadth of the Waters is straightened, is so
contracted and congealed, that they flow not, they spread not themselves as
usually. In very significant and apposite Terms, but very briefly, this is
described in chapter 38.30. The Waters are hid as with a Stone, i. e. the Waters in
Ponds and Rivers, and in some Parts of the Sea, are covered with Ice which is
hard, and as 'twere Stony, and may be called a Pavement of Ice. That this and
the like Operations of the most High are of considerable Use in the World
(beside what has been mentioned before) we gather from chap. 37. ver. 12. They
are turned round about by his Counsels, that they may do whatsoever he
commands them upon the Face of the World in all the Earth: i. e. all the
World over they are made use of in their several Vicissitudes to effect the
wise Designs and Purposes of God. And ver. 13. He causes it to come, whether
for Correction ( i. e. the Punishment of Men) or for his Land, ( i. e. more
universally for all Creatures, particularly the Ground or Earth) or for Mercy (
i. e. in a way of Blessing). It were easy to give Instances of all these, for
Histories readily furnish us with them. So in another Place of this Book, chapter
36. v. 31. where the foregoing Discourse had been concerning the Clouds, Rain,
Lightning, etc. it is said, By them he judges the People, i. e. to some they
are made use of for Punishment; and he gives Meat in abundance, i. e. to
others they are sent for Good, for their real Benefit and Advantage, and more
particularly they are someways instrumental toward the procuring of
Fruitfulness and Plenty, called here Meat.

I had almost forgot to mention Dew, which is of great Advantage, especially in
the Eastern Countries which are hot, and where little Rain falls. It is by the
singular Care of the Divine Providence that they have very Great Dews, which
are hugely beneficial to the Earth. Therefore you find these taken notice of as
a particular Largess of the Divine Goodness; Job 38.28. Mic. 5.7. and in
several other Places. Thus much concerning the Lower Heavens or Atmosphere,
that is, the Space between the Ethereal Heavens and the Earth, and the several
things which are Observable in it, as the Air, Winds, Clouds, etc. all which
proclaim a Wise, Powerful, Just and Merciful Deity.

CHAP. V.
The Frame of the Earth argues a Godhead. A particular Account of the Torrid
Zone, and of the two Temperate, and two Frigid Zones: especially the two latter
are showed to be Testimonies of Divine Providence. The present Position of the
Earth is the same that it was at first, whatever the Theorist (who confutes
himself) suggests to the contrary. Against him it is proved, that the Shape of
the Earth at this day is not Irregular and Deformed; and that the Primitive
Earth was not destitute of Hills and Mountains. These are of considerable Use.
The particular Advantages of them are recounted, and thence the Wise Disposal
of the Creator is inferred.

NOW let us pass to the Earth, that Part of the World where we are placed,
where the visible Footsteps of a Godhead are easily to be traced. The Frame of
this Spacious Round, (for this Figure of it is proved from its Shadow cast upon
the Moon in an Eclipse, which shows that the Earth and Sea make one round Body,
for the Shadow renders the true Form of the Body which causes it;) the Frame,
I say, of this Spacious Globe is excellent and astonishing if we contemplate
the Hills, Valleys, Lakes, Rivers, Rocks, Promontories, Woods, Islands,
Peninsula's, Continents, of which it is composed, the Mixture of which renders
it not only useful but beautiful. Nature proceeds not always in the same Track
and Path, but (as Philo observes) (...) De vita Mos.
delights in the Variety and Diversity of its Artificial Works. And the
wonderful Skill and Art of the Author who framed them thus are to be admired.
But more especially the Diversity of the Situation and Position of the Earth is
remarkable. It was the Wise Contrivance of the Creator to place it in that
Oblique Posture that it is now in, it being most convenient for the Good of
Mankind: He that made of one Blood all Nations of Men, to dwell on all the Face
of the Earth, has determined the Bounds of their Habitation, Acts 17.26. Hence
there are Different Zones (as they are called) into which the Earth is divided.

There is first that which is called the Torrid Zone, because the Influence of
the Sun is very vehement and active in this Part of the World: but this is no
Hindrance to its being Inhabited, as some of old vainly fancied. This is all
that Space of Earth which is between the two Tropicks. But there is a great
Latitude as to the Inhabitants of this Zone, for some of them live directly
under the Equator: And these only, of all the Dwellers on the Earth, have a
Right Sphere, and always have an Equinox, i. e. their Days are exactly 12 Hours
in length, and so are their Nights, neither more nor less. They have the
peculiar Privilege to see both the Poles at the same time: And all the Fixed
Stars rise and set to them. They have 2 Summers and 2 Winters in a Year, the
Sun going directly over their Heads twice a Year, i. e. when he is in Aries and
when he is in Libra, so that their 2 Summers are then; and their Winters are
when the Sun is in Cancer and Capricorn. Thus are situated some parts of the
East Indies, and some part of America, and the Islands of Sumatra. And though
they are so liable to the Perpendicular Rays of the Sun, yet by the special
Providence of Heaven it happens that the Inhabitants of these Hot Countries
have Cool Briezes that constantly fan and refresh them in the Afternoons, and
their Nights are both long and cool, which makes amends for the excessive heat
of the Day. Other Inhabitants of this Zone are seated between the Equinoctial
and the Tropicks, and these likewise have a double Summer and Winter, only
their Days and Nights are more unequal than those under the Equinoctial Line.
Thus are situated the Philippine and Molucca Islands, part of East India in
Asia, Ethiopia in Africa, Mexico in the North of America, and Peru, Brasil,
Guinea in the South of it. And it is well known that there is not a more
temperate Region than Peru in the World, the Nights cold tempering the Days
heat, and Rains being frequent, and cool Winds blowing constantly. Again, there
are others of this Zone that live right under the Tropicks: These have but one
Summer and one Winter in a Year, and their Situation is very convenient, and
upon several accounts desirable. Before I leave the Torrid Zone, I will take
notice of a very Remarkable Thing which Travelers of good Credit inform us of,
viz. That in most Places belonging to it there are vast Exhalations constantly
from the Earth, which are condensed into moist Vapors, and though they seldom
fall in Rain-Showers yet they affect the Region of the Air which is under them,
and render it very moist in the Daytime, and in the Night very cool and fresh.
And this abundant Mass of Vapors caused by the excessive heat of those
Countries affords matter for Dews, which are exceeding plentiful and copious,
so that they serve instead of Rain-Waters, and are of great use for the
Fertility of the Ground and Plants.

But Secondly, There are 2 Temperate Zones, which lie between the Tropicks and
the Polar Circles: the one between the Tropic of Cancer and the Artick Circle,
the other between the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antartick. It is the
peculiar Lot of the People that dwell in these parts of the World to have 2
Solstices and 2 Equinoxes in a Year; but one Summer and one Winter, and the Sun
is never vertical over their Heads. They have an Oblique Sphere, as all have
besides those that live under the Equator. We in England are situate in this
Parallel; so is all Europe: yea the greatest part of the habitable World is in
the Northern Temperate Zone. It was the pleasure of the Great Founder of the
World that this part of the Earth should be the Principal Stage of Action: It
was his Will and Appointment that this should be the Seat of the greater and
better part of Mankind.

There are also two Frigid Zones, the one between the Artick Circle and the
North Pole, the other between the Antartick Circle and the South Pole. The
Inhabitants are of three sorts, 1. Those who live under either of the Polar
Circles. Those that inhabit under the Artick Circle have one Summer and one
Winter in a Year. When the Sun is in Cancer, their Day is 24 Hours long, and
they have no Night: And when the Sun is in Capricorn their Night is 24 Hours
long. Under this Parallel are Lapland, Finmark, part of Russia, Iseland, etc.
And here it might be observed, as a Testimony of a singular Providence, that
these Countries which are extreme Cold are furnished with the largest Wood, and
the most and best Furs. 2. Those that dwell between the Polar Circles and the
Poles have sometimes continual Day and no Night. From the Sun's being in Cancer
their Day is in some places a Month long, in others two; and the farther they
live toward the North the longer are their Days, till you come under the North
Pole, where it is half a Year long without Night. In the other half of the
Year, beginning when the Sun is in Capricorn, the Nights exceed proportionably,
and last a Month, two Months, etc. In this part of the World is Nova Zembla,
Green-land, etc. 3. Those that live right under the Poles; and these only (of
all the Dwellers on the Earth) enjoy a Day that continues six Months complete,
which is succeeded with a Night that lasts as long: So that they may be said to
have but one Day and one Night in a Year. By reason of this latter the Country
is so cold and dark that it is not inhabited in this part of the Year.

But as for the other Places beforementioned where there are long and cold
Winters, there is reason to believe that they are most suitable to the
Constitutions and Tempers of the Persons who inhabit them. The great Disposer
of all things placed such Inhabitants there as were fit for that Region, and no
other: For they could not dwell in these Countries where we inhabit, as we
could not dwell there. So that the placing of those People in that dark, cold
and frozen part of the World, is so far from being a Detraction to Divine
Providence, that it is a singular Proof of it, and shows the Wisdom of the
World's Maker, in a suitable choosing of Places for Persons according to their
particular Temperament and Exigencies.

And both with relation to these and the Polar Regions we may truly say that
the excessive Coldness of these Parts is useful and serviceable for the good of
others that are near to the Sun, and have need sometimes of cooling. From these
remote Treasuries the Winds are fetched for the rebuking of the scorching Heats
of Summer; of which we can give no Natural and Philosophical Account, unless we
derive them from these great Storehouses. This acquaints us with the true
cause of that excessive Sharpness and Rigor of the Air which we feel
sometimes, and that of a sudden. This solves the unexpected change of Weather,
yea sometimes the sudden and unlooked for checking of Pestilential Diseases and
Infections which is known to happen. Inconsiderate Minds are apt to think that
the Regions that are seated under the Poles are altogether useless, and thence
perhaps may be tempted to question the Divine Conduct. But if we will consider
those Places, we shall find that they are as Necessary as any parts of the
World. It is true, they are for the most part Unhabitable, but their being so
makes others Habitable, for these are the common Receptacles of Cold, whence it
is dispersed by Divine Providence to those Parts where it is wanting at any
time, that is, when the Sun's Fierceness calls for a Check. And several other
ways those Polar Receptacles and Nurseries of Cold are serviceable, yea
necessary for the welfare of the World.

Lastly, The wise framing and ordering of the Sun's Motion and Progress (of
which I have spoken before) necessarily infer this Difference of Places on the
Earth as to Heat and Cold. Unless we will remove this Luminary from its
Ecliptic, and thereby disorder the whole Course of the World, and destroy the
various Succession of Times and Seasons which upholds Mankind as well as all
other Creatures whatsoever; we must be forced to confess that the several Zones
and Climates (tho differing so much in Heat and Cold) are useful in the
Creation, and that the Position of the Globe of the Earth is most wisely and
discreetly ordered.

The late Theorist boldly contradicts this, and tells us that the Situation of
the Earth is not the same now that it was before the Deluge. It did not stand
Oblique to the Sun, as it does at present, whereby we have a great Difference
of Seasons, as Spring, Summer, etc. but it had a right or parallel Situation,
insomuch that there was a Continual Equinox. And yet this Person, who is so
curious about the Idea of his First Earth, has given it us with a very great
Blemish, yea much worse Fault than any that he pretends to find in this present
Earth; for they are his express Words, Theory of the Earth, Book 2.
The Paradisiacal Earth had a Torrid Zone, which was Vninhabitable. All this
great Portion of Earth was burnt up and withered, and had no Grass, Tree or
Plant upon it, and so no Creature could find any Sustenance there. This is his
fine Paradisiacal Earth, as he calls it. And yet it is worth our observing that
he says in another Place in express Terms, Chap. 1.
All the Earth is green, and a Perpetual Spring is over it all, meaning his
Paradisiacal Earth. When he has thus confuted himself, there is no need of any
Body else to do it. But we may grant him his Theory, that there was a Primitive
Earth of a different Form from the present. It is partly true that the Earth is
not what it was, for there are the Marks of Sin and of the Fall even on the
Earth, and we read of a Curse denounced against it, Genesis 3.17. (though he is
pleased to turn that Chapter into mere Allegory, and thereby to null the main
Points of our Religion): and afterward by the violent Irruptions of the Flood
it is most probable that the Earth underwent some Alteration. But what is this
to the changing the very Situation and Posture of the Earth? How is it proved
hence that the First Earth had another Situation to the Sun, and had a
perpetual Equinox and Spring? These things are asserted by him, but no where
proved. Wherefore I look upon it as a precarious and groundless Opinion.

The Variety of Seasons before the Flood may be gathered from Genesis 8.22. I will
not again curse the Ground, nor smite any more every living thing as I have
done. While the Earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and Cold and Heat, and
Summer and Winter, and Day and Night, shall not cease. As much as to say,
Though during the time of the Deluge these Alterations of the Seasons were
interrupted, and the Sun's Heat and Light were as if they were not, because
they could have no Effect upon the Earth as long as it lay under Water, yet now
having restored things to their pristine Course and Order, I assure you they
shall continue so to the end of the World. Thus it is included in these Words,
that there were the same Vicissitudes of the Year before the Flood that there
are now. And this appears to be a Truth from what I have already showed, viz.
that the present Position and Situation of the Earth are very convenient,
useful, and in some Respects necessary: for there is a necessity of a
Vicissitude of Seasons, and a Variety or Exchange of Heat and Cold, because the
Fruitfulness of the Earth depends upon these; and Heat and Cold generated in
the Air are the two Hands of Nature, (as my Lord Bacon rightly says) by which
she does all her Work. It is unreasonable to conceive an Equality of these, and
consequently an Equal and Unvariable Temperature of the Year before the Deluge:
Which is thus lately represented by an Admirable Pen; A Man can hardly at first
imagine what a Train of ill Consequences would follow from such a Condition and
Posture of things: of which it would not be the least, that such a Mediocrity
of Heat would deprive the World of the most beautiful and the most useful Parts
of all the whole Creation; and would be so far from exalting the Earth to a
more happy and Paradisiacal State, that it would turn it to a general
Desolation, and a mere barren Wilderness, to say no worse. Such an Heat would
be too little for some sorts of Vegetables, and too great for others. The more
fine and tender Plants, those which will not bear a Degree of Heat beyond that
of April, would be all burnt up and destroyed by it: whilst it could never
reach the more lofty and robust, nor would there be near Heat enough to ripen
their Fruits, and bring them to Perfection. Nothing would suit and hit all, and
answer every End of Nature but such a Gradual Increase and Decrease of Heat as
now there is. He adds, that if he should descend to the Animal World, the
Inconveniences there would be as many and as great as in the Vegetable: and
such a Situation of the Sun and Earth as that which the Theorist supposes, is
so far from being preferrable to this which at present obtains, that this has
infinitely the Advantage of it in all Respects. Thus the Not. Hist. of the
Earth, Part 6.
Learned Dr. Woodward. Therefore the Perpetual Equinox of the Theorist is but a
Fancy, and we have ground to assert that the Situation of the Earth is the same
that it was at first, and that the Year had the same Seasons, Changes and
Revolutions that it has now, and that all these are Attestations of the Divine
Wisdom in making the World.

The said Theorist tells us also, that the Earth had no Inequalities on its
Surface at first, but was as smooth and plain as a Die (only this is square,
and that was round). And as for the Earth which we now have, he declares that
there is no Shape nor Beauty in it, yea it is Rude, Indigested, Irregular,
Monstrous. It is but the Rubbish of what was before: In short, he says, it is
nothing but Ugliness and Deformity. It seems, according to this Gentleman, it
is a Chaos again. But all the Wise Heads in the World have had other
Apprehensions of it. The most accurate and nice Judges of Beauty never thought
it was a Deformed Misshapen Lump. They never dreamt that Sea, and Rocks, and
Mountains rendered it Ugly and Monstrous, as this Author positively avers. They
rather thought that the Variety of Mountains, Plains and Valleys, etc. makes it
more grateful and comely than if it were all even: they thought that this
Diversity of its Parts was Ornamental. And so without doubt it is, and
consequently the Form of this present Earth (whatever this Theorist suggests to
the contrary) is Proportionable and Comely. He shows that he is no Judge of
Beauty, for according to him a Flat Face without a Nose, Forehead, Cheeks,
Eyebrows, or any other Protuberancies, would be handsome. So in the Face of the
Earth he requires a Perfect Equality, which indeed would be a Deformity. I deny
not but by Length of Time some Parts of the Earth may be worn away, or broken
in, and sunk down, etc. and so may look ragged and disordered: but he is very
effeminate and nice if he will not bear with these reverend Wrinkles, these
lesser Defects of Pulchritude in our Mother Earth, which she has contracted by
her Old Age. But as to the main, she bears her Years well, and keeps her
pristine Beauty. That Mixture of Risings and Plains, of Hills and Dales, etc.
which we discover in her, is an Ornament, and renders her in the whole Uniform
and Regular: and therefore it is not to be questioned but that she was not
without these at first.

And particularly as for Mountains, which he reckons among the Monstrosities of
this Earth, and as the Effect of the Desolating Flood, it is as evident as a
plain Place of Scripture can make it, that the Earth before the Flood was not
destitute of these; for it it said, Genesis 7.19. The Waters prevailed exceedingly
on the Earth, and all the high Hills that were under the whole Heaven were
covered. And further yet, ver. 20. (to make it yet plainer) fifteen Cubits
upwards did the Waters prevail, and the Mountains were covered. Therefore it is
undeniable that the Antediluvian Earth had high Hills and Mountains, unless he
will say that they were covered before they were. And if they were before the
Flood, it is not to be questioned that they were the Product of the First
Creation, and were made by God himself. It is probable this is intimated from
that Epithet which is given them in Genesis 49.26. the everlasting Hills. Gnolam
here signifies the Antiquity of them, viz. that they were made at first, when
the Earth was created, and so are as it were perpetual or everlasting. However,
if this be not meant, it is rashly said by a very Jo. Cl^ric. Comment. in loc.
Learned Writer, that it is an Idle Adjection. Which appears further from Psalm.
90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the
Earth and the World: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Where
we see that the Production of the Mountains, and the forming of the Earth and
the World are synchronical: which this Writer denies by saying they were
produced a long time afterward. This is a Psalm of Moses, which makes it the
more remarkable, for he that writ of the Creation, and afterward of the Flood,
and tells us the Waters of it covered the highest Hills and Mountains,
positively asserts here, that these Hills and Mountains were created at the
same time with the Earth and the World; which confirms what he had said before.
And that Passage in Prove. 8.25. is very much to this purpose, Before the
Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth: for Solomon is
there describing the Eternity of Wisdom, and showing that it existed before the
Creation of the World, and accordingly enumerates the principal Works of the
Creation, as the Depths, the Sea, the Fountains of Water, the Heavens, the
Clouds, the Earth and its Foundations, and among these mentions the Mountains
and Hills, and asserts that before these and the other Parts of the Creation
were produced, Wisdom had an Existence. Whence any Man of consistent Thoughts
would infer, that the Mountains (as well as the Sea, the Heavens, the Fountains
of Water, etc.) were part of the first Creation; for else they would not have
been reckoned up together with the rest as Parts of it. We may conclude then,
that those Vast Swelling Protuberancies of the Earth were of the same Date with
the World. Though, when I say this, I do not deny but there might be some Hills
raised afterward by the Waters of the Deluge in Noah's time, which as they
threw down some Hills, so they made some others by casting up great Heaps of
Earth. This I am not unwilling to grant as a thing Probable, but what I have
said before is Certain.

As to the manner of the Production of the First Hills and Mountains, no Man
can be positive. It is likely they were raised by Subterraneous Fires and
Flatus's, says Of the Primitive Chaos.
Mr. Ray; but I rather think that the Primitive Elevation of the Mountains was
another thing, and that those Fires were scarcely kindled, or set on work so
easily. Some have guessed they were thus caused, viz. whereas at first the
Waters and Earth were both mixed together, God soon after made a Separation
between them: and in order to the parting of them there were Cavities and
Channels made in the Earth to receive and convey the Water: whence the Earth
which subsided and was depressed in one Place rose up in another, and caused
the Mountains. This is thought to be a rational Account of the Formation of
these Vast Bodies: but whether it be exact or no, no Man can certainly tell.
But this we are sure of, that they existed at the first forming of all things,
and were constituent Parts of the Primitive Earth, which this Writer's Theory
utterly denies, and says it was all Champain, plain and level. So that whilst
he avoids speaking like an Orator concerning the Earth, (which he is set
against, he says) he cannot afford to speak Truth, i. e. to acknowledge what
the Holy Scripture it self attests in plain and intelligent Terms concerning
the Original of Mountains, viz. that they were a part of the first Creation of
the World.

And being so, they are questionless of Use, for the Great Creator made nothing
in vain. Because we cannot possibly see how Great the whole Body of the Earth
is, therefore there are some Parts of it purposely lifted up above the rest, to
give us some Intimation and Knowledge of this Huge Globe whereon we stand. That
Body which is 7000 Miles in Diameter, and above 20000 in Circumference, is as
it were abbreviated by this means into lesser ones, some of three or four, some
of ten or twelve, others of twenty or near thirty Miles in Height. By beholding
these Eminent and Exalted Parts we may guess at the Gigantick Proportions of
the Whole Extended Mass it self, and admire the Divine Providence which
supports its Weight and Bulk. Thus because the Earth it self was hid from us
(excepting what is to be seen within the Compass of our scant Horizon) by
reason of its Unequal Figure, and the Shortness of our Sight, it was fitting
that some Remembrances and Representations, as 'twere some Maps of the whole,
should be before our Eyes: and these are the High Hills and Mountainous
Eminencies which we see, as Caucasus, Olympus, Atlas, Athos, Aetna, Hecla,
Teneriff, which are as 'twere Epitomes of the Whole Earth.

Again, these were designed to be Boundaries and Limits of certain Regions and
Countries. Thus Taurus, the biggest Mountain in the World, divides all Asia
into two Parts, the one Northward, the other Southward. The Pyrenean Hills
separate the Kingdoms of France and Spain: the Alps part Italy from France.
And several other Mountains are the Natural Barriers which God has set between
Countries and Nations, though daring and ambitious Minds take no notice of it,
and impatiently long to have such a Miraculous Power as to be able to remove
these Mountains, to take away these Great Landmarks and Distinguishing Limits.

Moreover, these Parts of the Earth, which as to outward View are generally
fruitless and barren, and therefore may seem useless and unprofitable, contain
great Riches in them. Some of the Rabbis derive Har (the Hebrew Word for a
Mountain) from Harah, gravidam esse; and they give this Reason, because they
are big with Metals, and swelled with the precious Treasures that are lodged in
their Womb. These Places are the proper Receptacle of Minerals and all sorts of
Fossiles that are useful to Mankind. These Bulky Substances do not take up room
to no purpose: these Big-bellied Bodies are pregnant with things of the
greatest Value and Worth: within them are laid up the Wealth of the World. But
of this I shall say more when I come to speak of the Subterraneous World.

Again, these Places are fittest for the nourishing and producing of
Vegetables. There is no where else (as has been observed by Botanists) such
Variety of Plants and Herbs.

Further, these Elevations of the Earth are necessary for conveying Water to
us, for from hence by Channels under Ground are derived the Springs of this
Element. They serve as Alembicks to distill fresh Water for the Use of Man and
Beasts: and their Heights are serviceable to the more facile Descent of the
Streams. Nay, these Streams could not flow unless the Heads of them were thus
mounted above the ordinary Level of the Earth. There was an absolute Necessity
therefore of these Hills, that there might be a Descent of these Waters. If the
Earth were every where level and plain, there could be no running Streams or
Rivers. More especially, in very Hot Countries these elevated Parts of the
Earth are necessary to supply these Springs, for on the Sides of them those
abundant Vapors that are exhaled out of the Earth are condensed, and turned
into Water, as is proved by a very Mr. Halley, Philos. Transact.
Ingenious Gentleman. And Dr. Woodward 's Hist. of the Earth, Part 3.
another famous Virtuoso, who has written since, has exceedingly confirmed
this Truth, having with great Perspicuity showed that Mountains are the Heads
and Sources of Springs and Rivers, and that there would have been no Running
Streams on the Face of the Earth if there had not been these Exaltations of the
Ground, for here the Waters are condensed and discharged. Accordingly he
observes that those Countries that are in the Torrid Zone, or near or under the
Line, where the Heat is greatest, and consequently where there is the greatest
need of Water, are furnished with Mountains answerable, i. e. such as for
Bigness and Number surpass those of colder Countries. This he therefore
concludes to be the Providential Contrivance of Heaven, and to be an Argument
of the Divine Conduct and Wisdom.

As for the Highest Mountains in the Southern Parts of the World, an Mr. Ray,
of the Primitive Chaos.
Ingenious Naturalist tells us, that there is very great Use of them for
repelling the Vapors exhaled by the Sun's powerful Beams in those hot Regions,
and for hindering their Evagations Northward: which he thinks is of great
Advantage.

It might be added, that the High Hills render the Earth more convenient and
useful for Habitation; for if it were all even and level, the Houses would lie
open to the Winds and to the Sun, whereas by this Mixture there is a Shelter
from both.

Furthermore, this Inequality of the Earth is suited to the Difference of those
Animals that live upon it, to some of whom the higher and mountainous Places
which are hot and dry are most agreeable, yea it is observed that they cannot
live any where else; and to others those Regions that are depressed and are
more cool, moist and shady, are most wholesome and delightful. And lastly, a Dr.
Woodward, Part 5.
Worthy Writer is designing to prove that even the Vulcano's or Burning
Mountains (as Aetna, Hecla, Vesuvius, etc. which seem to be very noxious) are
of Use to the Places where they are, and to the Earth it self, and to Mankind,
insomuch that they could not subsist without these, or without the Agents
whereby these fiery Eruptions are effected. Thus from what has been said it is
abundantly evident that the Mountains are a very considerable Part of the
Creation, and are signal Testimonies of God's Bounty as well as of his Power in
his forming of the World.

CHAP. VI.
Vegetables are next considered, and their Different Parts enumerated, and
showed to be Arguments of a Divine Contriver. Their Fragrancy, Delightfulness,
Beauty. Their Various Natures, Kinds, Properties. Their Usefulness in respect
of Food. Particular Instances of some Foreign Plants, viz. the Metla, the
Cocus-tree. They are serviceable for Physic. The Signature of some of them
declares their Properties, and is a Divine Impression.

TO the Earth properly belong Vegetables, i. e. Trees, Plants, Herbs, Flowers,
and all Fruits that are the natural Product of them; which, whether you
consider their Excellent Make, or their Great Variety, or their known
Usefulness, bear witness that they are the Offspring of a Wise Parent. First,
let us contemplate the Curious and Exact Composure of these Vegetative
Creatures. They consist of, 1. A Root, by which they suck Moisture, Sap and
Nourishment from the Earth, and from which also these are conveyed into all the
Parts of the Tree or Plant. 2. A Trunk or Body: Or in Herbs it is called the
Stalk, which is remarkable for its distinct Knots and Ioints, which are at
convenient Distances, and were designed to uphold and sustain the Plant, for
these Joints strengthen the Stalk. 3. A Bark, which is for the Preservation of
the Trunk. And this is lined with an inward Skin, Peel or Rind. The Barks of
some Trees especially are very remarkable, and particularly that of the Cinnamon
Tree is worth more than the whole Body. 4. Pith, (Medulla, Cor) by this the
Aliment is carried from the Root to the other Parts. It answers to the Spinal
Marrow in Animals. 5. Branches, the extreme Parts or Limbs, and they answer to
Arms and Legs in sensitive Creatures. The lesser ones are Surculi, Twigs. 6.
Fibers or Filaments, little hollow Strings for carrying the alimental Juice, or
something of that nature to all Places. 7. Flowers, with their initial and
progressive Buds, Blooms, Blossoms. 8. Fruit, in order to which all the other
Parts are. 9. Seed, which is for the Propagation of the Species, and is
admirable for its Make; for a Microscope will inform us, that it contains the
Whole Plant in it. All the different Parts beforementioned are to be found
here shut up in a Shell or Husk: So that every Seed is a Plant epitomized.
Lastly Leaves, which may perhaps seem to be a very inconsiderable Part of
Vegetables, and might well be spared: but if we make Enquiry into them, we
shall find that they are for several uses. In respect of the Flowers and
Fruit Trees to which they belong, they are a Shelter and Guard to defend them
from the Inconveniences and Injuries of the Weather, viz. the Insults of sharp
and boisterous Winds, the excessive fall of Rain or Hail, and the immoderate
heat of the Sun. Leaves are likewise an Ornament as well as a Fence: and their
great variety of work is worth the Observation of the Curious, for some are
open and spread out, others are folded together, some are even and smooth,
others are wrinkled or crumpled, or rough. Others are either shining, or
winged, or perforated, or threaded, or spotted, or full of veins, or hairy, or
prickly, or flowery. Some are round, some are triangular, some are oval: others
are sharp-pointed, or forked, or cut and divided into several Partitions, some
of them into 8 or 9. And as to the Edges, some are plain, others are uneven;
and these latter are either indented, or waved, or engrailed, etc. or they look
as if they were rent and torn. Further, if we may give credit to Malpighius, a
very good Author in this matter (who is seconded by Mr. Ray who is another very
good Judge in the case) Leaves are for the concoction of the Aliment derived to
the Trees. In respect of others they have their use also, for they afford a
cool shade in Summer: which in hot Climates especially is unspeakably welcome,
because, comfortable and refreshing, pleasant and delightful. I could add that
in some places where there is abundance of Trees, the Leaves when they fall and
are dry do for a little time serve poor Folks for Firing; and I remember I have
seen them rake them together for that purpose. Or, if they be let alone upon
the Ground, they are a sort of Compost, and do in some small measure improve
the Soil.

Now, can any Thinking Head entertain such a Thought as this, that all these
several parts, which have all a plain relation to one another, and have also a
general reference to the good of Mankind, for which we see they are useful, and
wherein we may evidently see there is so much Design and Contrivance, were
produced by mere Chance, or (which is the same) by a blind Operation of
Unintelligent Matter? No certainly, this cannot enter into the Mind of a Man
that thinks and considers; especially if he takes notice of what the excellent
Malpighius and others have demonstrated, viz. that there is not any part or
function in Animals but it is answered by something of the like nature in
Plants. There are in this Rank of Creatures distinct Organs and Vessels for the
managing of Concoction, Nutrition, Procreation, etc. though they are in a
different shape and guise from what they are in Beasts and Birds, and such like
perfecter Animals. This was not unknown to the Ancient Stagarite, according to
whom a Plant or Tree is a Man invers'd: the Root is the Head and Mouth, the
Trunk is the Body, the Bark is the Skin, the Pith is the Heart, the Fibers are
in lieu of Veins, Arteries and Nerves; the Boughs and Branches are the Arms and
Feet, and the Leaves are the Hair. But this Old Notion has been lately
improved and more than ever illustrated by that Learned Italian, who has so
highly merited of Medicks and Natural Philosophy.

To proceed, what excellent Things does the Vegetable Kingdom afford us! Who is
not ravished with the excellent Shape, Color and Smell of the Plants and
Flowers which a choice Garden is stocked with? Hence perhaps some of the
Grecians philosophized in the Walks and Gardens about their Cities, and made
their serious Studies pleasurable by this means: Besides that here was
administered occasion enough for Philosophy. Here a Man is as 'twere
transplanted into Paradise again, and is environed with Innocent and Harmless
Delights. So that it is no wonder that One forsook his Crown, and turned
Gardener. He preferred Botanicks before Politics; or he reckoned a Florist's
Employment to be Royal and Princely, he counted a Garden a Kingdom, unriddling
that of the Poet, -- Inscripti nomina Regum
Nascuntur flores. --
Indeed there are some of these that seem to be formed for Sight and Beauty
only, or chiefly, as Tulips, Anemonies, etc. of which there is scarce any other
use to be made. And that use is sufficient, for hereby they show the more
Transcendent Beauty of their Maker. And as for the rest whose Virtue and
Efficacy we are well acquainted with, even they are endowed with their pleasant
and delightful Colors on purpose to entertain the Eyes of Men, and thereby to
affect their Hearts with the Sense of their Munificent Master, whose Livery
they wear. Of these our Savior speaks in Mat. 6.27. telling us that they spin
not, and yet they are very richly clothed, even with more than Royal Apparel,
for Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these, ver. 28. Hence
it was that a Pious Man (whose Name is well known) being invited by an
Honorable Person to go and see a stately Building, (the Masterpiece of
English Architecture in those Days, says my Author) desired to be excused, and
to sit still gazing on a Flower which he had in his Hand: For in this Flower,
says he, I can see more of God than in all the Beautiful Buildings in the
World. Yea, here is not only most exquisite Beauty to delight the Eye, but here
is a most fragrant Smell to please Nostrils and cheer the Brain. Both which
Gifts and Properties seem to be peculiarly bestowed upon Flowers as a
Recompense of their frail Nature, and sudden withering which they are incident
to above all the other Works of the Creation. Their excessive Sweetness and
their glorious variety of Colors make amends as it were for their Short Life.

Their great Number and Variety are also worthy of our Consideration. There are
some Plants that are of a lower and imperfect Rank, as those which grow in the
Sea, viz. Corals, (some of which are Red, some Black, others White) Spunges,
Alga's, etc. and some on the Land, as Mushrooms, Mosses, and several Vegetable
Excrescencies. But the more perfect Ones, such as have Seed and Flower, as they
are the most Numerous, so they are of the greatest Virtue and Use. These you
will find ranked in their several Divisions, and distinctly and accurately set
down by Mr. Ray in his History of Plants. And yet so vast is the number of
these Vegetable Bodies in the World that there are many more than you meet with
in the Exactest Botanist. For there are Plants peculiar to particular Countries
and Regions, as is confessed; and therefore in America and other parts of the
World which are yet undiscovered, there is doubtless a considerable number of
Simples which we have no knowledge of.

The difference of Plants is very great in respect of the Soil and Air which so
much differ, and from whence they derive their Nature. And tho I cannot
subscribe to the Rabbis, who (as we are Mr. Seldom de Dis Sir.
told) very confidently assert that there is not an Herb which grows on the
Earth that has not its peculiar Star to influence it, yet I doubt not but
their Difference is much caused by the peculiarity of that Influx and Virtue
which they partake of from the Heavenly Bodies, i. e. from their various
Aspects and Operations.

They are commonly by the Masters of Medicks distinguished according to their
degrees of Heat; some having a moderate Warmth, corresponding to the natural
Heat of our Bodies: others exceed the native temperate Heat of a Man, and
accordingly as this Excess prevails in them they are said to be hot in the 2 d,
3 d or 4 th Degree. Some are Strong and Robust, others are very Week and
Feeble, as Vines, Hops, etc. But this is to be remarked that such infirm Plants
are provided with Tendrels to lay hold on or twine themselves about other
Trees, or Poles, or any thing near them to sustain them.

Some make a Distinction of Sexes among Plants, as the Palm Tree, Lavendar,
Speedwell or Veronica, Piony, Fern, Southern-Wood, etc. but especially the
Palm Tree, which Galen, as well as Pliny and others, takes notice of. And they
being Male and Female, thence follow Love and Wedlock; and accordingly Pliny
tells us that if the Female Palm be far removed from the Male, it becomes
barren, and bears no Fruit: and such is the Conjugal Affection between them
that if the Male has the Boughs broken, the Female droops and withers. But
though this be the Dream of some Amorous Botanists, yet the most sober
Naturalists acknowledge, upon good Philosophical Accounts, that there is a
Correspondence between certain Plants of the same Species, and by their
Proximity or Distance this is sometimes discerned. And so among Vegetables of a
different Species there is (as some Philosophers and Physicians have observed)
a Sympathy and Antipathy: by which if they mean that some Plants agree and grow
well together, as the Lilly and Rose, Vine and Olive, Rose and Garlic, Vine
and Elm; and that others disagree in their Natures, and will not grow and
thrive by one another, as the Vine and Coleworts (the former shuns the latter,
and twines about every thing else but that: whence perhaps the old Notion, viz.
that Coleworts are an Enemy to Drunkenness, and are good to prevent it, first
had its Rise), Hemlock and Rue, Rose and Onion, the Vine and Laurel. If this, I
say, be all that they mean, that some Vegetables prosper and others do not
according to their Position and Situation to other Plants, I do not see but
that it is a Rational Assertion, and if the grounds of it were well examined
and looked into, they might yield matter for a devout and serious admiring of
the Works of God. There is such a thing as an Agreement and Consent between the
Natures of Beings: There may be observed a mutual League and Confederacy among
them. And other things are at Variance and Discord, and there seems to be an
open Hatred and Enmity between them Some have observed this in Animals, as the
Toad and Spider, the Stork and Bat, the Elephant and Hog, the Lion and Cock,
etc. which maintain a mutual Aversion to one another, from certain natural
Principles, as some Learned Enquirers have thought, tho this is rejected by
others. It is further remarkable that Plants of a contrary Nature and most
different Quality receive Nourishment from the same spot of Earth: Or (which is
equally admirable) in that one spot of Earth there are contrary Nourishments,
which those Plants draw to them according to their several Natures. This is a
noble Contemplation, and is worthy of our most accurate Disquisitions.

As to the Difference and Variety of the Nature of the greater Vegetables, and
of their Use also (which I am now coming to speak of) they are thus in part
represented by our English Homer, as he is deservedly styled, Spencer's Fairy
Queen.
The sailing Pine, the Cedar proud and tall,
The Vine-prop Elm, the Poplar never dry:
The Builder Oak, sole King of Forests all,
The Aspine good for Staves, the Cyprus Funeral:
The Laurel, meed of Mighty Conquerors
And Poets sage, the Fir that weepeth still,
The Willow worn of forlorn Paramours,
The Eugh obedient to the Benders will:
The Birch for Shafts, the Sallow for the Mill,
The Warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The fruitful Olive, and the Plantane round,
The Carver Holme, etc.


It is endless to go through the whole Vegetable Dominion, and assign the
Properties of every part of it. This is certain that Vegetables are sundry ways
beneficial to Mankind. Flax, Cotton, Hemp, with several others (of which I may
have occasion to mention some afterward) bear Clothing. And who knows not the
Usefulness of Plants as they are serviceable to Food and Physic? Tho there are
some Trees (and those the best in some respect) as the Oak, Fir, Elm, etc.
which yield no Fruit, or such as is very inconsiderable, the firmness and
usefulness of their Timber making amends in that kind, yet the greatest number
of Trees bear Fruit, and yield some sort of Food. The Earth is yearly a Teeming
Mother, from whose pregnant Womb all sorts of Fruits are produced for the
nourishing and sustaining that numerous Company and Variety of Creatures that
live upon it: And this wonderful Pregnancy and Fruitfulness argue a God. Whence
we find this to be the religious Language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.14, 15.
He causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the Service of Man:
that he may bring forth Food out of the Earth. He gives thence Wine that
makes glad the Heart of Man, and Bread which strengthens Man's Heart. Which
was gratefully taken notice of long before by that pious Observer of the Works
of Nature, Job 28.5.
As for the Earth, says he, out of it comes Bread, the support and staff of
Man's Life. This is one of the most visible and sensible Arguments of a Deity
that the World and particularly the Earth affords us. We taste as well as see
that there is a God, and that he is Good. Though there was a Fruit at first
which was forbid to be eaten, (by not attending to which our First Parents lost
Paradise) yet now all are freely indulged to us, and there is no transgressing
but by Intemperance and Unthankfulness. The cooler Fruits of the Summer (of
which there is great Variety) as they are for Pleasure, so they are given on
purpose by Providence to temper and allay the heat of our Bodies, and to cool
and refresh the Stomach in that Season of the Year. The warmer Fruits, Roots
and Herbs are in the Winter, when they are most serviceable to the Body. And
even the former Ones when they are laid up, and more digested and ripened by
time, are useful then likewise.

The American or Indian Plants far excel the Europaean Ones, as we learn from
those who have given us an account of the Coca, the Hovia, the Indian Fig Tree,
the Tuna, the Cacoa-nut, the Cocus-tree, the Metla. The last of these is thus
admirably described by the Immortal Cowley.

Plantar. lib. 9.
The Man that has the Metla may supply Himself with almost all things he can
want From Metla's almost all-sufficient Plant. Her very Tree is Fruit: her
Leaves when young
Are wholesome Food, for Garments serve when strong.
Nor only so, but to make up the Cloth
They furnish you with Thread and Needle both.
(A Thorn grows at the end of every Leaf, which together with the Stringy part
joining to it is used as a Needle and Thread to sow withal.) What though her
Native Soil with Drought is cursed,
Cut but her Bark, and you may slake your Thirst.
A sudden Spring will in the Wound appear,
Which through straight Passes strained comes forth more clear.
For Liquorish Palats Honey thou do bear,
For those whose Gust wants quickening, Vinegar.
But these are Trifles, thou do Wine impart,
That drives dull Care and Trouble from the Heart.
To all these Gifts of Luxury and Wealth
Thou giv'st us Sovereign Medicines too for Health.
Choice Balm from thy concocted Bark breaks forth.
No Antidote affords more present aid
Against doubly mortal Wounds by poisonous Arrows made.
Of all the Exotic Plants or Trees that we read of, the Cocus-tree or Indian
Palm Tree, (as some call it) is the most Admirable and Remarkable: For besides
that it bears clusters of Coco-nuts every Month, it affords Water, Vinegar,
Oil, Sugar: Yea, it supplies the Inhabitants with Bread, Wine, Clothing; for
the Pith of this Tree serves for the first, the Juice of it for the second, and
the Down of its Leaves for the third. This Tree alone is said to be sufficient
to build, rig, and freight a Ship. This alone is both Vessel and Cargo. Some
describe it thus, the Body and Branches of it yield Timber for Houses and
Ships: the large Kernel is Meat: the Shell is big enough to make Drinking Cups:
the Rind affords Materials for Cables, Sails, Ropes, etc. The Milky Liquor in
the Nut makes good Drink: and an admirable sweet Oil is pressed from the Kernel
of it. Mr. Herbert has thus deciphered it, In the Poem entitled Providence.
Sometimes thou do divide thy Gifts to Man,
Sometimes unite. The Indian Nut alone
Is Clothing, Meat and Trencher, Drink and Kan,
Boat, Cable, Sail and Needle all in one.
Or take it more largely in the Words of Mr. Cowley's Muse, What senseless
Miser by the Gods abhorred
Would covet more than Cocus does afford?
House, Garments, Beds and Boards, even while we dine,
Supplies both Meats and Dish, both Cup and Wine,
Oil, Honey, Milk the Stomach to delight,
And poinant Sauce to whet the Appetite.
Nor is her Service to the Land confined,
For Ships entire composed of her we find.
Sails, Tackle, Timber, Cables, Ribs and Mast
There with the Vessel fitted up, at last
With her own Ware is freighted; all she bears
Is Cocus growth, except her Mariners;
Nor need we even her Mariners exclude
Who from the Coco-nut have all their Food.


Among the Foreign Plants we may reckon Tobacco and Coffee: the former is the
Product of the Plantations in the West Indies, the latter grows on little Trees
or Shrubs in the Deserts of Arabia, and scarcely any where else: And both are
of great use at this Day in the Europaean parts, whether more for Diversion
than real Benefit I will not now dispute.

As to Physic, the use of Plants is notorious, as we may learn from every
Herbalist, and the Common Dispensatory. The Roots, Barks, Fruits, Seeds,
Flowers, Tears, Juices, Rosins, Balsams are particularly serviceable to Medical
Purposes. It has been observed and approved of by the most Inquisitive
Naturalists, that Plants are appropriated to particular parts of the Body; and
though they may be serviceable for curing Diseases of other parts, yet they are
chiefly and more signally destined for the redress of such and such individual
Ones: Thus Piony, Betony, Rosemary, Marjoram, etc. are appropriated to the Head
and Brain: Eye bright, Clary, Celandine, Rue, etc. to the Eyes: Parsley,
Marshmallows, Saxifrage, Drop-wort, etc. to the Reins and Bladder: Angelica,
Saffron, Balm, Buglosse, etc. to the Heart: Cardamom, Pepper, Ginger, Nutmeg,
etc. to the Stomach: Sebesten, Iujube, Lungwort, Horehound, Coltsfoot, etc. to
the Breast and Lungs. There are other Simples that are good against the
Distempers of the Womb, as Arach, Mother-wort, Birth-wort, etc. Herbs available
for Ruptures are Solomon's-Seal, Rupture-wort, etc. Wound-Herbs are St.
Iohn's-wort, Sanicle, Tutsan, Self-heal, Saracens Consound, etc.

And here I might mention what is asserted by several Ancient Natural
Philosophers, viz. That the outward Signature or Impression which is on some
Plants shows their inward Virtue; and that from the Resemblance which they have
to the parts of a Man's Body we may gather their secret Power, and know to what
particular part they are appropriated. Thus the Squill and Poppy are good
against the Headache, they themselves resembling a Head. The (...), from (...)
caput.
Walnut has upon its Fruit the Signature of the Head and Brain, and
accordingly it is beneficial to them. Which is taken notice of, and thus
represented by the Excellent Cowley, in his Fifth Book of Plants, Nor can this
Head-like Nut, shaped like the Brain
Within, be said that Form by chance to gain,
Or Caryon called by Learned Greeks in vain.
For Membranes soft as Silk her Kernel bind,
Whereof the inmost is of tenderest kind;
Like Pia and Dura matter.
those which on the Brain of Man we find:
All which are in a Seam-join'd Shell enclosed,
Which of this Brain the Scull may be supposed.
This very Scull envelop'd is again
In a Green Coat, his Pericranion,
Lastly, that no Objection may remain,
To thwart her near Alliance to the Brain,
She nourishes the Hair, remembering how
Her self deformed without her Leaves does show,
On barren Scalps she makes fresh Honors grow.
This Natural Stamp is observable on other Vegetables: Thus the Leaves of Balm
resemble a Heart: which Signature shows it to be Cordial, and a great Refresher
of that part. Eyebright has the plain impress of the Eye, and it is with
Success made use of against the Maladies of that part. Kidney-Beans, called so
because they represent the Kidneys, particularly affect those Vessels. The
Multiplicity of Joints and Knots in the Root of the Herb called Solomon's Seal
(which is denoted by its Greek Name (...)) shows that it is available against
Ruptures, and that it joins and knits green Wounds; it does close and seal them
up as 'twere, whence perhaps it has its Denomination. And Liver-wort and other
Simples might be mentioned, which are Medical for that part whose Signature and
Resemblance they bear. Some think this to be fanciful, but upon due
consideration it will be found to be very serious and solid: For these Marks
and Impressions are real things, and go along with the whole Species, and are
never altered. Two very Eminent Persons (to mention no more at present) who
were not guilty of indulging their Fancy and Imagination, and who were great
Enemies to Vulgar Errors and Prepossessions, freely own the significancy of
these External Resemblances on the Bodies of the Plants. The one is the Learned
De Verit. Christ. Relig.
Hugh Grotius, who among his Arguments for a God and Providence assigns this as
one. The other is the Famous Dr. Willis, who has (I remember) these Words in
his Pharmaceut. Some things are found good against the Iaundice by a similitude
of Substance, and as it were by a Signature, viz. as being endowed with a
yellow Juice, as Rhubarb, Yellow Sanders, Saffron, etc. These visible
Characteristicks of Plants were impressed upon them by the singular Favor and
Goodness of Heaven, to let us understand by the bare looking upon them what
they are useful for, to let us read in the Color, Figure and Proportion of
them what their intrinsic Nature is. In short, there is not the least Plant,
though never so contemptible and trodden under our Feet, but was made for some
use and purpose, as our late Improvements in this Study partly have discovered,
and as succeeding Ages (if they be not overrun with Sloth and Ignorance) will
further manifest to the World, and therein display the abundant Goodness and
Benevolence of God to it.

CHAP. VII.
God is to be found in the Subterraneous World. Where are Waters, Fires,
Metals, Minerals, to which latter belong Earths, Salts, Sulphurs, Stones both
common and Precious. The Loadstone particularly considered, and the Author's
Opinion concerning it. He disapproves of the Total Dissolution of the Earth at
the Deluge, and gives his Reason for it. His Judgment touching Earthquakes and
Trepidations of the Earth. He invites the Reader to reflect with great
seriousness upon the late Instance of this kind: and to that purpose offers
some Remarks upon it. Which he closes with a Devout Address to Heaven, to
supplicate the averting of the manifestation of the Divine Displeasure in this
kind for the future.

IF we descend into the Subterraneous World (as Kircher styles it) (...) Psalm.
95.4. infima fundamenta vel penetralia terrae, quae sciri nequeunt nisi
exquisita perscrutatione. Buxtorf.
the deep places of the Earth, as they are called by the Psalmist, these also
will supply us with Arguments to the same excellent purpose. Here we shall be
transported with the Contemplation of the strange Make and Composure of those
various Caverns that are hid from common Eyes, those Unseen Rarities of the
Underground World: for what is unseen of this Earth is most astonishing. Here
is a vast Receptacle of Waters, called by Moses the Fountains of the great
Deep, Genesis 7.11. This great Collection or Abyss of them is placed in the
Central parts of the Earth, as Dr. Woodward has probably asserted. Here are
Millions of Aqueducts to convey Water from the Sea. Here are Springs and
Fountains that supply the Land with Brooks and Rivers. Here are Medical Waters
and Baths for the relief of the Diseased. Here are also the vast Treasures of
Fire, that is, that Combustible Matter wherein those subtle Particles are shut
up that engender Fire; and likewise here are Magazines of Actual Fire, as
appears from those Volcano's, those fiery Eruptions which are taken notice of in
several Places. And that there is Fire in the Earth may be proved from this,
that Dr. Woodward, Not. Hist. of the Earth, Par. 3.
the Bottoms of the deeper Mines are very sultry, and the Stone and Ores there
are very sensibly hot, even in Winter. Here are lodged Metals (the 7
Terrestrial Planets, as the Chemists are pleased to call them) Gold (the
Sovereign and Chief of all, because of its transcendent Purity, Brightness,
Solidity and Weight) Silver, Steel (which is but the harder Part of Iron)
Copper, Quicksilver, Tin, Lead. As for Brass (Orichalcum, aes) it is a mixed
Metal, viz. of Copper and Lapis Calaminaris: Pewter is a Compound of Tin and
Lead. The Property of Metals whereby they are distinguished from other
Terestrial Bodies is, that they may be melted, and are malleable. Especially
Pure Gold is ductile above all other Metals, for an Ounce of it may be so
extended by Malleation, that it will take up ten Acres, if Dr. Charleton may be
credited. As for the use of Metals, none is wholly ignorant of it: they were
made for Defense and War, for Instruments to work with, for Medicine, for
Ornament, for Vessels to be used in eating and drinking, and all other Services
whatsoever, for Money and Coin; and in a word, they are some way or other
useful to all the necessary Ends of a Man's Life, and consequently are
Testimonies of God's Care and Concern for the Good of Mankind. Accordingly you
will find that these Metals are particularly taken notice of and mentioned by
Job to prove the infinite Power and Wisdom of God. Surely there is a Vein for
the Silver, and a Place for Gold where they fine it. Iron is taken out of the
Earth, and Brass is molten out of the Stone. Job 28.1, 2.

Here are the Repositories not only of Metals but Minerals, (for though by a
general Name all Metals are called Minerals, because they are dug out of the
Mines, yet in Propriety of Speech these are distinguished from them, because
whereas Metals are properly those Bodies that are capable of being melted by
the Fire, and of being beaten or drawn out by the Hammer, Minerals have only
one of these Properties) as Antimony, Litharg, Verdigrise, Minium or Red-lead,
Cerusse or White-lead, Black-lead, etc. And several other Fossiles there are
(which if I seem not to range in their due Order, I may be excused, for I have
consulted at one time or other several Writers on this Subject, but they all
differ from one another, they do not refer these Minerals to the same Heads) as
1. Those that are usually called Earths, as Terra, Sigillata, Lemnian,
Armenian, Samian Earths, and several others that are used in Medicks. 2. Salts,
as Common Salt (natural, not factitious) Salt Gemem, Salt Armoniack, Nitre or
Salt Petre, Allom, Vitriol or Coperas, etc. 3. Sulphurs, as Ambergrise (a
bituminous Matter found sometimes on the Seashore) Arsenick, Orpiment, or
Yellow Arsenick, Napht, Bitumen or Asphalt, Amber, Iet or Black-amber,
Stone-coal or Pit-coal: Concerning the last of which it might be observed with
relation to our selves here in England, that the Counties of the sharpest and
piercingest Air, and most troubled with cold Winds, Snow and Frost (as
Northumberland, Cumberland, etc.) have the greatest Plenty of Coals and at easy
Rates: which by the way is no contemptible Instance of Divine Providence. Of
these Sulphurous Materials it is likely Job's words are to be understood, chapter
28. v. 5. where speaking of the Earth, he says, Under it is turned up as it
were Fire, i. e. although the Superficies of it shows nothing of this kind, but
perhaps yields Corn and other Fruits, yet under it are such Fossiles, as
Brimstone and other Combustible Matter, which contain Fire in them, and so it
is properly said [ as it were Fire.] 4. Stones which are either Common or Rare.
Of the former Sort there are dug out of the Earth Marble (of which there are
several kinds, black, white, greenish, yellow, red, the chief of which last is
Porphyrie) Alablastre, a kind of softer Marble, Freestone, Flint-stone, Slate
or Tile-stone, Whet-stone, Lapis Lydius or Touchstone, Limestone,
Plaister-stone (of which Plaster of Paris is made) Asbestine or Incombustible
Stone, Talk, Pebles: and several Stones used by Physicians, as Lapis Lazuli or
the Azure-stone, Boodstone, Iew-stone, Aetites, Nephritick-stone, etc.

Those Stones which are Rare and Precious, are not (as the Vulgar Ones) made of
the Collection of small Sands, but they are liquid Consistencies or Drops
condensed in the Earth: they are such as these, the Diamond or Adamant, and the
Crystal: the former of which as it is the most Sparkling, so it is the Hardest
of all Stones; wherefore by reason of its irresistible Hardness it is used in
cutting and working of other precious Sons. Both this and the Crystal are
Transparent, and void of all Color. The Colored Ones are the Carbuncle, red
as Fire: Ruby, sparkling more than a Carbuncle, and not so fiery: Beryl, a
Seagreen: Opal, of all Colors very delightful and beautiful: Turcois, blew,
white and green blended: Topaz, golden Color, yet greenish: Emerald, green:
Chrysolite, a lighter green: Sapphire, blew or skie-colour'd: Hyacinth or
Iacinth, reddish, or red mixed with yellow: Jasper, of several Colors, green,
purple, yellow, and the Veins are of different Colors: Agate of diverse
Colors mixed: Onix, called so because it is of the Color of a Man's Nail:
Sardonix, compounded of an Onyx and Sardius: Chalcedony, of a cloudy duskish
Color: Amethyst, of a violet Color, i. e. compounded of red and blew:
Cornelian or Sardius, a languid Blood-Colour. All these Rich Gemms which are
remarkable either for their Transparency, or their Colors, or their Virtues,
(as Expert Jewellers and Lapidaries know very well) are lodged by a Divine Hand
in the Caverns of the Earth as in a safe Casket, and thence they are taken out
to enrich and embelish Mankind, and are illustrious Tokens of the Heavenly
Bounty and Munificence, and therefore even the Inspired Writings frequently
make mention of them.

To the Mineral Kingdom belongs the Lodestone, which has a most amazing
Virtue to draw Iron and Steel to it: and as the Masters of Experiments tell us,
being capp'd with Steel, its Atractive Power is the more forcible. But it has
puzzled all Mankind to assign a Reason of it: for what has been hitherto said
by Philosophic Men seems to be altogether unsatisfactory. Who can give Credit
to that Romantic Solution of the French Phi^osopher? The Attraction of the
Lodestone, says he, is caused by the Communication of the striate Particles
which issue forth of the Poles of the Heavenly Vortex, and find a fitter and
better Passage through the Pores of the Magnet and Iron than any other Bodies,
and drive the Air before them, and cause those two to meet together, and as
'twere to salute one another. But, besides that this is not Attraction but
Pulsion, it is a mere Figment of that incomparably Ingenious Monsieur, who knew
not how to solve this unaccountable Phenomenon, but by such Philosophic
Jargon as this. And as for the Load-stone's causing the Needle, which is
touched with it, to turn toward the North, there is this lame account given of
it. The Earth is a Great Magnet, and where there is most Earth ( i. e. least
mixed with Sea) as in the North Part of the World, the Lodestone looks that
way, and with it the Needle of the Compass. Others, to make it out plainer,
fancy a vast Company of Quarries of Lodestone in the Northern Part of the
World, whereby this Attraction is made, and whereby the Magnetic Needle tends
toward the North as its beloved Point. But this is fanciful rather than solid,
and no Man alive can make any certain Proof of there being more Load-stones in
the Northern Part of the World than there are in the South, or either of the
other two Quarters of the Earth. Therefore I must needs declare that though I
have an Ear always open to any ingenious and probable Resolution of a
Philosophic Difficulty, yet I look upon the Accounts that have hitherto been
given of this Phenomenon to be futile and insignificant: and no Man of
considerate Thoughts can acquiesce in them.

And I further declare that I am thoroughly persuaded that this Strange
Phenomenon (as well as some others, viz. that of Gravity and Levity, and the
Reciprocal Motion of the Sea) is not to be solved by the Principles of Matter
and Motion, but that there is a Supernatural Cause to be assigned of it. I do
verily believe that it was intended that this and such like Prodigious
Occurrences should lead us directly to the acknowledgment of a Supreme and
All-Wise Agent, to whom only we can attribute such strange Effects, unless we
miserably strain our Reasons, and fancy Causes where there are none. It is fit
that among so may Philosophic Problems and Difficulties as there are, there
should be some few that cannot possibly be resolved by a recourse to Natural
Causes; that by this means the Study of Bodies ^ight not extinguish the Notion
and Sense of an infinitely intelligent Mind; that Philosophy might not shut God
out of the World, but that on the contrary we might be forced to confess an
Immaterial and Spiritual Being, of Immense Understanding and Wisdom. So here
particularly we are gravelled with the Attraction of the Lodestone, and if we
speak freely and ingenuously, we must own that we know not how to render an
Account of it; which without doubt was thus designed by Providence, that we
might look up to the Original Founder of all Beings, and acknowledge his
Superintendency and more immediate Agency in this and some other strange Events
which we meet with in the World. Here is a dull obscure Stone that has Power
to Attract Iron to it, which is denied to Diamonds and Sparkling Jewels. This
one dark and unpromising Mineral is more serviceable to Mankind, as to
Navigation which is so much improved by the Invention of the Nautick Compass
made useful by this Magnetism, than all the Precious Stones and Gemms which the
Earth so charily deposites in her Bosom, and which being taken thence make such
a goodly Show in the World with their Luster and Brightness, and which really
deserve our Admiration, because they are borrowed from a Divine Light and
Glory. And thus I have in part showed (for it was not my Intention to insist
Largely on these things) what are the Wonders that are contained in the Bowels
of the Earth, what are the Treasures that lie hid under ground, and which are
trampled upon every Day.

And I doubt not but they are disposed of and placed in the same Order in which
they were at the first Creation. Though I find it avouched lately by Dr.
Woodward, Not. Hist. of the Earth, Part 1.
One of a very Philosophic Genius, that the whole Terraqueous Globe was at the
time of the Deluge put into the Condition that we now behold it in. He as well
as the Learned Theorist holds the Dissolution of the Earth, but in a far
different manner: for the Theorist makes it the Cause of the Deluge, but his
Hypothesis is that the Deluge was the Cause of the Earth's Dissolution; and
that all Metals and Minerals, and whatever else is found in the Globe of the
Earth, owe their present Frame and Constitution to the Flood I crave leave to
dissent from this Learned Author, for tho as to the Main he has excellently
performed his Task of giving us a Natural History of the Earth, and has
certainly taken the right way to compile it, founding it upon continued
Observation and Matter of Fact, yet perhaps he has gone too far in asserting
the Total Dissolution of the Earth, for according to my Apprehension there is
no need of maintaining this. It is my Persuasion that it is not very congruous
to the Notion which we have of the Divine Wisdom and Prudence to dissolve the
Whole Frame of the Earth, which was at first made with the utmost Art and
Skill, and to make a New Settlement of things in this Globe. It is somewhat
hard to adjust this to the Wise and Discreet Management of Heaven. It has been
objected by some, that the Laws of Gravity are not observed in this Hypothesis,
i. e. the weightiest and heaviest things do not subside lowest. Metals are not
always deepest in the Earth, and next to the Center, and yet they are heaviest:
and sometimes the lightest Bodies, as Shells, Bones of Fishes, etc. are lowest
of all, or at least are not placed according to the Proportion of their Weight:
which shows that these Bodies did not sink by virtue of their specific
Gravity, which is the thing he asserts. But I confess I rather say this to
provoke this Learned Author to make good his Hypothesis in all Particulars in
this nature, than to contradict what he says about it, for I have not duly
examined the Matter. Tho the Deluge was Universal, and in a great measure
rifled and disordered the uppermost Parts of the Earth, and displaced most of
the Bodies which it found there, and consequently made a very great Change, yet
at present I am not inclined to believe that there was (as He expresses it) a
turning all things topsie-turvy, and unhinging the whole Frame of the Globe,
and that (as he speaks in another place) the whole Earth was taken all to
pieces, and dissolved at the Deluge, and afterward framed anew. It will be
hard to prove that Massy Stones and all other Solid Minerals and Metals lost
their Solidity by the Flood. If this were so, how comes it to pass that the
Shells (which he often speaks of) remain still? Why were they not dissolved?
And why were the Particles of the Teeth and Bones of Sea-Animals (which he
likewise mentions) not dissevered? How came they to escape crushing in their
falling down and subsiding, which he supposes? Yea, how come they to be in the
very same Figure and Shape that they had at first, and to have no alteration?
Can we think that the constituent Parts of such solid Bodies as Stones and
Metals were disjoined, and that their Cohesion perfectly ceased, and yet that
those lighter Bodies of Shells, etc. kept their Consistency, and underwent no
Change at all? This I think is scarcely possible to be solved.

His main Proof of this Dissolution of the Earth and the Confusion that
followed it, is the Strata, the Layers of Stone, Chalk, Marl, Gravel, Coal,
Clay, etc. which he takes notice of. But I ask, why might not these be of
Primitive ordering? Why may we not hold that these Strata were originally so
disposed? I do not hitherto see any thing that hinders our Belief of this. And
as for Shells and Trees, etc. that are found in the Earth, they may be (and I
agree with him that they are) a Proof of the Universal Deluge, but they seem
not to me to be an Argument of that Total Dissolution of the Earth which he
asserts, that Ransacking of Nature, as he is pleased to call it. In short, I am
inclined to believe that all those Orderly Sets or Ranks of different Sorts of
Earth, which are every where observable, were made by the Almighty Hand before
the Flood, yea most of them at the first Production of the World. But if this
Curious Author should afterward make a full Proof of what he has propounded,
yet still our Main Point is preserved entire; for he grants, nay professedly
avers and declares that this Change of the Earth Part 2.
produced the most consummate and absolute Order and Beauty, and that it was
for the universal Good and Happiness of the whole Race of Mankind that were to
come after. And (which is yet more) he proves that Part 3.
this Change, this Dissolution of the Primitive Earth, and the framing of
another out of it, is a great and singular Work and Argument of Providence, of
Counsel and Sagacity, and he demonstrates in several Particulars that it is the
Product of a Reasoning and Designing Agent. We are come then at length to the
Grand Matter which I was all along aiming at, viz. the Proof of a Deity from
the Make and Disposal of the Earth. Thus that of the Psalmist is evinced to be
true, Psalm. 104.24.
The Earth is full of thy Riches, which he says to convince us of the Wisdom
of God in the Works of the Creation.

And now to close this part of my Discourse, viz. concerning the Earth, I will
add a few Words concerning Earthquakes, which are occasioned by those Spacious
Cavities and Vaults, which I have asserted before to be within the Bowels of
the Earth. Some of the old Philosophers imputed this Motion to Winds and
Vapors bred in these hollow Places. Others ascribe it to excessive Waters got
into the Channels of the Earth by reason of excessive Rains, and agitated there
in those vast Caverns. It was the Opinion of some of the Ancients, that this
Motion was the Effect of the Sea's beating on the Earth, and powerfully moving
and shaking it: whence Neptune had the Title of (...) Earth-shaker, and he was
called (...) and (...), which Words are of the same import. Others think it is
caused wholly by the Subterraneous Fires and Sulphurous Matter in those
Cavities. Thus that Admirable Dr. W. Not. Hist. of the Earth.
Observer of the Works of Nature, whom I have frequently cited, attributes this
Phenomenon to the Elevation of the Water out of the Great Abyss (which he
supposes to be in the central Part of the Earth) by the Virtue of this
underground Fire. He has a Particular Notion of this Heat causing this
Commotion and Disorder in the Earth. But I conceive that All these are the
Causes at one time or other, nay it may be at the same time, of Earthquakes
strictly so called, and Tremblings of the Earth which are Tendencies to them.
The Winds generated in the Entrails of the Earth, may by extending the Parts in
some Places cause a Tremour, or by a sudden violent Eruption occasion a Greater
Motion. So by the immoderate Rains, or by Inundations of the Sea, the Meatus of
the Earth may be washed and worn away, and other adjacent Parts may give way
and sink downwards, and thereby cause a Motion above, if with a subsiding, in
some of the extreme Parts. Also the Subterraneous Sulphury Matter (of which
there is great Quantity) being inflamed may produce these Concussions by
extraordinary Rarefaction, which making more room must needs produce an
unwonted Motion, and sometimes a horrid Noise. So that an Earthquake may be
said to be a kind of a Subterranean Thunder. This was Pliny's Notion of old,
Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 70.
Non aliud est in terra tremor quam in nube tonitru. Thus he speaks because of
the Resemblance between the breaking of the Earth and of the Clouds, and the
Dreadful Shock that accompanies both.

But though Earthquakes are thus resolved into Physical Causes, yet they are to
be looked upon as remarkable Testimonies of the Divine Power and Greatness. We
cannot but own and reverence these when we consider the Dreadful Effects of
these Concussions. Nay, it is hardly to be solved by any of the forementioned
Causes, how there can be a trembling of the Earth at the same moment in Places
that are so vastly distant from one another. There was an Universal Shock
almost all the World over in the Emperor Valentinian's time, about the Year of
our Lord 369. In the Year 1601, there was a shaking of the Earth in Asia,
Hungary, Germany, Italy, France at the same time. In Peru (as Acosta relates)
this Tremor oftentimes reaches near six hundred Miles from North to South. This
must have an Extraordinary Cause, and that Man must strain his Philosophy who
undertakes to give a Satisfactory Account of it from Common Principles and the
Natural Efficacy of Things.

This unusual Exertment of Divine Providence we of this Nation (as well as
others) have September 8. 1692.
lately felt with Surprise and Astonishment. And I hope it will be thought no
Digression if I here remind the Reader to reflect upon it with great
Thoughtfulness and Seriousness, and to consider and weigh the true Nature and
Design of this amazing Event. I know there are some Persons that slight all
such Occurrences, and tell us that they are from Natural Causes, and therefore
it is Weakness and Vanity to trouble our selves about them; Men of Philosophy
(say they) are acquainted with the Spring and Source of these Accidents, and
therefore are not possessed with Fear and Dread, and cannot be persuaded that
Nature, acting in its own way, and according to its due Laws, intends us any
Mischief. But the Reply to these Men is easy, for though I most willingly grant
that Earthquakes, and the lesser Tendencies to them, as Tremblings of the
Earth, are the Product of Natural Causes, yet it is as true that the God of
Nature, when he is provoked by the Sinful Enormities of a People, may and
oftentimes does turn these Natural Effects into Punishments and Judgments. So
that both Philosophy and Divinity are concerned here, and they are very well
consistent. We may as Naturalists search into the physical Reasons of these
Events; but then as we are Students in Religion we are bound to make a farther
Enquiry, and to take notice of the Design of Heaven in these great and
wonderful Effects that happen in the World. With Philosophers and Physicians we
are ready to grant that Scarcity and Famine, Plague and Pestilence are
naturally produced: and yet we are ascertained from the Sacred and Infallible
Records of Scripture, that these were oftentimes inflicted by God on purpose as
the Recompense of Men's heinous Sins. So it is in the present Case, (which makes
it very plain) the Motion and Shaking of the Earth are to be attributed to
Causes in Nature, (and I have before assigned what they are) yet we must
likewise acknowledge that there is a more than Ordinary Hand to be taken notice
of in this Matter: and as Understanding and Devout Christians we are to observe
what the Purpose of Divine Providence is at such a Time. Pursuant to this I
offer these brief Remarks on that Signal and Stupendous Dispensation.

1. The Ancients have thought that this was ever attended with something that
was Boding and Ominous. Thus Socrates the Ecclesiastical Historian pronounces
concerning the Earthquake which happened in the Days of the Emperors
Valentinian and Valens, that it was Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 20.
(...), a certain Sign of the Shakings and Convulsions which afterward were in
the Christian Churches. And I could produce other very Grave Writers who speak
to the same Effect with relation to Earthquakes that were felt in other Places.
Those Commotions in the Natural World are thought to foretell greater in the
Ecclesiastical and Civil.

2. The Holy Scriptures have particularly taken notice of this as a Sign of the
Divine Anger, and as a Forerunner of great Evils and Calamities. Thou shall be
visited of the Lord of Hosts with Earthquake, etc. Isai. 29.6. It was foretold
by our Blessed Savior, ( Mat. 24.7.) that there should be great Earthquakes in
diverse Places before the final Overthrow of Jerusalem. And you may observe
that in the Sacred Writ great Alterations, but especially those which are
Mischievous and Destructive, are Job 9.6. Psalm. 46.2. and 60.2. Isa. 13.13.
Joel 2.10.
expressed to us by Earthquakes, by moving and shaking the Earth, and such like
Terms. This is the Style and Language of the Old Testament, yea and of the New,
as is evident from several Passages in the Rev. 6.12. and 8.5. and 11.13, 19.
and 16.18.
Book of the Revelation. And therefore my Assertion is not groundless when I
say that this particular sort of Prodigies generally foresignifies some
Remarkable Evils and Calamities.

3. Let us observe and consider the Number and Frequency of this kind of Events
of late. Above thirty Cities and Towns in Italy and the adjoining Parts have
felt this Dreadful Motion within a few Years. And they that converse with the
History of Modern Occurrences, cannot but have informed themselves that there
have been more Terrible Shakings of the Earth in the space of these last ten
Years, than there were in above two (I may say 3 or 4) hundred Years before.
This certainly deserves our most serious Consideration, and may assure us that
some very Uncommon and Extraordinary thing is portended by these frequent and
repeated Agitations of the Earth under our Feet.

4. and lastly, Let us look upon this late Trembling of that Vast Element under
us as an Act of Divine Judgment and Mercy mixed together, (for we may consider
it under this double Notion.) First, let us view it as a Judgment, as a
Terrible Threatening from Heaven, as a Token of God's Anger and Displeasure
because of our multiplied Offenses and Enormities, for this is the General
Character of this Prodigious Occurrence. Let us see the Divine Hand stretched
out against us, and let us speedily reform our Lives, lest our continuing in
our Impenitence provoke the Almighty to cut us off speedily. Secondly, let us
admire this late Visitation as it has a Mixture of Singular Mercy with it. We
have heard what has been the deplorable Condition of some Other Countries
where Earthquakes have happened. Great Numbers of People have been swallowed up
alive by the gaping Ground, and have been buried in the Bowels of the Earth:
and the Circumstances of those that survived were unspeakably lamentable and
miserable. It is the peculiar Goodness of Heaven to us that we have not met
with the same Severity, that this late Concussion of the Earth was not of that
Violent and Furious Nature, and that it proved not fatal and destructive to us.
We are concerned now to remember and practice that Advice of our Blessed Lord,
Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. I say a worse thing, for even to
speak Philosophically (which some would have us to do in this Affair) if the
Sulphurous Matter in that part of the Earth which is under us (or whatever
else it is that is the Cause of Earthquakes) be not quite spent or dissipated,
or if its Exhalations have not had vent through the subterraneous Caverns and
Channels in some other Place, (it may be at a great distance from us) there is
some reason to fear an After-Clap, a more fierce and vehement Shock, with a
rending of the Earth, to make way for those Sulphurous Vapors. Thus even on
Natural Grounds it may be suspected that this Gentle Trepidation which we have
felt will be followed with a more Direful Commotion, and that both we and our
Habitations may be interred in one Common Sepulcher. But to wave Philosophy, I
am sure according to Divinity we have cause to fear that a worse thing will
befall us, because we grow rather Worse than Better by all these things that
happen to us.

If the Reader thinks fit, we will join in our Devotion upon this Occasion, and
humbly revering the late Stroke of the Divine Hand, supplicate that the Omen
may be happily prevented and averted.

O thou Eternal Being, Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth! Vouchsafe, we
beseech Thee, that we may be fully sensible of this Judgment which Thou have
threatened us with. Thou who show thy self a God of Power and Vengeance, by
making the Earth to tremble under its Inhabitants, put them into the like
Posture, and cause them to fear and stand in awe of Thee, to acknowledge that
they deserve to be utterly destroyed for their repeated Transgressions and
Offenses, and that it is from thine unspeakable Patience and Long-suffering,
from thine infinite Compassion and Forbearance, that so Profane and Wicked a
People are not actually consumed. O Blessed God, make this an effectual means
to convince Men of thy Almighty Power and Sovereignty, of thy impartial Justice
and Severity, and that thou have Various Ways of punishing Offenders. Thou
can make All the Elements serviceable to this dreadful End. Thou did
destroy the Sinners of the Old World with an Inundation of Water; thou did
consume Sodom and the Neighboring Cities by Fire: Thou have often by an
Infectious Air brought a devouring Pestilence on a People; and thou have also
caused the Earth to open its Mouth and swallow up rebellious Sinners. And this
we might justly fear will be our Lot from thine avenging Hand. Our Crying Sins
and abominable Practices have long since deserved that this Sudden and Terrible
Calamity should overtake us. And now if Thou do actually inflict it upon us,
we must acknowledge Thee to be Just and Righteous, for there is no Punishment
too severe for us.

But spare us, O Thou Merciful Preserver of Men, and deal not with us according
to our Demerits. Enable us to call to Mind that Terrible, but Loving Warning
which Thou lately gave us, and let our Behavior be suitable to it. Let us
with humble Thankfulness acknowledge thy singular Goodness and Mercy to us. Thou
have not dealt so with all People, for Thou have shaken the Earth, and
destroyed the Inhabitants of it at the same time. But Thou have been favorable
to Us, and have only threatened us. O let this thy Goodness and Forbearance
toward us lead us unto Repentance, and firm Resolves of virtuous Living. Do
Thou make us so deeply apprehensive of this extraordinary Instance of thy
Long-suffering and Clemency, that we may be effectually stirred up to render
Thanks unto Thee our Preserver and Savior, and to testify our Thankfulness in
a hearty abandoning of all our evil Ways, and in turning unto Thee our Gracious
God by Amendment of Life, that Thou may never be provoked to renew the
Tokens of thy former Displeasure, and to deal more severely with us than
hitherto Thou have done. To this End be pleased to affect our Hearts with the
Consideration of this late Wonderful Dispensation of thy Providence toward us.
Add this to this Great Mercy and Deliverance, that we may lay it to Heart, that
we may be made Better by it, that we may really improve it for thy Glory and
our own Welfare both here and hereafter. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for the
Merits of Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be Glory to eternal Ages.

None, I think, but Atheists will refuse to say Amen to these Oraisons: for
they resolving all things into mere Natural Principles (and by these they mean
no other than Chance or a Casual Hit of Matter and Motion) will allow of no
Religious Reflections on the Events that are in the World. And I wish there
were none that notwithstanding their disavowing the Name of Atheists as
reproachful, imitate them too much in this. Then we should have a happy Mixture
and Conjunction of Natural Philosophy and Religion; then in all the Works of
Nature we should acknowledge an Intelligent and Wise Being that is the Author
and Disposer of them. So much concerning the Earth.

CHAP. VIII.
The Sea, with all its Treasures and Riches, is another Evidence of an
Omnipotent and All-Wise Being. The several Sentiments of Writers concerning its
Ebbing and Flowing are examined. The Phenomenon is resolved into a
Supernatural Efficiency, and why. The Saltness of the Sea-waters is in order to
the Preserving them from Putrefaction. The Sea is kept within its Bounds by an
Almighty Arm. God's Providence seen in making it both the Source and Receptacle
of all Waters. The Theorist's Conceit of the Primitive Earth's being without
Sea, refuted by Scripture and Reason. The great Usefulness of the Sea in
several respects.

AGain, the Sea furnishes us with abundant Arguments for an Invisible and
Almighty Being. For what is the Sea but that great Heap of Waters which was
gathered together by God's Omnipotent Fiat at the Creation of the World? For he
was pleased to depress some Parts of the Earth, and make them lower than the
others, and so the Waters fell down thither by their own Weight, and have ever
since been contained within those hollow Parts of the Earth. These are called
the Waters under the Earth in the Second Commandment, because they are in those
Receptacles that are below the Surface of the Earth, and which were made on
purpose to receive and hold that Element for the Use and Advantage of Mankind
and other Animals. But from those Discoveries that have been made concerning
that Vast Element we may conclude that it encompasses the greatest Part of the
Earth. Africa is an Island, or a Peninsula at least: Asia and Europe make one
Peninsula: America consists of two vast Islands. Or take it according to Geogr.
l. 1.
Varenius's Geography, who tells us that the four spacious Continents of
Europe, Asia, Africa and America, are four Great Isles: and so is Greenland,
and that Part of the World which is termed the Southern or Magellanick Land. So
that indeed this Terrestrial Globe is made up of Islands, some greater and
others less. Or, speaking more generally, we may say that the whole Earth seems
to be but One Great Island.

In this Psalm. 104.25.
great and wide Sea (as the Psalmist rightly styles it) are things creeping
innumerable: for the Fishes of the Sea are reckoned among Creeping Animals,
because they move on their Bellies in the Water, and because they are without
Legs and Feet: and they are said to be innumerable because the Water is the
most prolifick of all the Elements. It is emphatically said by the same
Religious Observer, that here are not only small but Great Beasts, for there
are generally Greater Animals in this watery Element than on the Earth, because
of the abundant Humidity which is procreative of a more than ordinary
Magnitude. But of these I am to treat distinctly afterward, when I come to
speak particularly of Animate Creatures. In the Sea are not only Fishes, but
Plants proper to that Salt Element; of which sort is Coral, which is a stony
Concretion in form of a Shrub growing in the Sea, and therefore is called by
Paracelsus the Sea-Tree. Here is Amber, a Sulphurous Rosin of the Earth cast
into the Sea, and there concreted. There are Pearls of a vast and almost
incredible value taken out of the Deep: so that what our Savior said of a
Merchant-man, Mat. 13.46. might be literally true, viz. that he sold all he had
(his whole Estate) to buy one Pearl: for here God has treasured up Great
Riches in a small Compass. But the Sea it self is the Richest Mart in the
World, God has made the Traffic on the Ocean to be the greatest Procurer of
Wealth and Abundance.

Who admires not the singular Hand of the Almighty in the Ebbing and Flowing of
this huge Mass of Waters? Twice in somewhat more than four and twenty Hours
there is a Reciprocation of Tides. Six Hours the Sea flows, and as many Hours
it ordinarily ebbs. The Cause of which strange and astonishing Phenomenon is
differently assigned. Not to attend to the Stoics, (who holding the World to
be an Animal, fancied the breathing or sucking in of the Seawater and letting
it out, as Fishes do through their Gills, made this rising and falling of it)
it is generally ascribed to the Moon because it is known by Experience that the
Sea swells when the Moon is above the Horizon, and so by degrees swells yet
more till it comes to the very Vertical Point: and then when it declines, the
Sea Flags. Now, if it be thus, if the Sea swells when the Moon passes over the
Meridian, and presses the Air and Water; and if the greatest Swellings and
Flowings are at the Equinoxes, because the Moon then more directly and
perpendicularly presses the Earth; and withal, if in full and new Moons the
Motion of the Sea toward the West be more vehement and impetuous than
ordinary, because the Moon is at such times nearer the Earth, and so more
forcibly presses the Water, and thence causes a greater Flux than usually; if
it be thus (as we are told) who can doubt whether the Phenomenon be not to be
solved by this Planet? Yes, there is some Place for doubting, because (as
Geograph. l. 1.
Varenius assures us) it is not attested by the Observation and Experience of
the World, that when the Moon is Vertical the Tides are always highest, and on
the contrary, that when she is at the Opposite Point it is always lowest Water:
which yet would necessarily happen if the Moon were the Total Cause of the Flux
of the Sea.

And further, as there is not the Greatest Flux in some Places when the Moon is
in its Meridian, or at the time of its Newness or Fullness; so it is true that
in most Parts of the Mediterranean, and in the Baltic Sea, and on the Northern
Shores of the Pacifick Sea, there is little or no swelling or flagging of the
Waters. It is true these Seas do not lie so open to the Moon as the Ocean: yet
notwithstanding this, they should have some considerable Degrees of Flux and
Reflux, but they have not. The same is observable in the Euxine Sea, and in the
Dead Sea in Asia; nor is there any regular and due Motion in the Archipelago.
Yea, in the Northern Ocean beyond Scotland, toward Norway and Green-land, the
Exaltation and Depression of the Waters are scarcely sensible. From which
Instances we may gather that the Moon is not the complete Efficient of the
Agitation of the Sea, for then all Seas would be affected with its Influence
more or less. The most that we can say is, that where this Reciprocal Motion
is, it depends only in part on the Regency of the Moon. Kepler attributes it to
a Magnetic Virtue in the Moon, but he has not had the Fortune to gain any to
his Opinion.

Others therefore attempt to solve it another way: if the Moon cannot effect
this Reciprocation of the Sea's Motion, the Sun shall. Accordingly some imputed
it to the Sun's raising of Vapors and Exhalations from the Sea. This was an
old Opinion, for De Plac. Philos. l. 3. c. 17.
Plutarch tells us that it was held by Aristotle and by Heraclitus: but there
seems to be little Foundation for it, because Exhalations are raised in all
Seas, Lakes and great Waters, but there is not a Flux and Reflux in them all,
as has been already observed. The Younger De Motu Marium.
Vossius holds that this Motion is caused by that of the Sun, which is from
East to West, and such is the Flux of the Sea. And this seems to have been the
Opinion of Pliny and Ptolomy long before. But there is no ground at all for it,
for the Tides may as well be imputed to the Stars as the Sun, seeing they as
well as this move from the East. Again, it is to be remembered that the Sea moves
from West to East in the Ebbing, and yet the Sun at the same time has no such
Motion. But there are so many and easy Objections (and those unanswerable)
against this Hypothesis, that it would be lost time to insist on this any
further.

But if neither Sun nor Moon can do the Work, the Earth must, according to
Galilaeus and Dr. Wallis, who make the Motion of the Earth the sole Cause of
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea. But first they must prove that the Earth moves:
which will be a hard Task, though it is so Modish a Piece of Philosophy among
the Moderns: and then they must render a Reason why Lakes, Meres and Rivers do
not flow and ebb as well as the Sea, at least why they do not move in some
small measure, seeing they cannot but be affected somewhat with the Agitation
of the Earth, as well as the Broader Waters. The Learned De Orig. ^ontium.
Lydiat and some others search lower for the Original of the Sea's Motion, and
impute it to Subterraneous Fires. But this is very weak, for if those Fires
were able to give it Motion, it would certainly give it Heat also; and the
lower Men dive, the warmer they would feel the Waters to be: but I never heard
of any Man that pretended to prove this.

Wherefore the Insufficiency and Weakness of these several Accounts given by
Learned Men concerning the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, incline me to resolve
this Phenomenon wholly into a Supernatural Cause, viz. the Power of God. Lest
this should be thought to be a Piece of Philosophical Phanaticism, I will give
the Reader an Account of what I say. I grant it is noble and worthy of our
rational Faculties to search into the Natural Causes of things, and
Philosophically to unravel the Secrets of the most abstruse Effects. But when
we find our selves puzzled and non-pluss'd, and are not able to trace the
Effects to their Physical Causes, we ought to look up higher, and own the more
Signal Finger of God. And this is our present Case, we cannot apprehend any
Second Causes wholly interested in the Matter that is before us: after all our
Searches we find that this Wonderful Phenomenon is above the Efficiency of
Natural Agents: and it is certain that it is worthy of the Almighty Creator that
some should be so, and that for an excellent Purpose, viz. that we should have
some Check to our Inquisitions, that we should be sensible of the Weakness and
Shallowness of our Conceptions, that we should adore the Creator himself, and
that we might thoroughly be convinced that the Divine Power infinitely surpasses
that of Natural Efficients. For these and other Reasons which we know not of
(nor is it fit we should) God sometimes acts absolutely and entirely without
making use of the Natural Agency of Second Causes: he manages and performs the
whole Work himself without any Concurrence of theirs. Thus by an immediate Act
of his Power he every Day puts this vast Abyss of Waters into a vehement Motion
all the World over. And this Exertment of Power is accompanied with infinite
Goodness, for it is for the real Advantage and Welfare of the Universe that
this Heap of Waters is thus forcibly shaken by him. The alternate Motion of the
Sea which is caused by this violent Concussion, is for the Preservation of that
Element, and the hindrance of its being corrupted.

And I impute the Saltness of these Waters to this: for as for the Reasons
which some give of this particular Property of the Seawater, as that it
proceeds from the Rocks of fossile Salt which are at the Bottom of the Sea, and
sometimes upon its Shores, as some would make us believe; or that it is the
Effect of the Subterraneous Bituminous Fires, as Lydiat conceits; or that it is
caused by the Adustion of its Particles by the Sun, as Aristotle thought, and
the like; I look upon them as very imperfect and unsatisfactory Accounts. It is
true it has been observed that the Ocean is salter in those Places which
belong to the Torrid Zone than in those that are near the Poles, or under them;
but this seems not to proceed from the Sun's Heat, but from other Causes. There
is from the Ocean near the Equinoctial, a greater Quantity of Water evaporated
than from the more remote Seas, and this is dissolved into Showers of fresh
Water which fall generally in those Places which are at a great distance from
the Equinoctial, and qualify the Saltness of those Seas. Besides, fewer Rivers
(whose Water is void of Saltness) discharge themselves into that Part of the
Ocean which is near the Equinoctial, than into that which is near the Poles,
and thence the former exceeds in this saline Quality. These may be the Reasons
why the Ocean between the Tropicks is salter than in the Temperate or Frigid
Zones. I say further, if Saltness were produced by Heat, then there might be an
Experiment of turning fresh Water into that which is salt, at least brackish,
by Fire: but this was never yet done. Yea, I prove that Saltness is not from
the Solar Heat, because this on the contrary changes the Nature of that Water
which is salt, and makes it fresh; for the Water that is by the Heat of the Sun
exhaled from the Sea, and turned into Showers, (as was intimated before) is not
Salt. Therefore the Heat of the Sun is not the Cause of the Salsitude of the
Waters. I am then of Geograph. l. 1. c. 13.
Varenius's mind in this, that these salt Particles are coetaneous with the
Ocean it self, and therefore we ought no more to inquire into the Original of
them, than into the Original and Generation of the Sea it self, or of the whole
Earth. But we may with some Satisfaction rest in the Final Cause of this
Property, which is that it may be serviceable to the same end that the Motion
of this Element is, viz. to preserve it from Putrefaction. If the Ocean were
either stagnated, or had lost its saline Quality, we should soon feel the dire
Effects of it: Fishes would die, Navigation would be impossible because of the
Corruption of that Element, and the Inhabitants of the whole Earth would in a
short time be infected and stifled with the noxious Steams of it. Here then we
cannot but own, and with Reverence admire the Power, Goodness and Wisdom of the
Great Founder of the World, that he was pleased thus to contrive the Ocean for
the Good of Mankind, and the Service of the Inhabitants of this lower World.

And these Divine Attributes are no less observable in the Bounding of this
Vast Element. For though, it is true, it is lodged in the more depressed Parts
of the Earth, yet by its rapid and vehement Motion it is naturally apt to fly
out of its proper Receptacles and Channels; and in many Places it has advanced
it self and gained ground, and is now in a Tendency to spread it self yet
further, and to enlarge its Dominions. But the Overruling Arm of Heaven puts a
stop to its Career, and checks its enraged Waves, and permits them to pass no
further. This that Pious Sufferer acknowledged when he was describing the
infinite and unsearchable Power of God, Job 26.10.
He has compassed the Waters with Bounds. The (...) i. e. circino terminum
aquae descripsit. Buxt. Lexic.
Hebrew Verb here used is by Buxtorf rendered Circinavit, and then the Elegancy
of the Expression is very considerable, He has as with a pair of Compasses
exactly described the Bounds of the Sea: he has with Divine Art and the most
Accurate Skill and Wisdom terminated the boisterous Waves and raging Billows of
the Ocean, he has shut it in with Mountains, Rocks and Commodious Shores. This
is taken notice of by another Inspired Author, Psalm. 104.9.
Thou have set a Bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to
cover the Earth, and to overwhelm the Inhabitants of it. Especially those of
the Islands (of which We are a Part) are concerned to mention this with most
thankful and hearty Resentments. Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, therefore (as the same Devout Man says) let the Multitude
of the Isles be glad thereof. If He were not Lord and King, if he did not rule
and govern the World, and particularly this Impetuous Element, if he did not
mercifully restrain and confine it, it would unavoidably break in upon us and
devour us. It was unsufferable Presumption in Xerxes to attempt to fetter the
Hellespont, it was saucy Arrogance in King Canu^e to charge the Sea not to come
in upon him. And it is but a fond Superstition in the Venetian to think to
espouse the Sea, and marry the Adriatic on Holy Thursdays. It is the Almighty
Providence of Heaven only that can give Laws and Rules to the Roaring Waves. It
is this only that can allay and moderate the Deep when it boils like a Pot: it
is this alone that can curb and master its Fury. So the Almighty himself
informs us, Job 38.8.
He has shut up the Sea with Doors; and again, Ver. 10, 11.
He brake up for it his decreed Place, and set Bars and Doors, and said,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud Waves be
stayed.

And farther Proofs of this Divine Power we may take notice of in the Deep, if
we consider that God has made this both the Source or Origin, and also the
Common Receptacle of Waters. Fountains and Springs arise not only from the
Great Abyss of Waters in the Center of the Earth, (as a late Dr. W. Not, Hist^
of the Earth, Part 3.
Worthy Writer has rendered very probable) but from the Ocean, i. e. from
condensed Vapors or Waters themselves sent up from the Sea through the Earth,
and by the Subterraneous Fires exhaled up to Hills and Mountains, and thereby
the Cold condensed into Waters, which supply Rivers, and are at last carried
back to the Sea. This admirable Contrivance is, as I conceive, meant in Psalm.
104.8. They ( i. e. the Waters) go up by the Mountains, (by advantage of Rise
they climb up through secret Passages of the Earth) they go down by the
Valleys, (they thence fall by their natural Weight into those Places where they
are most profitable for the Use of Men) and so at last into the Place which
thou have founded for them, they return to the Ocean their Great Repository.
There is a Continual Circulation of Water in the Earth (as of Blood in the
Bodies of Animals:) it constantly flows from Place to Place, and never stands
still. From the Sea it passes to Spring-heads through Subterraneous Channels
(and sometimes Fish as well as Water is conveyed in these Passages, if they be
of any considerable largeness; whence by the way I think may be given an
account of Shellfish and Bones of other Fish, which are sometimes found in
digging deep in the Ground: it is probable they came from the Sea in these
Pipes under ground:) from those Spring-heads the Water is derived to Rivers
(tho I grant these are partly supplied by Rains and Snows, as when sudden
Inundations happen:) and from the Rivers there is a Passage into the Sea again,
and thus the Waters run round as Blood in the Veins and Arteries of Living
Creatures. And the circular Motion of one is as necessary for the Good of the
World in general, as the other is for that of Animals in particular.

There is indeed a Late Ingenious Writer that fancies the Sea is a Blemish to
the World, and therefore he tells us that the First Earth was without any such
thing. But it is no wonder that he that dreams of an Earth without Clouds makes
it wholly void of Seas. Yet this is to be wondered at that any Man should aver
with Confidence that the Antediluvian Earth was without Sea, when we read in
Genesis 1.21. that God created great Whales; they must be Whales on the dry Land
according to this Author, for he allows no Sea for them; nay, when we expressly
read that God gave Adam Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, Genesis 1.26, 28. Only
here again our wonder must cease when we remember what the Author has since
divulged to the World, viz. that the first Chapters of Genesis are not to be
understood in a Literal, but an Allegorical Sense. So that according to this
Gentleman it was an Allegorical Sea; and Allegorical Fishes too are spoken of
by Moses, or rather by God himself: and then there is as much reason to believe
that the Earth and the Air with the Cattle and Fowl in them, which are
mentioned in the same Place, are Allegorical, and he may as well say the whole
World is so too.

But it was Unphilosophically done of him, as well as against Scripture, to
make the Earth destitute of Sea; for if we rightly scan the Nature of things,
we must acknowledge that these two cannot be separated, because the great Mass
of Earth cannot subsist without a proportionable Measure of Moisture, nor can
the Water be contained in a Place unless the Earth holds it. The Water pervades
all the Parts, to be a kind of Bond to them, that the Earth may not crack, fall
asunder and crumble into pieces. Again, the Water was made to give Drink to
every Beast of the Field, Psalm. 104.11. and even to Man himself, whose
primitive Refreshment it was. This must be derived mostly from the Sea by the
Channels in the Earth, ^or the Rains and Mists which this Author supposes
before the Flood were not sufficient for this and all other Purposes of this
Element. Besides, it is an unintelligible Mystery that there should be no
Clouds, and yet Rain. Likewise, the Seawater percolated by its passing through
the Earth, and at the same time mixing with it, was appointed by the Great
Operator of the World to be serviceable to the Fruitfulness of the Earth, for
without this (as well as Rain) no Plants, and consequently no Fruits, and (as
the Consequence of that) scarcely any Animals could be nourished. The World
then must have been in a very miserable Condition according to this Learned
Author's Theory, which locks up all the Water of the World in the Abyss, so
that no Body was the better for it. According to him it was well that the Frame
of the Earth broke and fell down into the Great Deep, (and how could it do
otherwise when it was made so slight?) for from that Dissolution the Earth has
been eve^ since universally watered. So it seems the Deluge was not so much a
Curse as a Blessing; for though the Inhabitants that then were, perished by it,
yet ever after we have found the Benefit of it. Indeed this Author has well
husbanded the Matter by his Hypothesis, for it would have required, he says,
Eight Oceans (though several good Mathematicians have not been of his mind) to
bring that Universal Flood on the World, but he has done it with a far less
Quantity of this Element. So that it is plain he is a good Provident
Philosopher, and has saved a great deal of Water by his Theory. But where God
and Nature are not sparing, why should we be? And why does the Theorist
imprison the whole Element within the Earth? So that according to him there was
no Sea for above sixteen hundred Years: or if there was any, it was a Sea shut
up and of no use. I have endeavored to set it free, and that by Good
Authority, even the Divine Law of the Creation mentioned once and again in
Genesis 1. I have showed the Necessity and Usefulness of this Great Blessing to
the World, and I will proceed to do so yet further.

It cannot be denied that though the Sea seems to be very bleak and chill, yet
the Influence of it is Refreshing, yea Warming. Which Minutius Felix was
sensible of, when speaking of the Providence of God, which is so careful of the
Good of the Universe, he tells us that Britannia sole deficitur, sed
circumstantis maris ^epore recreatur.
our Britain is deficient as to the Sun, but in way of Recompense is recreated
and comforted by the warmth of the Sea which surrounds it. This tempers the
Cold and Austerity of the Winter, and gently warms those Countries whose Shores
it washes. This Secret was not unknown to Tully, as is clear from that Passage
in his Writings, De Not. Deor. l. ^.
The Seas being stirred with the Winds are so warm, that a Man may thence
easily perceive that there is a certain Heat contained in so great Moisture;
for that Warmth is not to be reckoned as external and adventitious, but as
raised from the inmost Parts of the Ocean by Agitation.

It was also designed by God that it should be useful for Navigation, and
consequently for Traveling: for though the vast Seas which are between
Countries seem to stop the Traveller, yet by the help of Ships a speedier
Passage is made than if he went on dry Land. Especially since the Invention of
the Sea-map and Compass we can visit the remotest Parts of the World in a far
shorter time than we could have done if there had been no Seas. This the famous
Americus Vespatius, Columbus, Magellan, and our own Drake and Cavendish could
witness.

In the next place, I might adjoin this, that the Sea is of great use for
setting Limits and Boundaries to several Kingdoms and Nations in the World. For
by reason of the Interposition of this they have an entire and separated
Dominion, because those Parts of the Sea which is next to them do as it were
terminate and confine their Jurisdiction: and those neighboring Waves are
themselves part of it. For though the Sea be in perpetual Flux, and is not
strictly and physically the same, yet it is so in respect of its Channel and
the Shores it washes. A Man may have a Propriety in those things which are
Variable and Transient: he has a right to the Air and Light, and accordingly
an Action lies in case of Nuisance, i. e. annoying the one, and obstructing the
other. So it is with the Waters of Rivers, or of the Sea: tho they are
Variable, yet they are subject to Propriety. For (as the Learned in the Law
rightly tell us) things may be Common as to their Use unto All, and yet they
may be Proper by Right to one Nation or Person. Thus such and such Seas are
appropriated to one certain Kingdom or Country, and so become the peculiar and
distinct Bounds of those Places. And withal, they are a very good Guard and
Fence, they are a strong and secure Wall, especially if they surround the
Region. Thus the Sea is of singular Use.

Moreover, let us call to mind what the Pious Psalmist says, Psalm. 107.23, 24.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in great Waters, these
see the Works of the Lord and his Wonders in the Deep. They are entertained
with variety of Wonderful Occurrences, which those at Land are Strangers to: on
these prodigious Mountains of Waters they have a Prospect of those Admirable
Things which others cannot reach the Sight of. And after all they are filled
with Admiration and Astonishment, and must confess they cannot sufficiently Job
3^.1^.
enter into the Springs of the Sea, and walk in the search of the Depths, as
God himself speaks.

Lastly, notwithstanding what some fantastic Men have conceited, these Waters
are a Great Ornament to the World. The Poets, who are Good Judges in this Case,
and are owned to have Skill in determining what is Beautiful and Adorning, give
their Suffrage here, for it is well known that in their Descriptions of Places
they make use of this as an Embelishment. To conclude, the Earth and Sea make
one Beautiful Globe, and are a convincing Demonstration of the Wisdom of God in
making and contriving the World, and that in such excellent Variety.

CHAP. IX.
The Wisdom and Power of God are discerned in the Formation of Living Creatures
that are Four-footed: which are distinguished accordding to their Hoofs, or
their having or not having Horns, or their Chewing or not Chewing the Cud.
Their Serviceableness in respect of Food, and Work or Labor. Instances of the
latter Sort. Even Creeping and Grovelling Animals exalt their Creator. Fishes
(some of which are of a Vaster Magnitude than any other kinds of Animals) show
the distinguishing Providence of God in the peculiar Structure of their Bodies,
in order to the Element they live in. Fowls are purposely shaped and contrived
for the particular use they were designed for. Their Food is sometimes
extraord^narily provided for them: and sometimes they are supported without it.
They are observable for their being Musical, for their imitating Man's Voice,
for their Beautiful Colors. Birds of Prey are generally solitary. The several
Incubations of these Creatures afford Matter of singular Remark. The wonderful
Make and Contrivance of their Nests speaks a Divine Architect.

WE have spoken of the Inanimate World: now I proceed to that which is Animate,
viz. those Creatures which belong to the Sensitive and Animal Kingdom. And in
these, because they have Organized Bodies, the more signal Contrivance of
Divinity is seen. Here chiefly the Hand of an Intelligent and Divine Author is
discernable. Especially if we consider the wonderful Variety and Diversity of
this sort of Beings: for they are either Terrestrial, Aquatile or Aerial.

The first are those living Creatures which have their abode upon the Earth,
and they are either Fourfooted or Reptile. The former, which we generally call
Beasts, are either Whole-hooft, i. e. such whose Hoofs are whole and entire,
and have no division at all, as the Elephant, Horse, Ass, Mule; or that have
divided Hoofs, and they are of two Sorts.

First, Such as are cloven into two Parts only; and they are either, 1. Horned
Beasts, and Chewing the Cud, as the Ox, Cow, Sheep, Goat, Stag, Rhinoceros.
Concerning whom we may observe that the Meat which is rudely and in have eaten
by them is conveyed back to the Mouth again, there chewed, and then swallowed a
second time. For these Creatures want an upper set of Teeth, and therefore
Rumination is given them to supply that defect: and they are furnished as it
were with a double Stomach, for they fetch back the Meat which was before eaten
and let down into one part of the Stomach; and they eat it again, and then send
it more prepared to the other part or side of it. Or, 2. they are without
Horns, and yet Chew the Cud, as the Camel and Dromedary: But as to Teeth, there
is this difference between this sort of Animals and the other, that though they
chew the Cud, yet they have Fore-teeth in the upper Mandible. Or 3. they
neither have Horns nor chew the Cud, as the Swine or Hippotamus.

Secondly, There is another sort of Four-footed Animals with divided Hoofs,
viz. those that are Claw-footed, i. e. whose Hoofs are divided into more parts
than two, as the Lion, Bear, Wolf, Fox, Tigre, Leopard or Panther, Dog, Cat,
Mouse, Hare, Coney, Ape. Tho we cannot give an exact Account or Reason of this
Difference in Animals, yet it is reasonable to believe that the Diversity of
their Nature and Shape is according to the Different Uses and Ends for which
they were made. Particularly as to the difference of these Beasts relating to
their Chewing or not Chewing, the Excellent Lib. de Ventric. and Intestin.
Dr. Glisson has most divinely penetrated into this Secret of Nature, and has
discovered the particular Reasons of it, and therein manifested the Wise Design
of the Author of Nature.

And here I may be excused from saying any thing concerning the Fabric of
Animals, because that will be included in my Discourse of the Body of Man,
which as to the main and substantial Parts differs not from those of other
Creatures.

Likewise, the Great Usefulness of these Animals is so well known that I need
not much enlarge upon it. Not to mention how serviceable they are for Clothing,
several of them are for Food, whereby our Lives are upheld: and this was a very
merciful Indulgence to Mankind, especially after that great Primitive
Malediction, Genesis 3.17, 18. which had so great Influence on their Bodies: and
therefore these stood in need of some more than ordinary Recruits, viz. the
active and generous Spirits which are produced by that Nutriment which is
caused by feeding on Animals.

Others are for the Service of Man in those Laborious Works which are above his
Strength, and which could not possibly be performed without the assistance of
these robust Creatures. Thus Oxen and Horses are of indispensable Use in
Ploughing, and other Employments in Husbandry, without which there could be no
prospect of a Harvest, and consequently the whole Staff of Bread would be
broken. The former of these two Creatures were heretofore ( i. e. before the
Invention or frequent Use of the stirring Flail) helpful in threshing or
treading out the Corn: and the latter were of old most eminently useful in
Ba^tel, as they are also at this Day: to which purpose we have that Excellent
Rhetorical Description of this Animal in Job 39. made by God himself. And
besides, it is unspeakably serviceable in Journeying and Traveling, and in
bearing and carrying those Burdens which are too heavy for humane Shoulders.
This was anciently the Work of Mules and Asses, and is so now in Foreign
Countries. Where also Camels, which have a Natural Pack-saddle on their Backs,
showing them to be Beasts of Burden, are very frequent, and are employed in
those Parts of the World in the like Service. Dromedaries, well known in India,
Arabia, Africa, can travel a hundred Miles a Day with great Burdens on their
Backs. And both these and Camels are particularly prepared for it by the Wise
Disposer and Moderator of all things: for they can live without Drink 4 or 5
Days, and thereby are fitted for their long Journeys in the Deserts where there
is no Water. The Elks in Swedeland and Livonia and the adjacent Parts, are very
swift Beasts, and are used to draw or carry: they are much swifter than Horses
and of that bigness. The Laplanders Rain-Deers serve them for all Uses: they
are Animals proper to that Country only.

The Great and Mighty Elephant was heretofore extremely useful in War, (as we
read in Q. Curtius and other Historians) and did Wonders. However, if we
respect only his Vast Bulk and Proportions, he is a visible and standing
Monument of the Divine Power. Which is the meaning of what is said, Job 40.19.
He is the chief of the Ways of God, he is Reshith the Beginning, the Top, the
Head, the Principal of all the living Creatures made by God. Here is as 'twere
a Complication of Animals, here are many Beasts in one, and thence he has his
Name or Behemoth, i. e. as it were a Plurality of Beasts: for such his
extraordinary Greatness seems to include in it, and thereby sets forth the
Infinite Power of his Maker.

And in the all other Four-footed Animals (of which we are speaking) there are
some Emanations of the Celestial Power and Virtue to be discerned. The
fecundity of the Divine Goodness is seen in the Various Exertments of the
Animal Life in these Creatures, as the Strength of the Horse, the Ox, etc. the
Fierceness of the Lion, Wolf, Tigre, Leopard; the Greediness of the Swine; the
Mildness of the Ass and the Sheep; the Salacity of the Goat; the Swiftness of
the Camel and Dromedary, of the Horse, the Hound, the Hare, etc. the Sagacity
of the Fox and Ape; the docible Nature of the Elephant; the domestic
Faithfulness of the Dog, and his Love to his Master; and all the other
different displayings of the Sensitive Nature in these Beasts. For the
Indulgent Creator would have all the various Species of Brutes enjoy their
Essence in the way which is most agreeable to them.

The other Sort of Terrestrial Animals are those that are called Creeping
Things, as the grovelling Serpent, (of which there are several kinds) the
slow-paced Snail, Adders, and Snakes, and particularly the Rattle-snake which
makes a Noise before it is seen, and so gives warning of its being near; and
abundance of other Reptile Animals which proceed from the same Infinite Source
and Author. For it is certain that these despised Creatures are as beautiful in
their kind in the Universe as Angels and Cherubims: and they according to their
Make and Nature extol their Creator as well as these. Though we need not
believe the Mahometans when they tell us that at the time when Abraham was cast
into the Fire by the Chaldeans, the Frogs came and spurted Water out of their
Mouths upon him, (for which Reason these Animals are in great Esteem with them,
and must not be killed) yet we may join with them when they say that The
Coaxation of Frogs is Lauding of God. The meanest Creature that creeps upon
Earth speaks a God, praises his Name, and celebrates his Honor; for besides
that its very Being and Life are the Sole Gift of an Infinite and Omnipotent
Author, it is someways useful and profitable in the World, and thereby conduces
to the Divine Glory.

The next Rank of Animals are those which live wholly in the Waters, viz. in
the Sea or in Rivers, as Fishes. Of Living Creatures these were the first that
were made, then Birds, and afterward Four-footed Beasts, because they exceed
one another in their Make and Qualities: for the Creation was Gradual, and
proceeded from what was less perfect to that which was more. But though these
Aquatiles be inferior to other Animals, as being destitute of several Bodily
Parts which the others have, yet in some respects they are equal to them, and
as to their Fruitfulness they exceed the greatest Part of all other Creatures.
These and Birds being Ovi^arous have many young Ones at a time, which is the
Effect of that Blessing, Be fruitful and multiply, Genesis 1.22. which (as we may
observe) was particularly and peculiarly spoken to Fish and Fowl, though not
exclusively of other Creatures. Indeed it was congruous to Divine Providence
that there should be a very great Number and Plenty of Fishes, because this
sort of Creatures (above all the rest) feed one upon another. Of all Animals
these are of the vastest Magnitude, as the Whale, and all Cetaceous Fish. But
especially Whales, those Mountanous Fishes, those Living Islands, those
Hyperboles of Nature, exceed all other watery Animals in greatness. Therefore
the singular Power and Providence of God are set forth in the Description of
the Leviathan, Job 41. as well as in that of its Brother at Land the Elephant,
in the foregoing Chapter. And there are other Fishes of a very large Size, as
the (Crocodile (which is so great that Bochart fancies it to be meant by the
Leviathan: and a late Panchot. M. D.
French Author attempts to prove that there are no other Dragons in Nature but
Crocodiles) the Dolphin a great lover of Men and Music, the Tuny, the
Saw-fish, and several others, which together with the lesser Inhabitants of
this briny Element give Testimony to a Deity. Even these Mute Animals proclaim
the Divine Power and Wisdom.

It is to be observed to this purpose that though Fishes have some Parts common
to them with other Animals, yet they have several that are proper and peculiar
to their kind: which shows the distinguishing Providence of God in the
Structure of their Bodies, and making them serviceable to those ends which they
were intended for. None of them, except the Cetaceous kind, have any Ears or
Ear-holes, yet they hear if several credible Writers are to be believed: nay,
it is plain from this, that those who go about to take them do it Silently, for
they find that Noise affrights them from coming to the Bait or Net. Fishes of
the greater and more perfect kind have Lungs and Breath. But to those of the
ordinary kind and size their Gills serve instead of Lungs, and with them they
let in and out the Water which is to them in lieu of Air. Others who have been
very Curious in their Enquieries are of opinion that they take in and emit the
Air with their Gills, and so these are of the same use to them that Lungs are
to Quadrupeds; and the Blood passes in its Circulation through the Gills as in
Beasts through the Lungs. For that Fishes have a kind of Respiration, and
breathe through these Organs, is not to be doubted, they say, whatever the
Aristotelians have said to the contrary. Fishes have no Eyelids, as other
Animals have, and the reason is because they have no use of them.

Mr. Ray has showed that their Bodies are purposely shaped for their more easy
Swimming. Their Fins answer to the Whence Pinna is both a Fin and a Wing.
Wings of Birds, and cause their quick Motion. Yea some of them have such long
and large Fins that they serve them to fly with. Not only Not. Hist. l. 9. c.
26, 29.
Pliny mentions the Sea-swallow and other sorts of Fishes that fly above the
Water and hover in the Air a considerable time, but De Piscib. l. 4. c. 18.
Rondeletius and our Purchase make mention of them, and I do not see any reason
to question their Credit. This these Fishes are able to do by the extraordinary
Strength of their Fins. And the same Parts (though not so strong) in others are
the necessary Instruments of their moving so nimbly. And so are their Tails,
which are as 'twere the Rudder to these Vessels. And in most Fishes there is an
Air-bladder which helps them to swim. And from other Particulars which are
mentioned in Habieuticks, especially in those Curious Remarks on Fishes made by
the Ingenious and Inquisitive Mr. Willoughby, it is evident that an
Intellectual Spirit is the Author and Contriver (for there can be no other) of
these Animals.

Having thus spoken of those Creatures that live on the Earth and in the
Waters, let us now in the next place take a Survey of those whose Habitation is
in the Air, or who have Wings; and so I take in even those whose abode is on
Land, as Cocks, Hens, tame Geese, etc. or generally on the Water, as Ducks, and
great Numbers of Wild-Fowl; for the original Matter of Fish and Fowl being the
same, (for we read that they were both made out of the Waters, Genesis 1.20.) it
is no wonder that some of these latter affect this Element. Particularly
concerning Waterfowl it may be observed that they are generally Whole-footed,
which Structure of that part was designedly such that their Feet might be a
kind of Oars in the Water, and thereby promote their swimming. Not only as to
these but all other Feathered Animals, we may observe with Mr. Ray, that the
particular Make of their Bodies, the peculiar Configuration of those Parts
which distinguish them from all other Creatures, is adapted to the use of
Flying, which is a Property bestowed on this Rank of Creatures, and none
besides.

In order to this they are very Light, and in order to their Lightness they are
of a Hot Temper, and very Spirituous: they have large Lungs to let in good
Quantities of Air when they fly long and far. They have little Sharp Heads to
cut the Air, and make way for them; they have Small and Slender Legs of an
inconsiderable Weight, and their Feet are made with a convenient Breadth to
shove the Air. On all these Accounts they are framed for their Work, and are by
their very Make, agile, brisk and full of Expedition. It seems to be a Design
of Providence that they propagate by laying of Eggs, because if they had
brought forth their young ones alive, especially in considerable Numbers, they
must first have born them in their Wombs, which would have been burdensome, and
would have hindered their Flying. And it is particularly observable that the Wing
(which is their proper Glory) is of a most astonishing Fabric, and that the
Strength of all Fowls lies in this part chiefly: whence perhaps eber ala is
from abar potens, robustus fuit, or abir fortis, robustus. The Reader may
consult that Industrious and Curious Author beforementioned (who has reduced
all the Feathered Tribe to their proper Classes.) He exactly Domini
Willoughbaei Ornitholog. lib. 3.
describes both the outward and inward parts of Birds, and shows the peculiar
use and end of their Structure as it is different from that of other Animals:
and he shows that they are furnished with Parts according to the end they were
made for, and that the Frame of them is above the Art of finite Creatures.

The Eyes of Birds generally excel those of other Animals, for they flying at a
good distance from the Earth, it was requisite that they should be
Quick-sighted, that they might espy their Food. Because 'twas not fitting for
them to have Teeth to chew their Food, they have therefore a Double Stomach, or
their Meat is prepared both in their Crops and in their Gizards. It is first
taken into the former, and there softened and macerated, and then it is sent to
be perfectly digested in the latter which to that end is of a strong Muscular
Substance. And that the Meat may be thoroughly concocted, they take down Pebbles
and little Stones to grind it: so in the Ostrich's Stomach are sometimes found
Stones, yea and Iron. Albertus Magnus and Aldrovandus testify on their Knowledge
that they have seen this Animal swallow these, but either by vomition or
excretion they ejected them.

The Provision which is made by the Wise Maker of all things for this sort of
Creatures, especially in the extremity of Winter, when the ground is fast
locked up with Frost, or when all things are covered with Snow a long time, is
very wonderful. To which our Savior (who was acquainted with the Nature and
Condition of all Beings) refers when he says, Mat. 6.26.
Behold the Fowls of the Air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into Barns: yet your Heavenly Father feeds them. He in an
extraordinary and sometimes inconceivable way provides Food for them, without
their taking any care about it. This one Consideration, if it were pursued (by
the Helps which we have from Natural History, wherein the strange ways of
furnishing these Creatures with Food are mentioned) would lead us to a firm
Belief of God's Providence. When our Great Instructor bids us consider the
Ravens, Luke 12.24. he acquaints us that there is something extraordinary in
the Provision made for those greedy devouring Creatures. And he that was an
Eminent Type of our Lord had long before observed that God feeds the Young
Ravens, Psalm. 147.9. the Emphasis and Force of which Words may be learnt from
Mr. Willoughby in his Ornithologia, where he tells us that Ravens newly hatched
are not fed by the old ones, (as the young ones of other Birds are) but are
abandoned by them for a time, and by the special Provision of Heaven are
nourished with the Yolk of the Egg remaining in the Belly after exclusion: for
a good part of the Yolk is received into the Cavity of the Belly in these Birds
when they are newly hatched, which being by degrees conveyed into the Guts by a
certain Passage, serves to nourish the young ones newly excluded.

And we shall be further persuaded of Divine Providence when we consider that
many of the Winged Nation are maintained and supported a long time without
Food. Swallows feed upon Gnats and Flies and other Insects in the Air; which,
when the Weather begins to be cold, disappear, and therefore go away because
there are no more of these Insects to feed on. But how they fare in their
Travels is hard to tell, viz. whether they meet with some kind of Food in those
Places to which they repair, or whether they subsist without any, which is most
probable. For it has been found that they immure themselves in holes, and lie
there till the Summer comes; for it is certain that several Animals, as well as
these, live some Months without taking any Food. And Sennertus and other
Physicians give some Examples of the like among Men and Women.

This sort of Creatures which I am now speaking of (I mean Birds in general)
are hot and dry, yet they drink but little, which goes into the Habit of their
Bodies; for they (as Fishes) have no Bladder to hold any Urine, that their
Bodies may be the lighter, and be fitter to move in a fluid Element, i. e. to
fly or swim in the Air. But these small Drinkers are great Singers: which that
Divine and Inspired Poet, who is so diligent an Observer of all the Works of
the Creation, takes notice of, Psalm. 104.12. They sing among the Branches, they
take pleasure in frequenting of Groves, they love to exercise their Natural
Music among Trees, according to that description which Virgil gives of them,
Aethera mulcebant cantu, lucoque volabant.
One reason why they are more Musical than other Creatures, is because they are
of a hotter Complexion, and therefore require more Breath and Air to cool them,
and consequently make more Noise, and more Variety of it. They are the Male
Birds that sing most, whilst others are generally mute, for those are endued
with a greater natural Heat than these; and moreover by the Music of their
Voice they charm their Females, and allure them to their Pleasure. And as these
Creatures sing naturally and without teaching, so some of them are taught to
speak, or to imitate a Man's Voice and Singing, which is from a peculiar
Conformation of those Organs which are serviceable to the Voice, and is in no
other Animals besides. In this they are Pleasurable and Delightful, and give a
great Diversion to Mankind, which God was pleased to make one end of the
Creation.

Some of them are observable for the Variety and Beauty of the Colors with
which they are adorned. Even these are Arguments of a Divine Hand, or else God
himself would not have mentioned his giving goodly Wings (or Feathers) unto the
Peacock among his other Great and Admirable Works, Job 39.13. How the
generality of Fowls are really profitable and advantageous in respect of Food
(and that of the choicest kind) is so well known that it need not be enlarged
upon. And as for Birds of Prey (which have their Use likewise) it is observed
by a Learned Enquirer into these things, that generally they are not
Gregarious, i. e. they do not live and fly together in Companies, which is by a
singular Providence, for should they come in Flocks, and jointly set upon
Cattle, they would do a vast deal of Mischief.

If next we should speak of the several Iucubations of Volatile Animals (from
the appearance of the Punctum Saliens, the little bloody capering Spot, the
first Essay and Rudiment of Life, to the daily Advances of it, and even to the
time of the breaking their Shells and coming forth, which are all accurately
described by Dr. Harvy) we should find very Remarkable things to entertain our
thoughts, and to cause us to acknowledge (as that Noble Observer often does) an
Incorporeal and Divine Author of them. And it may be therein we might read
Lectures of Our selves and our Own Origination, for it is no incredible Paradox
that all Animals, yea even the whole Race of Mankind (as well as Castor and
Pollux were thought to be) are of an Egg. And the little Sanguine Point is the
like in Man that is in other Creatures; but whether its Motion be Dancing or
Trembling, whether it be a Presage of Joy or Sorrow in our Lives, is uncertain.

The Nests of Birds are undeniable Evidences of an Overruling Wisdom and
Prudence. These Warm Lodgings which they frame for themselves and their young
ones are of all Shapes. Some are flat, some elevated: some round, some
semicircular: some hanging, some lying: some Horizontal, some Perpendicular:
some quite open above, some ceiled and closed wholly, some in part only: some
are lined and matted as 'twere: some seem to be plastered with great Art. And
it is remarkable that Birds of the same kind make their Nests always of the
same Materials, and laid in the same Order and Figure; so that by the Make of
the Nest we may certainly gather what Bird's Nest it is. Now, whence can this
so neat, so commodious, so exact Architecture proceed but from a Divine
Director? For these Animals have of themselves no understanding of the Means
and the End, and of the Subordination of one to the other: and yet they
constantly act as if they perfectly understood these. Wherefore unless we will
assert them to be Rational Creatures, i.e. to be like our selves, which is to
say that Birds are Men, we must confess that they are acted by an Intelligent
Agent; and thence it is that they erect, build, shape, and sometimes conceal
their Nests with unimitable Art, Contrivance and Cunning; and they hatch and
bring up, and protect their Young with indefatigable Care and Industry, and
even with the danger of their Lives. Tho they are void of Counsel and Reason,
yet by the Direction of a Supreme Guide they perpetually tend to those Ends
which they have no knowledge of.

And it is observable further that when one of these Creatures varies from the
common Instinct of Nature, and shows no natural Affection and Tenderness in
hatching or feeding its Young, yet then there is Provision made for them. The
Raven mentioned before does sometimes leave her Brood, yet you have heard how
they are taken care of. The Cuckoo builds no Nest, as other Birds do, nor sits
upon or hatches its own Eggs, but finding the Nest of some other Bird, devours
the Eggs she there finds, and in the room thereof lays her own, and accordingly
they are hatched by the other Bird. The Ostrich leaves her Eggs in the Earth
(Job. 39.14.) in the Lybian Sands; but there they are hatched and brought to
maturity by the Heat of the Sun: and this seems to be a particular Act of
Providence, because this great and heavy Creature would crush the Eggs with its
weight.

CHAP. X.
In the Smallness of Insects is displayed the Skill of the Divine Artificer. A
Fly is of a wonderful Make. The Omnipotent Deity is discernable in a Be, and
in a Silkworm. The Ant is more largely considered, viz. as to its
Indefatigable Industry and Sagacity: both which are celebrated by all sorts of
Ancient Writers. The admirable Artifice of the Spider in making and hanging her
Web, and catching her Prey. A Flea is the Workmanship of Divinity. Mites have
Organized Bodies.

TO Winged and Flying Animals belong Insects which are an inferior sort of
them, as Moths, Beetles, Hornets, Wasps, Gnats, Flies, Bees, Silkworms, Ants.
Which, though they be small Creatures, are big with Wonders, and show forth
God's Omnipotence and Wisdom. For as Apelles and Protogenes two Eminent
Painters of old were known by their Subtle Lines, and grew famous for them, so
in this great Table of the World the Smallness of the Strokes which are drawn
argues the exquisite Skill of the Great Limner. Those are esteemed the
Skilfullest Artificers that can show most Art in the least Space and Compass.
The Iliads shut up in a Nut-shell were large Testimonies of the Artist's Skill.
Aelian. Hist. Animal.
Callicrates the Lacedemonian was much celebrated for making Flies and the
least Insects in Ivory. Aelian. Hist. Animal.
And Myrmecides the Milesian who was famous for the like Art, declared that he
employed more time in making a Be than the most unskilful Workman did in
building a House. And he was applauded for his expense of Time and Art, who
under the shadow of a Flie's Wing exactly pourtraied a Chariot and Horses. Thus
is it with the Works of Nature and Providence: the more Minute they are, the
more Wonderful. Nature is thrifty here, and shuts up much in a little room. It
studieth to be Compendious, and to Epitomize its Art. It is true, all things
are equally possible and easy to the Omnipotent Maker and Artist: yet if we
consider the Workmanship in it self, we shall conclude with Pliny, that Natura
nusquam magis quam in minimis est. Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 2.
Nature never shows it self Greater than in the least things.

A Gnat, if we barely respect the Contractedness of its Make and Proportions,
and the finess of its Limbs and Organs, is on that account more considerable
than an Ox. And a Fly on the same consideration is more wonderful than an
Elephant. This little Animal (as well as that Great one) has a Snout or Trunk
wherewith it takes in all its Food. It is studded from Head to Tail with Silver
and black Armor: it has a fuzzy kind of Substance like little Sponges
wherewith the Soles of its Feet are lined, and this is filled with a viscous
Liquor which it can at Pleasure squeeze out, and so glue it self to the Place
it walks on, especially when it walks with its Back downwards, in an inverted
Position. Besides these Creatures have their Legs slit at the End into Toes or
little Claws, by which they lay hold on the Rugosities and Inequalities of
Bodies. And much more has been discovered by those Modern Glasses, which lay
open even the minutest Particles and Atoms in Bodies of the least Size. There
are the Words of an Malebranch, Search after Truth, B. 1. chapter 6.
Excellent Divine and Philosopher, The least Flies, says he, have the
Proportion of their Members as just as those of other Animals; yea it seems
that God has given them more Ornaments to recompense the Smalness of their
Bodies: they have Crowns, Helmets and other Curiosities on their Heads which
outdo the most luxuriant Fancies of Men; and I may confidently aver that they
who have never seen any thing but with their naked Eye, have never beheld any
thing so fine, so exact, and even so magnificent in the Houses of the Greatest
Princes, as what we discover with Microscopes upon the Head of a silly Fly.
The Eye of a Fly (says our Christian Philosopher, Mr. Boil) is a more curious
piece of Workmanship than the Sun it self. Another Great Searcher into Nature
tells us Judge Hale 's Contemplations.
that if a Man would spend his whole Life in the study of a poor Fly, there
would be such a Confluence of so many wonderful and difficult things exhibited
in it, that it would still leave much more undiscovered than the most singular
Wit ever yet attained.

Bees are Creatures of singular use to Mankind, whether we respect their Honey
or their Wax. And because of their great serviceableness they are to be found
not only in hot Countries but those that are very Cold. There are abundance of
them in Muscovy, there are whole Forests of them in those Parts, as Modern
Authors assure us. These Creatures are remarkable for the Admirable Structure
of their Bodies, which is made agreeable to the particular Ends of their
Creation. They are notable for their Great Industry, Toil and Labor in
gathering their Honey, and for their as strangely Sagacious and Provident
Laying it up in their Hives against Winter. To which purpose they make their
Combs, and contrive their various Cells in them with astonishing Architecture,
and they cover them with Wax to keep the Liquor from spilling. The Seventy
Interpreters had so great an Esteem of this Creature for these excellent
Qualities, that they made bold, after what is said of the Ant, Prove. 6.6. to
add this, (...), etc.
Go to the Be and learn how laborious it is, and how noble and gallant a work
it exercises it self about, by whose Labors both Kings and meaner Persons are
furnished with a wholesome Food. It is a lovely and glorious Creature, and
though it be but weak and feeble, yet it ought to have pre-eminence for its
great Wisdom. And though this be neither in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack or
Latin, yet you will find it mentioned by some of the Clem. Alex. Strom. Basil.
Homil. 8. in Hexaem.
Fathers as a memorable Passage concerning this Animal. Now, no Person of
composed Thoughts can deny that these Propensities, these Instincts, these
Actions which are so observable and wonderful in this Insect, are the
Impression of God and no other. These Creatures have also a kind of Government
and Conduct: And, if we may credit Mr. Butler.
One that has made it his Business to enquire into the Polity of them, it is a
Female Monarchy. There is a Queen, not a King of Bees, as was thought
heretofore by Aristotl. hist. an. l. 5. c. 21. Senec. de Clem. l. 1. c. 19.
Plin. l. 11. c. 17.
the Ancients. However, this is unquestionable that they observe a very strict
Order and Discipline, and there is both Encouragement and Correction when they
see Occasion. They prudently unite their Forces, and work in common; they
jointly build their Cells, and furnish their Storehouses for future Exigence,
as Virgil, rather like a Natural Philosophers than a Poet, describes them in
the last Book of his Georgicks. This is all from an Omnipotent and All-Wise
Deity, and cannot be otherwise: which ocasion'd some Ancient Philosophers to
think, Virg. Geor. 4.
Esse apibus partem divinae mentis, --
That these Working and Politic Creatures had Souls in them that were Portions
of the Divine Mind. So far were they from thinking (with some of late) that
Inert Matter could do all this.

Again, the stupendous things which are related concerning the Silkworm,
(which I reckon among the Flying Insects, because, as you shall hear, after all
its changings and shiftings it is a Butterfly) and are known to be really true,
attest a more than Natural Principle and Power. This Insect is first produced
of an Egg, which comes to be a small Worm or Caterpillar, and feeds on Mulberry
Leaves: being put into a Box it spins it self all into a silken Substance: then
it dies, and afterward lives again, and has Wings like a Butterfly; and then
before it dies again, it lays Eggs, which produce Silkworms, and so the Race of
them is propagated. See Malpighius de Bombyce, where he gives a particular
account of its Production, Structure, Food, Growth, Generation, and Workmanship
of making Silk.
And all these strange Changes, these wonderful Metamorphoses, are wrought in
this Insect in six Months. It is to be observed also that it renews its Life
with the Year, and not before things are ready for its Sustenance. For it lies
dead all Winter long, and lives not till after the Spring, i. e. when the
Mulberry-tree Leaves are grown, which are its Food. The Egg enlivens
accordingly as this Tree blossoms. Or, if these Silkworms, were Flies at first
(as a Swammerdam de Insect.
late Learned Naturalist asserts, telling us that were only clothed with a
certain Skin or Coat that hid their natural Shape, which afterward wore off)
yet the several Steps and Preparations to it are very Remarkable and full of
wonder.

And then their making of Silk out of their Bellies, the putting it out with
incredible Swiftness, and drawing it so subtle, and to such a vast length, are
as surprising as any thing that has been hitherto said. By reason of which
excellent Workmanship they are of far greater value than all the Plants and
Canes from whence a great part of the Silk of the East Indies and Persia are
derived. By this means this sorry contemptible Animal, this winged Worm is of
such great use in the World; by this means this little despicable Insect
becomes more profitable and serviceable to Man than the Vast Elephant and
Prodigious Whale. Upon all which Considerations this single Creature is an
unanswerable Argument of an Intelligent and Wise Contriver, from whom alone it
could have Power and as 'twere Wisdom to effect all these wondrous things.

And such also is the Ant or Pismire, which I reckon among the Winged Insects
because it has (as I have often observed) Wings in one part of the Summer.
This is a Laborious and Provident Animal, and is represented as such by that
Inspired Philosopher, Prove. 6.8. She provideth her Meat in the Summer, and
gathers her Food in the Harvest. In which Words these two excellent
Properties of this Animal are propounded to us, viz. her Diligence and her
Wisdom. The First appears in that she provides her Meat, she gathers her Food.
Which is largely expressed in Natural History, where we are told that these
little Laborers gather Grains of Corn in the Fields, and with great Pains and
Sweating bear them to their Repositories which they have provided. The Burdens
they carry are many times greater than their Bodies. They bear some of the
smaller Grains in their little Mouths, and the greater ones they sometimes
shove on with their Feet, and sometimes lift with Head and Shoulders. They join
in the Work and help one another in carrying and drawing their Burdens. If the
Grain be too big a Load, they divide it: if it be dampish, they lay it out to
dry in the Sun and open Air. If one of them that is not laden meet another in
one of their Narrow Paths, he will give him the Way. Nor length, nor roughness
of the Way, nor the most scorching Heat of the Sun make these little Porters
give over their Work: nay at full Moons they ply it hard all Night. Thus are
they Indefatigable in the gathering and providing of their Food: and Diligence
is here commended to us under those Expressions.

Secondly, the Wisdom and Prudence of these Creatures are remarkable, which
appear in taking the fittest Seasons for Labor, the Summer and Harvest, and in
that which is implied in this, viz. providing for the Future, laying up store
against Winter. Here it is to be noted, that this is meant of this sort of
Insects in the Eastern Countries; for an Observing Naturalist tells us, that he
could never find that Ants in England, or in these Northern Regions, store up
Grains of Corn. Therefore we must not judge concerning this Creature from what
we see at home: we must not question what Authors have said of it, although we
discern no such thing in it in our own Country. I confess it is something hard
to believe what Herodotus says, that the Indian Ants are as big as Sheep,
though Busbequius (a very Credible Author) says the same. But this is certain
that the same Species of Animals differ very much according to the different
Climates and Regions they are in: some Qualities that are observed in the one
are not in the other. Thus, notwithstanding what we know concerning Ants in
this Country, all Natural Historians unanimously report that in others they are
great Hoarders of Corn, and thereby make Provision for the Winter. And they
observe, that lest the Corn they carry to their Granaries should put forth and
grow, they bite it at one end: and thence some think they have their Name
Nemalah from Namal praecidere, circumcidere, because they bite off the ends of
Grains or Seeds to prevent their Growth, though Dr. Brown in his Vulgar Errors
says this is no Security against the growing of Corn. But whether this be true
or no, it is certain that these Industrious Gatherers lay up their Provision
safe in their Cells which they dig and make under Ground, that they may be
stocked with Food to serve them all Winter.

There are other Instances of their Wisdom in Natural History: they dispose and
manage their Affairs in good order, they have among them the form of a
well-governed Commonwealth. Yea Pliny says they have their set Fairs and
Markets whither they come in great Companies, and do as it were establish
Leagues of Friendship, and converse with one another. They bury their dead,
they teach the young to labor, and the idle they expel. They have generally
three Cells or Houses; in one they live, in the other they breed, and in the
third they keep their Corn. And to inhanse the Wonderfulness of their
Transactions, Solomon adjoins that they have no Guide, Overseer or Ruler, they
have not a particular Lord or Governor set over them, they are not under any
One's Command, as the Bees are. They are reckoned by Aristotle among those
Animals that are (...), that have no Governor, and yet they act as orderly as
if they had.

The Wise Man here advises the Sluggard to go to this dumb Teacher, who
instructs not by Voice but Example, and he bids him consider her ways, i. e.
(according to the Hebrew Phrase, and indeed the Style of most Nations) her
Manners and way of Living: unless you will choose rather to embrace the
Interpretation of the Learned Bochart, who by Ways understands the several
Paths and Tracts of the Ant. It is useful to consider, to observe how orderly
and regular these Creatures are in their Passages, Intercourses, and Journies.
It is worth our taking notice how busily they travel, and by the often
trampling of their little Feet wear a Path even in hard Flintstones, how they
disturb not one another in their Walks, but (as has been said already)
courteously give way to one another, and help one another in their Journies,
how they bear one another Burdens, and ease one another if they see any
overloaded. Thus consider their ways, says Solomon, and thereby learn to be
wise, so wise as to follow their Example of Industry and Wisdom, so wise as by
this Natural History to admire and own the Creator, who has given them this
singular Instinct.

And not only Solomon, but several Philosophers, Poets, Orators, Historians,
Fathers, have celebrated the Industry and Sagacity of the Ant. Hist. Animal. l.
9. c. 38.
Aristotle, Not. Hist. l. 11. and 30.
Pliny, Var. Hist. l. 1. c. 12.
Aelian, have given us a particular account of these: and the last of them is
of opinion that these Creatures have (...).
a certain kind of Divining Sense. What words shall I use, says De Solert.
Animal.
Plutarch, to express sufficiently the Diligence of the Pismires? It is a
difficult Task to give a perfect account of the whole Economy and Apparatus of
these Creatures. There is not among all the Great things of Nature a sight of
Greater Wonders than they. Among the Egyptians they were a Symbol or
Hieroglyphick of Knowledge and Prudence. And so among the Arabians they are a
Representative of the same Virtues. The Ant is mentioned by Horace as an
Example of Industry, Sat. 1.
Parvula (nam exemplo est) magni Formica laboris.
And in respect of its providing against Winter, it is said by him to be --
Haud ignara ac non incauta futuri.
And its living in Winter on what it had laid up in Summer is thus expressed,
-- Vtitur ante
Quaesitis sapiens. --
Virgil in his fourth Aeneid describes them well, and so does Ovid in the 7 th
Book of his Metamorphosis. Tully played the Orator highly when he said, In
formica non modo sensus, sed etiam men's, ratio, memoria. De Not. Deor. l. 3.
that in the Ant there is not only Sense but Mind, Reason and Memory. The best
Wits both sacred and profane have touched upon this Subject. Epiphanius in his
Physiologus has several things concerning their Industrious Providence. And
(that you may see all Persons conspiring in this Theme) the Jewish Doctors have
an Exhortation to Prudence in these words, My Son, take heed that the Ant be
not wiser than thee, whilst that provides her self Food in the Summer to serve
her when the Winter comes, and thou spendest all the Day in Sloth and Idleness.
Thus the Wisdom of this little Insect is acknowledged and made use of by all
sorts of Persons: and we know it could not have this Excellent Property of it
self, therefore it is an Argument of Divine Wisdom acting in it.

Whether the Cochinele is to be numbered among the Volatile Insects I am not
certain, but we are informed from several Modern Relations, that it is a little
Animal (for few, I think, will give Credit to Pomet, in his History of Drugs,
that it is a Plant or Grain) bred on a little Tree or Shrub in the West Indies,
and that whole Gardens there are stocked with it, which the People gather twice
a Year from the Trees. They are of great use, for they yield an Excellent
Color, which is used in Dying and Painting: and they are also useful in a
Medical way, as being very Cordial.

And besides Flying Insects there are Creeping ones; and all small Vermin are
reckoned in this number. Even these are in their kind a Proof of a God, yea and
a very Considerable one: for in these Little Animals we as plainly read the
Characters of a Deity as in those of a Larger Volume. For these contain a great
deal in a little; and the Lesser they are the more Admirable is their Frame,
and consequently their Author is on that account to be the more admired. How
wonderfully artificial is the Spider's Web or House, as it is called in the
Hebrew, Job 8.14? How curious is the Architecture? How fine and delicate a
Thread does it spin? how thin and soft a Web does it weave? And therefore no
meaner an Author than Aristotle tells us that Spinning and Weaving were first
learned from the Spider. Thence with respect to this Curious Weaving or
Spinning it has its Greek Name (...), and Latin Aranea, and French Araigne,
from the Hebrew arag nevit, texuit, or arach textura: and it is not improbable
that our English word Spider is but a Corruption of Spinner, for Spinn is the
German word for Spider. And with this agrees that Poetic Fancy, that Arachne
an Excellent Spinster was by Pallas turned into a Spider. The Web which this
Creature works and spins out of its Bowels, is by it framed on purpose to be a
Net or Trap to catch Flies, which are a great part of her Livelihood. And that
you may be persuaded of the truth of what Solomon says, that the Spider is one
of those things which are exceeding wise, Prove. 30.24. you may observe that
this Web is with admirable Art and Subtilty framed by her for that very end. It
is hung and fastened according to the Rules of Mathematics, for the Lines of it
are drawn exactly from the Center to the Circumference, and back again from the
Circumference to the Center with parallel Distances. It is from the Accuracy of
this Geometrick Workmanship, that this Cunning Artist immediately feels the
touching of its Web by a Fly, or any such other little Insect, whereupon it
forthwith seizes on it as Prey. And that this may the more effectually be done,
this Hunter after he has spread his Net, cunningly hides himself in his
Covert, that the Flies may not espy him. And if we may credit Dr. Power.
one who has been very conversant with this sort of Creatures, this alone, of
all Animals, has a multiplicity of Eyes, and so its extrordinary Sight as well
as Feeling fits it for its Work, both which are a Divine Donation.

Some by the help of Microscopes have discovered very Remarkable things in the
Structure of Lice and Fleas (for a True Virtuoso has Glasses for these as well
as for the Stars). Muffet and Power tell us of the escalop'd Protuberancies of
the Body of a Louse, and the Gantlet-work of all its Parts. They tell us that
the Heads, Bodies and Limbs of Fleas are of polished Armour-work; and, that we
may not wonder how these puny Creatures can frisk and curvet in their heavy
Armor, we must know that this is most artificially fastened and jointed with
Jemmars, which are so excellently contrived that they facilitate the nimble
Motion of all the Parts. The reason why they are thus armed Cap-a-pe, like
Cuirassers in War, is that they might not be hurt by the great Leaps they take:
to which purpose they have an excellent Eye, the better to look before they
leap. At their Snouts is fixed a Proboscis or hollow Trunk, by which they both
punch the Skin and suck the Blood through it, leaving that Central Spot in the
middle of the Flea-biting where the Proboscis or Probe entered. And many other
Notable Observations there are concerning this silly Insect, from whence we may
gather it is the Workmanship of some Divine Hand. Wherefore it was St.
Augustine's devout Query, Quis disposuit membra culicis and pulicis? Who has
disposed and set in order the several Joints and Members of a Gnat or a Flea?
Who has given them that excellent Contexture of Parts?

Lastly, Mites, Nature's minimum quod sic, a thousand whereof do not weigh one
single Grain, are of a Structure that is most strange and wonderful. Those that
have taken pains to search into these Diminutive Beings by the assistance of
Modern Glasses, (those Spectacles whereby we may see to read the smallest Hand
of Nature) acquaint us that they have peculiar Vessels to convey their Spirits,
and have Parts and Organs inservient to Sensation, Nutrition, Motion, etc. Here
we may behold and admire in what narrow Bounds, in how little a Particle of
Matter Life may be exerted, and exercise all its different Functions. And all
the Men under Heaven (and I might add, all the Angels in it) are not able to
give these Powers of Life and Sense to any Being, nor have they Skill or
Ability to restore them to them when they are deprived of them. Therefore here
we discern the true Source of Life and of Existence it self, even Him who is so
often called in a signal manner the Living God.

To conclude, as Solomon says of the Ants, so we may say of all Insects, they
are a People not strong, Prove. 30.25. they are puny and feeble Creatures, and
some of them may seem to be altogether Useless, and might very well be spared
in the Great Heap of Beings: if they where wholly destroyed and all the Brood
of them annihilated, it may seem a Courtesy to Mankind, who are often pestered
with them. But this is the reasoning of Ignorance and Presumption, for it
becomes us not to dislike the Workmanship of Heaven, be it never so little and
weak: and we must remember that what it wants in Bulk and Strength is
recompensed some other way. An Insect is an Argument of the Divine Wisdom as
well as an Animal of the first Magnitude. Even the pettiest Creatures in some
respect far surpass these.

CHAP. XI.
It is from a Divine Author that all Animals are fashioned and contrived in
their Parts and Organs, in their Senses and Faculties, according to the
Employment, Use and End for which they are serviceable. The Natural Propension
in them to propagate their Kind is from God. So is their Sagacity. This latter
is voted for Reason by some Writers; who also attribute Speech to them. It is
proved that this is groundlesly asserted, and that Reason is the Sole
Prerogative of those Beings that are capable of Religion. To those who object
the Uselesness, nay Hurtfulness of several Animals, (as if this were an
Argument against Providence) it is answered, 1. Though we are not able to
assign the Use of some Creatures, yet it does not follow thence that they are
Useless. 2. The Creatures which seem most Vile are a Foil to the rest. 3. There
is something worthy of our Observation in every one of them. 4. Some of these
are Food for others. 5. Most of them are useful to Mankind in a Medical way.
The Author's Conjecture concerning the benefit of Gnats, Fleas, Lice, Flies,
Spiders. Venomous Creatures carry an Antidote with them. 6. The most hurtful
Animals may be beneficial to Man as Crosses and Afflictions are, which are
welcome to the Virtuous. 7. That they generally do so little harm, when they
are able to do so much, is a Manifestation of the Divine Care and Providence.
8. The Enjoyment of their Essence is from the Divine Bounty, which none ought
to repine at. 9. They are made use of by God sometimes to plague notorious
Offenders. Lastly, That any Creatures are Noxious, proceeds from the Sin of
Man, and the Curse which followed it: wherefore we have no reason to complain
of them, or to question the Goodness and Providence of God. The Vast Numbers
and Various Kinds of Insects are some Proof of their Usefulness. All Creatures
are someways Good, and made for some Use. Though we do not see their Usefulness
at present, after^ Ages may discover it.

THUS I have particularly instanced in the Works of the Creation, and have
showed that the Existence and Providence of God are to be seen in them all.
Especially as to Animals, this grand Truth appears to be undeniable, viz. that
they are all framed and shaped exactly according to the several Ends and Uses
they were designed for: which is an irrefragable Evidence of an infinitely Wise
Contriver and Disposer. The Hare and Heart that are very fearful have swift Feet
to fly away: and the timorous Dove has swift Wings. So the most fearful
Animals have the quickest hearing, as the Heart and Hare, the Coney, etc. by
this means Nature takes care for their Safety, that they may secure themselves
by flight. To the Boar that is fierce and pugnacious are given prominent Tusks,
to the Lion Teeth and Paws of a peculiar make. Beasts that have no other way to
defend themselves are supplied with Horns. Those Creatures which are for
working or traveling, as Oxen, Horses, Mules, Asses, Camels, Dromedaries, have
such Hoofs as are capable of being shod, that they may thereby be the more
serviceable To Birds are given Feathers, for the Lightness of their flying, and
also Claws and Beak as proper Instruments in order to the Foo^ they live upon.
And briefly, all Animals a^^ furnished with proper Organs. Fowls are fitted by
the frame of their Bodies to the Element they converse in. So Fishes are shaped
purposely for the Water, and Beasts for the Earth: and all the Parts of these
several Animals are accommodated to their peculiar Uses and Purposes. (...).
Mich. Glyc. Annal. pars 1.
God has given them particular Figures and Operations as to their Bodies
according to the Indoles of their sensitive Souls, as Aristotle well said, if
he be rightly quoted by one of the Ancients. Their outward Texture is fitted to
their inward Faculty and Nature. There are certain Reasons to be assigned of
every distinct frame of Bodies in Brutes. It is not without cause that they are
thus and thus shaped, and not otherwise: and whence is this but from a Divine
Author?

Also, the Natural Instinct which is in these Creatures to propagate their
Kind, shows that it was from a Higher Power and Principle, that is, such a one
that is Intelligent, and intends the Good and Preservation of the World. And
Providence is particularly seen in this, that Animals that are shorter lived
have a great many little ones, and produce them often, as Dogs, Swine, all
Birds and Fishes; the frequent Production reparing the short living. But those
Creatures that live longer breed seldomer, and one at a time generally, as
Elephants, Deers, Horses, etc. And here it is observable also, that the less
perfect Animals are soonest set up; because they decline and make an end apace,
therefore they begin sooner.

And that Sagacity which we have so often observed to be in Brutes (yea in the
very Insects) is an Evidence that they are the Workmanship of a Wise Maker, and
are guided by a Wise Director. Besides what has been said already, we might
mention how the angry Porcupine knows when it is his time to dart sorth his
Bristles to wound his Adversary; the Ichneumon (the Rat of Nilus) takes the
opportunity of the Crocodile's gaping and leaps into his Mouth, and thence
descends into his Belly, and so dispatches him: the Iackal hunts always with
the Lion for part of his Prey: and withal it is observable, that this latter
cannot be without the assistance of the former, for he is neither swift nor
quick-scented, and therefore is happily befriended by the Iackal, who has both
these Properties, and so he is a fit Caterer for the other. Therefore this may
be the meaning of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.21. The young Lions roar after their
Prey, and seek their Meat from God; they seek it and procure it in this notable
way, which is by the singular Providence of God. This their natural way of
getting their Food is called seeking it from God, because he has given them
this particular Instinct and Sagacity. And several other strange Expedients and
Methods which Animals use in providing their Food, making their Dens and Nests,
avoiding things noxious and hurtful, and consulting their Safety and Welfare,
etc. are palpable Indications of that Overruling Wisdom which they are acted
by.

Some have lashed out too far here, and have from this Consideration, viz. the
great Sagacity of Brutes, attempted to prove that they are Rational. Plutarch
has a whole Libr. (...).
Treatise in favor of this. The Pythagoreans held the same, and it was
grounded on the (...). Democritus, Empedocles, and other Philosophers were of
this Opinion, as Eclog. Phys.
Stobaeus relates. And we learn from Sextus Empiricus that it was asserted of
old, that (...). Pyrrh. Hypot. l. 2. c. 5.
no Animal is Irrational, but that they are all capable of Understanding and
Science. Porphyrius is very warm on the same Argument, and makes it the grand
Foundation of his Discourse concerning Abstinence: for therefore he says we
ought to refrain from feeding on any sort of Animals, because they are, like
our selves, Rational Beings. Justice extends to them as well as to those of our
own kind, or rather they are of our own kind, and therefore we must be just to
them, and consequently we must not take away their Lives, for killing them is
Injuring them. And several other things he offers to prove this Opinion.
Indeed, to give this Author his due, he says as much for the Rationality of
Brutes as can possibly be suggested. Nothing can be more Ingenious and
Plausible than what he has delivered, so that Brutes are for ever obliged to
him for his Endeavors of this sort.

Nay, he and some others go further, telling us that they have not only Reason
but Speech, and that as there are different Species of Brutes, so there are of
Languages too, in which they understand one another. And some Philosophers of
old, as Melampus, Tiresias, Thales, Apollonius Tyanaeus, and Pliny (if A.
Gellius says true of him) pretended that they understood them: and Porphyrius
was so foolish as to believe it: and Pyrrhon. Hyporyp. l. 1.
Sextus the Emperick had the same Thoughts. It is true, some Brutes have a way
of communicating with one another, i. e. by the Noise they make they signify to
one another their natural Propensions and Desires: thus Hens hold some vocal
Correspondence with their young ones, etc. If this be all they mean by using a
Language, we acknowledge it; but we cannot but add, that it is improper and
absurd to call an Inarticulate Sound a Language or Speech. Nor can Brutes in
general be said to have or use this, when it is found but in few of them, and
especially when it is only an Expression of their natural Instincts, and not of
any internal Reason that they are owners of. Had there been any such thing as
the Language of Brutes, were should have heard of it from the Inquisitive Augurs
among the old Romans. If there had been any such Notion among the wisest of the
Pagans, most certainly they would have made Divinations from this. But it
appears that they had no such apprehension, and among all their ways of Augury
(which was from what they could possibly observe in Animals) we have not a Word
of this; we never read that any of their Soothsayers pretended to prognosticate
from the Language of brute Beasts. Which plainly shows that this was a
groundless odd Fancy of a few Men, and is no Proof of the Rationality of
Beasts, which is the thing they aim at.

There were some Jews likewise (as well as Pagans) that held there is Reason
and Understanding properly so called in Beasts. Philo was so deluded as to be
of this Number, and Maimonides and some other Rabbis followed him. Yea,
Lactantius de Ira Dei, cap. 7.
one of the Christian Writers (who was a Novice in Philosophy as well as
Divinity) maintains the Reasonableness of Brutes, and holds that they use a
Language. And there are some Moderns who almost forfeit their Rational Nature
by pleading for that of Brutes. But all Persons void of Prejudice and vain
Conceit exclude these Creatures from partaking of Reason strictly so called,
and only acknowledge a bare Semblance or Show of it in them. Which is the very
thing that the Old Stagirite long since asserted, Hist. Animal. l. 8. c. 3.
There is, says he, another kind of Prudence, Art and Wisdom in Brutes: and in
the same Place he calls it an Image or Resemblance of Prudence. As specious as
it is, it is founded in these two, Memory and Sense. The quickness of both
these produces those Actions in them which have some appearance of Reason,
some faint Glimmerings of Intellectual Light.

And let me add this, (which gives the true account of this matter, and is a
great Argument of the Divine Prudence and Management) these Creatures are
endued with this wonderful excellency of Memory and Acuteness of their Senses
(insomuch that they surpass Man) because they are destitute of Reason which is
Man's Prerogative. For Reason is principally in order to Religion, to the
knowing and enjoying of God, and understanding the Means in order to that end.
The Maker and Governor of the Universe has wisely compensated the want of
this in Brutes by bestowing on them a transcendent Sharpeness as to the other,
especially the Corporeal Senses, which are more quick and apprehensive in them
than in those of Humane Race. Eagles and some other Fowls are more
quick-sighted than Men. Some sorts of Dogs are note for their excellent
Smelling, (though any Considerate Man may see that this excellent Quality is
not so much for themselves as for their Masters, for the Benefit and Advantage
of their Owners) yea most Beasts have a wonderful Acuteness and Dexterity as to
their Outward Senses above Men, and that because God has bestowed some better
thing upon Man, viz. a Rational Soul. In which respect it is said, He teaches
us more than the Beasts of the Earth, and makes us wiser than the Fowls of
Heaven, Job 35.11. Therefore Pliny and Plutarch, who blame the Conduct of
Nature because all Creatures are armed but Man, who comes helpless into the
World, talk very unphilosophically, for they seem to forget that Man has
Reason, which is better than Horns, Shells, etc. They speak as if they were
unacquainted with the Excellent and Noble Nature of this Faculty, which is far
superior to all that is in Brutes, and shows the great and singular Felicity
of Man, viz. that it consists not in the Operations of the lower Faculties, but
in the Perfections of the Rational Endowments.

It remains now that I answer an Objection, and then put a Period to this Part
of my Undertaking. It may be said, Are there not many Useless and Superfluous
Animals in the World? Yea, is there not a great Number of Hurtful and
Mischievous Creatures on the Earth, and in the Air, and it is likely in the
Waters too? How can a Wise Providence be proved from the Existence of such
Creatures, as Foxes, Otters, Weesels, Pole-Cats, Rats and Mice? To what purpose
could Spiders, Flies, Fleas, Lice, Wasps, Hornets, Caterpillars; or Owls,
Kites, Valtures; or Frogs, Toads, Serpents, Vipers, Scorpions be made? Does not
the Troublesome Existence of these Creatures prove rather a Carelessness in the
Divine Management than a Provident Care of the World?

I answer, 1. Though we cannot reach the Final Cause of some created things,
though we know not the use of them, yet it follows not thence that they are of
no use. There may be Reasons that we do not know, why God made them: and there
may be a Reason why those Reasons are not known to us. Some Persons will be
asking a Rational Account of every thing in Nature, but nothing is more
Unreasonable and Impertinent than to demand this always. If it should be asked
why the Cock rather than any other Fowl gives warning of the Sun's appearing,
and crows before it rises? a Man may make a shift to find some Answer, but I
question whether it would carry any solid Reason or Weight with it. If it
should be demanded why the People about the Magellanick Streights are white,
and those about the Cape of Good Hope are black, seeing both of them are under
the same Tropic, I believe it would be difficult to give such a Solution as is
satisfactory. If a Man should be asked why Bays or Lawrel-leaves rather than
others crackle in the Fire? I do not apprehend what Answer he can return,
unless he should give a witty one instead of a wise one, viz. that whilst
other Leaves burn silently, these being the ancient Rewards of Victors, and
used in Loud Triumphs, make a Noise even in the Flames, and personate Fame's
Trumpet when they are expiring. And a hundred more Questions might be asked
which none can reply to with any satisfaction to himself or others. Therefore a
Wise Philosopher will not pretend to salve all things. This one would think
might suffice in the present Case, supposing that there were no Reason to be
assigned of God's making the foresaid Creatures: but I shall very soon let you
see that there is.

It is true, if we could say of any Animal, and prove it, that it was made to
no purpose, then God's Wisdom is impeached: for to make a thing to no End,
Design and Purpose, is unworthy of the Wise Creator. But we can never prove
that this or that Creature was made to no end at all: for though we are
ignorant of any End, yet there may be one. They may be of some use, though we
are not able to assign it. Nay we are sure they were made for some use because
they were made by Wisdom it self. But it is unreasonably required that All
Phenomenon should be solved, that we should know certainly the Design of God in
every thing. We ought modestly to enquire into the particular Usefulness of
things, why this or why that was made. What tho our shallow Understandings
cannot guess at the Purpose and Project of Heaven? Must we therefore deny that
there is any at all? This is unpardonable Folly and Presumption if it be
persisted in. Therefore let us not be guilty of such Language as this, it had
been better that such or such a Creature had not been made, for it is to no
purpose, it is of no use. This is a rash Censuring of the Almighty, this is
carping at the Works of God, yea this is charging God with Folly, and
consequently is no other than Blasphemy.

But, 2. We know the Uses and Ends of these very Creatures against which the
Objection lies, and therefore it is groundless and of no Force. For, 1. These
Creatures aforenamed are appointed of God to be a Foil to the rest. When we see
these troublesome and noxious Animals, we have thence occasion given us to
observe and admire, to value and praise God for those other parts of the
Creation which are every ways so beneficial to us, and are accompanied with no
Inconveniences. We should not sufficiently Prize these, nor be sensible how
serviceable they are to us, if we did not sometimes behold the others, yea and
feel part of some Incommodity which goes along with them. The one are necessary
to set off and commend the other: and this useful Diversity and Variety in the
Creatures are for the Perfection and Harmony of the World. This is the first
positive Reply to the Objection.

2. These Creatures, even those of them that are the meanest, set forth God's
Power and Wisdom, and therefore are not useless. There is something very
Observable in every one of these; their Make, their Rise, their Shape, their
Contrivance, their particular Instinct and Operations administer abundant
matter to us, whence we may certainly infer the Reality and Truth of these two
Divine Attributes; that is, we may gather from what we see in these Creatures,
that he that gave them their Being is infinitely Powerful and Wise: for there
are the plain Tracks and Marks of those Divine Excellencies in them. It is a
high Flight of a very Philosophical Man, The least Fly Malebranch Search after
Truth, book 4. chap. 7.
, says he, discovers more the Power and Wisdom of God to those that
attentively consider it, without being prejudiced by its smalness, than all
that the Astronomers know of the Heavens.

3. That Choice Attribute of God, his Goodness, is discovered in these
Creatures, for they are of real Benefit and Advantage, and that on several
Accounts.

First, they are beneficial to one another, for some of these mentioned in the
Objection are Food to others. Owls feed on Frogs, Rats and Mice, and other
Vermin. Flies and Gnats and other Insects are the Chief Sustenance of some
Fowls. In the Eastern Countries Serpents are commonly fed upon by Stags and
Hearts. And if we were at leisure to search further into Natural History, there
might be more Instances produced to this purpose. Here then is a plain and
direct Use of these Animals, and this use is for the Good and Advantage of
their Fellow Creatures. If God makes one Creature to be Meat for another, it is
so far Beneficial.

Again, these very Creatures (as mischievous as some of them are) are really
Beneficial to us: for some parts of them are made use of in Medicks, and with
good Success, as the Learnedest Physicians attest. A Wolf is useful in Physic,
and so is an Otter, and so are Mice and Moles. A Fox's Lungs are good for
Astmaticks, according to Dioscorides, l. 2. c. 41. and his Liver is useful for
the like Purpose, according to Pliny, l. 28. c. 13. and Celsus, l. 4. c. 4. The
Flesh of an Hedg-hog is a Remedy against the Elephantiasis, Dioscor. l. 2. c.
2. Its Liver being dried is good against Convulsions, says the same Writer;
and he tells us that it helps the Diseases of the Reins, in the same Chapter.
The Blood of a Weesel cures the Leprosy aforementioned, called Elephantiasis,
Plin. l. 30. c. 13. It is it self effectual against Poison, Dioscor. l. 2. c.
27. The Ashes of it being drunk are available against the Falling Sickness,
Plin. l. 30. c. 4. Its Blood is good against this Disease, Dioscor. l. 2. c.
27. The very Dung of several Beasts is particularly mentioned among Physicians
as useful. Toads dried and reduced to Powder, and otherwise prepared, have a
Medical Virtue. Earthworms (which are reckoned by most as a Useless sort of
Creatures) are several ways made use of in Physic. They knit and strengthen
the Nerves, Dioscor. l. 2. c. 72. they cure Sores and Maladies in the Ears,
Galen, l. 3. (...). They are used for the Teeth, Plin. l. 30. c. 3. and against
the Stone, l. 30. c. 8. and several other Distempers. Cantharides are useful
against the Jaundice, ^aith the Great Hippocrates, Lib. de Intern. Affect. and
for other Purposes he mentions them. Spiders were of Virtue against Fevers,
especially Tertians, Dioscor. l. 2. c. 68. Their Web is useful in Wounds, say
Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny. Millepedes or Hog-lice are often commended by the
same Persons for several Uses. Ant's Eggs are medicinal, Plin. l. 29. c. ult.
and l. 30. c. 15. Nay, Moths have their use, as Pliny says, l. 29. c. ult. A
Gnat burnt to Powder, and applied to a Scab, kills it; Hildegard. Phys. l. 4. I
could produce a great Number of Modern Authors who attest the Medical Use of
most of these Creatures, but I think it will not be expected here.

As for those Troublesome Insects which I mentioned last, viz. Gnats, this
perhaps may be said with Truth, that when they sting People, and so far do them
harm, they may at the same time do them a Courtesy; for tho they leave some
poinant Atoms in their Flesh, yet they, it is likely, suck out, and carry away
with them those that are much worse, and would have proved hurtful to their
Bodies if they had not been exhausted by these disturbing Animals. I confess I
never read in any Author that a Flea has any medical Efficacy in it, yet there
are five hundred Books written in that Faculty which I never perused, and so I
am not certain but that some one of them may mention this Insect as useful in a
Physical way. But suppose no such thing appears in any Writer, yet we cannot
thence conclude that it is wholly Useless, because (as I said before) there may
be Uses of things which we are ignorant of.

If I may conjecture, it is not improbable that both these and Lice, which are
reckoned very incommodious, (and are so) may in a very great degree be
serviceable sometimes to the Body of Man. Who knows but that the former may be
useful among poor People by a plentiful Phlebotomy, and save them the Charges
of a Lancet, and clear them of the worst of their Blood gratis? And it is not
unreasonable to think that both these and the latter purge some Bodies of
particular ill Humors, which they suck up and live upon: These Vermin to
which Human Bodies are incident, are as necessary perhaps to them at some times
as some of those Emunctories which God has placed there to drain off
superfluous Choler, Phlegm, etc. The like we may say as to Toads and Serpents,
Vipers, and other Poisonous Creatures in respect of the Earth. They are made to
lick up the putrified and malignant Matter from it, and thereby to purge it of
what might be hurtful to Fruits and Plants. This is the true reason why there
are Venomous Creatures, and not that which Pliny assigns, viz. that Not. Hist.
l. 2. c. 63.
our Mother Earth out of Pity and Compassion toward us brings forth Poisons,
that by them we may dispatch our selves out of this wretched Life with an easy
Draught, without Wounds or Bloodshed.

Flies, of which sort of Insects there is such a vast number, are serviceable,
I conceive, to the meliorating of the Air, for this is their Food generally,
and they suck in the worst part of this Element, (as we may gather from their
hanging about any thing that is putrid and corrupt) and so refine and purify
it. The same is to be said of Spiders, and some other Insects. So Ravens and
some other Creatures devour the Carcases of Beasts that are cast into the
Fields, for they feed upon Carrion, and therein do great Service, because by
this means corrupted Bodies and all manner of Filth are taken out of the way,
which otherwise would infect the Air. Thus they are of good use to the World.

This is not the common Apprehension of Men; especially if we speak of some of
those Insects before mentioned; they are generally voted as Useless in the
World, as appears from that Passage in Plautus, Curcul. act. 4.
Item genus est lenonium inter homines, me^ quidem animo,
Vti muscae, culices, pedesque pulicesque
Odio and malo, and molestiae; bono usui est is nulli.
It was thought they were to no purpose, neither could be to any that is good;
but I hope the Contrary is evident from what I have said.

And it may be observed further in pursuance of what I am speaking of ( viz.
the Advantage that accrues to us even by the worst of Animals) that there is no
Venomous Creature but carries its Antidote with it: it has something which
will cure the Poison it imparts. A Scorpion's Flesh applied to the Wound made
by it, heals it. Dioscorid. l. 2. c. 13. Though the Viper's biting be
poisonous, yet of it is made a most effectual Remedy to hinder its being
lethal. Poison is expelled by the Fat of Dragons, says Pliny, l. 29. c. 4.
Galen of old observed that the Wounds that are inflicted by Venomous Creatures
are cured by a Powder made of their Flesh, or by some part of the Flesh applied
to or rubbed upon the part affected. De Theriaca, cap. 11. The Sting of the
Tarantula, tho it is not cured by this Fly it self, yet it is by another sort
of Flies, Cantharides. Bapt. Port. Phyto, l. 6. c. 23. Finally, under this Head
we may observe what Naturalists have assured us of as a certain Truth, that in
those Countries where there is great store of Serpents, there are also growing
such Plants as are sovereign Remedies against their Venom: and there are more
of them in those places than in any others.

Further, All those troublesome and hurtful Animals abovementioned are
beneficial to Man, because the Mischiefs they do are for his Good, i. e. he can
make a good use of them. For hereby he has a frequent opportunity of
exercising his Patience, of arming himself with Contentment and Humble
Resignation, of exerting his Fortitude and Self-denial, of allaying and
moderating his inordinate Delight, and pleasing himself in the Creatures, which
he is liable to. Thus the worst Animals are as serviceable and profitable as
Afflictions and Distresses, which all the serious Moralists as well as devout
Christians have voted to be of great and indispensible use in the Life of Man,
and are Tokens even of Divine Favor and Goodness.

Besides, that some of those Creatures abovenamed are able to do us so much
Hurt, and yet that they do so little, and so rarely, is an Argument of Divine
Goodness. That they are afraid of us and fly from us, when we are rather
thinking of flying from them, is an Evidence of that Kind and Watchful
Providence which attends us. Tho God produced these Creatures, yet we see that
they are powerfully restrained, and their hurtful Nature is checked and kept
in, which is a very observable but convincing Proof of the Heavenly Benignity
and Mercy.

Lastly, God made these Creatures (as well as Man) to enjoy their Essence and
Life, and therein to be partakers of his Bounty and Munificence. Whilst every
thing has the fruition of its Being, it is so far useful to it self: and this
is an Argument of the Divine Indulgence, and one reason of the Production of
things. God created all things that they might have their Being; Wisd. 1.13.
And yet this is to be understood so, that they were all made for Man, because
he can and may one way or other make them useful to him. Thus God's Goodness is
seen even in those Animals which on some account are not good.

4. They set forth God's Justice, and for that reason are serviceable in the
World. He is pleased to make use of them sometimes in the way of Punishment.
Thus Lice^ and Flies were produced on purpose to plague the Egyptians, Exodus
8.16, 20. Hist. Animal. l. ^. c. 31.
Aristotle mentions the Names of some that were killed with Lice bred in their
Bodies. So Sylla one of the Roman Dictators perished by the Phthiriasis, says
In Sylla.
Plutarch: and so died Philip the second, King of Spain, if we may credit very
good Historians, and the elder Vossius among the test. Some to whom Lice proved
mortal are reckoned up by De Insect. l. 5.
Aldrovandus. Hornets and Wasps were dispatched by the Divine Avenger to expel
the Canaanites, Exodus 23.28. Ios. 24.12. Wisd. 12.8. Locusts, Caterpillars,
Canker-worms, Palmer-worms, are threatened and inflicted as Judgments on the
disobedient Israelites, Joel 1.4. 1 Kings 8.37. Psalm. 78.46. and 105.34. What
Mischief Locusts did in some parts of Italy, Lib. 42.
Livy and Lib. 11. c. 29.
Pliny relate. The Pestilence and Mortality which they caused by their stink in
several parts of Africa is particularly set down by Lib. 5. c. 16.
Orosius, Paulus Diaconus, and others. And Modern Historians testify how
mischievous they have been in Dacia, Pannonia, etc. Herod the Great (as
Josephus relates) and Herod Agrippa (as St. Luke informs us) were devoured by
Worms or Maggots. And this was partly the loathsome fate of Antiochus (as we
read in 2 Mac. 9.9.) and of Maximinus (of whom Eusebius speaks, Eccl. Hist. l.
8. c. 28.) for their Bowels being rotted and eaten with Worms, they became a
Torment to themselves, and a Plague to others by reason of the intolerable
Stench which proceeded from their putrified Bodies. And other Examples of such
as were eaten up of this Vermin you may see in Aldrovandus, de Insectis, l. 6.
The Inhabitants of the Isles of the Cyclades, and the People of Troas were
banished their Country by Mice, they covering the places with such Multitudes.
Plin. l. 8. c. 29. and lib. 10. c. 65. Justin reports the same of the
Abderites: Hist. l. 15. And other Instances might be offered to prove that God
makes use of sundry Kinds of Living Creatures to plague notorious Offenders. He
therefore that complains of the Existence of these in the World, complains that
God has ways and means of Punishing the wicked when he pleases. And be the
Creatures never so hurtful, there is no reason for this Complaint; for the more
Harmful any one of them is, the more useful it is to the Purposes of Divine
Vengeance.

But then we must remember that we occasion this, yea that at first we pulled
down a Curse upon the Creatures by our Primitive Apostasy from God. We rebelled
against Heaven, and it is no wonder that they do so against us. We affronted
the Sovereign Majesty, and therefore we justly meet with some that take His
Cause, and revenge it. In short, whatever noxious Qualities are now discerned
in any of the Creatures, they proceed not from God, but the Sin of Man, whereby
they are corrupted. We have changed the Nature of them, we made them hurtful,
and therefore we have no reason to complain. But it is our Duty to accept of
the Penalty of our Delinquencies, and to make it useful (as we well may) to
Repentance, and our Turning unto God. We may conclude then from all that has
been said, that God made none of the Creatures in vain, but destined every one
of them to some use. We may give our Suffrage to that Saying of the Jews, There
is nothing in the nature of things of which there may not be assigned a reason
why it was created.

It appears from what has been suggested, that even Insects, which are the
imperfecter sort of Animals, and may seem to be the most useless of any, are
for Purposes of a considerable nature. And it is to me very evident that God
would not have made such Variety of them (as about Aldrovand. de Insect. Dr.
Lister in Hist. Animal.
sixty kinds of Flies, forty sorts of Beetles, five and twenty several kinds of
Spiders, fifty different Classes of Canker or Palmer-worms, an hundred sorts of
Butterflies) unless they were good for something. And it is observed by those
that write concerning this particular Rank of Creatures, that all Vegetables
whatsoever, nay all Animals both alive and dead produce their peculiar Species
of them: (but how this is consistent with that late Notion which some Learned
Virtuoso's have broached, viz. that there is no such thing in Nature as
Spontaneous or Equivocal Generation, I will not now dispute: only I will here
offer my Opinion, viz. that Insects are produced both ways, by equivocal as
well as univocal Generation; for I observe that the Divine Author of Nature is
pleased to act differently and variously) and moreover they are different
according to the diversity of Place and Country where they are bred. Nay, that
there may be a more speedy and plentiful Procreation of them, they are
generally Hermaphrodites, and sustain the part of both Sexes, as the Worthy Mr.
Ray has observed. Wherefore I question not but they are some way or other
Useful, for we must not think that these Beings are Multiplied in vain. And if
we enlarge the Horizon, and look upon Nature in her several Provinces and
Dominions, whether Animate or Inanimate, whether in the Heavens, Air, Earth, or
Sea, whether mineral, vegetative, or sensitive; if we survey the World and All
the Works of the Creation, we shall find that they were made for excellent
Ends. In the close of every Day's Creation that was the general Epiphonema, God
saw that it was good. And as this was said of every particular Day's Work, so
at last there is the like Approbation and Allowance of the whole Frame of
Beings, Genesis 1.31.
God saw every thing that he had made: and behold, it was very good; Good as it
answered to the Divine Idea, and the Will of the Creator: Good also, as it was
destined to the Use and Service of Man. All created Beings have a Goodness, not
only that which is Metaphysical, viz. in respect of their Being and Nature
intrinsecally, but extrinsecally and relatively as they are useful to Mankind
some way or other. Even those Creatures that are harmful are really good for
some Ends, as we know and experience. And there may be a Goodness in some of
the Creatures which as yet we do not see, but afterward may display it self,
and future Ages may have the happiness to make these Discoveries, though the
past and present ones enjoy the Good, but know it not. To shut up all; no one
part of the Creation is superfluous and unprofitable: every thing has its
proper Goodness. That is, in other terms, the Whole World is full of God and of
his Providence. And yet I have not yet spoken of Man, the Top of all the
Visible Creation, in whom the Wonders of God's Care and Providence are chiefly
manifested. But of Him I will distinctly and professedly speak in my next Essay.

CHAP. XII.
This Argument which has been used all along in this Discourse to prove a
Deity and Providence, was made use of in the Old Testament by Job, and by David
in several of his Divine Hymns, (which are distinctly commented upon): by St.
Paul in the New Testament, by the Christian Writers of the succeeding Ages, by
Pagan Philosophers and Poets, whose memorable Testimonies are cited. The Proper
Inferences from the whole are these: 1. We are obliged to own a Deity in the
visible Works of the Creation. 2. We have hence Encouragement to contemplate
the Creatures, and to study the Works of Nature. 3. By this Contemplation and
Study we should be induced not only to acknowledge, but to worship, love and
obey the Omnipotent Creator, and to devote our whole Lives to his Service and
Honor.

BUT before I enter upon that, let us seriously weigh the Worthiness of this
Subject which I have been insisting upon, and let us attend to the Proper
Inferences which may be made from it. That the matter of this Discourse may not
seem to be unworthy of the Reader's serious Thoughts, I desire him to consider
that this is the Argument which is used in the Holy Scriptures to prove a God,
and to convince Men of his glorious Perfections. To begin with the Writings of
the Old Testament, Job argues from the frame of the World and all the Creatures
that are in it, Ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the Fowls of
the Air, and they shall tell thee. Or speak to the Earth, and it shall teach
thee; and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Who knows not in all
th^se that the Hand of the Lord has wrought this? In whose Hand is the Soul of
every living thing. The latter part of the 36 th Chapter of Job, and the 37 th,
38 th and 39 th Chapters throughout treat of the Works of the Creation, and
thereby designedly evince the unlimited Power and unsearchable Wisdom of the
Almighty.

How frequent is David on this Theme, extolling God's Providence in respect of
the Creatures, the Heavens and Earth, Living and Inanimate things? He speaks
like a true Religious Philosopher in the beginning of the 19 th Psalm, The
Heavens, says he, declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy Work; v. 1. He speaks of these inanimate things here, and in other
places, as if they were endued with Sense, Reason and Speech, and could really
declare and show God's Power and Glory; but the meaning is, that they occasion
others, who are endued with those Faculties, to declare and set forth the
Divine Praises. And hence the Heavens (of which he particularly speaks here)
are called the Ministers of God's Word by some of the Ancient Tertullian,
Origin, Justin Martyr, Augustine.
Fathers. And it might be observed that Shemesh, Sol, is as much as Minister,
it being derived from the Chaldee Shamash, ministravit. Day unto Day utters
Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge, ver. 2. i. e. the Vicissitude of
Days and Nights made by the motion of the Heavens declares God's Providence,
and instructs Men in the Knowledge of the Creator. There is no Speech nor
Language where their Voice is not heard, v. 3. i. e. though these Heavenly
Bodies be speechless, though they silently roll about, and make no Noise, yet
they may truly be said to have a Voice, and there is no Nation or People in the
World that do not hear it, and loudly proclaim the Power and Wisdom of God. For
(as he adds) Their Line is gone out through all the World, and their Words to
the end of the World. In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as
a Bridegroom, etc. His going forth is from the end of the Heavens, etc. ver. 4,
5, 6. i. e. in the midst of the Firmament is placed the Royal Mansion of the
Sun, who sets forth at one extreme Point of the Heavens, and passes through all
Parts till he comes back to the same Point again, and so visits all Climates of
the Earth: the remotest Countries under Heaven are sensible of the Virtue and
Influence of his Universal Progress. And then the Psalmist passes from the
Consideration of the Heavens to the Word of God. After he had spoken of the
Book of Nature he proceeds to that of the Law, thereby acquainting us that both
set forth God's Glory: the Beauty and Uniformity of the World (and particularly
of the Heavenly Bodies) as well as the Written Word, give us an assurance of
his Infinite Perfections and Excellencies.

Again, in Psalm. 95. he is proved to be a Great God, and a great King above all
the reputed Gods of the Heathens, because in his Hands are the deep places of
the Earth: the Strength of the Hills is his also. The Sea is his, and he made
it, and his Hands formed the dry Land; v. 3, 4, 5. i. e. the Fabric of the
World, all the admired Treasures of Heaven and Earth, of Sea and Land, are
unquestionable Testimonies of his Godhead. The Psalmist does not think
(whatever some fancy) that the present State of the Earth, Sea and Heavens is
deformed and disordered: he praises and admires God in the Contemplation of
them. The whole 104 th Psalm is an Elegant Account of the Works of the Creation
and of Providence, for indeed it is impossible to separate these two: all
things that we see in the World prove not only the Being of a God, but that he
Rules them with Wisdom and Goodness. And this you may observe here, that this
Divine Poet reckons up these Works of God according to the Mosaic Method, i.
e. in that order in which Moses represents them to have been produced at first
by God when he made the World. He first mentions Light, which was the Product
of the first day, v. 2. then the Heavens and Firmament, and the Angels (the
Inhabitants of those upper Regions of the World) ver. 2, 3, 4. which were
created on the second day: then the Earth, Sea, Springs and Rivers, Plants,
Grass, Herbs and Trees, the third day's Work, v. 5. etc. after that the Sun and
Moon, v. 19. which were made on the fourth day; and the Fishes of the Sea,
which are the fifth day's Production, v. 25, 26. with which he concludes,
having supposed the Creatures of the Last day's Work in what he had said
before. The Sum of all his Philosophical and Religious Contemplations in this
Excellent Hymn, is comprised in those words, O Lord, how manifold are thy
Works! In Wisdom have thou made them all. He first acknowledges, and at the
same time admires the Wonderful Variety of the Works of the Creation; and
thence he rationally infers and declares that an Understanding and Wise Being
was the Author of them. From the serious Consideration of the Visible World his
Mind devoutly, but naturally, rises to a sense of the First and Supreme Cause
of it.

In the 148 th Psalm the same devout Poet extols God from the particular
Consideration of the Creatures of all ranks and sorts, first those in Heaven,
the Angels, the Sun, Moon, Stars and Light, v. 2, 3. 2dly, those that be^ong to
the Waters, Dragons (which is a word that here denotes all great Fishes) and
all deeps wherein they dwell, v. 7. 3dly, those in ^he Air, as the Meteors,
viz. Fire ( i. e. Thun^er and Lightning) Hail, Snow, Vapor, stormy Winds, v.
8. 4thly, on the Earth, viz. 1. Those that are Inanimate, as Mountains, Hills,
^ruitful Trees, and Timber Trees, among which the Cedar is chief, and does here
represent all the rest, v. 9.2. Living Creatures, and first those that are
Irrational, wild Beasts, and all Cattle, creeping things and flying Fowl, v.
10. Secondly, Rational, Mankind of what degree soever, Kings and all People, (
i. e. their Subjects) Princes, Judges, young and old of both Sexes. In the 135
th Psalm, v. 5, 6, 7. the same Subject, but more briefly, is treated of: and in
Psalm. 136. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. he gives a compendious but excellent Description
of this Mundane System, and of the Universal Furniture of it, and thence
excites Men to adore and magnify the Wise Creator of all. And interspersedly in
several other Psalms (some of which I have had occasion to mention before) he
falls upon this Excellent Theme, and admirably improves it to the purpose
aforesaid.

If we pass to the New Testament, we shall there also find this Argument used.
From the Fabric of the World St. Paul proves to the Men of Lystra, that there
is a God, a Living God, in Contra distinction to the Gentile Gods, or Idols
rather. From the making of Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all things that are
therein, he argues the Existence of an All-sufficient and Self-subsistent
Being, Acts 14.15. And again, Romans 1.20. The invisible things of God from ( i.
e. ever since) the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, even those
Invisible things are clearly manifested by those Visible Works that he has
wrought. Or perhaps the meaning of (...) may be from the Consideration of the
Creation, from this alone the invisible things of the Deity, viz. his Power,
Wisdom and Bounty are seen and proved.

This way of proving the Divinity by the Works that are seen, is used by
Fathers and Philosophers, by Christians and Gentiles, by Sacred and Profane
Writers. (...).
This World, says a Greek Father, is the School of Rational Minds, and the
Nursery of that Knowledge which we have of a God. Habet Deus testimonia totum
hoc quod sumus, and in quo sumus. Cont. Marcion. l. 1. c. 10.
Our own Make, and that of the World wherein we live, are Testimonies of a
Deity, says Tertullian. Basil the Great, Gregory Nazianzen and Ambrose have
written on the Six Days Works, and have with a mighty Fluency of Style pursued
this Argument. Athanasius in his Book against the Gentiles very closely and
solidly manges this sensible Proof of a Deity. Cyprian discourses after this
rate, Videmus Dei ^^tu tempora obsequi, elementa famulari, spirare ventos,
fon^es fluere, grandescere copias mes^ium, fructus mitescere vinea^um,
exubera^e pomis arbusta, etc.
that the Times and Seasons of the Year, and the several Elements are
obsequious and serviceable to Mankind; that the Winds blow, the Springs and
Fountains flow, the Corn and the Vines come to maturity, and there is a Plenty
of all other Fruits on the Earth from the disposal of God: wherefore his
Existence is not to be doubted of by any rational Person, yea by any one that
has the use of his Senses. Orat. 1 and 2 de Providentia.
Theodoret has well demonstrated the Providence of God from the Consideration
of the several Parts of the World. Octavius in Minutius Felix has a short, but
a very Witty and Elegant Oration, to prove a God and Providence from the Make
and Order of the upper and lower World. Among the Moderns I will mention only
our Divine Mr. Herbert in his Poem, to which he gives the Title of Providence,
where he excellently displayeth the Wisdom of God in the Works of the Creation,
in the several particular Beings which are the Product of it. It is an
Admirable and Choice Piece of Divine Rapture.

The wisest Heads among the Gentiles as well as among Christians, have
prosecuted this Theme, and have thought it to be of great force. Much after the
rate of the Great Apostle who tells us, God left not himself without witness,
you may hear an Ancient Philosopher speak, (...), etc. Heraclit.
It was fit (says he) that God's Works should witness concerning him: thus the
Sun, Night and Day, the Air, the whole Earth are Witnesses: yea all the World
bears Testimony to Him. And a Noble Platonist has in most select and excellent
Words thus charactered the Divine Being, (...). Max. Tyr. Dissertat. 25.
He who has disposed the Heavens into their admirable Order and Harmony, who
guides the Chariots of the Sun and Moon, who is the Master of the Celestial
Quire, and by his Voice and Beck keeps time, that the Music of the Stars be
true, and those swift Bodies keep their Rounds exactly: he who is the great
Arbiter and Disposer of the Seasons of the Year, who is the prudent Dispenser
of the Winds, and brings them out of their Treasures when he pleases; he who
shaped the vast Sea, and formed the Spacious Earth, and furnished it with
Rivers: he who nourishes and ripens the Fruits, and stocks the World with
living Creatures. Tully in his Second Book of Divination, proves a Sovereign
Cause of all things from the admirable and exquisite Composure of the World.
Esse praestantem aliquam aeternamque naturam, and eam suspiciendam adorandamque
hominum generi, pulchritudo mundi ordoque rerum coelestium cogit confiteri.
The Beauty of this, says he, and the Order of the Heavenly Bodies, do even
force us to acknowledge that there is an Excellent and Eternal Nature, and that
this is to be admired and adored by Mankind. Unde h^^e innumerabilia oculos,
aures, and animam mulcen^ia? unde illa luxu^ia^ quoque instruens copia? neque
n. necessitatibus ^^^^aminodo nostris provisum est; usque in delicias (...)
Whence comes it to pass, says Seneca, that there is such a Multitude of
Grateful Objects in the Universe, which ravish our Ears, Eyes and Minds? Whence
is there such an Abundance of things made as 'twere to support our Luxury? for
it is evident that there is Provision made not only for our Necessities, but we
are indulged even to Delight and Pleasures. This is from the Riches of the
Divine Being, and the overflowing Bounty of his Excellent Nature. I will
conclude with that of the Poet, (...)
-- Cum dispositi quaesissem foedera mundi,
Praescriptosque mari fines, annique meatus,
Et lucis noctisque vices, tunc omnia rebar
Consilio firmata Dei. --
When I had searched into the World's Great Frame,
And Nature's Leagues and Combinations seen,
How the Vast Ocean's bounded, how the Year
Runs its perpetual Course, how Night and Day
Succeed each other, then I rightly judged
That these and Nature's universal Laws
Were fixed by Counsel and a Cause Divine.
Thus you see what Reason, Scripture, and the Sentiments of the Wise agree in,
viz. that what we behold in the World is a Proof of a Deity and Providence.

Let us now seriously attend to all these, and thence gather what is our Proper
Duty and Concern on this Occasion.

1. Let us Acknowledge this Great Truth, that the World is the Product of a
Divine Mind, and that all the Ranks of the Visible Creation owe their Being to
this. Plutarch says rightly that (...). De Plac. Philos. l. 1. c. 6.
Men had first of all the Notion of a God from the Beauty of the things that
are seen in the World. But the Pagans went too far here, and their
Contemplations of the World ended at last in their owning it to be a God. Numen
esse Mundum credi par est aeternum, immensum, neque genitum, neque interiturum
unquam. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
It is meet, says Pliny, we should believe the World to be an Eternal and
Immense Numen, that had no Beginning, and shall have no End. This strange Creed
of theirs was the Foundation of Idolatry, i. e. of worshipping the Creatures.
It gives an account of the Egyptians and others paying Reverence to mean and
sordid Animals, Statius.
Vilia cur magnos aequent animalia Divos.
The Stoics indeed Totum hoc quo continemur, and unum est, (...) Deus. Sen.
Epist. 92. Vis Deum Mundum ^ocare? non faller^^ ipse enim est totum quod vides.
Idem, Quaest. Not. cap. 45.
held the World was God, but they were too wise to understand it in the gross
Sense: their meaning was that a Divine Spirit or Mind pervades this World, and
actuates all its Parts, and preserves it in Being and Operation. This is the
sense of Cato's Word in Lucan, Jupiter est quodcunque vides. Which is of the
same Import with -- Iovis omnia plena: all things are replenished with the
Divine Influence, every Creature owes its Subsistence, as it does its Being and
Original, to God. Which is that very Truth I am now reminding you of, and is
every ways so reasonable and accountable. You may see God in the things he has
made. The Impress of Divinity is stamped on the Creatures, as Princes put their
Effigies on their Coins. We find the Idea of God, i. e. Infinite Goodness and
Wisdom reflected from the visible Objects of Nature. This I question not was
the true Meaning and Intention of Plato when he held the World was In Timaeo.
a Living Creature, and that every thing in it is Animated. I deny not that his
Followers (if they may be called so) took the World to be a real Animal; but as
for the Old Gentleman himself, I am persuaded that by the Soul of the World he
would have us understand the Order and Harmony of it, as he plainly shows in
his Timaeus. Its Parts are as orderly and its Motions are as regular and
proportionable as if it were inspired with Life, yea as if it were some
Intellectual Animal. This exact Order and Regularity it received from that
Eternal Mind who gave it its Existence. God may truly be called the Soul of the
World. Him let us acknowledge to be the Author of this Beautiful Universe:
whilst some deluded Epicureans or Platonists date its Being and Form from
Chance or Necessity, let us (with one of the Antientest Philosophers we read
of) confess that (...) Diog. Laert. in Thalete.
the Fabric of the World is most Beautiful because it is God's Voluntary
Workmanship.

2. Be invited hence to Study the Works of Nature, to contemplate the
Creatures, to meditate on the Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his
Hands. The great God is set before our Eyes in the World, and may be seen and
taken notice of in every Creature, like the Picture or Statue of some Founder
of a College set up in some eminent and noted Place for all the Society to
behold it. God has copied forth himself in the Creation. The Creatures are so
many Glasses wherein the Divine Glory is reflected, wherein the Image of God is
represented. Think it then a noble and divine Work to be employed in the
Contemplation of these. You that have time and leisure and helps
proportionable, set some time apart for this Study. Take a Survey of this huge
Pile of the World, consider well the Various Parts of it, scan its Excellent
Structure. View first the Lower Rooms of this Habitation, this Spacious Earth,
which God has given to the Sons of Men, with all the Excellent Furniture
belonging to it, the different Sorts of Vegetables and Animals it is provided
with. Let your Thoughts descend into the Subterraneous Mines and Treasures of
inestimable Value. Go down into the Deep Seas, and there be astonished with the
multiplied Wonders of that Place. Then return again, and mount the Upper
Stories of this Divine Habitation: Entertain your selves with the Wonders of
the Aerial and Ethereal Regions, converse with those Immense Globes of Light
and Fire which adorn that part of the Universe.

Exercise your Thoughts with these and the other Excellencies which this vast
Fabric of the World will exhibit to you: which had its Name given it by the
Greeks from its Ornate Figure and Comely Make. Pythagoras is said to be the
first that gave that Denomination of (...) to this Great Frame of Heaven and
Earth, as Laertius and Plutarch tell us: and the latter of these adds that it
was styled so (...), from the Order which is in it. And the Latins gave it the
Title of Mundus upon the like account, viz. from its Neatness, Elegancy and
Beauty. This may allure us to the Study of Natural Philosophy, and a Survey of
the Structure of the World. For here we shall certainly meet with perfect Order
and Ornament, even such as will conduct our Thoughts to the Divine Author of
them. If this be not the effect of our Studies and Enquiries, they are all in
vain: for the knowing of the Works of Nature, and being able to count them, are
not True Philosophy, unless we gather a God from them. Else John Tradeskan
would have been the best Philosopher in his time; and any Man that can show the
Rarities at Gresham College would be as Good as Virtuoso as any of the Fellows
of the Royal Society. We must not think it enough to be acquainted with the
Works of the Creation: we must advance yet higher. Our Skill in Natural History
must lead us to Theology: by studying the Composition and Economy of the
World, which bears upon it all the Characters of Divine Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, we ought to be acquainted with God himself, to whom alone these
Attributes originally belong.

And none ought to be discouraged here, for All Persons, of what Rank or
Quality soever, are in some measure concerned in this Employment, and may
manage it with Success. This should be an Universal Work; nor indeed need they
to be any Great Philosophers to do this. There is not much curious Knowledge and
Observation required in the more General Discharge of this Duty. Do but look
abroad, and see what is before you, and if you have honest and sincere Minds,
and affectionate Thoughts, you will make a good use of what you see, because
you will presently behold God in the Creatures. For the whole World is God's
Image: and therefore in its beautiful Proportions, in its admirable Composure
you will soon discern his Resemblance. You will behold the invisible things of
God in the visible and outward Shape of the World. You will with ease find that
there is that in the Creation which could proceed from none but an Eternal and
Infinite Spirit, from one that is Omnipotent and Omniscient. Be conversant then
in this Great Library, be Students in this Book of Nature, which even he that
runs may read: for the Character is very plain and legible, and the Contents of
this Large Volume are easily undestood. Read the Godhead in the Sun, Moon and
Stars, in the Air, Earth and Sea, but especially in the Creatures of the Animal
Kingdom, which are endued with Sense and Life: these are all written in Capital
Letters. The Devout St. Anthony (in Ecclesiastical Story) was well versed in
this Great Volume, though he was never guilty of any other Learning: he used to
say to the Philosophers, This is my Book and Body of Philosophy which I read,
viz. the Works which God has made: here I can read the Will of God and the
Words of Heaven. Such Scholars you may all be, and that without any great
Labor and Study, for the Book is always before you, and wide open, and you may
be always reading in it. And though these things are neglected and despised
because they are Common, (as (...). De Vit. Mos.
Philo observed) yet know that they are of themselves Admirable, and worthy of
your continual Thoughts, and they will be of great use to you. Be convinced of
this that it is not below a Christian Man to observe and meditate upon the Works
of Nature. The New Creature does not destroy the Old, or make it useless.
Whilst you search into the Works of God you will find God himself, and you
will acknowledge the infinite Understanding and Wisdom of the Maker of all
things. For he has made the Earth by his Power, he has established the World
by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion, Jer. 10.12.

3. and lastly, By acknowledging this Substantial Truth which I have been
treating of, and by contemplating the upper and the lower World, let us be
brought to glorify the Omnipotent Architect, to praise and worship him, to fear
and serve him, and to dedicate our whole Lives to him. If the Heavens declare
the Glory of God, if those Celestial Lamps show by their Light their Maker's
Beauty, and set forth his more Resplendent Glory, of which the Sun and
Brightest Stars are but Shadows; yea if the meanest and most obscure Creatures
do in their Kind and Measure celebrate his Praises, if a Gnat or a Fly declare
the Power and Wisdom of their Maker, if even inamimate Creatures sing Te Deum
to him, then how much more are We obliged to praise and glorify him who have
this Example before us, and for whose sake all these things were made? If all
things every where be full of the Deity, let not our Mouths be empty of his
Praises. That the World is a Temple, was the Acknowledgment of the Pagans.
Mundi magnum and versatile templum, was Lucretius's Language, though he was an
Atheist. But Plutarch goes further, and tells us that this World is a most Holy
and Divine Temple. Let us then dedicate it to God's Service, and let us sing
Praises to him in his own Temple. Let us worship him in his Own House, as (...).
Philo calls this World. Let us perpetually extol the Builder of it for the
regular Frame, excellent Beauty and wise Ordering of it.

And let us not only with our Tongues (which are our Glory) laud and magnify
this Divine Founder, but let us with all Reverence Serve and Obey him, and be
zealous of performing all Homage to him in our Lives. All Creatures in their
kind render some Service to him, every thing pays him Tribute: the Sun with its
officious Heat and Light, the Moon and Stars with their proper Influences: the
teeming Earth with all its Plants, Flowers, Fruits and Animals, with all the
Treasures that lie locked up in its Bowels: the Water, the Air, the Fire, Heat
and Cold, Summer and Winter do all obey him. Let not Man then only be defective
in his Duty, Man who has Skill to use all these things unto rational and
artificial Ends, which no other Creature can do. Let him be brought by his
Contemplation of the Visible World to a most Affectionate Devotion, and all the
Acts of a Sincere Religion. Let him be led by the Consideration of those Divine
Perfections which the wondrous Fabric of the World discovers to be in God,
unto an entire Love of him, and an ardent Desire to have intimate Communion
with him, and thereby to be rendered like unto him. Who made these Beautiful
Objects in the World but Beauty it self? All the Glories of the Universe are
but the Rays of that infinitely Glorious Light which is above. Wherefore let us
climb up by these Sunbeams to the Father of Lights: let us by these glorious
Manifestations of God in the Creatures make our Access to the Creator, (...).
the Framer and Maker; the Father of all things, as Plato often calls him. But
let us rise higher than this Philosopher, (who yet was far exalted above all
his Brethren-Philosophers) let the Creatures lead us to the Blessed Author of
the New Creation, Christ Jesus our only Redeemer and Savior, the Essential,
Eternal, Incomprehensible Wisdom, by whom God made the Worlds, as the Apostle
expressly testifies, Hebr. 1.2. Wherefore in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord (the same undivided and Eternal Godhead) let all our
Knowledge and all our Practice be terminated, for Romans 11.36.
of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be Glory for ever.
Amen.

The End of the First Part.
THE Second Part: Wherein the Existence and Providence of God Are Proved from
the Admirable Fabric and Contexture OF MAN'S BODY.
CHAP. I.
The Body of Man is more excellent and perfect than those of other Creatures,
as to its Stature, and several of its Organs and Vessels. This singular and
peculiar Workmanship is elegantly expressed in Psalm. Cxxxix. 14, 15, 16. which
Words are Commented upon. In the first Noble Cavity, viz. the Head, are
observable, the Skull with its Sutures and its Membranes, with which it is
lined; the Brain, the Face with its Forehead, Nostrils, Cheeks, Lips, Chin,
Mouth, to which latter belong the Palate, Uvula, Tongue, Teeth: The wonderful
Contexture, particular Use and Design of all which Parts are distinctly set
forth, and showed to be the Effect of stupendous Wisdom.

THE Heavens and Earth are the Greater World, and Man the Lesser, according to
the ancient Distinction of the Rabbis into Gnolam Gadol and Gnolam Caton;
which has been since used by most Writers. Wherefore having spoken of the
first, the Greater and more spacious World, I will now proceed to speak of the
second, Man, (...) the Microcosm, who is the Abbreviature and Compendium of all
the Classes of Mundane Beings, and participates of every thing that is found in
Nature. The two grand Ingredients of this Noble Being, are a Thinking Substance
and Organized Matter. But it is the latter of these only which I design at
present to treat of, for I undertake the Proof of a Deity from the Visible and
Corporeal part of Man only. And I choose to instance in Man rather than any
other Living Creature whatsoever, because he is the most Perfect of all
Animals, the Parts of his Body are most Exquisite and Admirable.

There is a Peculiar Formation of Humane Bodies even as to their External
Figure and Shape. Their Difference from the Bodies of Fishes is most of all
apparent: so as to Birds, there is a very manifest Difference in the Fabric
between them and Men. Yea, though Four-footed Animals have most of the Organs
that Man's Body has, yet this differs from them (as well as from all other
Creatures) in several respects. Man's Body is more excellent, as to its Frame
and Make, than that of this sort of Animals. There are those Admirable things
to be observed here that are not in them. Man is of an Erect Stature and
Figure, which no other Creature is of: And though it be boggled at by a Dr.
Brown Vulg. Err. Book 4. Chapter 1.
Learned Enquirer, yet he grants (which is as much as he need to establish the
Erectness of Man) that his Spine and Thigh-Bones are in right Lines, whereas it
is otherwise with the rest of Animals. So that from this peculiar Mark it is
plain, that he is above other Creatures, and is the Prince of the Creation.
This singular Configuration is no other than (...) Greg. Nyss.
a Signature of Royal Dignity, as one of the Ancients rightly said. This
Upright, Stately, and Majestic Frame of Body, shows that Man was made to Rule
over the Brutes, and that he was designed for yet greater Empire and Government.

This Noble Creature has a Head of a spherical Form, which is almost proper to
himself: And though his Eyes seem to differ but little, viz. as to the external
color, from those of other Animals, yet there is a greater Variation as to the
inward Contexture of them. The interior Make of the Eyes of Birds and Fishes
is different from that of Man, says Monsieur Rohault, Tract. Phys. par. 1.
cap. 30. A Dr. Willis de Anim. Brut. cap. 15.
Learned Artist of our own has observ^d, that there are but six Muscles in
Men's Eyes, whereas there are eight in Brutes, there being two added of peculiar
use to them, because they hang their Heads down: therefore one of these (which
he calls Suspensorius) is serviceable to keep the Eye in a good situation, that
it fall not out, and the other (which he calls Membranosus) is useful to guard
and hide the Ball of the Eye when Beasts thrust in their Heads among Grass and
Hay. An undeniable Argument of the Care, Wisdom, and Providence of the Creator,
who fitted the Parts of Creatures to their special Use and proper Needs. And
there are some other things in the Eyes of Brutes which are not to be found in
those of Men, as another Dr. Briggs Ophthalmograph.
Learned Observer tells us.

Though De Corp. hum. Fabric. l. 7. c. 1.
Vesalius, that famous Anatomist of the last Age, pronounces the Fabric of
Man's Brain and that of other Animals to be alike, yet those who have lately
handled the Anatomick Knife dissent from him, and assign some (though no great)
difference between them. As to the Quantity, it is certain that Man, for his
Proportion of Body, has more than any other Creature; for Archangelus and
Bauhinus observe, that his Brains weigh four pounds, sometimes five, and
sometimes five and a half. And according to the abundance of Brains Man has
proportionably the largest Head. It is, says Histor. Animal. lib. 1.
Scaliger, the fifteenth part of his Body, whereas that of some other Animals
is not above the fifth, sixth, or seventh.

There are sundry other things in Man's Structure which are not found in
Brutes, as the particular Conformation of the inward parts of the Mouth, and
other adjacent Organs, whence Speech is the sole Prerogative of Men, excepting
a few apish Birds which have some resemblance to Man in some of those parts.
Again, the Hands and Fingers distinguish Humane Bodies from others; for no
Brutes are furnished with these. No Animal whatsoever has a Chin, but Man,
said Pliny of old, and I do not see that there is Reason to reject his
Observation. Some Beasts have the frame of their Stomachs different from that
of Men, because they chew the Cud, which he does not; (for the Chewing Man at
Bristol, whom our Philosophical Transactions lately mentioned, and some other
Ruminating Men in other Countries, spoken of in the Historical Observations of
Physicians, are singular and extraordinary.) The situation of the Paps or Teats
in Women is different from that in all other Animals, who have them placed
below their Bellies; but by an especial Care and Providence it is otherwise in
Women, who hold their Infants in their Arms, and so this proves most convenient
for suckling them. The Cone of the Heart in Man deflects to the Left more than
that of Brutes; and his Pericardium sticks and is fastened to the Diaphragm; but
it is otherwise in those Creatures. There is a visible Unlikeness between Humane
and Brutish Bodies, as to the Beard, Abundance of Hair on the Head, and several
other things relating not only to the outward Figure, but the inward
Disposition of the Organs and Vessels. Therefore I made choice of the Body of
Man rather than of any other Creature, to discover to you the Transcendent
Wisdom and Goodness of God in its Fabric. Every thing is wrought with singular
Art and Contrivance: the excellent Workmanship speaks a more excellent Author.

This is that which the Psalmist proclaims aloud to the World, when he says,
Psalm. cxxxix.14.
He was fearfully and wonderfully made; so made, that he could not but
reverence and admire the Divine Maker. My substance, says he, was not hid from
thee, when I was made in secret, thou had the whole framing and shaping of me
in the Womb: I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth: where he
compares the Make of his Body in the Womb to Phrygionick Work; for the Verb
Rakam which he here uses is acu pingere, to make Artificial Needlework and
Embroidery: and accordingly by this Word in Exodus xxvi.36. xxxvi.37. is expressed
that Curious working in Needlework which was used in the Hangings of the
Tabernacle: and in Ezekiel. xvii. 3. it is made use of to signify diverse Colors.
Thence Rekamoth in Psalm. xlv. 14. is raiment of Needlework, supposed to be
fashioned with diversity of Figures and variety of Colors, and therefore is
rendered by the Septuagint sometimes (...)^ and (...), and by the V. Latin,
Varietates, and Vestes diversorum colorum. So that this very fully sets forth
the Wonderful and Various Formation of the Foetus; this emphatically expresses
that Diversity of Art which is observable in the different Members and Parts of
it. The Body is the Soul's Vest, but it is of no ordinary Make and Contexture:
it is admirably wrought and shaped with diverse Colors, and in various
Lineaments and Proportions. Symmachus comes nearest to the Hebrew Word, who
renders it (...), variegatus fui, I was artificially wrought with Variety of
curious Work, Skin, Flesh, Bones, Nerves, Arteries, etc. And the Womb is here
called the lowest parts of the Earth, it being a modest Expression used by the
Holy Ghost to denote those secret and remote Passages which are appropriated to
Conception and Pregnation. And it is very proper too because the Earth was as it
were the Womb out of which Man was taken at first: and ever since, among the
Writers of all Ages the Earth is styled a Mother. In these lower parts of the
Earth, in these dark and hidden Recesses, I was by the Divine Care and Wisdom
curiously wrought, says the Psalmist.

Which he farther expresses in the next Verse, Thine eyes did see my substance
yet being imperfect (when I was but a misshapen Embrio) and in thy book all my
members were written, (Thou by thy infinite Wisdom had determined the
particular Configuration of all my Parts, even before they were completely
finished) which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there were none of
them, i. e. they were by a continued, gradual, and successive Formation brought
to this admirable Shape which at first they had nothing of. Thus this Divine
Philosopher and Prophet acknowledges that the Formation and Structure of his
Body was a strange and amazing Work, such as none but God could be the Author
of; and therefore if he should go no farther than his own Original and
Primitive Fashioning in the Womb, he had sufficient ground to own and revere
the stupendous Wisdom of the Almighty. Man's Body is a Curious Piece of
Workmanship, or (in the Style of this Divine Writer) of matchless Tapestry, of
unimitable Embroidery, of most ravishing Beauty and Elegancy: the Contemplation
of which alone is able to lead us to a Deity, an infinitely Wise Being, who
gave it this exquisite Shape.

And this now I will particularly demonstrate to you, beginning with the
Highest and Noblest Region, the Heaven of this Lesser World, the Head: for it
was De Mundo, cap. 6.
Aristotle's Notion, that this answers to the Heavens in the Greater World.
This is the most sublime and exalted, the most eminent and perspicuous part of
this Humane Fabric, the chiefest of all in use, and first in make; for (if we
may argue from the Formation of a Chick to that of other Animals) the Head and
Eyes are, according to the famous Dr. Harvey, the first Rudiments that appear,
and have any Resemblance of the Parts of a living Body. In this Noble Cavity is
lodged a most Divine Treasure, the Brain, which, because it is so choice a
Viscus, and of so great worth and use, is safely enclosed in a Pan or Skull.
This Tegument is called Gulgoleth by the Hebrews, from Galgil Sphaera,
Rotunditas, because of its round figure, which is most convenient for defense.
The Brain is as it were the Kernel, and this is the Shell that enwraps it:
whence the French Word Test (which signifies the Head or Skull) is perhaps
from the Latin Testa, because this is as it were Cerebri Testa, Cortex,
Putamen. And it may be I do not conjecture amiss if I say Shell is the same
with Skull, only this is a Corruption of that.

That I may here display the Wisdom of the infinitely Wise Artist in the
Contrivance of this Globose and Concave Covering of the Head, this Habitation
of the Brain, or rather Nature's Helmet to defend it from all Injuries, it is
observable, that it is at first somewhat Softish and Spungy, that it might not
by its Hardness be offensive to the Vterus in its passage, but might rather on
occasion yield to Compression. And again, it is remarkable, that it is joined
together by Sutures, which are requisite at first, that the redundant Humidity
of the Brain which is so copious in Infants, may evaporate by those passages:
and afterward it hardens by degrees, and has the firmness and solidity of
other Bones: but yet so as these Dented Fissures still remain, and thereby the
parts of the Cranium (when there is occasion) do more or less recede from one
another. Which is of great and singular advantage to it; for first, by this
means the Cranium does somewhat give way to Blows and Falls, and by not
resisting them is the safer. Secondly, It is for the more easy Emission and
Dissipation of superfluous Vapors and vicious Humors through those Seams.
Thirdly, Hereby this hard Covering is so qualified, that it is not too close
and pressing upon the Substance of the Brain. Fourthly, By reason of this it is
that outward Medicaments applied to the Head become more effectual, because the
virtue of them is conveyed through these Chinks. For these Reasons this
Headpiece, which was made to secure that Noble part, was fastened together by
these yielding Toothings.

And besides, it was the Work of the infinitely Wise Framer to compose this
Covering of several Bones, this being for the Safety and Security of it: for if
it had been One Bone, it would have been liable to be split and broken by a
violent Stroke or Fall, and the Brain thereby would have been the more injured:
whereas now the Fracture may happen to one Bone, and proceed no farther,
because it is stopped by the neighboring Suture, which secures the next part.
Nor is the Brain compassed and guarded only with this Strong Cap of Bone, but
under this it is clothed with two Meninges.
Coats or Membranes, Dura Matter.
one somewhat hard and thick to keep it from being touched and hurt by the
Skull, the Pia Matter.
other thinner and finer, because it is the inmost Caul, and next to the Brain.
Such is the Divine Care and Goodness in preserving and sheltering this First
and Choicest part of Man with a Triple Vestment, or (as I may call it) a Cap
with a double Lining, not to speak of the Pericranium.
Proper Skin which encompasses the Cranium, or of the Hair which defends that,
which are yet other Coverings. This shows the Great Concernedness of Heaven for
us, and this acquaints us, that the Brain is a very Noble Part, and is of
special and singular Use. Which is the next thing I am to treat of, and thereby
to discover farther the Divine Founder of this Humane Structure.

Hic mentis est regimen. Cic. Tusc. 1.
The Brain is the Seat of the Soul, and the Source of Life, the great
Laboratory of Animal Spirits, the Spring and Fountain of all Hic habet sensus
arcem, hic culmen altissimum. Ibid.
Sense and Motion; for these are caused by those nimble and active Spirits
which are dispersed through the whole Body, and diffused into all the Members
of it in order to Sensation and all the Functions and Exertments of Life. These
are those fine and exalted Particles of Matter that are the Medium by which the
Soul acts on the Body: that produce such great Wonders in Nature, and work such
excellent Effects and Operations in us. Now, the Almighty Operator has made it
the Office of the Brain to elaborate these Spirits, and to send them thence by
the Nerves into the several parts of the Body. And that this Useful Agent may
be always set on work for the good of the whole Body, God has appointed the
Heart (another Strange and Wonderful Engine in us, which we shall distinctly
speak of afterward) to yield a continual stock and supply of Subtle Vapors
from its warm Blood exhaled through the Carotides.
Iugular Arteries into the Plexus Choroides.
midst of the Brain and the Vessels that environ the Conarion: which, when they
are there sufficiently sublimated and refined, are thence diffused with great
force into the Nervous Channels and the whole Body.

Thus there is a continual Correspondence and Conformity between the Brain and
the Heart: to which purpose it may be observed, that when the spirituous parts
of the Blood exhale up into the Brain by the Diastole of the Heart, the Brain
is heaved up; and when they cool by the Hearts Systole and the taking in of
fresh Air into the Nostrils, it subsides. So that the Brain has its Pulsation,
and beats as the Heart and Arteries do, as has been observed by Physicians and
Surgeons in Fractures of the Cranium, who then had an opportunity of
discerning this Motion. And here, by the by, we might remark that the Sides of
the forepart of the Head are called Tempora, i. e. Times, in many Languages,
because they have a set and successive Motion, like Time: and the Hours may be
reckoned by these Temple-Pulses as by a Clock, for there are about 3000 of them
hourly in a Man of perfect Health. Thus by the Contrivance of the Heavenly
Artist the Brain and Heart keep time, and so the Harmony of this Divine Machin,
to which they belong, is preserved.

But that we may be convinced that there is nothing here but mighty Wonders, we
are to observe that the Brain, which is (as has been said) the Seat of Sense
and Life, and the Efficient of Animal, i. e. the Finest Spirits, is it self the
most dull, phlegmatic, and coldest part of the Body. The substance of it is
lax, spongy and porous, and is but a Glandule, says Dr. Wharton. It is made of
soft Pith and Pulp, which is liable to be shattered and displaced. But the
Divine Hand has cast a Net over it, and through it as 'twere; which holds the
parts together, and hinders their Dislocation. Which strange Contexture of
innumerable little Twisted Strings and Fibers (as well as its Matter) shows it
to be framed for some special use and Design, which no other part of the Body
is made for, and it calls upon us to admire and adore the Composer.

Next, the Face or Countenance, which is that forepart of the Head which is
always bare and exposed to view, is to be considered by us. The Excellent
Features of it are the greatest Discrimination between Man and Brutes: for
either they have no Face properly and strictly so called, or it looks not
forward as Man's does, who has a Body erect (which no other Creature has) and
consequently a Countenance of that posture. Here the Supreme Creator's Image is
most especi^lly discerned: this is a Transcript of the Heavenly Spirit, this is
the Mirror of that Divine Soul which is within. And therefore this part of Man
is the chief Subject of Physiognomy, which so far as it is natural and sober may
contain some Reality in it, and has been approved of and practiced by the
Wisest among the Ancients, as Pythagoras, Aristotle, Hippocrates, Galen, and
others. There are generally some external Signs and Marks in the Visage which
demonstrate the Temper of the Mind. From inspection of the constant and natural
Lineaments in the Countenance we may sometimes guess at the Soul. For God has
imprinted these Characters there, that we may read the Dispositions and
Inclinations of Men in them.

And the strange Diversity of Men's Countenances is no contemptible Argument of
the Wisdom and Goodness of the Creator in making them so wonderfully Various.
It is to be admired, that though all Men have the same shape and figure of
their Faces, yet there are different strokes and lines in every one of them:
Sic and similes universi videmur, and inter se singuli dissimiles invenimur, as
Minutius Felix speaks. If Men were alike in Face as Sheep and some other
Animals, what a strange Confusion would be in the World? How many Evils and
Mischiefs would follow upon it? If the Visage (significantly called (...) the
fashion of the Countenance, Luke ix.29. and (...) the particular appearance or
form of the face, Mat. xxviii.3.) were alike in all Persons, Parents could not
know their Children, Husbands their Wives, Relations their Kindred. Magistrates
could not discern the Guilty, Creditors could not know their Debtors. So
Injustice, Fraud, Murder, Bloodshed, Adultery, Incest, would reign among Men,
and yet there would be no way to discover and detect them. This must needs
happen if one person could not be discerned from another: which could not
possibly be if they were all alike. And thus the Society of Men would have been
broken, and there could have been no humane Converse. It was therefore the work
of Divine and Infinite Reason, to make this great Variety of Faces which we
see, to give Men distinct Lineaments, that so they might certainly be known one
from another. This different shaping of humane Countenances is a proof of an
All-wise Being, and one that had a regard to the good of Mankind.

But if we particularly survey the several Parts which constitute this Divine
Form in Men's Faces, we shall have yet a greater Sense of this Supreme Disposer.
The Forehead is a singular Ornament, full of Grace and Majesty: it is the Index
of Joy or Sorrow, of Severity or Mildness, of Anger or being pleased, of Shame
or Impudence: and in brief, if the Roman Orator spoke good sense, it is the
door of the Soul. The Protuberancy of this part is useful, for it conveniently
shades the Eyes, it beats off the excess of Light which would be troublesome
and offensive, and be some hinderance to the sight.

The Nose or Nostrils were made not only to contribute toward the Beauty and
Comeliness of the Countenance, but to be of great Use and Necessity. For their
Offices are first to draw in and let out the Breath, they are the proper Organ
of Respiration. Again, they are extremely useful for the forming of the Voice
and Speech, which we may observe are deficient when these parts are so.
Further, this is the Instrument of Smelling, furnished with Os Cribrosum,
Processus Mamillares.
others on purpose to discharge that Office. And I might mention this also,
that it is serviceable to transmit Odours to the Brain for the refreshing of
it. The Nostrils are instrumental in Anger (which is a natural and lawful
Emotion if it be for just Causes) and the Agitation of them discovers this
Passion, especially if they be contracted, as in some Persons. Which may give
an account of that Phrase used in the Holy Book, Exodus xxxiv.6. Psalm.
lxxxvi.15. Erech appajim Longus Narium, as Arias Montanus renders it according
to the letter; but the Septuagint translate it (...), Pagnin, tardus ad iram,
and our English Translators long-suffering. To which is opposed Retzar appajim
Prove. xiv.17. Brevis Naribus, as Montanus renders it; (...) as the Seventy; he
that is soon angry, as our English Version gives it according to the sense,
though not the letter. But any observing Man may see that the Original refers
to the use of the Nostrils in those Persons that are Angry. And accordingly
nothing is more common in the Sacred Style of the Old Testament than the words
Aph and Appajim, Nasus, Nares, for Ira and Iracundia. Lastly, I have no more to
say of this part, when I have added that it is for the Excretion of the
redundant Humors of the Brain, and thereby to purge it. Thus the Employments
of this Part are Various, as indeed there is scarcely one single Part of the
Body which has not several and different uses (as will appear from what we
shall farther say) which is a convincing demonstration of what I have
undertaken to prove, viz. That the Parts of Man's Body, and their Use, argue a
Deity.

The Cheeks, the largest portion of the Face, conduce to the beauty and
perfection of it, and are the chief seat of Blushing, the tincture of Virtuous
Modesty. Here are hung out the Ruddy Ensigns of Shame: here Bashfulness
displays it self in a fiery Color. The provoked and heated Blood ascends hither
to testify the Consciousness to some unbecoming Act. This gives an account of
burning shame, and shows, that though it be a Vulgar way of speaking, yet it is
founded on good reason. Nay, it seems to be the language of the Inspired
Prophet, who to express the utmost Shame and Confusion of persons, says their
faces are the faces of flames, Isa. xiii.8. The Lips were made to be the Cover
of the Mouth, Gumms, and Teeth, and to be a Guard to these latter: they serve
also for the forming of the Voice, and help in speaking and pronouncing of
words articulately: and moreover, in Tasting they have their particular use.
The Chin, the prominency or forepart of the Under-Jaw, is a peculiar grace and
embelishment to the Visage, and is that part which no Animal is adorned with
but Man, as has been before suggested.

With the Mouth (that so visible and useful Fore-door of this our humane
Habitation) we take in food and drink: and that it may not only receive, but
hold and contain the former of these till it be well masticated, it is Hollow
and Capacious. With this also we take in and emit the Air, to convey it to the
Lungs, and with this we form our Speech. So that, considering the absolute
necessity of this part, we cannot but think that Pliny and others are fabulous
when they tell us of People near the Head of Ganges in the Indies who have no
Mouths. Moreover, with this we eject Spittle or any other superfluous Humor
that annoys that part. These are the distinct Offices of this Oral Cavity. To
which belongs the Palate, i. e. the Upper Part or Roof of this Concave place,
and it is serviceable both for Speaking and Tasting. Here is a Uvula.
Little red piece of spungy flesh (hanging down from the Palate into the Mouth)
which is of no mean use, for it is someways serviceable to promote the
modulation of the Voice, it hinders the Drink from regurgitating out of the
Mouth into the Nostrils: and it stops the defluxion of Humors from the Palate
on the Larynx. When we consider this little Part, we may call to mind what an
Inspired, Man says, and conclude that he speaks like a Good Natural
Philosopher, Those parts of the Body which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary, 1 Cor. xii.22.

Here is the Tongue, the grand instrument of Speech, which is a Faculty that
God has vouchsafed to Man alone, and therefore we are obliged to make use of
it in celebrating the Praises of our Creator, who has given it us on purpose
to extol his Infinite Wisdom and Providence in the structure and frame of our
Bodies, and particularly of this Noble Part, whereby we not only make known his
Perfections, but hold Converse with our Brethren in the World. We can never
sufficiently admire the Excellency and Usefulness of this divine Gift of
Speaking. And the Variety of it, i. e. the difference of Voice and Speech in
Men is as remarkable as that of their Countenances, of which I spoke before.
This is of unconceivable advantage to Mankind, and hinders that vast confusion
and di^order which otherwise would happen. The Tongue is likewise the Organ of
Tasting; and I might add, that it is helpful in transmitting the Food into the
Stomach. And to all these purposes it was framed by Heaven of a soft and
pliable matter, that it might contract and dilate it self, as there is occasion.

The Teeth (which are commonly, though not always, thirty two in those of
perfect Age and Vigor) may deserve our notice in the next place: the Fabric
of which is such that we must be forced to confess it was the production of an
Extraordinary and Supernatural Agent, and one that consulted our Good and
Benefit. For we cannot but observe, that the Teeth are not all alike, but are
of a different size and shape, according to the different Use they were
designed for. First, there are four Teeth above and four below which stand
foremost in the Jaws, and are very sharp, that they may cut and divide the Meat
at its coming into the Mouth, or even before it comes into it, for these
Fore-teeth serve to bite or cut off a piece or morsel from any solid Food which
we are to take, and for this purpose these Biters, these Incisores, or
Incisorii.
Cutters, are made with a very acute edge. Also it is observable, that these
Fore-teeth conduce to the Speech as well as Eating. Next to these are placed
another sort of Teeth called the Canini.
Dog-teeth, but more vulgarly the Eye-teeth. There are two of them in the
upper, and two in the lower Jaw, or sometimes but two only, one on each side.
These are more pointed than the former, and are deeper Rooted, and consequently
are Stronger than they, because it is their work to break the food. Besides
these there are the Molares.
Grinders, which are peculiarly fitted for their employment; for after the Meat
has been cut and broken by the other two sorts of Teeth, these bruise and
macerate it, and give it its last preparation for the Stomach. There are
generally Ten of these in a Jaw, and they are bigger, broader, and flatter than
the rest, that they may perform their Grinding the better. And because they are
made use of most of all, and have the toughest work, therefore the Provident
Maker furnished them with stronger Hold-fasts than any of the Teeth. These
great Iew-teeth (as they were called Metalgnoth, Prove. xxix.17. Prove. xxx.14.
of old as well as they are now) have three or four Roots or ^angs, because
these only are used in Chewing, which requires Strength. C. Havers; M. D.
One has lately taken notice of Divine Providence in this, that the Fabric of
the Grinders is fitted to that kind of Food which Creatures feed upon: in Men
they are Obtuse, because their Meat is generally soft: in Dogs and some other
Animals that live usually on harder Food they are Sharp, with several points:
in those Creatures that feed on Grass and Hay, or Corn, they rise up with
ridges, and answer to the inequalities of a Millstone. And in other Animals
that feed on Flesh as well as Grass, they are of a middle nature, and fit for
the mastication of both.

This must be said, that most of the Teeth (as well as the Iaws, qu. Chaws,
from Chawing or Chewing: and this very word Chaws is retained by our
Translators Ezekiel. xxix.4.xxxviii.4.
Iaws in which they are set) were designed for Chewing: and it is certain, that
a considerable time should be employed in this work; for all solid Meat we take
should be chewed well. We English are often negligent herein, from whence
follow Indigestion and other great Inconveniences, as a Mr. Lock of Education.
Thinking Writer has observed. I will only take notice here in the Close, that
some are born with Teeth, which is thought by some to be as Ominous as it is
Strange: but this we are certain of, that it is an Indication of more than
ordinary Strength and Vigor of Nature. M. Curious Dentatus (who had his Name on
that account) and Papyrius Carbo, are mentioned as Examples of this by Lib. 7.
cap. 16.
Pliny. And our King Richard III. was another Instance of it: and it is said
that a Neighboring Prince (who is a Biter) was born into the World with these
Weapons.

CHAP. II.
The excellent Fabric of the Ear, and the several Parts and Organs which
contribute to the Sense of Hearing. The peculiar Structure of the Eyes; where a
large and full Account is given of their Humors, Coats, Muscles, of the
Eyebrows and Eyelids, and the Hair belonging to both. The transcendent
Usefulness and convenient Situation of this part of the Body.

THE Rare and Artificial Composition of the Ear, and the Organs that are
serviceable to Hearing, is next to be considered. Who can so much as doubt
whether an Almighty Power and an Immense Wisdom were concerned in the Texture
of these Parts when he observes that the Ear consists of these three wonderful
Cavities? 1. A large one called the Tympanum or Drum, because it, with the
Membrane over it, has such a resemblance. In this are the four little Bones
which are called the Hammer (because it is of that shape,) the Anvil (something
like it) the Stirrup, and the Orbicular Bone. 2. An other lesser Cavity, styled
the Labyrinth, which has a hole in which the Stapes is terminated. This
Labyrinth consists of four little round Holes or Caverns, into which the Air is
received and defecated, and sent to the Cochlea. 3. Then, the other Cavity
(smaller than the former) is this Cochlea, called so because it is in the figure
of a Snails shell.

Now, no Man of any consistency of mind can think that all this Artifice showed
in the framing of these Tortuous Caverns and Various Meanders was the blind
effect of Matter and Motion. No: here was Design and Contrivance: all this
Apparatus was to complete and perfect the Sense of Hearing. The Ear has these
Curious and Various Hollows that the Air and Sound may be retained in them for
some time, and not easily vanish thence, that so the Hearing may be the more
orderly and distinct. And even Music it self is beholding to the particular
Fabrication of this part of the Body: for though the Nature and Essence of
Musical Sounds depend upon the Tremulous and Uniform Motion of the Air and some
other Causes (as an Dr. Holder of the Natural Grounds of Harmony.
Ingenious Person has lately showed) yet it is not to be doubted that these
Harmonious Strokes are much beholding to the constitution of the Organs of
Hearing, and the particular frame of the Ear in some persons especially. By
reason of these Anfractres and Ambages the sudden Irruption of the Air either
very cold or hot cannot hurt the Brain, nor can the excess of Noise endamage
it, for by this Obliquity and Crookedness of the Passages the Air is qualified
and moderated. These are the Reasons, without doubt, of this particular
Workmanship of the Ear, the many Windings and Turnings of it. And as all these
Parts which I have mentioned are of absolute use and necessity, so the outward
Lobe or Flap of the Ear, that little soft and fleshy part, seems to have been
made to be an Ornament it self, and for the receiving of one: and accordingly
we learn from the most Authentic Monuments of Antiquity, that this was the
first and earliest, as well as the most natural piece of Finery that was used,
especially by the Fairer Sex.

The stupendous Fabric of the Eyes invites us next to behold them, and therein
to see a God. There are three Celebrated Humors (as Anatomists style them) or
Diaphanous Liquors which this part of the Body is famed for: the foremost of
which is the Watery one, called so because it is a thin Lympha, and void of all
Color. This is placed in the forepart of the Eye, that the Images of things
may be first rudely formed here; and thence more exactly delineated in the
Crystalline. Which is the next, and is called so by reason of its Transparency:
its situation is in the middle or center of the Eye. The third, which is the
Vitreous Humor, is the remotest, being seated behind the Watery and Crystalline
ones; and being much bigger and of a greater consistency than these, it is
useful somewhat to stop and terminate the Visive species: and accordingly is
conveniently placed at the bottom of the Eye, nearest to the Brain. These are
the Clear and Pellucid Casements of the Body to let in Light, and to transmit
its Beams in order to Vision: for from the fit refraction of the Luminous Rays
which pass through these different Humors (different not only as to their
quantity but consistency) the Sight is made and promoted. So that, before we go
any farther, we have enough to convince us that this particular Make of the Eye
was from an Intelligent and Provident Director, who framed the several Parts of
Man's Body to special and peculiar Ends, and particularly designed the Eye to
be the Organ of Sight.

But these Liquors which are found here, and which are as Glasses and
Spectacles to the Brain in order to Seeing, would be wholly useless to this
purpose if their Transparency were not qualified and checked, if there were not
something (like the Foil in a Looking-glass) to unite and retain the visive
forms in the Eye. This therefore is done by certain Membranes or Tunicles,
which more powerfully refract the Rays of Light, and are serviceable for the
farther shaping and retaining the images of things; and besides, they are
serviceable to separate one Humor from another, and to keep and preserve them
in their proper places and particular Apartments; so that these Liquid
Substances are steady and fixed. The first and outer most of all these Coats is
that Adnata.
Common one which covers all the Eye, unless it be where a perforation is left
for the Ball or Pupil. This is that Skin which makes the White of the Eye. The
second has its Sclerotica.
name from its Hardness, for (as the Learned Dr. Willis observes) this being
one of the upper Coats of the Eye, it was to be strong, and as a Fence against
Injuries. And it is also called the Horny Tunicle, because it is of the color
of a thin bright piece of Horn, viz. in the forepart of it, but it is opacous
behind. Strictly speaking (as another Learned Physician notes) it is the
foremost part of this Skin which has the Epithet of Corneous, and the hinder
is properly the Sclerotick. This Membrane enfolds the whole Eye, as the other
before mentioned does: only there is an Aperture reserved for the Pupil.

The third is that which is called by Anatomists the Uvea.
Grapy, and also the Choroides: or, to be exact, the Anterior part only is that
which should be called Grapy. It is generally black in Man, and therefore has
its Name because it resembles the skin of a Black Grape when it is pressed.
However, the inward Superficies of this Membrane is black, to determine and fix
the Rays. It encloses the Eye on all parts, the Ball excepted, where it is full
of Holes to let in the Light.

Out of this Coat are formed and produced the Pupil (known by the name of the
Ball or Black of the Eye) and the Iris, both which are very Remarkable
Curiosities. The former is a Round Hole in the middle and forepart of this
Vveous Membrane, and it is so commodiously framed, that it is capable of being
contracted or dilated (and consequently of being lesser or bigger) as occasion
is, i. e. according to the difference of Objects, or rather the difference of
Light which the Eye receives into it when it beholds Objects. In this Apple of
the Eye (for so also it is most vulgarly called) appears the Little Image of the
person who looks upon it, whence it is called by the Hebrews Ishon ( Deuteronomy.
xxxii.10. a Diminutive of Ish) Virunculus, because the Pourtraiture of a Little
Man is seen here: and with the Greeks it has the name of (...), Puella, for
the like Reason, because one of the other Sex may as well be seen in this
Looking-glass. Accordingly it is likewise in Hebrew called Bath gnajin, the
daughter of the Eye, Psalm. xvii.8. and among the Latins Pupilla, i. e. Parva
puella. Though some Critics think they give it this name because it is a part
that is tender and delicate. Whence in the forenamed place it is said, Keep me
as the Apple of the Eye: for this is a very choice part, and must be preserved
and guarded with great Care and Circumspection.

And behold yet farther the wonderful Contrivance of that Omniscient Mind who
framed this excellent part! In this sable and dark Spot of the Eye is the Sight
placed (whence it is called the Sight,) or here at least the Visive Faculty is
first exerted, though (as you shall hear anon) it is perfected in the next
Membrane. This little Obscure Hole is the inlet to all our Light. This indeed
is worthy of the Great Creator, who in the first Production of the World
brought Light out of Darkness. This I may call Nature's Window in the Body, at
which the Visive Rays enter, and strike upon the Crystalline Humor, and from
thence are refracted to the bottom of the Eye, where the Vision is consummated.

This Black Circle which I am now speaking of, is environed with a Bright Iris
or Rainbow, so called because it is of diverse Colors: though it is true that in
some Creatures it is black, in some gray, in others blue, according as this
Uveous Membrane is colored. This distinct Part of the Eye is of a peculiar
Make, it consisting of certain Processus Ciliares.
Nervous Fibers; which, like small Hairs, issue from the Pupil, like Rays from
a light Body, all in a Circle. These, as D. Willis rationally conjectures, are
instrumental in the Contraction or Dilatation of the Ball of the Eye, and (as
he adds) the main Vigor and Briskness of the Eye are seated here.

The fourth and last Membrane (for though some Ophthalmists have talked of a
Fifth, viz. the Aranea, yet our late Anatomists, who have been more exact in
their Enquiry, assure us this is not to be found) is the Retina, so named
because it is fashioned like a Net. Though there were some Preparations and
Initiations of Sight in the Pupil, yet this Part must be judged the chief Organ
of it: For here the Images of Objects are pourtraied, and thence by the Optic
Nerve represented to the Brain to be examined and judged of by the Soul. All
the other Coats (as well as the Humors) were but serviceable to this: This is
the Principal Seat as well as Instrument of actual and complete Vision. And the
particular Situation and Make of it were designed for this very Purpose, for
this is the farthest and inmost Membrane, and is nearest of all to the Optic
Nerve and Brain: Yea, it is made out of the innumerable Filaments of this very
Nerve, so that there is an immediate Commerce with the Brain. Besides, all
Parts in the Eye are unequal but the Retina, which is concave, and that
purposely, that it may be fitter to receive and retain the visive Rays, or
rather the Forms of them, and then transmit them to the common Receptacle of
Sense. This is the curious Frame and Contexture of the Eye, in respect of the
several Humors and Tunicles with which it is furnished: And who espies not the
Deity through them?

It is granted that the Ancients and Moderns agree not as to the particular
solving the manner of Sight. An W. Bridge M. D.
ingenious Man, who has been curious in anatomizing the Eye, confesses
ingenuously that it is by unknown Ways that this Exactness of Sight is effected
by these several Organs and Parts. But they all agree to admire the excellent
and wonderful Structure of the Eye: They jointly acknowledge the Aptitude of
the several Parts to reflect and refract the Rays, and the Fitness of the
Retina, especially to receive the Impressions of Light, and the admirable Tone
of the Optic Nerve. In brief, they are all astonished at the Position and
Configuration; the excellent Texture and Composition of this Organ. Let a late
expert Anatomist speak for all the rest, Isbrand de Diemerbroesk Anatome Corp.
Hum.
If the Fabric of the Eye be narrowly observed and considered, surely there is
not a Man living who will not be rapt into Admiration of the infinite Wisdom of
the supreme Deity, who in the Structure of these Organs was so much the more
accurate, by how much the Sense of seeing surpasses all the other Senses in
Excellency and Worth.

Though it is impossible to tell the particular way how the Sight is performed
by the Help of these several Humors and Membranes, yet we are certain it is
done by them: Of which we have this Demonstration, that if any of these Parts
fail, if any of these innate Liquors be deficient, or any of the Coats
vitiated, the Sight is impaired, or wholly lost, as is evident in Suffusions,
Strabism or Squinting, the Pin and Web, Cataracts, though perhaps the second of
these may be caused, not only by the misplacing of the Crystalline Humor (as
it is generally said) but by some Defect in the Muscles. And this here might
remind me to add something concerning the unparalleled Structure of the
Muscles which belong to the Eye, and which are another Argument of its Divine
Workmanship. Anatomists mention six, four of which are direct; the first to
lift it up, the second to move it down, a third to move it to the right,
another to the left side: The other two turn the Eye about, and serve for
oblique Glances.

I propound this also to be considered, that the Eye is made with a round
Prominency, that we may not only see things which are before us, but those
which are on either side of us. Which latter we could not possibly do if the
Eye were flat, and if it were not set out a little beyond the Place where it is
fixed. Both which argue the Providential Care of Heaven toward us.

And because this Part of the Body is of extraordinary Use and Necessity, as
well as of Beauty and Comeliness, the Omniscient Mind who framed it, has taken
especial Care of its Safety and Preservation. This is observable in sundry
Particulars, as first, the Eyes are lodged in two safe Sockets, two strong
Boney Cavities, where they are securely enclosed and defended from Hurt. And
likewise the impendent Brow and the prominent Nose save them from hard Strokes
and Blows. Moreover, there are Eyelids, to be a farther Security and Defense
to them, which are to be closed at Pleasure to prevent that Danger which may
accrue by too much Light, or by Dust, or Smoke, etc. Hence, if we may credit a
good old Grammarian, who was well skilled in the Derivation of Words, the Eyes
in Oculi ab oculendo, i. e. tegendo. Varr^.
Latin have their Denomination from this Cover which God has given them. The
Upper Lid especially is most remarkable, it being as a Portcullis (for to that
Anatomists generally compare it) clapped down every Night for the Eyes Safety,
and at all other times when there is occasion for Sleep: Or whenever the Eye is
assaulted, this Part is let down presently to secure it: (I say presently, for
its Motion is with great Expedition, and thence Gnaphgnaphim is the Word among
the Hebrews for Palpebrae, from Gnaph, celeriter se movere: And the doubling of
that Word denotes the Quickness of the Agitation, the Suddenness of the
Vibration of this Part.) If Plempius had not been Purblind, as to his Mind as
well as Eyes, he would not have blamed (as Ophthalmograph.
he does) the Formation of this Part of Man which is so peculiarly contrived.
This is the true Reason of the Fabrication of the Eyelids, and therefore
Fishes are destitute of them, because living in the Water they are not so
obnoxious to Injuries and Blows, or troublesome Flies, or any thing that may
hurt the Eye; and again, because these Creatures sleep not, or very little.

Farther, observe that these Eyelids are fortified with stiff Hair as with
Palisadoes against the Incursion of Flies and such like small Bodies as I have
mentioned before, which would molest this Part. Nay, it is to be remarked that
this Hair with which the Eyelids are edged and bordered, never grows longer
than it is at first, but has a certain Dimension which it does not exceed:
Whereas no other Hair in the Body does the like. Which is a palpable Evidence
of the divine Care and particular Disposal in this matter, viz. that these
Hairs may be a Guard to the Eye, and yet not in the least impede the Sight,
which they would certainly do if they grew long. And farther yet, we may take
notice that these Hairs are set thin, that they may not be any Obstruction to
the seeing. So that considering these wonderful Circumstances, which visibly
testify the Wisdom of the Maker, we have reason to abhor and condemn that
blasphemous Passage of a Plempius in Opthalmograph.
Physician of the last Age, that if he had had the Formation of the Eyelids of
Man, he would have contrived them quite otherwise. This is unreasonable and
rash as well as impious, for we plainly see that this Guard of the Eye could
not have been formed with greater Wisdom and Contrivance.

Moreover, above the Eyes there is an Arch of Hairs called the Hairs of the
Eyebrows, which were placed there for the Ornament of the Face, for unless
these were a Beauty, Mahomet would not have promised his Followers the Converse
in Paradise with Women whose Eyebrows shall be as wide as the Rainbow. They
were no less made for the Preservation of the Eyes, for these do in some
measure keep off Sweat from sliding down from the Head or Forehead into the
Eyes. So admirably fenced and guarded is this curious Piece of Workmanship by
the Celestial Operator of it. This is the Care he took of this Part which is so
noble and so useful, and is so valued by us. Whence, Mat. 18.9.
to pluck out the Eye was an ancient proverbial saying to express the Loss of
those things which were most dear and precious to us.

Our Savior has spoken of this Part in a most expressive and comprehensive
Manner, The Light of the Body is the Eye, Mat. 6.22. This is the Light or Lamp
(for that is the true rendering of the Word (...)) which directs and guides us
in all the Actions of the Body, in all the Affairs of Life wherein Corporal
Sense and Motion are concerned. For, as (...). De Op. mundi.
Philo says well, what the Mind is in the Soul, that the Eye is in the Body,
for both of them see, the one intelligible, the other sensible things. Yea, it
is certain that the Eye is the Mirror of the Mind, there we may as 'twere see
the Soul, there the inward Affections and Propensions of it, especially those
of Compassion and Kindness discover themselves, whence by a good Prove.
23.6.28.22. Mat. 6.23. Mark 7.22. Luke 11.34. Mat. 20.15.
Eye is meant a benign, and by an Prove. 23.6.28.22. Mat. 6.23. Mark 7.22. Luke
11.34. Mat. 20.15.
evil one an envious and covetous Mind: And these are Phrases used by the
Hebrew Doctors and Talmudists.

We might farther take notice that this Light was wisely placed in the
uppermost and highest Region of the Body, as on a Watchtower, that thereby we
may look about, and discern Dangers afar off, and that by this means the Eye
might preside over the whole Body and all the other Senses. What the Sun is to
the great World, that the Eye is to the lesser: It is the Guide, Light, Life
and Cherisher of it. And finally, to put a Period to our Remarks on this Head,
as there is a double Organ for the Sense of hearing, so there is for this of
seeing; there is a Pair of these glorious Lights in the Body, that if one
fails, the other may supply its room. Therefore we may justly look upon Pliny's
Relation as fabulous where he talks of People of some Parts of the World with
but one Eye; for indeed, such is the Goodness and Liberality of our Creator
that there is not any Animal monocular in the World. Thus I have gone through the
various Parts which constitute the Face or Countenance, and I have only this
one thing to add, which the Lord Bacon in his Essays suggests to us, that a Man
shall see Faces, which if you examine Part by Part, you shall find never a good
one, and yet all together do well. Which is a farther Illustration of the
Divine Art, Wisdom and Providence. So much for the Face, which consists of
several Parts, and thence perhaps (...) (a Word in the Plural Number) is used
among the Hebrews to express it.

CHAP. III.
The Neck contains two Passages or Channels of a very admirable Contrivance,
viz. the Windpipe with its Larynx and Epiglottis, and the Throat or Gullet. The
second or middle Partition of the Body, viz. the Breast is also showed to be
the Product of ^n omnipotent and intelligent Operator. The particular Use and
Serviceableness of the Lungs, and the peculiar Composure of them in order to
this. The proper Office of the Heart. Its Vessels for conveying of Blood. The
Circulation of this noble Liquor. The Swiftness of its Motion. The Situation of
the Heart. The useful Membrane which encloses it. The several Uses of the
Diaphragm.

I Should now descend from the Head to the next celebrated Partition of Man's
Body, and that is his Thorax.
Breast. But first we must take notice of the Passage to it, the Neck, that
fair and straight Isthmus which joins these Regions. This is the round Pillar
that sustains the Head: This is the Atlas that upholds that Heavenly Part: The
Inside of it is the Throat, which is furnished with two most useful and
admirably contrived Cavities or Pipes.

The Aspera Arteria, the Windpipe, the Weasand.
first is that which is feared in the ^orepart of the Neck, and is that Vessel
by which The Air is taken and sucked in, and also breathed forth: And therefore
this Pipe leads to the Lungs, yea, is inserted into them, and several Bronchia.
Branches of it are spread through the Mass of the Lungs. Besides, this is the
principal Instrument made use of in forming the Voice, and questionless the
peculiar composure of it, the admirable Fabric of its grisly Rings was in
order to this. The Larynx, the Throtle.
Uppermost Part of it is more particularly and signally instrumental to the
Speech and Modulation of the Voice: and it is to be observed that the all-wise
Contriver has added a Epiglottis.
Cover, (which is a small Flap or cartilaginous Membrane, somewhat like a
Tongue, and thence has its Name) to this Head or Top of the Windpipe, that,
when we are swallowing, none of the Meat or Drink may go down into this Cavity.
For so it is that what we eat and drink cannot be conveyed into the other
Passage the Gullet (of which I shall speak next) but it must first pass over
the uppermost End of this Pipe: Wherefore this Flap covers this End when we
swallow, and hinders the passing down of the Meat and Drink into the Weasand.
So that it appears hence, this little Piece of Flesh is of absolute Necessity,
and we can neither eat nor drink without it. Can the most hardened Atheist
persuade himself that these things were by chance, or from mere Matter moved?
Indeed I can scarcely think that any Man can entertain such Thoughts. Nay, it
might be added, as farther remarkable, that this Cover we have been speaking
of, is not so close but some humid Liquors (as Lohocs and the like lambitive
Medicines for Distempers in the Lungs and Breast) may be gently conveyed that
way, and descend by the sides of the Larynx unto the Lungs, which still shows
the Art and Wisdom of the Contriver.

The Oesophagus, or Gulle^.
second Passage or Pipe is that which is placed behind this Cover, and the
Windpipe to which that belongs, and is seated next to the Vertebrae of the
Neck. This is that by which we let down our Meat and Drink, and therefore leads
directly to the Stomach. As the forenamed Cavity is the Fistula of the Lungs,
so this is the Tunnel of the Stomach, and accordingly is adjoined to the upper
Orifice of it, as that is to the Lungs. Both these Vessels are of indispensable
Necessity: Without the one we can neither breath nor speak, and without the
other we cannot have any Food or Nourishment conveyed to us to support our
Natures. And it may be this latter as well as the former, is someways
serviceable to the making of a Vocal Sound: For there are several Instruments
that concur to promoting the Pronunciation, and rendering the Sound Articulate.
Thence the Hebrews and others divide their Letters into Guttural, Dental,
Labial, Lingual, and others are denominated from the Palate.

And now, having observed what Passages are into the Breast, I will speak of
that it self, that large and capacious Venture, that middle Region of Man which
contains all the Parts between the Neck and the Midriff. And here we are to
take notice of the divine Workmanship in those two principal Vessels which the
Breast contains, viz. the Lungs and the Heart. From the admirable Structure and
exact Motions of the former a Dr. Willis Pharmaceut. Rational.
pious Physician of our Age takes occasion to admire (though he says he cannot
do it enough) the excellent Artifice of the divine Creator evidently adapted
even unto Mathematical Rules, for here he plainly appears (as he says) (...)
How duly and orderly do these Bellows (for so they are not improperly called)
discharge their Office of attracting and emitting the Air? How faithfully do
they serve to Respiration, which is for the ventilating and cooling of the
Blood, or (as others think) for the attenuating and refining, the subtilizing
and enkindling of it? For by means of the Subtilty of the Air which is taken
in, the Heat in the Heart is provoked and blown up into a vital Flame.

I will not here dispute whether the Lungs follow and depend upon the Motion of
the Breast and Midriff, and are filled and moved as Bellows are, because they
are distended; or whether (as some of late contend) they are dilated by the
elastick Force of the Air rushing in, and so upon their Extension follows the
swelling of the Diaphragm, and thereupon the Motion of the Thorax. This is
Inspiration: And then in Expiration the Diaphragm is contracted, and returns to
its right Figure, and the Air is expelled. Neither will I question, Whether it
be a collateral End of Respiration to discharge and expel an excrementitious
Fluid out of the Mass of Blood, as Not. Hist. of the Earth, Part 4.
the excellent Author whom I have formerly cited, thinks he can sufficiently
prove.

But this we are sure of (laying aside all Disputes) that the Lungs are the
great Instrument of breathing, and that they are absolutely requisite for the
admiting of the Air in order to the rouzing of the vital Spirits, and quickening
and maintaining the Flame of Life: for the sensitive Soul is fed by Air, as the
Body by Food. And we are sure of this likewise, that they are necessary Organs
of Speech and Voice, of articulate and significant Sounds. And we have no
reason to doubt of this, that the great Architect and Framer of Man's Body has
particularly fitted and composed the Lungs for these Purposes, for they Whence
they are called Lights, because considering their Bulk they are the lightest
Parts of all the Body.
are light, spongy and flexible, and full of hollow Places, to hold the Air,
and convey it through hidden Passages to all the Body: And they are wide and
capacious that the Air may play in them, and have its full Scope in the Cavity
of the Thorax. And moreover, that they may be firm and steady and so perform
their Operations with the greater Certainty and Accuracy, they are on the Back
of them fastened to the Spina, and thereby become fixed. This may convince us
that they are the Work of a supreme and primary Cause, who is Owner of infinite
Understanding, and does all things with Skill and Counsel. Wherefore that is an
excellent Spark of Devotion in the Talmud, At every Breath that a Man
breaths, he ought to praise God his Creator.

The other rich Treasure in this Chest is the Heart, the Fountain of natural
Heat, which it disperses over all the Body by virtue of its peculiar Office,
which is to make Blood, and to distribute it by the Arteries into the Parts.
Whether the so deservedly admired Motion of the Blood be from an infinite
Faculty (as Galen thought) or from Rarefaction which expands the Heart (as
Carts determines) or from the Air taken into the Lungs (as Mr. Hobbes
suggests) or from the Quantity or Copiousness of the Blood falling into the
Heart, which labors to expel it thence by a Constriction of its Fibers, whereby
the Cone of it is brought nearer to the Basis (as Dr. Charlton thinks) I will
not here dispute, but this we are certain of, that an intellectual Spirit was
the first Cause and Efficient of it: And any considerate Man that takes notice
of the wonderful Make and Figure of the Heart, and of all the Vessels
subservient to it, cannot but acknowledge as much. Therefore a Dr. Lower, de
Cord.
celebrated Anatomist of our own, resolves the Motion of them and of the Blood
into a divine and supernatural Principle, not to be conceived and explained by
us. We know that when the Blood flows into the right Ventricle of the Heart,
this is dilated; and when it is thrust out thence, this is contracted; but the
true natural Spring of this Diastole and Systole.
double Motion is hid from us. Whether the Motion of the Heart depend upon the
Blood, or the Motion of this depend on the Heart (because if it be a great
Muscle, as not only Hippocrates and Galen, but some modern Philosophers and
Physicians have averred, it seems of it self to be made for Motion, being
actuated by Spirits, and drawn by Fibers) it is not my Business here to
enquire, but this is the thing which ought to employ our Thoughts and excite
our Devotion, that (whatever second and natural Causes may be assigned of this
Phenomenon) the supreme Author and Contriver of it is some intelligent
Substance, and it is impossible it should be otherwise. For the whole
stupendous Contexture of the Heart and its double Ventricle, with the four
Vessels in them, viz. two Veins in the right, and two Arteries in the left
Side, the former to convey the Blood to the Heart, the latter to carry it off,
together with the various Nerves, Fibers, etc. is a Work of Understanding,
Prudence and Judgment; for all these Parts have Relation to one another, and
are mutually helpful in their Operations, and they all apparently conspire for
the Good and Welfare of the Body.

Who can sufficiently admire the Circular Conveyance of that noble Liquor
through the Vena Cava.
greatest Vein of the whole Body (into which all the other Veins empty and
disembogue their Blood) into the right Ventricle of the Heart, out of this into
the Lungs through a capacious Artery (falsely called a Vena Arteriosa.
Vein) which has its Original from the Heart, and is divided into many
Branch^s which are dispersed through the Lungs; out of this Parenchyma of the
Lungs into the left Ventricle of the Heart through a remarkable Vein (corruptly
called an Arteria venosa.
Artery) which has its Rise from the Lungs, and is mixed with the Branches of
the Aspera Arteria, and the Arterious Vein? And so when the Blood is digested
and perfected in both those Ventricles of the Heart and Lungs, it is carried
out of the left Ventricle into the bigger Sort of Arteries through the Arteria
aorta.
great Artery, which proceeding out of the Heart disperses its Branches through
the whole Body, and out of the lesser Arteries (not by Anastomoses or
Inosculations, as some have thought, but) through the Substance of the Flesh
into the lesser, and then the greater Veins, and thence through the Vena Cava
into the right Ventricle of the Heart again, and so the Circulation is made.
Or, the short is, that the Heart has on one side of it the Vena Cava, and on
the other the Arteria magna, both which great Trunks have Branches dispersed
through all the Body, even the extremest Parts, and are continued to one
another by capillary or small Vessels, and so there is no Interruption of the
circular Course of the Blood, but it returns to the Place from whence it first
set out. These are the Journeys of the Blood, these are its several Stages,
these are the distinct Channels and Vessels it moves through. Thus by the Heart
and other Passages, as 'twere in a Water-engine, it is carried in a constant
Course round: Which is a sufficient Evidence that these Machines were at first
made, and then set into Motion by an omnipotent and wise Being.

And the Speediness of this Motion is as remarkable as the Circulation it self:
For from the Pulses, which are the sensible moving and beating of the Arteries,
and are made as often as the Blood rusheth out of the Heart into these Vessels,
we may gather the swift Career of this liquid Substance. Primrose is singular
in his Opinion, and reckons but seven Hundred Pulses in an Hour: Other
Physicians rise much higher, but with great Inequality, they being more used to
feel, than tell the Pulses. Harvey reckons two Thousand, Regius three Thousand,
Bartholine about four Thousand; for according to the different Temper and Habit
of the Body the Agitation of the Blood varies, and consequently the Circulation
of it is finished sooner in some than in others. If we speak of what is
commonly experienced in most Persons that are healthful and well disposed in
Body, and are of a just Stature, it is generally agreed that the Heart usually
gives in the Space of an Hour about three thousand Strokes. The whole Mass of
Blood (which in a Man's Body who is adult, seldom exceeds Twenty four Pounds
Weight, or is less than fifteen) passes through the Heart and whole Body six or
seven times in an Hour in some, oftener in others: Yea, a late Dr. Lower.
Tractat. de Cord.
learned and applauded Physician tells us, that in some Persons all the Blood
passes through the Body thirteen times in one Hour. And he endeavors to show
exactly that the Situation and Structure of the Heart are fitted for this swift
Motion, that the Vessels are wonderfully made to distribute the Blood through
the Body in so short a time, and to perform their whole Circle and Periodical
Revolution.

This more particularly may be observed, that this noble Mover is placed
exactly in the Middle of the Breast (and in a manner of the whole Body) that
the Influence of it may equally reach all Parts: Though indeed the Pulse is
more sensible on the left Side, which is by reason of the left Ventricle,
wherein the vital Spirits are elaborated, and where is situated the great
Artery that conveys them forth thence, both which are on the left. And besides,
the Cone or Point of the Heart deflects rather to the left Side, to give way
perhaps to the Ascension of the Midriff.

That this choice Vessel of the Heart may be defended and preserved, it is
encompassed with the Lungs, which hang on both sides of it, and are called by
some Anatomists the Hearts Pillow. And add to this that this precious Treasure
is enclosed in a Membranous Covering, which is styled the Pericardium. As the
Heart is fastened to a Part of the Spina to keep it steady, so this Capsula is
fastened to the Midriff, to keep it in its right Situation, and also to defend
it from Injuries. And it is not to be omitted, that within this Membrane there
is a serum or thin Liquor, which is placed here on purpose to keep the Heart
moist, and consequently to promote its Motion: Whereas if the outward
Superficies of the Heart were deprived of this serous Matter, it would (it is
probable) through continual Agitation and Heat grow dry, and wrinkle, and be
made unfit for Motion. This Lympha therefore is of great Use, and (as all the
other things before mentioned) convinces us that the Fabric of the Heart was
from an understanding Mind, and could not be from any other. And after all,
this may be observed (which is very strange and wonderful) that the Heart is
insensible, as De Generatione.
Dr. Harvey proves from one who had a Fracture in his left Side, so that this
Part was exposed to view, and was handled, but not perceived. So much for the
Heart, which is the lower Heaven as 'twere in this little World; the Head being
the upper one, where the divine Soul has its Throne.

Having viewed the middle Cavity or Partition of humane Bodies, and having
found it to be a Structure worthy of its Creator, I should now with religious
Admiration pass to the lowest Region of the Body, which answers to the Earth in
the sublunary World: But because this is separated from the foregoing Region by
a certain Septum transversum.
cross Bound called the Diaphragm or Midriff, we ought therefore to take notice
of that first. This Muscular Partition lies over-thwart the lower Part of the
Breast, and is sometimes known by the Name of Praecordia, because the Heart
touches it with its Cone. Through this fleshy Skin the Gullet descends: And to
this Part likewise the Pericardium, the Liver, Spleen, Stomach are all
fastened, whence there is a Communication between them and it. The Use of this
Partition is to divide the vital Parts from the natural ones, i. e. the Heart
and Lungs from the Stomach and other lower Bowels; as it was fit there should
be a Distance between these Parts of so great Difference in their Nature and
Use, therefore this Wall was made between them. Again, it is useful to help the
Exoneration of the Intestines, for by pressing these the Faeces are more easily
evacuated. But its chiefest Use is for Respiration, for by contracting it self
it extends the Breast, and by that Extension is Inspiration wrought: So by
extending it self it contracts the Breast, and by that means Expiration is
performed. Thus it is, next to the Lungs, (which it immediately touches as well
as the Heart) the principal Instrument of free breathing.

And besides these Uses already mentioned, it is concluded by the most
judicious Searchers into the Secrets of Nature that this Part of the Body is
useful for Laughter, that innocent and healthful Diversion of Man's Life if it
be used lawfully and moderately: For this peculiar Posture of the Countenance,
with that sonorous but inarticulate Voice which attends it, is to be ascribed
in great part of the shaking of the Muscles of the Diaphragm, caused by an
Agitation of the Spirits dilating the Heart, and consequently this Part and the
Breast, which being moved, affect the Muscles of the Face, and cause this
pleasant Figure of it.

Hence, Dr. Willis. De Anatom. Cerebri.
one of our learnedest Masters in Physics gives an Account of this particular
Motion of the Countenance from the peculiar Frame of the Midriff and the Heart
of Man, which is different from that of all other Animals. This is the Reason
why Laughter is proper to Man only. And the same inquisitive Person takes
notice that Idem. De Anim. Brut.
the intercostal Nerve is of a particular and unparalleled Composure in Man,
whence there is a wonderful Consent between the Praecordia and the Parts of the
Mouth and Face, insomuch that as soon as Grief invades the Breast, the Face
corresponds and is troubled. Hence Men, of all Creatures, only weep as well as
Laugh. This we may entertain as a Truth, whatever Aen. ^.
Virgil or Lib. 8. c. 42.
Pliny suggest to the contrary, who tell us of weeping Horses. But every
Moisture or Distillation from the Eyes, which is seen even in some Brutes
sometimes, is not to be called Tears. Il. 17.
Homer who tells us of weeping Horses Ill. 19.
, mentions speaking Brutes of the same Species; he that gave them Tears could
give them humane Speech. And the same Il. 5.
Poet talks of immortal Horses that feed on Ambrosia instead of Oats, or any
such ordinary Provender. There is no Creature, properly speaking, weeps but
Man, for this comes from that inward Sense and Perception which are not in
irrational Animals. This must be attributed to the particular Make of their
Organs: And this particular Make must be ascribed to the Will and Wisdom of the
Creator, who knew this was most suitable to Humane Nature.

CHAP. IV.
The Frame of the third and lowest Region of the Body speaks a divine Artist.
The convenient Position of the Stomach. Its wonderful Operation in the
concocting of Food. The diverse Opinions of Writers concerning the Cause of it.
The Author's particular Sentiment. An Account of the Intestines, and of the
proper Uses of them. The several Passages and Conveyances of the Chyle. The
distinct Offices of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas. How this lower Partition of
the Body is guarded and secured. The mutual and necessary Correspondence of the
Brain, Heart and Stomach, which are the principal Contents of the three Regions
of the Body. How by the Nerves and Animal Spirits conveyed in them all Motion
and Sensation are performed in humane Bodies.

I Come now to speak of the lower Region it self, (which is the largest, i. e.
the longest and broadest of the three Divisions of the Body) the Abdomen or
Belly, i. e. all that Space in the Body which reaches from the lowest Part of
the Breast to the Fundament. Here first the Stomach deserves our Consideration;
and that which we shall take notice of in the first Place is its Situation. By
which I do not only mean its Position immediately under the Diaphragm (which
without doubt is for the best) but I take notice that as the Heart, the most
useful Part in the middle Region of the Body, is encompassed and kept safe by
the Lungs, so this which is most considerable in the lowest Venture is seated
between the Liver and the Spleen, That on the right, This on the left Side of
it, and is kept warm by both. The former especially ^herishes and comforts this
Part, and that is the reason why it is placed so contiguous to it. Besides, the
Liver and Spleen on both sides of the Stomach guard and defend it from the
Ribs. Nor is the Pancreas or Sweet bread a mere Expl^^ive, to fill up the void
Places between the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, but is as it were a Pillow to the
former of these (as some Anatomists have called it) lest when it is full it
should be hurt by the Hardness of the Vertebrae. This Guard about it shows it
was designed to be a Vessel of great value.

But the admirable Operation of it does much more discover it to be so: For
after it has taken in the Food, it does by means of that Variety of Fibers
with which it is set about, enclose and wrap it up, and then betakes it self to
Concoction, a most amazing Work, and such as speaks a divine Author. The
toughest and hardest Meats are digested in three or four Hours Space, and
turned into a soft Pap, which could scarcely be effected in a Pot over never so
hot and fierce a Fire; and therefore the Food is not concocted by the mere Heat
of the Stomach, as the old Philosophers thought, nor by any Heat brought to the
Stomach from the Heart, as Des Carts and his Followers positively determine.
But whence this fermenting, acid, vellicating Juice, which is the Cause of this
strange Alteration of the Meat, and turns it in so short a time into a whitish
kind of Substance like to Cream, has its Original in the Body, is not easy to
tell.

We have no Assurance that this sharp corroding Humor comes from the gastrick
and meseraick Arteries, as some think. Nor can we prove that it is an acid
Menstruum derived to the Stomach from the Spleen, as others imagine; yea, some
think there is Ground to believe the contrary, because there is no proper
Vessel to promote that Commerce between them. But though herein they are
mistaken, for the Spleen is joined to the Stomach by a little Meatus called Vas
breve, yet no Man can certainly tell whether there be any such sharp Liquor
carried by this Passage. And it is known that Dogs when they have their Spleen
cut out, are no less voracious, and concoct what they eat as soon as before.
Others hold that this stomachick Ferment proceeds immediately from the Blood,
i. e. the salt Humor in it: Whence melancholic and hypocondriacal Persons
(who abound with this saline Liquor) have oftentimes a Boulimy: But there are
Objections levelled against this by some learned Men, and they are not easily
satisfi^d. Some think that a Pancreatick Juice is the great Promoter of this
Work. Riolanus and other Moderns impute it to the sour Relics of the Chyle
which remain in the Stomach, and are turned into a Leven. Dr. Willis refers it
to a sulphurous Acidity, and to the active Spirits which issue from the
stomachick Nerves. The Glandules at the bottom of the Stomach afford a certain
Ferment, say others. The Heat of the adjacent Parenchyma the Liver contributes
much to it, says Dr. Glisson. It is from a nitrous Principle, say Tilingius,
and Dr. Mayow: Which is in a manner the same with Dr. Willis's Opinion. It is
an odd Notion of Dr. Harvey, that it is made by Trituration. Some have thought
that the Saliva which is mixed with the Meat in the Mouth is the great
Instrument of Concoction: Thus thinks Diemerbroek, and I find that Monsieur
Rohault is one that enclines this way; but this kind of Moisture is sometimes
very defective in those that have a very sharp Appetite, and digest their Meat
very quickly, and therefore I cannot think that this is the Aquafortis that
dissolves the solidest Food so quickly.

This is all that we know in the matter, and are sure of, that, viz. it is a
most stupendous Fermentation that thus dissolves all the Parts of the Food, and
turns them into that milky Subsistence in so short a time. That whatever is
taken into the Stomach is consumed so suddenly, is a most strange, surprising,
and prodigious thing. Any thoughtful Man will grant this. Yet I do not say this
as if I questioned whether it is done by natural Means or no, for (to offer my
Opinion and Sentiment in the Point) I hold that it is performed by the
particular Make and Structure of this Part of the Body. It has that individual
Substance, Shape, Contexture and Formation whereby it is fitted for this Use,
viz. Concoction: And the Reason why no other Vessel of the Body does or can
discharge this Office, is because it has not Parts thus adapted. And this is
the general Solution which I would give of the Operation and Function of any
other Vessel in the Body, as the Brain, Lungs, Heart, etc. When there are
Disputes about the particular Manner of their executing their Offices, I
conceive the best Answer is, that all that is done, is done by a peculiar and
singular Fabrication of the Parts. God has given them a particular Turn and
Form, and thereby they effect such and such things. This is signally true of
that Part which I am now treating of, viz. the Stomach. And though all is done
here in a natural way, yet it was caused at first by a supernatural Efficient,
the supreme divine Author of all things, who framed this Vessel after this
particular manner, and most wisely designed and contrived the Operation and
Office of it in order to the nourishing and sustaining of the whole Body.

Which will appear if we consider what becomes of the Chyle, that milky Juice
into which the Food is here dissolved. It is sent through the Pylorus.
lower Orifice or Mouth of the Stomach into the Guts, which are fitted and
prepared on purpose to receive it, and to give it a farther and higher
Digestion. Properly there is but one Intestine, which has diverse Names
according to its diverse Parts or Offices. That which immediately adheres to the
Bottom of the Stomach has its Duodenum.
Name from its being thought to be in its full Dimensions twelve Fingers in
Length, though the expertest Anatomists find it not half so long. This has no
Windings, but descends straight from the Pylorus, that the Chyle may pass
thence the better: And it has a narrow Cavity that it may pass by degrees, and
not all together. The next (for I will mention them all, because they have some
particular Service, though not very distinctly known to us) is the Iejunum.
hungry one, so called because it is often empty, by reason of the abundance of
lacteal Veins that are there, which suck up the Chyle. The Ileon.
third is much larger than these two before mentioned, and is therefore capable
of receiving more of the Faeces, and of retaining them a longer time. Here is
the Iliack Passion. (Note that these three first Intestines are generally known
by the Name of the small Guts:) The Caecum.
fourth is an obscure or blind Appendix (whence perhaps it has its Name) of
the Intestine last mentioned, and of that which I shall name next; for it rises
out of the End of the one and the Entrance of the other. It has its peculiar
Use in the Reception of the Excrements, in preparing them for Ejection, in
correcting the Flatus that proceeds from them, and in serving also as a
Ligament to fasten and uphold the Peritonaeum. The Colon.
fifth is the largest and thickest of all, and the chief Receptacle for the
Faeces. Here is the Scene of the Cholick Pains, bred of Winds and Vapors which
arise in this lower Region of the little World. Lastly, there is the Rectum.
straight one, so nominated because it directly tends to the Anus: And here
(for there are Wonders in every Part of the Body) between the Podex and the
Vesica is that so useful and excellently contrived Sphincter anus
Muscle, whereby untimely Excretion is prevented and hindered; the Benefit of
which cannot sufficiently be expressed. I may justly call it the Key of the
Postern-Gate of the Body with which it is opened and shut as often as there is
occasion, which is a thing not only of singular Use and Convenience, but of
absolute Necessity.

And as for the more general Use of the Intestines, it is very observable and
worthy of their Author: For first they were designed to retain the Nourishment
a considerable time in order to its better Fermentation and Concoction: To
which purpose they are made of a round, long and concave Figure, that they may
be more capacious and hold the Chyle the longer time, and that they may be the
fitter for Motion. Secondly, the Intention of them was to separate what is
brought into them, the useful Parts from those that are of no Use. Thirdly, to
convey and distribute the wholesome Portion of the Chyle into its proper
Receptacle for the Nourishment of the Body. Fourthly, to expel the useless
Parts and Sediment downwards. And though the other Employments be more
honorable, yet this is as necessary and admirable as they. To these Ends their
peristaltick Motion was given them, which is singular and peculiar, and
ordained for this very purpose and no other. By this Motion (which is compared
usually to that of Earthworms, which move the Parts of their Bodies
successively and gradually) the pure, profitable and defecate Parts of the
Chyle are separated from the Excrementitious, and the Faeces are by degrees
depressed and carried off. That there should be this peculiar Contrivance of
these Parts, and that they should have spiral Fibers, peculiarly fitted for the
Employment they are designed to (whilst other Parts have Fibers of a quite
different Nature) shows whose Workmanship it is. And the many Turnings,
Foldings and crooked Windings of these Vessels were designedly framed by God
for the promoting of these Ends. Hereby the Chyle has time to digest
sufficiently, and to send laudable Nourishment to the Body: Otherwise it would
too soon be ejected and precipitated. If the Intestines had not these Windings,
we should be always hungry, because the Meat would slip out of the Stomach too
soon. Therefore, when there has been the contrary Make of the Guts, a
perpetual Appetite and Voracity have been observed, of which see Instances in
Riolan. Anthrop. l. 2. and Cabrol. Observat. 10. Nature does not perform its
Work too fast, but leisurely and sedately by Help of these Meanders and
anfractuous Passages of the Entrails. I have only this to observe further, that
all the Intestines are joined together by the Mesentery, that they may not be
loose; and they are also fastened to the Vertebrae of the Back.

But because both the Stomach and Intestines were primarily intended for
conveying and dispersing the useful and nutritive Part of the Food into the
several Parts of the Body, I will proceed to show you the manner of this
particular Conveyance and Distribution, one of the greatest Arguments of the
divine Contrivance of Man's Body that we can desire. The Food, i. e. the major
Part of it being converted into Chyle in the Stomach, and afterward, by the
Contraction of its Fibers, detruded down into the Guts, the more tenuious Parts
of it are directly conveyed to the lacteal Veins, which are dispersed through
the small Guts and the Mesentery. Here is the first Preparation of the chylous
Matter after its Descent out of the Stomach. Then from these milky Veins it is
carried to the common Receptacle, which is of a membranous Substance, and is
placed at the Root of the Mesentery, and above the Vertebrae of the Loins, to
which it is fastened (though some have lately exploded this common Receptacle of
Pecquet:) From thence it ascends to the Ductu^ Thoracicus; and thence into the
subclavian Veins (called so from the Claviculae or Chanel Bones by which they
pass) and thence it flows into the upper Trunck of the Vena Cava, where it is
mixed with the Blood, and thence it runs directly into the right Ventricle of
the Heart (in its Diastole) where it is turned into Blood: And thence into the
Lungs (by the Heart's Systole:) Thence into the left Ventricle of the Heart,
whence passing through the Aorta, or great Artery, it is poured into the
Arteries of the whole Body, and thence returns again by the Veins: For the
lesser Veins bring it to the Vena Cava, and from thence (as was said before)
into the right Ventricle of the Heart. Or briefer thus, the prepared Chyle,
which is the nutritive Part of the Food, is carried to the Heart by the Veins,
sent about by Arteries, and goes back again by Veins. This is the Passage of
it; this is its constant Circuit.

However, though we may be mistaken in some of the chyliferous Passages, yet as
to the main, the Progress is rightly stated; and we cannot but acknowledge (as
the learnedest Enquirers have done) that the Motion of this liquid Matter from
one Place to another, is surprising and amazing. The various Stages of it, its
sudden mounting and climbing up, even from the Intestines to the Thorax, its
making way through so many different Channels, is all of it divine and heavenly
Mechanism. None can see and observe these things, but they must be confirmed in
the Belief of a God.

And now I should say something particularly of the Liver and Spleen (though I
had occasion to mention them before, and observed they were a Guard to the
Stomach, and on that account were of use:) The former of these was said, by the
Ancients, to be the Blood-making Vessel, but now it is otherwise agreed by the
learned, viz. that the Blood is made in the Heart. Wherefore they assign that
Part other Offices, which yet are of no mean Advantage to the Body. Dr. Glisson
is of opinion, that the Liver is of the Nature of a Streiner, i. e. the Blood
and other Humors are defecated as they pass through it. And moreover, he
thinks that it promotes the Fermentation of the Blood running through it. But
those who are persuaded that no Chyle or Blood is carried to the Liver, because
Anatomists do not find any Passage from the lacteal Veins thither, assert that
the chief Employment of this Part is to separate and prepare Choler for the use
of other Parts of the Body, and that the grosser Part of it is derived by the
Gallbladder and Bilary Passage (which are in the hollow Part of this Viscus)
into the Intestines to promote and facilitate the Evacuation of the Excrements
out of those Parts, which are thereby rendered fluid, and so fitter for Motion:
But the better and milder Part of this Juice is sent into the Blood
continually, and is very serviceable to augment its Fermentation. I will not
interpose here to examine or judge which of these Opinions is most probable;
but any Man of rational Thoughts will determine that a Part of the Body which
is of that Bigness and Consistency that the Liver is of, was not placed there
without good reason, and for some considerable End.

Then as to the Spleen, it was thought by the Ancients that its Employment was
to separate the melancholic Part of the Chyle, and to contain it in its
particular Cavity, (as the Gallbladder is the Receptacle of the yellow Choler)
and after Concoction of it, to transmit some of it to the Entrails, some to the
Veins, and some to the Stomach. Others lately assign other Offices of the
Spleen, but cannot well agree what they are. Dr. Glisson will have it to be
useful for the preparing of his succus nutritious. Others think it is
serviceable for the gathering and dreining of a certain acid excrementitious
Juice. But the most probable Function of it is to help and further the Ferment
of the Blood, and to advance its due Concoction in the Body. It is certainly a
necessary Vessel in humane Bodies, and cannot be taken out of them without real
Damage to them, though some other Animals may make a shift to live without it
after it is cut out. Or that a Man may live without it, perhaps may not wholly
be denied; but yet it is useful to the Health of the Body, for a thing may be
useful though not absolutely necessary. Hear therefore what a Isbrand de
Diemerbrock.
Person of Understanding and Judgment in these things has said: The great
Architect, says he, never made any thing in our Bodies to no purpose. What Man
therefore in his right Senses, can believe that so eminent and large a Bowel as
the Spleen is, should be given in vain to Men and Beasts, without any Necessity
or Use in order to Life?

And so I doubt not but the Pancreas or Sweetbread (which is a glandulous
Substance seated under the back Part of the Stomach, at the Bottom of it, and
so is, as it were, its Cushion to lean upon) is of considerable Use in the
Body. It is said by some, to send a Juice to the Stomach in order to the
Concoction. By others it is thought to afford a Liquor to the Guts for
fermenting the Chyle there. It is concluded by others to be a Dreyner, viz. of
some useless excrementitious Humor that passes that way. Thus Physicians and
Anatomists disagree about it, some asserting one thing, some another. And here
let me say this, with relation, not only to this Part, but to those immediately
before spoken of, that though we have not a particular or full Knowledge of the
Use of them, yet we ought not to conclude thence that they are useless. But
rather as one of the Ancients said of Heraclitus's Writings, that what he
understood of them was good, and he thence gathered that what he understood not
was so too, the like we may in a resembling manner say of the Parts of the
Body, we have a full Proof concerning most of them that they are very useful,
and there is reason to infer thence, that the rest are of the like Nature,
though we cannot give a particular and distinct Account of them.

And now I will shut up all that I have to say concerning this last and lowest
Region of the Body, when I have observed to you, that this being the only
Partition that is not guarded with Bones (for the Ribbs came no farther before
than the Diaphragm,) there is other Provision made for it, for it is in a
special manner fenced and secured (though not with Bones, yet) with several
other Coverings. As first, there is that Skin which is called the Peritonaeum^
Rim of the Belly: This covers all the Entrails, and not only defends them, but
keeps them warm, and likewise keeps them together, and thereby prevents a
Rupture. There is another Skin or Membrane which wraps up the Intestines, and
that is the Omentum.
Cawl or Kell: This is under the Rim, and is not so large as that, but it is
useful for the foresaid purposes, and also to keep the Bowels glib by its
Fatness and Moisture, (not to speak here of its Serviceableness to Concoction,
which might have been mentioned before, for when this Part is corrupted and
defective, Digestion fails, of which see an Example in the Philosophical
Transactions, Aug. 20. 1684. Furthermore, there is the Mesentery in the middle
of the Entrails, which is another Tie and Security to these Parts, for it laps
them close together, and holds them in their right Places, lest by the Motion
of the Body they should be shaken and misplaced. Thus the Care of the Almighty
is every where seen. None can observe these Parts but must confess that they
were purposely framed by divine Providence.

There are other observable things yet behind in this Region, but it was not my
Design to treat of all: And besides, I may, before I end this Discourse, have
occasion to speak of some of them. I hope I have already, in good measure,
performed the Task I undertook, i. e. given Proof of the Existence of a Deity
or divine Intellect from the Frame of humane Bodies, by considering distinctly
the three celebrated Regions of them. The Brain, the Heart, the Stomach are the
chief Wonders of these several Apartments. The first elaborates the animal
Spirits, the second commutes the Chyle into Blood, which the third had before
prepared and fermented. All things in the Body depend on the mutual
Correspondence of these three. We owe it to the Heart that the Spirits never
fail in the Brain, and we are beholding to the Brain that the Motion of the
Heart never cease: For all that Force and Vigor which are in this latter,
are communicated to it by the brisk Spirits flowing from the Head. But then
again, these must be made there, and continually supplied by sending forth of
Blood out of the Heart to the Brain. If one of these be interrupted, there
follow Apoplexies, Lethargies, etc. If the other be suppressed, there are
Syncopes and Lipothymies. And both these great Operators, the Heart and Brain,
are obliged to, and even depend upon the grand Laboratory for the whole Body
the Stomach, the Kitchen where the Food is prepared and dressed, for there can
be no laudable Spirits or Blood without good Chyle and well concocted. In these
three chiefly consists our Life, viz. that the Meat be prepared in the Stomach,
that the finer and choicer Part of it be transmitted to the Heart and
neighboring Vessels, there to be assimilated into Blood, and lastly, that the
purest and subtilest Part of the Blood be sent and extill'd to the Brain, and
there refined into animal Spirits. These, these are the Quintessence both of
the Chyle and the Blood: They are the ultimate Result of all the Concoctions,
they are the Perfection of Natures Operations.

By these volatile Parts of the Blood it is that both Motion and Sensation are
performed in the Body, and that after this wonderful manner, those subtle
Particles which by continual Pulsation of the Heart are hurried with the Blood
by the carotidal Arteries up into the Brain, are there by that laxe and boggy
Substance imbibed and separated from the Blood, and thence are transmitted to
all the Parts of the Body: Which is done by the Mediation of the Spinal Marrow
( i. e. the Pith of the Back Bone, called the Silver Cord by Solomon, Eccles.
12.6. and accordingly in the Caldee, Buxt. Lex. Chald. p. 718.
chut is filum, funiculus, and also medulla spinae dorsi, because this descends
like a white Thread or Cord. This I may call a Label descending from the Brain,
and it is indeed an Appendix of it, or the Brain at length.) And the Nerves or
Sinews, which are originally planted in the Brain, and the foresaid Marrow of
the Back Bone, are spread through the Body on purpose to carry these fine
subtle Spirits from the Brain into all the Parts; and there are seven Pairs or
Conjugations of them for that Use. Because the Parts belonging to the Head are
the most considerable, there are therefore six of these Pairs appropriated to
them. One Couple constitutes the optic Nerves, another appertains to the
Muscles of these Parts, a third is proper to the Ears, and three Couples go to
the Tongue, and its adjacent Parts. The remaining Pair is divided into several
small Nerves that are inserted into the Lungs, Stomach, and other Parts
belonging to the second and third Ventricle. Bartholine assigns three Pair
more which have their Rise also within the Cranium. And he (as well as the
Ancients) reckons thirty Pair that proceed from that Part of the Medulla which
is in the Vertebrae, and are distributed over the whole Body.

These, and the whole genus nervosum (though they are useful for the fastening
and linking of the Parts of the Body together, which is no inconsiderable Use
of them) are more especially designed to be the Organs of Motion; for this is
caused by those active Spirits (before mentioned) in these Nerves, in
concurrence always with the Muscles, which are purposely framed for the
promoting of it. For into these are inserted the Nerves, which are the proper
Vehicles of the Animal Spirits, and bring them from the Brain hither, and
thereby produce Motion: For the Muscle swells by an Influx of those Spirits
into it, and so moves the Part or Member. This Action of the Muscles is
performed, not only by the Nerves, but the Fibers and Tendons, which are of
most exquisite Contexture, insomuch that an Mr. Ray's Wisdom of God in the
Creation.
English Philosopher avoucheth, that in the Muscles there seems to be more
Geometry than in all the artificial Engines in the World. All the Motion of the
Body depends on these, which are so set one against another, that when one is
contracted, it draws with it that Part of the Body which it is joined to, so
that the opposite Muscle at the same time is extended: And at another time, if
this Muscle be contracted, the other necessarily is shrunk up and draws to it
the Part that is annexed. And the only reason why this Muscle is thus affected
rather than that which is opposed to it is, because the same Quantity of
Spirits flows not from the Brain to one that does to the other. The short then
is, that a Gale, a Current, a Blast of Animal Spirits, is the Spring of all
voluntary Motion and Progression; for though the Limbs are moved by the Muscles
which slip up and down) and these by the Nerves, yet both are originally moved
by those agile Spirits.

And Sensation (as well as Motion) is performed by these, for the feeling Power
is then exerted when the Threads of the Nerves, by occasion of the sensible
Objects which make some Vibration on them, affect the Brain. To which purpose
these Strings are spread over all the Body, so that whenever any Object touches
them, either mediately or immediately, the Brain presently discerns it, just as
a Spider feels the shaking of her Web, if any Thread of it be touched. Thus the
Nerves and the Spirits in them (which are continually diffused) are the Cause
and Principle of all Sense. This is the Reason which persuades me to believe
that the Brain (the chief and principal Part of all the Body) is the Seat of
the Soul. For where should we fix its Throne, but in that Place where there is
the original of all Sense and Motion? And this is the Brain, which (as you have
heard) is the Source of all the Nerves, and all Spirits conveyed in them and to
them. Here then this great Queen resides as in her Palace, and these pure
refined Particles are her immediate Instruments in all her Functions, and
particularly they are the Means of Sense and Motion. Wherefore we may infer (as
an Dr. Power.
ingenious Observer does) That the Fabric of our Bodies was made in
Subserviency to the Animal Spirits, for the Extraction, Separation and
Depuration of which all the Parts of the Body were contrived and designed: As
the Chemical Laboratory and all its Furnaces, Crucibles, Stills, Retorts,
Cucurbits, etc. were made by the Artist for the making of his Spirits and
Quintessences. And this is as much as if he had said, All was made for the
Soul, for this acts wholly by these Spirits, and can do nothing without them.
And it is likely that there is a secret Parcel of these which are the Soul's
Vehicle, and whilst the other Spirits (as well as the Blood) circulate in the
Body, a certain Number of these remain in the Brain: Or if they shift Place,
and circle with the rest, the Soul supplies it self with fresh Spirits.

However, this is evident and unquestionable, that the Soul acts in the Body by
Mediation of these Animal Spirits, which are dispatched over all the Body by
the Nerves. And though we feel Pain or Ease in the most extreme Parts of our
Bodies, yet the Sensation is in the Brain properly. Therefore De Scorbuto.
Dr. Willis ranks the Gout, which infests the Feet, among the Diseases of the
Head, because the Pain is felt by the Nerves which are seated in the Head. And
upon this Ground we may most philosophically assert, that in the Brain are
situated all the five Senses, and that all the Senses are feeling or touching,
because they are all exerted by Help of the Nerves, which are originally seated
in the Brain. By the Spirits which are communicated to these, the Soul affects
the Body, i. e. moves it and makes it sensible. When these are dissipated and
diminished, the Body becomes languid and weary: When they are intercepted, it
is stupid and senseless: When they are wholly stifled, it becomes dead. And all
this depends upon what had been said before concerning the Communication which
is between the Heart and the Brain; that is, the former sends Arterial Blood to
make these Spirits in the latter, and this latter returns this Kindness to the
former, by transmitting those Spirits to it, whereby it is enabled to thrust
the Blood contained in it, into the Arteries, and so it does it self a Kindness
at the same time. The serious Consideration of this Friendly Reciprocation of
Motion between these two, cannot be enough admired: and the Contemplation of
this and all the rest which has been said on this Subject, cannot but infuse
into us a firm Belief of a Godhead, who has thus wonderfully constituted the
Body, and has rendered himself adorable from the Consideration of those many
Excellencies which he has furnished it with.

CHAP. V.
The several Kinds of Flesh, and how exactly fitted and placed in the Body
according to their several ses and Purposes. Why the hinder Part of the Cranium
is so strong and thick. The admirable Conformation and Contrivance of the
Vertebrae of the Neck and Back. The particular Structure of the Hip-Bones. The
Nature and Use of the Ribs. How smiting under the fifth Rib, 2 Samuel 2.23. is to
be understood. The peculiar Configuration of the Bones of the Hands. The
general Use of the Bones, together with the Marrow of the whole Body. They are
numerous. The Nature and Serviceableness of the Gristles. A distinct
Enumeration of the several Sinks and Dreins which are made to carry off
excrementitious Humors. What is the immediate Matter of the Seed. What of the
Milk. The Author interposes his Opinion. The Lymphatick Vessels. The Pores of
the Skin.

THere are some other things worth our notice; which, because they were not
properly reducible to any one Region or Venture (some of them belonging, partly
to one, and partly to another, and some appertaining to all) I have left them
to be spoken of in this Place. I will therefore add a few Remarks concerning
the Flesh, and the Bones, and the several Drains of the Body, all which we
shall find to be undeniable Testimonies of the singular Care and Goodness of
God in framing our Bodies. First, It is not unworthy of Consideration, that
there is a fourfold Sort of Flesh.

1. That which is Musculous, and is most properly Flesh. This being solid and
nervous, is made use of to cloth the Bones, and to guard and secure the
internal Parts. This is a Fence to keep them from being exposed to Danger. And
being flexible and soft, is further serviceable to shape the Limbs and Members,
and give them a Proportion and Comeliness. It was given to plump and fill up
the Skin, and thereby to adorn and beautify the Body: And especially, to
prevent or cure the Disorders of a Meager Countenance, an Hippocratick Face.
And it is not only for Ornament, but Ease and Repose. This is a soft Bed of it
self, and makes Discumbiture a delightful Posture, and conciliates Rest and
Sleep. And in the Daytime, as well as in the Night, it is commodious and
easy, because it facilitates our Sitting. Where, by the way, I could observe
that the hinder Parts of Man's Body, which are for sitting, are covered with
this Sort of Flesh more than any other Part of the Body, and more than the like
Parts are in any other Animals whatsover: Which was designedly done without
doubt, because these Parts are fitted for the Posture of sitting, which no
other Creatures are capable of in that way. It is Man only that sits, i. e.
rests his Body upon the Ischias: Beasts having four Legs, can stand upon them
the better, and so support their Bodies a long time without being wearied: But
Man wanting these Supporters, requires Rest, and these Parts are excellently
fitted for this end, i. e. they are round, fleshy, and very prominent, that
they may be the fitter Cushion for the Body. The God of Nature has herein
provided for our Ease.

2. There is another sort of Flesh, called Parenchyma: Though it is but
improperly said to be Flesh, because it has no Muscles. Yet this Viscerose
sort of Flesh is most suitable (which is the thing I would observe) to those
Vessels and Parts of the Body which are composed of it, as the Lungs, the
Liver, Spleen, Reins. It is a Substance proper to these and no other Parts, by
reason of its Laxness.

3. A Membranous Flesh, or fleshy Skin, which is as agreeable to its Kind as
the rest are, it being adapted to a particular Use and Service in the Body,
which no other sort of fleshy Substance could fit, because being clammy and
glutinous, and sticking close, it is a suitable Covering to wrap up other Parts
of the Body in. Of this therefore are composed the Coats of the Eye, the
Gullet, the Guts, the Bladder, the Pleura or inward Lining of the Ribs, the
Pericardium, Peritonaeum, Amnios and Chorion.

4. Glandulous Flesh, which is slippery and porous, on both which accounts it
is fit for the purposes it is made use of in the Body, viz. to move with Ease,
to imbibe excrementitious Liquors, and to transmit them: Of this sort are the
Kernels about the Throat, Paps, Arm-holes, the Groin, etc. Thus this Variety of
Carnous Substances in the Body is according to the different Use of them, which
establishes yet further the Notion of a Deity, a wise and provident Creator who
suits all things in the lesser, as well as in the greater World to their proper
Ends and Uses: And it is a Demonstration that Humane Bodies have plain
Impresses of Divine Wisdom upon them.

As to the Bones, they likewise are a worthy Subject to treat of: For, as the
Philosopher of old said in another Case, Et hic Dii sunt, here (as in other
Parts of the Body) the divine Workmanship is seen, it is evident that God is
here, i. e. The Heavenly Power and Wisdom are plainly discernible in the
Fabric of these Parts. I intend not to expatiate here by transcribing the
common Treatises of Anatomy, and giving you a particular Account of the whole
Compages of the Bones, but I will only give a Glance on some few of them. I
have already mentioned the Bony Cap which is the outward Cover of the Brain,
and is, as 'twere, stitched together by its Sutures of different Forms: only
here let me observe this, that because the Cerebellum.
hinder Part of the Brain, where the Animal Spirits are bred, is of the
greatest Use, and is the chief Source and Original of the Nerves, therefore the
Heavenly Architect has made the back Part of the Skull harder and stronger
than the other Parts of it, either that before, or on the Top, or those on the
Sides. And there was another Reason why this hinder Part of the Cranium should
be thicker and stronger than the rest, because this is otherwise unfenced
against Casualties: For if a Man falls upon his Head backwards, there is
nothing to help and defend him; wherefore this Part is fortified by Nature.

In the next place I will take notice of the commodious Vertebrae of the Neck,
which are a great many little Bones set together in such a manner that the Neck
may turn or bend this or that way with Ease, whence without doubt, they had
their Denomination. Moreover, it was with Wisdom contrived, that the Medulla of
the Brain being lengthned out, should be securely conveyed from the Head
through this Guard of turning Bones into those of the Back (to which it is
joined,) which were made to be a larger Case to hold the prolonged Brain, or
now I may call it the Brains of the Back. This Spina (called so perhaps because
its back Part is set with many little ragged sharp Bones like Thorns, but it is
vulgarly called the Chine, which it may be, is a gross Corruption of Spine) is
so marvellously placed and framed by the divine Disposer, that it is the most
able and substantial (as well as the greatest) Supporter of the whole bodily
Structure. The Composure of it is admirably advantageous, because it is not one
Bone (for then it would have been inflexible) but it is a Ridg of Bones from
the Head to the Hips, and consists of no less than 24 Vertebrae, which are made
to bend, so that a Man may conveniently stoop when there is occasion. Again,
this long Ledg of Bones is framed with continued Interstices and Apertures, out
of which all the Nerves, with their enclosed Spirits proceed, and are spread
into the several Parts of the Body for the strengthening and nourishing of it:
Whence (as I conceive) when these Vertebrae are out of order and displaced, as
in those Bodies that are crooked the Strength and Growth are impeded. The
Rickets (a Disease of Children, and if we may credit Onomatol. in verbo Rickets.
Dr. Skinner known in the British Isles only, and in no other Part of the
World) has its Denomination from this Part (for (...) is spina dorsi) because
it is the chief Scene of this Distemper, as our Dr. Glisson determines.

Toward the lower and further Part of these Vertebrae are placed the Hip or
Coxendices.
Huckle Bones, which are two thick massy Bones that are fastened to the Os
sacrum on both sides of it: And there is in these a most remarkable Acetabulum
is the Latin Word. By the Greeks it is called (...), in which the Hip-Bone is
turned, Aristot. Hist. Animal. l. 1. c. 13. The Hebrews call it Caph, Genesis
32.25.
Pan or Cavity where these are joined together, and into which the Head of the
Thigh Bone is inserted, and therefore is called the Hollow of the Thigh, Genesis
32.25. (which the Angel forcibly put out of joint when he wrestled with Jacob.)
Skilful and observing Anatomists speak very great things concerning the
peculiar Fabrication of these Bones, concerning the strange Commissures and
Junctures of them, the admirable locking of them in, that they may be both
strong and useful. The Bones of the Thighs, Legs and Feet support the other
Bones which are above them, and therefore may justly be reckoned the Basis, the
moveable Foundation of this Humane Building, and accordingly a singular and
inconceivable Care is taken in the fashioning of them, witness about 30 Bones
in one Foot.

The Ribs, those crooked Bones which are the Limits and Boundaries of the
Thorax on the Sides of it, are next to be mentioned. They were designed by the
Heavenly Artificer to be a Fence to this noble Region of the Body, and the
Viscera of it, viz. the Heart and Lungs: And the unequal Figure and Flexure of
them are not a little conducive to the Safety of those Parts which they
environ. And perhaps, that is the moral Intent of Genesis 2.22.
the Woman's being made of the Man's Rib, that she should be, in her Capacity,
a Safeguard and Protection to her Husband, according to that primitive and
emphatick Epithet of a Wife ( Genesis 2.18.) (...), as the LXX render it, and
according to the V. Lat. adjutorium: And Pagnin and Buxtorf translate it
Adjuvamen, Auxilium; which is suitable to that excellent Character of a married
Woman, Prove. 3.11, 12. The Heart of her Husband does safely trust in her, so
that he shall have no Need of Spoil, i. e. of Riches violently got. She will do
him good and not evil all the Days of her Life. All Men and Women have 24 Ribs,
12 on one side, and 12 on the other. There are on each side seven greater ones
(and they are uppermost, and known by the Name of Legitimate) which are all
joined to the Sternum.
Breast Bone. The other five lesser (which are situated below these, and are
called spurious) are shorter on both sides, and do not reach so far as the
middle of the Breast.

Perhaps smiting under the fifth Rib (or in or about the fifth Rib, for the
Praeposition el is of a large Signification, as the learned know) which is
mentioned in 2 Samuel 2.23.3.27.4.6.20.10.
the old Testament, may signify that Place in the Body which is under or near
the last of these spurious Ribs, viz. the fifth, that broad Place which
reaches as far as the Bottom of the Belly, and lies open to any Blow, because
it is not defended with Bones, the reason of which is, because this Part of the
Body admits not of it, there happening such a different and unequal Distension
of the Stomach and Intestines, according to the different times of eating or
not eating. And other weighty Reasons there are which have particular respect
to the Sexes, and may better be conceived than expressed. And that this is the
true Acception of the fifth Rib I gather from 2 Samuel 20.10. where it is said,
Ioab smote Amasa in the fifth Rib, and immediately it is added in the next
Clause, and he shed out his Bowels to the Ground. Megni, the Hebrew Word here
used, may relate to the Viscera or Intestines of the lower Belly; and
especially the Word Shaphak, to pour forth, intimates that Megni is meant of
these, for the Effusion of the Bowels is properly meant of the Guts, which are
wont to gush forth when there is an Incision made, as here in the present Case
by a Sword. This Part under the Short Ribs (which were five,) just above the
Belly, is the most eligible Place for such a Purpose, for here are no Ribs or
any other Bones to resist or put by the Stroke: And besides, it is probable the
Breast Plate or Armor reached generally no farther than hither. This makes me
inclinable to think, that this and the other Places are to be interpreted
concerning the fifth lesser Rib, and not the fifth superior one (as some
Expositors understand the Words) under which Place the Heart is situated, but
is not so easily come at.

I could mention also the wonderful Multiplicity of the Bones of the Hands,
those noted Instruments of Action. There are no less than 32 of them in one of
these Members: And the Variety of them as to Figure, Size and Make is equally
remarkable: For this great and mavelous Diversity of them is wholly in order
to the diverse Uses of this excellent Limb. By that various shaping, placing,
ordering and joining together of so many little Bones in this Part of the Body
it is fitted for those Ends which it was made for. Hereby it is able to bend
and turn it self as there is occasion, whence among the Hebrews the Hand is
called ekeph, from akaph, incurvavit, flexit. Hereby it is capable, not only to
feel and handle, but to lay hold on things; yea, hereby it is fitted for the
most useful Services of Man's Life, as Building, Husbandry, Surgery (which
has its Name thence) Military Actions, Writing, Painting, Engraving, Playing
on Musical Instruments, and all or most of the necessary, as well as the
recreative Arts and Employments of Human Life. Therefore some Critics have
thought that the Latin Manus comes from the Chaldee, Man an Instrument, because
it is so serviceable and useful, and is what the great Philosopher calls it
(...). He tells us, and very truly, that the Hands of Men are Arguments of
their being the most sagacious and understanding Creatures that were made, for
these ( Aristot. de partib. animal. l. 4. c. 10.
says he) are Instruments whereby we take things, and with these we make use
of other Instruments: And it is a sign that Man is capable of many Arts, and can
use many Instruments to act with, that God has given him Hands, which are the
most useful Instruments of themselves. Hence it is, that Man, of all Creatures
only, has Hands. De usu part^ l. 1. c. 1.
Galen talks after the same rate, concluding Men to be the wisest of all
Animals, because they have this noble Part bestowed upon them. It is well known
that this ancient Physician, who was of famed Learning and Skill, (though of
pagan Principles) was induced to acknowledge an infinite wise Disposer and
Manager of all things from the very consideration of the admirable Make of
these Parts, and he breaks out into a Hymn upon that Occasion, of which I may
speak something afterward.

Yet, after all that he and others have suggested concerning the Usefulness of
this Organ, this must be said, that, as artificially as it is framed, it would
be of little Use if the Fingers of it were not armed with Nails: For these are
necessary for preserving that fleshy Part where they are placed, which is
exceeding tender: They are useful for strengthening the Parts themselves in
their Work, for making them capable of handling and dealing with hard and solid
things, and for many particular Services which this Organ was made for. So that
the very Nails of our Fingers point to a God.

And as to the Bones in general, this we are to observe, from another ancient
and famous Inspector into Human Bodies, that these Parts (...). Hippocrat. lib.
de Oss. not.
give a Steadiness, a Rectitude, and a Shape to the Body: They were more
especially made to strengthen and confirm the Corporeal Fabric, and therefore
are more solid and substantial than any other Parts. Not to attend to the
Beresh Rab.
Talmudick Fancy about the little Bone Luz (as they call it) at the end of the
Spina dorsi, that never putrifies when all the rest do in the Grave; by virtue
of which incorruptible Bone the whole Body shall be restored and rise again:
Not to listen, I say, to such fantastic Dreams, this we are assured of, that
the Bones are of a very firm and solid Nature, and it is certain that they last
a long time, as has been seen in Graves and Sepulchers. This Solidity of them
is intimated to us in the Hebrew Tongue, where Gnetsem, os, is from Gnatsam,
robor avit: And this Noun Gnetsem is sometimes Robur, Substantia. Wherefore
both Psalm. 6.2.22.14. Lam. 3.4. Ier. 50.17.
Jews and Job. 33.19.
Arabians express Decay and Weakness by breaking and wasting the Bones, and the
contrary, by their Job 21.24. Psalm. 51.8. Prove. 3.8.15.30.
flourishing.

And besides, the Firmness which these Parts have of themselves, there is an
Addition to it by that strong Connection, Conjunction or Articulation of them,
which all anatomick Observers speak of with Admiration: And which the Roman
Philosopher and Orator long since took notice of, telling us that Mirabiles
commissuras habent, and ad Stabilitatem aptas, and ad artus finiendos
accommodatas, and ad motum and omnem corporis actionem. Cic. de not. Deor. l. 2.
their Ioyntings and Closures are wonderful, that they are purposely made for
the Stedfastness of the Body, that they are fitted to be the Boundaries of the
several Limbs, and that they are exactly accommodated to the Motions and
Actions of the whole.

Again, the Marrow of the Bones, which is included in the larger Cavities of
the greater ones, and in the obscurer Passages of those that are lesser, is of
singular Use, for (as we are told by a Dr. Willis, de Scorbut^.
learned and religious Physician) this keeps the Bones moist: If they were not,
says he, furnished with this unctuous Humor, they would grow dry and brittle,
and soon crack and break. And further, the Joints of the Bones, by this
Moisture, are made glib and slippery: This Oil is useful to supple them and the
Ligaments, and thereby conduces to the Easiness of Motion.

I will not here enlarge on the peculiar Rarities which an C. Havers, M. D.
ingenious Person has lately discovered in the particular Structure of the
Bones, as the several Plates of which they consist, lying one over another,
their superficial Cavities, their Blood Vessels, etc. all which have their
special Uses and Ends. That which is most obvious, and which none can doubt of
is, that the Bones were made by the all-wise Being to sustain and support, to
fasten and corroborate the whole Body. And that they might do this the more
effectually, their Number is very great: There are in Human Bodies, if we
reckon great and little, moveable and immovable Bones, no fewer of them than
248 according to Hippocrates and Galen's Arithmetic. And it seems this very
Number was received among the Jews, for their Rabins aver, that there are 248
affirmative Precepts in the Law, just so many (say they) as there are Bones in
the Body of Man. Riolanus will have us bate one of this Number, but Albertus
magnus adds considerably to it, and reckons 276. some have fancifully reduced
them to the Number of the Days in the Year. But I find that the most skillful
Anatomists of late count above three hundred.

Leaving others to compute the precise Number of them; we are certain of this,
that it is very considerable, and that they were all designed to render the
Body more stable, firm and steady. These are the Posts and Studs, or rather
these are the Pillars of this House of our Bodies: These are Props and Supports
of our fleshly Tabernacle: These are the Upholders and Sustainers of this
Corporeal Building. And that this was the main End of them appears from this,
that most Fishes, because they live in another sort of Element which is soft
and liquid, and has no Resistances made to it at any time, have no Parts of
such hard Substance as Bones, properly so called, but rather Cartilages or
Gristles, which are more convenient and proper for the Use of that sort of
Animals, which still convinces us of the universal Wisdom and Providence of God
toward all his Creatures.

And further, as to this Cartilagineous Substance which I last mentioned, we
may take notice how fitly it is made use of in Human Bodies, that is, in those
Parts where it is most useful. Thus because it is serviceable for shaping and
fashioning those Places which are hollow, or which have a Prominency above the
rest, we see that the Ears, the Nose, the Larynx, Epiglottis, etc. are made of
it: For this is not so stiff and hard as Bone, but gives way, and therefore is
not easily broken or hurt. Because it is an useful Medium for uniting of hard
and soft Parts together (it being it self of a middle Nature between them) we
continually find it among the Ioints and the Articulations of the Members and
Limbs. We may observe that the Ribs are at both Ends of them tipp'd with this:
And the Breast Bone it self, to which the greatest Part of the Ribs are joined,
has a Mixture of this Substance. Yea, the lower Part of it, which reaches to
the Diaphragm, and the Mouth of the Stomach, and defends them, is a perfect
Cartilage of a Sword-fashion (whence it has its Ensiformis.
Name,) i. e. it is sharp and pointed at the End like that Weapon. If some
great Coward should chance to read this, perhaps it will make him tremble to
think that there is a Sword or Dagger so near his Heart.

To proceed, it was necessary that the Body which is daily contracting
superfluous and noxious Humors, should have some Vessels and Channels on
purpose to drain them away. And accordingly the divine Wisdom, when it erected
this House of Flesh, made several Sinks and Drains to carry these off, and
thereby to purge and clear the Body. And yet this must be said, that some of
them serve not chiefly to this End, but only by the by, as may be gathered from
what was said when I had occasion to speak of them before. The Nostrils are for
the Evacuation of a particular pituitous Excrement that flows from the Brain.
The Palate and Mouth are for receiving and ejecting the Spittle: Though here I
make a Difference between the insipid Spittle (I mean that superfluous and
viscid Humor which troubles the Mouth, and is useless, and proceeds from
Catarrhs and Corruption of the Saliva) and the Saliva it self which properly is
not an Excrement, for it is of great Use. It moistens the Jaws and Oesophagus,
and the Organs of Speech, and makes them slippery, and thereby serviceable: It
is useful to quench the Thirst, it mixes it self with the Food when it is
masticated, and by its Moisture fetches out the Sapor of it: This Salival
Humor promotes and facilitates the swallowing down of the Meat, and it is a
necessary Preparation, and an initial Fermentation in Order to Concoction. In
the Eyes the Carunculae lachrymales are for the serous Defluxion of Tears which
come from the Arteries of the Head into these Places. And as Weeping is
contrary to Laughter, so it is produced in a contrary way, for it is caused by
the Compression and contracting of the Vessels, as the other by the Dilatation
of them. The Ears are the Evacuators of the bilious Excrement that flows
thither. That learned Person whom I have so often mentioned, is of opinion,
that the Lungs are the grand Emunctory of the Body: And Not. Hist. of the
Earth. Part 4.
he promises to prove, by several Experiments, that there passes out of the
Body a greater Quantity of fluid matter this way ( i. e. upwards, and through
the Lungs) than there does of Urine by the Kidneys, downwards. The Gallbladder
in the hollow Part of the Liver, is the Dreiner for Choler, and the Spleen is
the proper Sink for Melancholy or black Choler.

The Reins or Kidneys are for the Reception and Excretion of the Urine, the
watery Part of the Meat and Drink, which is conveyed to them together with the
Blood from the emulgent Arteries, but is here separated from the Blood, and
then conveyed from these Parts to the Vreters, and thence to the Bladder, which
is of singular Use to receive, contain and hold it till it be replenished, and
then it discharges it by the Vrinary Passage. Though truly there may be some
doubt whether all the Urine be an Excrement of the Blood: For it may be
conceived improbable, that all the Liquor a Man drinks, goes through his Heart.
If he takes down Mineral Waters in great abundance, he evacuates them so
speedily, that one can scarcely imagine that they went about that way. And when
he drinks vast Quantities of the strongest and hottest Wines, one would think
there should be a greater Inflammation and Commotion in that Part, viz. by a
mighty Increase of the Quantity of the Blood, than is usually felt. This may
prompt us to believe that Liquor has some other way to the Reins, that some of
it goes into the Blood, and that other Parts of it go more directly to the
Reins by some Passage which is not yet discovered. The Use also of the
Glandules or Kernels, which are dispersed up and down the Body, is to separate
and strain the Phlegmatic Humors: For though it is probable that some of them
(as Dr. Glisson has observed) are for Nutrition (as the T^ymus or great
Glandule of the Thorax, the Glandules of the Mesentery) yet it is not to be
questioned that others, and those the greatest Part, are for Secretion. Such is
the Pituitary Glandule in the Brain, which receives the superfluous Humors,
and conveys them to the Palate, Nostrils, etc. Such are the Kernels behind the
Ears, and those about the Throat and Jaws (called both by the Learned and
Vulgar Amygdalae faucium. Plin. Tonsillae.
the Almonds of the Ears, because they resemble them in Figure,) the Kernels
under the Armpits, etc. also the Seminal Kernels, and more especially, the
Prostatae, which are proper Emunctories for the Seed, which is produced from a
Part of the arterious Blood which is brought from the Heart, out of the Arteria
magna, through the spermatick Arteries into the Parastatae, and there prepared.
Some hold that it is made wholly in these Vessels; but it is denied by others,
who assert that it is the proper Office of the Testicles. The middle Opinion
seems to be truest, viz. that this seminary Matter is elaborated and made in
these, and thence flows into the Parastatae, which further prepare it by a
particular Secretion. Some have thought that this is not the Product of the
Blood, but of the Succus Nutritious which is carried in the Nerves, and is
derived from the Brain and Spinal Marrow: And others reckon it to be a lacteous
Excrement. But still it is granted by these dissenting Parties that the
Glandules before mentioned are made use of for the separating or preparing of
this seminal Liquor.

There are also the Glandulae Mamillares.
Glandules belonging to the Paps, where Milk is made of the Blood which is sent
from the Heart by the Arteries into these Parts, for the nourishing of young
ones. Though it is true, others are of opinion that this lacteous Excrement is
not blanched Blood, but Part of the Chyle conveyed to the Breasts: But from
what I shall immediately suggest, it will plainly appear that the old Opinion
is the most rational and eligible That of Plutarch is undeniable, that (...).
De amore prolis.
the admirable Confection and dispensing of Milk are sufficient to demonstate a
Providence, and a divine Solicitude and Concern for Mankind. Who can be an
Atheist, i. e. deny an intelligent and provident Disposer of the World, who
observes that in the time of the Pregnancy of Women, that Blood which had
another Chanel before, is now directed to nourish the Foetus, and as soon as the
Time of Gestation is over, i. e. as soon as the Infant is born, the Passage of
the Nourishment is again on a sudden changed, and it finds its way to the
Breasts and Paps for Nutrition of the Infant? the Pores of the Glandules, which
we are speaking of, being then fitted to receive and alter the Blood conveyed
to them; which, as soon as it ascends thither, is turned into that white Juice
called Milk. This seems to be a clear Evidence of the Truth of the ancient
Doctrine, that Milk is the more immediate Product of Blood. But yet I do not say
this to exclude the Modern Opinion wholly, for in some Persons perhaps (who
exceedingly abound with Blood) and at some times (when the Vessels are more
peculiarly adapted and qualified) the lacteous Liquor may be made both ways. I
take leave thus to interpose in the Controversy, and to compromise it, because
I observe that Nature delights to vary in her Operations, and to do her Work
more ways than one. I only here add, that Milk is of a peculiar Substance, or
rather contains three kinds of liquid Substance in it, serous, creamy, caseous,
and has a great nutritive Virtue in it, and consequently, is not properly an
Excrement, though it be reckoned to be such by Physicians in the laxer way of
speaking. And so is that other which I last mentioned; but in a strict Sense
they are both of them above the Nature of Excrements, i. e superfluous and
useless Humors of the Body: For the one is for Procreation, the other for
Nourishing the Fruit of the Womb.

Next, some late Anatomists tell us of certain Vasa lymphatica.
Pellucid Vessels which carry a limpid Liquor in them, and perhaps have their
Rise out of the Glandules (of which I spoke before) that are every where
dispersed about the Body. Bartholine, the first Discoverer of them, thought
they were designed to convey that thin transparent Liquor to the Chyle-bearing
Vessels; and some have believed them to be spread up and down every where to
moisten and cool the Body: But (as I have suggested before, that there are
several Uses of the same Parts) these lymphatick Vessels may be likewise
intended to be Receptacles of superfluous serous Excrements, and to be of the
Nature of common Sewers to the Body.

Besides all these, there are the Pores of the Skin, which are universal
Emunctories for Sweat and Perspiration. The Skin is a kind of Network, as the
excellent Malpighius represents it, who often viewed it in a Microscope, and
tells us that it appears in the Form of a Net, full of Holes, by means of which
our Bodies are perspirable. Perpetual Exhalations and Steams issue forth thence
from the Mass of Blood, and thereby ill and offensive Humors are thrown off
and evacuated, which, if they were kept in, would be very destructive to the
Body, and become the Fuel of most Diseases. Or if this be not performed with
Freedom and Ease, Diaphoreticks are seasonable to provoke this Evaporation;
which could not be done unless there were these little invisible Passages in
the Skin, these Eyelet-holes and Perforations, as 'twere, all over it. De med.
Stat.
Sanctorius was the first that found out the exact Weight of insensib^^
Transpirations, and made and used a weighing Chair for that purpose. He first
discovered that more than half of what we eat and drink exhales by these
imperceptible Emanations. These vaporous Excrements, though not seen, exceed in
abundance all the other sensible Excretions and Purgations which I have been
speaking of.

Lastly, The Intestines, and the various Foldings of them are, and were
designed to be Vents and Evacuatories for the grosser and more offensive
Excrements, which are separated from the alimental Parts of the Chyle, and are
thrust out of the Body by Siege: Which, as sordid as it seems to be, is as
necessary for the Welfare, yea, I may add, the Being of Mankind as any of the
Offices and Functions of the Body that have been named in this Discourse. Thus
you see, how by these diverse Sinks and Conveyances, the useless Parts are
carried off, the ill Humors are separated and drained, more especially, the
Blood is percolated and refined, and the whole Body is scoured, cleared, and
purified. This cannot be the Result of Chance, but argues Design and
Contrivance. It was a divine Director that disposed the several excrementitious
Faeces into their proper and peculiar Receptacles, in order to the good Plight
and Health of the Body. Thus in every Part of this Humane Structure the
Footsteps of divine Wisdom may be discovered.

CHAP. VI.
The wonderful Formation of the Foetus in the Womb is an irrefragable Argument
of the divine Wisdom and Power. It is so acknowledged by David, Solomon,
Hippocrates, Harvey, Glisson. Whether the Child, all the time of its close
Confinement, be nourished with Blood or Chyle, by the Navel or by the Mouth. As
its living in the Womb, so its safe coming forth thence is the effect of a
divine Conduct and Providence. The secret Parts are Proofs of a wise and
intelligent Creator. A Reflection on the whole. The Body of Man a Temple. The
great Variety of Workmanship in this Structure. St. Paul speaks like a natural
Philosopher. Every thing in humane Bodies shows wise Forecast and Design. Though
some of the Hypotheses proceeded on in this Part of the Discourse, should prove
faulty, yet the very things themselves will always remain Arguments of the
divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness. The exact Symmetry of Man's Body proved by
several learned Writers. The Exquisiteness of this Fabric is made use of as an
Argument for the Demonstration of a Deity by David, Job (whose observable Words
are paraphrased upon,) Isaiah, the great Apostle, the Christian Fathers,
Learned Jews, Gentile Philosophers and Physicians, several of the Moderns, as
Bartholine, Diemerbroek, Harvey, Glisson, Willis, Lower, Boil, Ray.

I Have hitherto spoken nothing of the Formation of Man's Body in the Womb,
which is far more astonishing than any thing that I have said yet. In respect
of this the Psalmist might well say, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, and
curiously wrought in the lowest Parts of the Earth. There is no account to be
given of the stupendous Operation of the Vterus, unless we acknowledge a divine
Being. This is that puzzling Problem which the wise Man starts, How the Bones
grow in her that is with child? Eccles. 11.5. Where the Bones, because they
hold the whole Body together, are put for the whole Compages of all the Parts
and Members of the Body. How this is formed in the Womb, how ( (...). Athen^g.
de Resur. mort.
as one of the Ancients expresses it) in a mere similary Body (such as the Seed
is) such a Variety of so great and excellent Virtues should reside as to
produce such a Diversity of Parts, and to prepare a convenient Lodging for the
Soul, is a strange and unaccountable Work. This Seminal Power, this
Architectonick Virtue was so marvellous^ that Lib. (...).
Hippocrates thought the Seed was endued with Understanding and Reason.

Our immortal Harvey has this Notion, that the Functions of this and the Brain
are the same, and are therefore called Conceptions, and are both immaterial;
and from this Phantasm or Idea, the Lineaments and Proportions of the F^etus
are drawn, and are so commonly shaped like those of the Parents and Kindred, on
whom the Imagination is most fixed. But we must not surmise that this great Man
began to Hobbize betimes, and dreamt of thinking Matter, for any one that
peruses his De Generat. Animal.
Book, will perceive that he ascribes not this Power to the Seed it self, but
to something divine and celestial that acts thus in it. In several Places of
his Exercitations, he acknowledges that by an extraordinary Power of the
supreme Being, and not by its own natural Virtue, it effects the Fabrication of
the Body. Since him the famous De Ventric. and Intestin.
Glisson has spoken very profoundly of the Nature and Way of Impregnation or
Formation of the Foetus, and he owns it is impossible to solve this Formative
and Prolifick Virtue without having Recourse to a divine and supernatural
Efficacy. In brief, we cannot describe the plastic Faculty, we cannot give an
account of the whole Process of Generation, which consists of Conception,
Formation or the Delineation of the several Parts, and Animation by infusing
the Soul; but this we know, that it far surpasses all finite Power. And without
doubt Monsieur Des Carts, who was so thinking a Philosopher, would never have
ascribed this great Work to mere Mechanism, but that he was unawares betrayed
into it by his solving of other things by mechanic Principles: So that it would
be expected that he should make an uniform Piece of Philosophy. And thence he
was, as it were, forced to go through with his Work that he had begun, and to
maintain that all is done mechanically, even in the Production of Man.

But that the Foetus should live and be nourished in the Womb, is as strange
and stupendous, yea, and as unaccountable (unless we acknowledge a divine Hand
that disposes in this Affair) as its being conceived and formed there. It has
b^^n thought that all the time it resides in those dark Caverns, it receives
its Aliment, i. e. the Mothers Blood by the Navel, as Fruits by the Stalk
receive their Nourishment from the Tree; and that it is not nourished by the
Mouth, because, if it should open it, it would presently be choked with the
Abundance of excrementitious Liquor that the Membranes wherein it is enclosed
are replenished with. But others are of opinion, that the Embryo is not
nourished by the umbilical Vessels, but by the Mouth only, into which it sucks
and receives a lacteal Humor in which it swims: Though unless there be a
supernatural Hand in it, this Liquor may as well enter into the Nostrils as the
Mouth: The little one thus sucking in Milk in the Womb, learns (they say) to
suck the Breasts as soon as born. And as it opened its Mouth to suck, so it may
do the same to breath; which some have denied, but it is proved by the Vagitus
uterinus, attested by Physicians, for a Voice supposes Air and Respiration.

This is the Account which Naturalists lately give of the Nourishment of the
Foetus, and according to my Judgment (for I find both in Theology and
Philosophy it is a safe way to tack Opinions together, and thereby generally we
come to have the whole Truth) it is not irreconcilable with the former Opinion
of taking in the Nutriment by the Navel; for the young one may be fed partly by
the Mouth, and partly by the Navel. The first perhaps is before the perfect
Delineation of the umbilical Vessels, the second afterward when there is a
perfect Formation of them. A Isbrand de Diemerbroek.
foreign Physician enclines this way: But, so far as I am able to judge in the
case, it is more likely that for the greatest Part of the time the Embryo is
sustained both these ways, that is, the purer Part of the Liquor which is
contained in the Amnios is attracted by the umbilical Vessels, but the more
crass Part which is milky and creamy, is sucked in by the Mouth. So it is
nourished both by the Mothers Blood and by Chyle. Thence it is no wonder that
feeding on a milky Substance in the Womb, it looks for it as soon as it is born,
and that we ever after are nourished by a lacteous Consistency, viz. the Chyle.
Thus the seemingly different Opinions are reconciled, but both of them are
amazing and astonishing, and the Matters contained in them cannot be effected
without an omnipotent Guide.

No more can the coming forth of the Foetus be, I mean in an ordinary way, and
without Caesarean Insection. Unless we suppose a divine Help and Conduct, this
little Prisoner could never with Safety break his Bonds, and get loose from his
Durance, and make his way into this Light. That it lived in its close
Confinement was wonderful, and that at last it comes alive into the World is so
too. That this Weakling was not stifled when it was there, and when it left
that Place, is equally wondrous. All we can say is, that this is owing to the
mavelous Care of the Almighty, to the particular Midwifery of Heaven.
Accordingly, De usu part. lib. 15.
Galen admires the Providence of God in the wonderful Exclusion of the Foetus.
And so does one of the most acute Philosophers and Physicians among the
Arabians, who acknowledges Avicenna. l. 3. tract. 1. cap. 2.
that the Separation or Divulsion of the Parts in order to the making way for
the Foetus, and the restoring of them afterward to their right Position, and
that without any Hurt, is to be reckoned as the Work of the most high God.
Wherefore we find this signally taken notice of by the devout Observer of the
Works of Nature and Providence, Thou art he that took me out of the Womb, Psalm.
22.9.

Besides what has been said, the Providence of God is observable in this, that
Man's Body, as to its Parts, Shape and constitution is more serviceable for
laborious Work and Business than that of the Woman, because she was not
designed to have her share so much in these as Man. The Breasts or Paps of
Women being tender and very prominent, render them unfit for several
Employments; therefore the Amazons cut one off. If it were proper to recount
several things relating to the particular Temper and Indispositions of that
Sex, it would thence appear, that the Bodies of Males are much stronger in
their Make, and thereby the divine Providence and Wisdom are discovered, in
that the Composition and Frame of the Sexes are according to the Ends and Uses
they were particularly and distinctly intended for by the omnipotent Creator.

Lastly, those Parts of the Body which Modesty bids us conceal, lest chaste
Minds and Ears should be offended, are as great a Proof of a wise and
intelligent Being as any of those that I have named and insisted upon. Those
secret Parts are manifest Indications of the divine Prudence and Goodness. Here
we may apply that of the Apostle, Those Members of the Body which we think to
be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant Honor: And our uncomely
Parts have more abundant Comeliness. For our comely^ Parts have no need: But
God has tempered the Body together, having given more abundant Honor to that
Part which lacked, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. God himself has transcendently honored
them by constituting them the Organs of Humane Generation, whereby is produced
this excellent and amazing Fabric of the Body which I have been treating of,
whereby Mankind is propagated, and the Species continued, whereby this World is
peopled, and whereby Inhabitants are provided for a better World. And all this
argues great Providence, Wisdom and Bounty, and is worthy of the divine Author
of all Beings.

To approach toward a Conclusion, let us briefly reflect upon the whole, and
stand amazed at the innumerable Wonders which the Body of Man presents us with,
and which are all of them Demonstrations of a Deity and a divine Providence.
When we see an excellent Piece of Architecture, as a beautiful Temple, a
stately Palace, or some other notable Structure, we with great Delight dwell
upon the several Parts of it, and at last pronounce it to be the Product of an
excellent Art and Skill, of great Project, Counsel and Contrivance: And no Man
of Understanding doubts that it is so. Have we not as great, yea greater reason
to acknowledge that the Body of Man, that fair and stately Fabric, the several
Rooms and Apartments of which I have been describing, is the Effect of Wisdom
and Skill, yea of that which is divine and supernatural, seeing we know full
well that no Humane Art or Finite Power is able to erect such a Building, nor
the least Part of it? There is more Understanding and exquisite Invention, an
exacter Disposition, a more curious and accurate Proportion of Parts to be
discerned in this magnificent Structure than in the skilfullest Piece of
Architecture in the World. Let us then admire and adore the Skill of the great
and eternal Geometrician, and let us reverence and applaud this divine
Workmanship, the Masterpiece of the whole Creation.

The Body of Man is called a Temple, Ioh. 2.19. 1 Cor. 6.19. and the admirable
Contrivance of it shows who was the Maker and Builder of it. The uppermost Part
of this Humane Edifice, that higher Region where the Soul is seated, is the
Holy of Holies in this Temple, and God himself may be said to dwell here. In
this noble Part is the sacred Ark which contains the Law of God: Here is the
Oracle which God has set up in us to instruct and inform us. The middle Parts
of the Body are the Sanctuary or holy Place of this Temple, where upon the
Altar of the Heart, a continual Intense is evaporated, and the two Ventricles
belonging to this choice Part, are the Lamps of Oil, the Biolychnium which is
ever burning and ever spending. The lower Division of the Body, with all the
extreme Parts that appertain to the whole, are the outward Court of this sacred
Building, wherein the most remarkable thing is the Stomach, the Altar of
Holocausts which are offered every Day incessantly, and where so many Beasts
are consumed. I need not speak of the Reins and other Vessels which in this
Temple supply the Place of the Laver: Nor need I go further and enumerate the
several Offices, Chambers, Repositories, Treasuries belonging to the whole
Structure, all which proclaim the Wisdom of the omnipotent Architect.

The infinite Loveliness and Perfection of the divine Artificer are shadowed
forth by his lovely and complete Pourtraiture of them. Who can sufficiently
admire this when he beholds the Variety of the Structure, the Diversity of the
Workmanship? When he observes the Parts and Vessels in Man of so different
kinds, when he takes notice of the several Offices and Functions belonging to
Concoction and Nutrition, and the Elaboration of the Blood? When he views the
strange Conveyances, the greater and lesser Channels and Conduits for the
Liquors and Juices contained in it? When he considers how this Structure is
supported with Bones, guarded and fortified with Limbs, clothed and fashioned
with Flesh, strengthened with Cartilages (which are of a middle Nature between
Bones and Flesh) warmed and beautified with Fat, covered on the outside of all
with a Skin and Vnder-Skin, covered within with several Membranes and Tunicles,
enlivened and actuated with Spirits, supplied with these by the Nerves, moved
and set on work as by these, so by the Muscles and Tendons, furnished with
Blood by Veins and Arteries (whether greater or capillary,) joined together
with Ligaments (another sort of Substance of a middle Nature between a Membrane
and a Cartilage (wherewith the Joints of Bones and the Gristles are bound
together?

Thus (as the Apostle speaks like a natural Philosopher, expressing the
admirable Dependence of one Part of the Body on another, for his Words are a
plain Allusion to this) the whole Body being fitly joined together ((...)) and
compacted ((...)) by that which every Joint supplieth according to the
effectual working in the Measure of every Part, makes Increase of the Body,
Ephesians. 4.16. And again, with Reference to the natural Head and Body he says, and
that most significantly, -- the Head, from which all the Body by Joints and
Bands having Nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases, Col. 2.19.
which is a brief and summary Account, not only of the sovereign Influence of
the Head (the Fountain of Spirits) on the whole Body, but of the harmonious
Connection of the several Parts, of the close Conjunction and Agreement among
themselves. By those (...) (as this holy Writer truly and properly styles them)
those several Iunctures and Bands, the Body is compacted, made fast and firm,
and cannot be disordered easily by a violent Motion: And yet at the same time
it is by means of these rendered pliant and flexible. Such is the various Work
of the divine and wise Contriver, such are the mighty Wonders that are
interspersed through all the Operations of the Body.

This therefore is the thing I urge, that in the Make of all these Parts of the
Body, there is observable, a Design, an acting for some End: And this
infallibly leads us to a God. It was madly and sottishly said by Lucretius,
Lib. 4.
Lumina ne facias Oculorum clara creata,
Prospicere ut possimus,
and much more to that purpose, the sum of which is this, that the Eyes were
not made to see, nor the Ears to hear, nor the Tongue to speak, nor the Legs
and Feet to walk, but Men having Eyes, Ears, etc. make use of them for seeing,
hearing, etc. It were to be wished that this Poet had not been englished by so
fine a Hand as he is, for by the extraordinary Goodness of the Verse, the
Badness of this Epicurean's Notions is (I fear) unhappily instilled into the
Minds of young Gentlemen. Though it is true also, that the Extravagancy and
Absurdity of them are their own Antidote, where there is a considerate Reader.
So that it may be said, the ingenious Gentleman, who has done this Author into
our Language, has exposed him as well as translated him. Certainly no Man can
have the Face to deny that the Bodily Parts have a Correspondence with one
another, and are mutually helpful in their Offices, which could never have been
unless they had been with Wisdom fitted and accommodated for it. No Man of
tolerable Understanding can deny that the Eyes, Ears, Lungs, Heart, Stomach,
etc. were made for those individual Purposes of seeing, hearing, breathing,
sanguification, Concoction, etc. He that considers that the Veins have certain
Valvulae of a peculiar Texture, proper for promoting the Course of the Blood,
and that the Arteries have their convenient Filaments for dispersing the
spirituous Parts of it, cannot but own that they were appointed for these very
Purposes. All this shows wise Forecast and Design, and consequently proves a
supreme Intelligence that actuates the World.

Say that I have not exactly and punctually explained the Design and Intent of
Providence in all the Parts and Vessels of the Body which I have mentioned; say
that there be various and different Opinions concerning the Use of some of
them, (as will easily be granted) yet we cannot possibly err as to this, that
the most of them were designed for those very particular purposes which we have
named: And as to the rest, there is some great and noble Use for which they
were made, and this is promoted and effected whether we know it or no. Suppose
some of those Hypotheses I have proceeded on should be false (as Anatomy and
Physic are improved daily, and new Discoveries are made) yet this will no ways
invalidate the Design of my Discourse, because, though some of these things in
the Body of Man be solved by other Principles and Maxims, the things themselves
will still be serviceable to show the Wisdom and Providence of God. Nay,
perhaps they will be more strange and wonderful according to other Hypotheses
or Principles than in that way which I have offered for the Solution of them.
Whether Bartholine's or Sylvius's or Willis's Hypothesis be truest, it is not
requisite to be ^ully satisfied. It is not necessary for us to know whether
Pecquet, or Des Carts, or Malpighius, or our own Harvey, Glisson, Wharton or
Needham have given the best Account of some Functions of the Body, for however
they may differ, they agree in acknowledging the admirable Contrivance of them.
And from the things themselves which we have propounded it is apparent that the
Body has animal, vital and natural Powers in it, and that it is extremely
fitted for the Discharge of the several Offices belonging to these, and that
there are different Vessels and Parts made use of in order to it. And we see
that all things are plainly contrived for the best, and for promoting the
Welfare of the Body. This is that which I have been evincing, and this is
enough to prove the great Hand of God in the Make and Constitution of the whole.

And as for the exact Symmetry of all the Parts taken and considered together,
it has been the Subject of many wise Heads, and will yet further conduce to my
present Design, which is to assert a Deity from the Configuration of Man's
Body. They agree in this, that the Proportions and Dimensions of it are
extraordinarily accurate and harmonious, and that the Parts exactly answer to
one another, both as to the Longitude and Latitude. It is so excellently
proportioned, that, if we may credit Lib. 3. c. 1.
Vitruvius, who was a good Judge in this Case, the Measures of Temples, Ships
and Engines were taken from it. And in another Place he says, that every
well built House must be according to the Proportion of the Members of a
well-figured Man. It was long since observed by Augustine. de Civ. Dei. Ambros.
de Arca Noe.
two eminent Writers of the Church, that there were the same Proportions in the
Fabric of the Ark, that there are in the Body of Man. So a Kircher de Arca Noe.
curious Person of this latter Age takes notice, that this ancient Structure
was accommodated to the Dimensions of Humane Bodies; that is, its Longitude was
sixfold to its Latitude, and tenfold to its Profundity: And hereupon he takes
occasion to declare, that there is such a Harmony and Symmetry of the Members,
that they all have an exact Reference to one another: Whence he infers (and
that rightly) that there is something divine in the Disposition of the Parts of
Man's Body.

Other learned Pens, as Cardan, Mizaldus, Gauricus, treat of this choice Theme,
the orderly and harmonious Conformation of the Parts. So do De Geographia.
Johannes Baptista Ricciolus and De Symmetria, etc.
Albertus Durerus, the latter of whom endeavors to prove that the whole Art of
limning and pourtraying is borrowed from the symmetrical Proportions of the
Body. Lucas de Burgo and Augustinus Gallus on Vitruvius insist upon these exact
Figures and Delineations of the whole Humane Structure: They inculcate this,
that there is a just and perfect Conformity in our Bodies, and particularly
that the Height of Man is the same with his Breadth, i. e. the Space between
Head and Feet, and between the Hand stretched out is alike, as was long since
observed by a Quantum spacium hominis ^ vestigio ad verticem, tantum esse
passis manibus inter longissimos digitos observatum est. Plin. l. 7. c. 7.
learned Naturalist. So Man is of a quadrate Figure: And yet, if you place him
thus with his Arms and Hands stretched out, you will find that the Figure of his
Body makes a perfect Circle, the Center whereof is his Navel. Here, if I may so
say, we have found the Quadrature of a Circle, we may discern the Symmetrical
Mechanism of the Body.

As we observed before (when we had occasion to speak of the Lungs and Heart,
and other Parts of the Body) that the Motions and Operations of it are exact
and geometrical, so now it is evident that the Figure, Shape and Proportion of
it, with the Situation of all the various Parts and Organs are so too: And
hereby they become the more subservient to one another, and mutually assist in
the Functions of Life, Sense and Motion. This is no Workmanship of Humane
Skill, here is no Automaton made by Art, no Daedalus's walking Venus, no
Archytas's Dove, no Regiomontanus's Eagle and Fly. Here is none of Albertus
magnus or Friar Bacon's speaking Head, or Paracelsus's Artificial Homuncle.
Here is nothing but what proceeds from a divine Principle and Art, and
therefore cannot be reckoned among those mechanical Inventions which have an
external Show of Sensation and Life for a time, but are destitute of a vital
Spring. If all other Arguments should be laid aside, yet this single one, from
the Fabric and Syntax of Man's Body is sufficient to evince the Truth of a
Deity. This particular Frame and Constitution will extort a Confession of the
Existence of an infinitely powerful, wise and Beneficent Being.

And this is a Topic which has been constantly made use of by considerate Men
in all Ages of the World. Not only by the Psalmist in that excellent Hymn which
I have so often quoted, but by him again in Psalm. 119.13. Thy Hands have made
me and fashioned me. Which Words it is probable, he borrowed from holy Job,
whose Writings were much ancienter than his, where he more than once argues
from the Structure of his own Body; Thy Hands (says he) have made me and
fashioned me together round about, Job 10.8. Thy Hands, i. e. thy divine Power
has elaborately and curiously formed me (for the Words are very expressive in
the Hebrew) with Flesh, Muscles, Nerves, etc. for these (as the Rabins observe)
are called gnatsabbim, from the Verb gnatsab here used. And the other Words are
as observable, together round about, which expresses the Formation of every
Part with the same Elaborateness and Exactness. The whole Circumference of the
Body shows the divine Art and Care. He proceeds, v. 10. Have thou not poured me
out as Milk, and curdled me like Cheese? Which is a modest and chaste Simile to
set forth the Conception in the Womb, and to signify how the tenuious and
thicker Parts of the seminal Mass are separated, and turned by degrees into a
fleshy Substance. Thou did (says he) in the first Formation of me, temper my
Body with a most transcendent Wisdom; thou did make some Parts of it liquid
resembling a milky Substance; but others thou wast pleased to make more firm
and consistent, and as it were, to coagulate them, that by this Solidity and
Compactness they might be able to contain and keep in the other more loose and
fluid Parts. He adds, v. 11. Thou have clothed me with Skin and Flesh (as with
an upper and an under Garment) and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews: By
this Diversity of Parts thou have rendered my Body fit for those excellent Ends
to which thou at first ordainedest it. This mightily convinced him of the
Power, as well as of the Being of God, and therefore he again ( Chap. 31.15.)
acknowledges this very thing, viz. that God made him and fashioned him in the
Womb. The Prophet Isaiah often endeavors to confirm his Countrymen in the
steady Belief of the Almighty Jehovah from this very Consideration; The Lord
made thee and formed thee from the Womb, Isaiah 44.2, 24.49.5. etc.

And in the sacred Writings of the new Testament this Argument is not omitted,
as is clear from what I alleged before out of the great Apostle St. Paul, from
whose Words we learn, that the merciful and indulgent Creator has, in the
Configuration of Human Bodies, consulted the Necessities, yea, the Health and
Delight of Mankind. There is another excellent Passage in this inspired Author
concerning the same Subject, which I will here set down at length, that the
Reader may observe the Philosophical Genius of this accomplished Man, who was
as great a Naturalist as he was a Divine, and was perhaps as able to read a
Lecture of Natural Philosophy as of Theology and Christianity. The Body, says
he, is not one Member, but many. If the Foot shall say, because I am not the
Hand, I am not of the Body; is it therefore not of the Body? And if the Ear
shall say, because I am not the Eye, I am not of the Body; is it therefore not
of the Body? If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the hearing? If the
whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But now God has set the Members,
every one of them in the Body, as it has pleased him (i. e.) they are disposed
and ranked according to his infinite Wisdom,) etc. These are the weighty Words
of this incomparable Naturalist, and the Sum of them is, that the Frame of all
the Parts and Members of the Body is suited exactly to the Service, Advantage,
and Welfare of the whole, and that this admirable disposing, fashioning and
tempering of the Body is an absolute Proof of the divine Skill and Providence:
Though I grant that he applies these things to a far higher Subject.

The Christian Fathers and ancient Writers of the Church were wont to insist
upon this Theme. Minutius Felix, after he had been speaking of the peculiar
Providence of God in the erecting of Human Bodies, concludes at last, that
Nihil in homine membrorum est quod non and necessitatis causa sit, and decoris.
there is no one Member appertaining to them but is both for Necessity and
Comeliness. Lactantius has a Book of the Workmanship of God, wherein he
descants on the Body and all the Parts of it, arguing a Divinity and Providence
from them. Orat. 3. de Providentia.
Theodoret undertakes to prove the Providence of God from the Fabric of Man's
Body: And Orat. 4. de Provid.
particularly from the Consideration of the Composition of Man's Hands. Basil
and Gregory Nazianzen have writ of the Creation and Formation of Man: And the
latter of these very elegantly calls the Structure of the Body, (...), the
natural Artificialness of it. Jews, as well as Christians, have owned this
Argument, else we should not have it among the Sayings of the Rabbis, that the
Body of Man is a Symbol of the divine Precepts. Which though they vainly make
out, telling us, that the affirmative Precepts are 248, and so many are the
Members of the Body: The Negative are 365, and so many are the Nerves, yet it is
evident that they look upon the wonderful Fabric of the Body as a Testimony of
a Deity. Philo the learned Jew declares, that (...). De Plantat. Noe.
the Care of Providence is manifest in every Part of this Contexture; and
particularly he instances in the erect Figure of Man, and thence pronounces
that he alone of all the Animals (...). Ibid.
is set in a select and eximious Posture.

The Gentiles are not dissenting from the Jews in this particular. Galen, whom
I had occasion to mention before, De usis partium, lib. 3, 11, and 17.
concluded there was a divine Creator when he had considered the Body of Man,
and discovered the particular Frame of it. He acknowledges that the Order, Use
and Disposition of it is such, that there is nothing defective, nothing
redundant in it. Whereupon he religiously and devoutly sets forth the Praises
of the Allmighty, and adores his Wisdom and Goodness. He proclaims to the
World, that this divine Being was pleased to adorn and beautify things better
than ever Art could do it. And these Acknowledgments he says he makes,
although he had done all he could that the excellent Structure and Composition
of Animals, and the reason of them might be ascribed to the bare Mixture of the
Elements, rather than to God the Maker of all. Many of the Greek Philosophers
have pitched upon this Topic, stiling Man (...). Plato.
the greatest of all Wonders, (...). Pythag.
the Measure and Standard of all Creatures, and the Perfection and Complement
of them. One of the most learned and sensible of the Latin Philosophers, I mean
De Not. Deor. l. 2.
Tully, has largely proved from the several Parts of Man's Body, that it is a
divine Fabric.

This is excellently performed also by some of our Moderns, even of the last
and of this present Age: Bartholine and Isbrand de Diemerbroek and other
foreign Physicians and Anatomists (be it spoken to their Praise and Honor)
have from their Discoveries in this lesser World asserted the Notion of an
infinitely wise Creator. At home we have several eminent Persons of the same
Faculty, and other learned Philosophers that have vouched the Existence of a
Deity from the wonderful Organization of the Body of Man, from the exquisite
Frame of the several Parts fitted exactly to their several Ends. The most
celebrated Dr. Harvey in his Book of Generation and other Treatises most
devoutly owns a divine Power, a heavenly Wisdom in the Formation of the Parts
of Man, and frankly confesses that it cannot be otherwise solved. The learned
and solid Dr. Glisson in his Searches into some peculiar Parts does piously
acknowledge the same, and from this very Argument establishes the Notion of an
immaterial and intellectual Being. Who is more forward in admiring the divine
Omnipotency and Contrivance in the several Vessels and Organs that Man is
constituted of, than the renowned Dr. Willis? In all his Writings he
theologizes, and constantly resolves the Operations and Functions which we
wonder at in Men's Bodies, into the Care and wise Disposal of an infinite and
perfect Intellect. Dr. Lower speaks like a Divine when he treats of the Heart,
and preaches a God from the Anatomy of it. The noble and famous Mr. Boil,
through all his Philosophical Writings, endeavors to discover a God in the
Works of Nature, and successfully baffles Atheism by the sole Help of natural
Philosophy; and particularly in some Places by Considerations drawn from what
is observable in Humane Bodies. And the worthy Mr. Ray in his late Treatise of
the Works of the Creation, forgets not to argue against Atheists from the same
Head.

This may encourage those that have Opportunity and Ability to acquaint
themselves with the Structure of Man's Body, and to spend some time in the View
and Contemplation of this admirable Composure. This will be an Employment, not
only diverting, but useful to them: By considering the Configuration of their
Bodies they will happily advance the Devotion of their Minds: By searching into
themselves they will find a God. For this is that which I have been all this
time evincing (and I hope I have, in some measure, accomplished it) that Man,
the perfectest Model of created Excellency, is the Representation of God; that
even in his outward Form there are indelibly engraven the Marks of divine
Power, Wisdom and Bounty; that here are to be seen and admired the signal
Characters of the Heavenly Image, the very Lineaments of a Deity.

CHAP. VII.
An Apology for Physicians: Wherein there is given an account why they commonly
lie under the Imputation of Irreligion and Atheism, viz. 1. From a Vulgar
Prejudice which has prevailed in the World, and that among Gentiles, Jews,
Christians. It had its first Rise from that Averseness which was justly showed
to those who were only Pretenders to the Art, and abused this Noble Profession.
2. This Prejudice is partly nourished by the particular Deportment of the
Persons of this Faculty when they visit their Patients. 3. It may perhaps, be
increased by observing how seldom (in respect of some others) they appear in
Places of Public Devotion. 4. It may be occasioned by their Promiscuous
Converse. 5. They may, by some, be thought to have no Religion, because they
have so much Philosophy. As for such of this Faculty as really favor Atheism
in their Speeches and Practices, this is not to be imputed to their Particular
Art and Calling, for there are some very Bad Men of all Professions. There are
some Footsteps of Religion in the Prescriptions of Physicians. Galen was in his
way devout. Modern Physicians have been Illustrious Examples of Christian Piety
and Devotion, and Great Assertors and Patrons of our Holy Religion. A
Physician, as such, is disposed to be a Wise and a Good Man.

I Had, in the foregoing Chapter, put a Period to this Discourse, but that a
Query, or you may call it an Objection, came in my way, which I am willing to
return some Answer to, lest what I have said receive some Prejudice and Harm
from it. It may be demanded why natural Philosophers and Students in Physic,
whose Employment it is to search into the Works of Nature, to dive into all
those things which appertain to the greater or lesser World, and who are well
acquainted with those natural Operations which are said to be found in both,
are generally observed to have but a small Portion of Religion?

But more especially, the Objection lies (as some imagine; how truly you shall
hear afterward) against those Philosophical Men who chiefly study the Nature
of Man's Body, and scan all its Parts, and have a very distinct Knowledge of
the excellent Structure and Composure of it. What is the reason (say they) that
such great Numbers of these Persons have so little Sense of a God in their
Lives? Why do some of them profess an Indifferency as to Religion, and scarcely
acknowledge the Author of it? Yea, why do some endeavor to expel both of them
out of the World, and to introduce Atheism, Skepticism and Profaneness? Whence
is it that these Men see little or nothing of a Divine Being or Providence in
the Works of Nature, who yet one would think should discern these sooner than
any others, because they are constantly conversing with such Objects as are
said to be visible and apparent Proofs of a God, and of his stupendous Wisdom?
May we not rather be inclined to believe that the Matters before discoursed of
are no Arguments of the Divinity, and that we wrongly infer from the Parts of
the World, or of Man's Body, that there is an infinitely wise Author and
Contriver of them? For if there were, what Reason can be given why these
learned and diligent Enquirers into these Matters are so far from evidencing it
by their religious Lives; that on the contrary they confute it by their
blasting of all Religion, and laughing at the very Notion of a Deity?

I answer, though this among some may be the Character of Natural Philosophers,
and particularly of Physicians, yet it does not follow thence^ that we are to
believe it to be true. Yea, it is certain that it is founded upon Mistake, and
is occasioned by a false Representation of some Matters which relate to the
Persons of that Faculty. And to be particular, I conceive there are these
following Reasons why They, rather than others, lie under the Imputation of
Atheism and Irreligion.

First, this proceeds from a common and vulgar Opinion which has prevailed in
the World. They have been anciently struck at, and some severe Commonwealth's
Men would not suffer them to be Members of Humane Societies. Plato was for
banishing them out of his Republic, and Cato the Censor was a deadly Enemy to
them. The old Gentleman did not love to hear of Sickness or Death, or suppose
any such thing. He could dispatch himself without Physic if there were
occasion. He had a present Remedy against all Diseases. He could, like his
Grandson, cure himself with his Sword. Aesculapius's Temple was without the
City of Rome, that it might appear thence, says Not. Hist. l. 29. c. 1.
Pliny the Elder, that the Romans did not willingly, but of necessity,
attribute any thing to Physicians. Indeed this Author (as is evident from that
Chapter where he thus speaks) was most bitter (on what account is hard to tell)
not only against Physicians, but all Medicks: But this is no Reproach to them,
for this Writer, who gives too great occasion to his Readers to think him to be
an Atheist, would not have been so severe against Physicians if he had taken
them to be such. It is certain that the unprejudiced and wise had other
Sentiments of them, and looked upon them as useful Members of the Community.
Nay, Plato himself (as we may be informed from his De Repub. l. 3.
Writings) seems to be against Physicians in this respect only, that dissolute
Men were encouraged to live in Debauchery and Luxury, and to expose themselves
to Diseases, in assurance that they could be cured by these. For the like
reason the old Censor before named was a great Enemy of Physicians, and Plin.
l. 29. c. 1.
would not have them brought from Greece to Rome. These Statesmen and
Philosophers thought Physic was a Promoter of Vice; but a Man would think
these politic Heads might have better secured their Commonwealths against it
by inflicting severe Punishments on the vicious, than by expelling the
Ministers of Health.

But truly, if we narrowly examine the matter, we shall find that both these
great Men (notwithstanding what Pliny suggests) had no Antipathy against the
Professors of Medicks barely considered, but only so far as they abused their
Profession. They were not against Physicians, but Pretenders to the Art (and
who indeed is not against them?) Who always did more Harm than Good. Julius
Caesar knew the Worth of the former, that is, such as were Men of Art and
Skill, and accordingly Sueton. in vit. Iul. ^aes.
he made them free of the City of Rome. But vulgar Souls, who search not into
the true Nature of things, from the Dislike which some considerable Men had of
the ill Managers of this Art, took up a Disesteem of all the Professors of it,
and ranked them among the worst of Men. And even the learned, to comply with
the common Notion, have sometimes inveighed against the Sons of Aesculapius,
and a great many piquant Sayings are found against them. The Jewish Masters are
extremely forward to gratify the People in this Point, and are full of their
Sarcasms to this purpose; but Rabbi Judah outstrips^ them all, who is positive
that Kidushin s^u de sponsalib. c. 4.
the best of Physicians go to Hell. Thither this circumcised Doctor sends them
to cure them of their Disease of Atheism, which he thinks they are all incident
to, for there are no Atheists in that Place. Among Christians, as well as
Pagans and Jews, this Opinion has taken place, and the Religion of a Physician
is looked upon as a Chymaera, and is turned into Sport and Ridicule. Many
verily think that their Art makes them Atheists, that when they commence in the
Faculty, they take an Oath to abandon all that is pious, and that for the
future they know and think of no other Day of Judgment than that of their
Crisis on a Disease. They are persuaded that what was said of some Physicians
of old is true of all in every Age of the World, viz. (...). Psellus.
that they know nothing but what is perceived by Sense, and attend only to the
Body, as if they were mere sensitive Animals. Whilst they go a Simpling they
are thought to be condemned to Nebuchanezzar's Fate, Fields and Grass, and so
become brutish and sensual. They take the poetic Fable to be Truth, viz. that
Chiron, a noted Physician, was half a Man and half a Horse, and they will allow
the rest of that Order to be no other than Centaurs and Monsters.

All this proceeds from an old Prejudice against them, which first began among
the vulgar and such as have shallow Apprehensions of things. It may be, they
took offense at their Language, which generally is not like that of other Men.
Perhaps they disrelish'd their hard Names both of Diseases and Medicines, and
thought those could be no very good Men who use a sort of Conjuring, as they
take this to be. Or, it is likely their Prejudice may arise from Covetousness
as well as Ignorance, they would have a cheap Health, and therefore they listen
with great Attention and Concern to what is reported of the old Romans, that
after they had banished Physicians, they six hundred Years together preserved
themselves found and in perfect Health by eating only of Coleworts or Cabbage.
Some have an Averseness to Doctors (as they call them) because it is
chargeable. Nay, there are some fantastic Folks that think these Persons can
cure a Disease no other way than by killing the Patient. The very
Colledg-Dispensatory seems to them to be but the Office for Burial: And the
Aphotheeary's Mortar rings the Man's first Peal. It is no wonder that such
Cabbage-eaters as these vote our Artist to be a very bad Man.

Again, this Conceit may be nourished by the particular Behavior which is
observed in them when they visit the sick. They ^eem to be regardless of their
Danger, and though they know that their Case is deplorate, and even desperate,
yet they remind them not of another State, and of preparing themselves for it.
Whence some are apt to gather, that they believe no such thing themselves. But
this is a very uncharitable Inference, and those that make it, consider not
that the Physician and the Divine come to the Sick on different accounts, and
to discharge different Offices. The latter is to take care of their immortal
Part, and to address himself to them accordingly: But the business of the
former is to advise and administer what is proper for the restoring of their
Bodies to Health; and if they faithfully employ their Care about this, they
discharge their Part.

Not but that it is to be wished that they would (and I doubt not but some of
them do, especially when there is no Clergyman at hand) as Good Men and
Fellow Christians apply themselves to their Patients as they see occasion, and
make use of this seasonable Opportunity to discourse religiously to them, to
admonish them concerning their former Actions, to urge them to repent of the
Evil of them, to beg the divine Pardon and Favor, and to fit themselves for a
better World, when they see they cannot keep them any longer in this. But yet
Discretion must go along with Religion, and therefore, though they perceive
that the poor Clinick is incurable, yet they are not obliged to tell him so
with their own Mouths; but it is better to commend this Office to some of his
Friends and near Relations. This is more seasonable and prudent than a personal
Application to him, for it does not become the Physician to doom his Patient.
And let us be cautious of censuring and dooming the Physician.

Moreover, this may be one cause why they are voted to be Irreligious, because
they are not seen so often at the solemn Places of Devotion, they are not so
frequent at the public Prayers and at Sermons as other Men. A Physician
oftentimes has the Character that Horace gives of an Epicurean, Od. 3^. l. 1.
Parcus Deorum cultor and infrequens.
But if the Law, which is grounded on good Reason, excuses them in this case, I
see no reason why we should not. Their necessary Avocations are a sufficient
Plea for them: Yea, an Act of Mercy is preferrable to Sacrifice. To save a
Man's Life is an high Act of Charity, which is one of the most substantial
Ingredients of our Religion. (...), mederi, adorari.
To heal and to worship are expressed by the same Word in the Greek: And (...)
and (...), idem. J. Pollux in Onomast.
a Healer and a Priest are synonimous in the same Language. I am sure we may
here make good use of the Criticism. A Physician^ whilst he is conscientiously
discharging his Office, is accepted as if he were employed in divine Worship,
yea, as if he were an immediate Minister of Religion. Therefore the Cavil has
no Ground, no more than that of the Pharisees against our Savior, that he
healed on the Sabbath day.

Furthermore, this Rank of Men may perhaps incur the Censure of Irreligious,
because their Converse is so promiscuous, and they oftentimes are concerned in
the worst Company, I mean the worst that can be for Religion, that is, some who
are professed Patrons of Atheism, and whose Practice is suitable to such a
Principle. It is true, if they frequently associate with such, and in hope of a
Fee, comply with them in their Folly and Madness, yea, if they do but so much
as connive at these, they pay dear for their expected Guineas. But if only in
the way of their Profession, they converse with such Persons, that they may be
serviceable to them, by preventing the Maladies they fear, or curing those they
labor under, I do not see Cause to condemn them. The Objection will lie as
reasonably against Divines who have the Charge of Souls, who if they will
fulfill their Ministry (as the Apostle advises) and perform all the Parts of
their sacred Function, must visit their Flock, and hold Converse, even with the
worst, to reclaim and reform them: Which is no more than what our Lord did when
he eat and drank with Publicans and Sinners.

Once more, some devout and well-meaning Persons may think Physicians have no
Religion because they have so much Philosophy. They hear them talk so much of
Bodies, that they are ready to infer, they have no Sense of the other Part of
Man. Whilst they solve things in a natural Way, they are suspected to own no
supernatural Principle. But this is an erroneous ^urmise, for these things do
not exclude one another. A Man may be a Philosopher and a Christian: He may
(nay he must) acknowledge a first Cause, though he holds that there are
secondary ones: Divine and natural Agents are not inconsistent. The Discourse
of a Physician should savor of both these, especially the former, and then the
observing World would have no Cause to object against them the want of
Religion: Then it would be seen that their excellent Employment has Influence
on their Practice, and furnishes them with devout Thoughts of God, and a firm
Belief of his infinite Power and Wisdom. Thus you have my Thoughts concerning
the Occasion of that Calumny which Physicians generally lie under I have
endeavored to take off those Prejudices and Censures which seem to reflect a
Scandal on that noble Profession.

But if it be further urged, that many of them are really such as they are
reported to be, yet this does not at all invalidate the Proposition which I
have asserted: For either we speak of Physicians improperly so called, that is,
ignorant Quacks, etc. Or those that are learned and well skilled in the
Faculty. As to the former, they deserve not the Name of Physicians; and
therefore, though it could be proved that some of these are Atheists, yet it
cannot be imputed to the Faculty, because they are not properly of it. Yea, I
further grant that Ignorance in Medicks, as well as in all other learned Arts,
capacitates Men for Atheism. As for the latter, i. e. those who are skillful in
this Science, and merit the worthy Title they bear, it is not to be denied that
even some of these have procured to themselves the Imputation of Atheism and
Impiety by their profane Speeches and irreverent Discourse about sacred
Matters, and by their scandalous and enormous Actions.

But what is this to the Purpose, unless it can be proved that their being
Physicians makes them talk atheistically, and that the Study of Medicks is the
Cause of their Profaneness? There are some Professors of the Law, and some in
sacred Orders whose Lives are a Reproach to their Studies and Calling: But did
ever any Man of correct Thoughts lay the Fault of this on the Profession of Law
or Divinity? So it is in the present Case, the Faculty is not blameable: The
Persons we are speaking of are not made Atheists by being Students in Physic,
but being atheistically inclined before, they bring a Scandal on the
Profession. Their Irreligion is not the Effect of their searching into natural
Causes: They do not scruple a Deity or divine Providence; because they have an
Insight into Humane Bodies, and all the Operations of them, but this may be
truly said, that their being debauched and wicked Livers makes way for their
atheistical Notions and Sentiments.

But this is to be said further, that it is unreasonable and unjust to libel
the whole Faculty for the sake of a few; for all unprejudiced Men must own that
there have been, and are as few of that Profession (considering the Proportion
of them) as perhaps of any other that are regardless of sacred things. If a Man
looks into their Dispensatories, he shall find that they have made use of God's
Name, and some of the Saints, and of the most holy and venerable things even in
their Art. There are some Footsteps of Religion in several of the Names which
they have given to medical Simples and some Compounds. Wood Sorrel has been
styled by them Allelujah: Heartsease, an Herb of the Trinity; (though indeed
Vulg. Err. l. 2. chapter 7.
Dr. Brown says, this is named from the Figure of its Leaves:) Angelica an
Herb of the Holy Ghost. Mugwort has been called Saint John's Girdle: Other
Herbs have the Name of Saint Iohn's-wort, and Saint Peter's-wort, and Saint
Iames's-wort. Cardamom-Seeds are called Grains of Paradise: Solomons's Seal is
Scala Coeli with them. Another Plant has been christened Herb of Grace, and
another Holy or Blessed Thistle. And it is likely, our Lady's Thistle refers to
the Virgin Mary. And our Savior's Name is made use of to honor some
Vegetables: A kind of Gromel is called, not only Job's Tears, but Lachrymae
Christi. Wild Clary has the Name of Oculus Christi: Great Spurge is called
Palma Christi, and another Manus Christi. The Apostles in general (besides
those before particularized) have not been forgot by them; for there is a
Medical Ointment that has it Denomination from them: And other Medicaments are
entitled Holy, Divine, and by the Grace of God. It appears from this, that
there have been some Religious People of this Profession, or else Pretenders to
it; and then they were far from being open Atheists. We see they have had some
Thoughts of God and Religion, of Christ Jesus and Heaven, and of things and
Persons that are Sacred.

Not to mention the Praises of St. Luke, who was both a Physician and an
Evangelist, and is the brightest Glory of these Artists; there were many others
(whom I intend not to enumerate here) who were very great Devotionists, and
showed a mighty Respect to God and Religion. Even Galen (though he unhappily
reflects on Moses and our Savior, being mislead by his Pagan Principles) was
in his way Devout, and (as you have heard) broke out into a Celebration of
God's Goodness, Wisdom and Power from the Consideration of the Structure of
Man's Body. I have made mention of several of the Moderns before, who, like
true Pious Philosophers, often take occasion in their Writings to remind the
World of a Supreme Being, and to own and reverence his Authority. I will here
add concerning Sennertus, that he not only shows himself every where in his
Works, a very Religious Physician, but he composed and published a Book of
Meditations and Prayers, which is a farther Evidence of his Piety. Gesner, a
Physician of Zurich, in his Books of Animals, takes notice of the All-Wise
Maker, and quotes several Passages out of the Holy Scriptures. Bauhinus speaks
very divinely when he discourses of the Fabric of the Ears.

That Eminent Physician of our Age Dr. Willis gave as great Proofs of his
Godliness as of his Learning: He was as conversant in the Practice of Piety as
in that of Physic. Whilst he lived he was a constant frequenter of the
Prayers of the Church, and at his Death he left a Salary to maintain the
Offices of Devotion for ever. And herein he was followed by the honorable Mr.
Boil, who, though he was no professed Master of Medicks, yet was skilled in the
Art and in all Natural Philosophy which is so requisite to it: This Excellent
Person, to give a lasting Demonstration of his being highly concerned for
Religion, bequeathed an honorable Allowance for the maintaining of a perpetual
Theological Lecture, wherein the Christian Religion is to be asserted and
defended against its Chiefest Adversaries, and particularly and expressly his
Will is, that Atheists should be attacked with the utmost Strength of Argument.
Dr. Woodward, a professed Physician, speaks like a Religious Philosopher in his
Natural History of the Earth, and owns the Divine Wisdom and Contrivance. But I
must forbear to mention the Living. Thus we see that this Rank of Students are
disposed to be Religious, and their Employment leads them to it, because they
are continually studying and contemplating the Works of God.

If you ask why the Lives of such Men are not always Good; yea, why they do not
excel? I ask you again; why do not Sextons and Grave-makers live better than
other People, seeing they converse with the dead, and are constantly reminded
of Mortality, and another World? Nay, you may as well ask why every individual
Clergy man is not transcendently Good and Virtuous, since their Business and
Calling are in themselves conducive to it. The true cause of this is want of
Serious Attention and Due Application. So it is here, a Physician, as such,
would naturally prove a Good Man, but then he must ^eriously and attentively
lie under the Influence of his Principles, and suffer the Virtue of them to
take hold of him, and not wilfully and stubbornly throw it off. For, though
his Calling is in it self an Antidote against Atheism, yet it will not have its
Effect if he takes a Counter-Potion. So then, if you should find that these
Artists have less Religion than other Men, it is not to be attributed to them
because they are skilled in their Art, but because they abuse it.

The short of all is, their searching into the Works of Nature is able to
render them Wise and knowing Persons; Men of great Insight and Sagacity.
Whence, among the Ancients Apollo was the God of Wisdom and Medicks. And this
may be signified in the consecrating of a Serpent to Aesculapius the God of
Physic. And this Study also, if duly managed and applied, will make those that
are conversant in it as Good as they are Wise: For Physics do naturally
conduct to Ethics. A Natural Philosopher will be, if not otherwise hurt, a
Good Moralist. His intimate conversing with Matter and Bodies will raise him to
an Apprehension of an All-Wise Spirit. Though he deal in Grovelling Vegetables,
and stoops and bends to the Earth to gather them; yet, even this Posture makes
him more Erect toward Heaven, and exalts his Mind to the Author of Nature. An
Anatomy Lecture is a Preparative to one of Divinity: And whilst he views and
considers the Exactness of the Humane Fabric, he is thence effectually
provoked to acknowledge, revere, and worship the Divine Architect.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PART I. page 88. line 27. read correct. p. 121. l. 1. r. Stag^rit^ p. 174. l.
last but one r. there by. p. 192. l. 21. r. Halieutic^^. p. 204. l. 24. for
there r. they. p. 229. l. 5. r. noted.

PART II. p. 46. l. last but one r. admitting. p. 48. l. 7. r. insite. p. 50.
l. 22. insert perhaps before not. p. 64. l 22. r. Colic. p. 72. l. 19. r.
come. p. 75. l. 11. after manner make (;). p. 88. l. 19. r. (...). p. 94. l. 1.
blo^ out (^). And some other Literal Faults require Amendment.

Books written by the Reverend Mr. John Edwards.
AN Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament, which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a probable Resolution of them, in two
Volumes in 8o.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and, Perfection of the Books of
the Old and New Testament, with a Continued Illustration of several Difficult
Texts throughout the whole Work, in three Volumes in 8o.

Some Thoughts concerning the several Causes and Occasions of Atheism,
especially in the present Age, with some brief Reflections on Socinianism, and
on a late Book entitled The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the
Scriptures. 8o.

Now in the Press and will speedily be published.
A Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of a Late Writer's Opinion concerning
the Necessity of only One Article of Christian Faith: And of his other
Assertions in his late book of the Reasonableness of Christianity, and in his
Vindication of it. With a Brief Reply to another (professed) Socinian Writer.

All sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John Wyat at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.


