Die Sabbathi, 27. Sept. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the further
supply of the British Army in IRELAND.
Whereas the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, have by
an Ordinance published the Eighteenth day of October, One thousand six hundred
forty and four, Ordained and Declared, That for the support and supply of the
British forces of Horse and Foot in the Provinces of Vlster, Munster and
Connaught in the Kingdom of Ireland, several weekly sums of money in the said
Ordinance expressed, should be Charged, Rated, Taxed and leavied, upon all and
every the several Counties, Cities, Towns, Liberties and places of the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales, to begin from the first of September then
last past, and to continue for the space of twelve months; which moneys were
to be issued for the service aforesaid, in such manner as the Committee of both
Kingdoms, or such persons as should be by them Authorized by their Order should
direct.

In which Ordinance, a special Proviso is had and made, that no part of the
money, which should be leavied or paid in by virtue of, or according to the
tenor thereof, should be employed to any other purpose, but only for providing
and sending supplies for the said British forces, and carrying on of that war,
until the sum of Fourscore thousand pounds had been Leavied, Collected and paid
into the Treasurers appointed by that Ordinance to be disposed of for that
purpose, as therein is expressed; And then Ordained and Declared, That
whatsoever moneys should be Leavied, Raised, and paid to the said Treasurers by
virtue of that Ordinance, over and above the before mentioned sum of Fourscore
thousand pounds, such overplus of money should be disposed of, in such manner
as should be further resolved and ordained by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, as in and by the said Ordinance amongst other things more at large
does appear.

And whereas the Committee of both Kingdoms in pursuance of the said Ordinance,
and of other Directions from the Houses of Parliament, has already disposed
of, or else designed for the payment of the Commanders, Officers and Soldiers,
and for the providing, sending over into Ireland, and paying for Victuals,
Clothes, Arms, Ammunition, and other things necessary for supply and
maintenance of the said British Forces, and other necessary occasions incident
thereunto, the aforesaid sum of Fourscore thousand pounds, which is to be paid
according to the engagements, contracts and agreements by them for that purpose
made, and to be made, and not to be otherwise diverted.

And forasmuch as there is now required for the use of the Scottish Army in
Ireland, Sixteen thousand Bolle of Oatmeal, Seven thousand Cassocks and
Breeches, Seven thousand Shirts, Seven thousand pair of shoes, Seven thousand
pair of stockings, Seven thousand Caps for the Common Soldiers, and Four
thousand pounds worth of Cloth, and other necessaries for the Officers of the
said Scottish Army; And that Mr. John Davies of Carrickfergus in Ireland, has
propounded and contracted to furnish the same at certain Rates and Prizes, and
upon such conditions as are agreed on betwixt the House of Commons and him the
three and twentieth of April last, the whole charge thereof amounting to the
sum of Four and twenty thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds, so that he may
receive payment and satisfaction in manner following; (that is to say) By
advance unto him of the sum of Three thousand pounds within one month, Three
thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds more within one month after that, and
by receiving the residue, being Eighteen thousand pounds, out of the Ordinance
of Parliament for Ireland, of the Eighteenth of October, One thousand six
hundred forty and four, before mentioned, after the said Fourscore thousand
pounds by that Ordinance limited, and by the Committee of both Kingdoms, either
disposed, or to be by them disposed of for the British forces in Ireland,
shall be paid or satisfied: And upon condition that he may out of the remain of
the money that shall come in by the said Ordinance of the Eighteenth of
October, One thousand six hundred forty and four, for Ireland, after the
aforesaid sums of Fourscore thousand pounds, and, Eighteen thousand pounds are
paid, receive satisfaction of the several sums of Nine thousand forty and five
pounds, which appears by his Account made the tenth of April, One thousand six
hundred forty and three, to be due unto him above two years since, for
provisions delivered unto the British and Scottish Regiments in Ulster, by
direction of the Parliament, and contract made with Mr. Nathaniell Fiennes, Sir
Philip Stapleton, and Mr. John Hampden; and of Three thousand one hundred and
fifty pounds, which he stands engaged for to Mr. Maximiliam Beard, and Mr.
Thomas Brown of Cheapside London, for provisions delivered in Ireland to that
value; and for which they received Warrants to be paid out of the Adventurers
money, but have not received any of the same, the said Warrants nevertheless
being charged upon him in his Accounts: And in case he shall not receive full
satisfaction out of the said Ordinance in the way propounded of, the before
mentioned Eighteen thousand pounds, and the Twelve thousand, one hundred,
ninety and five pounds, so due unto him upon his Account, and to Mr. Beard and
Mr. Brown, within six months next after his delivery of that quantity of
Oat-meal at Carrickfergus, and the Shipping of the other goods from hence,
Certificates being returned of the same, some other course and way may be found
out to satisfy unto him so much thereof as shall be behind, and cannot be
raised by that Ordinance.

The Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, resolving to pursue the
aforesaid Contract, made the three and twentieth of April last past, with the
said Mr. Davies, for supplying the Stottish Army in Ireland, with the Oat-meal,
Clothes, and other necessaries now by them so required, and that payment be
made unto him in the manner, and within the time limited; And also to give
satisfaction unto the said Mr. Davies for the debt already due unto him; and
for his other demands in the the way propounded, as may be for his indemnity
and future encouragement to undergo the like good services: They have already
taken Order, That the sum of Three thousand pounds is paid or seeured unto him,
the said Mr. John Davies, or his Assigns, in lieu and satisfaction of the
first Three thousand pounds by him required in his Proposition, to be advanced
within one month: And for the same purpose have also settled the payment of
Three thousand, seven hundred and fifty pounds more, in lieu and satisfaction
of so much propounded, to be paid unto him and his Assigns within another
month next after the first: And for his further satisfaction and payment of
the residue of the moneys, that according to the Rates and Prizes before
expressed, shall become due unto him the said John Davies, for the Oat-meal,
Clothes, Cloth, and other necessaries, which in performance of this Contract he
shall deliver at Carrickfergus in Ireland, or Ship from hence for the use of
the Scottish Army in Ireland, such residue amounting to Eighteen thousand
pounds. The said Lords and Commons have thought fit to Ordain and Declare, and
be it hereby Ordained and Declared, That the same shall be paid unto him or his
Assigns out of the first of such moneys as shall come to the Treasurers hands,
out of all the Counties, Cities, Towns and places of the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, by virtue and means of the before mentioned Ordinance of
Parliament, of the Eighteenth of October last, for relief of the British
Armies in Ireland, next and immediately after the beforesaid sum of Fourscore
thousand pounds intended by the said Ordinance, and already disposed or
designed by the Committee of both Kingdoms, for relief of those British
Armies, is accordingly satisfied and paid.

And it is hereby further Ordained and Declared, That when and as soon as the
before mentioned sum of Four score thousand pounds shall be satisfied and paid
as aforesaid, for the relief of the British Armies in Ireland, and Eighteen
thousand pounds as aforesaid, toward the supply of the Scottish Armies in that
Kingdom, out of the moneys arising and coming in by means and virtue of the
Ordinance of Parliament of the Eighteenth of October last; Then payment and
satisfaction shall be made and given out of the remainder of those moneys unto
the said John Davies and his assigns, of the before mentioned sum of Nine
thousand forty and five pounds due unto him upon his account, for provisions
delivered to the Scottish and British Regiments of Horse and Foot in Vlster in
Ireland above two years since by direction of the Parliament, and contract made
as aforesaid with Nathaniel Fines Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, and
John Hampden Esquire; and of Three thousand one hundred and fifty pounds more
unto him or his Assigns for dis-ingagement of him to Master Maximilian Beard,
and Master Thomas Brown of Cheapside, of the respective Sums as aforesaid of
Fifteen hundred pounds, and Sixteen hundred and fifty pounds, he procuring them
upon payment of the said moneys, to deliver up to be cancelled the Warrants and
Orders which they formerly had for the payment of the same; And the present
Committee of both Kingdoms, who have now the power of issuing out the moneys,
arising and coming in by the aforesaid Ordinance of Parliament of the
Eighteenth of October last, or any other Committee that shall be hereafter
authorized thereunto, are not to divert or dispose of those moneys, or any part
of them, to any other use, or to any other person whatsoever, but for the
payment and satisfaction of the said John Davies and his Assigns, the before
mentioned sums of money hereby Ordered to be respectively paid unto them: But
the said Committees are hereby authorized and required, as it shall be made
appear unto them by the Certificate of such person as is entrusted to receive
the same, That the said John Davies or his Assigns, shall ship away from
London the Cloth, Suits of Clothes, Shirts, Stockings, Shoes, and Caps,
according to the Contract before mentioned, for the use of the Scottish Army in
Ireland; and that he shall deliver for their use at Carrickfergus in Ireland,
the Oat-meal as is before expressed, To grant and issue forth their Orders and
Warrants unto the Treasurers appointed by that Ordinance for payment of the
several and respective sums of money, unto the said John Davies, or his
Assigns, in the course and order herein prescribed, which Orders and Warrants
the said Treasurers are hereby required to observe accordingly, and to
discharge the same: And it is hereby recommended to the said Committee of both
Kingdoms, to use all good means for the speedy Leavying, and bringing in out of
the several Counties, Cities, Towns and places of this Kingdom, and the
Dominion of Wales, the moneys required by that Ordinance, who hereby are
authorized to send forth such Letters and Warrants, for the better effecting
thereof, as they shall think meet; And it is hereby also further Ordained and
Declared, by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That
they will from time to time, as occasion shall require, nominate Committees in
such places and Counties within this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales as have been
hitherto omitted in the aforesaid Ordinance of the Eighteenth of October last;
and will also add to the present respective Committees of any Counties, City,
Town and place, such persons as shall be recommended, and be for the better
advancement of the service.

And whereas there are not any persons specially named for the Isle of Wight,
and some other places and Counties in this Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, as Committees to execute the powers in the said Ordinance of the
Eighteenth of October, and in some other Counties and places, some persons of
eminent note are omitted, whereby the service therein is neglected; Be it
further Ordained, That

For the Isle of Wight.
Sir Henry Worsl^y and Sir Robert Lisle, Knights; Robert Dillington, John
Lisle, William Bowreman, Edw: Dennis, Thomas Bowreman, William Maynard, Edward
Cheek, John Worsley, and John Bunkley, Esquires; Robert Mathews, Alderman;
Thomas Kerne Colonel; Captain Man, and Henry Ringwood Gentleman, Mr. Leg, Mr.
Oglander.

For the County of Hereford.
Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Colonel Edward Harley, James Kirle
Esquire; Colonel Edward Broughton, John Flacet Junior, Henry Jones Gentleman,
Captain Thomas Blaney.

For the County of Monmouth.
Herbert Esquire, Knight of the Shire; Thomas Hughes Esquire, John Walter
Esquire, Rumsey Gentleman, Christopher Catchman, and William Jones Gentlemen be
respective Committees for the purposes in the said Ordinance mentioned; and are
required to do and execute all such powers, authorities and things within the
said Isle and Counties, to be done as fully as any other persons are authorized
by the said Ordinance for any other place in that Ordinance mentioned; And that
there shall be added to the present respective Committees in the said recited
Ordinance named of the Counties and places hereafter mentioned, viz.

To the Committees for the County of Middlesex, John Hicks Gentleman.

To the Committees for the County of Essex, Joachim Mathews Esquire, Edward
Pickrell Gentleman.

To the Committees for the County of Sussex, William Freeman, Nicholas
Shepherd, Richard Gates, Henry Avery, William Waterfield.

To the Committees for the County of Leicester, Cradock Gentleman.

To the Committees for the county of Hertford, George Smith Esquire. And to the
Committees for the county of Bedford, Sir William Butler Knight.

To the Committees of the County of Devon, Christopher Savorey of Strilson
Esquire in the County of Devon; Philip Crooker and Richard Wood Esquires.

And to the respective Committees of the several counties of Gloucester,
Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, and counties of the city of
Gloucester and city of Exon.

Colonel General Massey, and Colonel Nicholas Devereux.

And the said persons so added to the said Committees as aforesaid, and every
of them are hereby authorized, and required to do and act in every respect, as
if they had been originally named and appointed of such Committees by the same
Ordinance.

And because it will much concern the said John Davies to have the moneys
arising by that Ordinance duly leavied, Collected and brought in to the
Treasurers hands within the time limited by the contract made with him: It is
hereby thought fit and declared that the said John Davies shall have power to
nominate and employ such persons as he shall make choice of, and for whom he
will answer to earry the Letters, Warrants, and instructions of the Houses of
Parliament, and of the Committee of both Kingdoms to the several parts of this
Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales, and to solicit the Committees of the
Counties, Cities, Towns and places; and the Collectors and other Officers
employed for the Leavying, Collecting and bringing in of those moneys, and to
bring from time to time their respective answers and proceedings.

And for the defraying of the charges of such persons and Messengers: It is
hereby ordained and declared that an allowance of six pence upon every twenty
shillings to be brought in by means or virtue of that Order, after the before
mentioned sum of Fourscore thousand pounds, already disposed of, or designed by
the Committee of both Kingdoms for the British Army in Ireland shall be
satisfied and paid, shall be made and given unto the said John Davies or his
Assigns; And the Committee of both Kingdoms are hereby authorized, and required
to give order to the Treasurers for payment and allowance thereof, who are
according to such orders to pay and allow the same out of those moneys so
coming in by the said Ordinance.

And it is hereby further Resolved, Ordained and Declared by the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That in case the said John Davies
or his assigns shall not by and out of the moneys coming in by the said
Ordinance, receive full satisfaction of the several sums hereby Ordained to be
respectively paid unto them within the space of six months next after the
delivery of the full quantities of Oat-meal at Carrickfergus, and the shipping
of other goods from hence (due certificate being made and returned to the
Speaker of the House of Commons for the time being, or the Committee of both
Kingdoms concerning the same by the Commander in chief of that army for the
Oat-meal, and by such as shall be entrusted to receive the other goods here)
And the said John Davies or his assigns making it appear how much at that time
is unpaid and due unto him; That then, and in such case the said John Davies
his Executors and assigns shall be allowed, and paid damage after the Rate of
Eight pounds per Centum, per Annum from the failer of payment at six months
end as aforesaid, of so much of the said moneys as shall be unpaid and
unsatisfied; And that some further and fit way and course for satisfaction
thereof, shall be taken by both Houses of Parliament.

And whereas some doubt has been conceived by some, whether the said Ordinance
be to continue one full year, by reason of some expressions which they conceive
to be doutfull: It is hereby Ordained and Declared, That the same is to have
continuance for the space of one full and entire year (that is to say) from the
first day of September, One thousand six hundred forty and four, until the
second day of September, One thousand six hundred forty and five, in those
Counties, Cities and places, where the said moneys have been already Taxed,
Rated, and Assessded, and in those Counties, Cities and places, where no
Assessments have as yet been made by virtue of the said recited Ordinance, by
reason of the present distractions, to begin and have Commencement from such
time as they shall be reduced to the Obedience of the Parliament, and to
continue for the space of one entire year, likewise to the end all places may
pay their respective shares and proportions toward so good and profitable a
work.

And whereas diverse sums of money to be raised by virtue of the said recited
Ordinance, may after the Collecting thereof, peradventure lie and remain in the
Collectors hands some space of time, before the same can with convenience and
safety be brought to London, which may prove very prejudicial to the said Mr.
John Davies, by occasioning delay in the payment of such moneys as are or shall
be assigned unto him out of the money to be raised by virtue of the said
Ordinance, in case he might not receive the same until it be first brought up
and paid in to the said Treasurers at Grocers Hall; Be it therefore Ordained
and Declared, That if the said Mr. John Davies shall at any time or times
hereafter, be willing and desirous to receive and take any part of the moneys
to him Assigned, or to be Assigned of any of the Collectors in the several
Counties or places where the same shall be Collected, and shall to that end
deliver unto the Treasurers at Grocers Hall, in the said Ordinance named, a
sufficient Acquittance for the same, as for so much money by him received of
them, That then the said Treasurers shall upon Receipt of every such
acquittance, deliver unto the said Mr. John Davies, Acquittances to the
several Collectors, for such moneys in like manner, as if the said Collectors
had paid in the same to the said Treasurers at Grocers Hall in London, any
thing in the said recited Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

Ioh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.
H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

