A Brief Vindication OF THE Fundamental Articles OF THE Christian Faith, AS
ALSO Of the Clergy, Universities and Public Schools, from Mr. Lock's
Reflections upon them in his Book of Education, etc. With some Animadversions
on two other late Pamphlets, viz. Of Mr. Bold and a Nameless Socinian Writer.

By John Edwards, B. D.

LONDON: Printed for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and I. Wyat at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO BOTH UNIVERSITIES.
HONORED SIRS,
A Late Writer has taken the confidence to make very Disrespectfull, Indecent,
Rude, and Scurrilous Reflections upon You, and has with that Scorn and
Insolence, which are peculiar to him, and cannot be supposed to be in any other
Man, censured your Studies and Ways and Methods of Learning, which are at this
day owned and practiced by you. They have always born the brand of Infamy who
have showed their ill will to these Public Schools of Education and Professed
Seminaries of Arts and Literature. Pope Paul the Second and Sixtus the Fourth
who succeeded him were infamous on this account, for both of them were ob^erv'd
to bear a Hatred to Universities, and publicly to declare their abhorrence of
Academick Men and Learning. Mr. Hobbes is a Modern Instance, who was wont to
decry the University-Studies and Learning, because he had espoused a Set of
Notions which were destructive not only to Academick but all Religious
Principles. But a later Instance we have in one Mr. Lock, who though he
infinitely comes short of the forenamed Person in Parts or Good Letters, yet
has taken the courage to tread in his Old Friend's steps, and publicly to
proclaim his dislike of University-Men, and to remonstrate against the Methods
they take in bringing up of Youth. The Name of Public Schools and Academies is
as hateful to him as that of Ath^nasius to a Socinian.

Nor is he pleased with our Old Christianity, but has offered a New Scheme to
the World, the same (the very same in words, as well as to the Thing) with what
Mr. Hobbes propounded as the Perfect and Complete Model of Faith, viz. To
believe in Christ is nothing else than to believe that Jesus is the Christ: and
no other Faith, besides this Article, is required to Eternal life. De Cive cap.
18. The belief of this Article, Jesus is the Christ or Messiah, is all the
Faith required for Salvation. Leviathan. Part. 3. Chap. 43. This is the
Doctrine which is revived and furbish'd up in the pretended Reasonableness of
Christianity: and you see whence it is borrowed. When that Writer was framing a
New Christianity, he took Hobbes's Leviathan for the New Testament, and the
Philosopher of Malmsbury for our Savior and the Apostles. See how naturally a
Man passes from arraigning and vilifying the Universities to affront and abuse
Religion! He had with pride and contempt trampled upon the former, and now he
attacks the latter, and treads Christianity it self under his feet.

It may be few of you have taken notice of the Affronts done to your selves by
this Bold Assailant, as not busying your selves with such sort of Writers, or
as thinking such Reflections below your Resentments. But I having had occasion
to enter the Lists with this Gentleman, it falls in my way to take notice of
his Double Insolence, i. e. to You and to Religion, but more especially the
latter, which he has miserably shattered and unsettled, and almost reduced to
nothing; having balked a great part of the Gospels, and wholly laid aside the
Epistles, and renounced all Articles of Christianity but One as necessary to be
believed to constitute a Man a Christian, and having every where showed his
disdain of the Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel, especially the Clergy of
the Church of England. So that he deserves to be treated with Satyr rather than
Argument. And therefore if there be in the ensuing Papers a kind of mixture of
the former with the latter, I hope it will not be disrelish'd even by the most
Serious and Judicious Readers when they consider on whom it is bestowed.

Gentlemen, I have now an opportunity of vindicating the Honor of those
Renowned and Learned Bodies to which you belong, and likewise of asserting and
defending the Cause of Christianity: wherefore I thought I should be defective
as to both these Concerns if I did not offer these Papers to You, and humbly
request You to take them into your patronage, with the Author of them, who is,

Most Learned Sirs, Your entire Servant and Hono^^er JOHN EDWARDS.

The Author to the Bookseller.
SIR,
YOu know Books Printed at Cambridge are commonly Licensed by the University,
and accordingly when I designed the following Papers for the Press there, I
requested Mr. Vice Chancellor and the Regius Professor of Divinity to peruse
them, which they did, and then returned them to me with an Imprimatur: and two
other Heads of Colleges (for I applied my self to no more) were pleased to sign
the same. The Form was thus:

April 17. 1697.

Imprimatur,

Hen. James Procan. Io. Beaumont Reg. Theol. Prof. Io. Covell S. T. P. Io.
Balders^on S. T. P.
But since I found it necessary to be printed at London, (...) that I might not
seem neglectful of (...) ^avour and Kindness of the worthy P^^sons before
mentioned; And that you and the Reader may see that the Ensuing Undertaking was
so far approved of by those Learned Gentlemen, that they Licensed the Printing
of it: I have thought fit for their (...) and yours to set down their Names.

Your humble Servant J. E.

A Brief Vindication OF THE Christian Faith, etc.
AFter I had observed the rude and surly Genius of a late Penman, the Author
and Vindicator of a Treatise which he entitules The Reasonableness of
Christianity, I had a mind to see what was his Humor in some other of his
Productions, and accordingly I looked into his Papers of Education, and there I
soon discovered that it was his settled Nature and Temper to Traduce all ranks
of Persons, and that he had taught his Tongue to Revel, and that he cannot write
three Pages without thrice as many Calumnies and Falsehoods, and so I less
wondered at his Rudeness to Me. There I found that he libels the most Learned
and Celebrated Societies of Men in this Nation, that he strives to blast the
reputation of the most Useful Persons, and to ridicule their Public
Employments and Statiens, that with an ungovernable pride and disdain he
discards some Arts and Sciences, and laughs at the Professors of them: And in
brief, I found that he imperiously flies at all, and like some Barbarous
Invader makes havoc wheresoever he comes, and spares no Sex, Place, or Quality
of Persons. Of which I will now give the Reader some particular Instances, and
undeniable proofs.

For I conceive it will not be expected that I should first endeavor to make
it clear, that the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity is the same
person that writ concerning Education, for all his Friends and Admirers, (who
would not wrong him, we must think) make him the Father of both: And he owns it
himself, for when I saluted him by the name of Mr. Lock in a late Treatise [The
Socinian Greed. Chap. 6.] he readily answered to it. In his Socinian Creed, p
120. he begins with M E, says he, Vindicat. p. 398. and afterward in the same
Page and the four following ones, he particularly applies to himself what I
said of him by Name in that Chapter; and he concludes p. 402. This is all that
is new, which I think My self concerned in, in his Soc^nian Creed. This All is
what I had said concerning his One Article, and concerning his baulking of the
Epistles, and concerning his crying down of Systems with a design to establish
one of his own. All along I charged Mr. Lock with these things, to which the
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity submissively replies, I think MY
SELF concerned in all this, which is as much as to say, I am Mr. Lock whom you
mentioned so often in that Chapter. And we shall find in p. 424, 425. of his
Second Vindication, that he takes to himself whatever I had said with
particular reference to Mr. Lock, whom I expressly named in the foresaid
Chapter. Here we see the Masker pulls off his Vizour, and after all his
Disguises owns himself to bear that Name which I called him by. I think then I
may proceed.

First, to give the Reader a right Idea of this Gentleman, I will take notice
of his way of treating the Universities whether at home or abroad, for we must
know that he is a Catholic Hater of them all, as appears from his scornful
censuring and disparaging the Learning now in fashion in the Schools of Europe,
page 158 of his Thoughts of Education, by which general terms he means the
Formed Academies as well as the meaner Schools and Seats of Education which are
in these European parts. Our Universal Railer spares neither Foreign Nurseries
of Learning, nor those in his own Country. It is as easy to him with the same
infectious Breath, to blast the one as the other. And his Pride and Arrogance
prompt him to blow upon both, and to defy all Methods of Education but his own.
But chiefly his spite is heightened against those Two Famous Seminaries of
Learning which our own Nation is blessed with, and thence it is that they fall
under such Benedictions as these from him, which I shall next take notice of.
The Tutours (says he) think it their great business to fill the Studies and
Heads of their Pupils with such Authors as these, viz. Burgersdicius and
Schiebler. p. 162. This is an unpardonable fault, and therefore the Lash is due
from our Severe Educator, and accordingly he here bestows it on the Cambridg
and Oxford Tutors. I charge you, young Men, as I am Tutor General, not to deal
in such Au^hors. Read John Lock who writ of Humane Understanding, and has had
little of it since, and not over much then. If you would fill your Pupils heads
with Whimsies, there is a Book for you, If you would have no Idea of the
Supreme Being, and a false one of Christianity, and a fantastic one of Good
Manners, then think it your great busi^ess to fill your Studies with my Essay,
and my Reasonableness of Christianity, and my Thoughts of Education. Though I
know not whether Burgersdicius and Schiebler be Authors in fashion amongst the
generality of Tutours at this time, but rather think they are not; yet if they
have been, or are among some, it is enough to ground an Out cry upon. In the
same page he tells us that Burgersdicius' s and Schieblers did not swarm in
Seneca' s days, as they do now in these. No, good Sir, nor did such Whimsical
Writers as John Lock and Sam. Bold swarm in those days, as they do now. He very
worshipfully urges the little advantage of Logic, p. 234. and presently after
adds, that the Skill of Reasoning well is seldom or never got by studying the
Rules which pretend to teach it. Again, in the same place, merely to disparage
the Academick Studies, he tells us that Right Reasoning is founded on some
thing else than the Predicaments and Predicables, and consists not in talking
in Mood and Figure: But we know, Good Sir, it is inconsistent with talking
against them.

In an other place, p. 145. he has a fling at Latin (as well as Logic)
brought from the University. What would the Man be at? Is he against all Latin^
It may be so, for what need he be at the pains to learn this Tongue when
Pedlars French best suits his way of living, and those he converses with? And
yet methinks this should not be his meaning that he is for no Latin at all, for
he may stand in need of it upon occasion; the being able to read a little of it
may serve him at a dead lift. Or, is he against False Latin only^ One would
think that should not be, for this Halfquarter (if that be not too much) of a
Student in Physic^ and Chyrurgery, has not Skill to tell when Priscian's head
is broken, or if he had, he has not Art enough to heal it. Or, does he rage
only against the Latin that is brought from the University? Ay, there it is, I
will warrant you: He imagines that it must be brought by the Carrier (and
perhaps this ^anciful Gentleman thinks Hobson is alive ^till) and must be paid
for, and this Hide-bound Gripple Man (who lays up all against the next rising
and falling of Guinea's) will not be at the charges.

But hark! there is a Terrible Broadside coming, for by way of a Concluding
Stroke he boldly tells us, that the Education which is at this day in the
University (and by this way of speaking you may perceive he intends one of our
own Universities) is useless for the World, and Man's Life. Now we are sunk, and
never can rise again. A Man of University. Education is to be kicked out of the
World, and deserves not to Live in it, because he is not bred up according to
the Rules of one Mr. Lock's Education. His University Learning is not useful
for the World, it will never make him a Committee Man, and help him to
understand Manufacture and Fishery: And if it will not do that, what is it good
for?

And this Lewd Declaimer is full of Invectives against the Persons as well as
the Studies of University Men, for he lets us know that the young Tutour from
the University is neither well-bred, nor skilled in the world, nor well
principled in the grounds and foundations of true virtue and generosity, p 145.
His Latin and his Logic were bad, but his Ethics are much worse; he has been
fooling with Burgersdicius, but has not looked into Machiavel, and thence
principled himself with the grounds and foundations of true Virtue and
Generosity, which cannot be but from him alone. And then he is very sharp again
upon the University-Tutors because they are not well bred, and have not the
knowledge of a man of Business, p. 159. and have no knowledge of the World, p.
162, 163. and therefore are unfit to be Tutors, and to read Lectures to
Gentl^men, it being impossible (as he adds) that any one should come forth well
fashioned out of unpolished ill bred company, p 163. The Universities are this
unpolished ill bred company, and how then can a well fash^on'd Tutor, and one
that is fit to read Lectures to Gentlemen proceed thence?

This is ths best Language Mr. John Lock can bestow upon University-Men. He
would have us know that he has engrossed all Gentility and Good Breeding to
himself, that University-Air inspires Men with Rusticity, and makes them errant
Boors and Peasants, that a Fellow of a College is a Clown, and must be so by
the Statutes, that Tutors are the worst of Corydons, and belong to the Rabble
and High-Shoes, that the College Raven has more Manners than the Scholars, and
that the very Latin which is brought from those places smells of Barbarism.
Afterward he rebukes the Unmannerliness and Rudeness of Scholars, p. 262.
meaning the foresaid persons, and rattles them again for their want of Good
Breeding. Again, in an other place he derides and scoffs at the Liberal Arts,
and the Tutors Learned Enc^clopaidia, p. 150. There is some unlawful Magic in
this Circle of the Arts, and he would not have any one come within the Compass
of it. In short, from what this Tutorer of Tutors has let fly already against
our present Academies, we may perceive him inclined to inveigh as heartily
against them as Culpeper ever did against the College of Physicians. But the
two Grand things which he upbraids them with are their Deficiency as to their
Learning, and to their Breeding. With respect to both which, if he were
indulged his Liberty, it is not to be doubted he would use such Language as
this:

The Students in the Universities, as well as the Books in the Great and Common
Library of one of them, are all Chained; they are Tied to certain Methods of
Study, and their Authors are prescribed them. They live in perfect Durance, and
the Bocardo and Toll-booth are but representations of their respective
Colleges. At their very entrance they are imprisoned and Shackled, a
Burgersdicius or some such System-maker is clapped into every youths hands, and
they cannot be matriculated without Predicaments and Predicables. There is
nothing but Restraint and Imposition here. Oxford presents us with a Bible in
its Armorial Ensigns, thereby pinning the Epistles upon us, as well as the rest
of the Scripture. The Light and Cups (as Sacred as they are) of the other
University are fantastic Emblems, and serve only to dazzle and intoxicate the
minds of the enslaved Pupils of Alma Matter; who (poor Souls) are not skilled in
the World, and understand not Trade and Commerce, and know not that
Sturbridg-Fair is the best Commencement. Again, as their Knowledge, so their
B^eeding is contemptible, for a Man cannot be a Gentleman, and read
Burger^dicius and Scheibler. Logic gives one an ill Mien and Shape, and
therefore (as I hinted before) there is not a well fashioned Tutor among them.
They have no more Manners than what is left in the bare M^tto of the Founder of
New College. If those of this University were remanded back to ^reke-lade and
Leche-lade (their first Principles) those of the other were reduced to their
old Inns and Hostles, it would be suitable to their merits: But it would be
much more agreeable if they were removed out of the World. I ever thought that
the best way to decide the Controversy between Ca^^s and Twyne about the
Antiquity of these Societies is to dissolve them both. They are so Useless and
Insignificant a part of Mankind, so Ill bred a Company, that the Nation would
not be a Farthing the worse if they underwent the same fate with the Abbeys and
Monasteries. In short, I am one that like nothing which belongs to the Ford or
the Bridge, No, not so much as the Buildings of the former, for in my judgment
Lowse-Hall is as good a Structure as the Theater. I see nothing that is
Genteel, or Learned in either of the so much Celebrated Universities. Both
their Behavior and their Studies are to be abhorred because they are not
according to the Pattern of my Seraglio which I intend to publish to the World,
and have partly done it in my Education.

But where then can we suppose this Raving Tutor and Reformer to have been
bred, who thinks and talks after this rate? And to what Society does he belong?
If Charity did not give a Check here, we might mention the Famous and Renowned
Gymnasium at the entrance of Moor-fields, that Academy of poor shattered
Noddles, that Receptacle of Inflamed Meninges.

Because the Universities are constantly supplied from the Public Schools,
therefore it is no wonder that he who is a professed Enemy to those Higher and
Supreme Seats of the Muses, shows his rancour against the Inferior ones, and
such as are in order to the other. He is severe upon Schoolmasters (though not
so severe as he every where complains they are upon their Boys) and their way
of Education, and will not entertain a favorable thought of any thing they do.
As before I observed that he routed Burgersdicius, so now he laughs at the
Teachers of Lily's Grammar, p. 290, nay he would have no Grammar at all, p.
291. The way of learning Latin in a Grammar School he declares against with
great superciliousness, p. 291. He would not have any Language learnt by
Grammatical Rules, p. 288. but only by roat, p. 295. In an other place he shows
his dislike not only of Logical Disputes (which is a Touch to the Academick
Gentlemen) but of Set Declamations, and very vigorously appears against making
Latin Themes and Decla^ations, p. 297. and 7 pages more, not only because he
was so dull at these Exercises when he was in his Boyship, but because it is,
as he says, the Vulgar Method of Grammar Schools, which he has a strange
Antipathy against, and is so weak and indiscreet as to discover it by ill
Language. Surely the fear of the Schoolmasters Rod (which with some emotion
and trembling he mentions p. 268. and in other places) was betimes begot in his
mind by his early deserving it: And that frightful Idea made so deep an
impression on his thoughts, that it will continue with him all his days, and he
will ever have a fling at that Instrument of Education, as he calls it.

A Publick-School is the worst of Prisons, that which we silly folks call a
Free School is a house of Bondage with him, the Children are chained to the Oar
seven, eight, or ten years, p. 268. Again, in the same place, They are put into
the Herd, and driven with a Whip or Scourge, etc. This is very sad and
lamentable indeed, they are both Slaves and Beasts. You Gentlemen that are
Masters of the Great Schools in London, Westminster, Eton, Winchester, and all
the rest of you that are of that so Useful and Honorable Employment, you are
all of you a company of Tyrants, Oppressors, Taskmasters, Herd-drivers,
Overseers of Galleys: You unmercifully as well as unjustly treat the poor
Children that are under you, cruelly chaining them to the Oar, and at the same
time driving them like Beasts, as this Man of Sense expresses it. And you that
are their Parents, how unreasonable do you act when you put them to School? You
commit them to the Common Gaol (as you know Westminster-School is but one
Remove from the Gate House) you enter them Gally-flaves, and you make their
condition equal with that of your very Brutes: And all this you do to get them
a little Latin and Greek, which might be had at a great deal cheaper rate of
pains and time, p. 268. And then after all this, you and their Masters give
some of them their Mittimus to the Universities, where they are in Bondage and
Jail again: There they tug at the Oar, there they run the Gantlet through dry
Systems of Logic and Philosophy, p. 164. yea (which is worse, far worse) dull
Systems of Divinity, p. 283. So that it seems not only the Logic, but the
Philosophy, and the Divinity of the Universities are exposed by this Instructor
Param^unt. No Books whatsoever that contain any Set Rules (so he phrases it) of
any Art, even Gra^mar it self, must be taught or sold; and so St. Paul's School
and Chu^ch-yard must both of them be laid aside together. Hence we may
interpret what he says p. 267. where he calls himself a Bookish man, not
because of his reading of Books, but because of his condemning the Sale of
them. What think you? Is this not a new sort of Bookish man? What think you?
does he speak like one that is in a Post for the enco^raging and improving of
Trade in this Kingdom?

I had almost forgot an other freak of our New Tutour, and that is his
undervaluing and vilifying of Music and Poetry, two signs of an Ill-natured
man, and one that has a Harsh and Un^un'd Soul. The former he censures,
together with the Persons that are Masters of it, p. 346. ^elling us that he
has scarcely heard among men of Parts and Business any one commended or
este^med for having an Excellency in Music. And it has the last place among
all Accomplishments according to our Gr^ff Tutour p. 347. The latter viz.
Poetry is condemned by him p. 302, where he is falling upon the Schoolmasters,
and their way of educating of Youth. If a Child has a Poetic vein, it is to
me, says he, the str^ngest thing in the world that the Father should desire,
or suffer it to be cherished or improved, p. 302. He would have the Parents
stifle and suppress it as much as may be, p. 303. His School master must not so
much as enter him in Versifying, p. 304. Yea our Rough Reformer, who c^n rail
only i^ Prose, is against making of Verses, Verses of any sort, p. 302. Who
gives us a tas^ of the strange Genius of this Projector, and shows that he
prefers his own Conceits and Whims to the judgment of the Wise, and that he
has the hardiness to censure and defame all those Brave Men of our own and
other Countries that have been esteemed and honored for their excellent
Poetic Vein, and by their Ravishing Number have obliged the Learned World, as
some of them by their Pious Raptures have been extremely serviceable to
Religion. But neither Universities nor Schools, nor the Studies and Arts they
profess, nor the Persons that teach or learn them, the Books which are read by
them can find any acceptance with our Quaint Educator. If he be for any
University, it is Rakow* though as yet he defers his Matriculation. If he be
for any Library, besides his own Set of Books, it is Bibliotheca Fratrum
Polonorum, though he pretends he has read nothing in it.

That the true Worth of this Gentleman, who is now under our consideration, may
be further evidenced out of his Writings, and that the world may see that he
who defames the Academick Bodies is disposed to be a Catholic Railer, I will
in the next place remind the Reader how abusively he trea^s the Nobility and
Gentry of this Realm who send their sons to Travel. He ridicules both the
Father and the Mother, upbraiding the one for his Want, for he cannot stay any
longer for the Portion, which is to come into his hands when his Son is
married; and jeering the other for her Fondness and Childishness, for she must
have new babies to play with. p. 372. And my Young Master is laughed at for his
Marrying and Propagating as if these were two Ridiculous things, especially the
former. This would well enough become a Town-Wit and have passed in a Play, but
it sounds odly and prodigiously from a Grave Tutour, from a Stanch
Metaphysitian, from a Formal Breeder up of Youth, and from one who lays down
Rules of Civility, Good Manners, and Breeding, p. 256, 257, 258, etc. and in
several other places inculcates this that a Teacher and Governor of Children
(of which rank he thinks himself the Chief) must be a well-bred man, nay he
must not fail to be a well bred man, he must be exactly well bred.

Surely some Persons of Honor of either Sex will set a Mark on that foresaid
passage in his book, and observe the Lightness and Scurrility of his
expressions, and in ^he Margin note this, that this Writer has no regard to
his own Rules, that he teaches men to trample upon his own Dictates, and that
he gives the world to understand that his Foppish Gravity is to be hissed at.
If there were some real ground for what he says, yet a Writer of a book on
purpose (as he pretends) to chastise the Indiscretion and Ill Breeding of
others, would not have used terms of that nature. Or, if a discreet man had
censured the practice it self, yet he would have been careful to do it without
those unmannerly and indecent Reflections on a great part of the present
Nobility of our Kingdom, with others of the Gentry. Or, if he had made bold
with my Young Master (as he calls him) yet he might have forborne reflecting so
rudely on their Honorable Parents, and speaking so disrespectfully of some on
whom our Dependence has been, and making himself and the reader merry with his
Lampoons upon them. Is this the man that cries up himself for the Gift of
Educating? Is this deportment which I have been mentioning the Character of a
Well-bred man? Or is it not rather the Idea and Pourtraiture of an Ill-bred and
Wandering Pedagogue, of an Itinerant Tutour who scampers from one Shire to an
other, to give documents about reading Reynard the Fox p. 279. which he calls
Education, and has writ a Book about it?

He flings at the Reverend Judges, by fixing a Pasquil upon one of them, p.
105, 106. of his Second Vindication. Which is either true or false; if we can
suppose the former, yet no Discreet man would publicly mention it, out of
respect to the the Honorable Robe. Especiall^ this Writer should not have
exposed any of that Order, seeing he had particularly commended and urged
decency of words, p. 256. Educat. and had declared that it is the part of a
Well-bred Man to express a respect to persons according to their Rank and
Condition. p. 258. But on the other hand, if this Imputation be false, then he
deserves to fall into the hands of those Ministers of Justice, and to be
sentenced according to his Crime. But I return to his Treatise of Education.

It is observable that the Softer Sex have found no Protection from this Rough
Man* He is not only an University Hater but a Hater of Women. He exposes the
behavior of two Ladies of Quality, that fell out with one an other in Company,
and relates the Paritculars of it. p. 265, 266. It is likely that one or both
of them have been told of this passage in his book, and they cannot but think it
is an Affront to them, and must needs be so far from believing him to have any
of that Good Breeding which he pretends to teach the world, that they will
rather stigmatize him as a Scandalous Blab that tells all he hears, a Tom
Coriat that relates whatever he picks up in his perambulations. Join this with
his Reflections on those Persons of Honor before mentioned, and then give me
your opinion of the Breeding of our Gensorious Tutour.

That he has an Antipathy to the Whole Sex, one would guess from what falls
from his Pen, p. 14. If women were themselves to frame the bodies of their
children in their wombs, we should certainly have no perfect children born,
which perhaps may go down very glib with his Admirers, but you see he ventures
to border upon Profaneness and Blasphemy rather than he will not express his
dislike of the Female Order. Whether this be done in revenge to the Sex, who
generally, where some body comes, dub him the Hard-favour'd Man, and sometimes
upon occasion make use of him to scare their Children, I will not dispute. Or
it may be he that has been used to play with the Young Ones, thinks he may
make bold to be rude even with the Mothers. Else he would not have given them
the odious name of Munkies, p. 15, and in reproach have called the House of
Office Madam Cloacina, p. 36. This is the cleanly, genteel, and polite language
of John Lock that writes himself Gent. And this style and behavior are the
more strange because they are observed in one that has been freely admitted to
the Concerns of that Sex.

I might here harmlesly divert the Reader with his Scotchhoppers and Dibstones,
p. 115, 237, 275. with his Documents about Milk-potage and Water Gruel p. 18.
and his teaching Children to evacuate dexterously, p* 33 to p. 38. Which latter
succeeds only when the Party is present, it being promoted by his
Vespasian-Looks. He has spent some time, he says, in the study of Physic, p.
40, and especially of the Guts, which he very feelingly and concernedly
discourses of p. 34, 35, 36. as if they were that part of the Body which he
most minds. Which is one reason perhaps why he hates Colledg-Commons, and for
their sake the Universities.

But I will not make any farther Additions, because I will not prevent my self
in what I design at an other time, and because what I have before produced out
of his Pages is sufficient to convince us what a Talent of Education he has,
and how fit a person he is to have Youth committed to his charge. He has been
consulted of late, he says, by many about the breeding of their children,
Epist. Ded. but let me request such to consult their Reason, and demand of that
to tell them whether a Rash Censor of the Studies and Learning of our own
Academies, whether a Rude Reviler of those in the most Honorable Station,
whether a Defamer of Laudable Arts, whether a Supercilious Innovator and a
Fantastic Reformer in the Methods of Teaching, and lastly whether a Corrupter
of our Holy Faith, and a professed Depraver of the Chief Articles of the
Christian Religion (of which I shall speak anon) be a person fit to be
consulted about the breeding of their Children. The Orthodox Parents (and I
hope we have some of them left in England still) will surely be cautioned by
this not to commit them to this bold Patron of so Bad a Cause, who prides
himself in his Heterodoxy, and boasts that he has renounced the received
doctrines of the Christian Church.

And thus having in a preliminary way descanted on some part of his book
concerning Education, that the Reader might thence have some insight into the
Man I was to deal with, I shall proceed now to take notice of his other Papers,
which relate to Religion: for his New Education was in order to the introducing
of a New Religion. He had spoken before against the Learning in fashion, and
now he comes to censure the Religion in fashion, (as he calls it) and the
Fashionable and Titular Professors of it (as he Styles them, p 93) i. e. the
established Ministers of it. He had showed his perverse spirit in his Notions
about the breeeding up of Children: next he will try how successful he can be
in the perverting of Men. He will see what he can do with Grown people, as well
as with his Young Masters. Having taken upon him to reform the Universities and
Schools, and to cast off their Studies and Learning, he is encouraged to go on,
and to reform Religion, and to give us a New Model of Christianity. Accordingly
he published a Treatise entitled The Reasonableness of Christianity, wherein
he pretends to teach the world what they have been so long ignorant of, viz.
that if a man acknowledge a God, there is but One Article of Christian Belief
which is necessarily required to be embraced by him in order to the
constituting him a Christian. As for all other Articles and Doctrines delivered
by Christ and his Apostles in the Writings of the New Testament, he pronounces
them to be unnecessary and useless as to the making a man a Christian, and
capacitating for Life and Salvation. This Novel Conceit, which is an
unwarrantable Restraining and Confining of the Christian Faith and makes
Christianity a far different thing from what it is represented by our Blessed
Savior and his Apostles, has been Vindicated by him once and again. And as I
thought my self obliged to reflect upon his First Vindication in a Discourse
which I published, and en^ituled Socinianism Unmasked, so now I am designing to
attack his Second Vindication, and by exactly setting down his own words (which
I shall very faithfully do) and by impartially examining them, to convince the
Unbiased Reader of the Vanity, Weakness and Inconsistency, of the Absurdity,
Falsehood and Dishonesty of his Arguing, and on the contrary to establish this
Doctrine in men's minds, that there are More Articles then One in the Christian
Religion which are the necessary and indispensable matter of our Faith, in
order to our being True Christians.

Only first let me be permitted to observe how the Vindicator, to bubble the
Reader, insinuates that in my Socinianism Unmasked I used ill language and
railing; and again in the same place (his Preface) he complains of my Style as
rude and scurrilous: whereas any impartial Reader may satisfy himself that I
always kept my self close to the matter which was before me, I attended to the
Merits of the Cause, and made no Reflections but what his way of Discoursing
drew from me. I will not deny that I labored to assert the Truth with that
Concern and Earnestness, that Zeal and Ardour which so Good a Cause deserves. I
don't love to dally with the Grand Articles of our Religion, for I look upon
Languid and Timorous Assertors of Evangelical Truths as a sort of Betrayers of
them. There is as much of Judas as Nicodemus in such persons. It is one of the
most Ominous Defects and Miscarriages of this Age that such numbers of men are
Faint and Indifferent in matters of this nature. I thank God I am not of so
Phlegmatic a Mold, I have not so grovelling and dastardly a spirit as tamely to
suffer this Upstart Adversary to shock Religion, and pervert the Faith, and not
to stand up in defense of it, and to detect his Errors and Cheats. Therefore I
am now treated as his Mortal Enemy, because I tell him the Truth, and that
without timorous mincing of it. It is this that has raised in him an Angry and
Malicious Ferment, and has made him rage and huff, and fill the world with
Clamours. Occasional Paper. Numb. 5. p* 38.
One has rightly observed concerning his Second Vindication that it is an
Angry piece of work, and that he was in a Storm whilst he was writing it. It is
easily discernable that all along he is swelled with Coler and Revenge. Being
touched home, he equally raves against the Truth and Me.

We see the Physic has worked, as all the Filth and Excrements of his Papers
show. Dirt and Ordure, and Dunghills are the frequent embelishments of his
Style. I am charged with popular calumnies, falsehood, absurdity, bawling,
talking at random, malicious untruth, leger-demain. Nay, I am a Conjurer,
though I never took him to be such. I am a petulant Scold, I am Villainous, and
I am even what he pleases. I am sometimes an Innocent with him, and sometimes a
Jesuit (for our Scurrilous Tutour is very happy in his wise and significant
tacking of Calumnies together.) I Am a Reprobate with him as to my Parts and
Breeding. I am honored with the Epithets of a Buffoon, and (with an Innuendo)
a Devil. I have Lying and Impudence laid to my charge. Yea, this Well-bred
Governor, calls me a downright Impudent Liar.

And abundance of such Rhetorical Flowers I could present the Reader with out
of the Vindicator's Garden, for you must know that though he is a deadly Enemy
to Poetry, yet he is a Great Rhetorician. The Strangeness of the Scene is, that
though he plentifully Rails every where, yet he cries out against me as if I
did so. It is plain that he would suffer no body to Rail but himself: He is
clearly for the Monopoly of this Trade. He seems to be of the Humor of him
that would let no body where he was Swear but himself, Let him then engross the
whole Commodity, I Will not pretend to be a Sharer or Rival with him. One that
has spent the greatest part of his time among Nurses and Gossips and the
Loquacious Fry, is not to seek in the Art of Scolding, nay is supposed to Excel
in it. To such a one I am ready to give the Precedence, because I question
whether any of the Sisterhood at Billingsgate can outstrip him.

This Thorow-paced Railer flies to Personal Reflections, that is, such as he
counts to be of that nature, or else he would not have filled his Papers with
them. I am a Preacher, and a Pulpit-Orator, p* 61, 206, 352, 386. which are
very scandalous imputations with him: Wherefore he often insists upon these,
and touches upon my Parish and Parishioners, p, 203. and the very naming of an
Use of Exhortation, p. 393. is a Jest, and a piece of Stinging Wit with him. In
one place, p. 14^. he is so Logical, that he infers I am no Good Arguer or
Writer because I am a Preacher. And yet he will grant that a Man may be a
Commissioner for Trade to the Barbado's, and yet be a Good Writer. But whether
he can be so as he is a Conceited Tutor, I leave to be considered. He has such
a rude way of treating the most Eminent Persons (as you heard before) that I
could not expect to escape him who am in an other Level. But it is observable,
that whilst he maliciously strikes at me, he defames most of the Best Writers
of our Age, who are known to be Preachers and Pulpit Orators, and this has
been the main Employment of their Lives. Nay, I could take notice that in his
Vindication he uses the Testimonies and Authorities (though it is true he has
mistaken them) of some of those Writers that have been famed for their
Preaching and Pulpit Oratory Now, if Preachers be no Arguers, then why does he
make use of their Authority? If they be, why does he vilify them? Good Mr.
Vindicator, be persuaded to leave off these Contradictions and Nonsense. But
any discerning man may see that here (as well as in several other places of his
Vindication, and some of his other Writings) his design was to ridicule the
Sacred Office of Preaching, and to blast the whole Function. We may guess what
honorable thoughts he has of it when he attempts to apply the term Post, in
way of a rascally Quibble, to the Ministry, and the Persons concerned in it, p.
422. Therefore his Bitter Reflections on the Ministers of the Gospel and their
Office, are deservedly taken notice of and censured by a late Writer.
Occasional Paper, Number. 1. and Number. 5. Truly there should be some care taken of
this Gentleman; for the very mentioning of Preaching, though it be from his own
mouth, inflames his blood, renews his Frenzy, and makes him Rave. This poor
crazed Tutor should be looked after, and soundly dosed with Hellebore, lest in
the fits of his overheated Brain he should lash out, and revenge himself on
the Wainscot of our Pulpits, and with them of the Reading Pews, for the sake of
the Epistles, (of which hereafter:) And it is well if our whole Bibles escape
his fury for the same reason.

But our Scolding Tutor falls upon me again p. 30. and now the Topic is
Preferment, and Admission to Preferment in the Church of England, p. 24. It may
be this is done to invite me to take notice of his Preferments; and therefore
though he be so rude as to upbraid me for my want of Titles and Dignities, yet
I shall be so Civil to him as to acknowledge and recount those which he is
Master of. I own him to be Censor-General of the Logic and Latin of the
Universities, Corrigidore and Regulator of all the Public Schools in
Christendom, Great Master of the Anti-Academick Order, Tutor in Air and
Controller to the Youth of Seven Counties, Curator in Ordinary to Costive
Paunches, Principal Secretary to the Deists Office, Feoffee in Trust for
Sozzo's Pupils, etc. And I beg his pardon that I forgot to mention those
Offices and Places before.

He is at me again, p. 67. and obliquely insinuates (for he is full of his
Squinting Hints) that I am for that Maxim, The Doctrines in fashion, and likely
to procure Preferments, are alone to be received, and so would imply that I am
ready to receive any Doctrines in fashion, be they never so Unreasonable or
Impious, and that Gain will tempt me to this or any thing else. Why, I tell
you, Sir, you are in the wrong box, I am not the man you take me for, I was
never hired to write for the lowering of Guineas, I never sought or held a
Place with the forfeiture of my Honesty, and therefore I defy your Impotent
Raillery not only against me, but against the Whole Clergy, High and Low, for
you look upon them all as Mercenary, and that they receive no Doctrines but
what are in fashion, and are likely to procure Preferment. Which you have
learnt from your Brethren of Racovia, who tell us that the Church of England
men are or would be Answer to the Archbishop's Sermon, p. 44.
Pensioners of the World.

Behold the Insolence of our Libertine, who has had the sway among Children,
and has Lord-Mavor'd it over Nurses and Chairwomen! He has been so worshipped
and obeyed by the Striplings, and has had such an absolute command of their
Legs and Hats, that he expects the like submission and obeisance from all
others, and he thinks he may say any thing, and not be opposed, for he cannot
brook Contradiction. But I shall force him to it, and seeing he has thought
good to Riot thus with his Pen, he must not think to go untouched. Seeing he
has taken the liberty to reflect on my Calling and Function (and therein has
abused all of the same Character with my self) he must not take it ill if I
sometimes glance upon the Post he is in, and his Studies and Employments. If I
follow so laudable an Example as his, he is obliged to pardon me, and to
remember that he was the Aggressor.

And though indeed we are forbid to answer such people according to their
folly, yet in some Circumstances, i. e. when Pride and Conceit, and such like
Ingredients are mixed with their Folly, we are permitted by the Wise Man to
answer them according to the merits of their willful and affected folly, lest
they should be wise in their own conceit, lest they should be hardened in their
Pride and Arrogance, and think themselves Wise because no body checks and
bridles their folly. Indeed it is almost a Reproach to a man to encounter such
an Adversary, who has the second time gulled the world with false Stories, and
abandoning all shame and ingenuity, given himself up to obstinate resolves of
maintaining a Cause which will prove to mischievous to Christendom: An
Adversary that has no sense of what he does, but is blinded and infatuated by
Prejudice, so that he has left himself no power to judge of his own words or
actions. Which renders him a person not fit to be treated with that respect and
deference which are due to an Ingenuous and Civil Opponent. To use him Gently,
is to handle a Bear with Ceremony and Caution. And sometimes he is not worth a
Serious Reply, for he Cheats the people, and then makes Sport of it. But
however, though I shall be somewhat free with him, yet I will not thrust upon
the Reader any thing that is indecent, rude, spiteful, or entrenching upon
Truth. When we deal with such men, our Master's Example forbids us to revile
again, but the Apostle allows us, nay commands us to rebuke them sharply; I
shall not be thought perhaps to be defective in this, but none can censure me
for Excess if they consider what the Badness of his design (as well as the
Petulancy of his Style) required. But where he gives me any scope for Arguing
and Reasoning the case* I have with great seriousness applied my self to it,
and I hope I have established the Truth upon firm and solid grounds.

I will begin with his Preface to his Vindication, where he inserts a very
Gracious Epistle to Mr. Bold, his late Convert, and now Confederate, and there
pretends to tell him the Birth of his Reasonableness of Christianity. It was
begot (if you will believe the Father of it) on the Controversy of
Justification: He might have as well have said on the Controversy of
Predestination: for it as much belongs to one as the other: And so you see it
was a mere By blow, and worthy of the Parent. But he is extremely fond of this
Spurious Issue, and applauds himself for being the Author of it. The first view
I had of it, says he, seemed mightily to satisfy my mind. I wonder that every
body did not see and embrace it, though Systems of Divinity said nothing of it.
I was pleased, says our Narcissus, with the growing discovery, every day,
whilst I was employed in this search. And more to the same purpose in the same
Epistle. Then he proceeds to applaud the Godfather of this Brat Mr. Bold.
Concerning whom he declares, that he has more readily entertained, and more
easily entered into the meaning of his Book than most (he might have said any)
he has heard speak of it. And afterward, Mr. Bold has entered into the true
sense of my Treatise, and his notions perfectly agree with mine. And therefore
he must needs be (as he styles him) a Calm Christian, a Grave Divine, a Man of
Parts, a Well-bred Man. And he has (if you will credit our Encomiast) a settled
repute, etc. Would you know the reason of all this Coaksing? It is no other
than this, that same Mr. Bold who was Sponsor for the Bastard brood, had in a
late Pamphlet mightily extolled the Dad of it, Mr. Lock. He calls him the
Ingenious Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, Rep p. 3. and that
great and eminent Person, p. 27. (It is a sign so when one of so little sense
and discretion votes him to be such.) He is no Disparagement to the Cause, he
says, p 27. and there is a good reason for it, I must tell him, for as a
Person, so a Cause that has nothing of worth in it, is not capable of being
disparaged: Poor Creature, he ^hinks it a great matter to have One Pen (besides
his own) wagging on his side. He is mightily rejoiced that he has got a Single
Patron for his Single Article, and is over joy'd at such Fulsom Encomiums
thrown upon him, and therefore he heaps up as many as he can on the other's
head. The sum of all which is this, CLAW ME, AND I WILL CLAW THEE.

It is worth the observing that the Vindicator subscribes himself at the close
of his Letter to Mr. Bold (which in a conceited manner he claps into the
Preface) his most humble servant. A. B. Upon which these short Remarks may be
made, 1. That he is ashamed of his Name, and that with good reason. 2. He is
ashamed of his Cause and dares not Personally own it, and set his Name to the
defense of it. This and the former may be reckoned as the only Instances of
Shamefacedness and Modesty, that the man was ever guilty of. But 3. We may
gather from those two letters which he has affixed to the end of his Epistle
Who he is, for though he has only set down A. B. yet he has left us to add
the next letter C, and then we know what person is meant, viz. a Breeder up of
Boys to learn their First Rudiments, a Learned Teacher of A B C. concerning
which you may find more p. 272, 273. Educat.

From the Preface and Epistle I pass to the Book it self, the first part of
which is spent in the old known way of Malefactors at the Bar: they are always
willing to evade the Charge, to insist upon the little Niceties, and on the
Formality of words, and the Exact Punctilio's of Matter of Fact. This is the
practice of our Criminal, p. 6, 7. and he thinks thereby to palliate his Guilt.
He is loath to own it, for he knows his demerit, and the Consequence of it. He
is to be excused indeed for this, or rather there is a known Proverb that
excuses him: that makes him so backward to Confess. I have given an account of
this matter in my Socinianism Unmasked p. 5, 6. and have also showed since that
the Formal Words are agreed to by his late Proselite. So that his own Gizzard,
Mr. Bold, comes in Evidence against him, and lets us know that we have no
reason to listen to him when he waves the Enditement. He will say and unsay, as
it comes into his head, and will put the Reader off with any shuffling
suggestions, merely to evade what I had justly laid to his charge. One of his
great Cavils is that I allege matter of fact, but do not justify the
Allegation, p 2 and 7. and undertakes to prove it from my pretending (as he
says) to know and deliver his thoughts, p. 8. This (says he there) is an
Instance of False Allegations in matters of Fact, and such as are not capable
of a Negative proof. Such poor, little, trifling stuff does he obtrude upon the
Reader; as if one that had read his Writings could not in a probable way tell
what his thoughts of such a subject were; unless you will say he dissembled
when he wrote, and this perhaps is it which he means when he says there
concerning me, that that I affirm what I do not know. And so you see what he
has got by caviling against what I alleged, he has before he was aware let
the world know that he believes not what he writes, that his Thoughts and his
Pen hold no correspondence, that when he pleads for One Article only, he does
not think that there is but One, but however he designs to root out All by
reducing all the Articles of Christianity to One. Who would attend to any of
his Objections, when it is plain that it is not his business to search out
Truth, but to betray it?

He has nothing to say to what I replied to his former Vindication, and
therefore now to cheat the world, and amuse the Reader, and to give farther
proof of his daring Confidences, he bids me p. 9, 25, 72, etc. go to work
again, 1. to prove that there are these words in his Reasonableness of
Christianity, viz. that Nothing is required to be believed by a Christian, as
absolutely necessary to make him such, but this Proposition, Jesus is the
Messiah: 2. to prove that he set himself on purpose to find but one Article of
Faith: 3. to prove that he contends for One Article of Faith with exclusion and
defiance of all the rest: 4 to prove that the believing of Jesus to be the
Messiah is not the only Article sufficient to make a man a Christian. And
several other things he calls upon me to prove, and the silly Accountant scores
them up as he goes along, and sets down the Figures. And he would not have left
off where he does, but that the Innocent had numbered as far as he could go.
There is not one Particular he mentions, which I have not proved and evinced in
my Socinianism Unmasked: and therefore I scorn, at the motion of such a
Whiffling Objector, such a Crude Repeater of what he had said before in his
First Vindication, but now has lately vamp'd up, and sent abroad again, I
scorn (I say) to produce the same Proofs again, and to affront the Reader with
Needless Repetitions, which is the guise of this trifling Writer.

But seeing our A B C darian calls to me over and over again to prove this, and
to prove that, I will now put him upon Proving, and see how he will discharge
that part. In order to this I am to acquaint the Reader that this Gentleman in
his Former Vindication called for a List of Fundamental Articles, i. e. such as
the Holy Scripture represents to us as requisite to be known and believed, that
we may be True Christians. I obeyed the demands of this pert Vindicator, and
performed the Task which he was pleased to set me: in my first Chapter of my
forenamed Treatise I assigned a considerable number of Articles of the
Christian Faith, as absolutely necessary to be known, i. e. so far as they can
be known, for there are Great and Profound Mysteries couched in some of them,
so that I had reason to say they were in some measure (which expression the
Vindicator vainly objects against p. 70.) to be known and understood, and to be
believed: and I particularly and distinctly proved that all of them are of that
nature, and consequently no man can be a Christian without a competent
knowledge and belief of these Doctrines. I also there propounded a General Rule
whereby all such Articles and Doctrines may be discerned; i. e. they may be
known to be such from the Nature of the things contained in them, for no
Evangelical Truths are absolutely and indispensably necessary to be known and
to be assented to in order to the constituting of us Christians but those that
have Immediate respect to the Occasion, Author, Way, Means, and Issue of Man's
Redemption and Salvation. But our Vindicator attempts not in the least to
invalidate this Description of Necessary Articles; nay though he mentions it
again p. 130. yet he cannot invent any thing to object against it, only asks
this and the other Question nothing to the purpose. Our bold Reformer in
Divinity scribles on, and shows not himself concerned to disprove what I
propounded and asserted. No: he does not so much as pretend to it. But he
quarrels and shuffles, and makes a long Harangue about the Set Number of
Fundamental Articles, and enquires p. 69. whether there be neither more nor
less then I have assigned. Which is nothing to the purpose, for Christianity
consists not, as this Narrow soul'd Man would suggest, in a Point. If he will
make it his business to score them up, so let him; it is none of mine.

I have assigned several Articles of Necessary Belief, I have particularly
Enumerated such Doctrines as have all the Marks of being Fundamental. Let him
prove that they have not those Marks, or let him take what course he pleases to
prove that they are not Fundamental Truths, and such as ought to be known and
asserted to in order to make us Christians: and when he has done this
particularly and distinctly, I will be a^ leisure to tell him whether I think
there be any more that belong to the Foundation* I have done my part, I have
proved that more then One Article is absolutely requisite to make a man a
Christian, and yet he is still craving, and calls to me, and demands, and
requires, and challenges me to prove this and that, and yet will not prove any
thing himself. This is a Mad way of Writing, to boast still of his One Article,
and yet not show that any one of these Articles which I named ought not to be
added to it. This is the business he should have undertaken, and therefore for
the future I expect that he either allows of those Articles as Fundamental or
else particularly show that they are not. Pray set your self to this work, and
prove (if you can) that all those Articles which I have mentioned are not
necessary to be believed, to make men Christians: and by that time you have
done this, I shall find you fresh employment which will hinder a man's jaunting
to my Young Masters houses, and his going a Gooding.

And the Justice and Fairness of my dealing with him will appear from this,
that I hold him to his own Rule: The Rule of Fair Dispute, says he, is to
prove where any thing is denied: to Evade this is shu^^ing. p 451. He stiffly
denies that those Propositions which I assigned are necessary to be believed,
for the constituting a man a Christian: I call upon him to prove it, I have
made it evident that they are all of them Fundamental Articles, but he will not
own them to be such: then I say, Prove the contrary. I expect this of you, I
demand and require it of you, and will insist upon it (to use your own
peremptory style.) Your Talk is this, to prove that those doctrines of the
Gospel which I enumerated are not as necessary to be known and believed, to
constitute a man a Christian, as that One Article which they have named. And
when you have tried what you can do toward a proof of this, I Will tell you then
what I have more to say to you. But you see I put you upon following your own
Rule, and if you do not observe it, you are by your own sentence a Shuffler.

It is observable that this Long-winded Rambler has spent above 20 pages (viz.
from p. 48, to p. 71.) in Little Queries, Evasions, Shiftings, Wranglings about
words, and yet with pretenses of great Seriousness. But especially he is for
his Queries, he is every where Asking, he has more and more Questions to put,
which verifies a good Ancient Saying which we have concerning such a Foolish
Querist as he has showed himself to be. This strange Impertinent humor
abounds so excessively in him that one would be curious to enquire what is the
source of it, whence it is that throughout all these Papers he is ever starting
of idle trifling Questions. I can resolve it into nothing but this, that one
whose Converse has been always with Children must needs assimilate and ape
them, for (as he observes himself, Educat. p. 220) they are mightily given to
this way of asking of Questions: and yet this Pedantick Tutour justifies this
childish folly in himself of acting thus, p. 54, to p. 60.

Well seeing he is such an Intemperate and Lavish Asker, I hope he will not
deny me the liberty of asking him only three or four Questions: and I conceive
I have as much Authority to demand an Answer as he.

I. Why does he pretend sometimes to assert more Articles then one, whereas at
other times he peremptorily contends but for One, which he calls the Sole
Article and the Only Article? In two or three other places he talks of
collecting several Articles, but how is that consistent with One? Concerning
that Account of Faith which he offers to the world he thus speaks p. 232. No
one Article which the Apostles proposed as necessary to be received by
unbelievers to make them Christians, is ommitted in it. When he says, no one
Article is omitted, it is implied that there are more Articles then one. If
there be More, I demand of him to set down just how many they are, seeing he
demands the like of me. But with all let him tell the world whether he talks
thus as one that is Crazed, and knows not whether One and Many Articles be the
same, or whether his speaking thus be a Preparative to his Recanting his former
Doctrine. Here are several Lesser Questions in the Great one that I propounded:
let us have his Answer to them all.

II. What is the Reason that he has not all this while undertaken to disprove
that Plurality of Fundamental Arrticles which I asserted? Why neither in his
First nor Second Vindication has he dared to show that those Articles are not
to be believed in order to the denominating a man a True Christian, and a
Member of Christ? If he could have done it, no body can doubt but that he
would, and that with mickle Confidence, for no one will suspect that it is the
want of that that hinders him from such an enterprise. This Judicious Player at
Dibstones finds fault with my Collection of Fundamentals, and yet meddles with
no particular one of them: only is so senseless and ridiculous as to deny them
to be Fundamental Doctrines of Christanity, and such as are necessarily to be
received by every one that lays claim to Christianity. I demand a Reason of
this, I require a particular and full Account why every one of those Articles
is not to be received as Fundamental. I shall insist upon it till he either
assigns some Reason, or confesses he cannot.

III. How can he expect that I should comply with his demands, which are very
numerous, and particularly with that of assigning a Set Collection of
Fundamentals, when he has told me already that he is resolved (like a Well
bred man and a Good Christian of one Article) to slight whatever I shall offer
to him? If I should propound such doctrines as I verily believe to be
Fundamentals, he before hand asks why he should take them from me rather then
from an Anabaptist? p. 52. And in the same place he says he has as much
reason to believe an Anabaptist or Quaker, etc. as me. Which is as much as to
tell me in express terms that he has taken up a resolution to attend to no
Articles of Faith that I shall propound. Where were the Thoughts of our Pilgrim
Tutour when his unwary tongue dropped such words as these? Even when he is
soliciting me, yea challenging me to give him a List of Articles, he proclaims
to the world that he will not accept of any of them: he declares that he would
sooner take a Set of Articles, and Fundamentals from a Socinian or a Papist
(for he particularly names them both on this very occasion, than from me, p.
52. And, Sir, we will believe you without swearing.

IV. An other Question I shall put to you, and require an Answer to it. Seeing
you have taken part with the Follower of Socinus, and have adopted several of
their Notions and Tenants, and interpret some Scriptures which relate to the
Trinity in the same way that they do, and thereby have given occasion to be
thought one of the Party, and yet you pretend to disown all acquaintance with
them p. 222, 223. seeing you appear thus with a double face, and amuse the
world with these disguises, I require of you to return an Answer to this Query,
and the several parts of it, Whether you verily believe that Jesus is so the
Son of God that he is really God, and that in the Unity of the Divine Essence
there is a Trinity of Distinct Persons or Subsistencies, that the Father is
God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and that these Three are One
God, as the Scriptures plainly and expressly declares. Seeing you are so brisk
in your demands, I expect a positive Answer to mine, and hereby shall we know
whether you are a True Man, or a Spy. When I see you have performed this work,
I will still find you more employment.

I had proved (Socinianism Unmasked chap. 2.) that his Opinion of One Article
was founded, among other things, upon this Notion, that all things in
Christanity must be so plain that they may be easily comprehended, and that
there may be nothing difficult to men's understandings. This I made clear from
the tenor and coherence of his words, from his (...) of reasoning, from the
scope of his book, and from the plain sense of his expressions. But our
Vindicator cannot bear this, and therefore puts himself into a posture of
shifting and evading whatever was brought against him, and by all imaginable
arts he labors to stifle my Reasonings and Arguings on that Point. One of his
knacks is to frame a Dialogue between me and him, p. 34, 35, 36. and he is so
silly in the contriving of it that it baffles him instead of favoring his
Cause. Fearing that the Dialogue would not do the feat, he appears in the shape
of a Syllogizer p. 39. though the Inconsiderate Man had derided Logic and
Syllogism, because they are University-Learning. The next he falls into the old
trade of Questions, Where? and When? and after this is done he begins his
Dialogue again. This is one of the Distracted Scenes of his Vindication, and
the Reader may thence form an idea of the Whole Work, and see with amazement
what little Knacks and Conceits he applies himself to, that he may juggle men
out of the Truth. He has so accustomed himself to showing of Tricks among his
Young Fry whom he has had the Tutorage of, that we must never expect any
other of him, whatever Subject he handles.

P. 93, 94. he will not admit of any Mysteries in Christianity, and therefore
opposes what I had asserted, viz. that there are some Doctrines in the Gospel
which are not plain and clear, and yet are of necessity to be believed. If he
had been Master of any Sincerity, he would have observed how I explained my
self, and showed that all the Doctrines and Articles of the Christian Religion
are not alike: some of them are in themselves Evident and Illustrious, others
because of the Transcendency of their Matter are Obscure and Mysterious, and
not level to our humane understandings, as the doctrine of the Holy Trinity,
Christ's Incarnation, etc. but yet are believed with a firm and unshaken Faith.
This is so Rational that none but the hood winked Masker would have excepted
against it. And he does it after a very poor rate: He nibbles at the
distinction I make between the Certainty or Reality of some Evangelical
Doctrines, and the exact manner of the things themselves contained in those
Doctrines: But he fin^s it pricks his chaps, and so he gives it over.

However, like the Gentlemen of Racovia, he cannot endure to hear of Mysteries
in Christianity, and therefore here he takes occasion to express his great
dislike of those who assert that in the Christian Religion there are Mysteries
properly so called, i. e. such Truths and Articles, that as to the Manner of
the things contained in them are not Intelligible, but exceed humane Reason,
and cannot possibly be fathomed by it. The denying of this is one of his last
Artifices and Contrivances, for if we briefl^ recount the Methods of this New
Projector, we shall find them to be in this order; first he presented the world
with odd Conceits of the Idea's of things, thereby to undermine the Principles
of Truth, and to discompose the received Notions in Philosophy and Divinity, as
a very B^. of Worcester in his Vind. of the Trinity, chapter 10.
Reverend and Learned Writer (though one of the chiefest and most Eminent of
the Pulpit Orators) has lately proved against him. Then, that his Sentiments
might prevail, he prescribes a new way of Bringing up of Youth, and seasoning
them betimes in some Private Nurseries with such Principles as he and his
Associates shall dictate; and accordingly all Public Schools and Universities,
and their Studies are cried down by him. Next, there comes forth a New Plat
form of Religion, all the Fundamental Articles and Doctrines of Christianity
are discarded by him, excepting One bare single Article, which he thinks fit to
retain till he has a fair opportunity of throwing that off too. Then he
further advances, and every where very warmly inveighs against Ministers and
Preachers, partly because of their University-Learning, but chiefly because
they oppose his groundless notion of One Article, and assert the Fundamentals
of Christianity. And lastly, to complete his design, he strikes in with the
Deists and Socinians, and laughs at the Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
and thereby encourages men to cast off all Revealed Religion, the greatest part
of which consists of Profound and Inexplicable Mysteries, and such as Humane
Reason neither found out, nor can comprehend when revealed. These are the Ways
and Methods he has applied himself to, in order to the undermining of the
Orthodox Faith.

Here I will observe to the Reader how profoundly skilled in Greek our
University Hater is: He brings in these words (though alien to his purpose)
(...), which, says he, if we put into English, are [the dead shall rise] p.
100. He might have found it rightly translated to his hand in our English
Bible, 1 Cor. 15. 15. but we know the Gentleman does not much meddle with the
Epistles (especially St. Paul's) as we shall hear afterward. He thinks, good
man, that (...) is a Verb of the future tense. And here we see the reason why
such as he declaim against Public Schools, and against Grammar. It is no
wonder indeed that he despairs of setting up for a Critic for fear he should
set the world of laughing, p. 67. To this Eminent Skill of his in Criticism and
Grammar we may refer Cincinnetus, a new Name for a Dictator of Rome, p. 356. of
his Education.

He plays upon the Sacred Names Jesus and Messiah p. 107. and would persuade
the Reader to believe that he ought no more attend to the meaning of the word
Jesus and the word Messiah when the Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, is
tendered to him to believe, than to the Signification of the Name Saul or
Arthur, or any other Name whatsoever. But what is the reason then, I ask the
Vindicator why these Names Jesus and Christ (which latter is the Greek for
M^ssias) are so particularly and distinctly explained, and descanted upon by
those Learned and Pious Writers who have commented upon the Apostle's Creed? We
see they spend a considerable time in giving the true and full Import of these
Denominations. There is mentioned a Man in the same Creed, under whom our
Savior suffered, but we do not find that his double Name is searched into and
sisted by Expositors as those Blessed Names Jesus and Messiah are. And the
reason is plain, because Christian men are concerned to know the true meaning
and Sense of these Titles, or else they cannot know who it was that was born,
suffered, and died for them. In the very Names themselves there is included the
Nature of this Divine and Extraordinary Person, and therefore it was fit that
they should not be ignorant of this. But it is not so with other Names, they
need not any such Explaining and Opening: as for example Pontius Pilate and
John Lock are well known to be such Persons, though the Extraction of the Names
be not explained. I hope our Captious and Ludicrous Vindicator will consider
this, and not ridiculously and impiously undervalue and debase the Names of the
Son of God, and compare them with those of King Saul and Prince Arthur, and
tell us (as he does afterward p. 108.) that this Proposition Jesus is the
Messiah needs no more Explication than this, Cyrus was King of Persia. And as
to what he subjoyns p. 109, 110. that I own the Easiness of the foresaid
Proposition, the Masker's Understanding is clouded, or else he would not have
quoted these Words in p. 74. of my Socinianism unmasked to the purpose he does,
for any one may see that I intended them to be but a General Description or
Character of the Messiah; and the Occasion of that Lax Character of him is
discernible in that place to any one but our Muffled Vindicator.

He would show himself a Critic p. 112. etc. in descan^ing upon the word
Integral and Essential, which I made use of in a general meaning for whatever
appertained to the Essence and integrity of a Christian: which shows that our
Tutour was Over-nice, that his Exceptions are mean and low, and that he is but
Practitioner in Water Gruel.

P. 117. he tells the Reader that all that part of my Discourse in Socinicnism
Unmasked which reaches from p. 28 to 35. is nothing but Pulpit-Oratory. If the
Reader will be pleased to consult that part of the Chapter, he may satisfy
himself that there is Ignorance as well as Malice in this Imputation: for I
there she^ that he treads in the steps of those of the Racovian way who cast
off several Articles of Christian Faith because they are in part Dark and
Mysterious: I show that this was the practice of Grellius, and is followed by
the English Socinians at this da^: I particularly assert the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, and show in what sense it may be said not to be Difficult: I
prove that it contains in it no Contradiction: and as to the One Article so
talked of by him, I make it evident that it is not more Intelligible than any
of the Articles which I propounded as Fundamental. These are the Contents of
that Part of my Treatise, and I appeal to the Reader whether this be the
Pulpit-Oratory. That the Creature should give it this Name, is the highest
piece of Nonsense, and the plainest proof of Stupidity that he could have
divulged to the world: u^less: you will say, it was only to have a fling at the
Pulpit (which he often mentions with Contempt and Reproach) and then it is
Profane Spite.

When I objected to him his Contempt of the Epistolary Writings of the
Apostles, which I evinced from his passing them by and wholly neglecting to
gather any Articles of Faith out of them, he replies, in way of Recrimination,
that I have passed by several Chapters and Verses in my C^ll^ction of Articles,
and thence infers my Contempt of them, p. 122. It is to be hoped there are but
few men in the world whose brains are thus disordered. Could any one but this
shallow Vindicator think that I should collect the Fundamental Articles of
Christanity out of all the Chapters and Verses of the New Testament? Or, if I
did not so, and mentioned not some of them, that this was any Argument of my
despising those Writings? Could any but this poor Dandler of Infants imagine
that there is a parity between these two, viz. my collecting of the Fundamental
Articles out of the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles, and his presenting of us with
one Article only out of the Evangelists and Acts, without so much as taking
notice of the Apostolical Epistles? Could any but this Weak Arguer infer from
my not mentionig every ch^p^^r and verse in the New Testament that this is the
same with omitting all the Epistles? Could any one that has not the like
Hardened Front with himself publish to the world that this is a sign of my
Contemning the Scriptures? and then upon this occasion he has the vanity to
vent a silly paultry Quibble upon passing by, which none but such an abhorred
Pedant would stain his paper with.

Then, as if he had discarded all Truth, and feared his Conscience with a hot
iron, he has the face to utter such words as these viz, that I, though a
Minister of the Gospel, cannot bear the Texts of Scripture which he has
produced, nor his quotations out of the four Evangelists, p. 152. whereas any
one that pursues what I have writ may see that I only objected against his
Quotations as not being a Complete Collection, and because in several places he
distorted the Evanelists words. Yet according to his never-failing art of
Falsifying he represents me as one that vilifies the Four Evangelists. Such
another daring Falsehood is that, that I think the Gospel, the Good News of
Salvation, tedious from the mouth of our Savior and his Apostles, p. 126. For
which apparent forgery I claim the forfeiture of his Ears, if he has not (as
he has deserved) lost them before. And from this you may gather what Sincerity
there is in his objecting to me that I make bold with Truth, and that what I
say is utterly false p. 403. you must not credit one word of it, for once a
Forger, and always so. This is his master piece of Art to cheat and abuse the
world with downright Falsities, and to betray Christanity, and yet whilst he is
doing this to accuse others of being False.

He grants p. 127 what I had urged about the Four Gospels being writ to and for
Believers, as well as Unbelievers, and yet immediately after he revokes his
Grant, and sophistically shifts it off, so that no man alive knows where to
have the Gentleman.

But it is worth our remarking that it has pleased God to leave this Man to
his own infatuations, and to suffer him to produce and insist upon a protion of
Scripture which is an absolute Con^uration of what he brings it for. p. 125. He
quotes a great part of the fifth chapter to the Hebrews to prove that the
Necessary Articles and Principles of Faith are not to be gathered out of the
Epistles, particularly he makes use of those words, You have need that one
teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God. v. 12. And
the Apostle in chap. 6. v. 1. particuarly sets down these Principles of the
doctrine of Christ, (as he also styles them.) Who but this Obstinate and
Senseless Vindicator would hence infer (as he strenuously does) that the
Apostolical Epistles, and this especially, were not written to teach men the
Fundamental Principles of Christianity? We have seen what a Talent he has of
Grammar and Criticism; now behold the man's Improvements in Logic? If you
please we will reduce what he says into a Syllogis^^^, because this profound
Logitian has set us a Pattern before, and he will take it ill if we don't
follow him.

If it be plainly expressed in the Epistle to the Hebrews that they have need
to be taught again the First Principles of the Oracles of God, and of the
doctrine of Christ, and accordingly the Apostle distinctly tells them what some
of these Principles are, then neither this Epistle nor any other Epistles of
the Apostles distinctly show what were those doctrines, which were absolutely
necessary to make men Christians (I use the Logitian's own words):

But it is plainly expressed in the Epistle to the Hebrews that they have need
to be taught again the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and of the
doctrine of Christ, and accordingly the Apostle distinctly tells them what some
of those Principles are:

Ergo, neither this Epistle nor any other Epistles of the Apostles distinctly
show what were those doctrines which were absolutely necessary to make a Man a
Christian.

Or more briefly he argues thus, This and other Epistles tell us what are the
Necessary Principles of Christianity; Ergo, they do not tell us.

You have a taste of his Logical Faculty, and I doubt not but you likewise have
been drawing a Concl^sion from the Premises, viz. that such Wild Reasonings
argue a flaw in his Skull that uses them. Is this the Thoughtful man? A
Creature that goes on all four, if it could speak, would talk much better
Sense. Here is such a Heap of Contradictions, and such Impiety in citing the
Holy Text to patronize them, that I question not but the Judicious Reader will
hence form such thoughts of this Gentleman as his great merits require.

But surely in his next quotations out of an Epistle (though it be a part of
Scripture which he so much dreads) he will take care to speak tolerable sense,
and not to abuse the Sacred Writ in this palpable manner. Let us see then how
it is with him in his Citation out of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. In
order to prove his former wild Conceit, that the Epistles of the Apostles are
not to be consulted for Fundamentals of Christianity, he alleges chap. 3. v.
2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able
to bear it: neither yet are ye able. The plain meaning of which words without
doubt is this, that the Apostle had hitherto taught them, and continued still
to teach them the Necessary and Indispensable Doctrines of Christianity, such
as were as needful for them as Milk for babes. Because they were not able to
bear any heavy Superstructure, he made it his chief business to lay the
Foundation, and this Foundation is Jesus Christ, v. 10, 11. The plain way of
Salvation by this JESUS the Son of God, the Plain and Easy Articles of the
Christian Faith (all of them Plain as to the Truth and Certainty of them,
though some of them not Plain as to the manner of the things comprehended in
those Articles) these plain and simple Truths (which are as Pure and
Unsophisticated as Milk, and therefore are so termed here) are those Doctrines
which the Apostle taught the Corinthians. And now then let us see how this Man
of Logic argues from the Apostle's words; and to give you the better light
into his excellent way of Arguing, we will present it in Mode and Figure, for
Mr. Chillingworth, says he, bid his Adversary write nothing but Syllogisms, p.
228. and besides we find that Good Mr. Bold is for Syllogisms, p. 4. of his
Reply: So that upon these Weighty Authorities we must betake our selves to this
way of Disputing. Thus then he argues,

If the Apostle fed the Corinthians with milk, i. e. taught them the Plain and
Necessary Articles of Christianity, and delivered such in his Epistles to them,
then we are not to think that any Fundamental and Necessary Articles of the
Christian Religion, such as are to be received to make a man a Christian, are
to be found in this or any other of the Epistles:

But the Apostle fed the Corinthians with milk, i. e. taught them the Plain and
Necessary Articles of Christianity, and delivered such in his Epistles to them:

Ergo, we are not to think that any Fundamental and Necessary Articles of the
Christian Religion, such as are to be received to make a man a Christian, are
to be found in this, or any other of the Epistles.

Risum teneatis? If the Vindicator can clear this from Nonsense, I promise him
that the Reader and I will leave off laughing at him for his cashiering of
Burgersdicius. But in the mean time we see the reason why this Itinerant
Innovator is so zealous against Logic, and University-Learning. He trembles at
the thoughts of Strict Sense and Argument, because these make against him: Yea,
he makes the Blessed Apostle contradict himself, merely to contradict me.

And I would further remark, that immediately after he had quoted those
foresaid words of the Apostle, he adds, THEREFORE very little is said in this
Epistle for explaining any part of the Great Mystery of Salvation (and yet
before he was against all Mysteries in Christistianity) contained in the
Gospel, p. 131. And presently after, The same holds in all the other Epistles,
and THEREFORE the Epistles seemed not to me to be the properest part of
Scripture (he said before they were not at all proper) to give us the
Foundation, p. 132. He complains of a therefore of mine, where there is no
cause at all for it, p. III. but here is such a pair of Therefores as never was
heard of in any Age, and be sure never will be, unless it be in his Writings.
It was St. Paul's way to instruct the Corinthians in the plain Principles of
Christianity, he took care to settle them in the Foundation, seeing they were
not fit at that time for any considerable Superstructure, and therefore (says
our Vindicator) we must not expect to meet with any such Principles in this
Epstle, or in any others. There are several people in that Great Brick House he
wots of at the lower end of Moorfields, that never bid for that place by
talking so ravingly. Whether the Childrens Crying and Bawling, or the M^thers
Unkindnesses to him have put him into these disorders, I shall not determine,
but the poor Animal is certainly much shattered, and it is to be feared belongs
to the Hospital of the Incurable.

Then he proceeds, p. 138, 139. to mention my taking notice of his feigned
ground of Writing the Epistles, viz. because the Fundamental Articles are mixed
here with other Truths. But having nothing to rejoyn, he falls to Railing, a
fault which he imputes to me, but is peculiar to himself.

And as for what I said of Mixture, that those things which are promicuously
put together are capable of being distinguished (which he boggles at) there is
an Example of it in one he knows very well; a Committee man and a Vindicator
are mixed together, but there is a possibility of distinguishing, yea of
separating the former from the latter, the Honorable from the Vile; though it is
true some things are so mixed in some persons that they will never admit of a
separation, as a Chamber-Quack and an Abhorrer of Universities; or thus, an
Innovator and a Creed-Hater. There is no parting of these. In the same place he
thinks it Witty to reflect twice on my Degree in the University, as if B. D.
were as Contemptible as A B C, which is his own Character.

He jogs on still p. 140, 141, etc. sometimes coining matter, and fastening it
upon me, sometimes impertinently asking of Questions, and requiring Answers,
and every where falling into ridiculous Impertinencies, and weak reasonings:
And what else could be expected from a Man that had all his days been used to
the Tattle of Brats and Nurslings, and has thereby perfectly learned all their
humors, especially (as I observed before) their impertinent Queries, and
troublesome Babblings? Thus our Old Tutour is twice a Child, though he doats so
extremely that he cannot see it, but verily persuades himself that all he has
writ against me is Strong and Nervous, and, like what he dictates to his Young
Masters, must not be examined and censured.

Only here it is to be noted, that what he says p. 145. concerning Popular
Haranguing, is a saucy Reflection on the Chiefest and most Eminent of the
Clergy of our Church, whose constant employment has been that which he
contemptuously calls Popular Haranguing, and in other places Pulpit-Oratory, i.
e. Preaching. Such is his Spleen against this Evangelical Institution, and the
Ministers of it, though he makes a show of being a Christian. But he that will
bespatter the Universities, and Academick Learning, and expunge the Chiefest
Articles of Religion out of the Bible, will not stop at any thing.

But our Penny-Post is upon the hoof still, p. 146, 147, etc. and his Quill is
as Itinerant as himself, and like its Owner, fixes no where, has no
Habitation. Sometimes he quotes what I have said, and misinterprets it, at
other times, to fill up his book, and to make it bulky, he gives you large
shivers out of his own Writings, for he thinks none are so good as they, and
that is the reason he never quotes an Author, unless it be to disparage him. He
trifles to a prodigy, and according to his constant Method, he never fails at
the close of a Paragraph to wind up all with Railing, his Mother Tongue.

But wondrous it is to see what work he makes p. 156. where the Reader will be
puzzel'd to tell whether his Falsehood or his Weakness be greater: He complains
that I call him a Betrayer of Christianity and a Contemner of the Epistles,
because he did not out of them name [Satisfaction:] Whereas the Render will
find, if he thinks fit to consult my Socinianism Unmasked, that I treat of his
Contempt of the Epistles in one Chapter, and of his refusing to use the word
Satisfaction in an other. And I mention his not naming of Christ's Satisfying
for us on no other account but this, that it argues he is a favourer of
Socinianism, because when he professedly and designedly enumerates the
Advantages of our Savior's Coming, he speaks not of his making Satisfaction
for us. This is the true and plain account of the matter, whence it is obvious
to take notice of his willful violation of Truth and Sincerity. He jumps from
the Third Chapter of my Book to the Seventh to form a Falsehood against me. He
most untruly and perversely represents the thing he speaks of, and there is no
shadow of Verity in what he says: So that the Reader is sufficiently cautioned
against depending upon his word for the future; and he must always suppose him
to be an arrant Masker.

But he is as Silly as he is False, for, in the same place, to excuse himself
as to his not mentioning of Satisfaction, he says, there is not any such word
in any one of the Epistles, or other Books of the New Testament in his Bible as
Satisfying, or Satisfaction made by our Savior, and so he could not put it
into his Christianity as delivered in the Scripture. Very sound and solid! It
being such a Noble Strain of Logic and Reason, we will form it into a
Syllogism, and leave it as Mr. Lock's Memorial to posterity. It is briefly thus:

If there be no such word as Satisfaction in any of the books of the New
Testament, it cannot be put into Christianity as delivered in the Scripture.

But there is no such word as Satisfaction in any of the Books of the New
Testament.

Ergo, it cannot be put into Christianity as delivered in the Scripture.

Get thee gone, for a Cunning Disputant: thou have not thy fellow, I verily
believe, within the Compass of the four Seas. By the same way of Arguing I will
prove that the doctrine of the Trinity is no part of Christianity as delivered
in the Scripture. And so you may, says the Vindicator, for I hold there is no
such thing as the Trinity in Scripture.

But I will try again, by the same Argument I will prove that the Divine
Decrees, and the Attributes of God, and his Providence are no Part of
Christianity, because these words [Decrees, Attributes, Providence] (as it is
understood of God) are not in Scripture. Nor do the Sacraments belong to
Christianity, because that word occurs no where in the Sacred Writings, as
Barclay (Apol. p. 292.) profoundly argues. Nay, The word Christianity is not to
be found in Scripture, why then does this man talk of Christianity as delivered
in the Scripture? You see by this what strange and inconsistent things he
obtrudes upon the Reader. He will not allow of Satisfaction because the word is
not mentioned in the Bible: Is there any reason then to own such a thing as
Christianity, seeing the word is not found there? But he will say, the Thing
is. And the same I say of Satisfaction; and so the Vindicator shows himself to
be a sorry contemptible Wrangler, and lets the World know that he has dealt so
much with Children, that he is of that number himself.

But afterward p 157. he pretends to own the Thing, and to say it may be
collected out of his Reasonableness of Christianity. Yet still the Stubborn and
Stomachful Man (which disposition he observes reigns much in Children Educat.
p. 121, 122.) will not buckle to the Word. Surely this same word satisfying
has been some way or other very mischievous to him, that he so starts back at
the naming of it. But to come close to the business, I appeal to any Impartial
Man whether it can in any probability be believed that a person own such or
such a Truth or Doctrine of the Gospel, and yet will not express it by that
Word or Name which all the Professors of the Orthodox Faith have agreed to call
it by. This is the Case of the Vindicator, he pretends to allow of the
Satisfaction of Christ, and yet he absolutely refuses to use the Word. But till
he can give us any Reason for this refusal, we shall believe that the true
Cause why he will not admit of the Word is, because he disbelieves the Thing it
self.

P. 159 he would be fastening two Properties of a Jesuit (as he says) upon me;
but every one says they are his Own, and therefore I will not injure him by
laying claim to them. And this I Will tell him moreover, that he has an Other
Property of one of that Order, which he has not named, and that is Trudging up
and down, and having no Home. And if a man can be of Loiola's Order and a
Mendicant too, then I Am sure he may put in for both.

What he jabbers p. 163, 164. about Satisfaction not being named at the
Admission of those of Riper Years to Baptism, he might have seen answered, if
he had had two eyes, in my Socinianism Unmasked, p. 47.

P. 168. he comes to make little Whimsical Remarks on what I had said of the
Apostles Creed, he raises Trifling Objections; he sets up a Phantom, a mere
Shadow, and then encounters it; he is wanton and freakish, and in brief, the
Kitling plays with his own Tail.

He insists upon the terms Abstract and Abridgment, p. 173, 174. and spends a
great many vain words about them, but cannot for his heart disprove what I
asserted, viz. that the foresaid Creed is an Abstract or Abridgment of the
Christian Faith, which is more fully expressed in the Holy Scriptures, not only
in the Gospel, but in the Epistles, which our Vindicator cannot endure to hear
of. At last I am to be the Jesuit again, and he is to take Mr. Chillingworth's
place, and so the Protestant is to confute the Papist, and there is an end of
that silly Fantastic Fiction of our Masker, not worthy of one of the poor raw
Boys that he has dragged up in his time.

Further, it is to be noted that after he had banded as fiercely as he could
against my notion of Abridgment, and, to thwart me, had produced
Chillingworth's sense of the word, he confesses that he is ignorant whether
what Chillingworth had given, be the nature of an Abridgment, or no. p. 177.
Which shows how fickle and restive he is, and that he builds upon precarious
hypotheses, and is not careful whether there be any Ground for what he says.
This would make one doubt whether this Writer be in his right mind or no. Has
not former Thoughtfulness disordered his Brain, that he thus talks?

P. 177. he would seem to pay some honor to the Primitive Church and the
Church of England (though no man believes it, no not himself) and to vindicate
their practice in admitting persons to Baptism upon the Faith contained in the
Apostles Creed, as if no more were to be believed by them than what is in
express terms in that Form of Confession. But the Catechism of our Church may
satisfy him that more is comprehended in that Form of Faith than is expressly
there mentioned, else it would not have been said that we are chiefly to learn,
in these Articles of our Belief, to believe in God the Father, in God the Son,
and in God ^he Holy Ghost. He may look long enough into the Creed, and never
find there these words, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; but Our Church
lets us know that these terms are really contained in that Profession of Faith.
Whence it follows that when persons are baptized into the Faith of the Apostles
Creed, they are baptized into the Faith of the Trinity, and consequently into
more than is in express words mentioned in this Symbol of our Faith. Which is
the thing that this Quarrelsome Animal objects against, but is not able after
all his fluttering to effect any thing. Besides, it is evident that our Church
thinks not this Creed to be absolutely Perfect and Complete, because she adds
other Creeds to it, as the Nicene and Athanasian. Which it is probable she
would not have done if every thing to be believed were in express, direct, and
full words set down in the other Form of Belief. And again, as to what he says
of the Primitive Practice of admitting persons to Baptism upon the bare
confession of the Apostles Creed, he betrays his Ignorance, having not learnt
from several Eminent Writers that this Creed is not exactly the same that it
was in the First Ages of Christianity, but that some Articles have been added
to it. But the heedless Masker attends to none of these things, but goes on
Chattering, and loves to hear his Clack move. But you must pardon him, for he
that is used to the Conversation of Nurses, and the whole Posse of the Chatting
Crew, cannot be thought to moderate his Intemperate Organ.

P. 183, 184. he heaves very hard to take off a Blunder that had been justly
imputed to him, but he runs into a greater and more ridiculous one, and salves
it by Supposition, for he would have it supposed (and that is a great word with
him, you must note, in his Writings) that the Compilers of the Creed who lived
in several Centuries, yet lived in one age or time. This is precious stuff, you
will say. Though some of the Compilers of the Creed lived at some years
distance from one an other, yet by a Supposition they are Contemporary, and
live together. Yes, it must be so by all means, he peremptorily vouches that
the supposition of their living together is easy, at what distance so ever they
lived, and how many so ever there were of them. p. 185. This is as if he should
suppose that all the Pedantick Tutors that lived in King Richard the Second's,
and King Henry the Eight's reigns should live at the same time with our
Vindicator who is of the same race and kind. One would not think that a man
that talks so much against Poetry as he does, should have such a fansiful knack
of Fiction. The sense of this Blunder has somewhat dampt him, and for some
pages together he is down in the mouth, and only sneakingly desires me to show
him this, and show him that, i. e. to show him his Folly: which I need not do,
he has sufficiently done it himself.

Then p. 190, 191, 192, 193, etc. he is at his old work of Repetition, and
quoting himself (though he could not quote a worse Author) and filling up whole
pages with what he had said in his Reasonableness of Christanity, and in his
former Vindication. And truly this is his employment every where, so that a man
may modestly compute that there are three parts of his book spent in
Reiterating the same things, and in the very same words. He that is so much
against Themes will not permit himself to vary the Phrase, but brings over his
old matter again in the very same individual terms that he used before, which
renders his Farce very ridiculous and irksom. But besides the impudent Vanity
of the thing, there is a great deal of Knavery and Dishonesty in it, which he
ought to answer for. None but he that has counterfeited his Name would impose
upon the world by offering them a false number of Pages, to heighten the Price
of them. The Reader is cheated into a book of above thirty sheets, when* if you
pare off his Repetitions, there remain not above eight or nine. Here is a gross
piece of Injustice, to make the Buyer pay five shillings for a Twelve penny
Cut. This is a New way of Writing, to insert one book into an other verbatim,
and so to chouse the unwary Chapman. Nay, it might be further observed that
whatever he has added in this last Pamphlet is run over again in some places
of it, as if he studied to make it more Ridiculous then it seemed to be at the
first reading. But it appears it was his business to heap up a Multitude of
words, and to eeke out his poor lank matter: for a Book was to come out against
what I had writ, and there was a necessity of Stuffing it and Swelling it, and
to say Much where Nothing could be said to the Purpose.

In his next pages 202, etc. he is stark mad at me for intimating that he and
his Allies are Underhand Factors for Rome. See how it pleases the Divine
Disposer of all things that by occasion of a small Hint a man shall discover to
the world his Inward Consciousness, and together with that his Propensions and
Designs which he with all the art imaginable labored to mask and conceal! When
I but mentioned the Tendency of the Party to Rome, he, as a Concerned and
Guilty Criminal, starts up, and shows himself galled and pinched, he flies
about and grows furious and outrageous. What! says he, does this Orthodox
Railer tell us that we are Factors for Rome, and truck for Popery? What! does
he think that because I hate Universities, I am in love with the Whore of
Babylon? How can I be of the Roman Church that am of none? But this is easily
answered by the known Maxim, One of no Religion will soon be of any. Skepticism
makes way for Popery. The doctrine which the Author and Vindicator of the
Reasonableness of Christianity has spread abroad, is contrived on purpose to
bring men off from the Received Articles of Christianity, and to prepare them
to be Scepticks and Infidels. I hope to give the Reader satisfaction about this
and in a few words to convince the Intelligent and Serious Considerer that it
is the design of this Writer to unsettle Religion, to introduce Indifferency
and Neutrality into Christianity, to place all Opinions on a level, to
represent all Doctrines to be alike, that there may be no contending for any
Articles of Faith, that those which were looked upon by the Primitive Church
and by Our Own as Fundamental Doctrins of Christianity may for the future not
be thought necessary to be known and believed in order to making men True
Christians, He persuades men that One Article will do their business, and that
those who pass for Orthodox Protestants confound people with bundels of
doctrines, which are useless and unnecessary; that half the Bible, Yea a
quarter of it is enough, that One of the Evangelists Writings contains all the
rest (for which he quotes Mr. Chillingworth) and therefore if all the rest were
lost, we need not concern our selves about it; as for the Epistles of the
Apostles, we need not trouble our heads with looking into them, for there is
only now and then dropped by the bye an Article of Faith.

And then, this Author under the pretense of declaring against Systems of
Divinity (which is his Common Subject) strikes at all the Received and
Celebrated Doctrines of the Christian Church, and represents them as
indifferent and precarious. Every where he shows his abhorence of the very word
System (as if it were as uneasy to him as Satisfying) so that it is a singular
and extraordinary favor he would quote (as he does, and that with Respect) Dr.
Cudworths book that bears the Name of System. Now, I am only to take notice of
the Ground of his inveighing against Systems, which is his design of bringing
an odium on the Settled Truths of Christianity, and to make way for his own
Giddy Notions. Accordingly he pronounces concerning those Stable Fundamentals
of Christianity that they were framed and fashioned according to the humors,
interests, or designs of the Heads of Parties, as if they were things depending
on men's pleasure, and to be suited to their convenience. These are his words p.
215, 216. and speak his heart; and the Turkish Spy does not express his mind
more fully. Thus he disposes his Readers to be of no Church, of no Religion. Or
at least he would persuade them that one way of Religion is as good as an
other: which is the prevailing doctrine of these days. Therefore Mr. Bold (one
whom I shall afterward account with) was much mistaken when he said, he never
hardly appeared on a fashionable subject, Rep. p. 3. for this Opinion, and that
One religion is as good as another, is the Modish doctrine every where. This
Country Gentleman is in the Fashion, and does not know it. (And thence you may
judge of the Truth of what Mr. Lock says of him, that he takes not up his
Opinions from Fashion. Pref. to his Vindicat.)

Now this is a fair step toward Rome, for if one Religion be equivalent to an
other, and our Salvation is not concerned in the belief of the Necessary
Articles of our Faith, then we are at liberty to embrace what Form and Model of
Articles we please, and those of the Church of Rome will perhaps be thought as
good as any. There is a strange passage in this Writer, p. 217, 218. which
speaks his favorable opinion of the Pontifician way, I have often wondered,
says he, to hear men of several Churches so heartily exclaim against the
Implicit Faith of the Church of Rome, when the same Implicit Faith is as much
practiced and required in their own, though not so openly professed, and
ingeniously owned there. First, he lets us know that from that Converse which
he has had with persons of several Churches, whether of the Communion of the
Church of England, or those of the Dissenters, he finds that they are against
the Church of Rome. Secondly, that though they are against the doctrine of
Implicit Faith in the Church of Rome, yet they like it well enough in their
own. Thirdly, they not only like it, but practice it, yea the very same
Implicit Faith. Fourthly, they not only practice* but require it, they command
and enjoin those of their Communion to believe all they say with an Implicit
Faith. But fifthly, they do not this with so good a grace as those of the Roman
Church do. For those latter are very open and ingenuous in their profession and
practice of implicit Faith, but the former are not so. Protestants have not
that Candor and Fairness which are to be seen in Papists; they neither so
openly profess, nor so ingenuously own this doctrine, but yet as strictly
practice it, and require the practice of it as they do. I leave it with the
Reader to determine from the Premises which of these two, those of the Roman or
of the Reformed Churches, have the happiness to be most in favor with this
Gentleman.

In the known style of the Roman Priests and Writers he declares that the
Scripture serves but like a Nose of Wax, p 213. And as the Heads of the Church
of Rome deny the Bible to the Common people, so he is advancing toward this
apace, for he lops off three of the Evangelists, (for one he says will
suffice) and all the Epistles. And further to show his good will to the Roman
Catholics, and to their Beloved Notion of Transubstantiation he tells us p.
408, 409. that if a man understands those words of our Savior's Institution
[This is my body] and [This is my blood] in a Literal sense, he must believe
the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper are changed really into his Body and
Blood, though he knows not how. And afterward he says,, He is obliged to
belive it to be true, and to assent to it. And presently afterward, To deny
assent to this as true, would be to deny our Savior's Veracity, and
consequently his being the Messiah sent from God. Here he lets us know that his
One Article is quite renounced if Transubstantition be not admitted. You see
what his making of [Iesus is the Messias] to be the Sole Article of Christian
Faith, comes to. But this doctrine of Transubstantiation is so grateful to him
that he brings it over again, p 413, 414. assuring us that the Old Gentleman at
Rome, who has an Ancient Title to Infallibility, may make Transubstantia^on a
Fundamental Article necessarily to be believed, as well as I make the Divinity
of Christ and his Satisfaction, etc. (for these he means by the Sense of any
Disputed Texts of Scripture, because the Texts concerning these Points are
disputable with him) Fundamental Articles necessarily to be believed. It is
brought to this issue it seems, that Transubstantiation is as Fundamental an
Article of the Christian Faith as any that can be named besides Iesus's being
the Messiah. Thus by the Overruling Providence of Heaven this sort of Writers
discover the inward bent of their thoughts and inclinations, though they labor
to hide them from the world. This Gentleman would be thought to have no
kindness for Rome, and yet his own words confu^^ him. As I observed before that
he stoutly Rails whilst he is remonstrating against that practice, so here he
stiffly patronizes Popery, even when he had pretended to show himself
displeased at my charging him with it.

And I could produce several other passages out of his Writings which makes it
appear that our Prester John is inclined to receive the Roman Missionaries; I
could make it evident that he is Indifferent as to the Reformed Religion, and
the Doctrines professed by the Owners of it, and that he inspires men's minds
with a dis-esteem of those Articles which the Christian Churches since the
Reformation have unanimously asserted and vindicated, and that he represents
them as Ridiculous. You must not, says he, give ear to what the Preachers and
Pulpit Orators of these Churches tell you about more Articles than One as
necessary to be known and believed, in order to making you Christians. If you
assent to this Single Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, I declare to you that
you are, as to matter of Faith, as Good Christians as St. Peter and St. Paul
were. When your Parish Priests endeavor in their Popular Harangues to persuade
you that this is not the sum Total of the Christian Faith, but that there are
other Necessary and Fundamental Doctrines which are of the Essence of
Christianity, you must roundly tell them from me, that the Catalogue of
Fundamentals every one alone can make for himself: no body can collect or
prescribe it to an other, but this is according as God has dealt to every one
the measure of light and faith, and has opened each man's understanding, that
he may understand the Scripture. These are the express words of our Vindicator,
p. 85. and from them it undeniably follows, that though no body must be a
Creed-maker, yet every one may be a Fundamental-maker. Mr. Hobbs was pleased to
give this power to the King only, but this Gentleman is more liberal, and
grants it to every Subject: He may make what Catalogue of Fundamentals he
pleases, and put this into it, among the rest, that the Pope is Infallible, and
that the Religion of the Church of Rome is to be preferred to that of the
Reformed. Fundamentals depend not upon the Scriptures, but upon men's
Understandings, and therefore every man according to his apprehensions may make
as many, and as few Fundamental Articles as he thinks fit. What think you now
of our Tutor, our Anti-Academian? Is not this Man of One Article disposed to
entertain the Twelve New Articles of Faith of the Council of Trent?

It is impossible to conceive how Great Mischief that person may do whose Head
is stuffed with such Notions as these, especially if we consider he is always
creeping into Houses, and insinuating into Families, and wheadling the Masters
and Mistresses, and infecting the early thoughts of young Ones with such
Principles. Such a one the Commonwealth is concerned to have an eye upon, for
the safety of the Public. And though all this while I don't suppose him to be
set on work upon any consideration of his extraordinary Skill or Ability, as if
I took him either for a Conjurer or a Jesuit, yet he may be made use of as a
very fit Tool, as a Convenient Machin, and (as I said before) he may serve to
be an Underhand Factor. And if the Creature had not been some such thing, it
is impossible he should startle and stare, and fling about (as the Reader may
observe he does) at the naming of Popery and Rome. He conceals the resentment
as well as he can, but the Observing Reader may plainly discern it. None would
have been guilty of this but our Ridiculous Masker, who, in imitation of the
Changling kind, hides his face, and then thinks no body sees him. But
notwithstanding all his Ar^ifices and Disguises, he bewrays himself. As they
vulgarly say of the Fiend, that when he appears in Humane Shape, he can never
dissemble it so well, but he is some way or other discovered, there is some
mark to discern him by.

A little after, p. 229, 230. he returns to the One Article again, and upbraids
me for many. I have, he says, a reserve of the Lord knows how many more, p.
233. which is Irreverently and Profanely spoken, because he uses the Sacred
Name so slightly and vainly. By this we may guess what manner of Education his
Children and Nurslings have: He that abuses that Holy Name himself will not
check this fault in others.

Then in three pages together, 232, 233, 234. he falls into his old Trot of
telling me, and desiring to show, and let him know, etc. Without any shame or
remorse he continues to stuff whole pages with Reiterations of his former
Writings. Though he was lately not for telling, but for weighing of money, yet
he has other thoughts with respect to his Books, for he reckons Number to be
Weight. Such Writers glory in the number of their Lines, and think to be
Voluminous is to be Argumentative.

Next, p. 238, etc. he runs back to Object against the Reason which I assigned
why the believing of Jesus to be the Messiah is so frequently mentioned in the
New Testament And he busies himself with Wire drawing every word that I had
said, and scores up all along (as he had done before) what I must show him, and
what I must prove, and sets them down in distinct Figures: And yet after all
these little devices and pedantick tricks, he has not raised one Objection
against me that has any thing more in it than his Childrens Rattle. And indeed
it must needs be so, and cannot be otherwise: when men have taken up false
deceitful Notions, and then labor to Vindicate them, it is presently seen that
their pretenses of Arguing are mere Sound, and are nothing but Childish and
Noisy Amusements.

In no less than 20 pages afterward he busies himself in hunting for
Objections and Cavils against what I had said, and at last resolves to admit
but of a single Article as necessary to be believed in order to the making a
man a Christian, But will not that Sermon of St. Peter in Acts 2. evidence that
there are more Fundamental Points than that one, Jesus is the Messiah? Are not
our Savior's Passion, Death, and Resurrection particularly mentioned in ver.
23, 24 and are they not Fundamental Articles of Faith? Can you believe Jesus to
be the Messiah, without believing him to have suffered, died, and rose again?
To this it is answered, p. 268. that these Articles were not proposed by St.
Peter to the unbelieving Jews as Fundamental ones, and consequently they are
not to be reckon^d as Fundamental Articles, for it is certain that the Holy
Apostle proposed them as they were. I request the Serious and Judicious Reader
to take an estimate of Mr. Lock's Reasonableness of Christianity from this one
thing, viz. his denying the Articles of our Savior's Suffering, Death, and
Resurrection to be Articles of the Foundation, i. e. such as are necessarily
required to be believed, for the costituting a man a Christian. That he deni^s
this is plain, because he tells us that St. Peter propounded not these Articles
as Fundamental, and because according to him there is but one Fundamental
Article. If there be but One, then these are no Fundamental Propositions,
unless you will say that three added to one make but one. Which I think he will
scarcely assent to, unless his Arithmetic be proportionable to his
Christianity. Besides, in an other place, p 233. he is Positive as to this
matter, for his words are these, [The Death and Resurrection of Christ are
recorded by the Spirit of God in Holy Writ, but are no more necessary to be
believed to make a man a Christian than any other part of Divine Revelation]
that is, than any Inferior Truth mentioned in the New Testament, as that
Christ rid upon as Ass. This he declares to be as requisite to make a man a
Christian as that Christ died and rose again.

But stay, we must not think the day is our own, the Adversary begins to rally,
and pushes upon us with his strong Reserves, as thus, p. 268. Those Articles of
the Crucifixion, Death, and Resurrection of Christ were not proposed here as
the Fundamental Articles which St. Peter principally aimed at, and endeavored
to convince them of. And afterward, They are not the Principal thing aimed at,
p. 269. but only brought in by the bye. A Wager on it that he is good at Push^
pin. None but such a Trifler as the Vindicator could have been so shameless as
to offer this to a Reader of any sense and consideration: for it is evident in
this Sermon that our Savior's Crucifixion, and Death and Rising again are
equally urged with his being Lord and Christ: And the Apostle mentions his
Resurrection again, v. 32. This Jesus has God reised up, and therefore exhorts
his Countrymen and Brethren to embrace this Jesus, to believe that he
suffered, and laid down his life, and took it up again for the Good of the
World. But our New Modeller of Christianity tells us that these are Articles
occasionally brought in here by St. Peter, and only as Arguments to persuade
the Jews, but were far from being Fundamental and Necessary Points of Christian
Faith, such as they must needs believe. And how does he prove that these were
brought in as Arguments? Ay, that is worth our taking notice of. That our
Savior's Crucifixion, Death and Resurrection were used here as Arguments to
per^wade them into a belief of this Fundamental Article, that Jesus was the
Messiah, is evident, says he, from hence, that they preached here to (...) who
kn^w the death and crucifixion of Jesus, as well as Peter, and therefore they
could not be proposed to them as New Articles of Faith to be believed, p. 269.

The answer is obvious, that though those Auditors knew as well as their
Speaker that Christ suffered on the cross, and there expired, and rose again,
yet they were ignorant of the Design and End of all this, viz. that he
suffered, and died and rose from the dead for the Benefit and Advantage of
Mankind. Thus they were New Articles of Faith to them, and thus St. Peter
proposed them to be believed and received, as appears from that Question of
those Jews who were converted by this Sermon, What shall we do to be saved?
Which implies that St. Peter had told them Christ's Death and Resurrection were
in order to the Salvation of lost mankind: and therefore they desire to know
what Method they must take to have the Benefit of that Salvation and
Redemption; and accordingly he exhorts them to Repent, and to be baptized every
one of them in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, v. 38.
These Jews were before strangers to this, they had no persuasion concerning the
Design of Christ's Suffering, Dying, and Rising again, viz. that Salvation and
Pardon of sins were to be obtained by them, and therefore the Apostle preaches
tehse Truths to them. And that they are the Principal Doctrines in this Sermon
appears from their being insisted upon so largely, from v. 23, to 36. but as
for that Other Article, that Jesus is the Messiah, it is not expressly mentioned
throughout the whole Sermon, only the substance of it is in ver. 36, after the
other Grand Articles of Christ's Passion and Dying and Rising had been amply
discoursed of and urged. And yet our Bold Breeder up of Small Craft faces it
out that that was the Sole Proposition and the Sole Truth the Apostle labored
to convince them of, and to bring them ^o. p. 270. and that the Others are no
Fundamental Articles. Our new Theologue is for a Messiah that neither Suffered,
nor died, nor rose again.

I leave the Reader to judge of this, whilst I follow our Traveling Tutour to
p. 281. etc. where we still fi^d him perverting of St. Luke's Writing. He sets
himself to misrepresent his History both of the Gospel and of the Acts, as if
he had a particular pike against that Good Man, that Holy Writer, above all the
rest.

From p. 209. to p. 299. he undertakes to set down the Contents of our
Savior's and the Apostle's Preaching, and thence to prove that One Article
only was propounded to be believed to make men Christians. But our bold
Undertaker falls very short of what he designed, as I shall make evident from
the Texts he alleges. First, he quotes Mat. 4. 23. Jesus went about all
Ga^^ilee, teaching in the Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom,
called in the 17th v. the Kingdom of heaven, which is no other than the State
of the Christian Church under the Gospel, with all the Great Benefits and
Privileges, as well as the Duties and Offices which appertain to it. This is
the Gospel of the Kingdom, even the kingdom of heaven, for it is that Doctrine
and Dispensation wherein Heaven and Happiness are freely offered to mankind,
and whereby they may be made actual Partakers of them. This is that which
Christ taught and preached, and thence our deep Logitian in^ers that he taught
and preached but One Article, as if the doctrine of the kingdom of heaven
contained in it no more. Next he quotes Mat. 10. 7. where our Lord enjoined his
Apostles to preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. And he adds Luke
10. 9. where our Savior commands the Seventy Disciples to give and preach to
the Inhabitants of some particular places in Judea, and to say unto them, The
kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. Which is as much as to say, Go and preach
the same Gospel that I my self have taught, for this is the Sum of what I have
every where published and preached, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand, Mat. 4. 17. Reform your lives, and embrace that Doctrine which approaches
nearer and nearer unto you every day, and is more and more to be discovered to
the world. It is no less then the doctrine of the Kingdom of God, i. e. Gods
spiritual Government of his Church under the reign of the Messiah the Savior
and Redeemer: wherefore you must be careful to inform your selves concerning
the Laws of this Spiritual Kingdom, and to know and believe them, as well as to
practice them. If a Man can prove hence that there is but One Article in all
Christianity to be assented to, to constitute a person a member of Christ, he
has a faculty of Proving which none ever heard of before.

Well, but why does he not go on? He had undertaken to prove the One Article
from the Commission given by our Savior to his Apostles and his Disciples, and
why then does he not proceed, and quote Mat. 28. 19, 20. among his other Texts
that he produces? This is worth the Readers taking notice of, for it will
discover to him the Genius and Spirit of the man we are now dealing with.
Though he had taken upon him to set down and rehearse the several particular
Commissions our Savior gave the Apostles and Disciples when he sent them to
preach the Gospel yet he omits this most Solemn order of all, whereby they and
their Successors were enjoined to teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things etc. They were to convert all Nations to the Faith of the Gospel,
and to make them Christ's Disciples (for the word is (...)) by baptizing them
into the profession of the Holy Trinity; and consequently they were to be
instructed in this doctrine, in order to their being made Christians: they must
know and believe that in the Eternal Godhead there are Three Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; this is propounded as requisite in order to their being
admitted and constituted Disciples of Jesus. If the Vindicator had not been
conscious to himself that this is the True Sense and Import of the Text, it is
certain he would have produced it among the other places: but (which is dismal
to consider) he stifles the inward sentiment of his Conscience, to secure his
One Article; for he saw that the Article of the Trinity was plainly expressed
in this Commission, and as plainly enjoined to be believed as a Necessary Point
in order to give a man the denomination of a Disciple of Christ, or a True
Christian; and for this reason our False Masker conceals this place, even when
he was pretending to give an account of those Texts which mentioned our Blessed
Saviors Commissions to his Apostles. This shows what a Perfidious Scribe we
have got, one that makes nothing of wilfully leaving out any Text of Scripture,
to further his design and purpose and at other times he as wilfully perverts
plain Texts to the same end. The consideration of which strange behavior, will
I doubt not, obtain me an Excuse among Impartial and Intelligent Readers for my
manner of handling this Adversary, whose obstinate Hypocrisy and dissimulation
call for no other than the severest Chastisements and Correptions: though I
confess it is with no mean regret and reluctance that I put my self upon this
way of writing; but t^ere is no help for it in the present case; he must of
necessity be disciplined and taught, as the men of Succoth, with Thorns and
Briars. I should not have undertaken this task upon my own private and personal
account, because Contempt, and Neglect are the best Return in this case: but
when I saw our Holy Religion endangered by his sacrilegious attempts of
depriving us of the greatest part of it, and when I observed his Rude
encroachments on the Professed Schools of Learning, I found it was a Public
Cause, and that every one, who would, had a right to engage in it, and to
oppose him as a Common Foe, as a Proclaimed Rebel, as an Outlaw, as a Pest of
the Community, and to treat him accordingly.

I will stay a little to examine one ridiculous passage p. 304: I had offered
to prove that there is more than that One Article, Jesus is the Messiah, to be
believed to make a man a Christian, by producing that place Romans 10. 9. If thou
shall believe in thy heart that God raised him (i. e. Christ Jesus) from the
dead, thou shall be saved: where the belief of Christ's Resurrection is
propounded as absolutely necessary to salvation: and if so, then Jesus is the
Messiah is not the Only Article, as he often inculcates. What is his Answer to
this? To believe the Resurrection of Christ, says he, is in effect the same as
to believe him to be the Messiah, and so is put to express it. And again p.
305. Believing Christ's Resurrection is put for believing him to be the Messiah:
so that these which seem to be Two Articles are but one and the same. And if
they be so, then why throughout all his Collection of places out of the
Evangelists and Acts did he not mention all those Texts (which are very many)
that speak of our Savior's Resurrection, and why did he not reckon them to be
the same with those that speak of Iesus's being the Messiah? Why did he not all
along tell us that one is put to express the other? The true Reason is because
he thought of no such thing at that time, but has invented it since, to shift
off what I said.

This is such an other piece of Invention as that in his First Vindication p.
6. that he designed his Treatise of the Reasonableness of Christianity chiefly
for Infirm Christians, such as disbeliev'd or doubted of the Truth of
Christianity: and again in his Second Vindication p. 152. he says, he chiefly
designed his book for Deists. (though b^ the way we may take notice of his
Contradicting himself, for Deists are no Christians, and if he designed his
book chiefly for one, he could not design it chiefly for the other.) And yet if
you consult his whole Treatise of the Reasonableness of Christianity, you shall
not find one syllable that intimates any such Design, though there, if any
where, he was obliged to discover and declare it, that the Reader might not
mistake the Intention of his book. This proves that what he has since added in
both his Vindications is mere Fiction and Sham, and he was forced to fly to
this Asylum when I h^d laid open the mischief of his Papers. This may convince
us that he will first assert and print any thing, and then afterward he will
(in his Sniveling way) come and Retract it, or gloss it over with some pitiful
Evasion. But where is the Probity, where is the Integrity of the Man all this
while?

Nay, (to return to the Present Matter) it is plain that he designedly omitted
those places which mention our Saviors Resurrection, because it was his
persuasion that they belong not to this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah. He
declares (as you lately heard) that in St. Peter's Sermon, Christ's Resurrection
(as well as his Sufferings and Death) was brought in only by the bye, and was
not a Principal Article, was not principally aimed at, but that this
Proposition Jesus is the Messiah is the sole Truth the Apostle labored to
bring them to the belief of: and lately we were told by him that the
Resurrection of Christ is no more to be believed to make a man a Christian,
than any Ordinary Truth or Proposition recorded in the New Testament.

Yet after all this, he palpably contradicts what he has said, and in plain
terms tells us that Christ's Resurrection and his being the Messiah are the
very same, and one is put to express the other. Before he held them to be
distinct, and so distinct, that where he found the one he could not find the
other, as in several places of the New Testament that he consulted. The
Resurrection of our Lord was not taken notice of by him as appertaining to the
Messiaship. When St. Peter in the main part of his Sermon preached concerning
Christ's Resurrection, our Expositor told us that it was made use of only as an
Argument to persuade them of this Fundamental Truth, that Jesus is the Messiah,
p. 269. and yet now all of a sudden this Proposition is equivalent, nay is the
same with Jesus rose from the dead. There is no account in the world can be
given of this, but that he will be saying something, though it be to his own
apparent Confutation. See here the Influence of Company! It is a Common Topic,
but the Reality of it could never be more evinced than in this Instance. Here
we see how it tinctures men's Manners, and transforms them into the shapes of
those they associate with. Here is one that has spent his days among Talking
and Gossiping people, and they have made him such a one as themselves: He has
learnt of them the knack of Perpetual Jabbering, and his Tongue will wag when
the Sexton is covering him with Moulds. But if this were all, we might pass it
off with a little mirth. But alas it is dismal and horrid to consider what a
Profligate Writer shows his Head in the World, who is neither ashamed to
contradict himself nor the Holy Writings of the Apostles: And so he brings a
contempt on the things of God and Religion, and vacates the Authority of
Scripture, only to gratify some of his Fraternity, who with himself have a
design to smother the Chief Articles of our Religion, and to stifle the
Christian Faith.

P. 344, 345, etc. he is mightily Concerned (if you will believe him) that he
should be thought to favor Socinianism. What Evidence I brought for it he
labors to render invalid, but with little success. He would maintain forsooth,
that though I have proved him a Socinian, yet he is no Socinian; and what if he
be both? May not a man be a Socinian and no Socinian, as well as a Physician
and no Physician? But he farther complains that he is the first man that was
ever found out to be at the same time a Socinian and a Factor for Rome, p. 346.
No, Sir, you are mistaken here (as in all your other Points) you are not the
first man, for there was a Jesuit in the late Reign (as a professed Socinian
owns, in his Exceptions of Mr. E. examined, p. 46.) who published a Paper
entitled, An Address, etc. wherein he pretends to show that the Scriptures
commonly alleged for the Incarnation of the Son of God, and for the Trinity,
admit of an other sense. And this Paper was read by the Jesuite-Preacher in
Limestreet, and zealously urged by him in his Pulpit. Whence it is evident that
Popish Priests, when they see it makes for their Interest, cry up the Socinian
Principles and Doctrines. A I^suite can appear in all shapes and figures, as
well as a Vindicator, and that is the reason that our Vindicator mentioned not
this when he was enumerating the Properties of a Jesuit, for he knew well
enough that he could assume the guise of a Quaker, or a Socinian, or any other
Sect; and therefore a Socinian and a Factor for Rome are not inconsistent.
Which proves that the Vindicator had no cause to complain of my coupling these
Two together, and that it was as weakly as falsely said of him, that he was the
first man in whom both these Denominations meet. Socinianism was first brought
out of Italy, and thither it tends.

Our Runnagate Tutor being almost out of breath with Impertinent Nonsense and
Repetitions, begins to sit down, and take up with Quotations, p. 350: and of
whom? Of two Orthodox Prelates of our Church. But wherever he mentions that
word Orthodox, he intends it for a Jeer, so that those Worthy Persons he gives
that Epithet to are much obliged to him for his Buffoonry. But that is not all,
they are two Prelates, he says, whom, when he follows Authorities, he shall
prefer to Slichtingius and Socinus (the good man thinks Socinus was after
Slichtingius.) Here is the Honor that is done to those Eminent Men of our
Church; he can only give them the preference to two Notorious Corrupters of our
Christian Faith. What an impudent affront is this to the Ashes of the late
Archbishop, and to the Right Reverend Bishop now living, from the Pen of this
Episcopus Puerorum, this Contemptible Overseer of Hanging-Sleeves? When he
follows Authorities, is as much as to say, he never will, for our Puny-Governor
is Authority to himself. Thus he quotes those Excellent Prelates only to abuse
them, and to distort their words, as may be seen in what he says of them. And
it is very observable that this man who scorns Authorities, yet brags in an
other place that Letter to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 69.
he has Great Authorities to justify him: And in what? viz. that the Soul of
Man is Material. Here our good Gentleman can depend upon Authorities, and call
them Great Ones, when they shock the Immortality of Humane Souls, but in a
Point of Orthodox Faith he laughs at Authorities.

This Ignorant Writer stands to what he said before, that [the Son of God] was
a phrase that among the Jews in our Savior's time was used for [the Messiah.]
p. 357. Which has no foundation at all, and none but the man that talks of the
Mishna, and never saw it, would have asserted any such thing. Mr. Seldom, who,
it is thought, was the better Antiquary and Judge in this matter, expressly
tells us, that by [the Son of God] the Jews meant [the Word of God] (as he is
called in the Chaldee Paraphrast) which was the same as if he had professed
himself to be God. De Jure Not. and Gent. l. 2. c. 12. For the Old Jews belief
was (as several Good Authors have proved) that the Messiah was God, or the Son
of God, for they looked upon the Son of God as Synonymous with God, when it is
applied to the Messiah. Rittangel, a Learned Writer, who had been a Jew,
sufficiently proves this from the Jewish Writings. And from other Testimonies
it might be proved that the Son of God was not a term only to express the
Messiah, but that it signified something more, viz. That Jesus is the Proper,
Natural and Eternal Son of God, that he is One with the Father, as having the
same Divine Nature and Essence. Thus in the strictest sense he is the Son of
God; and the Jews in our Savior's time understood this expression thus,
otherwise they would not have attempted to stone him for Blasphemy, when he
said he was the Son of God; which according to them was the same with being One
with the Father, and making himself God, Joh. 10. 30, 33, 36. Whence it is
evident that the Son of God denotes the Divinity of Christ, which the word
Messiah does not, and consequently the Son of God and the Messiah are not terms
of the very same signification. And that place Acts 8. 37. I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, inefragrably proves it, which I urged in my former
Treatise* but when the Vindicator came to repeat what I had alleged, he leaves
out the words of the Text, as the Reader may see, p 370. which is an argument
of his hating the Light. But as being ashamed (which is prodigious in him) of
that Omission, he afterward mentions the Text, and sweats to evade the force
of it. My Argument ran thus, If the Eunuch, who was instructed by Philip in the
Christian Faith, professed that he believed Jesus Christ or the Messiah to be
the Son of God, then that word Messiah or Christ is not of the very same
signification with the Son of God, but imports something else: But the Eunuch
professed, etc. Therefore the word Messiah is not of the same signification
with the Son of God. The Minor is the Text: The Major is proved from this, that
if the Son of God signified no more than the Messiah, then the Eunuch's words
are a downright Tautology, for they are as much as if he had said, I believe
that the Messiah is the Messiah. A man would think there is some sense and
reason in this way of Arguing. No, says our Gentleman, I will not allow that
there is any Sense in this, for the Tautology will be quite removed if we take
[Christ] here for a proper Name, p. 374. Say you so, Good Mr. Vindicator! Then
why may not your One Article [Iesus is the Messias] be reduced to this [Jesus
is he whom we call the Messiah, or whose Proper Name is Messiah?] What is the
reason that you did not take the word Christ for a Proper Name in all those
other places where you allege that Name to signify his Office? And what is the
reason that the word Messiah in your Collection of Texts may not be thought to
be the same? Unless your Pedantship will say that a Greek word, but not an
Hebrew or Syriack one is capable of being a Proper Name? You see the strength
of our Adversary. After so many years plodding and booking it he cannot afford
any other then such weak insipid trash as this. Get thee gone, I say to thee,
for a maker of poor thin Physick^broth.

P. 399. he thinks it Profane that I say of him, that he makes our Savior a
Coward. But if I prove that he represents him as such, then the Profaneness
will lie at his own door. Though, it is true, our Savior used great Caution at
the first Preaching of the Gospel, and did not on all occasions and to all
persons declare himself to be the Messiah, yet he was not so Reserved and
Timorous as this Writer would have us believe, for he has the confidence to
say in his Reasonableness of Christianity that Christ made no other discovery
of himself at the beginning of his Ministry but by Miracles and
Circumlocutions, and general Discourses, p. 59. And in an other place of that
Book he says he did this lest the Sanhearim should have laid hold on what he
said, to have got him into their power, and thereby to take away his life, p.
62. And afterward he says, our Savior would by no means in express terms
profess himself to be the Messiah, p* 72. and that for the same reason. Nay, he
tells us that out of this wary and cautious principle he never in the whole
course of his Ministry, so much as to his Disciples, much less to the
multitude, or the Rulers of the Jews, declared himself to be the Messiah in
express terms, p. 148. And in almost a hundred pages together, (viz. from p.
59. to p. 152.) he labors to instill this Notion into the minds of his
Readers, that our Blessed Lord had not Courage enough to own himself to be the
Messiah, the views of Danger hindered him from letting the world know Who he was.

But how contrary is this to what we read in the Evangelical Writings? When the
women of Samaria had mentioned the Messiah, John 4. 25. Christ immediately
thereupon said unto her, I that speak unto thee am he, i. e. the Messiah. Here
in plain and direct words he owns himself to be the Messiah, and this was at
the very entrance of his Ministry. Again, we are assured that he went about all
Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. i. e. that the
Messiah was come, and that he himself was that Messiah, for it was no more
dangerous to proclaim himself to be the Messiah, than to tell the Jews that the
Messiah was come, for they would soon know what Particular Person it was.
Further, though our Savior (as is particularly taken notice of by the
Evangelists) showed his Prudence and Discretion in not exposing himself to
unnecessary dangers by too great a freedom of speaking, yet at the beginning of
his Ministry we find that he plainly, and without any reserve told the Jews
that God was his Father, John 5. 17. or, which is equivalent, that he was the
Son of God, which is as much as if he had said, he was God; for so the Jews
interpreted it in that place, for they said this was making himself equal with
God, v. 18. He told them at the same time that he had power to raise the dead,
v. ^1. and that he is to be Judge of the world at the last day, v. 22, 27. that
all men ought to honor him as they honor the Father, v. 23. that he gives
Eternal Life to those that believe on him, v. 24. and more fully and amply in
other expressions in that Chapter he publicly and expressly declares himself
to be the Messiah and the Son of God. And it is observable that he made this
free, plain and open profession of himself, and his Divine Nature, and
Messiaship at that very time when the Jews persecuted him, and sought to slay
him, v. 16.

Judge then of the Truth and Consistency of what this Dabler in Scripture and
Divinity says of our Savior, viz. That in the whole course of his Ministry he
never expressly declared himself to be the Messiah Nay, (which makes it the more
unaccountable and prodigious) he holds that Christ never all that time owned
himself to be the Messiah, although according to him, there was no other
Article of Faith propounded by Christ and the Apostles to be believed to make a
man a Christian but this, that Jesus is the Messiah. Judge of the truth of what
he says, viz. that our Savior always spoke to the Jews (whether his own
Apostles and Disciples, or others) concerning himself in obscure and mystical
terms, p. 99. as being afraid to speak out, and standing in awe of the Angry
Jews, who sought to kill him, p. 85. Is not this clearly confuted by what I
have alleged out of the Gospels, and is it not further confuted by what we
read in Mat. 10. 28, 32? where our Savior dis^wades his Apostles from fearing
them that kill the body, and requires it of them as their duty that they
confess him before men, i. e. (as is most evident from comparing John 9. 22.
with 12. 4) that they confess him to be the Messiah. And can we think that they
were obliged to do this unless he had plainly told them that he was the
Messiah? But, according to this New Expositor, Christ exacted more of his
Apostles than he dared to do himself; for he was Cautious and Fearful, and
therefore would not confess himself to be the Messiah; he had not Spirit and
Valor enough to own that Character in the whole course of his Ministry, lest
he should thereby be in danger of his life, as he expresses it. What is this
but belying our Blessed Savior, and making him a Coward? And who but a
Poltron, a Cowardly Flincher from the Fundamental Articles of our Faith would
entertain such a vile and impious thought of our Lord and Master?

It is pleasant to see p. 222. (which should indeed have been mentioned before)
how this Imperious Dragger up of Youth handles the Ancient Grave Citizen who
dedicated a Book to him, and most submissively crouch'd to him. In stead of
acknowledging his good will and respect to him, this Supercilious and
Unmannerly Well bred man snibs him for his forwardness, and condemns him as a
System-Maker, though the poor man had railed in three or four places of his
Pamphlet against all Systems. What a Magotted Vindicator is this?

Now our Pilgrim is approaching toward his journeys end, and therefore p 403*
etc. spends his languid remains upon Mr. Bold's feeble Vindication of him;
where he has made his case worse (if it be possible) then it was, and involves
him further in self-contradiction. But seeing the Western Gentleman was so
loving and friendly to to the Creed-hater, this same Creed-hater was resolved,
right or wrong, to assert and vindicate whatever that Gentleman said, it
dropping from the pen of so Dear a Friend, who did what he could to help our
lame Vindicator over the style. Though afterward he shows him a Dog-trick p.
440. where he snarls (but covertly) against him: he disapproves of Mr. Bol^'s
indispensa^ble necessity which he speaks of. But because he must not seem to
fall out with him so soon after sworn friendship, he makes a Distinction
between absolute and conditional necessity, and so compromises the matter. Now
all is well again, and Mr. Lock and Mr. Bold are as Great as two Inkle-makers.
Now the style runs thus, Mr. Bold and I say p. 448. I follow Mr. Bolds order p.
449. Mr. Bold's reasoning is clear and strong p. 468. because he reasons for
him. Now you will find Mr. Lock vouching every syllable that Mr. B. says, sense
or nonsense: he swallows all dow^, and sordidly licks up his drivel (as he does
his own in his Loathsome Repetitions) and desires and infects his Paper with it.
Nay he solemnly engages for him for the future, I dare answer, says he, for
Mr. Bold, 418. (But have a care Sir, of satisfying; remember that, I pray) if
he shall please to turn Turk, and read Lectures to me out of the Alcoran, I
promise to attend to him.

Our Stroling Tutor pretends to tell us p. 451. what answering with ill
language is called in his Country: but let him first prove that a Vagrant is of
any Country.

There are several other Passages in this Authors Bundle of Sheets which I
might reflect upon: but lest I should be thought to be too Severe and
Unmerciful to him, I will here hold my hand. I hate to insult over a poor Worm
of what sort or denomination so ever; otherwise I would here ri^le and uncase
the Whole Bloated Pamphlet that is before us, and let the world further see
what a miserable Arguer, what a poor Manager of Controversies we have got, and
offer some other incontestable proofs of his design to erect a New and Maimed
Christianity in opposition to the Old Catholic one. It is but some part of his
Paper-Fardel that I have handled: perhaps when I have perused the rest, he may
hear further from me. I deal with him as he does with his Bantlings, I don't
cram and gorg him, but give him a little at a time. I have thrice as much more
to say to him about his Vindication, besides a Just Set of Animadversions on
some other parts of his Education, whence (if I see Occasion) I shall make it
appear that he is neither fit to teach Children nor Men And I hope I shall do
good service to Church and State in further unmasking of him.

Brief Animadversions on a late Reply of Mr. Bold, of Steeple in Dorset-shire,
to what I had writ against his Defense of the One Article.
THere is a necessity of making some Addition here, unless I should give the
Reader the trouble of a Formal Answer to some thing that Mr. Bold (one of Mr.
L's Proselytes) has lately published, and unless I should send it to the Press
by it self. Which I find there is no reason to do, because some very brief
Animadversions on that Author's feeble Attempt will serve the turn. It is the
unhappiness of this Gentleman, who I think means well as to the main, that he
has espoused a Groundless and Unscriptural Notion, and then thinks himself
obliged to vindicate it. Good man, he is easily warped, as his best Friends
complain and lament. They allow him to be serviceable in an honest Practical
Discourse, but find him not able to discern the Merits of a Cause in
Controversy, or, if he did, to manage it aright. If you will believe him, he is
a man of a Cold Phlegmatic complexion, p. 24. and he often boasts himself to
be one of Temper and Mildness. But then he must mean it thus, that he comes
sober and gentle to destroy our Religion, and to shatter Christianity, of which
he has given us sufficient proof in these as well as in his former papers.

Nay, we must not think him to be so Phlegmatic and Mild as he would persuade
his Readers he is, for I assure you he comes on like a Smart Antagonist, and
falls upon me without Mercy, as well as without Judgment. He complains of
Vinegar in my Ink p 4. but let the Reader judge what Gall there is in his, when
he charges me with coarse treating. Pref. p. 3. weak and sorry stuff p. 46
jumbling p. 24. banter p. 2. imperious rambling Pref. p. 16. Nay, he rises
higher, and declares that he finds in my papers Railing p. 52. sulphurous
eruptions p. 47. Malignity Pref. p. 4. nay (to consummate all)
Antichristianism. Pref. p. 4. You see the man disgorges choler, in stead of
Phlegm. He has got heart of late from his new Friendship and League with the
Vindicator, whose upstart Conceits he is resolved to defend, and especially the
One Article, though it be with defiance of all the other parts of Christianity.
Accordingly he declares with much confidence that the belief of Iesus's being
the Messiah is the ONLY Article indispensably necessary to make a man a
Christian, and (as the Consequence of that) that the belief of more is
unnecessary. Pref. p. 4.

Which is as much as if he should speak thus to his Auditors, There are a great
many Ministers of the Gospel that hold it is necessary to the making a man a
Christian that he should believe several Truths and Doctrines recorded in the
New Testament, as that we are by nature the children of wrath, that we are
freed from this wrath by the Meritorious and All-sufficient Undertakings of
Christ Jesus who is both God and Man; that he gave himself a Sacrifice for us,
and satisfied Divine Justice by paying an Infinite Price for us; that hereby he
has purchased Justification, Pardon of sins, and Eternal Life for us; that
this Savior and Redeemer rose from the dead, and is exalted unto Glory, and
will judge the quick and the dead at his last appearing. But, my Friends, I must
tell you, those that preach these doctrines as necessary to be known and
believed in order to make men members of Christ and of his Church, talk idly
and impertinently, and are not at all to be attended to. For it is my opinion,
and I have preached to you, and I have thrice printed it, that none of those
foresaid doctrines which either Jesus Christ or his Apostles delivered, are
necessary to be believed to give you a Title to Christianity. You and I may be
true Christians though we are ignorant of every one of those Doctrines before
rehearsed, though we know nothing of the nature and intent of them, nay though
we never heard of them: for there is but One Article of Faith, and no more,
that is required to make us Christians, and that is this, that Jesus is the
Messiah. If you believe this, take it upon my word, you need nothing more (I
mean as to matter of Faith) to make you True and Living Members of Christ. This
alone is that which properly deserves the Name of Justifying Faith, and is that
Faith which God will impute to a man for Righteousness. I have been blamed by
several of my Brethren in the Ministry for preaching and printing such
doctrines as this, and they have baffled me (as they think) out of the Holy
Scriptures, and have demonstrated that there are sundry other Points of Faith
that are required to be believed in order to the making a man a Christian; but
I cannot be brought to listen to what they say. Neither Churchmen nor Dissenters
shall bring me off from this persuasion. I will rather stick to Worthy Mr.
Hobbs and Mr. Lock then part with my Opinion at the solicitation of Thousands
of Divines and other Christians whom they call Orthodox. I Am chiefly confirmed
in this Notion by the latter of those Gentlemen whom I named, who cruises up
and down the Countries to propagate this doctrine, and I hope will take Steeple
in his Circuit very suddenly, and then he will further satisfy you (though I
should not have used that word Satisfying because it is ^o hateful to him) and
instruct you in that and some other matters relating to Religion, which no
Christian ear ever heard of before.

After Mr. Bold had asserted the Darling Proposition, he presents us with an
other, which is no less strange and monstrous, and from whence we may guess at
the Character of the Man, who is Mr. L's humble admirer. His express words are
these, Pref. p. 5. A man's knowing that Jesus Christ has revealed such a
doctrine, brings him not under an Obligation to believe it, but he may,
notwithstanding that, withold his Assent. This is the maxim of Mr. L's New
Christian, but the Mischievous Ingredients of it are sufficient to show the
nature and design of this Writer: for though he will perhaps say that he
delivers that afterward which is contrary to the interpretation which I make
of these words, yet the Answer is plain, that he makes nothing of Contradicting
himself, and therefore this is no Plea. He can say, and unsay, as he thinks
fit, of which I gave several Instances in my Reflections on what he writ
before. This then is no excuse at all, but rather shows his Weakness, that he
cannot tell when he talks inconsistently; or his Insincerity and Perverseness,
that he will make use of Contrarieties to serve his own ends. I know likewise
he will say that he speaks this of those Doctrines the belief whereof does not
constitute a man a Christian, but this is a mere Evasion, and he cannot possibly
make use of it with any shadow of Sense; for if you ask him what those
Doctrines are, he will tell you that they are those which I before specified,
and reckoned as Fundamentals of Christianity. But he denies them to be such,
and he cannot do otherwise; for if there be but One Article of Faith necessarily
to be believed to make a man a Christian (which is the thing he so stiffly
maintains) then all the rest are not necessary to be believed to make him so,
or to denominate him to be such.

Having thus prevented and obviated the Cavils which he might start, I Will now
very concisely present unto the Reader a few Remarks on that Proposition which
I quoted out of Mr. B's last printed Papers, viz. that I knowing that Christ
has revealed such or such a Doctrine, brings not a man under an obligation to
believe it, but he may notwithstanding that with hold his assent.

First, this baffles the end of Christ's revealing his doctrines to the Sons of
men, for without doubt they were revealed for this very purpose, that we should
yield assent to them. But this Gentleman tells you that there is no such thing,
Revelation has no affinity with Assent, and therefore this could not be the
End and Design of that. And herein he follows the Pattern sent him by a late
Writer in his Christianity not mysterious, p. 38. Divine Revelation, says he,
is not a motive of Assent, nor a ground of our persuasion, or a reason we have
to believe a thing, as if we were to receive it only because revealed.

Secondly, This separates Knowledge from Belief, and makes Religion, and even
Christianity it self a mere Notional Speculative thing. We may according to
this Wise Shaper of Christianity read the New Testament, and see what Christ
and the Apostles delivered there as matter of Belief, but we are not under an
obligation to believe what they delivered. We may, if we please, look into the
Gospel and the Acts (but have a care of peeping into the Epistles) and thence
stock our selves with Propositions, and furnish our Brains with Knowledge, as
well as our Tongues with something to talk of, but we are excused from yielding
Assent to the truth of them. Such a monstrous Idea does this Writer give us of
that Sacred Institution of the Blessed Jesus.

Thirdly, This is bidding defiance to the Divine Authority of the Scrip^ures,
for whoever refuses to believe those doctrines which are revealed in the Sacred
Writings, does in effect declare that those Writings are not divinely inspired.
And yet Mr. L's Disciple assures his Reader that though Truths and Doctrines be
revealed in the Writings of the New Testament, yet we are not obliged to give
credit to them, and to profess our belief of them: which is no other then
annulling the Authority of the Scriptures.

Fourthly, This Assertion destroys that very One Article which he contends for,
for if the revealing of a Truth obliges us not to believe it, then we may with
hold our Assent to this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, as well as to any
Other; for seeing they are all equally revealed in the Scripture, we ought to
make no difference. So that you see the poor Foolish Builder pulls down his own
Structure with his own hands. The Beloved Article which he so much insists upon
is ruined by what he himself asserts. This is the just Judgment of God on such
audacious Innovators, and Depravers of Christianity: Whilst they are throwing
down the Propositions which others with great reason assert, they demolish
their own.

Fifthly and lastly, This wild Proposition of the Replyer is destructive of all
Revealed Religion. Let there be never so many doctrines revealed to us by the
Holy Spirit in the Divine Oracles, a Christian is under no obligations
according to him to believe them, for all being alike revealed they may be
equally disbeliev'd. This is the New Theology of our giddy Worshipper of that
Idol Opinion of One Article. One would scarcely think that he should at this
time of day have the confidence to talk after this rate, and to impose such
dangerous and pernicious notions upon the world. Or, at least one would think
that this Writer and his Fellow should not stare, and show themselves so
extraordinarily concerned when we tell them that they are Betrayers of
Christianity.

Having descanted on his Main Propositions, and seen what the dismal Contents
of them are, I Will look into some other things which are most obvious in his
Reply. I expected he would have attempted to purge himself of those
Self-Contradictions which I laid to his charge, and proved in the plainest
manner imaginable from his own words, which I faithfully set down* but he, like
his brother-Criminal, deni^^^, but gives no reason why he does so. He follows
the example of the Vindicator, and unmercifully Repeats what he had said
before: And all the rest is studied Evasion, Subterfuge, Whiffling. It is in
vain to mention all the Particulars; it shall suffice to propound to the
Reader's view one of them, and from that let him guess at all the others.

I had been proving in my Reflections on Mr. B. the Absurdity of the Opinion of
One Article, and had showed how he contradicted himself, one Instance whereof
was this, that he had said, that a True Christian is as much obliged to believe
that the Holy Spirit is God, as to believe that Jesus is the Christ (which are
his own words) and yet he says, There is but that One Article [Iesus is the
Messias] to be believed to make a man a Christian Whence I inferred (and
whether justly or no, let the Reader judge) that he spoke things repugnant and
contradictory; for if a True Christian be as much obliged to believe one as the
other, then it is certain that a man cannot be a True Christian without
believing both, and if there be a necessity of believing both to make a man a
True Christian, then the belief of one only is not enough. Now, mind what the
Replyer says to this, and how fallaciously and sophistically he discourses, p.
19. It is as necessary for me, says he, to believe that Jesus was at Cana of
Galilee, and turned Water into Wine there, as it is that he was crucified
without the Gates of Jerusalem, because I have the same evidence for the one
that I have for the other. But I can not say it is of as much Importance for a
man to know the one, as it is to know the other; much less can I say that no
man can be a Christian till he knows and believes that Jesus was at Cana in
Galilee, etc. Which is so extraneous and foreign, and every ways so impertinent
and inconsistent, that if one did not know with what Writer this Gentleman
symbolizes, it might create astonishment to hear such a senseless and incoherent
application of these words: for whereas I had asserted that a man cannot be a
True Christian unless he believes other Articles and Doctrines, (viz. such as I
have mentioned before) as well as that One of Iesus's being the Christ; and
accordingly to disprove this he should have showed that those Articles are not
as necessary to be believed as that Single one he mentions, he (not regarding
the matter he was about) produces some Historical passages out of the New
Testament, viz. Christ's being at Cana of Galilee, and turning Water into Wine
there, etc. and then thinks (though one would think it is impossible he should)
he has effected what he undertook. But does not any considerate man see that
there is no comparison between these things which he alleges and those other
before spoken of, between the belief of some Historical Circumstances and the
belief of the Grand Fundamental Points of the Christian Religion? Is there not
a vast difference between these Inferior Truths and those that are of an
Higher nature, even such as are of the Essence of Christianity, and have
Immediate respect to the Salvation of our Souls? Though the belief of the
former be not absolutely necessary to make a man a Christian, does it follow
thence that the belief of the latter is not necessarily requisite for that
purpose? Who but the Replyer and the Vindicator (for he takes his part as to
this very thing in his Vindication) could first imagine any such thing, and
then puhlish it to the world? What Talent of Reasoning Mr. B. had before he
undertook this Cause of the One Article, I cannot tell; but since I am sure he
is a very poor Arguer, and makes out nothing of what he pretends to, but fills
up his pages with weak, dilute stuff, yea without any dash of what is sprightly
and generous.

And that he and his Cause run very low, is evident from what he says, p. 24.
in ^efence of his One Article. The Notion, says he, of One Article may induce
those who embrace it, to esteem more Persons Christians than the other Notion
can allow of. And thus far I fancy (and you say right, Good Sir, it is no more
than a fancy) the advantage is on the former's side, for I conceive there is no
hurt in letting Charity, as well as Patience, have its perfect work. Thus he;
and he is pleased to confess that this is the suggestion that comes from a cold
Phlegmatic temper. If he means that it is very flat and dull, I think every
body will agree with him. Tho truly we must grant that here are some footsteps
of Ingenuity (such as it is) for here is set forth the True Cause why this
doctrine of One Single Article is so vigorously urged at this day, and even
upheld by Pensions Old Reynard would not say a syllable of this throughout his
whole Treatise of the Reasonableness of Christianity, and his two Vindications
of it. He thought it was too gross and broad, therefore the Dissembler
concealed it. But Unwary Mr. Bold, who tells all he knows, acquaints us with
the true and proper design of the setting up of One Article, and the furious
appearing against all the rest. By this means, says he, we shall have more
Christians (such as they are) then ever were before. There are many that will
embrace One Point of Christianity, who will refuse to own the rest, so that we
shall have Christians in abundance. But whether they be True Christians, or
whether they be esteemed to be such (that is his word) is not material: but we
shall have the Number of these latter much increased and that is enough. And
besides, says he, we shall have more Charity (and there is no hurt in that:)
when there is but One Single Article of Christian Faith, we shall all Agree,
and what a fine world shall we have then?

Ay but, Sir, would it not be a better world if there were no Article at all,
and then besure there could be no Contention? whereas now there is occasion for
it, for some will not allow of the One Article you speak of. Therefore
according to your own way of Arguing it were best to throw off that One
Article, and with it all the other Fundamental and Necessary doctrines of our
Christan Faith, and then it is certain we shall have no Point of Faith to fall
out about, and Charity will ride in triumph, and yours and Mr. L's Christianity
shall bear it company in the same Triumphal Seat. This is the force and
strength of our Author's Reasoning, whatever he may pretend. Surely Steeple is
well taught when such a one is their instructor. Who would have thought that
there is such a Pious Contriver for Religion in any part of the Kings
dominions? Who could have thought that All the Fundamental Principles of our
Faith (except one) were to be cashiered to make way for Charity? And who can
think that the One Article so much talked of will remain long without the rest?
And, in a word, what man of ^ense and sobriety can think that these wild
Notions are not spread abroad on purpose to subvert the Foundations of
Christianity, and to bring in Infidelity, and to turn us out to the herd of
Deists and next to Atheists? Let not Mr. Bold say that these are Guesses (as in
one place I remember he says I am a Guesser, because I am a Critic, which is
as much sense according to his applying of it, as if one should say he is a
Conjurer because he is Rector of Steeple:) No, Sir, here is no Conjecture for
the thing that I say is plain and obvious, and depends upon natural and
rational consequences, and we every day see more and more the truth of it.

As Dull and Phlegmatic as he is, his Invention is ripe, witness that horrid
Fiction and False Imputation p. 25. line 3, etc. But I must not stand upon
these things.

Then he would argue from the use of the term Christian p 25. that there is but
One Article. which is so poor and mean that he deserves to (be what he is) Mr.
Locks Second in the present Combat. Yet he has so good an opinion of this
which he suggests, that he says, It may afford some light to this matter. No,
Sir, there is no such thing as Light here only a Wooden Candle-stick. I am loath
to suppose any Brass about it, though one would wonder how he could have that
face to offer any such thing as this to prove that there is but One Article to
be believed to constitute a Christian man, which was the ma^ter he undertook.

Our Mushrom-Scribe is drawn to the dreggs, and in his next Paragraphs does
nothing but Cant, and Hover in Obscure and Ambiguous terms: but has not a dram
of Reason left, as the Reader cannot but own, if he had nothing else to do but
to consult the pages.

Then he Catechises his Friends, p. 29, 30, 31. and makes sorry work of it, but
at last it is observable how this Wild Reasoner, who had been all along in his
Reply (as well as in his former Papers) endeavoring to assert the necessity of
but One Article in Christianity, and opposing what I had said in behalf of More
Articles, it is observable (I say) that at last he gives up the Cause, and
meekly prostrates himself to what I had offered: Let a man believe, says he,
never so many particular doctrines taught by Christ and his Apostles, that
belief will prove no more but that he believes Jesus is the Messiah, p. 32. If
the believing of many doctrines taught by Christ and his Apostles be the same
with believing that One doctrine, why then has he made all this stir? for if
many will prove no more than one, then vice versa, one will prove to be many;
and if his One Article be thus multiplied, than why does he quarrel with me for
asserting Many Articles?

But still there must be (whatever comes of it) but One Article, and he
undertakes to prove it, p. 36. from St. John's words, Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5. 1. Which every one, says he, I
suppose will acknowledge to be as much as to say, ^ Christian. And thence
infers, If the belief of more Articles was absolutely necessary to make a
person a Christian, it could not with truth be said, Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Which is a farther proof of the
Shallowness, or (which is worse) of the willful Obstinacy of this blind
Worshiper of the Idol that Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Lock have set up: for any one that
is moderately versed in this Epistle of St. John knows that it is a Collection
of several Marks and Evidences whereby persons may examine and know whether
they be True Believers, and Christians indeed; and among several others which
he assigns this is one, that they believe Jesus to be the Christ. Now, can any
one that is not very Weak or perverse infer hence, that the belief of no other
Article but this is absolutely necessary to make a man a Christian? Is it not
plain from other places in this Epistle that Love to God and the brethren,
keeping the Commandments, etc. are Signs and Evidences of Regeneration, as well
as believing Jesus to be the Messiah? And why then upon the mentioning of this
latter in the place forecited, must we conclude that none of those are
absolutely necessary to make one a Christian or a Regenerate person? If we
should follow Mr. Bold's way of Interpreting, then, when it is said in this
Epistle, Every one that does righteousness is born of God, chapter 2. v. 29. we
must infer that doing of righteousness, without any believing, gives us a title
to Regeneration: And when it is said, Every one that loves (which refers to
loving one an other in the same verse) is born of God, chapter 4. v. 7. we must
thence gather that Brotherly Love of it self, abstract from all Believing, and
consequently from believing that Jesus is the Messiah, is the only thing
necessarily required of us to make us Christians; and so our Learned and
Profound Arguer baffles himself, and ruins his own One Article.

Our Rambling Disputer tells us in the same place, that St. John the Divine was
a more Reverend Rector than the Rector of Steeple: where, besides the Whimsical
Conceitedness of the Style, he humbly intimates that he himself is a Reverend
Rector, for else he could not say, the other is more Reverend.

What he demands, p. 40 about those terms the Son of God and the Messiah, I
have answered in the foregoing Discourse.

I urged from Acts 8. 37. that the Son of God and the Messiah are not terms of
the same signification, because else the Eunuch could not say that he believed
Jesus Christ to be the Son of God. To which he returns this fantastic Reply, I
think, says he, they amount to somewhat more, viz. that Jesus Christ is The
Christ. Which has not the least foundation in the Original, from whence only
he can pretend to borrow it, and therefore we must look upon it as a mere
Shuffle. And indeed afterward he does as good as confess it, for
notwithstanding his thinking it to be a good Reply, he unthinks it, but puts us
off with an other groundless Conceit, (the same that the Vindicator had made
use of) viz. that Jesus Christ is used in the New Testament as a Proper Name,
as if only his being called Jesus or Christ was sense of those places where the
words Jesus and Christ are so often mentioned in Scripture.

At the conclusion of all, I must own myself obliged to this Dorset-shire
Gentleman for any thing that he has sai'd of me in some places of his last
Papers that looks Respectfully and Civilly, and in a strain above what I
expected or desired. Wherefore, abstracting from our present Debate, I am ready
at all times to express the Deference which I owe to his Person and Office, and
more over I assure him that I am in perfect Charity with him and all men,
though there is no Consideration whatsoever can bribe me to a concealment of my
dislike of his present Enterprise.

Brief Reflections on a late pretended Answer of a Nameless Socinian to a
Discourse, entitled, The Socinian Creed.
THe Double^column'd Gentlemen begin to appear again, and one of them has
published a Pamphlet which he calls at a venture The Agreement of the
Unitarians with the Catholic Church, etc. And truly I am to own with great
thankfulness the honor he does me there of joining me with Three Learned
Prelates of our Church. I am bound to make some Return for this extraordinary
kindness, and perhaps he may meet with it somewhere in this Paper. But this I
must needs add that he is too lavish and excessive in his favors when he gives
me the Preference to those Eminent Persons both in his Title and his Book: for
the First part of this Learned Scrible bears this Inscription, An Answer to Mr.
Edwards, wherein the Nameless Author pretends to say something with relation to
a Book which I lately committed to the public view, entitled The Socinian
Creed: in which I first gave a brief, but impartial Account of those Erroneous
and Unsound Principles which are generally espoused by the Foreign and English
Socinians; and then I showed the proper Tendency of them to Irreligion and
Atheism.

So that according to this Distribution of my Work, the Socinian Brother who
undertook-to answer it was obliged in the first place either to confess that
those Principles and Tenants were owned by that Party of men both at home and
abroad, or else to prove that they were not. And then, as to the Other Division
of my Task, he was bound either to acknowledge that the Socinian Principles and
Doctrines have a Tendency to Irreligion and Infidelity, or else he was under a
necessity of showing that they have no such thing. Any man of good reason and
sense would expect these things from him, and accordingly let us see what this
Anonymous Writer has done, and thence gather whether he has acted the part of
an Answerer, which he took upon him.

As to the first Part it is plain before the Readers e^es that this Pamphleteer
is so far from disowning most of those Articles and Doctrines which I fixed
upon the Socinians, and from charging me with wronging them in asserting that
the Foreign and English Socinians defend these very Articles in their Writings,
he is so far (I say) from this that in effect he acknowledges to the world that
they are the very doctrines and sentiments of those persons, and that they are
worded in that very manner as I set them down, and that the Authors whom I
quoted delivered them in those very terms, and that I have not misrepresented
any of them. Which undeniably appears from this, that he undertakes not to
invalidate any one of my References or Quotations. If I had in the least
perverted the sense and meaning of any single Socinian Writer that I produced,
if I had in any degree falsified in my Citation of them, I should most
certainly have heard it from this Gentleman in this his last Effort, especially
when he particularly mentions my References and Quotations. p. 3. Out of that
vast number of them which I made use of he would not have failed to set down
one Instance at least, if he could have met with it, of my injuring the
Racovian Authors by falsely alleging their Writings.

But so it is, there is not one single Quotation or Reference, which I brought
to prove and confirm what I avouched concerning the Socinians, that he excepts
against; which most assuredly he would have done, if there had been the least
ground imaginable for it. And it is certain that he had Time enough to do it,
since I published what I writ, if the thing had been any ways feasible: and I
suppose it will be granted that he wanted not Will to effect it. So then from
his not doing it, nor so much as attempting it we may conclude his utter
Inability and hereby he does as good as grant that the Socinians are guilty of
All they stand charged with by me in the Socinian Creed. He lets the world know
that I have done them right, and that I have fathered nothing upon them falsely.
He vouches the Truth of my Collections, he asserts the faithfulness of my
Testimonies and Proofs out of the Original Authors. By all which he arraigns
and convicts himself, and stabs his own Cause. And yet this he calls an Answer
to me. Let the Reader judge of the Consistency of these things, and thence form
a suitable Idea of this Wild and Sensles Undertaker.

Then, as to the other Articles of the Socinian Creed, it is observable that he
is loath to let the world know by a formal Confession from him that he and his
Friends allow of those doctrines, and therefore he betakes himself to the
wonted way of Shuffling, Equivocating and Dissembling; and indeed he performs
this part to a Wonder, and almost exceeds the late Vindicator in this excellent
faculty. It is pleasant to see how he higgles and dodges. says and unsays, has
neither regard to the Truth, nor to what he says himself. But we must not
think this strange, for that man will take the liberty to contradict himself
who is Resolved to do so to others. Nay, it cannot escape the Reader's
observation that this Anonymous Scribe, merely to avoid the Imputation of some
Articles I fastened on the Socinians, ven^ures to renounce what the most
Considerable and Staunch men of that Party, yea what the Modern and Domestic
Socinians have in express terms asserted:

Of which I will give one instance (though there are several others:) He may
for our parts, says he, be Anathema that teaches or believes that doctrine,
viz that there is no Merit in what Christ did or suffered, and that he made not
Satisfaction for our sins p. 7. Yet one of the First-Rate Racovians tells us
that it was taught by Soci^us and his brethren in plain and direct words, that
Smalc. cont. Frantz. Disput. 4
the Opinion of those is false, absurd and pernicious who have feigned that
there is any such thing as Merit i^ Christ. And this Author himself speaking of
Christ's Merit and Satisfaction pronounces them Homil 4. in 1 Johan Catechism de
morte Christi. Qu. 12.
Fiction, a Deceitful opinion, erroneous and very dangerous. And the English
Socinians at this day (of whom our present Penman without a Name is one)
declare their disbelief and abhorrence of this Persuasion, viz. that Christ
Merited and Satisfied for us. In one of their late Prints they let us know that
The Antit^lu^tarian Scheme of Religion. p. 18.
the Oblation which Christ made of himself was not made to the Justice of God,
or by way of Reparation, but, as all other Sacrifices, (viz. of Beasts) by way
of humble suit. And (which is more) these men have scoffed at and ridiculed the
Merits and Satisfaction of our Blessed Lord, as the Reader may satisfy himself
in the Letter of Resolution concerning the doctrine of the Trinity. p. 7. And
the Antitrinitarian Scheme of Religion, p. 18. and a Letter to the Clergy of
both Universities. chap. 6. and 8. all which I have particularly and distinctly
quoted in the account of the Socinian Creed. And it is well known that in
several others of their Pamphlets they have derided and exposed the Merit and
Satisfaction of our Savior: and yet now they Anathematize those that do so.

Which, with abundance of other the like Instances in this last attempt of
theirs, shows a Prof^igate sort of Writers they are. They are not afraid to
call down a Curse upon their own heads: and with their Execrations they mix the
most palpable and notorious Falsehoods, and thereby convince us that they have
abandoned all Faith and Integrity, that they are under an obstinate resolution
to debauch their Understandings, to abuse their Reasons and Consciences, and to
impose upon the world.

We must either say this of them, or else (which I would be most willing to
believe) that they are disposed to a Recanta^ion, and are inclined to
relinquish several of those Articles which they stiffly mantain'd before. I hope
it will be improved into a full sincere Renuntiation. However, I have gained
this Point; that I have brought them to Retract in words at least, some of the
Articles of their Creed. It is worthy of our Remark that whereas in some of
their first Prints they answered very tamely to the name of Socinians, now this
Gentleman throws off this Character, and will no longer bear that Badg: which
shows that they are Changeable, and design some New model, and have a mind ^o
have it graced with a New Title. Our Nameless Trimmer proclaim his Agreement
with the Catholic Church, and very orthodoxly he would seem to talk concerning
the Incarnation of Christ and some other Doctrines, p. 25, 26, etc. as if he
were inclined to tack about, and leave the Socinian quarters. Whatever he
intends* this is plain that he confutes himself and his Party, and then he
calls it an Answer to me. Indeed these are the best sort of Answers a man would
desire: and to say Truth, the Party cannot afford any other.

But behold the Inconsistent Folly and Stupidity of the Man! Though he frankly
submits to my References and Citations, and even throws up some of the Articles
of his own Creed, yet he is pleased to charge me with Infamations in the
Title Page of his book. An Intelligent person would think that those Great and
Undeniable Truths which I had asserted in my late Treatise are neither
Infamations nor Defamations, they being founded upon Reason, Antiquity, and
Scripture. Nor could the several members of the Indictment which I drew up
against the Socinians deserve that Name which he uses, because he himself owns
the greatest part of them to be True. Wherefore all that can be said is that
Infamations is a dainty term that he is much taken with, and accordingly he
resolved that it should come in some where, right or wrong, into his Papers;
and where better than in the Front of them, to make up the Raree Show? But if
we will attend to the true import and meaning of the word there, it is this,
that the Socinian Doctrines are Infamous, and that I had rightly represented
them as such, and that this Writer, who dare not show his head, or subscribe
his Name, is not able to disprove either of these things. Thus it is the
deserved Lot of this sort of men that the more they write the more they expose
themselves, and discover to world the Incoherence of their Assertions, the
Vanity of their Pretenses, the Weakness of their Judgment, the Strength of
their Prejudice, and above all the Badness of their Designs and Projects, which
all Wise and good Men see and abhor.

Next, as to the Second Part of my late Discourse, it is to be observed that he
makes no Reply to the imputation of that Tendency to Irreligion and Atheism
which I so often urged, and as often proved against the men of Racovia, and the
very English Unitarians. And indeed I was not singular in this Impeachment of
them, for I evinced it to be the persuasion of Others (of Great Judgment and
Sagacity) that sundry of the Socinian Opinions have a natural Vergency to
Infidelity and Impiety, and one that has writ since, and professes to the
treat the Socinians with Civility and Good Temper (and would be so treated by
them again, as he bespeaks their kindness in his Preface) is not shie of using
this very language, but in plain and downright terms tells us that Mr. Norr^'s
Acco^nt o^ Reason and Faith, p. 13.
the general Principle on which the body of Socinianism turns is of that
nature that it advances the most Absurd, and withal the most Impious and
Blasphemous Proposition imaginable. And in another place, As from a Socinian it
is easy to commence a Deist, so he that is once a Deist is in a hopeful way to
be an Aiheist whenever he pleases. And afterward thus, in his Address to the
Socinians, The Consequence of your Principle, (viz. That nothing is to be
believed but what they can comprehend) leads you not only out of Christianity,
but out of all Religion whether Natural or Revealed, even beyond Deism, even
into Atheism it self* And again he tells them, that their Principle of
believing nothing but what they can comprehend directly leads to Atheism. It
seems then that though Atheism be voted by some a Rude and Unmannerly word, and
though Atheist be thought to be an Ungenteel term, (wherefore the Plausible and
Modish Style of [Deist] is used, and is Bishop of Worcester's Pref. to his
Vind. of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
a Name that gains reputation among all such as hate Religion, but know not how
oth^rwise to distinguish themselves from professed Atheists, which they would
by no means be taken for) though, I say, the Title of Atheist be not modish and
fine enough for some men's mouths, yet we see that this Gentleman, who Pref. to
the Account of Reason and Faith.
remonstrates with some Passion against that Rudeness of Style which he espies
in some Writers, and particularly engages before hand to show himself Civil to
the Socinians, yet boggles not in the least at this way of Expression, but with
great freedom and boldness declares it to be his Opinion and Belief that these
men are in the next capacity to be Atheists, and that their Principles and
Doctrines directly lead to Atheism, as well as to Impiety and Blasphemy. And
that we may know he is in good earnest, he repeats this over and over again.
This is the very thing which I undertook to prove in my late Discourse (and I
hope to the satisfaction of every unbiased Reader) by that plentiful
Enumeration and Induction of Particulars which I offered, whence I demonstrated
that a great number of the Socinian Articles naturally tend to the promoting*
of Irreligion and Profaneness, and even to the effacing of the Sense of a
Deity.

But what says our present Author to this, who has taken upon him the Office
of an Answerer? Why truly he Skulks, and hides his baffled head, and has not
one syllable to say for himself, or against me. This is a new kind of Answerer,
a Silent one, because he is conscious to himself that nothing can be offered.
It is not to be doubted that if the foresaid Charge could have been evaded any
ways, he would have attempted it. Had there been any thing said by me against
his Party which he could have disproved, questionless he would have undertaken
it. Had there been any show of Reason or Truth on his side, he would have let
us known it. Had there been any Excuse to be invented, he would not have failed
to publish it, and that with open Mouth. Wherefore all persons of Understanding
must conclude that he acknowledges the Truth and Reality of what I objected to
the Socinians, viz. that most of their Doctrines and Principles damp Religion,
and nourish Vice, and foster Atheistical and Licentious Practices: which is the
thing that makes Socinianism so Fashionable at this day, and gains it so many
Proselytes.

And now from the whole what a Strange Prospect have we of the Undertaking of
this Doughty Champion for the Socinian Cause? I appeal to the Reader whether
his Incoherent and Shattered Pamphlet can be called an Answer, and consequently
whether the Men of Racovia, who have much pretended to Grammar and Criticism,
speak Properly ly^and (which is a higher Consequence) whether they have not
ab^ured all Modesty in obtruding such a piece of work upon the world. This
shows that their business is to make a Noise, whether there be any Sense or
^ignificancy go along with it or no. They make a great stir, but effect
nothing; they are very busy, but yet to no purpose. This we may truly say,
Their Heads are a proof, against some Philosophers, that there may be Motion
where there is Emptiness. I promis^d the Gentlemen before hand that if any
thing substantial in the way of Reply were offered by them, I would not be
backward to meet the Answerer with a Rejoinder: but here is nothing that looks
like it, he is so far from offering any thing of Substance, that he does not so
much as pretend to a Shadow of any thing that is of that nature. There is not
one Proposition that I laid down which is shaken by him, and he has not so
much as started One Objection against all I writ, and yet he has the
Confidence and Effrontery to dub his Pamphlet an Answer.

But it may be this will end well, it seems to argue that the Socinians are
drawn to the very dreggs, and have nothing to alledg in their behalf. This
looks as if their Plenipotentiaries were inclined to a Treaty of Peace, and
were forward to put an end to the Seven Years War between the Unitarians and
Trinitarians* For what can we think else when all their Ammunition is spent,
and they can fight no longer? This Champion who was chosen and culled out of
the whole Host of the Unitarians to engage the Contrary Side, le^s fall his
Weapons. His Courage abates, and his Spirits flag and dwindle: He dares not
grapple with the Arguments I proposed, neither does he produce any of his own.
He raises no Exceptions against me nor takes any notice of mine against him.
Nay, which is Wondrous and Astonishing, his Invention is so barren that he
cannot coin any new Cavils against what I delivered, nor rally up any old ones.
Thus when they have no Forces to bring into the field, the War must needs
cease. When they surrender their Garrisons and Holds (as I have showed they do)
and fairly give up the Cause, what can we conclude but that they are coming
over to us?

And as for my self particularly, whatever the matter is, they are very
Complaisant, and surely they intend in a short time to take me into their
favor For though this Infallible Judge is pleased to tell the world that I
have writ some trifling books (those he means that I have writ against his
Brethren of Racovia) and some indifferent ones, those I suppose which I have
writ against a Friend of theirs lately) yet out of abundant grace and goodwill,
he vouchsafes to declare that somebody has been serviceable to the Common
Christianity by some Learned Books, p. 17. (I wish I could say as much of our
Author): and again, that he has writ diverse Good Books, and one Excellent one,
p. 3. Though one would be loath to take a Disciple of Socinus upon his bare
word, and though it would be immodest and vainglorious to attribute or apply
any such thing to my self, yet as it is the frank Testimony of an Adversary,
who would not esteem it as a singular Mark of Favor? who would not resent
these Obliging Kindnesses from an Enemy, especially when they are mixed with
Reflections, as in the present case? for then it is a sign that the Approbation
forced its way through Calumnies and Falsehoods. In short, I perceive they have
a mind to be Friends with me, they would have at least a Cessation of Arms, if
I would agree to it.

On which occasion I will take leave to say, that I am most heartily Glad that
I have appeared in this Cause, maugre all the insults of the Adversaries; I
thank the Father of Lights that he was pleased to dispose me to this Honorable
Service, and in such a Juncture, when the whole Posse of the Unitarians and
their Allies attacked the Christian Faith with such Force and fury. When these
Granadiers came on so fiercly, who could but expect an Assault? who was not
sensible that Religion was invaded, and that Christianity it self was in
extreme danger? It is a Comfortable Reflection to me that I have born up
against the Bold Aggressors, and that I have, according to my mean powers,
asserted and vindicated the Truth with that warmth and zeal which become every
Christian Breast. And now I must tell them I scorn to flinch from so good a
Cause as I have undertaken* and I will never submit to gratify the humor and
genius of Deists and Scepticks, or any Well Willers to Racovia. Though I am as
great an Admirer and Lover of Civility and Good Temper as any Man, yet I will
never be bribed to a fainthearted Relinquishing of the Truth. No: I will by the
Divine Aid, vindicate the Religion of the New Testament, and the Faith of the
Christian Church in all ages, and that with open face. And particularly, as to
what I last writ and published, I will make it stand the shock of the most
daring Socinian in Christendom.

But to let these Gentlemen see that I am no Man of Contention, I declare to
them that I am not averse from complying with their Offers, if they be Sincere
and in Good Earnest, and if they resolve not to violate their own Articles of
Peace. I will forgive their Colts teeth (as this pleasant Gentleman words it)
if for the future they use not (as they have done in most of their Writings)
those of the Bear. And why indeed should I contend with these Catholic and
Orthodox Men? for that is the Style now in their last Print. Who will fall out
with those that profess Agreement with the Catholic Church? But especially the
Title of Orthodox (which they so abhorred) is much courted by this Author, as
the Reader cannot but observe. Which may be an occasion to us to think that
these Persons are inclined to do something to deserve that Name. It is my
hearty Prayer and Wish that they may show themselves to be of this number. And
I promise them thus far to yield to the Terms of Peace, that if they renew not
the Quarrel, and assault me not afresh, this shall be our Last Campaign, and so
here is an End to our Debates and Rencounters.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 29. read and if those, p. 11. l. 14. r. Vnreaso^ably, p. 12. l.
penult. r. which, p. 13. l. 6. r. numbers, l. 11. r. nor the, p. 19. l. 15. r
him for, p. 33. l. 22. r. assented, p. 34. l. 27. r. task l. 31. for they r.
you, p. 38. l. 21. r. declare, p. 39. l. 15. dele the, p 42. l. 20. r. more to,
p. 46. l. r. peruse, p. 56. l. 17. r. owns, p. 5^. l. 31. r. bandied, p. 64. l.
4. dele and, p. 75. l. 13* for give r. go, p. 94. l. 22. before to insert it.

BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. John Edwards.
AN Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a Probale Resolution of them, in two Vol.
8^.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, with a Continued Illustration of several Difficult Texts
throughout the whole Work. In three Vol* 8^.

Some Thoughts concerning the several Causes and Occasions of Atheism,
especially in the Present Age, with some brief Reflections on Socinianism, and
on a Late Book entitled, The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in
the Scriptures 8^. price 1 s. 6 d.

A Demonstration of the Existence and Providence of God from the Contemplation
of the visible Structure of the Greater and the Lesser World. In two Parts. The
first showing the Excellent Contrivance of the Heavens, Earth, Sea, etc. The
second, the wonderful Formation of the Body of Man. 8^. price 4 s,

Socinianism Unmasked: A Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of a Late
Writer's Opinion concerning the Necessity of only One Article of Christian
Faith, and of his other Assertions in his Late Book Entitled, The
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures, and in his
Vindication of it; with a brief Reply to another (Professed) Socinian Writer.
8^. price 1 s. 6 d.

The Socinian Creed: Or a Brief Account of the professed Tenants and Doctrines
of the Foreign and English Socinians, wherein is showed the Tendency of them
to Irreligion and Atheism. With Proper Antidotes against them. 8^. price 3 s.

A Brief Vindication of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, as
also of the Clergy, Universities, and Public Schools from Mr. Lock's
Reflections upon them. With some Animadversions on two other late Pamphlets,
viz. of Mr. Bold and a Nameless Socinian Writer. 8^. price 1 s. 6 d.

Brief Remarks upon Mr. Whiston's New Theory of the Earth: and upon another
Gentleman's Objections against some Passages in a Discourse of the Existence
and Providence of God, relating to the Copernican Hypothesis. 8^. price 6 d.

BOOKS Printed for Jonathan Robinson, and John Wyat.
A Practical Exposition on the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, in two
Volumes, in Quarto.

The Vanity of the World, with other Sermons, in 8 vo.

Sermons or Discourses on several Scriptures, in Four Volumes, in Octavo.

The Almost Christian discovered, in some Sermons on Acts 26. 28. All these
written by the Right Reverend Father in God Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop
of Londonderry.

Bishop Usher's Life and Letters. By Dr* Parr, in Folio.

-- 's Body of Divinity, or the Sum and Substance of the Christian Religion,
Folio.

-- 's 22 Sermons on several Subjects, Fol.

Iosephus's History of the Jews, Folio.

Dr. Bates's Harmony of the Divine Attributes, Octavo. 4th Edition, 1697.

Charron of Wisdom, in three Books.

All Dr. Antony Walker' s Works, viz.

The Sinfulness and Danger of delaying Repentance.

The Virtuous Woman, or the Life of the Countess of Warwick.

The Virtuous Wife, or the Life of Mrs. Eliz. Walker.

His Sermons of Water-drinking, Preached at Tunbridge wells, etc.

The worthy Communicant, a Treatise showing the due Order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The 17th Edition. By Jeremiah Dyke. Newly
reprinted 1697.

The Poor Doubting Christian drawn unto Christ. By Thomas Hooker.

Ovid's Metamorphosis, in English Verse. By George Sandys.

Aesop's Fables in Prose, with Cuts

Solitude improved by divine Meditation. By Nathaniel Ranew, late Rector of
Felsted in Essex.

Practical Discourses concerning Death and Heaven. By Nathaniel Ranew.

Correction, Instruction, or a Treatise of Afflictions. By Tho. Case.

The Principles of Christian Religion, with a brief Method of the Doctrine
thereof. By Bishop Usher.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the fullness of Christ, In two Sermons. By W. Bridge.

Brinsley's Posing of the parts reprinted 1697.

Sir Simon D'ews Journal of all Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments, Folio.

Bacons Historical and Political account of the Government of England.

FINIS.

