AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT: For the
Leavying of MONEYS, by way of Excise, or, New-Impost, As well for the better
securing of TRADE, as for the maintenance of the ARMY raised by the PARLIAMENT,
and payment of the Debts of the Commonwealth.

Wherein the said LORDS and COMMONS have thought fit To alter the Rates Printed
in a former Ordinance, And to impose other and lower CHARGES upon the several
Commodities herein expressed, as by a SCHEDULE hereunto annexed appears.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed, by Richard Cotes and John Raworth, 1643.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the speedy Raising
and Levying of Moneys, by way of Charge and New-Impost, upon the several
Commodities, in a Schedule hereunto annexed, contained, as well for the better
securing of Trade, as for the maintenance of the Forces raised for the defense
of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, both by Sea and Land, as for and toward
the payment of the Debts of the Commonwealth, for which the Public Faith is,
or shall be engaged.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the great necessity, of providing present supply for the
preservation of this Kingdom, our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, from utter
ruin and destruction, by the restless and cruel Designs, Practices, and
Treacheries of Papists, and Malignant persons; And for that many great Leavies
have been already made for the purposes aforesaid, which the well-affected of
the Kingdom have willingly born, and the Malignants have endeavored by all
cunning ways to evade. By reason whereof, the said Lords and Commons hold it
fit, That some constant and indifferent way should be had and established, for
the Leavying of Moneys for the future maintenance of the Parliament Forces,
and other great Affairs of the Common wealth; whereby the Malignants and
Neutralls may be compelled to pay their proportionable parts of the said
Charges, and the Subjects in general be rated and taxed with as much ease and
indifferency as may be: For which purpose, an Ordinance was lately made by the
said Lords and Commons, for setting of a Charge, or new Impost upon the
several Commodities in a Schedule thereunto annexed specified. Now for the
better and more speedy advancement of this work, and the more easy Payment of
the said Charge, and for other weighty considerations, the said Lords and
Commons have thought fit to alter the said former Rates, and to impose other
and lower Charges upon the several Commodities in a Schedule hereunto annexed
expressed, then were imposed by the said former Ordinance; And do therefore
Ordain, That the said former Ordinance, and every matter therein contained, be
hereby adnulled and repealed, and not to be put in execution in all or any part
thereof, by any person or persons whatsoever, but that this present Ordinance
do take effect, and be observed by all and every person and persons, as if the
said former Ordinance had not been made. And the said Lords and Commons do
hereby Ordain and Declare, That the several Rates and Charges in the Schedule
hereunto annexed contained, shall be set and laid, and are hereby set, laid,
and imposed, upon all and every the commodities within this Realm, the Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick, over and above all Customs, and other Duties,
due and payable for the same.

The Schedule.
IN this Schedule are contained the Excise, and new Impost, by this Ordinance,
set and imposed upon the several Commodities herein mentioned.

l. s. d. Tobacco FOr every pound of Tobacco which is not of the English
Plantations, as well already imported, and remaining in the hands of the
Merchant or Importer, as to be imported to be paid by the first buyer thereof
from the Merchant or Importer, two shillings 0 2 0 For every Pound of Tobacco
of the English Plantations, as well imported, and remaining in the hands of the
Merchant or Importer, as to be imported to be paid by the first Buyer thereof,
from the Merchant or Importer, four pence 00 00 04 For all Tobacco now
remaining in the hands of the Ingrosser or Seller thereof, by whole sale, to be
paid by the said Ingrosser or Seller upon the sale thereof, the like respective
Rates as aforesaid. Wines. For every Tun of Wine already imported or to be
imported to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer,
and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity, five pound 05 00 00
For every Tun of Wine bought for private use, to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof, from the Merchant or Importer, and fo after that Rate for a greater or
lesser quantity, five pound 05 00 00 Which Rates so to be paid by the Retailers
of Wine shall be allowed them upon the sale thereof in the price. And for all
Wines now remaining in the Vintners or Retailers hands, they shall pay only
half Excise, the same to be allowed them in the price thereof upon the sale.
And for all Wines remaining in the hands of the Cooper or other Trader in Wine,
they shall pay the whole Excise, the same to be allowed them in the price upon
the sale thereof. Strong Waters For all strong Waters, and Aqua vitae imported,
or to be imported, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity, after the
Rate of eight pence the Gallon. 00 00 08 And for all strong Waters and Aqua
vitae made or distilled within the Realm, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwicke, the like Rate to be paid by the Maker or Distiller thereof. Beer and
Ale. For every Barrel of Beer or Ale of eight shillings the Barrel and
upwards sold, to be paid by the Brewer or Maker thereof, and to be allowed him
in the price thereof, two shillings. 00 02 00 For every Barrel of Beer or Ale
of eight shillings the Barrel, and upwards, which any Housekeeper Breweth for
his own spending, to be paid by every such Housekeeper, twelve pence. 00 01 00
For every Barrel of six shillings Beer, or above four shillings the Barrel,
sold, to be paid by the Brewer or Maker thereof, and to be allowed him in the
price, six pence. 00 00 06 And the like Rate to be paid by all others who Brew
the like Beer for their own spending. Perry and Syder. For every Hogs head of
Perry or Syder, sold, to be paid by the first Retailer thereof, and so after
the same Rate for a Barrel, or any Measure above a Barrel, two shillings. 00
02 00 For every Hogs-head of Perry or Syder bought for private use, to be paid
by the first buyer thereof, twelve pence. 00 01 00 For every Hogs-head of Perry
or Syder which any Housekeeper makes for his own spending, to be paid by
every such Housekeeper, twelve pence. 00 01 00 Provided, That for all Beer or
Ale, Perry or Syder now remaining in the hands of any Inne-holders, or other
Retailers thereof, they shall only pay the half Excise. And for all Beer or
Ale, Perry or Syder to be used for fishing at Sea, no Excise to be paid.
Grocery For all Grocery Ware imported, or to be imported, for every twenty
shillings value thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser value,
to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer, twelve
pence. 00 01 00 Druggs Item, For all sorts of Druggs imported or to be
imported, for every twenty shillings value thereof, and so after that Rate for
a greater or lesser value, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the
Merchant or Importer, twelve pence. 00 01 00 Mercery. For all sorts of
Mercery-ware imported, or to be imported for every twenty shillings value
thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser value to be paid by the
first Buyer thereof, from the Merchant or Importer, twelve pence. 00 01 00
Silks Imported. For all Raw Silks imported or to be imported for every twenty
shillings value thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser value,
six pence. 00 00 06 For other Silk in the Gumm, ready thrown imported, or to be
imported for every twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably, nine
pence. 00 00 09 For all other Silks Dyed, imported, or to be imported for
every twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably the said several
Rates for Silks to be paid by the first Buyer thereof, from the Merchant or
Importer, twelve pence 00 01 00 Lynnen Drapery. For all sorts of Linen, both
fine and course imported, or to be imported for every twenty shillings value
thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer thereof, from the
Merchant or Importer, twelve pence 00 01 00 Haberdashery For all sorts of
Habberdashery-ware imported, or to be imported, for every twenty shillings
value thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer thereof,
from the Merchant or Importer, twelve pence 00 01 00 Upholstry For all sorts of
Upholstery Ware Imported and to be Imported, for every Twenty shillings value
thereof and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the
Merchant or Importer, Twelve pence. 00 01 00 Saltry. For all sorts of Saltery
wares Imported or to be Imported, for every Twenty shillings value thereof, and
so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer, Six pence. 00 00 06 Soap. For all Soap made within the Realm,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, for every Firkin of the best sort, Ten
pence; and for every Firkin of the second sort, Nine pence; and for every
Firkin of the worst sort, Eight pence; and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser quantity to be paid by the maker thereof. 00 00 10 00 00 09 00 00 08 For
all Soap Imported or to be Imported, for every Twenty shillings value thereof,
and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant
or Importer, Eighteen pence. 00 01 06 Drapery, new and old For all sorts of
Woollen Cloth, and other commodities made of, or mixed with Wool, made or spent
within this Realm, the Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, for every Twenty
shillings value thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof, Six pence. 00 00 06 Paper. For all Paper bought of the Merchant, for
every Twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the
first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer, Twelve pence. 00 01 00 Skins
and Leather. For all Skins and Leather Imported or to be Imported, for every
Twenty shillings value thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the first
Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer, Twelve pence. 00 01 00 Glass-men
For all Glasses and earthen Ware Imported or to be Imported, for every twenty
shillings value thereof, and so proportionably to be paid by the first Buyer
thereof from the Merchant or Importer, Twelve pence. 00 01 00

All which Rates to be paid for any Foreign Commodities Imported, shall be
paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer, or from the
Broker who uses to deal between the Merchant and the Shopkeeper, and for
all the Commodities hereby charged with the Excise in manner aforesaid, which
shall be sold or delivered at a price.

I. PRovided that this Ordinance shall not extend to any the Commodities in the
said Schedule mentioned, which are already bought from the Merchant, or
Importer thereof, by any person or persons who has bought the same to sell
again, or spend, except it be otherwise particularly expressed in the said
Schedule.

II. And be it ordained, That every person or persons who has Imported, or
shall import any the Commodities in the said Schedule mentioned, for his own
private use or spending, or for any other purpose then to sell again, shall
pay the Rates and Charges hereby set and Imposed upon the same Commodities.

III. Item, For all Commodities here Rated, which are first Imported, and after
Exported beyond the Sea, the Excise thereof being paid, and due proof thereof
made by Oath of the party or Witnesses; which Oath the said Commissioners, or
the major part of them, or such as they shall appoint under their Hands and
Seals, shall have power to administer, shall be repaid, and the said
Commissioners and their Deputies shall have power to repay the same
accordingly; Provided, that if any Merchant, or other Buyer of any Clothes, or
other Woollen commodities made within this Realm, the Dominion of Wales, or
Town of Berwick, shall buy the same to Transport beyond the Seas, and shall
accordingly Transport the same, then no Excise thereof to be paid.

IV. And for the better levying of the Moneys hereby to be raised, Be it
Ordained by the Lords and Commons, That an Office be from henceforth erected in
the City of London, called The Office of Excise, or New Impost; whereof there
shall be seven Commissioners to govern the same, who are hereby appoin^ed and
nominated: And the said Commissioners, or the Survivors of them, or such as
shall be hereafter appointed, or the greater part of them, shall have power,
and are hereby Authorized from time to time to choose a Treasurer or
Treasurers, being one or more of themselves; and also shall choose Registers,
Collectors, Clerks, and other subordinate Officers (for whom they shall be
answerable) whom the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, may, and
shall from time to time, and have hereby power to displace, and to place others
in their rooms and to allow them such several yearly Wages out of the Receipts
of the said Office, for their pains and service therein, as the said
Commissioners, or the greater part of them shall think fit and reasonable, and
as shall be approved of, and allowed by both Houses of Parliament.

V. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the Seven
Commissioners herein named, shall be, and are hereby nominated and appointed to
be Governors of the said Office, viz. John Towes Esquire; Alderman of the City of
London, Thomas Foot Esquire Alderman of the City of London, John ^enrick
Esquire Alderman of the City of London, Thomas Cullam Esquire Alderman of the
City of London, Simond Edmunds, John Lamet, and Edward Claxton, Citizens of
London.

VI. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the
Commissioners hereby, or hereafter to be appointed Governors of the said
Office, and such Treasurer or Treasurers us shall be by them chosen as
aforesaid, shall respectively before they enter upon the said Office, take a
solemn Oath before the Speaker of the House of Peers, or the Speaker of the
House of Commons for the time being, for the due execution of their places; And
every of the said Speakers shall have power hereby to administer the said Oath.

VII. And it is hereby Ordained, That all parts of the Cities of London and
Westminster, with the several Suburbs thereof, and all other places within Ten
miles thereof, or thereabouts, which shall be thought fit by the said
Commissioners, shall be subject to the Rule and Government of the said Office.

VIII. And that the like Office and Offices, and so many of them, and such and
so many other subordinate Commissioners shall be erected and appointed in all
or any the Counties of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, and in
all such Cities, and places thereof, as the said Seven Commissioners, or the
Survivors of them, or major part of them, or such other as shall be appointed
chief Commissioner^, or the major part of them for the time being shall
appoint, for whom the said chief Commissioners shall be answerable. And the
said subordinate Commissioners shall take the like Oath respectively before the
Speaker of either House of Parl. or such person or persons as the said Speaker
shall appoint under his hand and seal, or before the said chief Commissioners,
or such other person or persons as they or the major part of them, under their
hands and seals shall appoint; which said several Speakers, Commissioners, and
other persons so by them Authorized, shall have power to minister the said Oath.

IX. And the said subordinate Commissioners, and other inferior Officers which
shall be employed by the said chief Commissioners, shall have for their
several pains in and about the said business, such reasonable sum and sums
of money allowed them as the said chief Commissioners or the major part of them
for the time being shall think fit and appoint, with the allowance of both
Houses of Parliament.

X. Item, that the said several and respective Commissioners shall quarterly
make their accounts of all their receipts and disbursements at the said Office
in London, unto one or more Auditor or Auditors to be appointed by the said
houses to receive the same; which said Auditor or Auditors shall take the like
Oath for the due execution of their places, and in such manner as is hereby
appointed for the said Commissioners; and shall make and keep a Duplicate or
counter-part of all accounts and entries in the said several Offices, the same
to be presented by the said Auditor or Auditors to the said Houses, when, and
as often as it is required. And (...) Faulconbridge of the City of Westminster,
Gent. is hereby nominated and appointed Auditor for the said service.

XI. Item, that the said Commissioners, or any of them, shall not issue out any
money, raised, or levied by virtue of this Ordinance to any person or persons
whatsoever, but by order of both Houses of Parliament to be directed to the
said chief Commissioners, or the greater part of them, unless it be
concerning the payment of the said chief Commissioners allowances Quarterly;
and of wages to the said subordinate Commissioners and other Officers; and of
Rents due for house-roome or rooms where the said Offices shall be kept, or
other necessary expenses in and about the said Offices, the said several
sums and disbursments to be such as shall be allowed of by both Houses of
Parliament: which said Commissioners upon passing of their accounts, shall from
time to time be discharged thereof by both Houses of Parliament: And that it
shall and may be lawful to, and for every of the said chief Commissioners to
make a Deputy, for whom he will answer.

XII. Item, that the said Office in all places where it shall be kept, shall be
kept upon all the week days (except the Lords day) from eight of the clock
in the morning, till twelve at noone, and from two of the clock in the
afternoon, till six in the afternoon, for the entering and Registring of the
names and sir-names, as well of the Sellers, Buyers, and Makers of the said
several commodities in the said Schedule mentioned, and the several
quantities and values thereof, and for receiving of all moneys which shall be
due and payable for the Excise, and for other things necessary to be done
touching the said business, which said entries shall be made accordingly.

XIII. That all and every the Merchants and Importers of the said foreign
commodities in the said Schedule mentioned, and all common Brewers of Ale or
Beer, and Distillers of Aquavitae, and Strong Water, and others chargeable by
this Ordinance, with the Excise for any the commodities in the said Schedule
mentioned, shall weekly cause to be entered into the said respective Offices a
true and perfect list or account of all and every the said commodities
respectively, and of the said Ale and Beer and strong water, weekly brewed,
made or distilled, and shall not deliver any of the said commodities to any of
the Buyers thereof, or other person or persons (except such of the said
commodities as shall be by the license of the said chief Commissioners or the
major-part of them, or such as they shall appoint, be transported beyond Sea)
until the same shall be so entered as aforesaid; And that no person or persons
chargeable with the said Excise, shall sell or dispose of any of the said
commodities, without first receiving a Ticket or Warrant from the said
respective Office, that the Excise or new Impost due for the same is paid or
satisfied, and if any of the sellers of any of the said commodities chargeable
with the Excise shall refuse or neglect to make a true entry thereof, according
to the last precedent Article, or shall do any thing contrary thereunto; the
same being proved by Oath of two witnesses before the said respective
Commissioners, or the major part of them, who shall have power hereby to
minister the said Oath, or confessed by the party, shall forfeit double the
value of the said goods or commodities so by him or them neglected to be
entered, or so delivered, sold or disposed of contrary to the said Article to
the use of the Commonwealth, the same to be levied by the said respective
Commissioners or Deputies, or such as they or the major part of them shall
appoint by distress and sale of the offenders goods (if they shall not be
redeemed within fourteen days) rendering to the party the overplus, and for
want of sufficient distress all and every the said Commissioners or Deputies,
or the major part of them respectively, or such as they shall appoint, shall
have power to commit such offender to Prison, till he pay the said forfeiture.

XIV. That no Merchant, Tradesman, Stranger, Ship-master, Mariner, or other
person or persons, Importer of any goods or Merchandise into the Port of
London, Cinque Ports or other Port, Creek, or place whatsoever within this
Realm, the Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, shall land or discharge any
goods or commodities upon the shore before they shall have first given notice
thereof to the Officers of Excise for that place, by delivery of a Bill of
entry under his hand, specifying the said several goods or commodities so
imported, their quantities, weights, and measures respectively, under the
penalty in the said next precedent Article contained, and to be levied in like
manner.

XV. And be it ordained, that it shall or may be lawful to and for the said
respective Commissioners, or the major part of them, out of the forfeitures
above mentioned, to give and allow to any person or persons which shall inform
them of any abuse committed by any person or persons contrary to this
Ordinance, so much money for his and their reward and recompense, of his or
their pains, as the said Commissioners, or the major part of them shall think
fit, the same to be allowed to the said Commissioners upon their accounts.

XVI. That if any common Beere-brewer, Alehousekeeper, Cider or Perry maker, or
other person chargeable with the said Excise in the Country, or in any City,
Town, or place, do not make a true entry in manner aforesaid in the said
Office appointed, in the Country, City or place, where they dwell, or in such
Office erected, next to their place of dwelling, and the same be confessed, or
proved, as aforesaid, then they shall incur the like penalty as aforesaid,
the same to be levied and disposed of in such manner as aforesaid.

XVII. Item, That the said Chief Commissioners, or the major part of them,
shall have power to punish all inordinate Officers, or other persons belonging
to the said Offices, which shall be wilfully negligent, remiss, or refractory
in the said service, by fine, not exceeding the double value of their yearly
wages, the same to be levied, and employed in such manner as aforesaid: And
shall likewise have power to punish any other offense, contrary to this
Ordinance, (not hereby otherwise provided for) by fine or amercement to be
levied and employed in such manner as is appointed for the said other penalties.

XVIII. And be in further ordained, that the Customers or Commissioners for
Tonnage and Poundage, shall from time to time, permit and suffer the said
respective Commissioners or any of them, or any of their Deputy or Deputies, or
such as they shall appoint, to search, view, or examine, any Note, Book, or
Books, belonging to the Custom houses, or to take Copies thereof, or of as
much thereof as they please. And that the said Commissioners of Excise or any
of them, or any of the said chief Commissioners Deputies, shall have a place
to sit in the Custom houses, and shall have power by themselves or their
Agents to take notes or copies of all entries of goods and merchandises
imported, or to be imported from time to time.

XIX. Item. That the said respective Commissioners of Excise, and Deputies of
the said chief Commissioners, or the major part of them, respectively shall
have power and authority to call before them any person or persons, whom they
shall think fit, to inform and testify touching the premises, and to examine
any such person, (other then the party himself) upon oath, for the better
discovery of any fraud or guile, in the not entering of any of the said
Commodities, or not payment of the Excise, or new Impost, according to the
tenor of this present Ordinance; which the said Commissioners or the major part
of them, or such as they shall appoint under their hands and seals, shall have
power to administer, and the testimony of two credible witnesses shall be
sufficient in that behalf.

XX. Item. That there shall be allowed yearly unto every of the said chief
Commissioners of Excise for the time being, for his care and pains in and
about the said service, the sum of (...) to be paid him quarterly to his own
use.

XXI. Item. That this Ordinance shall begin and take effect from the eleventh
day of September, 1643. and from thence to continue for one year, then next
following.

XXII. That the said respective Commissioners, or the major part of them, shall
from time to time appoint any Officer or Officers belonging to the said Office,
to enter into the Sellers, Shops, Warehouses, Storehouses, or other places of
every person or persons that sells, byeth, or spends, any of the said
Commodities in the said Schedule mentioned, to search and see what quantities
of any of the said Commodities, every or any such person has on his hands, or
any other person or persons to his use, and for the preventing of all fraud and
abuses that may be used of practiced to avoid the payment of the said Excise
and new Impost.

XXIII. That all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, Sheriffs,
Constables, and all other Officers, be from time to time ayding and assisting
to all and every the said respective Commissioners, and other Officers of
Excise, and to every of them appointed by this Ordinance, in the execution
thereof, and of the Articles therein contained: and that especial care be
taken, as well by the said respective Commissioners, as the said Justices of
Peace and other Officers, whom it shall concern, and every of them, That the
Assizes of Beer, Ale, Wine, and other things, be duly kept and observed, and
the abuses therein punished according to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf
made, as they will answer the contrary to both Houses of Parliament.

XXIV. That the said Commissioners and other Officers, and every of them
appointed by this Ordinance, shall have power to call the Trained Bands,
Volunteers, or other Forces, of or within any County, City, or Place,
respectively to be ayding and assisting to them, to compel obedience to this
Ordinance where any resistance shall be made: which said Trained Bands,
Volunteers and other Forces, and their several Commanders and other Officers,
are hereby required and enjoined to give their aid and assistance accordingly
as often as need shall require.

XXV. And be it further ordained, That as well all and every the said
Commissioners, Deputies, Treasurers, Registers, Receivers, Auditors, or other
Officers whatsoever, belonging to the said several Offices, as all and every
other person and persons which shall do any thing in execution or performance
of this present Ordinance, shall be therein from time to time protected and
saved harmless, by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament.

FINIS.
An Ordinance and Declaration of the Lord and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
touching the Salary and Allowance to be made to the Commissioners and Auditors
for the Excise. Together with the several Oaths to be taken by them. As also
directing the manner and time of the Entries to be made of all Goods bought or
sold, chargeable with the Excise, since the 11. of September, 1643.
Die Lunae 18. Sept. 1643.
WHereas an Ordinance was lately made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
fon setting of a charge by way of Excise or new Impost upon the several
Commodities in a Schedule, thereunto annexed, contained. In which Ordinance no
certain Salary is expressed for the Commissioners thereby appointed to execute
the same.

Be it now Declared and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the chief
Commissioners appointed by the said Ordinance to put the same in execution, or
as many of them as shall execute the same, shall have for their pains and
service therein six pence in every twenty shillings that shall be raised and
paid in to the Treasurer or Treasurers of Excise appointed by the said
Ordinance, the same to be allowed them quarterly upon their accounts by the
said Treasurer or Treasurers, without any further Warrant.

And be it further hereby Ordained, That William Bond of London, Merchant, be
appointed an Auditor for the said service, over and besides Master Thomas
Fawconbridge, who was appointed an Auditor by the said former Ordinance, and to
have the like power with him: And that every of the said Auditors shall have
for their several pains and service in that behalf the sum of (...) per
Annum, to be allowed them quarterly by the said Treasurer or Treasurers out of
their Receipts, without any further Warrant.

And it is hereby Ordained, That the said Commissioners, upon passing of their
accounts before the Auditor or Auditors for the time being, and allowance
thereof by the said Houses, shall be discharged of the said accounts from time
to time by both the said Houses.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the several
Commissioners and Auditors appointed, and to be appointed for the said service,
shall take the several Oaths herein prescribed, in such manner as by the said
Ordinance is expressed.

The form of the oath for the Commissioners,
YOU shall swear to be faithful and true in your place of Commissioner for
the Excise during the time you shall be a Commissioner, according to the
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament in that behalf made. You shall
according to your knowledge execute the same diligently and faithfully, having
no private respect to your self in prejudice of the Commonwealth. You shall
make and deliver a true account of all your Receipts and Disbursments, to such
Auditor or Auditors as is, are, or shall be from time to time appointed by both
Houses of Parliament, according to the said Ordinance. So help you God, and the
contents of this Book.

The form of the Oath for the Auditors.
YOU shall swear to be faithful and true in your Office of Auditor for the
Excise, during your continuance in the said Office, according the Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament in that behalf made. You shall take the accounts
which shall be made unto you quarterly by the Commissioners for Excise, and
make true Entries and duplicates or counterparts thereof, and shall truly
present the same to both Houses of Parliament, as by the said Ordinance is
appointed; And in all things diligently and truly execute your said Office to
the best of your skill and knowledge. So help you God, and the Contents of
this Book.

And be it Declared and Ordained, That all manner of persons who have bought or
sold any Goods or Commodities chargeable with the Excise, since the eleventh of
this instant September, 1643. or shall buy or sell any such Goods before the
execution of this Ordinance, shall within ten days next after the twentyeth
day of this month (if the said Goods were or shall be bought or sold within
the Cities or Suburbs of London or Westminster, or ten miles compass thereof)
or if in any other place or places, then within ten days next after the
erection of the said Office of Excise in or near such place or places, cause
entry thereof to be made in the several and respective Offices, to which the
same shall belong, that so the duty of Excise may be discovered and paid for
the same, under pain of forfeiture of double the value of the said Goods or
Merchandises, to be levied in such manner and form, and to such uses as by the
said Ordinance is appointed, for not entry of Goods liable to the Excise.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

