AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For the
punishing of such Soldiers as absent themselves from their Colors, and the
Army under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
And all Soldiers who are under the Command of the said Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX,
are within Six days after Publication hereof, to repair to their Colors upon
pain of death.
WHereas by Ordinance of Parliament entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, For the speedy Raising and Impresting of Men
for the recruiting of the Forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, in
the defense of the Kingdom. It is Ordained (inter alia) that the Committee of
the Militia for the City of London, the Deputy: Lievtenants and Committees of
Parliament, in every County, City, or place within this Realm, or any two or
more of them, within their several Limits and Jurisdictions, shall be and are
thereby Authorized, Required, and Enjoined from time to time, to Raise, Leavy,
and Impresse such number of Soldiers for the defense of the King, Parliament,
and Kingdom, as shall be appointed by both Houses of Parliament, by the
Committee of both Kingdoms, or by Sir Thomas Fairfax. The said Lords and
Commons for preventing abuses which may happen by the Soldiers absenting
themselves from their Colors and the Army, and by the harboring and
concealing of Soldiers so Raised, Leavied, and Imprested, as aforesaid, do
therefore Order and Ordain, That all Soldiers already Raised, Listed, or
Imprested, or which hereafter shall be Raised, Listed or Imprested under the
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall upon pain of death to be inflicted
without mercy, repair to their Colors within six days after publication
hereof: And for such as shall be hereafter Imprested and Listed, within six
duyes after their Listing; and constantly abide there, and not depart without
License under the hand of Sir Thomas Fairfax, or of the superior Officer then
present of the Regiment wherein such Soldier or Soldiers shall Serve. -- And
^or the better discovery of all such persons who have been Imprested or
Listed, as already have, or hereafter shall absent themselves from their
Colors, The said Lords and Commons do hereby require and command all High
Constables, petty Constables, Tithingmen, and Headboroughs in their several
Divisions, Hundreds, Towns, and Parishes, to make strict search and inquiry in
the several Houses within their respective Limits and Parishes, for finding
out such Soldiers as may be harbored there. And if any Soldier or Soldiers
shall be found remaining in any of the Towns and Places aforesaid, the high
Constables and petty Constables aforementioned, are hereby Authorized and
required to apprehend their persons, and carry them before such of the
Deputy-Lievtenants, Committees of Parliament, or Justices of Peace as are
nearest to the places where they are so apprehended; who are hereby authorized
and required to commit such Soldiers to the County-Goale, or other Prison, and
to secure their Horses, Arms, Soldiers clothes, and Moneys, if they have any,
for the Service of the State. And for the preventing the harboring and
concealing any Soldier or Soldiers, as aforesaid, who shall depart out, or
absent himself from the said service without license.

It is further Ordained and Declared, That every Town or Parish wherein such
Soldier or Soldiers shall be found to be harbored or concealed, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of ten pounds; and every person harboring or
concealing any soldier or soldiers, as aforesaid, shall pay for every
soldier so concealed and harbored forty shillings: All which said sever all
sums of Money to be forfeited, as aforesaid, shall be Collected, Leavied,
and paid in such sort, manner, way, and form, and shall be employed to the
same uses as are Prescribed and set down for leavying of Money in the former
Ordinance of Parliament, for railing and maintaining Forces for defense of the
Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. And to the intent that all
soldiers under the command of the said Sir Thomas Fairfax, and all and every
other person and persons concerned in the premises may take notice hereof.

It is further Ordained, That this present Ordinance be forthwith Printed, and
published in the several Market Towns and Parish Churches of every County
within the power of the Parliament within six days next following the receipt
thereof, that none may pretend ignorance of any of the particulars before
mentioned.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That the Deputy-Lievtenants, Committees of
Parliament, all Majors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Governors of Towns, and Justices
of Peace of the several Counties, Cities, and places within this Kingdom,
shall take special care to put this Ordinance in due execution, according to
the purport and true meaning thereof.

24 April, 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed, and published in all Market Towns, and Parish Churches
in the several Counties under the power of the Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, 1645.


