THE CENSORS CENSVRED, IN A Brief Discourse: To which is adjoined the AUTHORS
LETTER TO AN Anti-Episcopal Minister Concerning The Government of the CHURCH.

Written in the year 1651. but not printed till now.

LONDON: Printed for Phil. Stephensat the Kings Arms over against Middle
Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1661.

To the READER,
Courteous Reader,
ALthough the many Books which have been already printed in defense of
Episcopacy, may seem not only to forestal the credit, but to evacuate the use
of future Impressions, about the same subject; yet considering the mess of
Confederate Brethren, who are sworn to oppose it, which (being an Oglio of all
Sects) is of far greater dimension then the defendant party. I presumed it
would not amount to the reckoning of a vanity to enter with my unkeen weapon
into the same field: which (though unworthy to be mustered with those forces of
wit, that fight for victory) may serve (like the attendants of an Army) to face
the enemy. It is the fate of truth for its naked simplicity to be as little
known, as trusted, with earthly inhabitants: whereas error, clothed with
glosing variety, finds not only acceptance, but maintenance in the hearts of
most. What Gangrenes of Heresies, and fretting sores of schismatical opinions
have infested the body of our National Church? since Bishops (the ministerial
preservers thereof in soundness of Doctrine) were first divorced from their
office, as the History of former ages can yield no examples to parallel, so
(being by Satan's subtilty heightened to an exquisite degree of wickedness) the
possible corruption of succeeding times, will want invention to excel. Such was
the sudden growth of greedy innovations in the black art of enmity, against
their ancient guides, that experience has proved them to be a true exception
to the Philosophers saying, Nemo repent fit turpissimus. And if their master,
who raised them to the pinnacle of preferment, had not thrown them down headlong
by a timely temptation, they would have all turned conceited Monarchs, and not
looked over, but for the Kingdoms of the earth. It will be as much shame
hereafter to report, as it is now grief to remember the fiery generation of
those meteors o^ men, which (rising by the fall of our great stars) have
vapoured from the Regions both of pulpit and press, into the houses of the
honorable, and musty Cottages of the basest people, deluding them into such a
lamentable deviation from their right principles, that the greatest part of
them (like benighted Drunkards) are not yet able to find the way home. The
consideration whereof does offer us so much occasion, to pity the dangerous
estate of their diseased souls, that I could wish no better success to attend
this work, then that, by detecting the malignant distemper of their faults, it
may become a direction for their recovery. But knowing that habituated Crimes
will not readily yield to a separation from the subjects that possess them,
and that custom in sin, (holding reason in bondage to the dominion of sense)
does seldom nauseate the sinner to a detestation thereof. I am disposed to
doubt, that the event will be unanswerable to the scope of my desire. However
the chiefest Part of this Book being written in time of persecution, when
Tyranny had stated the Tribes of all honest men in a fitter capacity of
receiving wrongs then giving reasons, I shall not now disown the exposing
thereof to public view, though it happen to make a fermentation of humors in
the choleric stomachs of our English Pharisees. For being set forth with the
same intention wherewith it was first penned, more to declare my willingness
to approve, then ability of mind to defend the right of Episcopal Government.
It may not be coujectured to be composed with confidence to confute those that
deny, but out of love to confirm them who believe the same.

To thee therefore, Gentle Reader, whosoever thou art of this number, do I
principally dedicate this my labor, wherein if thou apprehend nothing
deserving thy condemnation, but the truth of my affection to the welfare of the
Church, it will be applause enough to satisfy the expectation of

Thy well-wishing friend, HUGH EDMONDS.

THE CENSORS CENSURED.
AS in natural, so in bodies Politic, there are no distempers more smartly
afflicting, than those which invade the most noble parts, and amongst the many
causes, which work a solution of unity, in a civil constitution of government,
the corrupt humors of a brainsick clergy are the most intrinsecal. The Truth
whereof, though we have by the sad experiences of our own past miseries been
better taught to bewail, than dispute; yet being farther instructed by the
present discovery of their propagated mischiefs (notwithstanding the bountiful
rays of mercy diffused amongst them from our Englands Sun) we cannot but
account it a pitiful folly to commiserate them, who think it a virtue to be
cruel to themselves; for they, whom neither the sense of their own sin, nor
apprehension of the Kings pardon can reform, must needs be not only the (...)
charity, which submits to the worst of Governors, and it may be justly
feared, that no true concordance will inhabit the center, whilst such
Heteroclites are left to lurk in the circumference of the Church, who will
rather profess themselves St. Peter's animals by standing out in their own
conceit, than St. Paul's souls in stooping to the authority of their lawful
superiors, neither can they be well thought fit Trustees for the security of
the Gospels treasure, who having once shipwrackt their Allegiance to the King,
are still bankrupt of faith and honesty. Those are the old stocks, whereupon
Satan has graffed the variety of Sects, which has been the shame, and is yet
the grief of Englands Church, whose first non conformity to Canonical orders,
has been the very originals, whereunto the many copies of obstinate Fanatics,
that are now extant, have their true reference, who following the tracts of St.
Judes murmurers, in admiration of some men's persons for advantage sake, do
dissociate themselves from the community of Saints, not only in opinion, but
practice, than which nothing can be more destructive to the concord and
peaceable unanimity of spiritual Congregations; for as in physical Compositu^s,
a violent disunion of Integrable parts breeds a more dangerous shisme in the
body, than a humerous distemper; so in Ecclesiastical corporations, an actual
separation from the Catholic fellowship of believers in Gods service is a
greater pandor to confusion, than the scandal of a speculative distraction. It
is time therefore for our Seminary Presbyters, who have been the
Protoplastiques of a Rebellious generation, both in Church and State, to make a
confession of their past faults, as well as their present faith to the King.
They are now sufficiently read in the book of their own consciences to know,
nemo periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defendit, to Apologize for sin is
more damnable, than to act it, and not to retract inexcusable errors, does as
much unqualifie a delinquent for mercy, as the perpetration thereof can adapt
him to justice. Repentance, though it may be too soon ended, can never be too
late begun; he, that lives like St. Lukes judge on the bench, neither fearing
God, nor regarding man, may have the grace to die like the Jews thief on the
Cross, with profession of both; for that power which expressly denies
forgiveness to one sin only, does implicitly conceede a possibility of
pardon to all others. On this consideration it would be worth their pains to
translate their Petition for Presbytery into a Suit for Indemnity, and
publicly to acknowledge his Majesty's Declaration which is the proof of his
grace, to be an argument of their guilt, who (like cunning fencers, that aim at
the legs, when they intend to veny the pate) under a reformative pretense of
destroying those revenous beasts, which worry the people, begged leave of their
master to hunt the kingdom, which being granted, they took liber^y of
themselves to make him their chief game: for it is well known from Dan to
Beersheba, that the credit of their false doctrine was the very leaven
wherewith the people were first molded into a sour lump of armed malice
against their Sovereigne.

And I may truly say, it was the unlucky Boutefen, which not only yielded smoke
to smother all Treaties into a nullity of success, but that gave light also to
clear the way for more active instruments then themselves to take off the Head
of our eternally renowned Saint Charles, together with the Government from his
soulders; for although they entered not the Stage with those miscreants that
personated Pilate in the fifth Act; yet because they appeared with others who
played the parts of Annas and Caiphas, in the first Scene of the Tragedy, we may
justly christen them the Grandfathers in law of that bloody fact, which being
unmatchable in humane stories, may be in some sort compared to the crafty
complement of the cruel wolf in the fable, who told the sheep, Da mihi potum,
and ego mihi dabo cibum, meaning to eat him up for his courtesy. A fact, which
as former ages have not been so learnedly wicked to invent, so I hope the
future will be more honestly wise than to imitate; A fact, which may school
our Kings of England into a use of the Italians prayer, to be delivered from
their friends whom they trust, as well as from their enemies whom they fear,
and inform the people with the Spaniards soul, rather to sheath their swords in
one another bowels upon private quarrels, than to draw them against their
Sovereign in open war.

But, if the Recognition of such an execrable murder be not caution enough for
subjects to restrain them from Rebellion, let the memorable example of the
Amalekites punishment be their exhortation to obedience, 2 Samuel 1. 13, 14. who
(though a stranger to Saul's kingdom, and by them requested to conclude his
pain with the inference of death) was by David's command for touching the Lords
anointed, instantly condemned to loose his life.

If Kings lives then are so precious in Gods account, that they may not be
touched in the heat of proclaimd hostility, what a cursed sin must that be,
which justifies those who take them away in cold blood?

By these animadversions I hope the whole host of spiritual officers, who have
fought against the Regiment of the Church, will be victoriously fens'd into a
unanimous Judgment, that it is far better for them to have the Apostles
doctrine in their hearts, then the Scots discipline in their hands, to be
content with that estate wherein they have been, then to covet that wherein
they ought not to be, to submit to the King in causes Ecclesiastical, rather
then by calling his power in question, to abuse their own authority in the
Gospel, to give Caesar his, will be no substraction from their due, had not our
Savior paid for himself and Peter, it might be doubted, whether the Clerks of
this age (like the old Egyptian Priests) would not plead their estates
untributary, as well as their offices unsubj^ct to the King.

With what tenure of spiritual power they are invested Jure divino, none but
those Laics whom the Popes Mandate has screen'd from the Sunshine of Gods
word, can be ignorant.

The officious Acts of Jehoiada to Jehoash, and Nathan to David, are not only
presidents to warrant the right, but boundaries to limit the extent of their
claim; they must instruct Kings as the one, and may reprove them as the other
did, which was not executed by an excommunicative scourge to make David do
penance for his offense, but with the monition of a meek spirit, to give him a
penitent sense thereof; for as the act of reproof argued the King to be Gods
subject: so the mode of reproving maintained him to be the Proph^ts Sovereign.

And thus I believe Azariah withstood Vzziah by no other force, save that of
the tongue, whose aim was to strike at the fact, not the person of the King, to
induce him into a consciousnesse of his fault, not to require his submission to
punishment, which, because immediately inflicted of God* supposes him
priviledg'd not to receive it from man: so that rebus sic stantibus, our
ministerial Guides have little reason, and less grace to pride themselves in
their Ghostly authority of reb^^ing Kings, such verbal Reprehensions being no
more then religious servants (not adventuring beyond the sphere of their
calling) may lawfully practice toward their ungodly masters; for as it is the
Resolve of Divines, that in case of neccessity Quil^bet Christianus est
sacerdos, so it is not only the liberty, but the duty of every one in Gods case
boldly to reprove an offending brother, as I think my self bound to tell the
associated brethren, that they have highly wronged the Majesty of God and the
King, both by their orall and manual prolusions to introduce a new fangled
government in the Church, and that it will be more safe for them to observe the
duty of looking into their own, then the false commission of overseeing their
superiors actions, the performance whereof might happily make that saying ex
culpa sacerdotum ruina populi, to be as well known to themselves, as felt by
others, and convert the hypocrisy, which some do, into the sincerity of
obedience, which all should profess; for though none of them be puritanized
into Donatisme, but can protest it their necessary obligation to reverence the
Kings person, yet most are so far sublimated from the dross of superstition,
that they cannot without defiling their consciences veil to the train of his
ceremonious Titles, they can easily concoct supreme Governors, dryly
swallowed, but with the sauce of Ecclesiastical causes it quite nauseates their
stomachs, and the name of head is more offensive to their palates, then
perfumes are to the nostrils of those that are grieved with an Histerical
passion; a monstrous straw for such mighty men to stumble at, which may be put
in the same balance with that of their schismatical Predecessors in the
conference at Hampton Court, who were scandalized with the word absolution in
the Liturgy, but well content with the Term Remission of sins.

What difference there is betwixt supreme Governor and Head in a notional
acception, is more fit for Grammatical Critics, then politic Christians to
inquire, as they are complicated in one subject, and determined to a constant
oneness both of action and end, they must by the rules of honesty as well as
Art, be construed Synonymous, and in a promiscuous manner adjudged to contract
their literal variety into an identity of sense.

Indeed we cannot deny but the Title of supreme Head was first given to King
Henry the Eight by the Pope, who being by his own institution in the world (as
the soul is in the body by Gods Creation) Totus in toto, and not only
singulis, but universis major, cannot be supposed to part with a piece of
himself but for his own ends; yet we conceive it no trespass against any
Canon, either of Scripture or reason, to convert that to a good use, which was
first bestowed to an ill purpose, but for Presbyters to take that away for the
better esteem of their own authority, which was given by the Pope, to disgrace
the Kings jurisdiction in the Church, is no less unreasonable to devise, then
irreligious to practice.

That great Bulwark of objection, (Christ is the sole Head of the Church, ergo
no other can have the Title) which has been presumed too strong for an army of
Schoolmen to beat down, must necessarily yield upon terms to our side. For
although as the Church is internally considered in respect of the kingdom of
Grace, and our Savior Christ as Lord thereof, by right of Redemption, ruling
the hearts of the faithful by his spirit, there is no subjection allowable, nor
headship to be attributed but to him only; yet as he is King by right of
Creation, loving an Imperial Sovereignty over all his creatures, and the Church
in a militant condition, which (by reason of an inseparable commixture of good
and bad, and common relation of the inward and outward man) does necessarily
require an external policy to maintain a uniformity and order in the worship of
God, so he has ordained his Vicegerent on earth to whom both Clergy and Laity
must be subject.

And in this qualification of sense Kings may be truly styled supreme Heads in
causes Ecclesiastical, within their Dominions; Thus Samuel called Saul the Head
of the Tribes of Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 17. which in eodem signo rationis does
imply all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as civil in that Commonwealth, to be
his subordinate members. And that the Priests were subject in their very
Offices to the supreme power of their magistrates, 2 Chronicles. 8. Solomon's Acts
in ordering their courses, and appointing the Levites to their charges, (who in
manifestation of their duty are said not to depart from the commandment of the
King) do sufficiently evidence, whose authority likewise to punish sins of the
first table, that refer to Religion as well as those of the second, which
belong to humane society.

Gods own prescript Laws to Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 17. Levit. 17. are the
authentic seals to confirm, whereunto we may annex that fact of our Savior
Christ himself, chastising the Jewish Pedlers, by virtue of his divine Royalty,
for profanation of the Temple, as an exemplary proof beyond all exception.

Having picked out the pith of their Divinity in the former objection, there
rests one hard Argument more a break, wherein lies the marrow of their
Logic, if the power, say they, in Ecclesiastical matters be proper to the
supreme magistrate as a Magistrate, then it should belong to all magistrates,
and consequently to the heathen: the definition of a magistrate being one in
Christian and Heathen Princes; but this would be both sinful and ridiculous to
assert, ergo that cannot lawfully be maintained.

Truly this is a witty sophisme, which deserves the Reply of an ingenious
Respondent in the Philosophers School, salse profecto, sed falso quidem. I
presume the same learning which qualified them to oppose others, may enable
them to answer themselves in this point; for if their consequence be good,
Baals Priests had as much right to the service of the Temple, as the Levitical
Clergymen, neither can our Protestant ministers have a better Title to the
dispensation of Christ's ordinances, then the officers of the Romish Church do
now claim.

Therefore if they will honestly defend their own as we do the Kings authority
in the Church, they must acknowledge their argument to be contrary to the
principles of art, as their opinion is to the precepts of Religion; for when a
Restrictive Term is adjoined to an equivocal subject (as magistrate is) To
argue from an indefinite to a universal, is an illegal consequence, the reason
is, because what is attributed by such a note of limitation, is not an absolute
but a comparate propriety, which does convenire subjecto mediante alio, as the
power of the King in c^uses Eccl^siastical is not proper to him, simply
secundum naturam, but Relatively as he is a true Christian Magistrate;
according to which univocation, if their Argument had been formed, the
consequence would be logically true.

But as we do appropriate this power only to Kings truly Christian, So I must
acquaint them that the Heathen subjects had such a Reverend respect to the
authority of the supreme magistrate in matters of their idolatrous Religion,
that Aristotle, Polit. l. 3. could say (...). The King is Lord and Ruler of
things that pertain to the Gods.

To conclude, I wish those men, who (like the first matter have an indifferency
to all forms, and are so unfixedly disposed ^n Religion, that they can be
content with the Sichemites, to ^e circumcised for their advantage, would (not
for wra^h but for conscience sake) give a seasonable Testimony of their
obedience by a willing conformity to the Kings power in Ecclesiastical causes,
that the Church may be no longer grieved with the rapine of foreign wolves, or
(...) of (...), but that sound doctrine may flourish within her gates, and true
discipline be established in her borders, to which end the Lord send us a
speedy Restoration of our ancient Government by the hands of Zerubbabel and
Joshua, the King and the Bishop, that as we are baptized in one faith, so we
may be subject to one Rule, and as we are of one body, we may be all of one
mind, to worship God both in the purity and beauty of holiness, and to
preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Amen.

FINIS.

