BRIEF REMARKS UPON Mr. WHISTON'S New Theory of the Earth.

And upon an Other Gentleman's Objections Against some Passages in a Discourse
of The Existence and Providence of God, Relating to the Copernican Hypothesis.

By John Edwards, B. D.

LONDON: Printed for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and I. Wyat at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1697.



To my Worthy and Honored Friend Dr. JOHN WOODWARD, Professor of Physic in
Gresham College, and F. R. S.
SIR,
THE forming of these brief Remarks upon Mr. Whiston's Theory of the Earth was
occasioned by one of your Letters which you were pleased to honor me with: for
your mentioning that Undertaking of his, and your cursory Glance upon it
revived in me the thoughts which I a little before had of making some
Reflections on that Attempt. And the Motive to it was this, my apprehension
that this Learned Gentleman had not dealt fairly with the Mosaic History,
which (as I conceive) is a fault of a very high nature. I chiefly argue with
him about his abandoning the literal Sense, or the genuine meaning of the
Mosaic Creation. But I hope this may excite a Resolution in you to go further,
and particularly to rifle his several Hypotheses, which I question not you are
persuaded are founded on a precarious bottom. In defense of your self you will
be obliged to say something to him, for you are a Theorist as well as he, and
the Earth is your common Subject. But to the Theoretick part you have added
Experience and Observation, whereby you have cultivated this Theme to a
Prodigy, and are going on still to oblige the World with greater and nobler
Discoveries, the Consummation of which we all with great impatience expect and
long for.

As to this little Essay of mine, the Bookseller had notice of it, and in this
Idle Time (this Stationers Vacation) was pleased to call for it, to set the
Press on work. I was not wholly averse to the making it Public, because I knew
there is this one thing to commend it, viz. the Goodness of my Design, which is
to conciliate a Reverence to the Mosaic Writings, and particularly that part
of them where the First Formation of all things is treated of. In the first
Chapter of Genesis Moses presents us with the Primitive State of the World, and
acquaints us what are the First Principles and Rudiments of all things, viz.
the Chaos and Light. All Terrestrial, gross and dark bodies were framed out of
the first; and all Etherial, bright and tenuious bodies were educed out of the
second. Whatever belongs to this Earth and the Planets which are of a
resembling nature had its original from the former; and the Either, Sun, and
Stars, which appertain to the Superior part of the World, had their rise from
the latter. These are the General Sources, these are the Primitive Materials of
all visible beings in the World; the one passive, dull and inert, the other
active, subtle and brisk. On these two Principles, viz. the Chaotick Matter,
and Light or Fire there might be built a solid System of Natural Philosophy,
every way congruous to these and the other Discoveries of the Divinely Inspired
Philosopher in this Chapter. The contrary is that which I make bold to censure
and animadvert upon in the ensuing Papers, wherein I have showed that Mr.
Whiston makes his Philosophic Principles jarre with Revealed Truth, and
suffers his Mathematics to confront the Bible.

As to the Second Part of my Reflections, wherein I doubt concerning the Earths
moving about its Axis, it may be I differ from you, and from the generality of
Vertuoso's at this day. But truly I am not so much a Tychonian as to for swear
the Copernican Hypothesis: but the Truth of the matter is this, when I was
treating of the most Substantial Points of Divinity, that is, when I was
asserting and vindicating the Being and Providence of God, I was unwilling to
found these or any thing belonging to them upon an infirm and unstable basis,
upon a dubious and disputable Doctrine, and which had not long prevailed in the
Learned World. Such I take the Opinion of the Circumgyration of the Earth to
be: and therefore till I could be absolutely satisfied about the reality of it,
I thought it was safest to aquiesce at present in the other Doctrine, and the
rather because it is suitable to the Mundane System which Moses presents us
with, whose Literal sense of the Account of it is not to be slighted by
Christian Philosophers. According to this Inspired Sage the Grand Parts and
Divisions of the Material World were ranged and disposed according to the
Specific Gravity of them (though the Laws of Gravity or any other supposed
Mechanism were not every where observed in the Creation, nor any where exactly,
it being below the Divine Sovereign Being to confine himsef to such Laws) our
Earth and the Planetary Bodies, which are of the same matter with it as to the
main, have the lowest place, because they are heaviest: the Waters, which are
Ponderous in the next degree to the Earth, are accordingly situated next above
the superficies of it: the Atmosphere of the Air, conformably to the degree of
its weight, is above the Waters: and the Ethereal, Luminous and Fiery bodies, as
being lightest of all, have the uppermost place This is the Order and Method of
the Creation according to Moses's account of it, but it is inconsistent with
the Copernican Circumvolation of the Earth and his System of the Heavens. If it
be said that this Terrestrial Globe is a despicable Spot, a Speak, a Point in
comparison of the Vast and Spacious Congeries of the Sun and Fixed Lights, I
grant it is so if it be meant of their Bulk and Quantity; but then this must be
remembered that though the Earth be inferior to the Solar body and the Stars on
the account of Magnitude, yet it is far superior to them upon other Accounts,
which are of mighty weight and moment: all which I have particularly mentioned
and insisted upon in the Second Chapter of that Discourse wherein I undertook
to prove the Existence and Providence of an Eternal Infinite and All-Wise Being
from the Fabric and Sructure of the World. If any person will be pleased to
answer those Arguments, and satisfy me about them, I faithfully promise him I
will be his Proselite, and I will declare that I am not inclined any longer to
think that the Place of our Residence is not a Voluble Planet. I have lived to
see Monsieur Des Cartes's Philosophy introduced into the Public Schools with
great applause, and at last exploded: and this may be the fate of the
Copernican Hypothesis, though it has been embraced some considerable time by
the Greatest Philosophic Wits, who have now rendered it a Modish Opinion. Yet
there may be a Time when its Fashionableness shall expire, and when this Seat
and Habitation of Mankind shall return to its Rest again.

But why do I thus trespass? Truly, Sir, I must partly impute it to you; for
seeing you are wont to indulge me a great Freedom when I have the felicity to
Communicate with you, I have made use of that Liberty now, and thereby am
become Tedious. For which I beg your pardon, and request nothing more
passionately than that you would vouchsafe me the honor of letting me be
Esteemed (what I so sincerely am)

SIR, Your most Affectionate, faithful and humble Servant JOHN EDWARDS.
Cambr June 16. 1697.
OF THE Mosaic Doctrine OF THE CREATION. BEING Some brief Remarks on Mr.
Whiston's New Theory of the Earth; In Vindication of the Mosaic Account of the
Creation.
I Have in another place endeavored to prove (and I hope to the Satisfaction
of the Learned and Judicious) that Moses's Narration of the Creation of the
World is Literal and Historical, and that it is a true and just Account of the
whole Process of that Divine Work. And this I undertook to make good in
opposition to the fond Notions which had possessed some men's heads, and had
been divulged by their Pens, viz. that Moses is not to be understood according
to the Letter, that he speaks to the capacity of the Blockish Brick-makers that
were newly come out of Egypt, and scarcely understood Common Sense, and
therefore any Story of a Cock and a Bull would serve them. When Moses speaks of
the Creation, we are not to understand him as if he intended to give any True
and Real Account of that matter, we must not think that he would trouble the
brains (if you can suppose they had any) of a company of Dull Slaves with
Natural Philosophy. And when he speaks of the formation of Adam and Eve and
several things appertaining to it, we must not be so silly as to fancy a
Literal meaning of the words, but we must take it all in a Mystical and
Allegorical Sense. Thus the known Theorist dictates to the world. Where, by the
way, observe how weak and shallow such suggestions are, as if the first
Chapters of Genesis were to be read only by the people of that Age in which
Moses lived, as if none but Drudges and Slaves were to look into these
Writings; or, as if these were so ignorant and stupid that they could not
understand a plain and downright Narrative; or, as if these thick skinn'd
Laborers, who were not capable of Natural Philosophy, could judge of
Allegories; as if those who could not understand any thing of the plain History
of the Creation, were able to comprehend Mysteries, Parables, Hieroglyphics,
Mythologies; in short, as if an Allegorical and Mystical Sense were easier than
a Literal one. These things duly weighed are sufficient to show the Vanity of
that Writer's Discourse.

Notwithstanding this, another and a New Theorist has lately so far imbibed
his Notions as to show little regard to the letter of Moses's Writings: which I
take to be a very false Step, and a dangerous one, in a person especially that
is no Professed Deist, and by his Character seems to own the Authority of the
Scriptures. It is very strange and ominous that such a one should give so
little deference to Revelation and assert things which palpably interfere with
the Sacred and Infallible Records of Moses. His Grand Proposition is this, that
the Mosaic Creation extends no further than the Earth, or (as he expresses it
at other times) Nothing but the Earth only is the subject of the Mosaic
Creation. This every where occurs in his Treatise, so that there is no need of
assigning any particular page, as I shall do afterward when I cite any other
passages out of his Book. But who is there that hears this Proposition named,
and is not inclined to think that this Learned Theorist designed to expose the
Sacred History of Moses, and to erect a doctrine that absolutely runs counter
to the first words of the Bible, In the beginning God created the heaven and
Earth? Here is a dichotomy of the Whole Visible World into heaven and Earth,
and therefore we cannot but infer thence that the Heavenly Bodies are a portion
of that System which Moses here describes. These words are an Epitomy and
Abstract of the Creation, more particularly and distinctly delineated
afterward in that chapter, and consequently the Mosaic Creation extends to
the Heavens as well as to the Earth.

But what says the New Theorist to this? Why, he grants that in the
forementioned Text the Heaven signifies the Heavenly Bodies, viz. the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, but he denies that it is to be so understood elsewhere, and
particularly in any part of this first chapter of Genesis, for according to him
heaven here is no more than the Atmosphere of the Earth, or the Region of the
Air, p. 11. Which is a very precarious and groundless Interpretation, for
though it is true the region of the Air that surrounds the Earth is called
heaven and the firmament of heaven in this chapter, as well as in other places
of the Sacred Volume, yet we are to know that both these words heaven and
firmament are used here in a Different Sense. There is the Lower or Aerial
Firmament, v. 6, 7. and there is the Upper or Etherial one, v. 14, 15, 17. And
so heaven is either the Lower Heaven, which is no other than the Regions of the
Air, or the Atmosphere of the Earth; of the Upper Heaven, which is the Ether,
or Region of the Sun and Stars. The former of these Heavens was the work of the
second day, and is distinctly mentioned in v. 8, 9. The latter is expressly
named in v. 14, 15. and was the work of the fourth day. The not attending to
this distinction of the Two Firmaments or Heavens in this Chapter has been one
occasion of those Mistakes and Misapprehensions which this Ingenious Author and
some others of late have fallen under. But can there be any thing plainer than
this, that there was a Double Firmament or Heaven, one ( viz. the Expanse of
Air) to be between the waters and the waters, v. 6. i. e. to be placed between
the Seas below and the Clouds above; the other ( viz. the Ethereal Expanse) to
be the seat and receptacle of the Sun and Stars, v. 16, 17? God made two great
lights, he made the stars also, and God set them in the firmament of the
heaven, to give light upon the earth.

How then can it be true that Moses's description of the Creation reaches no
further than the Earth? Does not this History make particular mention of that
Higher Heaven or Expanse where the Luminaries are? does it not acquaint us what
was the design of the Allmighty in making it? Does not Moses in plain words
relate that the Fourth Days Work was the creating of the Heavenly Bodies, from
v. 14. to 20th? Does he not mention the Celestial Lights in general, v, 14, 15.
and then particularly the two great lights, v. 16. that is, the Sun, Moon, and
other Planets, for they are all comprehended under these two, as being the most
Eminent: which is no unusual way of speaking in Scripture. And the Stars also
(in the same verse) i. e. the Fixed Luminaries of Heaven are mentioned in
contradistinction to the Other Lights. Is it not strange now that,
notwithstanding this Evidence, any man should start up, and venture to maintain
that Moses in this Chapter speaks only of the formation of the Earth? Could it
be expected that one who has so great a share of Reason and Sense should thus
talk? Is it not prodigiously absurd that by Lights in the firmament of the
heaven, and Two Great Lights, and the Stars also all of them either by day or
by night to give light upon the earth, we should understand the Earth, and no
more?

Another late Dr. Nichols's Conference with a Theist Part. 1.
Writer saw how inconvenient, harsh and incongruous it was to do so, and
therefore though he was pleased to exclude the Stars, i. e. the Fixed Stars
from this Creation, yet he grants that not only the Earth but other Planets,
and the Sun it self were the matter of the Creation in this chapter. Indeed as
for the Stars, this Gentleman makes sure work with them; for he dashes the word
Stars out of the Text, which no Commentator or Critic ever ventured to do. But
then indeed, as if he repented of his rash act, he refers the word Stars to the
verb rule, and forces a strange and unheard of sense on the place. I wish this
Ingenious Writer had not too much gratified the Deists, whom he undertook to
confute, by flying to so precarious and shifting a Gloss on a plain Text of
Scripture.

But our present Author out does this Gentleman, and will have neither Sun nor
any other Planets, nor Stars to be part of the Creation recorded by Moses,
although express mention be made in this chapter of the Lights, both greater
and lesser, which were set or placed by God at the Creation in the Higher
Firmament: and although it be said Genesis 2. 1. thus (i. e. as was described in
the former chapter) the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of
them. Than which we could not have plainer words to express the Universal Frame
of the World, and every thing whatsoever that belongs to it, for the Inspired
Historian assures us that not only the heavens and the earth (which terms
themselves comprehend the whole Mundane Scheme) were finished in the six days
Creation, but he adds that all the host of them were finished likewise, that we
might not have any ground of surmising (with this Writer) that Mojes gives us
not an Account in the first chapter of Genesis of the Whole System of the
Visible World* Yet our Author confidently avers that in the forementioned place
the heavens and the earth signify the Terraqueous Globe alone, with its Air or
Atmosphere, without including the Whole Universe, or so much as the Solar
System, p. 10. To me it seems very wonderful and surprising that any Man of
Learning and lngenuity should so openly and plainly confront the Sacred Writer,
and misrepresent his Clear Account of the Creation of the World. I declare I
would not have troubled the Reader with any of these Reflections, were it not
upon this consideration only, that this Theorist apparently shocks the Divine
Revelation of the Holy Scriptures, and contradicts the plain History of the
First Inspired Penman. I take it to be a very ill work to deal thus with this
part of the Bible, for the rest of it may as well be treated after the same
manner, and then in a short time we may give up this Book to the Deists and
their fellows.

It is not from want of Deference to Mr. Whiston or his Parts and Worth that I
thus speak: I will be of the first that shall applaud his Ingenious Attempts;
but that which extorts a Censure from me is this, that he has the boldness to
offer to the public a Theory which is wholly inconsistent with the History of
Moses. And in this Censure all persons that pay a due reverence to the
Scriptures, must needs concur with me. It is ill in a Person of his Figure
especially to undervalue the Holy Text, and thereby to conciliate in others
(who are not so well acquainted with it) a disregard of the Sacred Penmen and
their Writings. This will be the natural result of such Undertakings, and I am
afraid has been; for if some men were not Deists before their perusal of such
Writings, these will make them so, because they see there is no Respect given
to Revealed Truth, and there is no care taken to conform their Notions about
the Creation (of which Moses only can give us an account) to the book of
Genesis.

But let us hear what the Worthy Author says in defense of himself and his
Interpretation. First, he tells us, that the Capacities of people could not
bear an universal account of the origin of things, p. 80. And again, The
Capacities of the Jews to whom Moses peculiarly wrote were very low and mean,
and their Improvements very small, or rather none at all in Philosophic
Matters, p. 82. And so p. 83. The rude and illiteratte Jews were newly come
from the Egyptian bondage, and destitute of the very first Elements of Natural
Knowledge: and this he gives as a Reason why he asserts that the Narrative which
Moses gives of the Creation reaches no further than the Earth. Such jejune and
childish Arguings can never have any power on Rational Minds, who delight not
to be entertained with fancy, but solid Truth. But no man can count this
Reasoning to be of the latter sort, for the Capacities of the people were able
to bear a plain Relation of the formation of the Heavenly Bodies, no less than
of the Terrestrial ones. The Jews might as well have understood Moses telling
them that the Sun, Moon, and Stars were created, as when he tells them that the
Earth was created. And accordingly we find that he relates the former of these,
no less than the latter, though this Theorist pretends (even against the
express words of the History) that there is no such thing. And who but this
Author and his Brother Theorist could have dreamt that there is any need of
Improvements in Philosophic matters to understand that the Sun and other
Luminaries of heaven were made by God on the 4th. day of the Creation?

And I should here also take notice of a great Mistake, viz. that the Book of
Genesis was peculiarly wrote to the Jews who came out of Egypt, as he speaks in
the same place. Certainly, the design of penning it was more Catholic, it was
intended for all succeeding Jews (to speak of no others at present) not only
such as were Illiterate and Rude, but those of sufficient Knowledge and
Understanding: and surely these might be of sufficient capacity to bear a plain
and short Narration of the making of the Heavens as well as of this Lower
World. This shows that there is no foundation for the Opinion which this
Ingenious Writer has espoused, but I hope will have thoughts of being divorced
from by what I have or shall suggest?

Secondly, he tells us that though the Sun and other Planets were not part of
the Creation which Moses relates, yet they are inserted into his Narrative of
the Six days Work, because he had a mind to gratify the dull ignorant people,
the rude and illiterate Jews he spoke of before. Those Heavenly Bodies are
fetched in here to comply with the Vulgar Notion, that they are part of the
Clouds, or belong to the region of the Air. p. 21, 22 It is true, it is not
unusual in the Holy Scriptures to condescend in some expressions to the
Capacity of the Vulgar, and there is an Instance of it in this very Chapter, v.
16 but this is a quite different thing from giving a Set Narration of a Matter
when there is really no such thing as is related. Which is the case here, for
this Writer holds that Moses, to condescend to the apprehensions of the people,
tells them expressly that the Sun, Moon and Stars were created on the 4th day,
and placed in the upper Firmament, though there was nothing of that nature,
nothing created, nothing then made, nothing in that place Set. If it were only
Impertinency that was charged upon Moses by the Theorist, viz. that he brings
into his Diary things that are nothing to the purpose, that the hooks in the
Solar System into the History that appertains only to the Sublunary World, we
might bear with it (though it is an ill Imputation, and unworthy of the
Inspired Writer) but when he charges him with Deceit and Falsity, it is not to
be suffered. Moses (as he grants) pretends to speak in this Chapter of Matter
of Fact, to relate the distinct time and proper place when and where things
were done, and yet this Relation is not True and Real, but a misrepresentation,
and a false account of things; for whereas Moses mentions a certain Time and
particular Day when the Lights of heaven were created, this Author peremptorily
denies that they were created at that Time, and on that Day: and whereas Moses
tells us that the Luminaries were set in the firmament of heaven, he says the
true place of these bodies is not assigned them, p. 18. However Moses records
it in his Journal, right or wrong, to please (and at the same time to deceive)
the dull People. He and his Abettors would excuse themselves by saying, it is
only concealing the Truth, but that is apparently false, for here is Actual
Deception and Falsifying, because here is a Positive and Downright relating of
what was not True, and yet delivering it as True. As to what this Worthy Author
says, that here is a compliance with the Common Notions, viz. that the Sun and
Stars are part of the Clouds, or belong to the Region of the Air, he makes the
Vulgar more Simple and Ignorant then they are, to show himself more wise than
others in his interpretation of the place. And especially he forgets here
(though he mentioned it before) that the Jewish Rabble were come lately from
Egypt, and there we know there were seldom any Clouds, there being constantly a
Clear and Serene Sky, so that it was Impossible they should be bred up with
this notion, viz. that the Sun was seated in the Firmament of the Air where the
Clouds are. This was not thought of by our Author, otherwise he would not have
averred that Moses here accommodates himself to the Popular Humor and
apprehension, and that he spoke to those of the Jewish Nation who who were
unlearned and Ignorant.

Thirdly, he offers this as an other ground of his strange Interpretation, that
though Moses makes mention of the Sun, Moon and Stars in his Diary of the
Creation, yet these great Luminaries of the world were made before, and only
now placed, or seem to be placed, in our Firmament, p. 14* 15. It is not
necessary, says he, to believe that these bodies were then first created when
Moses makes mention of them. p. 14. Which is against the whole tenor, scope
and coherence of the Chapter, and contrary to the Style and Expressions in
every part of it, which all run in the Preter-perfect Tense, not in the more
then perfect Tense, as he would have it understood. Who can think that the
Narrative concerning the fourth days work is to be Understood in a different
way from all the Rest? All things belonging to the other days works are set
down exactly, and according to the matter of Fact, but here he fancies it is
otherwise, the style varies, and there was no such thing as this days work: so
that there was a Double Sabbath according to him, God rested from the works of
Creation on the fourth and on the seventh day. But however to fill up the
space, Moses faith something and makes us believe that there was something
done. And this he does to suit himself to the Capacities of the Illiterate and
Vulgar. Whence it might be inferred that in the Rest of the Chapter he turns
himself to the Learned and Wise, but then the Author differs from himself, for
he had informed us before that among the Jews at that time there were no
Philosophers, but that they were all Idiots and Blockheads. These are the
strange and wild notions of our Theorist and yet they are swallowed down,
(though I hope but by few besides himself) rather then the Literal and Plain
History of Moses shall take place, rather than he will adhere to the Genuine
sense of the Text. And he himself acknowledges that all the other parts of the
Chapter, excepting what relates to the Fourth days work, are to be taken
otherwise, that is, they are meant of what was really done on those Particular
Days which are specified, and there is no reason imaginable to make any
Exception as to the Fourth day. He would come off by suggestions that the Sun,
and Moon and Stars are then said to be made or created when they became
Conspicuous, and their bodies distinctly Visible, p. 23. so that according to
this New Expositor they were not made till there was a clear Day or Night to
show them. The Author of this Conceit is two Learned to persist in it, and too
ingenuous not to blush at it.

Fourthly, an other profound Reason why the Heavenly Bodies are thus placed by
Moses was to prevent Idolizing of them. It was to show us the unreasonableness
of all sorts of Idolatry, or of the worship of any visible beings, though never
so useful and glorious. p. 81. Nay, he tells us that the securing of the Jews
from the adoration of the host of heaven could not otherwise have been provided
for. p. 28. Till the force of this Reason can be apprehended we may truly say,
there was poor Provision made against Idolatry, yea none at all. Unless he
means all the stars, Fixed as well as others (which his Hypothesis will not
allow of) it could not be designed to obviate or hinder Idolatry: this every
one cannot but apprehend. Or, can we imagine that the most Holy God would
obviate Idolatry by downright Falsifying? Can we think that Moses was inspired
to Lie, that the Heavenly bodies might not be worshipped? For so runs the
Argumentation of this Gentleman, Moses makes the Jews believe in this chapter
that God created the Sun and other Luminaries on the fourth day, and that they
belong to the Earth, and a part of this System, though there is no such thing;
but this he feigns as an Antidote against the Adoation of the Host of Heaven.
One would not have expected such a poor way of Reasoning from a man of
Postulata's and Lemmata's. Who would think that one so well versed in
Hypotheses, Phaenomena's and Solutions should discourse so weakly? But this it
is to abandon the Sacred Text, and not to adhere to the easy and obvious
meaning of the Holy Ghost in these Writings, and in this Chapter more
particularly. It is this that has betrayed our Learned Theorist to such
strange and unaccountable fancies; it is this that causes him to defend his
Proposition, viz. that the six days Creation extended no further than the bare
Earth, and that the whole System of the Heavenly Bodies is excluded from this
History of Moses, although in that very History he finds it clearly recorded
that the Sun, Moon and Stars, by which day and night are distinguished, are
part of the Six days Creation.

Next, I will observe that he is pleased to inform us of a New Calculation of
Time: in the primitive state of the world days and years were all one. Book 2.
p. 81. And afterward, Both these Periods are exactly coincident, and both are
performed in the same space of time. And then he thinks good to apply it, The
Works of Creation were finished in six days, that is six years, he says. But
how will he be able to reconcile this with Genesis I. 5? The evening and the
morning were the first day: and the same is said of all the other days of the
Creation. Here an evening and a morning are made the just limits of a day, and
therefore a day at the Creation of the world was not a Year, for there is a
greater number of evenings and mornings in the compass of a year. And so when
we read that six evenings and six mornings were spent in the works of the
Creation, we may rationally infer thence that these amount not to six Years.
And this Sagacious Writer would have made this Inference himself if he had not
been tempted to the forsaking of the plain, intelligible and obvious sense of
the words, and changing the easy and natural interpretation of Scripture for a
forced one.

Again, he thinks fit to symbolize with his Fellow-Theorist, and to raise the
same Objection against the Mosaic Creation that he did. For thus you hear him
objecting, p. 50 51. The length of the days assigned is wholly disproportionate
to the business done upon it. The Third day has two quite different, nay
incompatible Works assigned it And the Earth with its furniture takes up four
entire days, when the sun, moon and stars are crowded into one single day. And
the Improbability, yea and impossibility of the Works ascribed by Moses to the
Sixth day are asserted by him, Book 2. p. 89, 90, 91. These Cavils might
perhaps have become some professed Lay-Deist but they are unworthy of a person
that bears and Ecclesiastical Badg, and who is supposed to believe Moses's
writing, and not to find fault with Inspired History. Are we to judge of the
Proportion of the Days Works at the Creation? Are we to set the Almighty his
Task? are shallow heads to censure the Operations of the Omnipotent Creator?
Must they measure every Days proceedings at the first formation of the world by
certain Rules and Assignations of their own? This is intolerable, and no Pagan
Philosopher would have acted thus, for he could not but know that the Methods
of a Divine and Infinite Agent transcend the conceptions of weak and finite
minds, and that the Supreme Being is not confined to our Proportions, but acts
as he pleases. Natural and Common Productions are not the same with those
Primary ones. We must not argue from our ordinary Generations to that which was
at the beginning of all things. There was an other way and method observed, and
it is irrational and senseless to make these a Pattern to them. Here was the
Immediate hand of God, and therefore it is no wonder that the beginning,
procedure and finishing of these Days Works were of a different nature from
those Works that have been since. There being an Extraordinary and Miraculous
exertment of Divine Power, it is as unreasonable as it is Irreligious to find
fault with the Distribution of them. It is rash folly to expect Mathematical
Congruity in every Production, and to look for Mechanic Laws in the erecting
of the Universe, in the System of the Heavens, in the Planetary Bodies, in the
Sun and other Globes of Fire. It is incongruous to think that Mechanism was
observed in the formation of these. But of this I will speak more anon.

Only at present I take notice of the Agreement of the Two Theorists as to the
Main, (though this latter in one place severely chastises the former for the
false steps he has made in his Theory, p. 76, 77.) There is a perfect Union
and Friendship between them in the point of enervating the Mosaic History;
only they do it after a different manner. The Old Theorist (now we may call him
so, since this has dubbed himself the New one) directly and professedly
rejects the plain sense of the Mosaic Text, whereas this pretends to own it,
but at the same time miserably wrests and perverts it. The one openly declares
that what Moses says is not matter of Fact, but the other comes and
acknowledges in part that it is an Historical Account, but denies that it is
suitable to the Reality of things: it is a History, but False. The former
plainly and in downright terms owns his dislike of the Literal meaning of that
part of Genesis, but the latter though he admits of the Literal signification,
yet craftily and sophistically distorts the sense of the words, and puts a
force upon them. The first uses more freedom and ingenuity, telling the world
without more ado that the Historical sense is not to be admitted; the second
pretends to own the Account of the Creation, as to the very Letter, but baffles
it all by uncouth Expositions. Thus though the two Theorists take a different
Method, yet they unite in exposing the Mosaic Writings.

It is Melancholy Reflection when we consider how men are hereby taught to
vilify the Scriptures, to dispute the Mosaic Verity, to quarrel with the
Creation, to look upon the several Stages and Processes of it as feigned, and
because they are not adjus^ed to such Measures and Proportions as these persons
fancy, to vote them to be false and counterfeit What can a well meaning and
sober Reader think when he finds our present Author disparaging and traducing
the Mosaic Creation as unreasonable, unequal; irregular, indecent,
disproportionate, disagreeable to the Divine Wisdom, unsuitable to the nature
of things? for these are the Epithets he bestows upon it, p. 57, 65. What can
he think when he finds him professedly Ridiculing of it, p. 57. and
representing it as unbecoming the simplest Artificer? What can any man think
and imagine, I say, but this, that our Theorist has a mind to null the
Authority of Moses's Writings, to lessen the esteem of other parts of
Scripture, to set Revelation and Reason at odds, to vacate all Revealed Truth,
and in a word, to gain Proselytes to Deism? I am exceedingly troubled to let
such words as these go abroad into the World; but I should be much more so, if
I did not upon this occasion deliver my thoughts, If I did not freely tell the
world what my Resentments are as to this matter. I never taught my Pen to write
either for Ostentation, or for Preferment, but I have labored to bring it up
an obedient servant to Truth, and I hope it will never be ashamed of so
Honorable a Master. In so Skeptical an Age as we live in it becomes us not to
be Indifferent; yea, we are obliged to be very Warm and Concerned, and not to
let Temper (as it is now fashionably called) chill our Religion, and betray the
Truth. And I use this Freedom the rather because I deal with a Person of
Ingenuity, who approves of a due Liberty in Discourse, and will both give and
take it. I only suggest what Standers-by may think concerning his way of
Writing, not what he designs, for I will not entertain an ill thought
concerning him as to that. I only remonstrate against his unwary giving
occasion to his Readers to cavil at the Mosaic Account of the Creation, and
thereby to open a door to the evacuating of all the Historical part of
Scripture.

But what are the Reasons that are assigned by this Ingenious Gentleman and his
Associates why they reject the Mosaic doctrine about the Formation of the
World? They are these four especially, which I will briefly touch upon.

First, They oppose Moses's Account of the Creation because it favors not
their Opinion and Conceit of the existence of some Other People in the World
besides those of Adam's race. This Author talks of the Inhabitants, not only
inanimate but animate and Reasonable in the other Planets, p. 40, 41. And he is
at it again p. 58. There may be millions of other Species of Noble Creatures
not inferior to Man, p. 91. And therefore the Mosaic History is a poor mean
thing, because it takes not in those other Inhabitants of the World, it brings
us no tidings of the people that dwell in the Moon. But they should rather
argue thus, the Adamick race, and no other is mentioned by Moses, and thence we
may rationally conclude that there is no other, for it being Moses's business
to set down the Origin and Rise of Mankind, if there had been another stock of
them, he would certainly have told us of it. But he does no such thing; yea, on
the contrary, he assures us that Adam and Eve were the first Persons that were
created, and particularly that Eve was the Mother of all living, Genesis 3. 20.
i.e. the source and Original of all men and women that are in the world: and
therefore an Other Generation of Humane kind is a mear dream and fiction. But
it is probable, say they, that the Moon and other Planets are furnished with
Animals like our selves, seeing they are as capable of Inhabitants as our
Earth. I answer, No man can tell that. Though they be gross and solid bodies,
and therein be like our Terrestrial Globe, yet they may not be a fit dwelling
for any sort of Living Creatures, for Man especially. And indeed why should any
man think that Men like our selves were originally placed in the Planets, when
we are assured that these Heavenly Bodies were made for the Use of Men upon
Earth only? But of this afterward.

Secondly, they fancy that Moses's Description of the Creation is not suitable
to the Greatness and Vast Extension of the World: they are of opinion that he
talks too much of the Earth, and gives too Magnificent a Character of it,
whereas the Smallness of it deserves no such thing. Accordingly this Author
insists a long time upon this, p. 54, 55, 56. And urges that it is an
Inconsiderable Spot in respect of the Vast Heavenly Bodies, which stand Still
till that wheels about. For this reason they discard Moses, and are not a
little displeased with him because he is no Copernican. But these Gentlemen are
to be told that they weakly argue from the Vast Proportion of the rest of the
World in comparison of the Earthly Globe, for it is not Greatness and Bulk that
give a value to things. They discourse idly and injudiciously who extol the
Orbs of Heaven merely because they are Vast and Spacious, and despise the Earth
because it is but a Point in regard of them. No man of true and generous
Philosophy can argue thus: No, it is impossible he should, unless he can first
prove that Bulk is Worth. Judea was but a spot in respect of the Whole Earth
(the same that the Earth is in respect of the World) yet God made choice of
this small inconsiderable portion of ground to be the Scene of the most
Glorious things that ever happened since the Creaation. Why then may we not
think, or rather why do we not believe it (seeing it is so Evident and Bright a
Truth) that the Supreme Being created this Pittance of Earth for great and
glorious ends, to be the Stage of the Worthiest transactions in the world, and
consequently to dignify it above all other parts of the Universe, be they never
so Great and Large? And it is certain he did so, and we may see it plainly in
the First Chapter of Genesis. It is observable that the Whole Material World is
divided into heaven and earth, V. 1. and therefore this latter, the Earth, can
be no mean part of it. And we cannot but take notice that this poor Pightel,
this Moaicum of Earth (as you may call it) is described and represented by
Moses as the Main and Principal Work and Concern of the All-Mighty, and
preferable to all the Heavenly Bodies, and the Whole Universe.

Therefore we have no reason to quit Moses for Copernicus, but to believe that
the Earth, though so small a Globe, is of greater dignity than all the
Celestial System, than all the Planetary and Fixed Lights. They that discourse
otherwise betray a great Narrowness of Soul and Meanness of Spirit, because
they set a value upon Space and Quantity, and dote upon Roomth and Magnitude,
which are of no real worth and esteem: but at the same time they undervalue the
Order and Appointment of the Sovereign Marker and Disposer of the World, who
plainly shows us the Transcendent Dignity and Superlative Excellencey of the
Terrestrial System in his allotting more Time for the creating of that and what
belongs to it than all the rest of the World, and would thereby convince us
that the Earth, as small as it is, the Noblest and Choicest Part of the World.

Thirdly, They cannot be brought to acknowledge that the Heavenly Bodies, yea
and the Whole World were made for the use of Man: and on this account likewise
(as well as those before mentioned) they cast off the Mosaic History of the
Creation, because it favors not his Opinion of theirs, but represents Man as
the Lord of all the Creatures, and him for whom (next to the Divine Being) all
things were made, and more particularly the Heavens round about him. Our New
Theorist cannot endure to hear of this: it is a doctrine which he utterly
explodes, and in order to that depretiates and vilifies Mankind, p 89* debasing
him to the nature of a File or a Worm, in the Works of the Creation. So low, so
ignoble, so grovelling is he in his thoughts, and so injurious to his own kind.
It is true, he would seem to applaud Mankind as a Noble and Glorious Creature,
p. 90, and he takes notice of the Dignity of Man, Book 4. Chap. 1. p. 253: but
then we are to remember that it is usual with this Author to clash with
himself: what he asserts in one Part of his Book he renounces in another, as
might be evidenced in several Instances, but that is not my business at
present. Though it is highly improbable that there are any other Creatures of
humane kind that receive any advantage and profit from the Creation, yet he
declares that it is not wise and rational, it is not worthy to be believed of
the All-Wise God that he chiefly or solely created the World for our use, p.
70. He pronounces it inconsistent with the Divine Wisdom to make thousands of
glorious bodies for the sole use of a few fallen and rebellious creatures, p.
69. And after he had enlarged upon it, he concludes that it argues the most
extravagant degree of folly, p. 71. But softer terms would have become him,
when he was speaking of so high a matter: and I question not but he would have
used them if he had Thought before he spoke, that is, if he had thought and
considered how Noble a Being Man is, and that he was designed by his Maker to
be the Flower and Top of the Creation, and the Glory of the Visible World, and
that he has the peculiar honor to have his Nature united to the Deity: He
that has such apprehensions of Man, cannot think it strange that even the Sun,
Moon, and other Planets which more nearly environ him, and even the Fixed
Globes of Light and Fire, though at a vast distance from him, were created for
his Use and Service in some manner or other. They were made to shed their
Influences on Mankind here on earth, (which is expressed by their Ruling the
day and the night, Genesis 1. 16, 18.) and to give light upon the Earth, which
also is twice mentioned, v. 15, 17. Even the vast multitude of Fixed Lights,
which are meant by the Stars, v. 16. or at least are comprehended under the
host of heaven, Chap. 2. V. 1. were made for this very purpose, and
consequently for the Service of Man.

This is confirmed from what we are told concerning those Glorious Creatures,
the Angels, viz. that they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
Mankind, more especially them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1 14. It is
no wonder that the Heavens and all the Glorious Bodies in it are Servants to
Men, when the very Celestial Inhabitants are so. It would have been accounted a
wild and extravagant Notion that those Superior Beings should be Waiters and
Tenders on the inferior ones, unless the Infallible Writings had assured us of
it: but now being assured of this, we may be reconciled to that other Truth,
that the Heavens serve Man, and that the Sun and all the Luminaries are
Servants to the Earth, and officiously roll about it, whilst it stands to
receive their Influence. This is congruous to the Divine Greatness and Majesty,
who has made Man his Vicegerent in this lower world, and has constituted the
Earthly Globe the place of his Residence, in which respect it is more excellent
than all the Heavenly Bodies. But I have spoken something of this in an O the
Existence and Providence of God, Chap. 2.
other place, and therefore shall add no more now.

Fourthly and lastly, they hold that the Formation of the World was according
to the strict laws of the Mechanic or Corpuscular Philosophy; and therefore
seeing Moses represents it not as such, they give no credit to his Writings
about this matter. It is particularly alleged by our present Author that his
New Hypothesis of the Earth is exactly according to the laws of Mechanism, and
thence he concludes it to be Authentic. But the Consequence ought to be denied
for this reason, because he can never prove that the Creation of the World was
comformable every ways to the Mechanism to bodies and the laws of Common
Nature. We must not think that the Origin of all things was in the same manner
with the After-productions. Rather we are to conceive that the ordinary way and
method which have been observed in Nature ever since, were not observed at the
Creation; for Common and Second Causes had nothing to do then, the Divine Power
and Influence peculiarly interposed, and the Creation was a work of Infinite
and Miraculos Power and Wisdom. An Immediate and Extraordinary Hand set things
on work at the first erecting of the World, aid consequently no Mechanical Laws
can explain it. ^ know our Author seems to agree to this, Book 3. Chap. 1.
The change of the Chaos, says he, into an habitable world was not a mere
result from any necessary laws of Mechanism independently on the divine power,
but is the proper effect of the influence and interposition of Providence. Nay,
that the Whole Work and Process of the Creation was not from mere Mechanic
Laws, but from the immediate operation of the All mighty, and an Extraordinary
and Miraculous Power, he asserts in some pages together, Book 4. Chap. 1. where
he instances in several Particulars of the Creation.

But so it is, this Gentleman has a faculty of jarring with himself, for in
other places he disowns all this in three whole pages (36, 37, 38) he argues
about the Mosaic Chaos from the Properties of bodies, from the manner of their
productions, from the law of Gravitation, and expressly avers that at the first
Creation of the Earth all was done according to the known laws of matter and
motion, and therein mistakes and misinterprets the Mosaic Creation. Besides,
he would not have complained that in the Scheme of the Mosaic Creation bodies
alike in nature have an unlike original, and again, bodies unlike in nature
have a like original, p. 65 and that the Light appeared before the creation of
the Sun from whence it is derived, etc. he could not possibly with any
consistency of Sense have discoursed thus, unless he had supposed that all that
was done in the six days was according to the Ordinary Process of Nature.
Again, when he finds fault with the disproportion of the Days Works (as has
been observed before, and as you may see p. 41. The Time of the Creation of
each body was so disproportionate to the Work it self as is perfectly
irreconcilable to the divine wisdom of its Creator, and the accounts of the
Works themselves as they are set down by Moses.) It is apparent to every
intelligent man that he proceeds upon the Laws of Mechanism, and verily thinks
that these were exactly observed in the making of the World: which false Notion
is one Cause of his False Hypothesis. We have mean conceptions of the System of
the World if we think it is no more than a Clock or a Watch. The Supreme and
All-mighty Being does not confine himself to Mechanism and the Common
Principles of Natural Motion. And therefore it is vain to undertake to solve
all the Phaenomena's of bodies by them, and to attribute all their effects to
the common force and operation of Mechanic Powers, which, as I apprehend, is
the fault of this Learned Theorist and some others.

Thus I have briefly touched upon the Reasons and Grounds why these persons
relinquish the Mosaic Account of the Creation, and consequently the System of
the World founded upon it, and why they take Copernicus or Carts to be better
Writers than Moses. In the First Reason that they assign they are Fantastical,
and dream of a World of Inhabitants in the Moon and the other Planetary Bodies.
In the Second they are Childish, and esteem things by their Bulk and Show. In
the Third they are Sneaking, and debase themselves, and take no notice of their
Noble Nature. In the Last they debase the All-mighty himself by tying him to
Mechanic Laws. And in all four they seem to discourse unreasonably,
unphilosophically, unscripturally. They fly to precarious Evasisions of
Scripture, and give such a fanciful account of the Inspired Writers words
(which are plain and intelligible of themselves) that the Theists, and some in
a Form above them, cannot but confess themselves deeply obliged to them. The
number of those that undervalue the Holy Oracles is great already, and I fear
such Treatises as these encourage them, especially when penned by persons of
that Character and Order. Those of the Sacred Function, above all others,
should be very Cautious lest they offend in this kind. They ought to take care
that they interfere not with the Letter of Scripture, that they distort not the
sense of the Sacred Text, and prevaricate with the Book of God; and
particularly that they reject not the plain History of Moses, that they attempt
not to run down his Account of the Creation.

Our Theorist, I conceive, has been extremely delinquent as to these things,
he has thrown down Moses to erect himself, he has made bold with the First
Chapter of Genesis to introduce and establish his own Theorems and Hypotheses,
such as These, that the Chaos was the Atmosphere of a Comet, that a Comet
passed by the Earth at the Deluge, etc* and others about the Revolution of the
Earth not till Adams Fall, about the Change of its Figure, about Paradise,
about the Abyss, about the Planets, etc. which are Precarious Notions, and have
no solid foundation in Reason, Nature, or Scripture to support them. All which
a Dr. Nichols's Conference with a Theist Part. 1
late Writer of a free and brisk Genius has thought fit to expose, and even to
ridicule. But it is not my business to treat this Gentleman at that rate: I
only observe that he seems to have no regard to the Sacred History whilst he is
giving an Account of the Phenomenon of the Earth.

But yet this is not said as if I were so strait-laced as to abridg this
Excellent Writer in any thing of an Indifferent nature, or to debar him of a
Philosophical Freedom, or to lay restraint upon him as to any Disquisitions
that are Ingenious, and in the least Probable. But all this might be done
without entrenching upon Moses. He might, and ought to have adjusted his
Notions to the Text, and made them comport with Moses's History, and built
thereupon a Rational Theory, and a Scheme of Philosophy consistent with
Genesis. But it was his Infelicity to take a Contrary Method, to usurp upon the
Holy Writ, wantonly to oppose the natural and obvious meaning of it, to offer
such Interpretations as give occasion to persons to slight the Sacred Volume,
and to disregard that sense and meaning of it which lie plain before them.

To conclude, I considered the Mischief and Danger which might accrue to the
world by that extravagant Liberty which I apprehended Mr. Whiston had indulged
himself in: I considered that such daring Flights as these might prove fatal to
Young Students in Philosophy and Divinity, and teach them to erect their own
Hypotheses upon the ruins of the Sacred Text: I considered how injurious these
Attempts are to the Scriptures in general, and how derogatory to the Spirit of
God who indicted them: and the sense of this alone (without any other Inducement
whatsoever) moved me to use this Plainness and Freedom with so Worthy and
Learned an Author.

OF THE Motion of the Earth. AN Answer to some Objections against some passages
in my late Discourse (entitled A Demonstration of the Existence and Providence
of God) relating to the Copernican Hypothesis of the diurnal Revolution of the
Earth.
A Learned Gentleman was lately pleased to do me the honor to frame some
Objections against the Second Chapter of the First Part of my Treatise, wherein
I endeavored to evince the Being and Providence of God from the Works of the
Creation. First, he censures that passage Page 25. The Sun measures about a
thousand miles in an hour. He thinks I have not used the right method of
calculating the Sun's motion. I must confess to him I was not very Studious
about that, being disheartn'd by the great Difference of Computations which I
observed in the Authors I met with. It is well known how discrepant the
Calculations of Astronomers are. I have seen in my time a good many Writers on
that subject, but I could never light upon any one that satisfies that Point:
wherefore I chose rather to pitch upon a Common and Vulgar Computation than to
trouble the Reader with the several Opinions of Astronomers, or to offer one
that might seem incredible. Herein I conceive I have done nothing amiss. And
truly if the Objector had been Impartial, i. e. had consulted one part of my
Discourse as well as the other, he would not have found any occasion for an
Exception against the foresaid passage. If he had been pleased to take notice
of p. 60. l. 15, etc. these words would have silenced his Scruples, As to the
motion of them (viz. the Planets) there is a great disagreement among Writers:
therefore what has been said before as to this, must be submitted to those
that are able to judge of the different Hypotheses. Here is submission, but it
is not regarded: here was a modest acknowledgment of the Author's insufficiency
to give a just and accurate Account of the Motion of those heavenly bodies^ and
a Candid and Ingenuous Reader could not but infer that the like was supposed in
the Case before us. We are not able to determine in a matter where there are so
Various Sentiments. My design was to represent to the Reader the All-mighty
Power and Infinite Wisdom of the Supreme Being in ordering the Course of the
Celestial Luminaries, and especially of the Solar Globe: and this design I
thought sufficiently accomplished by a General Computation of the Suns Motion
and not by descending to Nice Calculations, which would rather amuse and
distract than give any Satisfaction.

Next, as to what I had offered against the Motion of the Earth, he objects
that I have not dealt fairly with the Copernicans, for I have produced their
trifling and less weighty Reasons, but have concealed the strongest. If this be
so, then I must tell him, that Kepler and Galilaeo (Great Names in Astronomy)
were Triflers, then Lansbergius, Varenius, Gilbert had no weight in their
Arguments; then Copernicus himself was a very easy and mean Arguer, and
defended his Post but slightly. I could mention a Learned Writer who is now
alive, the Worthy Mr. Ray, one of whose Arguments for the Copernican hypothesis
is The Wisdom of God in the Creation, p. 180.
the vast disproportion in respect of Magnitude that is between the Earth and
the Heavens, and the great unlikelyhood that such an infinite number of vast
bodies should move about so inconsiderable a spot as the Earth: and this is the
Chief Argument he propounds. And this, with others which I produced, were made
use of, and earnestly urged by other Learned Writers of great Note and Repute.
Now, who would have thought that the Modern Copernicans would confess that the
Arguments which the First Founders of the Opinion made use of, and which the
Chiefest Writers produced to bring men off from the other persuasion, were so
Light and Trifling? Or if they were Strong Reasons at first, how came they now,
by my exposing them, to be weak? Or, if the Worthy Persons before mentioned
thought fit to insist upon them, can any man give any reason why I might not
propound them as the Topics made use of for that Cause? It will be difficult
to return a satisfactory Answer to these Queries. No, says this Gentleman; for
though those foresaid Philosophers found out, or retrieved the Earths
Circumrotation, yet we of late found out the True Reason of it. And what is
that, I pray? The true Reason of this Hypothesis is this, its suitableness to
the laws of Mechanism. This is the Great Arcanum which our late Worthies boast
they have had the happiness to bless the world with.

But I desire these two things may be considered.

First, this is a Reason which was never insisted upon by Copernicus, the first
Reviver of this Hypothesis, nor so much as mentioned by some of the Greatest
Followers and Asserters of his doctrine, as I Am ready to prove out of the
Authors themselves, if it be denied. Those things which I alleged, and which
this Gentleman calls trifling, are the Principal Arguments which the generality
of Copernicans urge for their Opinion. They did not so much as understand the
word Mechanism, they had never heard of such a term. Gassendus, who gives a
summary account of all the Reasons produced for this Hypothesis, reckons up
those very ones which I gathered out of the Authors themselves: only he argues
indeed from the Motion of the Planets, which is uncertain and dubious; but he
has not a syllable about the laws of Mechanism. Tell me then, is it credible
that the First Inventers and Establishers of an Hypothesis should not be
acquainted with the True Reason why they threw off the received Opinion, and
embraced another?

Secondly, They that at this day use these Terms know not how to apply them to
the present purpose. I deny not the Excellent Use and Advantage of the
Mechanic Philosophy (of which I have spoken in another place) for most of the
Great and Brave Discoveries of this Age in Physiology, Medicks, etc. are owing
to this: but that which I assert at present is, that it is no ways applicable
to the matter in hand, viz. the Hypothesis of the Copernicans: for there is not
one of them, so far as I can judge, that has solidly showed and proved the
agreeableness of the Earths Circumgyration to the Laws of Mechanism. There is a
late Writer that talks as much of the Mechanical Laws of Motion as any man, but
though he asserts the Diurnal Circumvolution of the Earth, yet Mr. Whiston's
New Theory, Book 1 and 2.
he holds that in the time of Man's Innocence there was no such thing, but that
it was the effect of Man's Fall, and immediately followed upon the Curse on the
Earth, and is part of its Curse. Whence it follows that the Earths Motion was
not the Primitive state and property of it; it was not Natural to it, but
preternatural, inordinate and irregular, and consequently not according to the
stated laws of Mechanism. And as for the Other Authors who endeavor to solve
the Earths Motion in a Mechanical way, it is evident that they are not able to
effect what they have undertaken. And how indeed can we expect they should do
it, when we find them disagreeing about the Mechanic Laws? There never was a
greater dissen^ion among Natural Pilosophers than there is about this one
thing, as appears from comparing the Writings of Des Carts (who was the First
Substantial Author of Mechanism) Dr. More, Dr. Burnet, Mr. Newton, Dr.
Woodward, Mr. Whiston, and other Philosophical Men of this age, who have built
their respective and different Hypotheses and Theories on their different
notions of Mechanic Principles and Agents. They all pretend to proceed upon
Mechanical Laws: their Solutions are founded on the Natural Tendency of Matter:
and yet we see how wide their Notions are from one another, and how their
Hypotheses are contradictory to each other. Which plainly shows how fallacious
an Argument Mechanism is. And if we speak particularly of the matter now before
us, who sees not how differently these Principles and Laws are applied? Some
Writers (as this present Objector himself acknowledges) making out the
Copernican Hypothesis by the notion of Vortices, others by that of Mutual
Gravitation about a Common Center.

First, some think the Motion of the Earth demonstrable from the Vortices. So
the Great Des Carts, and the famous Dr. More in one of his Epistles; and there
are others that espouse this part of the Cartesian Physics. But it were easy
to show how improbable an Hypothesis this is on several accounts: for it puts a
Force upon Nature, because according to Des Cartes's own Principle all bodies
moving Circularly endeavor to get free of that motion, and to alter the
Center: so that there is nothing like Natural Motion in the hypothesis of
Vortices, but all is Violent, and against the easy known laws of Mechanism.
The Vortices are impetuous Torrents of fluid matter continually emptying and
discharging themselves: the Poles of every one of them are made forcible
Dreiners for the Eclipticks, and there is a constant disgorging and evacuating
of such and such a Set of Particles, accompanied always with a violent
emission, impulse, and protrusion. So that without Revelation we may tell that
there is War in heaven, perpetual justing and tilting, jarring and fighting.
Among the Vortical Orbs, Celestial and Planetary, there are Commotions and
Tumults, and the World is in a Continual Hurly-burly, a Pell-mell, a Confusion.
That the Vortices keep their Station, and are not swallowed up of one another
is a Miracle. One would think that it is impossible but that they should
encroach upon one another, according to the nature of that violent and rapid
motion which the Author of them has described. The truth is, no considerate
and thoughtful man can apprehend how the World has been able to subsist so
long as it has, on the supposition of that make and composition of the Vortices

Moreover, it might be proved that the doctrine of Vortices destroys the common
notion of Gravity, i. e. the descent of heavy bodies to the Center, that it
must necessarily hinder the Sun and Stars from being seen, that it is utterly
inconsistent with the Steadiness of their motions, and the certainty of their
Revolutions, that it is irreconcilable with the Flux and Reflux of the Sea,
etc. This and much more may be made good concerning the Vortices; which renders
Des Cartes's System precarious.

And indeed the Excellent Author himself thought it to be no other: in his
Philosophical Principles, part 3. Sect. 45. and in two or three other places of
his Writings (as those that are acquainted with them know very well) he
confesses it to be but a bare Hypothesis, he lets us know that he took the
liberty to feign and invent this. And indeed any man of castigate thoughts
cannot but perceive that it is a mere Romantic strain that this Earth of ours
was once a Sun, and that all the World was Heavens at first. This is Ingenious
and Fine, but not Solid. The World of Whirl-pools is a World of Monsieur Des
Cartes's own making. He intended it only for a Philosophical Expedient, which
might serve to give an account of the Phenomenon in the Heavens and the Earth:
but it is all Supposition, and you cannot build a Body of Natural Philosophy
upon it, nay you cannot evince the Earth's Motion (which is the thing contended
for) from this supposal. Hence it is that some Great Philosophers of this Age
labor to establish this doctrine on another Hypothesis: which they would not
do if they thought the laws of Mechanism as grounded on the Opinion of
Vortices, were true and solid. They would acquiesce in this, and not look out
for some other way to give a Solution of the Problem: but we see they are
dissatisfied, and fly to some other way of solving this doctrine of theirs.

Secondly then, it Vortices cannot do it, Gravity must. This is another
Principle of Mechanism that is relied upon. The Chief Person of late that
manages this is the Learned and Profound Mr. Newton, who in his Princip.
Philos. Math. tells us that there is Rest in the Common Center of Gravity, and
if the Sun be the Center then it rests, and the Earth moves about it. But
first, who is there that, weighing the several Systems of the World, (the
Ptolemaick, Tychonick, etc.) sees not how difficult it is to determine what
part of the Universe is its Center? They Learned Brahe thought the spoke and
argued like a Mathematician and Astronomer when he defended the Earths
Gentreity. Again, Mr. Newton himself seems not to hold that the Sun is the
Center of the Mundane System: nay he owns expressly in his 10th Proposit. the
distance of the Solar body from the Center of Gravity, which respects it self,
and all the Planetary bodies, with the Earth. Besides, this Mechanical
Principle which is styled Vis Gentripeta, or Gravity, is very obscure and
doubtful, and therefore unsatisfactory, because of the Different (if not
contrary) hypotheses it is built upon, according to the Various apprehensions
of Philosophical heads. From the discrepancy of their notions, and their ways
of solving this Phoenomenon we are able to gather only this, that the Problem
of Gravitation or Non-gravitation, and the suppositions and solutions about it
have puzzled the Wits of the profoundest Vertuoso's, and consequently we have
no Sure footing here.

Further, the Laws of Gravity can scarcely be said to be Mechanical: for
Gravitation is not a Mechanic Principle, because it flows not from the Nature
of Bodies, they being in themselves of a Passive nature, and therefore cannot
tend toward other Bodies, or draw them to them. There is no such Activity in
mere Corporeal and Material Beings, and consequently the laws of the Universal
Tendency or Attraction of Matter, which are supposed, must have another Spring.
Dr. More in his Metaphysics will let you know that they proceed from an Higher
Principle, that they cannot be solved in a mere Mechanical way, that they are
above and beyond all the force of Mechanism, and depend wholly and entirely on
the Divine Omnipotent Mover. But then you will say, the Gravity of bodies is a
Miracle: for the notion we have of a Miracle is, that it is some Occurrence
which is above or contrary to the fixed course of Nature. To which I answer,
though it is true the main and chief thing which constitutes a Miracle, is that
is surpasses finite power, and is the result of an Omnipotent Agent, yet there
are other Properties which must concur to denominate a Miracle, as Rarity and
Wonder; but these two are wanting here, for Gravity, and the Effects of it are
common and usual, and (as the consequent of that) beget not Admiration and
Amazement, and for these reasons we style them not Miraculous. But
notwithstanding this, we may hold that they are things that exceed the power of
mere Nature, they are not from the efficiciency of Matter, in what manner
soever moved, but are immediately from a Divine hand. Gravity, says a late Mr.
Whiston's New Theory, book 1. p. 6.
Learned Writer, is above, besides and contrary to the nature of Matter, and is
the effect of a Divine Power and Efficacy which governs the whole world; nay,
he sticks not to say, of Book 4. chap. 1.
a Supernatural and Miraculous Influence. And an Dr. Bentley, Sermon. 7.
other Ingenious Gentleman speaks to the same purpose.

Lastly, as to Mechanism it self, the laws and rules of it are very disputable,
and therefore we cannot solidly argue from it. The Renowned Cartesians (that
Great and Mighty Genius of Mechanism, whom all the Learned World admires and
applauds) proceeds upon and proves all by Mechanic Principles in his Theory of
the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, but yet we find that several of his
Principles and Maxims have been rejected since by very Wise heads, and great
Judges in Mathematics. Let One speak for all, Mr. Ray's Wisdom of God in the
Creation, p. 34.
Des Cartes's Rules, says he, concerning the transferring of motion from one
body in motion to another in motion or in rest, are the most of them by
Experience found to be false, as they affirm who have made Trial of them. Here
then is no Certainty, there is no proceeding on Mechanical Laws in the present
Controversy: which was the thing to be proved.

This is what I had briefly to suggest concerning the Two Mechanic Principles
which the Learned Objector founds the Motion of the Earth upon* And now I
appeal to himself whether he can alledg these as a grand and weighty reason (as
he expresses it) of the Phenomenon he defends, seeing they are so Uncertain
and fickle, seeing Naturalists so widely differ about them, and cannot agree in
assigning the Mechanism. Any rational man will infer hence that we can not rely
upon this doctrine in the present Case. This I think is very clear and plain,
and therefore let not the grand and weighty reason of Mecanism be brought to
prove the Circular motion of the Earth, till there be an agreement about the
Nature of it. Though Dr. More and Mr. Newton (who are the worthy persons our
Objector cites) make the Motion of the Earth the necessary effects of
Mechanism, yet they do it upon different grounds, they proceed on Mechanic
laws of Motion which are diverse from one an other, and depend on different
Hypotheses; therefore a third person cannot build upon either of them. How can
a man found the Earths Circulation on Vortices or Gravity, when the Authors and
Founders themselves prove it not from the same Mechanical Principles, but such
as contradict each other? for such are Gravity or the subsiding of bodies, and
the Whirling them round. If we had a mind to make use of these Hypotheses of
those Great Men, we cannot (if we would) adhere to both of them, because they so
vastly differ; therefore One of them only can be pitched upon, but which of
them is hard to determine, and this Gentleman himself does not assign which of
them he intends to own as the True Principle.

If you stick to the Vortices, you will be liable to the Witty Atheist you
mention, for the Vortices are looked upon by the Judicious as only an Ingenuous
Invention. If you rely upon the Principles of that other Worthy Gentleman you
quote, he will fail you as to any thing that looks like Demonstration, for he
is obliged first to prove and demonstrate his supposed notion of Gravity, and
the Cause of it (wherein he differs from very Great Philosphers and Vertuoso's)
before he can maintain that Point. And I need not tell you that if his
Principles be questionable, then your Inferences from them (which are the Main
of your Argument) must be so too. You proceed upon some Suppositions which that
Excellent Person has espoused, he betaking himself to a Particular way of
Philosophizing which most pleases him: but unless you can absolutely prove that
what he supposes concerning the nature of Gravity is certainly True, in my
opinion you effect nothing, I mean nothing that is certain and indubitable: for
otherwise I grant that you have most elaborately established the Newtonian
Hypothesis, and the Earths Motion on that foot: but if that foot be infirm, as
I conceive it is, then all your Arguing is of that nature also and you still
want a (...) to move this Globe. The short of all is, if you strike in with
Carts and More, you must renounce the Lucasian Professor: if you make choice
of this last, you must cashier the other two.

Where then is this Demonstration of the Copernican hypothesis from Mechanical
Principles which is talked of? I grant what this Gentleman says, that upon
supposition of Vortices the motion of the Earth is proved as fully agreeable to
Mechanism as a Boats swiming down the stream, if left at liberty: but then it
must be proved that there is this Stream in the make of the Earth and of the
Heavenly Bodies too, which he attempts not to prove. And as for Gravitation, as
it is represented by that Celebrated Mathematician he quotes, and the laws of
Mechanism consequent upon that, which he infers from the dimensions of the
Planetary System, I need not inform him (he being so well acquainted with it)
that there has been, and is at this day a great a disagreement among the
Learnedest Astronomers about the distance of the Planets from the Earth, and
from one an other; there have been professed Disputes and Quarrels about this,
and accordingly there must be a dissension about the Dimensions of those
bodies: and consequently if their Calculations be various, there is no Arguing
from thence; we cannot judge of the Mechanism of the Plannets because we are
strangers to their just Dimensions, and the laws of their Motion depending
thereupon.

When I considered these things, when I observed how obscure, uncertain and
precarious the Principles are on which the Earths Motion is grounded, I thought
it best (in my Discourse of the Existence and Providence of God) to lay aside
this New Hypothesis. Because I was not well satisfied with the Account which
the Moderns give of it, I chose rather to retain the Tychonick System, as being
least encumbered with Objections and Difficulties. Of which an Intelligent
Philosopher of this Age (whom I mentioned before) was sensible, and therefore
declares himself no Stickler for the Copernican Hypothesis, but very fairly and
ingenuously professes that Mr. Rays Wisdom of the Creation, p. 183.
he does not positively assert it, but only proposes it as an Hypothesis not
altogether improbable. But as to what I have offered, the Atheist (be he as
Witty as this Gentleman can make him) has no advantage by it, (whatever he
seems to suggest:) nay rather, it would have made for him if I had founded the
Providence of the Almighty on so tottering a basis as the laws of Mechanism.
The Cause would have received a great prejudice from the using of an Argument
so weak and dubious. Then it would have been disputed, whether the Penman of
the Book of Genesis or Monsieur Carts, or whether he or Mr. Newton were the
better Author: or rather it would have been plainly seen that there is a
greater deference given by some men to the latter then to the former, and that
the Philosophical Principles of the one are preferred to the Inspired Writings
of the other.

But the Truth of the matter is this, the Merits of that Cause I undertook,
viz. the Proof of the Divine Providence, were not concerned in this
Controversy, For whether one or the other hypothesis (viz. the Rest or the
Motion of the Earth) be true is not material as to the Main Business: and so
much I intimated in that Discourse, p. 57. l. 7. etc. After all, if the
Copernican hypothesis should be true, that is, if the Earth rolls about on its
Center, and so turns it self to the Sun in its various positions, yet still
there are the same Effects of this that there were of the other Revolution,
viz. that of the Sun; the good and benefit of mankind are promoted, and the
Power and Goodness of the Great Benefactor are declared. And I had said before,
p. 49. The motion of the Earth is a precarious Opinion, so far as I have
hitherto discerned. By which words I shut not out future Convictions, and I let
the World see that I am not Peremptory in my determination, but that I believe
the Power and Wisdom of God may be evidenced from both hypotheses. Yet it was
and is my persuasion that the doctrine of the Earths Rest is more probable and
accountable then that of its Moving: there is more to be said for its standing
Still then for its taking a Turn about the Sun. At least I shall continue in
this Opinion till the Writers who are of the other side agree upon a better way
of explaining and proving what they assert. Archimedes was modest who demanded
a Place to set his foot on, an to plant his Engines, and then he would
undertake to move the Earth: but some of the Gentlemen of the Copernican way
pretend to do this without any solid Footing, and without any Machins but those
of their own Ingenious Brains, which it must be confessed are very strong and
powerful, but not powerful enough to effect this Business they Undertake. I
hope then I may without of^ence retain my Persuasion, till I see it confuted by
Solid Arguments, and such as as are founded upon unshaken Principles. Seeing
this Learned Objector, who is of so deep a Comprehension, is not pleased to
produce such, I am apt to think that none else can.

I only observe in the last place, that he is for a Neutrality, and would have
me treat both hypotheses with indifferency: but he sets me a Task which he is
not willing to perform himself, for he has showed himself in what he writes to
be a great favourer of the Copernicans, in direct Opposition to the other side.
We can prescribe that to others which we take no care to observe our selves.

ERRATA.
PAge 27. line. 6. for aid read and, p. 28. l. 1. r. the seeming, l. 7. after
thus, add in way of exception, l. 8. r. wa^ really, p. 30. at the bottom r.
Part 2. The other Errata's you are desired to pardon, the Author being absent
from the Press.

FINIS.

