A LETTER OF Examination, TO All you who have assumed the place of Shepherds,
Herdsmen, and Overseers of the Flocks of People, of all sorts in Christendom;
to see if your Accounts be Ready, and what Order the Flocks be in. With a few
Lines of Good News to the several Flocks.

Woe be to the Shepherds that feed themselves: Should not ye Shepherds feed the
Flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth with the wool, ye kill them that are fed,
but ye feed not the Flocks. The Diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have
ye healed that which was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought back that which was driven away, neither have ye sought
that which was lost; But with force and cruelty have ye ruled them, and they
were scattered,

Ezekiel. 34. 3, 4, 5. Jer. 23. 12. Therefore I come against the Shepherds, says
the Lord: I will require my Sheep at their hands, and cause them to cease from
feeding the Sheep: Neither shall the Shepherds feed themselves any more, for I
will deliver my Sheep from their mouths,

Ezekiel. 34. 10. Printed in the Year, 1672.

A LETTER of EXAMINATION. TO All you who have assumed the place of OVERSEERS of
the Flock, etc.
COME all you (that have assumed the title of) Shepherds. Overseers and
Herdsmen of the Flocks of people of all sorts in Christendom, you have had the
Oversight, Herding and Ordering of the multitudes of people for a long time;
and the Lord has been as a man in a far Country: and now he is coming to call
you to account, and he will require the Flocks at your hands, and the time is
near that you must give account of your charge; and receive a recompense of
reward from him according to your deeds.

This is a Warning to you all, to have your Accounts ready, and see that the
Flocks be in good order, and that nothing be wanting; for you will not have any
to meddle with the Flocks but your selves, so at your hands the Lord will
require them.

Have you kept a dilligent Watch Night and Day with Carefuln^s for their
Souls? Have your Locks been wet with the Dew, and the Hairs of your Heads with
the Frosts, to preserve their Feet in the way of Peace, and from the Devourer,
and out of all fill thy and unclean ways? Have you been as good examples before
the several Flocks in all things, walking before them as good patterns? Have ye
led them to the pastures of Life, and fed them in due season? Or have ye not
played the Careless Idle Shepherds, Sitting in your Fat places, and Lying upon
your Soft pillows, at your e^^e: Feeding with the Fat, and Sporting your selves
in your day and time, whils't the several poor Flocks go astray in the by
Paths, and are scattered in the bar^en Wilderness, as Sheep wanting a
Shepherd, and as a People lost their Guide; where their poor Souls are
starved for want of the Bread of Life? Have ye led the severa^ Flocks to the
Fountain of Living Mercies and Wel-spring of Life: and caused them to drink
Freely, without Money, and be Refresh^d, wh^reby they all become Fruitful, and
none Barren as the Flocks in Solomon's Song chap. 6. ver. 5. or are they not
dried up Head and Tail for want of the Springs of Life and so Unfruitful in any
thing that is Good? And have not you in this condition led, and drove them, by
your Example, and Persuasion; to the dirty Paddles and Kennels of Sin and
Uncleanness? And have not you (the pretended) Heardsmen of all sorts persuaded
the Flocks that this is that they must Dr^nk and Lick up whilst on this side
the Grave? And is not your Flocks (as you call them) by that means fallen into
gross disseafes, as Rottenness of Heart, Unsoundness of Mind, Blindness and
Deafness, from seeing their Salvation, and Hearing the Voice of the Lord Jesus?
And are they not fallen into Lameness of Feet and Hands? and cannot walk
upright in the just man's path, which is a Shining Light, but stumbles at it:
nor cannot handle the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; by which
they should war against the Man of Sin, and break down his strong holds.

And by drinking Iniquity, Sin and Uncleanness, is not all the Flocks fallen
into gross disseases? that there is no health in them, and become weak and
feeble in the Faith that they should resist the Devil in, and overcome him: And
have lost their taste, smell and savor in the things of God; and every thing
that is seasoned with his Spirit and Power, become loathsome to their taste, by
reason of the Diseases and Rottenness wanting Salt in themselves to Savor
withal, by which they should be a sweet savor of a sweet smelling Sacrifice to
God, and to season the Earth. And through want of i^* is not the Earth Corrupt?
and the Creation Burde^ed, and Groans, and wai^s to be delivered from under
that Bondage.

And see now what you have in your Hoc^ (as you call them) to Offer to the Lord
that may find acc^ptance w^^h him, will he accept of the Unclean, Sick, (...)
or Blind? must no^ the Church that is presented to God b^ without Spo^, Wrinkl^
or any such thing? And nothing that is unclean can e^ter into his Kingdom. And
have you Shepherds and Heardsmen (so called) of all sorts loo^ed ^ar fully to
the sever^l Flocks, to keep them from the spots of the world? or are they not
run all over from head to tail with a Scab? as a Leyrosy. And have you not
played the lazy S^epheards, that looks not (...) to the Flocks, or else the
soph^sters? For you have said, That you have the care and cure of Souls: and
that you are the Physicians: and your Flocks (as you call them) falling into
such gross disseases and uncleanness, are not you the careless Shepherds, and
Physicians of no vallue? And would not you blame and be angry with the Herd^men
of your Flocks? and require your Flocks at their hands, and throw them into
Prison till they made satisfaction, that should deal so badly with you,
conc^rning your Flocks and Herds? And will not the Lord do so by you? and is
it not reasonable, just and equal that he require the Flocks at your hands? For
you have been well paid, for the looking to them; as you very well know, and
the Nations can witness.

Have you kept one certain voice? as the good Shepherd does, that the Sh^ep
might hear his voice and come together: and not stray and straggle, nor fall
into Pits. Or have not your voices been variable, and changable as the wind,
and given an unc^rtain sound? And your Flocks (as you call them) never find a
certain voice amongst you; and so are scattered into sects, devisions, and
parties, pushing one another with Head, Horn, Arm and Shoulder into the Pit,
and into the M^re: inftead of helping one another out of the Mire, and out of
the Pit. Again, have you been careful to count the Flocks morning and evening,
as Shpeheards ought to do, and usually does, that none be wanting? Or have you
not neglected this duty also, save at fleeceing time? And is not that like the
Hire^ing that cares not for the Flocks, but for the fleece? Have you kept the
Flocks that you (pretend to) be Overseers of well marked with the Lambs mark in
their foreheads, and in their right hands, that they may be known that they are
his? For if they be not, but marked with another mark, will he not say, Depart
I know you not? Have you acquainted the Flocks wi^h the fold of peace and
safety, and to come into it gently, and rest ^n meekness and quietness? Or have
you not been negligent, and they grown wild, as the wild Goats upon the
mountains and as Bu^^^^s unaccustomed to the yoke, and as Heifers snuffing up
the wind.

Have you not left the office of a Shepherd? and are not many of you turned
Hunters; and hunts the Lords little Flock, whom he has gathered by his Power,
into his Spirit, and has put them under the hand of the (...) Shepherd: that
feeds them in due season? Do not you hunt them as a Partridge, and make it your
Game and Sport to Spoil and Destroy them, as the Hook of your Prey: and
prepare your tongues like Bows, and your words like Arrows to destroy and cut
them off? and you know them by the Shepherds mark from all the Flocks in
Christendom (so called.)

And do not you Huntter-like, sound your Horns of Envy and Persecution, to
awaken and stir up all of the like Mind with you, and the like Spirit, to Hunt
and to Spoil the Lords little Flock, as though they were not worthy to feed,
and live upon Earth with the rest of the Flocks: as though the Earth were
yours, and not the Lords: or as if he might not have as much privilege as you
to have a Flock upon Earth, as well as you, as though he had no right, but all
were yours? and think you that the Lord sees not this? and will not this anger
him, and kindle his wra^h, and hasten him to call you to account, and to reward
you according to your works?

And may not he justly hunt you, who have been the chief hunters of his: and
prepare his Bow and his Arrows against you, and mark you out, and make you a
hissing, and a byword to the Nations? and is it not just for him to take the
Flocks from you, who have been careless and neglected your service, and duty?
and now will not let his Flock be quiet, but rend and tear them. Is it not
Justice and Equity for him to rend the Flocks from you, and redeem them from
your mouths, who will not suffer his, to receive the Law at his mouth whom he
has ordained a Priest for ever; whose Lips preserve knowledge? Will not the
just Principle in you answer to his Justice, that comes upon you with Equity to
take the Flocks from you, and lay you aside like an old Alminack, and gather
the Flocks, and put them under the hand of one Shepherd, Christ Jesus the good
Shepherd, who will bring them to the fresh pastures of Life, and feed them in
due season, and cause them to hear his voice, and to know it, and with his,
fould, and to ly down in it, in quietness, meekness and patience; where none
shall make them afraid: preserving from the storm, and from the heat, and and
will bring them to the Well of clean water, and Fountain of living mercies, and
cause them to wash and be clean, and to drink and be refreshed, that they may
no longer be barren in fruits of holiness, but may bring for^h to Gods glory;
and will anoint their eyes, with eye salve, and open their blind eyes, and then
they will see you to be blind guides, and bless the Lord that redeems them from
you, and he will give them Balsome and precious Ointment, even virtue that goes
out of him, the good physician that will cure their Spots, Scabs and Leprosies,
which ran all over them whi^st they were under your hands, and will purge their
corruptions, and cure the evil disseases of sin and iniquity, by which death
has had dominion, and will give them saving health, and ^eal their
backsli^dings, and open the mystery of his Kingdom to them, circumcising their
hearts, and ears, and causing them to understand those secrets, which are
hidden from the wisdom of this World, and bring them out of the many ways, into
the one Way, Christ Jesus the Way to God, and out of the many sects, devisions
and parties, holes, briars, thorns and thickets, which they are fallen into,
and been entangled in, in the cloudy and dark day they have been in, whilst
under your hands: and set his Name and his Fathers Name upon them, and give
them the Seal of the new Covenant, that they may know and be known, that they
are his, whom he has purchased with his precious blood, and redeemed, searched
and sought out, even as a good Shepherd, and bring them to the Mountain of the
house of the God of Jacob, and will teach them of his ways, Isa. 2d. chap. 3d.
verse. And he will watch over them who sleeps not, nor slumbers not; and will
work a reformation in the Nations, and ^ring them to the one true Church, which
is in God, Founded and Built upon the sure Foundation which God has laid, and
coupled together; as with the hand of a wise workman, into the Fellowship of
the one Body; and Christ Jesus the Head, which supplys the whole body, with all
things needful, to build them up in their most precious Faith, which gives them
victory over the man of sin, and renews into the true worship of God in the
Spirit and in the Truth, and to the uniformity in the spiritual worship, and a
true conformity to it, by his Law of the Spirit written in the heart, where
Christ is Priest according to the promise of the Father, Minister and Bishop of
the Soul, who ministers Life, Peace and Comfort unto them, and renews his holy
and heavenly Ordinances in the Church, baptizing into one Spirit, and into the
one Faith that works by Love, and purifies the heart, giving a white Stone, and
in it a new Name, and the sinceer Milk of the Word, officiateing the Priests
offices, in the Church of the first Borne; prepareing the Alter, and spreading
the Table with fine white Linen, which is his Righteousness, and prepares the
Bread for his Church, and fills their Cup with the new Wine, that they may all
drink of the Cup of blessings, which is the communion of his Blood, and may all
eat of the one Bread, which is the communion of his Body, and his Body is Bread
indeed, and his Blood is drink indeed, and this is that that gives Life; and
without it they cannot have Life, and this is free without money, which the
Lords Table is furnished with, and is inviting the People, and gathering the
Nations to it, from your chargable Tables, for you have sold them Bread, Wine
and Water at a d^ar rate, and he will feed them with all things necessary, as
one Household, of one Faith, and as one Family, Christ Jesus, greater then
Solomon to Rule them, as their Lord and Master, setting up and renewing family
Duties amongst them, to stand upon their watch, and to resist every appearance
of evil, and to Pray with the Spirit, and with Understanding, and to Sing with
the Spirit and with Understanding also, and he shall rule whose right it is,
and the Government is upon his Shoulders, whose Kingdom is Everlasting and of
whose Government there shall be no end, and the Lord will perform this, to
reform the Nations, to bring them to Uniformity, and true Conformity to his
dear Son.

William Edmondson.
Iamaica, the 24th. of the 12th. Month 1671.
THE END.

