A DISCOURSE Concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfection OF THE BOOKS OF
THE Old and New Testament. WITH A Continued Illustration of several Difficult
Texts of Scripture throughout the whole Work.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON: Printed; and Sold by Richard Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

Imprimatur.

S. Blithe, Procan. Deput. Io. Beaumont, S. T. P. Io. Covell, S. T. P. C.
Roderick, S. T. P.

Cantabr. April 13. 1693.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON, Lord Bishop of ELY.
MY LORD,
YOUR Kind and Generous Acceptance of my former Undertakings (which justly
merits my most Thankful Acknowledgments, which I here render to Your Lordship)
has encouraged me to make this Offering of another little Treatise, and to
request You to take both it and its worthless Author into Your Protection. Your
Name alone is a sufficient Amulet against the Censures which these Papers may
be exposed to by being made thus Public. None will venture to damn that Book
which Your Lordship shall be pleased to Patronize. I am confident of the
Goodness of the Cause which I have Espoused, but I am as sensible on the other
hand of my great and manifold Defects in the managing it. However, I entertain
good hopes of finding my Readers in some measure favorable to this Enterprise,
when they shall behold Your Lordship's Name, which is the known Name of
Learning and Piety, prefixed to it by,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble and Devoted Servant, John Edwards.

THE PREFACE.
WHAT I had prepared for the Public View concerning the Authority, Style, and
Perfection of Scripture I intended to have Published together in one Volume;
but finding that the Present Age is not for Great Books, I am content to comply
with it so f^r; especially perceiving the First Part of this my Undertaking to
swell into a moderate Octavo, I am willing it should go into the World alon^*
and accordingly I now Publish that First P^rt only, intending to treat of the
Style and Perfection of Scripture either in one or two Volumes afterward. The
whole Attempt is of near A^^inity with my fo^mer Undertaking, viz. of
Criticizing on several Texts of Scripture, especially such as are Difficult,
and giving the Resolution of them. I have all along, whilst I have mentioned
s^veral Passages of Holy Writ (to which the Opinions or Practices of the Pagans
refer) given an Explication generally of them; So that I am still in pursuit of
my former D^sign, and I make it my Business to clear and illustrate the Sacred
Writings, especially that part of them which is most Obscure and Difficult. But
the more particular Design of these Papers is to a^^e^t the Truth and Authority
of those Ancient and Divine Writings. and that from the Testimonies of our
professed Adversaries, viz. Pagans and Jews. It were folly to deny that diverse
of these things are mentioned in other Authors, and partly to the same purpose
that I have produced them, (as indeed what useful Subject is there that has
escaped the Pens of the Learned?) but then it will be fitting (if not
necessary) for me to add, in a just Vindication of my present Attempt, that so
far as I have conversed with Writers, I never met with any that Traced this
Noble Subject, both through the Old and New Testament, which is the Design of
this present Work. I know some have hinted at a few of these Remarks, and most
commonly without insisting on the Reasons and Grounds of them, and without
examining the particular Circumstances belonging to them. But I have not
contented my self with this superficial way of delivering these things, but
have endeavored to Search into the true and genuine Original of them, which
has occasioned several Just Discourses, and enlarged Disquisitions on the
various Matters which occur under those Heads. In brief, I have amply
prosecuted this Argument by offering a vast number of Particulars from my own
Enquiry and Observation: I have designedly Treated on this Theme, which scarce
any have done: I have methodically digested my Materials according to the
Histories, or other Passages in the Bible, to which they have reference in
Jewish or Pagan Writers: And Lastly, I have made the whole Serviceable to this
excellent Purpose, viz. the attesting and confirming the Truth of the Sacred
Scriptures.

But the main of this Preface shall be spent in vindicating my Interpretation
of 1 Cor. 15. 29. In my former Enquiry into that Text, where I maintained that
(...) (which our Translators rende^ Baptized for the Dead) is according to the
tru^ and proper Signification of the Words in that place to be Translated
Baptized on the Account, or by reason of, or for the sake of the Dead. Which
Interpretation, I perceive, some are backward to entertain, because they doubt
whether the Preposition (...) joined with a Genitive Case, be taken in that
sense in Profane Authors. They grant it is Equivalent with the Latin causa,
gratia, or in gratiam, but they think that these, and consequently the Greek
Preposition always refer to, and denote some Advantage or Benefit: Therefore
according to these Persons (...) should rather be rendered for the benefit of
the Dead, because this is the Acception of the Preposition in the Writings of
all Profane Authors. But to this I might reply, and that with most justifiable
Reason, that I am not obliged to prove that this Preposition is used in Pagan
Writers in the same Sense that I assert it to be used in this place of St.
Paul. Who knows not that some Authors have a particular and individual Sense of
some Words appropriated to themselves, and it is in vain to look for the same
Acception of them in other Writers? The Commentators on Homer, Aristophanes,
Herodotus, or any other good Greek or Latin Author, take notice that such a
Word or Phrase is used by these Writers in a Sense different from what is found
in others; and this is Satisfactory to the Learned. But especially if they find
that one of these Authors uses the same word more than once in this peculiar
Sense, they are confirmed in the belief of this singular meaning of it. So it
should be here; for this is certain, that the Authority of the New Testament is
every whit as good as that of the forementioned Authors, or any other. Any fair
Critic will readily grant, that if I produce two or three places in the
New Testament where the Preposition (...) has the Signification which I affix
to it, I perform my Task well enough. And this I have already done in my
Enquiry into that Text, where more than the forenamed number of places is
brought to confirm that particular Sense of the word (...) which I have
propounded. I could have mentioned Gal. 1. 4. and 1 Pet. 3. 18. and other Texts
made use of by Grotius, where he thinks (...) is to be rendered, [ by reason of,
or because of, or on the account of our Sins,] for our Sins were the proper
Impulsive meritorious Cause of Christ's Death; though we must not exclude the
Final Cause, because he suffered to take away our Sins. And Vossius goes
something higher, who assures us that (...) and ob, propter, pro pre^ixed to
Sins or Faults, and joined with Suffering or Punishing whether in Scripture or
any other good Author always signifies the Antecedent or meritorious Cause, but
never the Final: And I verily believe that Vossius was as good a
Grammar-Scholar as Socinus, whom he opposes in this particular. There are
other Texts which I might have produced, as John 11. 4. this Sickness is (...),
for, or on the account of God's Glory; and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. (...) for which (viz.
the Kingdom of God) ye suffer; in both which places (...) denotes an impulsive
Cause. And perhaps that place, 2 Phil. 13. (...) is to be understood so. It is
sufficient then to have proved that (...) is used in several places of the
New Testament in the Sense before-named, i. e. that it is as much as [on the
account] or [because of] or [for the sake] that it signifies some Reason,
Account, or Motive, why a Man should do such a thing. We need not search into
other Authors to find whether this be the import of (...) among them; this is
not requisite, for the New Testament is able to vouch it self.

But though to prove this Sense of the Preposition in Classical Authors be more
than I need to do, yet for the Satisfaction of the Scrupulous, for Vindicating
my Interpretation of that Text, and for the Establishing it beyond all
Exceptions for the future, I will show that this very signification of (...)
(and that with a word in the Genitive Case) is not uncommon in the Pagan ^^ile;
and particularly I will make it evident that it has not always a reference to
a Benefit, as some think. For Proof of this I might send you to Stephens's
Thesaurus where in the word (...) he produces some Passages out of Herodian,
Demonsthenes, and (as I remember) Plutarch, which do in some measure evince the
foresaid Acception of the Preposition; and out of Homer's Sixth Iliad he has a
a plain place, -- (...). where (...) is not rendered de te (as the common
Ve^sion is) but causa tua, or propter te, because of thee I hear ill of the
Trojans. Accordingly the great admired Scholiast Eustathius interprets (...) by
(...), and it is as much, he says, as (...), because of thee, or on thy
account. But whether this be the meaning of (...) in this place it is not so
much material as that we need controvert it; but this is sufficient for my
purpose that this famous Commentator who understood Greek so well, acquaints
us, that the Signification of (...) is sometimes as much as (...), yea when
(...) does not signify or imply a Benefit, as is clear in this place; for
these words of Hector cannot possibly be carried to any such Sense; that is
undeniable. Wherefore their Fancy falls to the ground who think the meaning of
(...) is [for the benefit or emolument of such a one].

I have something yet more to prove, (and that even from Pagan Authority) which
is this, that (...) frequently imports an impulsive Cause, and that directly
and plainly, and that it ought to be translated [on the account, by reason of,
because of] To evince this, I will choose out an Author against whom there can
be no Exception, I mean Isocrates, whose Writings are famed for their Propriety
of Phrase, and Clearness of Style. There he has these Expressions, Plataic.
(...) to fight on account of the Leagues made between them, Panegyr. and
Plataic.
(...), to fight for, or on the account of their Liberty, Plataic.
(...), to fight for, or because of their own safety. These are all Impelling
Causes, the Consideration of their League, of their Liberty, and their Common
Safety excited them to do what they did. As in a higher Sense I proved that
many in the Apostles Times were excited to initiate themselves into the Church
by Baptism by the Consideration of what the Holy Martyrs underwent for the
Cause of Jesus. They were Baptized on the account of, by reason of, for the
sake of those dead Saints, those glorious Champions whom they saw die with so
much Courage. To proceed in the same Author, he expresses himself thus, Orat.
2. ad Nicocl.
(...), to fight for Rewards, i. e. because of those Rewards which they
expected: These effectually stirred them up to behave themselves with great
bravery. So Panegyr. Orat.
(...) is Translated famae gratia by Wolfius, to die on the account of that
Fame and Glory which they knew they should purchase after Death. And of the
same sort is that Passage, Orat. ad Philip.
There are those, says he, that would not change their Lives (...) on any
other account whatsoever, yet are most willing to lose their Lives in the Wars
(...) on the account, or for the sake of getting a Name. This was the moving,
the Impulsive Cause of their dying. And that other set of Phrases, Panegyr. ad
Philip. Epist. ad Philip. Epist. ad Mitylen.
(...), Panegyr. Orat.
(...), etc. To render Thanks for this or that, confirms that Interpretation
which I have given, for those Favors and Kindnesses which they received, moved
them to pay that tribute of Thanks. What we meet with in another place is to
our purpose; Plataic. Orat. 1.
Is it just, says he, to inflict so unequal and seve^e Punishments (...), for,
or on the account of such Faults? And so it is used in the same Oration again,
with reference to Punishment. And when he says, Orat. ad Philip.
(...) quarum rerum metu perterritus, (as the foresaid Translator renders it)
it is evident that (...) is of the same import with because of, by reason of,
and that he speaks of those things which excited Fear in them. Lastly, It may
be observed in this famous Orator, that when he is about winding up a Cause, he
uses these Words, Panegyr. Orat. Plataic. Orat. bis.
(...) or (...) which his Interpreter rightly renders quare, quapropter,
propterea, which is in English, on which account, or because of what has been
said. He moves them to do this or that on the Consideration of what he had
propounded to them in the foregoing part of his Oration. I could produce many
more Quotations out of the same Author, and several others, Demosthenes more
especially, who no less than three times in Olynth. 1.
one Oration uses the Word in this manner, and in Philip. 1.
another place once or twice; but I think I have sufficiently established my
Notion already by what I have produced. You see plainly that (...) has not
absolutely a reference to a Benefit or Advantage, but that it is of a large
import, and signifies in general on the account, or for the sake, and more
especially that it denotes an Impulsive Cause, properly so called, and is used
to express those things or Persons that put Men upon Action; which was the
thing I undertook to make good, and I challenge any Man to disprove it. I have
defended the Signification of the Word (...) out of Classical Authors, that I
might thereby obviate the Scruples of some Inquisitive Persons, and give some
Satisfaction to the Curious, and make my Exposition of (...) more clear and
demonstrative, (when it is seen that it is founded on the Acception of that
Preposition, not only in the New Testament, but in Profane Authors) and, in a
Word, that I may render my whole Undertaking on that Text the more acceptable
to the Learned part of Mankind. To this rank of Persons I devote all my
Endeavors of this kind; but that which I now offer to the World is more
especially designed for the Use of younger Students in Sacred Learning, such as
are Beginners and Candidates in Theology, though I am well satisfied that these
Critical Researches will ^ot be useless to those of a higher Character.

A CATALOGUE of the Difficult Chapters and Verses in Holy Scripture, which are
Explained in this Book, (being set down in the same Order that they are there
mentioned.)
II. CHap. of Daniel, Concerning the Image whose Head was of Gold, etc. Page 9
VII. Chap. of Daniel, Concerning the Four Beasts. p. 10 VIII. Chap. of Daniel,
Concerning the Ram and He-Goat. p. 13 XI. Genesis 4. Let us make us a Name, lest
we scattered abroad, etc. p. 127 XXXVI. Genesis 24. This was that Anah that found
the Mules in the Wilderness, etc. p. 147 XV. Judge. 15, 16, 17, etc. Concerning
the Iaw-bone of the Ass wherewith Sampson slew a thousand Men. p. 149 XXXVIII.
Isai. 8. The Sun returned Ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. p.
200 XXXIII. Deuteronomy. 17. Where Joseph is compared to an Ox or Bullock, and why. p.
214 II. Luke 1, 2. There went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus that all the
World should be Taxed. p. 352 II. Matthew. 2. We have seen his Star in the East.
Verse. 7. Herod enquired of them diligently what time the Star appeared. Verse.
9. The Star which they saw in the East went before them, etc. Verse. 16. Herod
slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, from two Years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the Wise Men. p. 360
XXIV. Matthew. The former part, which speaks of the Destruction of Jerusalem; and
the parallel Chapter of St. Luke, viz. the XXI. p. 394 The Author's Vindication
of his Interpretation of 1 Cor. 15. 29. Praef.


ERRATA.
PAge 18. l. 28. for Ahaz, read Hezekiah. p. 37. l. 15. for end r. err. p. 99.
l. 8. dele not. p. 151. l. 15. dele not. p. 212. l. 30. r. with Ham. and l. 26,
27. correct the Hebrew words: And do the same in other places. p. 227. l. 21.
r. unutterable. p. 238. l. 11. r. on. p. 241. l. 9. r. deus is. p. 248. l. 18.
r. ex Aetheris, l. ult. for that r. at other times. p. 250. l. 17. r.
Martinius. p. 255. l. 26. r. tornare. p. 334. Marg. Quotations misplaced. p.
349. Marg. 3 last lines, put Apolog. 2. ad Sen. after the Quotation, Sed cum,
etc. And put ( b) before Adv. Gent. p. 363. l. 33. r. other Pagans. p. 364. l.
26. r. Silver locks. p. 376. l. 11. dele cites the same testimony, and. p.
411. l. 7 and 10. r. Cedrenus.

What other Faults have escaped, the Reader is desired to Correct.

Advertisement.
AN Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament, which
contain some difficulty in them; With a probable Resolution of them. By John
Edwards, B. D. In Two Volumes in Octavo. Sold by I. Robinson, I. Everingham,
and I. Wyat, in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Ludgate Street.

OF THE Truth and Authority OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.
CHAP. I.
The Internal Testimonies or Arguments to evince the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, viz. 1. The Matter of them, that is, the Sublime Verities, the Holy
Rules, the Accomplished Prophecies contained in them: Under which last Topic
several particular Predictions, chiefly in the Book of Daniel, are explained,
and showed to be fulfilled. Further, it is demonstrated that the foretelling of
future Contingences of that nature, especially so long before they come to
pass, could be from God only. 2. The Manner of these Writings, which is
peculiar as to their Simplicity, Majesty, and their being immediately dictated
by the Holy Ghost. 3. Their Harmony. 4. The particular Illumination of the
Spirit.

I HAVE chosen a very Noble and Important Subject to exercise my Pen, and to
entertain both my own and the Reader's Thoughts and Contemplations with; for no
Book under Heaven can possibly be the Rival of the Holy Bible, none in the
World can pretend to the transcendent Worth and Excellency of these Sacred
Writings. Here not only all Natural or Mor^^ Religion, but that also which is
Supernatural, is ful^ly and amply contained. Here is the Decalog^^ written by
God himself, and transcribed out of the Law of Nature; besides that there are
frequentl^ interspersed in these Writings other choice Rul^^ and Precepts of
Morality. But Supernatural Religion being the chief, this is the main Subject
of th^^ Sacred Volume: and this you will find partly de^livered by the Inspired
Prophets of the Old Testament; and partly by Christ Jesus himself in per^son,
and by the Evangelists and Apostles in the New Testament. Of these Holy
Scriptures I am t^ treat, which are the Standard of Truth, the infallible Rule
of Faith and Holiness, and the Ground work of all Divinity: for this being the
Doctrine which is according to the Word of God deliver'^ in Sacred Writ, we
must necessarily be acquainted with This, and know in the first place that it
i^ True, and make it evident that it is so. If a^^ Estate be given a Person by
Will, he must fir^^ prove that Instrument to be True and Authentic^^ before he
can challenge any Right to what is demised him in it. So it is here, God
bequeaths us a^ Inheritance, ( i. e. Life and Salvation, and Eternal Happiness)
and the Scriptures are as it were* the Will and Testament wherein this is
plainly expressed and whereby it is conveyed to us. Especially the Writings of
the Evangelists and Apostles deserv^ that Name, and thence are styled (...) for
the Greek word, which in its Original Import signifies a disposing of
something, is most commo^^ly applied to such a Disposal as is either by Coven^^
or Testament. Hence it is sometimes rendered (...) Covenant, and sometimes a
Testament: especially among the Lawyers the latter Sense prevails; and
accordingly you will find that a Last Will and Testament is expressed by this
word (...), in the Imperial Institutions, and other Law Books translated into
Greek. We may here join both Senses together; for what God has agreed to by
Covenant with Man, that Christ bequeaths and gives by Testament. Now we must
prove both these, i. e. we must make it evident that the Covenant and Testament
are True, before we can receive any Advantage and Benefit from them. There is a
Necessity of evidencing the Truth of the Scriptures, which are this Covenant,
and this Testament; otherwise we can build nothing upon them.

Here then, I. I will evince the Truth and Authority of the Scriptures, which
is the great Basis of all Theology. II. After I have largely insisted on this,
I will proceed to give you an account of the Nature of the Style and Phrase of
these Holy Books. III. I will advance yet farther, and demonstrate the
Excellency and Perfection of them.


The Subject of our present Undertaking is the first of these: in handling of
which I shall but briefly and concisely make use of those Arguments which are
commonly insisted upon by Learned Writers, till I come to fix upon a Topic,
which is not commonly, yea, which is very rarely and by the by used in this
Cause; and this I will pursue very largely and fully, I hope with some
Satisfaction to the Reader. There are many Arguments to demonstrate the Truth
and Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and show that they are worthy to be
believed and embraced by us as the very Word of God. Some of these Arguments
which are to prove the Truth of these Writings, are in common with those that
prove the Truth of the Christian Religion, on which I shall have occasion to
insist at another time: but my Design at present is to propound those which are
more peculiarly and properly fitted to evince the Truth of the Scriptures. And
these are either Internal or External. The Internal ones I call those which are
either in the Scriptures themselves, or in Us. The Characters of Divinity which
the Scriptures have in Themselves, are either their Matter, or the Manner of
the writing them.

I begin with the first, the Matter of them: and here I will mention only these
three Particulars.

1. The Sublime Doctrines and Verities which are in Holy Writ. In reading this
Book we meet with such things as cannot reasonably be thought to come from any
but God himself. In other Writings which are most applauded, the choicest
things which entertain our Minds, are the excellent Moral Notions and Precepts
which they offer to us, which are all the Result of Improved Reason and Natural
Religion. But here are (besides these) Notices of a peculiar Nature, and such
as are above our natural Capacity and Invention, as the Creation of the World
(in that Manner as is represented to us in these Writings), the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, the Eternal Decrees, the Incarnation of Christ the Son of God,
the Redemption of the World by his Blood, the whole Method of Man's Salvation,
the stupendous Providence of God over his Church in all Ages, the Coming of
Christ to Judgment, and (in order to that) the raising of all Men out of their
Ashes. These and several other Doctrines delivered in the Sacred Writings,
cannot be imagined to come from any but God; they carry with them the Character
of Divinity, as being no common and obvious Matters, but such as are towering
and lofty, hidden and abstruse, and not likely to be the Product of Humane
Wisdom. A God is plainly discovered in them, for the most Improved Creatures
could never have reached to this pitch. Any serious and thinking Man cannot but
discern the peculiar Turn and singular Contrivance of these Mysterious
Doctrines, which argue them to be Divine. We may therefore believe the Writings
of the Prophets and Apostles to be the Word of God, because of the wonderful
Height and Sublimity of those Truths which are contained in them.

2. The Exact Purity and Holiness both of Body and Soul, of Heart and Life,
which are enjoined in these Writings, are another Testimony of their being
Divinely Inspired. For though some other Books dictate Religion and Piety, yet
this is certain, that all the true and just Measures of them were taken
originally from this one Exact Standard, which was prior to them all, as I
shall show afterward. Besides, the Love and Charity, the Humility, Meekness,
and all other Virtues which the Scriptures describe to us, far exceed the most
advantageous Representations, the most exalted Ideas which the Heathen
Moralists give of them. These therefore are emphatically and eminently called
by St. Paul, the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15. because they breath the most
consummate Goodness and Piety, and that antecedently to all Writings
whatsoever: because every thing in them advances Holiness, and that in
Thought, Word and Actions. The End and Scope of them are to promote (...).
Clem. Alex. in Protrept.
Sanctity of Life, to make us every way better, and even to render us * like
God himself. The Holy Scripture was intended to set forth the Divine
Perfections, to display the Heavenly Purity, and thereby to commend the
Excellency of a holy Life. And it is certain, that if with sincere and humble
Minds we peruse this Book of God, we shall find this blessed Result of it, it
will marvellously instruct us in the Knowledge of the Divine Attributes,
especially of God's Unspotted Holiness; it will tincture our Minds with
Religion, it will pervade all our Faculties with a Spirit of Godliness, and it
will thoroughly cleanse and sanctify both our Hearts and Lives, which proves it
to be from God. But because I shall have occasion to say more of this, when I
treat of the Perfection of the Scriptures, I will now dismiss it.

3. To the Matter of Scripture we must refer the Prophecios and Predictions
which are contained in it. These I reckon another Internal Argument, because
they are drawn from what is comprehended in the very Scripture it self. What a
vast number is there of Prophecies of the Old and New Testament, which we find
fulfilled, and accordingly are Testimonies of the Truth of these Scriptures?
Here I will a little enlarge: and first I will beg^n with that ancient Prophecy
of Noah, Genesis 9. 27.
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan
shall be his Servant: Where are foretold things that happened above two
thousand Years afterward; for the Posterity of Iapheth, viz. the Europeans,
especially the Greeks and Romans, among other Conquests gained the possession
of Judea, and other Eastern Countries, which were the Portion of Shem. Again,
it was fulfilled thus; by Christ's coming and preaching the Gospel, and by his
Apostles propagating it, the Gentiles, who were of the Race of Iapheth, were
admitted into the Church of God, which at first indeed consisted of those of
the Posterity of Shem. Deuteronomy. 28. 49, etc.
Moses foretold the besieging of Jerusalem by the Assyrian Armies, and the
Calamities and Miseries which attended it, which were very near a thousand
Years after Moses's time. The Deliverance of the Israelites from the Oppression
and Slavery which they underwent in Egypt, was promised to Abraham above four
hundred Years before it happened. 1 Kings 13. 2.
King Josias was expressly named three hundred Years before his Birth; and
consequently it was a longer time before he could demolish the Altars, and
destroy Idolatry at Bethel, which was also particularly foretold by a Man of
God. Cyrus, who first united the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, and was the
first Emperor of the Second Chief Monarchy, viz. the Persian, was honorably
named and foretold by Isaiah to be the Deliverer of the Jews out of their
Captivity, and the Restorer of their Temple, almost two hundred Years before he
was born, and before that Deliverance was accomplished; Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1
-- -5. This is that Cyrus who conquered Astyages the last King of the Medes,
and translated the Empire to the Persians, and brought Asia and all the East
under his Power. This is that Cyrus whose Life Xenophon wrote, says Sir W.
Raleigh: and from some things there related, especially his last Oration at his
Death, we may probably gather that he received the Knowledge of the True God
from Daniel when he governed Susa in Persia, and that he had read Isaiah's
Prophecy wherein he was expressly named. And indeed Antiqu. 1. 11. c. 1.
Josephus tells us that he had so; and that when the Jews showed Cyrus that
Place of Scripture which foretold his Wars and Victory, and likewise his
Beneficence to the Jews, he admired the Divinity of the Book; and to make good
what he read, he conferred many great Kindnesses on that People. It is no
wonder therefore, says a Dr. Jackson.
Judicious Writer, that the History of Cyrus's Life wrote by the foresaid
Historian, is thought by some to be a Fiction, he being so Extraordinary a
Person, designed by God, and signally foretold beforehand. An extraordinary
Spirit and Vigor actuated him, which makes that Historical Account of him look
like a Romance. But notwithstanding what these Learned Men say, I am doubtful
whether this famous Cyrus whom I am now speaking of, was he that this Historian
gives us an account of; for that Cyrus whom he describes, died a Natural Death,
and expired peaceably on his Bed, and among his Friends; but this Cyrus that
set up the Persian Monarchy, died in the Wars, and was overcome by Tomyris
Queen of the Scythians. Therefore it is thought by others, that the Life of
Cyrus the Second is described by Xenophon. To proceed, the taking of Babylon,
and its being brought under the Power of the Medes and Persians, were predicted
by Isaiah many Years before they came to pass, Isa. 47. 1, etc. And this Noble
Prophet has deservedly gained the Title of Evangelical, because he so exactly
sets down what happened several hundred Years afterward upon the Arrival of
Christ, and the Dispensation of the Gospel. Jeremiah (another noted Prophet)
prefixed the seventy Years of the Babylonian Captivity: And in other Prophets,
who were Penmen of the Old Testament, there are very plain Predictions of
future Events; and the Accomplishment of them has proved them to be True. But
the Spirit of Prophecy is most eminent and wonderful in Daniel, who has
foretold the State of the World from the time of the Captivity, wherein he
lived, till the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, which was about five hundred
Years after. The Succession of the most famous Empires or Monarchies of the
World, is prophetically represented by him in his Interpretation of Dan. 2.
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream. There (as St. Ierom says) he shows that he Temporum
conscius, and totius Mundi. Polyhistor. Epist. ad Paulin.
had knowledge of all Times, and was fore-acquainted with the various History of
the whole World. There you will see the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek and
Roman Monarchies deciphered by the four known Metals, Gold, Silver, Brass, and
Iron. The Head of Gold is the Assyrian or Babylonian Empire, which was the
First and Richest Monarchy, and was the Beginning and Head of the rest which
were to follow. The Breast and Arms of Silver are the Medo-Persian Empire;
which because it consisted of two People, it is therefore fitly set forth by
two Arms. Belly and Thighs of Brass are the Greek Empire; which because it was
chiefly divided into two Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Sel^^cidae, it is well
expressed by two Thighs. Legs of Iron are the Roman Empire; which being (...)
into Eastern and Western, by occasion of Cons^^^tine's tine's removing his Seat
from Rome to Byzantium, is not unfitly set forth by two Legs. Its Feet are said
to be partly Iron and partly Clay, because being divided, it was not all of a
piece, but was of a different Nature: they could no more unite and cement, than
Iron and Clay. Then you read of a Stone cut out without Hands, i. e. the Lord
Christ, not born after the ordinary and humane way. This Stone was first
visible in the Days of those Kings, ver. 44. i. e. the Kings that make up the
Roman Empire: for then Christ was born, then Christianity was first set up.
This Stone shall become a great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth, ver. 35.
and destroy the Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron, i. e. put an end to these
Empires. Christ and his Church shall constitute another, viz. a Fifth Empire,
much more Glorious and Renowned than the former ones. This famous Prophecy, of
above two thousand Years date, was in a signal manner verified at the Coming of
Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and it shall have a further
Completion when the Christian Religion shall be propagated anew in the remote
Parts of the World, and at last shall become the Religion of the whole World,
and a Glorious Church shall be established on the Earth.

In the seventh Chapter of this Prophecy you have the Vision of the Four
Beasts, which foretells the very same which was represented by the Four Metals,
but more particularly and largely. First there is the Lion, i. e. the Assyrian
Monarchy, which has two Wings, which denote the two part of that Empire,
Babylon and Assyria. They are said to be plucked, i. e. shattered and
destroyed, as we read they were by Darius and Cyrus. This Lion is the same with
the Golden Head in Nebuchadnezzar's Dream. Next comes the Bear, which is the
Persian Monarchy set up by Cyrus, (as the former by Ninus) and expired in
Darius, whom Alexander the Great slew in Battle. The three Ribs in its Mouth,
are the three Chief Emperors or Kings of this Monarchy, namely, Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes, who devoured much Flesh, i. e. added many Nations to their
Monarchy. Or the three Ribs may signify the Persian Kingdom, which had united
to it the Medes, and the Babylonian Power and People, and so was composed of
three. This is the same with the Breast and Arms of Silver in the foregoing
Dream. The next thing in the Vision is a Panther or Leopard, with four Wings
and Heads; which signifies the Greek Empire, with the principal Kingdoms or
Satrapies which after Alexander's Death arose out of that Monarchy, viz. those
of Seleucus King of Syria, Antigonus King of the Lesser Asia, Cassander King of
Greece, and Ptolomy King of Egypt. The four Wings also signify the Swiftness of
Alexander's Conquests, and also the speedy Division of his Empire into four
Kingdoms. This is the same with the Brazen Belly in the preceding Dream. Lastly
there appears a Beast with ten Horns, which is the Roman Empire; though I know
some interpret this Fourth Beast of the Asiatick Monarchy, called by Historians
the Regnum Seleudarum, or those several lesser Kingdoms which set up upon the
breaking of Alexander's Monarchy. The ten Horns are ten Kings, as is plain from
the express Words in the 24th Verse; and these (say they) are Seleucus Nicanor,
Antiochus Soter, Antiochus Theos, another Seleucus, Ptolomaeus Euergetes, a
third Seleucus, Antiochus, Ptolomaeus Philopator, Seleucus Philopator,
Antiochus Epiphanes. And the little Horn mentioned ver. 8. is, say they, the
last of these ten. Others are of opinion that the little Horn that came up
among the ten Horns, is the Mohammedan or Turkish Empire, which grew out of the
Roman Monarchy, or those Territories which were possessed by the Romans: and
the three Horns it has seized on, are three Parts of the Monarchy, viz. Asia,
Egypt, Greece. But to unprejudiced Minds it will rather appear, that this part
of the Vision which speaks of the Fourth Beast, and the Little Horn, belongs to
the Roman Empire: for this Vision is but an enlarging on the Dream of the four
Metals before spoken of. And yet I will grant that this Prophetic Vision may
be taken with some Latitude, as many of the Prophecies of the Old and New
Testament (as I shall show afterward) are to be taken: and so Antiochus
Epiphanes and Mahomet (the one the Scourge of the Jewish Church, the other of
the Christian) may not be excluded here, but after a Prophetic manner implied;
yet so as the Roman Empire, and what was to happen in the World in those
Dominions, are chiefly and principally here meant. This is the Beast with ten
Horns, which are the ten Members or Kingdoms belonging heretofore to the Roman
Empire, viz. Asia, Africa, Syria, Egypt, Italy, Spain, Greece, Gallia, Germany,
Britain. This Fourth Beast is the same with the Legs of Iron and Clay, spoken
of before. It is easy and obvious to apply the Character of this last Beast to
the Roman Empire. It was dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly: it had
great Iron Teeth; it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the Residue with
the Feet of it; and it was diverse from all the Beasts that were before it, as
you read in ver. 7. And again, ver. 23. The fourth Beast shall be the fourth
Kingdom upon Earth, which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall devour
the whole Earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. This is a
most Graphical Delineation of the Secular Power of Rome, and of the Slaughter
and Ravage it has made on the Earth. It is farther added, that there came up
among the Horns another little Horn, ver. 8. that is, a Power distinct from
those ten Powers or Kingdoms before mentioned. Here then perhaps is meant the
Church or Hierarchy of Rome distinct from the Secular Power or ten Kings. This
is Popery in the most proper Sense, the Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Dominion
of Rome, as it is distinguished from the Civil or Temporal one: and it is the
same with the False Prophet in Rev. 19. 20. How naturally the Character of this
Horn is appliable to this Purpose, may be seen in the following ver^es.

The eighth Chapter reaches not so far, but yet contains a very notable
Prophecy, couched in the Vision of a Ram and a He-Goat. The Ver. 2.
Ram with two Horns is (as is afterward interpreted in express Words) the Ver.
20.
Kingdom of Media and Persia. The He-Goat is the Greek Empire: the Ver. 5.
notable Horn between his Eyes, is Alexander the Great, the first Greek
Monarch, as you find it expressly expounded in ver. 21. The rough Goat is the
King (or Kingdom) of Greece; and the great Horn that is between his Eyes, is
the first King. It is said, Ibid.
he touched not the Ground, i. e. he went on swiftly; for in twelve Years he
did all his Work, and in three Battles he vanquished Darius, and succeeded in
his Monarchy. Thus he smote the Ram, and brake his two Horns, and cast him to
the Ground, ver. 7. It was above two hundred Years before this was accomplished
that Daniel here foretold, and therefore it is a very considerable Prophecy,
and a very remarkable Proof of the Authority of this Book. Hence it was that
when Alexander the Great was on his march toward Jerusalem to destroy it,
Iaddus the High Priest went out to meet him with the Book of Daniel in his
Hand, which he opened and showed to that great Monarch, and let him see this
Place wherein his mighty Achievements and Glory were foretold: Which very
thing diverted him from doing that Harm to the Jews which he intended, and also
made him confident in his Enterprises against Persia, the Conquest of which
this Prophecy foretold. When this great Horn was broken, ^our other notable
ones came up in its stead, v. 8. that is, on the Death of Alexander there
sprang up these four Kingdoms, namely Macedonia, Asia, Syria, Egypt: These
stood up, but not in his Power, ver. 22. i. e. Alexander's; they were much
weaker and feebler, being divided. Out of one of these Horns came forth a
little one, ver. 9. who is afterward called a King of fierce Countenance, ver.
23. This is Antiochus Epiphanes, who came out of the Syrian Horn: by him the
daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the Place of the Sanctuary was cast down,
ver. 11. He destroyed wonderfully, and prospered and practiced, and destroyed
the mighty and the holy People, ver. 24. This and much more which you read in
this Chapter, can agree to no Person so well as to that Antiochus, who plagued
and embarass'd all Syria, and miserably shocked the Holy Land, and with
unspeakable Rage and Fury persecuted the People of it, and deprived them of
their Sacrifices, and defiled their Altars, and spoiled their Temple the
celebrated Place of their Worship, and cruelly and barbarously put many to
death that refused to violate the Law of Moses. At last it is said, he shall be
broken without Hands; which plainly signifies the sudden and unexpected
Catastrophe of him and his Army, which the Jewish History will particularly
inform you of.

I will not particularly insist on the eleventh Chapter of the same Prophet, in
the beginning of which it is foretold concerning Xerxes, that by his Strength
through his Riches he should stir up all against the Realm of Greece, ver. 2.
which we read was punctually fulfilled, for he entered Greece with an Army that
consisted of a Million of Men. And what is said concerning Alexander the Great,
viz. that his Kingdom should be broken, and divided toward the four Winds of
Heaven, and not to his Posterity, etc. ver. 4. we know was really accomplished.
The rest of the Chapter is a Prophetical History of the Exploits of those
several lesser Kings, among whom the Grecian Monarchy after Alexander's Death
was divided, especially of Antiochus the Great, and of Antiochus Epiphanes.
Here, as in the former Chapters, you may see many things foretold a long time
before they were fulfilled; which is a certain and undeniable Argument of the
Prophetic Spirit in the Scriptures.

We might proceed to the Predictions and Prophecies of the New Testament, which
we see also are performed in great measure. Here was foretold the wonderful
Propagation of the Gospel, the Rejection of it by the Jews, the Receiving of it
by the Gentiles, the Destruction of Jerusalem, and all the Calamities of that
Nation. These Predictions we know are accomplished. Besides, in the Writings of
the New Testament we read that Christ foretold many things concerning himself
and his Followers, as the Scandal which his Disciples, especially Peter, would
give, Mat. 26. 31. Peter's triple Denial of him, Luke 22. 31. and yet at the
same time he foretold that it should not be accompanied with a final falling
away, ver. 32. He foretold that he should be betrayed, and that he should be
mocked and scourged, and at last crucisied; and that the third Day he should
rise again, Mat. 20. 17, 18, 19. And as he predicted his own Death, the Place,
Time and Kind of it, with the time of his Resurrection, (and I might have added
also, of his Ascension, and of his sending the Holy Ghost;) so he did the same
as to the manner of John 21. 18.
Peter's Death: and he foretold Ver. 22.
John the Evangelist's long Life. He told his Disciples what should befall them
after his Departure, what Calamities and Sufferings they should meet with for
their professing the Gospel, and owning his Cause. He acquainted them that the
Gospel should be preached throughout the whole World, that Scandals and
Heresies should come into the Church, that many should apostatize from the
Faith, and desert Christianity, Mat. 24. And the Evangelists and Apostles, as
well as our Savior, from that Spirit of Prophecy which was in them, foretold
sundry things which we see since are fulfilled. In their Writings are
Predictions concerning the Calling of the Gentiles, the Conversion of the Jews,
the State of the Christian Church, the Rise of Antichrist, his Character, his
Progress, and his dreadful Downfall, a great part of which is already fulfilled.
Much of the Fate of the World, which they foretold, God has brought to pass;
which gives us assurance that the rest will be accomplished in due time. Yea,
there are at this day Prophecies fulfilled every hour, as that of the Blessed
Virgin in her Magnificat, From henceforth all Generations shall call me
Blessed, Luke 1. 48. The Memory of this holy Woman is daily celebrated in the
Christian Church, and her Name is blessed throughout all the Assemblies of the
Saints. They with one accord rejoice, that of her was born the Holy JESUS, who
is Blessed for evermore. And so likewise what Simeon and Anna foretold of
Christ, are every day accomplished: some part of their Prophecies is at this
very instant made good. That is another Prophecy which is now fulfilling, 2 Timothy 3. 1. In the last Days perilous Times shall come, for etc. with several
others that might be named, the Accomplishment of which no unprejudiced Man,
and of common Ingenuity, will refuse to acknowledge. Now this wonderful
Prophetic Spirit in Scripture, is a strong Argument that these Writings were
inspired by God, and that the Matter of them is Divine. For the foreknowing or
foretelling of things to come, is one Character of the True God, as you read in
Isa. 41. 22, 23. From thence it is evident that none can predict them, unless
he be immediately enlightened and taugh^ of God. The certain and infallible
Knowledge of future Contingences, which depend on free Causes, is from Him
alone. Wherefore when we see (as in our present Case) that things were expressly
foretold several hundreds of Years before they came to pass, and when we see
that the Events exactly answered to the Predictions, we cannot but acknowledge
that these Predictions were from God, and could not be from any else.

If it be objected, That other Writings beside^ the Bible have Predictions in
them, and that Men of Skill and Sagacity do sometimes foretell Futurities; yea,
that those who have the least Converse with God, those who deal with Evil
Spirits, have predicted things to come; and therefore this Argument is of no
force. I answer, first, It is true that Natural Skill, especially improved by
Art, by Reason and Philosophy, and the knowledge of the Laws of Nature, will
give Men Insight into some Futurities. For God has impressed a particular
Quality on Natural Bodies, and they keep a constant Course. He has fixed a way
for his Creatures to act in, and they never go out of it of themselves. The
Operations and Effects of Fire and Water, of Gravity and Levity in Bodies; the
Motion of the Sun and Moon, and the Eclipses of either, and the several Aspects
of the Heavens, may certainly be foretold: for they continually and unerringly
keep their Progress, unless God pleases sometimes to cross their usual Course,
as when the Waters of the Red Sea stood up on a heap whilst the Israelites
passed over; The Fire in Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace was restrained from doing any
harm to those that were cast into it; the Sun stood still in Joshua's time, and
was retrograde in King (...) And so there are monstrous and misshapen Creatures
born into the World, which deviate from the common Procedure of Nature. But
supposing that God suffers his Creatures to act according to the Laws of
Nature, it is easy to make a Judgment of them, and to foretell what shall
happen. But the things we are speaking of, and which are foretold in the Holy
Writings, are of another kind; they are not fixed and determined by Nature: and
therefore it is not in Man's power to predict their Events. Again, Physicians
have their Prognostics whereby they foretell what will become of the Patient,
whether the Disease will be hardly cured, or easily, or not at all. But because
these Prognostics are founded on a great many Symptoms, and these are
uncertain and dubious, it follows that those are so likewise: though it is
certain an experienced Artist will see very far here. Then as to future
Occurrences in Bodies Politic, a wise Man may by careful Observation and
Remarks on the Affairs of the World, gain some Insight into these; by being
long exercised in Business, by a large Experience of things, and by seeing what
has been heretofore, he may gather what shall be hereafter. A skilful
Historian, who has diligently perused the Transactions of former Ages, and
digested the Methods of Government, and scanned the Manners and Customs of
Countries, can do this. But this Foresight of things to come is Conjecture
rather than Knowledge: for we can have no certain Foreknowledg of what depends
on the Freewill of Man. Or if we will pretend to any Measure of it, we must
deal only in Generals: as for Particular and Personal Events, they are far
beyond our reach. And as for the particular Timing of them, especially if they
be far off, there is no Prospect at all of it. Or where the Causes and Effects
are Extraordinary and Preternatural, there we must confess our utter Blindness
and Ignorance: they are no more to be discerned by us, than the Antartick Pole
is to be seen by us in our Hemisphere. We know not what such Events will be; we
are not able to foretell them of our selves, they can be discovered by
Revelation only. And that is the Case which is now before us: the Predictions
which we read in Scripture, are concerning those things which no humane
Understanding or Foresight could possibly attain to. To foreknow and foretell
things that should happen to the Jewish and Christian Church, two or three
thousand Years before they came to pass; to predict the Deliverance of the
Israelites from their Slavery in Egypt, four hundred Years before it happened;
to mention Iasias and his Religious Acts three hundred Years before he was
born; to describe the future Monarchies of the World, and some of the most
remarkable Passages belonging to them; to foretell almost two hundred Years
beforehand, that there shall be such an Emperor as Cyrus, and to
particularize his Actions; these are such things as no Wise Philosopher, no
Learned Physician, no Pr^^dent Statesman, no Prying Historian is able to
foresee and discover: for they are not general, bu^ particular and personal
Events; they were at a vast distance, and not near at hand: and the punctual
Time of some of them was exactly assigned. If we respect second Causes, they
were such Occurrences as depended on the free Agency of Man: and if we respect
God, they were the mere Results of his Arbitrary Will and Pleasure; they were
preternatural and unusual Events, and therefore it was not within the compass
of Man's Apprehension to discover these things, the knowledge of them could not
be had without Divine Assistance. To this alone then we must attribute the
Prediction of them. The omniscient Eye of Heaven only could dive into these
Secrets which were so far off; and thence it is that the Scriptures (which are
by immediate Revelation) have recorded them.

Secondly, It is said in the Objection, that Evil Spirits help some to the
knowledge of future Events, and therefore we cannot prove the Divinity of the
Scriptures from the Prophecies which are there, and which are since fulfilled.
I grant indeed that the Devil helped his Followers, or pretended to help them
to the knowledge of some future things. This commenced into an Art among the old
Greek and Roman Pagans: Divination (which, as Tully defines it, is a Earum
rerum quae fo^^uitae putantur praedictio atque praesentio. De Divinat. l. 1.
Fore-sense and foretelling of fortuitous Events) was a Science among them: and
that Men were very eager of knowing beforehand what should happen, appears
from the several ways of Divining which they used. Their way of foretelling was
by observing the flight and chattering, the sitting and feeding of Birds, by
Inspection into the Entrails of these and other Animals that were sacrificed.
Some from the Aspects of Stars pretended to presage what should happen: and the
Professors of this Art were in great Esteem and Veneration. Dreams also were
observed, and strange Remarks made upon them. Some consulted the Dead, calling
up the departed Spirits, and asking them concerning future Affairs. The Oracles
were another way of Divining, and were the most celebrated of all. And many
other kinds of Divination and Soothsaying were in use with the Pagan World: for
they being mightily desirous to be acquainted with things to come, and to look
into Futurities, ransacked both Heaven and Earth, and made use of all things
above and below to inform themselves about them. But all the Information they
received by these different ways of Divining, was either Uncertain, or Casual,
or directly Diabolical. It was Uncertain, because it was grounded on unsound
Principles, on foolish and precarious Observances, and consequently the
knowledge of Events was conjectural and fallible. Wherefore the wisest and
soberest Men among the Pagans looked upon it as no other: and particularly it is
worth our notice that Tully, who is full of Arguments for Divination in his
first Book on that Subject, has as many against it in his second. This
Uncertainty was especially observable in their Oracles, which were the most
famous way of Divining among the Gentiles: the Priests were forced to speak in
ambiguous Terms, thinking to salve their Credit by that Obscurity and
Ambiguity. But we find no such thing in the Sacred Oracles and Predictions of
the Old and New Testament; these are plain and intelligible, clear and open: Or
if some few of them may seem not to be so, yet there are great numbers of
others that we cannot but acknowledge to be most evident and perspicuous; and in
respect of the Issue and Event of them, we know and are assured that they are
Certain and Infallible. Or secondly, their knowledge of future Events by those
foresaid ways of Divining, was by mere Accident. Their Soothsayers by Chance
told Truth, as Liars sometimes do: which appears from this, that they very
rarely hit upon an Event that came to pass. Wherefore we may infer, that when
they did, it was not by Skill, but Chance. But this cannot be said of the
Predictions I have been treating of, for there is not one of them that has
failed; and I could have produced hundreds of Prophecies more, and showed the
plain Accomplishment of them. Or thirdly, their knowledge of future Things was
Diabolical, by which I mean this, that it was gained by that Communion and
Correspondence which they held with Demons or Evil Spirits. But here it will
be demanded, How can these Spirits know future Events? And if they do know
them, how is our former Assertion true, that the knowing and predicting of
these things is from God alone? I answer briefly, That it is possible for the
Infernal Spirits, and for Men by their Assistance, to attain to the knowledge of
some future Occurrences: but those which we read are foretold in Scripture, are
none of that number, but are of another and higher Kind. First then, we grant
that these Demons (as that very Name imports) are Knowing and Intelligent
Creatures, and have a great Insight into the Nature of things, and are endued
with a more than ordinary knowledge of Physical Causes and Effects: whence we
may easily infer the possibility of their diving into some future Transactions
which depend wholly on Natural Agents. In the next place, those Spirits have
had long Experience of things, and are thereby grown very sagacious and
cunning, and on that account are able to guess of things that are to come: for
by observing what has a long time happened in such and such Circumstances,
they may not unsuccessfully sometimes conjecture what will be for the future.
Moreover, those Nimble Intelligences traveling up and down the World, ranging
and flying about, and visiting the remotest Regions of the Earth, and that with
unspeakable Expedition, must needs inform themselves concerning the diverse
Occurrences abroad, and make very great Discoveries as to what shall be
afterward, from the Consults and Actions which they behold in the World. The
Devil appearing in Samuel's Shape, told King Saul he should be with him the day
following; for he might partly know the Event of the Battle, by what he knew
concerning the Enemies Strength, and the Anger of God against that forsaken
Prince, etc. Lib. 3. c. 8.
Diodorus the Sicilian relates, that the Chaldean Priests foretold the Death of
Alexander the Great, and the dividing of the Empire among his Captains: which
they might venture to do (and it seems their Prediction succeeded) by the
Information they had from those Demons they conversed with, who it is likely
not only saw the debauched Life of that King, but the great Mischief which it
did to his Body, and from thence the probability of his being dispatched by a
violent Fever, (of which we read he died;) and they were not ignorant of the
Ambition and Contentions of his Captains; nay, perhaps they were conscious to
some Cabals which promoted those Events; and then it is not to be wondered that
they could foretell them. But there was another way too of foreknowing these
things, for they might be found predicted in Daniel's Prophecies, (of which we
have spoken) which the Chaldean Priests had without doubt some knowledge of.
There they found it written in express words, chap. 8. 8. The great Horn
(which, as the preceding Verses will inform you, is meant of Alexander the
Great) was broken, (i. e. in plain terms, he died) and for it came up four
notable ones, (i. e. his four chief Commanders succeeded him in the Empire.)
And this you will find repeated almost in the same words, in chap. 11. 4. that
there might be no mistake about the Prophecy. But truly I am inclined to think
that there is yet another Account to be given of this Passage in Diodorus, for
(as I shall hereafter make it more evident) there are a great many References
in the Pagan Historians to what is recorded in the Old Testament, though they
are generally done with some Obscurity or Mistake. And I take this to be of
that nature; for the Historian refers here not only to the Book of Daniel*
(which questionless was very famous in those days) and particularly to those
Prophetic Words before cited, but to Daniel himself: He was that Chaldean
Priest; for though he was an Hebrew by Birth, yet Chaldea was the Country he
lived in, and he was in high esteem with the Chaldean Kings. But when the
Historian speaks in the Plural of Chaldean Priests, it is a pardonable
Oversight, and such as is frequent in Writers. And he calls them Priests,
because among the Chaldeans their Priests were the most knowing Men, and the
Magi and these were Terms convertible sometimes. Or to call Daniel a Priest
instead of a Prophet, is a Mistake both easy and excusable: wherefore
notwithstanding this small Slip, there is reason to believe that the Historian
refers to the Prophet Daniel, who once and again in very intelligible, though
Prophetic Terms, foretells the Death of that Great Monarch, and the Division of
his Kingdoms amongst his Captains. I might add likewise, that Evil Spirits are
considerable Actors in the Affairs on Earth; and therefore it is no wonder that
they are able to foretell what they themselves are designing to bring to pass.
They could easily inform Spurina of Julius Caesar's Fate, when they had been
present at the Consults of the Senate, and were Instigators to take away his
Life. St. Austin speaks of one that knew and could tell the Thoughts of Men, as
when one thought of a Verse in Virgil, or the like. But Colloqu. Mensal.
Luther said well, the Devil had before possessed his Thoughts with that Verse,
and then it was not difficult to foretell what he did himself. Thus you see how
far, and in what manner, Devils and wicked Men by their Means may foreknow
Futurities. But now if we consider the things foretold in the Old and New
Testament, we cannot apply any thing of all this to them: for the foreknowing
that K. Josias, Cyrus and Alexander should appear in the World so many Years
afterward, the predicting of the Succession of the three Great Monarchies,
(for one of them was past) the erecting of the Kingdom of Christ, the wonderful
Propagation of the Gospel, the Conversion of Jews and Gentiles, and the like,
could not possibly be from the sagacious Insight into the Nature of things,
which the Evil Spirits may attain to, nor from their Observation and
Experience, which are only of things past or present; nor from any Acquaintance
with the Affairs of the World, as being Actors in them: for some of these
Events which we have mentioned out of the Sacred Writings, had no dependence on
Common and Natural Causes, and therefore could not be penetrated into by the
most subtle Enquirers into Nature, as we suppose Evil Angels to be: and
besides, they were at so vast a distance in respect of Time, that it is
impossible to imagine that these Spiritual Agents could have any Part then to
act in them. No Man of Sense can prevail with himself to credit any such thing,
but on the contrary he must be forced to acknowledge that it is wholly against
the Nature of those Events, to be foreseen and discovered by any Diabolick
Skill so long a time before they actually happened. Wherefore I conclude, that
the foreknowing, and consequently the foretelling of them, was by par^icular
Revelation from God. He was pleased by ^ecret Inspiration to inform his
Servants, and to give them a discovery of those things which no ^reated
Understanding could discern. Lastly, This may suffice in answer to those who
suppose that some Persons who converse with Diabolick Spirits, may have some
Foresight of future Contingencies; this (I say) may suffice, that the Case we
speak of, is far different: here can be nothing of the Devil, because these
Prophecies, and all the other Writings to the Old and New Testament, tend to
the promoting of Holiness and Godliness, and the destroying the Works of the
Devil. Their main Design is to weaken, and even demolish Satan's Kingdom, and
to set up that of Christ Jesus both in the Consciences and Lives of Men. It is
ridiculous therefore to say, that these Prophecies are from the Devil. No Man
of ordinary S^ns^ can digest such a Proposition; it is impossible it should
gain the Assent of any intelligent and sober Person. When we consider the
Nature of these Prophecies, and what they aim at, we must needs own them to be
from Him to whom all Future Things are Present, and who is the Cause as well as
the Foreseer of them. And therefore when we observe that the things which the
Writers of Holy Scripture have delivered, are actually come to pass, we may
with reason conclude, that their Writings are not Forgeries; but on the
contrary, that the Penmen of them were Inspired Persons; that they had the Gift
of Prophecy, which is an infallible Testimony of their Authority. These things
being thus foretold so long before, and being exactly verified since, it
undeniably follows, that the Books which contain these Predictions, and are
founded on them, are True and Certain. These Predictions coming from God, are
an a^ red Proof that these Writings were endited him, they being so great a
part of them. Thi^ that which an ancient Father long since deliver^* (...).
Orig. cont. Cel^. l. 6.
The foretelling of future things, says he, (...) Characteristick Note of the
Divine Authority (...) the Scriptures; for this is a thing that is abo^^ humane
Nature, and the Powers of it, and (...) only ^e effected by the Virtue of the
Divine ^^^rit. We may rely upon it, as an impregna^ Maxim, that the Spirit of
Prophecy, and the F^ filling of Prophecies, are a Divine Proof of (...) Truth
of the Scriptures, and are a sufficient Grou^ to us of believing them to be the
Word of Go^ Thus from the Matter of the Holy Scriptures, (...) have undeniable
Evidence of the Authority a^ Truth of them.

Again, the Manner of these Writings is another Proof of the Divine Authority
of them. The^ are not writ as others are wont to be: the Penme^ of these Sacred
Books do not speak after the ra^^^ of other Writers. How admirable is the
Simpl^ city and Ingenuity of these Men all along? The^ do not hide their own or
others Failings, yea eve^ when they are very gross and scandalous: thu^ Moses
recorded not only Noah's Drunkenness and Lot's Incest, but his own rash Anger
and Unbelie^* and David registers in the 51st Psalm, his own Murder and
Adultery: Jeremiah relates his own unbecoming Fears, Discontents and
Murmurings, chap. 20. 7, 8, 14. The Writers of the New Testament conceal not
the Infirmities and Defects, (...) the gross Miscarriages of themselves, and of
their Brethren; as their cowardly leaving of Christ (...) his Passion, John's
falling at the Feet of an An^el to worship him, Thomas his Infidelity, John and
James (the Sons of Zebedee) their unseasona^le Ambition, Peter's denying of
Christ even with ^erjury. This free and plain dealing of the Wri^ers of the Old
and New Testament, shows that ^hey are not the Writings of Men. A Man may ^ee
that there is no worldly and sinister Design ^^rried on in them, but that the
Glory of God is ^holly intended by their impartial discovery of ^he Truth.
Which was long since taken notice of ^y Lib. 1.
Arnobius in answer to that Cavil of the Pagans, hat the History of the Gospel
was writ by poor (...) People, and in a simple Manner: Therefore, ^aith he, it
is the more to be credited, because they write so indifferently and
impartially, and out of Simplicity. This Impartiality and Sincerity of theirs
are an irrefragable Argument of the Truth of their Writings.

And here also you will find an excellent and admirable Composition of
Simplicity and Majesty together. Though the Strain be High and Lofty, yet you
may observe that at the same time it is Humble and Condescending. To which
purpose a Learned Father says well, (...). Isid. Pelus. Ep. l. 5.
The Language of Divine Wisdom in the Scripture is Low, but the Sense is
Sublime and Heavenly: whereas on the contrary, the Phrase of Heathen Writers is
Splendid, but the things couched in them are Poor and Mean. The
Scripture-Writers make it not their work to set off and commend the Writings,
by being Elaborate and Exact. H^ are no set Discourses, no pointed Arguments,
(...) affected Strains of Logic. (...) Just. Mart. Dialog. cum Tryph.
The Writers (...) the Bible, says another ancient Father, did (...) make
their Writings in a way of Demonstration these unquestionable Witnesses of the
Truth being above all Demonstration. Nor shall y^^ find here that the Writers
strain for Eleganci^ and florid Expressions, as other Authors are won^ here is
no quaint and curious Method, no form^ Transitions, no courting of the Readers,
no unnecessary Pageantry of Rhetoric to gain Admiration and Attention.
Especially the Style of the Evangelists and Apostles is not tumid and affected
but plain and simple, and scorns the Ornamen^ and Embellishments of Fancy: for,
as an Arnob. lib. 1.
o^ Christian said rightly, Truth needs no Fucus an^ Artifice; and therefore
the Sense, not Words, are minded in Scripture. All good Men ought to be pleased
with this Simplicity and Plainness of the Holy Style: of which there is a
memorable Instance in an Sozom. l. 1. c. 11.
Ecclesiastical Historian, who tells us that Spiridion, a notable Confessor for
the Christian Faith, reproved one Tryphilius an Eloquent Man and converted by
him to Christianity some time before, because, speaking one time in the famous
Council of Nice, he did, instead of those Word^ of Christ, Gr. (...), Mark 2. 9.
Toll grabatum tuum, say, Toll lectum tuum humilem; he reproved him, (I say)
and that very sharply, for disdaining to use the word which the Scripture it
self uses. It is true, the Words of Scripture seem sometimes to be common and
rude, and altogether ungraceful, ( sometimes I say, for I shall show afterward
that Scripture is not destitute of its Graces of Speech;) but that seeming
Commonness and Rudeness are great Tokens of the peculiar Excellency of the
Style of Scripture. Gregory the Great excusing the Plainness and Rudeness of
his Style in his Comments on Job, professes, that Indignum vehementer exis^imo
ut verba coelestis oraculi restringam sub regulas Donati. Epist. ad Leandrum.
he thought it unworthy of, and unbecoming the Heavenly Oracles, to restrain
them to the nice Rules of Grammar. Surely the Writers of the Bible might say so
with more reason; it became them not to stand upon those Niceties and
Formalities of Speech which are so frequent in other Authors: for it is fitting
there should be a difference between Humane Writings and Divine. I agree with a
late Ingenious Author, who declares, that Robert Boil Esquire of the Style of
Scripture.
it fits not the Majesty of God, whose Book this is, to observe the humane Laws
of Method, and Niceness of Art. Inspired Writings must not be like those of
Men. The singular Grace of these is, that they are not Artificial and Studied,
but Simple, Plain and Careless; and that their whole Frame and Contexture are
not such as ours. An artificial Method is below the Majesty of that Spirit
which dictated them. This would debase the Scriptures, and equal them with the
Writings of Men. Wherefore the oftener I look into that Sacred Volume, and the
more I observe it, the more I am convinced that the Pens of the Writers were
wholly directed by a Divine Hand. For take any of the Books either Doctrinal or
Historical, and you will presently find that the way o^ Expression in them is
different from what the Authors of themselves would have used. If they had been
left to their own Genius, they would have delivered things in another Method
and Manner than you see them in. The Style of them therefore shows the Author.
In short, had the Scriptures been written in the common way of other Writers,
this would have disparaged them, and we should have had no reason to think that
they were Divinely inspired, which is the thing I am now proving.

Nay, I will adjoin this, that the very Words and Phrases of Scripture were
dictated by the Spirit; the very particular Expressions and Modes of Speech
were under the particular Guidance and Direction of the Holy Ghost. I know
there are many of a contrary Judgment, among whom the worthy Writer whom I last
quoted, is not the least confident, and positively asserts that the Style and
Language of Scripture were not dictated by the Holy Ghost, but the Matter only.
The Words, says he, were left to the Writers themselves, who as Men of Sense
could express their Minds in fit Terms. And to prove that the Words were not
dictated by the Spirit, he urges this, that Christ and his Apostles quote
Places out of the Old Testament as they are translated by the Seventy, which is
not verbatim. Now, says he, they would have cited the Passages in the very
original Phrases and Words, if these had been from Divine Inspiration. It is
evident therefore that they are not, because the Apostles use other Words and
Terms, far different from those in the Hebrew. But this is no valid Argument,
if you rightly consider it: for though the Apostles thought fit (for some
Reasons which I shall have occasion afterward to offer to you) to make use of
the Septuagint Version, which is but a Paraphrase in many places on the
Original Text, yet it does not follow hence that the very Words of the Original
were not dictated by the Holy Ghost. Neither our Savior, nor the Evangelists
and Apostles, do hereby declare that the Hebrew Text was not inspired, and that
even as to the Phrase and Words: but all that we gather from their using of the
Greek Translation, is this, that they found it convenient at that time (for
Reasons which shall afterward be alleged) to quote some Places as they are
rendered by those Translators, and not exactly according to the Original. This
does not necessarily imply, much less prove that the Penmen of the Old
Testament were not assisted by the Spirit in the very Words which they used.
But the contrary is grounded on very good Reason, for these Sacred Writings
being of a more excellent and transcendent Nature than all others in the World
besides, it was meet that they should surpass them all in This, viz. the
Divinity of the very Style. If you grant not this, you acknowledge these
Writings, in one respect at least, and that no inconsiderable one, to be no
better than the common Writings of other Men: which certainly cannot but be
looked upon as a great vilifying of the Bible. Christ promised his Disciples,
that when they should be brought before Governors and Kings for his Sake, it
should be given them what they should speak: for (as he adds) it is not they
that speak, but the Spirit of their Father that speaks in them, Mat. 10. 19,
20. And is it not most reasonable to think that the same Spirit taught the
Writers of the Old and New Testament what they should speak, and commit to
writing, and gave them Words to that purpose? Especially if you consider that
this was a Book which was to last to all Generations in the Church, an^ was
designed for the use of the Faithful, and for the confuting of their
Adversaries to the World'^ End; and accordingly was to be produced upon all
Occasions, and therefore was to be of an extraordinary Composure, and every
Word and Syllable was to be from God, and the Direction of his Holy Spirit. St.
Peter assures us, that the Writer^ of the Old Testament 1 Pet. 1. 21.
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: their Speaking, and consequently
their Writing (because this was according to that) was by the special Motion
and Influence of the Infallible Spirit; therefore their very Words (for those
are necessarily included in speaking) were dictated and directed by the same
Spirit. And the other Great Apostle tells us indefinitely and absolutely, and
without any restriction, that 2 Timothy 3. 16.
(...) Scripture is given by Inspiration of God: Now if (...) the Scripture be
by Divine Inspiration, it follows that the very Words of it are; for the Words
and Expressions and manner of Speech are a part of the Scripture: wherefore if
we grant that the Whole is by Inspiration, we must necessarily grant likewise
that the Parts of it are, for the Parts constitute the Whole. We have reason
therefore to assert that every Word in Scripture is endited by God, and that
every Letter and Syllable of it is exact, and that there is nothing wanting,
nothing superfluous, no Fault nor Blemish in the Style and Phraseology of it. I
cannot but here take notice of the fond Presumption of some of the Iewi^^
Rabbis and Masorites, who alter some Words and Expressions in Scripture, and
put others into their place. They forsooth in a more modest way (as they
pretend) read, instead of Urine, (in 2 Kings 18. 27. Isa. 36. 12.) the Water of
the Feet; instead of Shagal they read Shacab in all Texts; for Gnapholim, Deuteronomy.
28. 27. 1 Samuel 5. 6. they read Techorim: so in other places where they think
some Words are obscene, they substitute others in their room. These Men would
be more modest than the Scripture, and more chaste than the Holy Ghost; and yet
they herein contradict themselves, for some of them have said the Hebrew Tongue
is called Holy, because it has nothing obscence in it, nothing of that nature
can be uttered and expressed in it. This we are certain of, that there cannot
be better and fitter Words than what the Scripture has, for the Spirit endited
them all; and therefore the Practice of the conceited Rabbis is to be
exploded. Chrysostom. Homil. in Saul. tom. 8.
There is not one Iota, or the least Apex in Scripture, which is put there to
no purpose: And the same Father as truly says in another place, (...). Hom.
18. i^ Genesis
It speaks nothing in vain, nothing by chance. And the reason is, because All
of it (Words no less than Matter) is dictated and delivered from above by an
unerring Spirit.

Yet I speak not this as if the Sacred Writers of the Bible were so tied up by
the Spirit, that they cannot, or do not make use of their own natural or
acquired Skill. Though the Words be dictated by the Spirit, yet the Penmen
might write and speak according to the Improvements they had made in Speech. I
do not by what I have said, exclude the peculiar Eloquence or Strain of the
Writers, or their using the Helps of their Education, or their conforming to
the Dialect of their Country: for these are consistent with That. Isaiah being
a Courtier, and a Person of Quality, has a neat and elegant Style; and yet so
as he knows how to vary it according to the Matter he treats of: But generally
he is Lofty and Eloquent, his Style being raised by his Education, which was
suitable to his Noble Extraction, for he was of the Blood Royal. Jeremiah and
Amos being used to the Country, are mean and homely in their Language; the
latter especially discovers his Condition and way of Life in his low and rural
Strain. So in the New Testament, St. Luke, who had improved himself by Art and
Study, is very observant of the Greek Elegancy, and avoids all improper and
exotic Terms in his Gospel and in the Acts. Indeed the Style of the Sacred
Penmen is very different, and that Difference is an Excellency in this Book of
God. But that which I say is this, the Writers leave not off their peculiar
Style, though they were moved by the Spirit. As this furnished them with new
Expressions, so it let them make use of their own usual ones, but immediately
directed and assisted them in the applying of them. So that at the same time
when they used their Natural Style, they were Divinely helped to make it
^erviceable to that purpose which the Holy Ghost intended. Hence I conclude,
that the Style, and Words, and Composure of the Sacred Writings are such as
ought to be reckoned Divine. For this is one difference between this Book and
others, that every thing of it is Divine. And therefore those Persons who dream
of Solecis^^ in Holy Scripture, are the greatest Solecisers themselves; but
especially those who assert there are Mistakes and literal Falsities in the
Holy Book, are utterly to be condemned. Such is Institur. Theolog. lib. 4.
Episcopius, who dares affirm, That the Spirit left the Writers of the Holy
Scripture to their own humane Frailty in delivering such things as belonged to
Circumstances of a Fact. Their Knowledge and Memory were deficient and fallible.
The Spirit did not tell St. John how many Furlongs Christ's Disciples went,
chap. 6. 19. The same is to be asserted (he says) as to some Names, and other
Circumstances of Time and Place, which are not of the substance of the thing.
And before this you are told by Socinus and Erasmus.
^^o others, that the Penmen of Scripture (...) in some light things; not that
they would fal^^ty, but that they might forget some Passages. Melchior Canus is
of the opinion, that there are some considerable Slips in Scripture from the
weakness of the Evangelists and Apostles Memories. Yea, among the ancient
Fathers there was Hieronym. in Isai. 29, and 56. In Joel 11. In Mic. 5. Item in
1 Ep. ad Tim. Necnon in Epist. sua 50.
one who more grossly held, that the Writers of the New Testament sometimes
abused the Testimonies of the Prophets of the Old Testament; and that they
applied them to their present purpose, although they were nothing to it. Thus
St. Paul, he says, quoteth the Old Testament in his Epistles to the Romans,
Galatians and Ephesians, only to serve his turn, and to confute the Jews his
Adversaries. Read, says he, these Epistles, wherein the Apostle is wholly on
the Polemick part, and Videbitis eum in testimoniis quae habet de Veteri
Testamento, quam prudens, quam dissimulator sit ejus quod agit. Hieron. Apol.
adv. Rufin.
you will see how prudently and dissemblingly he acts in those Texts which he
cites out of the Old Testament. And at other times this bold Man is not afraid
to say that some of the Matters and Things in Scripture are set down wrong.
This is no less than Profane and Blasphemous Doctrine: wherefore that Father is
to be read with great Caution in such places as these. We on the contrary
assert, that God was not only the Author of the Matter and Contents of Holy
Writ, but also of the Words and Expressions; yea, even when those Writers
express their Sense in their own Terms, i. e. according to the Way and Dialect
which they were Masters of, and which was most familiar to them, even then they
were immediately assisted (...) the Spirit. Which was absolutely necessary,
that this Book might have no Errors and Failings in it of any kind, but that it
might transcend all other Writings whatsoever. If you do not hold this, you
make no considerable difference between the Holy Scriptures and other Writings.
Therefore I am thoroughly convinced that this is a Truth, and ought to be
maintained, viz. that the Holy Spirit endited the very Style of Scripture, that
even this was by the immediate Inspiration of Heaven.

To the Manner of its writing I may well annex its Harmony, and thence also
prove it to be Divine. Though there are several seeming Repugnancies, (of which
I shall treat afterward in a Discourse of the Style of Scripture, and
endeavor to clear them up to the Satisfaction of every sober and considerate
Person) yet it cannot but be acknowledged that all the Parts of this Book do
entirely agree, and are consistent with one another. This in other Books, which
are composed and written by one Author, is not so admirable, (tho in those
Pieces we oftentimes meet with very palpable Disagreements and Contradictions;)
but here we are able to remember, that notwithstanding these Books were written
by different Persons, and those many in number, and disagreeing in Quality, and
extremely distant as to Time and Place, yet their Writings contradict not one
another, but there is an excellent Harmony in all their Parts, there is a
perfect Concord and Consent among them all, such as is not to be found in any
other Authors in the World, though of the same Sect and Party. Excellently to
this purpose a very Wise and Judicious Judge Hale of the Knowledge of God, and of
our Selves.
Man thus speaks: When several Men in several Ages, not brought up under the
same Education, write, it is not possible to find Unity in their Tenants or
Positions, because their Spirits, Judgments and Fancies are different: but
where so many several Authors, speaking and writing at several times, agree not
only in Matters Dogmatical, of sublime and difficult Natures, but also in
Predictions of future and contingent Events, whereof it is impossible for
humane Understanding to make a Discovery, without a superior Discovery made to
it, I must needs conclude one and the same Divine Spirit declared the same
Truths to these several Men. And as to the seeming Contrarieties of some Places
of Scripture, this should not at all trouble us; for this is rather an Argument
of the Truth and Authority of it: it is a sign the Writers did not combine
together to cheat and delude us. If they had designed any such thing, we should
not have met with any Difficult and seemingly Repugnant Places in these
Writings. But seeing we do so, this (among other things) may confirm us in this
Belief, that the Scriptures were not contrived by Men who had a design to
impose upon us; for if they had had such a Design, they would have so ordered
it, that not the least appearance of Contradiction and Difference should have
been found. But truly there is no necessity of proceeding thus in this
Discourse; for to an unprejudiced and industrious Enquirer, there is nothing in
Scripture that looks like Inconsistent and Contradictory. Upon a diligent
Search we shall discern a mutual Correspondence in the Style, Matter, and
Design of these Writings; we shall find a happy Concurrence of Circumstances,
and an admirable Consistency in the Doctrines and Discourses, in so much that
we shall be forced to acknowledge, that upon this single Consideration it is
reasonable to believe that these Writings were endited by the Holy Spirit. This
Harmony then of the Scriptures I may justly reckon among the Inward Notes of
the Truth of Scripture, because it is adjoined to the Matter of it, which is of
the very Intrinsic Nature of it. What Justinian professes and promises
concerning his Digests in his Preface to them, that there is nothing Clashing
and Contradictory in them, but that they are all of a piece, is true only of
the Sacred Laws, of the Evangelical Pandects, which contain in them nothing
Dissonant and Repugnant. The Old and New Testament, the Prophets and Apostles
are consonant to themselves, and to one another; which is a great Argument of
the Truth of them. There is nothing in one Place of Scripture opposite to the
true Meaning which the Holy Ghost has revealed and asserted in another. The
Contents of the whole Book, whether you look into the Doctrinal or Historical
Part of it, have nothing contradictory in them: All the Authors of it agree in
their Testimonies, and assert the same thing, and consent among themselves. It
is the Nature of Lies and Forgeries, that they hang not together, as Haec est
Mendaciorum natura, ut cohaerere non possint. In^tit. l. 5. c. 3.
Lactantius on the like Occasion has observed. Especially if you search very
inquisitively and narrowly into them, you will perceive that they are Tenue est
Mendacium; perlucet, si diligenter inspexeris. Sen. Ep. 80.
thin and slight, and may easily be seen through. But the Contents of these
Writings have been diligently inquired into, and with great Care and Industry
examined by all sorts of Persons; and yet they are found to be every ways
Consistent with themselves, and the Testimony of the Writers is known to be
Concurrent and Agreeing. All wise and curious Observers must needs grant, that
there is no Book under Heaven that parallels the Scriptures as to this: Which
shows that they are more than Humane Writings, yea that they were Divinely
inspired and dictated. And this I take to be the Sense of St. Peter, who
assures us, that 2 Pet. 1. 19.
no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation. He speaks of the
first Rise of those Prophecies which are in Scripture: they are from God, they
are not of private Interpretation; they are not from Man's Invention, they are
not of his own Brain and Fancy, but they are to be esteemed to be (as they are)
Divine and Heavenly Oracles. Thus Alia omnia Dicta argumentis ac testibus
egent; Dei autem Sermo ipse sibi testis est. Salvian. de Guber. l. 3.
the Word of God is Witness to it self, and stands in need of no others. The
Scripture is sufficiently proved by what is in it, and is to be believed for
its own sake. Which made an ancient Writer say, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. ^ib.
7.
We have complete Demonstrations out of the Scriptures themselves, and
accordingly we are demonstratively assured by Faith concerning the Truth of the
things therein delivered. Which cannot be said of any humane Writings in the
World: for they carry no such Native Marks with them. But the very Inward Notes
of the Truth and Authority of the Scriptures, create in us a certain and
unshaken Belief. They may be known from all other Writings whatsoever, by the
Excellent, Transcendent, and Divine Matter contained in them, and by the
peculiar Manner of delivering and publishing it. These I call Internal Proofs,
because they are taken from the Books themselves, because they are something
that we find there. These assure us that they were written not by Man, but by
God.

There is yet another Internal Testimony. I call it so, because it is within
Us, though not in the Scriptures. As I have showed you that the Holy Spirit
speaks in the Scriptures, and bears Testimony to the Truth of them, so now I
add, that this Spirit speaks in Us, and works in our Hearts a Persuasion that
the Scriptures are the Word of God. By this Spirit we are enabled to discern
the Voice of the same Spirit, and of Christ in those Writings. This witnessing
Power of the Spirit in the Souls of Believers, is asserted in Acts 5. 32. and
15. 7, 8. and in 1 John 5. 6. From these Places it is clear, that there is an
Illumination of the Spirit joining with our Consciences and Persuasions; and
this Spirit powerfully convinces all Believers of the Truth of the Scriptures.
This Testimony follows immediately on our setting before us the Inward
Excellencies of the Scripture, as I have represented them: for God makes use of
those Evidences and Arguments to beget a Belief in us of the Divine Authority
of Scripture. The Spirit enlightens and convinces Men's Minds by those Means;
but more especially he urges these Evidences on the Hearts of the Religious and
Faithful, and thereby brings them to a firm Persuasion of the Scriptures being
the Word of God. This is no Enthusiasm, because it is discovered to us by
proper Means and Instruments; whereas that is without any, and is generally
accompanied with the despising of them. But the Evidences and Notes in the
Scripture are the Reasons and Motives of our Belief: only the Holy Spirit comes
and prepares and sanctifies our Minds, and illuminates our Consciences, and
causes those Arguments and Motives to make Impression upon us, and effectually
to prevail with us, and to silence all Objections to the contrary. Thus the
Truth of Scripture is attested by the Holy Spirit witnessing in us. But when I
say the Testimony of the Spirit is a Proof of the Truth of the Scripture, I
must adjoin this, that this Proof serves only for those that have this Spirit:
it may establish them, but it cannot convince others. No other Man can be
brought to be persuaded of the Truth of those Sacred Writings, by the Spirit's
convincing me of the Truth of them. Besides, this Proof is not in all that
really believe the Truth of these Books: some may be convinced of the Truth of
them without this; but where this is, it is most Powerful and Convictive, and
surpasses all other degre^ of Persuasion whatsoever. There is no such c^tain
knowledge of the Truth of these Holy W^ tings, as by the Testimony of the Sacred
Spirit (...) the Hearts of Men, produced there in a ration ^ way, and in such a
manner as is most suitable (...) our Faculties.

CHAP. II.
External Proofs of the Truth of the Holy Scripture^ Viz. the wonderful
Preservation of them, and Universal Tradition. Which latter is defended against
the Objections of those that talk of a New Character wherein the Old Testament
is written. The Jewish Masoreth attests the Authority of these Writings. The
Hebrew Text is not corrupted. The Points or Vowels were coexistent with the
Letters. F. Simon's Notion of Abbreviating the Historic^^ Books of the Old
Testament, rejected. The New Tement vouched by the unanimous Suffrage of the
Primitive Church. The Reasons why the Apocryphal Writings are not received into
the Canon of the Bible: with an Answer to the Objections made by the Romanists.

SEcondly, I proceed to the External Testimonies of the Truth of the
Scriptures: which being added to those Arguments which proved them to be True
in Themselves, will exceedingly corroborate our Belief of the Divine Authority
of those Books. And here I might mention the Testimony given to them by God in
the wonderful Preservation of them through all Ages since they were first
written. In all the Changes of Affairs, and the Overthrow of so many Cities and
Kingdoms, that Incomparable Treasure has not been lost. The Books of the Old
Testament were kept untouched and inviolable at the sacking and burning of
Jerusalem, and all the time of the Captivity in Babylon, and of the Dispersion
of the Jews. And ever since that time the Scriptures have been Unaltered in
Words and Sense, notwithstanding the frequent Endeavors of Satan's busy Agents
to corrupt them, yea utterly to destroy them. And next to God's Providence in
preserving these Books through all Times and Ages, we might add the mavelous
Success which has attended the Holy Faith and Doctrine contained in these
Writings. They have prevailed against the Power of Men and Devils, and to this
very day they are maintained and upheld maugre the Attempts of both of them to
root them out of the World.

But I wave this, intending not to insist upon Divine, but Humane Testimony in
this place. By External Testimony then I mean here no other than this, that
Scripture is attested by Universal Tradition; and this Tradition is both of
Jews and Christians. And what would a Man desire more in a humane way for
attesting the Truth of these Writings? From the joint Attestation of these
Witnesses I shall make it appear, that these Books which we now have, are the
true Copies of the first Originals; that the same Books and Authors are
faithfully delivered down to us, which were first of all delivered to the Jews,
and to the Primitive Christians; and that there is nothing in these Writings,
as we now have them, that is falsified or corrupted.

First, to begin with the Books of the Old Testament, the Names of which are as
follow; Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Ioshu^ Judges, Ruth,
the 1st and 2d Books of Samuel, the 1st and 2d Books of Kings, tho 1st and 2d
Books (...) Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, the Psalm^ Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, the fo^^ Greater Prophets, and the twelve
Lesser. These and none but these, were admitted into the Can^ of the Holy
Scriptures by the ancient Church o^ the Jews, whose Testimony is very
Authentic^ here; yea, indeed we cannot have a better. They acquaint us, that
these were the Only Writing^ that were universally agreed by them to be
extraordinarily Inspired: and they further tell us, that these Books which were
writ by different Persons* and at diverse Times, were first compiled and
collected into One Body or Volume by Ezra, and the Assembly of Doctors for that
purpose; and consequently that the Canon of Sacred Scripture of the Old
Testament, (as it is at this time) was not constituted till Ezra's days by the
Great Synagogue, as they call it. Upon his Return from the Captivity he
undertook this good Work; he gathered together all those dispersed Books
before. named; and after he had reviewed them, he publicly owned, and solemnly
vouched the Authority of every one of them, that the Church for the future
might not doubt of their being Authentic and True. But some add here, by way
of Objection, that this holy Man caused these Books to be written over in a New
Character, because the Jews had lost their knowledge of the former one, as well
as of the Tongue; and consequently the Bible is not the same that it was at
first. Eusebius and Ierom are alleged for this, especially the latter, who
seems to say that the Samaritan Character was the Old Hebrew Character in which
the Bible was first writ, and that it was first changed by Ezrd after the
Return from Babylon, he writing ^he Sacred Volume over in Assyrian or Chaldee
Letters, and neglecting the Old Hebrew ones which were the same that the
Samaritan are. And the reason of this was, they say, because the Jews were best
acquainted with this Character at that time. And some Bellarmin, Joseph
Scaliger, Casaubon, Arias Montanus, Villalpandus, Drusius, Capellus, Morinus,
Bochart, Vossius, Walton.
Modern Writers are gained over to this Opinion, who talk much of the Change of
the Character, and endeavor to persuade us that the first and old Letters of
the Hebrew Text were Samaritan, but that those which we now have are Assyrian,
and of quite another sort. But upon an impartial Enquiry, I find little or no
Foundation for this Opinion: It rather seems to me to be an Invention and Dream
of those who design to disparage the Hebrew Bible. They would persuade us that
the Authority of the Original is impaired, because we have it not now as it was
at the beginning; for the Old Bible was in Samaritan Letters, these being the
first and antientest Hebrew Characters. This is like the Story of the Hebrew
Points being invented five hundred Years after Christ, (of which afterward)
which tends to the same End, namely to discredit the Hebrew Text which we now
have, and wholly to take away its Authority; for if the Letters were changed,
it is probable some Words, and consequently the Sense of some Places are
altered. But that this is groundless, and that the Hebrew Bible is written in
the same Characters now that it was at first, you will find very largely and
convincingly proved by the famous Dissertat. de Lit. Hebr.
Buxtorf from the Auth^rity of the Talmud, especially the Gemara, (...) the
Cabala, from the Suffrage of the most Not^ Rabbis of old, and of the Learned
Modern Je^^ as Aben Ezra, R. Solomon, R. Ben Maimon, and^ who without doubt are
very competent Judges (...) this Case. To these may be added several of (...)
Christian Persuasion, as Picus Mirandula, F. Iuni^* Skikkard, Postellus, with
those three Eminent Persons of our own Country, Nic. Fuller, Brought^^
Lightfoot. If you consult these, they will satisfy^ you that the Hebrew Letters
which we have now in the Bible, were the Primitive ones, the very same that
were of old. But to give you my Thoughts impartially in this Point, I do
believ^ from what I find asserted by Writers on both sides, that there were two
sorts of Characters used by the Jews, as there were two sorts of Cubits and
Shekels, the Sacred and Common: and I gather, that the Samaritan Letter was of
the latter sort, that which was commonly used, and even sometimes in
transcribing the Bible; but the Sacred Character in use among the Jews was this
which we now have, and in which the Bible is at this day. This is the true
Original Hebrew Letter, and was used from the beginning by them. This I think
may reconcile the Disputes among Writers; for so far as I can perceive, the
Quarrels arise from this, that there is frequent mention made in Jewish and
other Authors, of the Bible's being written in an old Samaritan Character;
whence it was inferred by some, that this was the Primitive Character wherein
the Bible was written, and consequently that this which we now have is not the
true Genuine Character. But I answer, this does not follow; for this Samaritan
Vulgar Character was not the first and antientest, though it was sometimes in
use: but the Sacred Character, now called the Hebrew Character, is really such,
and is the true and most ancient Letter wherein this holy Book was written.
This is the Authentic Letter which God himself graved the Law in, and thence
had the Name of the Sacred Character: but the other called the Common and
Vulgar, was not in that esteem, it being a Deviation from that Primitive one.
And yet to speak freely, there was no great difference between these two
Characters, the latter being only some Variation and Degeneracy from the
former, which happened by length of Time. This is the real Truth of the Matter,
and it solves the Controversy, and ends all the Disputes on both sides. And the
Learned French Critic, who seemed to be of another Opinion, comes over at last
to this, when F. Simon's Crist* Hist: of the Bible.
he tells us, That there is no reason for Critics to dispute so fiercely about
the first Hebrew Characters: for if we attentively consider and compare
together the Samaritan and Hebrew Characters, we shall find that the difference
between them is not so great, but that they may be thought to have had one and
the same Origin. And he grants also, that it is from the Succession of so many
Ages, (which is wont to produce some Alteration) that there has been this
Variation from their first Figure. But this is inconsiderable, so that both
Characters may be said to be the same. We have no ground then to think that
Ezra changed the Character, but that he only amended the Defects and Slips
which he found in the Hebrew for by consulting and comparing the several
Copies, he purged them from the Errors and Mi^takes which were contracted in
the time of the Captivity. And after he had caused the Books (...) be fairly
written out, he put them into that Orde^ in which now they are placed; and so
he may b^ said to be the Composer of the Old Testament into that Model we see
it now in.

And from his revising the Books, and mendin^ them by comparing of Copies, was
the first beginning of Keri and Chetib, as most of the Learne^ Jews assert: for
where the Copies disagreed, o^ where two Readings were probable, there were
made Variae Lectiones; the one was put into the Margent, and is called Lectio.
Keri; the other into the Text, and is called Scriptio.
Chetib. I know some ascrib^ these not to Ezra, but to the Doctors of Tiberias^
but here, as before, I am willing to compromis^ the Quarrel; and therefore we
may ascribe the^ to both, they being begun by Ezra, and augmented by the others
afterward. This was one wa^ to keep the Bible entire and uncorrupted; and b^
the Favor of Divine Providence it has been transmitted so to us. At the same
time also the Canon (...) Scripture was digested into Partitions and Divisions*
as now it is; and there was then laid the Foundation of the Masorah or
Masoreth, which becam^ afterward part of the Jewish Cabala; which about the
Year of our Lord 494, was committed to writing by some skilful Grammarians, and
has bee^ very useful for preserving the Old Testament. There are three several
Species of this Cabala, (...) they tell us: the first is Gematria, (from (...))
a Mathematical Consideration of the Text of the Bible, the mystical numbering of
the Letters, and an account of the Great and Little Letters in Words. The
second is Notariaca, an Exposition of Scripture from certain Notes, Characters,
Lines and Points belonging to the Hebrew Text. More particularly, Noteriekon
(or Notaricon, or Notariaca, for I find that it is thus differently express d in
Writers) is when one Letter stands for a whole Word. This way of Cabalizing
gave the Name to Judas Maccabaeus, who writ on his Standards and Ensigns (...),
which is the Abbreviature or first Letters of those words (...) Exodus 15. 11.
and by putting Vowels to the Consonants, they read it Maccabi. The third is
Temurah, Mutatio, which is made by the transposition of the same Letters,
whence another Word arises which explains the Word that is transposed. Thus
(...) is explained by (...) Terra, which contains the same Letters. Thus (...)
Noah is said to have found (...) Grace, or Favor, Genesis 6. 8. The Letters are
the same, but transposed. So (...) (Exodus 23. 23.) is by Metathesis expounded
by (...) (Dan. 12. 1.) i. e. the Messiah, say the Jewish Doctors. But the first
and second way of Cabalizing, which obtain the Name of Masoreth, are the most
considerable to our present Purpose. These Critical Observations on the Bible,
made of old, and delivered from one to another, (whence they have their From
masar, trader^.
Denomination) treat of the Mysteries of Letters, why some Words are in
Greater, others in Lesser Characters, as (...) with a Great Vau, Levit. 11. 42.
So they observe there is an open Mem at the end of a Word in Neh. 2. 13. and a
close Mem in the middle in Isa. 9. 7. The Masorites likewise have taken notice
of the Likeness and Difference of Words, by Similitude o^ Diversity of Letters
and Points: they have mad^ Remarks on irregular and extraordinary Pointings;
they have observed the Variety of Accent^ and so criticized on all these in the
several Place^ of the Old Testament, that there cannot be (...) Change made in
the Hebrew Copies, but it mu^^ be presently seen. In this Masoreth on the
Hebre^ Text, they have reckoned which Verse in the Psalms is the middle one,
and which Letter is the middle Letter in that whole Book, viz. (...) in the
word (...) in Psalm. 80. 13. Yea, they have counted all the Verses and Words,
all the Accent^^ Letters and Vowels that are in every single Book^ (from which
critical Enumeration those Transcr^bers of the Bible were called by the Jews
Sopheri^ i. e. Numberers) and at the bottom of every V^lume they have set down
the exact Number of (...) these: and at last they reckon how many there a^ in
the whole Bible of the Old Testament. Fath^^ Simon indeed says, they mistake
in their Accomp^^ but that is more than he proves; and I do (...) think he ever
took the pains (as great a Critic^^ on the Bible as he is) to cast them up.
There (...) good reason to believe that the Jewish Critics (...) the Old
Testament are more to be credited in (...) Particular, than the French one.
However, from what has been said it appears that the Jews we^^ very careful
and studious, very exact and curio^^ in Scripture; by which means it happens
that the^ is an Impossibility of making any Alteration in (...) without being
discovered. That is the only Reason of my alleging here the Masoretick Notes:
(...) I undertake not to defend the superstitious R^^marks and Criticisms of
the Masorites; I applaud not their laborious Niceties, their childish
Transmutations and shuflling of Letters and Syllables, their trifling
Annotations on the Figure and Make of some Hebrew Letters. But I only take
notice of God's Providence in making these Critical Men to be very serviceable
toward the preserving the Bible of the Old Testament in its Purity. The
Observations of these Masoretick Doctors, who were Persons of great Skill in
the Language, and well acquainted with all the ancient Copies and Manuscripts,
and who above a thousand Years ago exactly numbered all the Verses, Words,
Letters, and even the minutest parts of the Hebrew Text, have been a great
Security and Preservative to it; they have kept it undepraved and incorrupt,
and have made the Reading of it certain and unalterable. This is the reason why
that Excellent and Noble Personage, the Learned Picus Mirandula, so highly
extols the Hebrew Cabala; without doubt he saw this Usefulness and Excellency
in it. Nay, before these Doctors of Tiberias drew up their Masoretick Notes,
there was (it is probable) extant something of this nature. They had before
this time some Account not only of all the Letters of the Bible, but of all the
Apices of them; for to this our Savior alludes in Mat. 5. 18. Not one Jot, or
one (...).
Tittle: which latter is meant of those little Horns, Pricks and Dots belonging
to the Hebrew Letters. Not only the smallest Letters, as Iod, but the Cuttings
of those Letters were diligently observed by the Masoretick Jews. And this
their nice, and almost fond Criticism was serviceable to the keeping of the
Hebrew Text entire and unchanged. Thus the Masoreth, as they express it, is a
Hedge or Fence to the Law. The^ critical Notes and Remarks of the old Jews have
preserved the Text of the Bible from being corrupted and abused. So that we may
from hen^ gather, that we have in our hands the same He^brew Text which was at
first given by God to (...) People.

But some tell us, that the Old Testament (...) b^rnt at the same time when the
Temple was, (...) that Ezra after the Captivity dictated and writ (...) over
again, according to what we find record^^ in 2 Esdras 14. 21, 23, 24. So there
was some Recovery of the Law; but the Original Book being lost, it cannot be
imagined but that there are many ^aults and Mistakes in This which we have
(...) present. I answer, Either this Passage in the A^pocryphal Writer speaks
of some other Book distinct from that of the Mosaic Law, or it is to b^
reckoned as fabulous and supposititious, and so (...) Credit^ is to be given to
it: for in Nehem. 8. 2, 3. there is mention of the Book of the Law being
brough^ before the Congregation, and its being read before (...) Men and the
Women; but not a Syllable of the Ma^t^r mentioned in Esdras, is hero to be
found. Yes, it is implied that the Book of the Law was still the same; for you
may observe that there is a particular Account of what the Chaldeans destroyed,
and burnt, and carried away at the taking of Ierus^^em, but there is not a word
of these holy Books; which most certainly would have been taken notice of, they
being of so inestimable a Va^^^. Morcover, if we should suppose the Law was
burnt in the Temple, yet there were many Copies of it among the Jews, which
without doubt were preserved. We have no reason therefore to suspect that the
Hebrew Original of the Old Testament is corrupted.

But some of the Ancient Fathers in the Christian Church, as well as some
Learned Moderns, have asserted that the Hebrew is corrupted. I answer, first,
as to the Fathers; it is granted that Justin Martyr declares himself to be of
this Opinion. In his Dialogue with Trypho he considently assirms, that the Jews
erased many things out of the Bible; and he assigns particular Instances in the
Psalms, Isaiah and Jeremiah. And this they did, says he, because they hated
Christ and his Religion, and thought some of those Places favored the
Christian Cause too much. (Here by the by you may take notice of that great
Mistake and Oversight in Bishop Ward's Part 3.
Essays, where he peremptorily asserts, that [ never any of the Ancient Fathers
have in their greatest heat of Zeal against the Jews, accused them of such
Corruption] i. e. of the Scriptures.) But this is not the first time that
Justin Martyr has suffered himself to be imposed upon in matter of Historical
Truth. This, among others, is questionless a gross Mistake of that good Man;
and his strong Averseness to the Jews, and his belief of their Willingness and
Readiness to deprave the Scriptures for their own Ends, betrayed him to it. As
for other Fathers, as Tertullian, Irenaecus, Origin, Eusebius, who, it is true,
sometimes complain that the Scripture is corrupted by the Jews, they speak of
their adulterating the Text rather as to the Sense than as to the Words; they
mean that the Translations which the Jews used were false, for they generally
adhered to Aquila's and Theodotion's Version, and preferred it before that of
the Seventy. Whence their Interpretations of Scripture were unsound and
erroneous, and thereby they sometimes set up Judaism against Christianity. But
this was done without corrupting the Hebrew Copies of the Bible. And that the
Jew^ had been guilty of no such thing, is expressly asserted and maintained by
Ierom and Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 15. c. 11.
Augustine, two Ancient Fathers, of a great Fame for Learning and Piety as
those before named. These worthy Persons refute that Suspicion and Rumor which
it seems were then risen, namely, that the Jews had adulterated the Hebrew
Text. These Fathers not only declare that they did no such thing, but they
praise them for their Faithfulness in preserving the Bible pure and incorrupt.
Then as to some of the Moderns, who have asserted the Hebrew Copies to be
faulty and depraved, it is easy to see what it was that prompted them to it.
The Hebrew Text is corrupted, and so is that of the Septuagint, say the
Romanists: but the old Vulgar Latin is incorrupt and infallible, so determines
the Tridentine Council. Galatinus, Leo Cast Melchior Canus, Huntlaeus.
Several of that Communion have written against the Purity of the Hebrew
Copies, and labored to prove them corrupt: but In Exercitat. and Diatribe.
Morinus has showed himself more zealous than all of them in this Point; and
he frankly confesses this was his main Design in it, viz. to baffle the
Protestants, who make the Scripture the Rule of their Faith and Manners. If the
Originals of the Bible be lost, and the Transcripts be defective and erroneous,
how can the Bible be a certain Rule? What will become then of the Religion of
the Protestants, who found it solely on Scripture? This being uncertain, that
must needs be so too. Wherefore the best and only way is to have recourse to
Tradition and to the Church; these are the only Rule of what we are to believe
and practice. Thus you see what the Romish Writers, who cry down the Hebrew
Text, aim at. But most of the learned Men of that Church have not prosecuted
their Aims and Designs this way. It is well known they have generally held the
Hebrew Text to be uncorrupted. And the same is defended by the generality of
Muis and ^uxtorf abroad; Brought on, ^^^her, Light^oot, ^ocock at home.
learned Protestants who have handled this Subject. Isaac Vossius is the only
Man of Note that holds the contrary, i. e. that the Hebrew Bible, as it is now,
is corrupted by the Jews. But against him and all others (either Ancient or
Modern) who are of this Opinion, I offer these following things to be
considered. If the Jews corrupted the Hebrew Text, they did it either before or
after Christ's time. That they did it not before, is evident; because first our
Savior never takes notice of any such thing, which certainly he would not have
omitted at such times as he reproved the Scribes and Pharisees for their known
Faults and Offenses, especially relating to the Law; as when he taxed them for
making the Law of God of none effect by their Traditions. Certainly he would
have rebuked them for so gross a Fault, when he corrected them for some that
were lesser. Nay, the Jews are not only not reproved for corrupting the Canon
of Scripture, but on the contrary, their Care and Faithfulness in preserving it
whole and entire, are particularly taken notice of, Luke 4. 16, 17. Acts 13.
27. and 15. 21. and commended, Romans 3. 2. Besides, Christ ^end^ his A^ditors to
the Old Testament, to read it, and ^earch it, John 5. 39. Whereas, if they had
corrupted it, he would without doubt have caution^^ them against it. Again, he
and his Apo^tles con^tantly proved their Doctrine, and confuted the Jews out of
those very Writings; which is an Argument that in our Savior's time those
Books were not corrupted: else he and the Apostles would not have so frequently
quoted them, and ^^ed the Testimony of almost every particular Book as
Authentical, and of Divine Inspiration. And that the Hebrew Text was not
corrupted by the Jews after our Savior's time, is as manifest, because the
Testimonies cited out of the Old Testament by those that succeeded Christ and
hi^ Apostles, are found to be the same in those Writings now, without the least
Alteration. Likewise, it cannot be showed at what time after Christ the
Corruption or Alteration of the Text began: though the Younger Vossius is
pleased to say it was presently after the Destruction of Jerusalem, which yet
he has no where proved. Farther, if you observe those Places in the Hebrew
Text, which some alledg as corrupted by the Jews, you will find that there was no
Occasion or Ground for so corrupting them. If they changed the Text, it was
questionless for their own Ends, and to maintain some Error of theirs; the
Alteration would especially have been in those Places which speak of Christ the
true Messiah, but you will not discover any such thing. If any object Psalm. 22.
16. They pierced my Hands and my Feet, and say that the Jews have there
purposely changed Caaru into Caari; I ask, why did the Masorites restore it to
its right Reading? If it had been corrupted by the Circumcised Doctors on
purpose, it would not have been taken notice of here by Men of the same
Persuasion, but they would have let it remain without any Marginal Correction.
But seeing they did not, it is a sign there was no Intention to corrupt the
Text. This indeed they do, they add a Keri to the Ketib, i. e. instead of Carri
sicut Leo in the Text, they write in the Margin Caaru foderunt, as much as to
say that Caaru is the true and genuine Reading. This the Masoretick Note here
testifies. Besides, it is evident that the Seventy did read it so, and
accordingly translated it (...); and thus it is rendered in the Syriack, Arabic,
Ethiopick and Latin. But the Place was by chance corrupted, because of the
likeness of the two Vowels Iod and Vau, and not out of design; for then the
Masorite Jews would not have supplied it in the Margin with that other word
Caaru, they pierced; which agrees with the History of Christ's Sufferings. Yea,
this Word is in some ancient Copies in the Text it self; which is not denied by
the learned Father of the Oratory, who had it from Rabbi ben Hajim the great
Restorer of the Masora; who acknowledges that in some of the Hebrew
Manuscripts of the Bible which he had seen, Caaru they pierced, or dug, was
in the Text. Or, why may we not take in both the Words into the Text, and so
reconcile the Textual and Marginal Reading? This we find done by the Chaldee
Version, which renders the Place thus, They did bite or pierce like a Lion; as
if the Original ran thus, Caaru caari, foderunt sicut Leo. This in my opinion
may be a safe way of composing the Difference about this Text. However, not
only from this, but what has been said before, I think it is manifest that the
Jews did not adulterate this Text. And among all those other Texts that are
said to be changed and adulterated, you will scarcely find one that has
reference to that great Concern o^ the Jews: whence we may conclude that the
Old Testament remains altogether unaltered. I might farther add, that the
Multitude of Copies was great everywhere both before and after Christ's time,
so that it was impossible to corrupt them all. I know some have inferred the
Corruption of the Original Hebrew from the great difference which is to be
found between that and the Version of the Seventy: but I shall afterward (when
I come to speak of the Perfection of Scripture) give a large and full Account
of the Reason of this Difference; whence I shall make it plain that this
Difference proceeds not at all from the Depravation of the Original Hebrew. The
short then is, that the Hebrew Bible is pure and incorrupt; and after all the
Disputes about the various Readings, it is undeniable, that there is no
difference in the Hebrew Copies as to any thing considerable and of moment; it
touches not any necessary Point of Religion, which we are bound to know and
practice. In the several Copies the same Historical Passages are related, the
same Miracles recorded, the same Prophecies and Predictions, the same
Doctrines, Laws and Precepts set down, and that without any varying. So that we
are certain of the Integrity of the Hebrew Bible. Notwithstanding what has
been suggested to the contrary, we are assured that we have the true Authentic
Copies of the first Original Writings; and in a word, that the Hebrew Text is
the same that it was, and is still in its original Purity.

But here it is objected, That the Hebrew Copies of the Bible might easily be
corrupted and altered, because they had no Points or Vowels at first. This
could not but make the Reading very uncertain and doubtful, and almost
arbitrary, especially in some Places: whence it is easy to imagine how great
Alterations, and consequently great Corruptions, might creep into the Text. In
answer to this you must know, that those only who are against the Purity of the
Hebrew Bible, (as Morinus, Vossius, Simon, etc.) hold that the Points were of
late Invention. And this they have picked up out of Elias Levita, who lived
about a hundred Years ago, and was of opinion that the Vowels were invented by
the Jewish and Masoretick Doctors of Tiberias, (a famous School for the Hebrew
Tongue.) So that it was about ^ive hundred Years after Christ when the Hebrew
Points were found out, and the Rabbis and Masorites of Tiberias were the first
Authors of them. This is the Judgment of Elias the Levite, and he is the only
Jew of this Opinion. Nor is he followed by any Christians but those who have a
design to vilify the Hebrew Bible, and to prefer and magnify the LXX, or some
other Translation. Of this sort are the Writers before mentioned, who largely
inveigh against the Authority of the Hebrew Edition. And to promote a Disesteem
of it, F. Simon's Crit. Hist. Of the Old Test*
one of them tells us, that the Masorites of Tiberias, who (as he says) were
the first Inventers of the Hebrew Vowels, Points and Tittles, borrowed them
from the Turks: the Bible, according to him, had these from the Alcoran. And
Is^ac Vossius de 70 Interpretib.
another tells us, that if Moses were alive, he would not know one Apex in the
Jewish Books, for they have their Letters from the Chaldees, and their Points
from the M^^soreths. Nay, he ventures to say, that if Ki^^ David were alive
again, and heard his Psal^^ read or sung in the Jews Synagogues, he would ask
what Tongue they used: for the right Sou^^ and Pronunciation of the Hebrew is
quite lo^ and no Man understands it (unless it be th^^ Writer himself.) All
this is Romance, and s^^ on foot only to disparage the Bible, and to mak^ us
believe that the Old Testament is not the same that it was. To which end also
the Hebrew Points or Vowels are condemned for their Novelty, and are said to be
invented by the Talmudick Docto^ and Masorites. Whereas there is mention made
in several ^uxtorf de Orig. Punct.
Jewish Writers, of the Points and Vowels long before the Doctors of Tiberias,
which is said to be about the Year of our Lord 500. And from what we have
observed already concerning the Masoretick Notes on the Bible, it is easy to
prove that the Hebrew Vowels were before that time: for if the Masorites
criticized on the Vowels, (as well as the other Letters and Accents, a^ was
said before) then it is not probable in the least that they invented them. We
find that they take notice of the Irregularity of these Points in several
places: whereas if they had made them themselves, they would have been all
regular. It is Nonsense to think that they that made the one, viz. the Critical
Notes, made the other, namely the Vowels and Points. Hear likewise what the
Learned Pocock says, Comment on Hosea 10. 10.
It is an Argument that the Vowels were antienter than the Masoretick Notes, in
regard that they seem thereby to be governed in judging of the Consonants. And
in some other place in his Commentary, he delivers his Judgment that the Vowels
were not invented by the Masorites, but were long before them, yea were of the
same Antiquity with the Letters or Consonants. It is well known that all the
Jews (but him before named) hold the Antiquity of the Hebrew Points; yea, some
of them carry them back as far as Adam, and vouch they were found out by him.
Other Learned Men among them assert that these Vowels were given at the time of
the delivering the Law on Mount Sinai; then it was that God writ the Decalogue
with Points, and gave it to the Jews by the hands of Moses. And as to the rest
of the Writings, and the whole Body of the Old Testament, the common Opinion of
the Jews is, that Ezra was the Author of the Vowels which are annexed to them;
and that he and the great Synagogue, of which he was President, first invented
them after the Captivity. Thus whether they commenced from Adam, or from Moses,
or Ezra, they all agree in this, that they were very ancient, and in a manner
coeval with the Letters and Words; and consequently that they are part of the
Text, and of Divine Authority. This being so old and so recent an Opinion, it
has gained the Suffrage of the wisest and learned Christians in the World.
You may particularly find it maintained in the Writings of Munster, Pagninus,
Buxtorf, Usher, Cappellus, Broughton, Lightfoot, Walton, all of them singularly
well skilled in Jewish Antiquity, and therefore fit Judges in this Cause. They
have proved by undeniable Arguments, that the Hebrew Bible had Vowels or Pricks
from the beginning, and that it was never without them. The Opinion then which
the Objectors have espoused, is justly to be exploded. It is against the
unanimous Testimony of the Jewish Church, the the Points are but Men's
Invention. It is unsa^^ and dangerous to assert, that these Vowels were added
since the first writing of the Old Testament: for the Certainty of the Truth of
thos^ Writings, (and consequently of the Writings o^ the New Testament, wherein
those are so often alleged) is shaken hereby. For no Man of Sens^ can believe
that the right reading of the Text could continue some thousands of Years
wit^o^^ the Points: this is an incredible Fiction. And then it is as impossible
that the genuine Sense o^ Scripture (which depends on the Words, as the^^ upon
the Vowels, as well as the Consonants) could have been preserved, unless the
Bible had bee^ Pointed. Whence it was said in the Jewish Ta^mud, that L^b.
Joma, c. 1.
Letters without Points are like a Body without a Soul. Hence was that Saying,
Zohar ex Midr^s^*
H^^ that reads without Points, is like a Man that rides without a Bridle. We
therefore firmly maintain, and that with the approbation of Antiquity, that the
Words of the Hebrew Text had Points added to them at the beginning; and that
these Points which we now have, are the same with them. To this purpose we here
appeal to the Testimony of the Jews, who will bear witness that the Books of
the Old Testament, which we now receive, answer exactly to the Pointed Text
which they have received, and always did. Nay, we may end the Controversy
without an Appeal, for our own Eyes and Ears will satisfy us. If we compare our
English, or Latin, or other Bibles, with the Hebrew one which is used among the
Jews, and is daily put forth by the present Rabbis in the several parts of the
World, we shall find that they agree; and we shall be convinced that they own
the same Books with us.

We need not stay to attend here to what a late Learned Writer (before named)
has with much Confidence, but slender Reason, suggested, viz. that the Bible
of the Old Testament is an Abbreviated Collection from Ancient Records, which
were much more large. He confesses that the Canon of Scripture is taken out of
Authentic Registeries; but the Authors who collected it, added and diminished
as they pleased: especially he asserts this concerning the Historical Books,
that they are Abridgments of larger Records, and Summaries of other larger Acts
kept in the Jewish Archives: and these public Scribes who writ them out, took
the liberty to alter Words as they saw occasion. So that in short, according to
this Critic, here are only some broken Pieces and Scraps taken out of the
first Authentic Writings* A bold and daring Assertion, and founded on no other
Bottom than F. Simon's Brain. Who would expect this from one that is a Man of
great Sense and Reason, one that is a great Master of Critical Learning, and
has presented the World with very choice Remarks on the History of the Bible?
(for truly I am not of Dr: Bright's Preface to Dr* Lightfoot's Works*
his Opinion, who says he sees not any thing in this Author's Writings bu^
what is common.) It is to be lamented that a Person, otherwise so Judicious and
Observing, has given himself up here to his own Fancy and Conceit. He invents
a new Office of public Registers that were Divinely inspired: he makes
Notaries and Prophets the same. He gives no Proof and Demonstration of that
Adding and Diminishing which the Scribes he talks of made: he hat^ not one
tolerable Argument to evince any of the Books of Scripture to be Fragments of
greater ones. Indeed I should mightily have wondered that so Ingenious, so
Sagacious, so Learned a Man ha^ broached such groundless Notions, if I did no^
consider that this subtle Romanist designs here^^ (as most of that Church
generally do) to deprecia^^^ the Bible, and to represent it as a Book of
Fragments and Shreds; that so, when our Esteem (...) the Authority of Scripture
is weakened, yea taken away, we may wholly rest upon Tradition, an^ found our
Religion, as well as the Scriptures, (...) that alone. This is that which he
drives at in (...) Critical History both of the Old and New Testamen^* But all
sober and considerate Persons will bewar^ of him, when they discover this
Design. The^ will easily see through his plausible Stories, fo^^ Surmises, bold
Conjectures, and seeming Arg^mentations; and they will have the greater
Reverence for the Bible; because he and others have attacked it with so much
Contempt and Rudenes^ and purposely bring its Authority into question* that
they may set up something else above (...)* Notwithstanding then the Cavils and
Objection of designing Men, we have reason to believe an^ avouch the Authority
of the Old Testament, and to be thoroughly persuaded that the Books are entirely
transmitted to us without any Corruption, and are the same that ever they were,
without and Diminution or Addition. We have them as they were written by the
first Authors; we have them entire and perfect, and not (as some fondly
suggest) contracted, abbreviated, curtailed. Unto the Jews, the ancient People
of God, were committed his Oracles, as the Apostle speaks; and they showed
themselves conscientious and diligent Conservators of them. The Jewish Nation,
says St. Augustine, have been as 'twere Quid est aliud gens ipsa nisi quaedam
scriniaria Christianorum, bajulans Legem and Prophetas? etc. Contra Faust. lib.
1^. cap. 23.
the Chest-keepers for the Christians; they have faithfully preserved that
Sacred Depositum for them, they have safely kept that Ark wherein the Law and
the Prophets were Locked up. God would have the Jews to be Librarii
Christianorum, says Epist. 60.
Drusius, Keepers of those Sacred Volumes for us Christians: and it is certain
they kept them with great Care, the like whereof is not to be found to have
been taken in preserving any other sort of Writings under Heaven. And seeing
they have so carefully handed the Old Testament down to us, we are concerned to
receive it with a proportionable Thankfulness, and to reckon this their
Delivering of those Writings down to us, as no mean Argument of their Truth and
Certainty.

Secondly, The Authority of the New Testament is confirmed by External
Testimony or Tradition, no less than that of the Old Testament. We have the
Authentic Suffrage of the Primitive Church, the Unanimous Consent of the
Christians of the first Ages, that this Book is of Divine Inspiration, and that
it is Pure and Uncorrupted. Some of the Fathers and first Writers give us a
Catalogue of the Books of the New Testament, and they are the very same with
those which we have at this day. Athanasius particularly enumerating those
Books, sets down all those which we now embrace as Canonical, and no others.
And many of the Fathers of the first Ages after Christ, as Irenaeus, Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian, etc. quote the Places in the
New Testament as they are now. If it be objected, that in the Fathers sometimes
the Text of Scripture is not exactly what we find it, and read it at this day*
This must be remembered, that they sometimes quoted the Meaning, not the very
Words. At other times their Memories failed them as to the Words, and thence
they changed them into others; and instead of those in the Text, used some that
were like them. So when they were in haste, and not at leisure to consult the
Text, they made use of such Words and Expressions as they thought came nearest
to it. In Prolegom. in Exercitas. Sac.
Heinsius shows this in a vast many places. Sometimes they contract the Word*
of the Text, and give only the brief Sense of it* at other times they enlarge
it, and present us with a Comment upon it: yea, sometimes (as they see
occasion, and as their Matter leads them to it) they invert the Words, and
misplace the Parts of the Text. But no Man ought hence to infer, that the
Scriptures of the New Testament then and now are not the same. And as for the
Number of the Sacred Writers and their Books, it hat^ been always the same, i.
e. the same Catalogue and Canon have been generally acknowledged and received
by the Christian Church. It is true, some Particular Books have been
questioned, but by a few only, and for a time: but the Church was at last fully
satisfied about them; the Generality o^ Christians agreed to own all those
Books which are now owned by us. All the Eastern Churches held the Epistle to
the Hebrews to be Canonical, though the Latins (it is granted) were not so
unanimous. This Epistle, and that of St. James, the second Epistle of St.
Peter, the second and third of St. John, and the Epistle of St. Jude, and the
Apocalypse, were questioned in the first Century, says Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
Eusebius; but he acquaints us withal, that they were afterward by general
Consent received into the Canon of Holy Scripture, for the Doubts were resolved
upon mature Deliberation. So that the questioning of those Books is now a
Con^^rmation of the Truth and Authority of them: they were once doubted of,
that for the future they might be unquestionable. And to come down to latter
Times; what if two or three Men of late, as Hemmingius, Baldwin, Eckard, think
Epistle to the Hebrews, St. James's, St. Jude's, the Revelation.
some of the Books of the New Testament Apocryphal? And what if Luther himself
seemed to say as much? What does this signify in respect of the universal and
concurrent Judgment of others? And as for the rest of the Books of the New
Testament, they were never doubted of at all, but have the Approbation of the
whole Church.

And that the new Testament was first written in Greek, as we now receive it,
is attested by the Universal Consent of the Ancients, who made enquiry into
these things. Only two Books are excepted by some: for though many of the
Flacius Illyricus, Erasmus, Calvin, Chamier, Lightfoot.
Learned Moderns maintain that St. Matthew's Gospel was written originally in
Greek, yet it is not to be denied that some of the Irenaeus, Origin, Eusebius,
Jerome, Augustine.
Fathers hold it was written first in Hebrew, for the sake of the believing
Jews: and if you will believe St. Catal. Scriptor. Ecclesiast.
Ierom, the original Hebrew was extant in his time, and he translated the
Gospel into Latin from that Copy. Who turned it into Greek is not certain; but
it was either by St. Matthew himself, or by some Apostolical Person, inspired
by the Holy Ghost; so that the Greek we now have, is from the same Spirit, and
of the same Authority with the other. The Fathers likewise generally say that
St. Pa^^ writ the Epistle to the Hebrews in their own Tongue, and that St. Luke
or St. Clement turned it into Greek. The contrary is held by some Moderns,
particularly Cajetan among the Romanists, and by many of the Reformed-Way. But
excepting (I say) these two Books, it is universally agreed that the whole New
Testament was written in Greek; and one Reason might be, because so great a
number of Jews lived among the Greeks, and used their Tongue; and therefore
this part of the Bible was sitly writ in Greek, as the other was long before
translated into that Tongue for the use of the Jews. For the sake of these
dispersed Jews, (therefore called the dispersed among the Gentiles, or
according to the Original, the Dispersion of the Greeks, John 7. 35.) who
understood and spoke the Greek Language, the New Testament was put forth in
that Tongue. Moreover, this was the most generally received Language at that
time, and therefore the fittest for the propagating the Gospel. This is a very
good Argument: for tho I do not think the j^ws at Jerusalem spoke no other than
the Greek Tongue among themselves, as Isaac Vossius confidently holds, and is
therein rightly blamed and confuted by the late French Critic; yet I am
satisfied that the Greek Tongue was universally und^rstood, and was with the
Latin Nu^c totus Graias Latiasque habet orbis Athenas. Iuvenal.
the Language of the Empire, and therefore was most proper for the
communicating the Christian Religion to the World. Graeca per orbem universum
leguntur. Pro Arch. Poet.
Tully acquaints us that in all the Roman Empire Greek was vulgarly understood.
It is no wonder therefore that the New Testament was writ in that Tongue, and
that St. Paul writes not only to the Galatians, etc. but to the Romans in
Greek, for they all understood it. It was the Modish and Courtly way of Speech
at Rome, as the French is now with us. Their very Women affected to learn and
speak Greek, for which they are jeered by the Satyrist, who calls Rome the
Greek City. In short, all the Eastern People spoke Greek, more or less, from
the time that Alexander the Great and his Captains spread their Dominion in the
East. The Syrians, Egyptians, Persians, and People of the Lesser Asia, were
acquainted with that Language. The Jews of any considerable Quality understood
Greek as well as their own Tongue: whence Josephus, a Jewish Priest, (or of the
Priestly Stock) writ his Books in Greek. The Evangelists and Apostles then
might well write in the same Tongue, it being so common and every where
understood. Especially it is no wonder on another account, that St. Paul writ
in Greek; for it was his native Tongue, he being of Tarsus, which was a City of
Greece. We may then very justly look upon the Greek Language as the Original
Text of the New Testament.

And it is generally agreed that these Greek Copies which we now have and use,
are True and Authentic, though in some things they differ: and none are
observed to oppose this but those who do it upon some Interest and Design, i.
e. to maintain some peculiar Opinion which they have taken up. The Variety of
Readings should not prejudice us: much less ought we to alter the Readings of
the Copies, and to substitute new ones at our pleasure. Which is the Fault of
Theodore Beza* though on other accounts an Excellent Person, and one that has
highly deserved of the Church of God: yet he is unsufferably bold in coining
new Readings of the Text. When he cannot find the Sense of a Place, he
presently questions the Truth of the Copy, and produces a new Reading; which
has brought a great Scandal upon his Annotations on the New Testament, which
otherwise are fraught with admirable Learning, and discover his profound Skill
in Divine Criticism. It is certain that the Greek and Latin Manuscripts which
he pretends to, are a Cheat: for questionless they would have been taken notice
of in the first Ages of Christianity, if there had been any such thing.
Therefore it is downright Imposture, and Beza was grossly deluded by it. Let us
from his Miscarriage, learn to be cautious, and not to venture so boldly upon
altering the Greek Copies. This is a very rash and unaccountable Undertaking,
especially in a single Person, and much more when it is very usual and frequent.

To speak next both of the Old and New Testament together. The Authority of
them is established by considering this, that though Bellarmine and others of
the Roman Communion (who are followed by Lewis Cappel, and some others that go
under the Name of Protestants) cry out that the Bible is altered and corrupted
by the Negligence of the Transcribers, and that the Text is uncertain by reason
of the different Readings and Variety of Translations, (which is done out of
design, viz. to debase the Authority of the holy Writings, and to make Men fly
to Traditions, and rest wholly in the Authority of the Church, and (I wish I
might not add) thereby to undermine some of the Foundations of Religion;) yet
this is certain, that the various Readings of the Old and New Testament are not
so many as are pretended; and all the various Copies in Hebrew and Greek, which
are found in all Nations at this Day, do agree in all material Points; and the
Scriptures being translated from those Copies into many Languages, concur in
the same substantial things. Again, as to those various Readings which are
produced, we may justly alledg the Words of an Bp of Cork's Discourse of the
Authority of Scripture.
Excellent Man; They are not Arguments, says he, of the Scriptures Corruption,
but of God's Providence, and of Human Industry to preserve Scripture from
Corruption. We may gather from this Diversity of Readings, that Men have been
very inquisitive and careful in their comparing of Copies; but we cannot thence
argue, that the Text is adulterated; yea rather we may infer that it is not:
for from this comparing and vying of Copies, we come to know and be ascertained
which is the True and Authentic one. And we may farther add, with the same
excellent Author, That it is morally impossible, since our Savior's time, and
indeed for many hundred Years before that, that the Scriptures (particularly of
the Old Testament) should have been corrupted: for the Multitude of Copies was
then such, has been since much more such, and so far dispersed, that neither
one Man, nor one Body of Men could ever get them into their hands to corrupt
them; and if some few or m^^^ny Copies had been corrupted, but not all, th^^
sincere Number would have detected the corrupt. Again, let it be considered
that the ancient Orthodox Writers of the Church do all ci^^ these Scriptures as
we now have them, in everything material: Yea, that most Heretics have pleaded
these same Scriptures, and denied them not to be genuine. To establish us yet
further, we must remember that these Writings have been openly read to the
People in all their solemn Assemblies in the several Ages since Christianity
began; and they being thus constantly used, could not possibly be altered and
corrupted: Besides that, all private Christians were exhorted to read and use
them in their Families; whereby they became so known and familiar, that
whenever any Alteration was made, they could presently observe it. Lastly,
notwithstanding the Author of a Tractat. Theologico-Politic.
late Tractate has brought diverse Objections against the usual Tradition, that
such and such Books of the Bible were wrote by the Authors whose Names they
bear; and though Mr. Hobbs before him had done the same, yet neither of them
have effected it with any Success. This is all they have done; they have only
showed that they are not so civil to the holy Writings as they are to the
profane ones: for it is every whit as clear that the Books of the Holy
Scripture were written by the Persons under whose Names they go, as that any
other Writings were put out by those whose Names they bear. Nor can these Men
vouchsafe to show that Civility to these Sacred Books, which even Jews and
Gentiles have done: for when both ^hese opposed these Books, you will not find
that they ever questioned the Authors, but the Doctrine only. We are therefore
to look upon these Men, and such as take part with them, as acting with higher
Prejudice than either Jews or Heathens did; and accordingly we are to slight
what they say, unless it be thus far, that from their impotent and malicious
Cavils we may be further confirmed in this Persuasion, that these Books of the
Old and New Testament were indeed written by those Authors, under whose Names
they are now received; that these Scriptures which we now have, are the same
which the Primitive Church received from the Apostles; that the Copies we have
of the Bible, are not corrupted; that God has preserved the Scriptures both of
the Old and New Testament, from all considerable Change and Depravation, (his
Providence not suffering any such thing;) that the Canon of Scripture which is
now received, is the very same that it was at first; and (which is the Sum of
all) that the Truth and Authority of it are impregnable.

It may be expected I should speak of the Apo^ryphal Books, which I have not
reckoned among the Inspired Writings. For doing this I have good reason; for I
find them excluded from the Canon of Scripture by those that are the best
Judges of it, I mean the Jews, who were the great Keepers of the Scripture.
They never took these into the number of the Books of Holy Writ, and that for
these two Reasons: First, because they were not writ by the Prophets. The Jews
believed that the Spirit of Prophecy ceased among them as soon as Malachi had
done prophesying. They owned no Divine Inspiration after his time, and
accordingly received not the Apocryphal Books into the Canon of Scripture, i.
e. Books Divinely inspired. (...) was written after Malachi's time, who was
(...) last Prophet, was not Canonical, was not of (...) Authority, and
therefore is not emphatical called Scripture. For, as St. Paul informs us,
(...) Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. (...)* That is the
Mark and Criterion of Scripture. (...) is backed by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Holy Men (...) God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (...) those
Writings which were not by Inspiration (...) God, nor from the immediate Motion
of the (...) Ghost, are not to be reckoned as Holy Scriptu^^ and such are the
Apocryphal Writings; they wer^^ written after the cessation of Prophecy and
Divi^^ Inspiration, and so they are not of Divine Auth^^rity, and cannot be
esteemed Canonical Scripture^^* Secondly, the Jews received not the Apocrypha
(...) to their Canon, because it was written in Greek not in Hebrew, as all the
Canonical Books are For God would not, they say, give them Scripture in an
Unknown Tongue: The Oracles of Go^ were to be committed to his People in the
Authentic Language, which is that of the Jews. The Apocryphal Writings being
not such, are rejected by them, and not taken into the Canon of Sacre^ Writ.

And as they were not received by the Jewi^ Church, so not by the Christian
one. You cannot but observe that Christ and the Apostles, who frequently quote
the Canonical Books, never quo^^ any of the Apocryphal ones: which gives us to
understand that they were not reputed as Inspired Writings: otherwise it is
most reasonable to think that our Savior, or his Apostles and Evangelists,
would at one time or other have cited some one Passage at least out of these
Books; it being their great Work (as you may see) to prove the Truth of what
they delivered from the holy Scriptures, which were inspired by God in former
Times. They embraced all Occasions of establishing Christianity upon the
Writings of the Inspired Prophets who went before: therefore if the Apocryphal
Writers had been of that number, they would certainly have been quoted by them;
and because they are not, it is an Argument that they are not Inspired Writers.
Again, the Christian Church, which immediately succeeded that which was in the
Days of Christ and the Apostles, received not these Writings as Divinely
inspired, and therefore excluded them from the Canon of Scripture. Look into
the Writings of the ancient Fathers of the Church, (who without doubt made it
their business to search into the Canon of Scripture, and to be satisfied which
were the Divinely inspired Books) and there you will see that those of the
Eastern Church received only the Jews Canon of Scripture as to the Old
Testament. Thus Cited by Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. l. 6. 19.
Origin recites the Canonical Books of it as they are now reckoned, viz. two
and twenty, after the number of the Hebrew letters. And Cateches. 4.
Cyril of Jerusalem has these express Words: Read these two and twenty Books,
but have nothing to do with the Apocryphal ones. Study and meditate only on
these Scriptures, which we con^idently read in the Church. The Apostles and
first Bishops were true Guides, and were more wise and religious than thou art;
and these were the Men that delivered these Scriptures to us. Thou then being a
Son of the Church, do not go beyond her Bounds and Orders, but acknowledge and
study only the two and twenty Books of the Old ^^^stament. And other Fathers of
the Chur^^ as Melito Bishop of Sardis, Athanasius, Amphilo^^us, Epiphanius,
Eusebius, Gregory Nazianzen, G^^gory the Great, Basil, Chrysostom, testify that
(...) Books, and no others, of the Old Testam^^^ which we receive now, were the
Canonical Boo^^ of old, and received so by the first Christi^^* Those eminent
Lights of the Latin Church, R^t Ierom, Hilary, disown as Uncanonical (...)
Books of Apocrypha. The two latter especially (...) very positive: Prolog.
Galeat. Prolog. in lib. Salomonis ad paul. and Eustock
Ierom expressly tells us, that (...) Canonical Books of the Old Testament are
but (...) and twenty, just the number of the Hebrew Al^phabet, and no more; and
he enumerates the particular Books which constitute the whole. (...) says
indeed, that some make them four and tw^^ty, but it is the same Account, for
they reck^^ Ruth and Lamentations separately. But as for (...) others, he says
they are not part of Inspired Scripture, and the Church does not receive the^
among the Canonical Writings. So Prolog. in Psalm.
Hilary giv^ us the just Catalogue of the Books of the Old T^stament, and
peremptorily affirms that there (...) but two and twenty Canonical Books of it
in all* which are the same with the thirty nine according to the reckoning in
our Bibles. To Fathers w^ might add Synods and Councils, as that antie^^ one of
Laodicea, convened A. D. 364. which drew up a Catalogue of the Books of
Scripture, and makes mention only of these which we now r^ceive, but leaves out
the Apocryphal ones. This Canon was received afterward, and confirmed by the
Council of Chalcedon, one of the first four General Councils. And the sixth
General Council, held at Constantinople, A. D. 680. expressly ratified the
Decrees of that old Laodicean Council, and particularly this, that the
Canonical Books of the Old Testament were but two and twenty. There is another
Reason also, besides the Universal Suffrage of the Christian Church, why the
Apocryphal Books are ejected out of the Canon, viz. because some things in them
are false, and contrary to the Canonical Scriptures, as in Ecclesiasticus 46.
20. 2 Esdras 6. 40. and some things are vicious, as in 2 Maccab. 14. 42.

After all this it is easy to answer what the Romanists say on the other side.
They quote the third Council of Carthage, which they tell us received the
Apocryphal Books into the Canon. And among the Fathers, St. Augustine, they say,
owns them: besides that two Popes, viz. Innocent the First and Gelasius, took
those Books, which we style Apocryphal, into the Canon. As for the Council
which they alledg, it was but a Provincial one, and therefore is not to be set
against those more Authentic and General Councils which I produced. Nor must
that one single Father whom they name, stand out against that great number of
Greek and Latin Fathers whom I mentioned. The Popes bear a great Name among our
Adversaries, but they are but two, and must not be compared with those
Councils, and that multitude of Fathers who are on our side. Or, if they lay
such great stress on a Pope, I can name them one, and he one of the most
eminent they ever had, viz. Pope Gregory the Great, who Exposit. in Job. l. 19.
c. 17.
declares that the Book of Maccabees (a main Piece of the Apocryphal Wr^^tings)
is no part of the Canon of Scripture. W^ may set this One Pope (for he is Great
enough) against the other Two. Besides, their own (...) are against them: the
Apocryphal Books are (...) received as part of holy Inspired Scripture by
I^^dorus, Damascen, Nicephorus, Rabanus Maurus, H^go, Lyranus, Cajetan, and
others, who are of gre^^ Repute in the Church of Rome. We regard (...) what the
packed Council of Trent has decreed viz. Sess. 4.
That besides the two and twenty Books (...) the Hebrew Canon, those also of
Tobias, Iudit^ the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Maccabe^^^* Baruch, are
to be received as Canonical; and the they are of equal Authority with the Canon
o^ the Old and New Testament. What is this to the general Suffrage of the
Primitive Councils* Fathers and Writers, who have rejected the Apocryphal
Books, and received but twenty two into the Canon of Scripture belonging to the
Old Testament? You see what Ground we have, no other than the Universal Church.
We reject some Books as Apocryphal, because they were generally rejected by the
ancient Primitive Church: and we receive the rest as Canonical, because they
were believed and owned to be so by the universal Consent of the Church. See
this admirably made good in Bisho^ Cousins's History of the Canon of Scripture.
Yet after all that has been said, we count the Apocryph^ Writings worthy to be
read and perused. The there be some things amiss in them, yet we give great
Deference and Respect to them, as containing many Historical Truths, and
furnishing us wit^ Matter of Jewish Antiquity; as likewise because there are
many Doctrinal and Moral Truths in them, especially in the Books of Wisdom and
Ec^lesiasticus. For this Reason, I say, we bear great Respect to them, and rank
them next to the Holy Canon, and prefer them before all Profane Authors. This
was done by the ancient Fathers, who frequently alleged them in their Sermons
and Discourses: which is one Reason (I question not) why these Apocryphal Books
came to be made Canonical by some of the Church of Rome; namely, because they
were so often quoted by the Fathers, and in some Churches read publicly. But
this is no Proof of their being Canonical, but only lets us know that these
Books were in their Kind useful and profitable, as indeed they are. Therefore
St. Praefat. in libr. Proverb.
Ierom says, the Church receives not these Books into the Canon of Scripture,
though she allows them to be read. And concerning these Writings our Church
says well, (quoting St. Ierom for it) Artic. 6.
She does read them for Example of Life, and Instruction of Manners, but yet
does not apply them to establish any Doctrine. Which gives us an exact account
of the Nature of these Books; namely, that they contain excellent Rules of
Life, and are very serviceable to inform us of our Duty as to several weighty
things: but they being not dictated by the Holy Ghost, as the other Books of
Scripture are, they are not the infallible Standard of Divine Doctrine, and
therefore are not to be applied and made use of to that purpose. This and the
other Reasons before mentioned, may prevail with us to think that these
Writings ought not to be numbered among the Books of Canonical Scripture.

And thus we have argued from the Tradition, and the Testimony of the Church.
And if this be done as it ought to be done, it is valid: for the Truth of the
Copies, the Canonicalness of the Books, and the like, are not decidable by
Scripture it self, but in the Way that all other Controversies of that nature
are. As you would prove any other Book to be Authentic, so you must prove the
Bible to be, viz. by sufficient and able Testimony. There is the same reason to
believe the Sacred History, that there is to believe any other Historical
Writings that are extant. Nay, the Testimonies on behalf of the Holy
Scripture^, are more pregnant than any that are brought for other Writings.
Besides all that can be said for the Sacred Volume of the Bible, which is wont
to be said for other Writings, I have showed you that there are some things
peculiar to this above a^^ others. The main thing we have insisted upon is
this, that the Books of the Old and New Testament have been faithfully conveyed
to us; and that they are vouched by the constant and universal Tradition both
of the Jewish and Christian Church; and that these Books, and no others, are of
the Canon of Scripture: for to be of the Canon of Scripture, is no other than
to be owned by the Universal Church for Divinely Inspired Writings* The Church
witnesses and confirms the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures; for she
received them as Divine, and she delivers them to us as such Yet I do not say
that the Church's Testifying these Books to be the Holy Scriptures, gives an
Absolute and Entire Authority to them. A Clerk in the Parliament, or any other
Court, writes down and testi^ies that such an Act, or Decree, or Order, was
passed by the King, Magistrate or People; and he witnesses that he has
faithfully kept these by him, and that they are the very same that at such a
time were made by the foresaid Authority: but the Authority of this Act, Decree
or Order, rests not in the Clerk, but wholly in the King, Magistrate or People.
So the Church records and keeps the Sacred Writings of the Bible, and bears
witness that they have been faithfully preserved, and that they are the Genuine
Writings of those Persons whose Names are presixed to them: b^t the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures depends not on the Church, but on the Books and
Authors themselves, namely their being Inspired. And indeed this Authority of
the Scriptures cannot depend on the Church, because the Church itself depends
on the Scriptures. These must be proved before the Church can pretend to be any
such thing as a Church. We cannot know the Church but by the Scriptures;
therefore the Scriptures must be known before the Church. It follows then that
the Papists are very unreasonable and absurd in making the Ultimate Resolution
of Faith to be into the Testimony and Authority of the Church. This we disown
as a great Falsity; but yet it is rational to hold that the Church's Testimony
is one good Argument and Proof of the Truth of the Sacred Scripture: according
to that known Saying of St. Augustine, I should not believe the Gospel, if the
Authority of the Church did not move me. Not that he founds the Gospel, i. e.
the Doctrine of Christianity, and the Truth of it, on the Testimony of the
Church; as the Papists are wont to infer from these Words, and frequently quote
them to this purpose. No: the Father's meaning is this, that by the Testimony
and Consent of the Church he believed the Book of the Gospel to be verily that
Book which was written by the Evangelists. This is the Sense of the Place, as
is plain from the Scope of it; for he speaks there of the Copies or Writings,
not the Doctrine contained in them. The good Father relies on this, that so
great a number of knowing and honest Persons as the Church was made up of, did
assert the Evangelical Writings to be the Writings of such as were really
inspired by the Holy Ghost; and that they were true and genuine, and not
corrupted. And the whole Body of Sacred Scripture is attested by the same
universal Suffrage of the Church, i. e. the unanimous Consent of the Apostles,
and of the First Christians, and of those that immediately succeeded them;
several of which laid down their Lives to vindicate the Truth of these
Writings. This is the External Testimony given to the Holy Scriptures. It is
the general Persuasion and Attestation of the Ancient Church, that these are
the Scriptures of Truth; that they were penned by holy Prophets and Apostles,
immediately directed by the Spirit, who therefore could not err. It was usual
heretofore among the Pagan Lawgivers to attribute their Laws to some Deity, tho
they were of their own Invention; intending thereby to conciliate Reverence to
them, and to commend them to the People. But here is no such Cheat put upon us:
God himself is really the Author of the Holy Scriptures; these Sacred Laws come
immediately from Him, they are of Divine Inspiration. There is no doubt to be
made of the Divinity of the Scriptures, and consequently there is assurance of
the Infallibility of them.

CHAP. III.
The Authority of the Bible manifested from the Testimonies of Enemies and
Strangers, especially of Pagans. These confirm what the Old Testament says
concerning the Creation, the Production of Adam and Eve, their Fall, with the
several Circumstances of it; Enoch's Translation, the Longevity of the
Patriarchs, the Giants in those Times, the Universal Flood, the building of the
Tower of Babel.

I Have propounded some of the chief Arguments which may induce us to believe
the Truth and Certainty of the holy Writings of the Old and New Testament. I
will now choose out another, for the sake chiefly of the Learned and Curious,
which I purpose to enlarge upon; yea, to make the Subject of my whole ensuing
Discourse. I consider then that we have in this Matter not only the Testimony
of Friends, but of Enemies and Strangers: and it is a Maxim in the Civil Law,
and vouched by all Men of Reason, that the Testimony of an Enemy is most
considerable. The Jewish and Christian Church, as I have showed already, give
their Testimony to the Scriptures: but besides these Witnesses there are
Others, there is the Attestation of Foreigners and Adversaries. These fully
testify the Truth of what is delivered in the Holy Bible: we have the
Approbation of Heathen Writers to con^irm many of the things related in the Old
Testament; and both Professed Heathens and Jews (for we must now look upon
these latter as professed Enemies, when we are to speak of the Christian
Concern) attest sundry things of the New Testament, and vouch the Truth and
Authority of them. Here then I will distinctly proceed, and first begin with
the Old Testament, and let you see in several Particulars, that even the Pagan
World gives Testimony to this Sacred Volume; that the Gentiles relate the very
same things that this does; that the Great Truths, and Notable Histories,
Notions and Practices in the Books of the Old Testament, are to be met with in
Profane Writings, but taken from these Sacred ones. The Heathens borrowed many
of their Rites and Vsages from Traditions which were founded in the Holy
Scriptures. They derived many things in their Religion and Manners from these
Sacred Fountains, though it is as true that they have labored to pollute them.
But I will make it clear and manifest that they fetched them thence; and I will
abundantly prove that most of the chief things in the Old Testament have been
attested both by the Fables, and the Serious History of the Pagans. There have
been some High-fliers, I know, who have carried on this Notion to a ridiculous
Extravagancy. Thus (...), page 216.
Zimmeranus speaks of an odd Jacob. Boldu^ d^ Oggio Christiano.
Capuchin, who has vented very wild things in prosecuting this Argument, viz.
that the Gentile Mysteries were taken from the True God, and from the
Scriptures inspired by him. And one Iacob^ Hugo (in his Historia Romana) is
quoted by the same Person as very extravagant in this kind: for he holds that
the Roman Story was a Narrative of the History of the Gospel. Pious Aeneas was
St. Peter; and his sailing from Troy to Latium, was the Story of St. Peter's
leaving the Chair at Antioch, and going to Rome. Homer and Virgil's Heroic
Poems are an account of St. Peter and the Church, and of the Shipwreck and
Misfortunes which this latter meets with in the World. Ilium or Aelia is
Jerusalem; that was the Name which Aelius Adrianus gave it. The Acts of the
Apostles, the Jewish War, and the Destruction of Jerusalem, are contained in
Homer's Iliads; and so are the Life and Death of Christ, and the whole Gospel.
He tells us that Romulus and Remus signify the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul,
the Founders of the Roman Church. And more extravagantly yet he goes on,
telling us that Diana signi^ies the Holy Trinity; Curtius on Horseback
swallowed up in the Lake, is the Virgin Mary, whose Temple is seen there in the
Marketplace at Rome with this Inscription, D. Virginis Templum a poenis
inferni liberantis. And a great deal more of such Stuff this Hugo has, which
no Man of Consideration and Sense is able to bear. Indeed such wild and
far-fetched Conceits may be justly entertained with Laughter and Contempt. Nor
do I look upon some things which some others (of more composed Thoughts)
mention as any real Testimonies given to the Scriptures. They strangely fancy
an Affinity between Scripture and Paganism, between what they read in the one,
and what they meet with in the other, though there be no Cognation at all. Thus
the Greek Fable of Minerva's being the Offspring of Jove's Brain, took its Rise
from the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Eternal and Ineffable Generation of
the Son of God, says a Casp. Peucer. de Divinat. generib.
Learned Man: and Isis the Egyptian Goddess, is (says he) Ishah, Mulier, or
Virgo, i. e. the Virgin Mary, from a Tradition among them, that a Virgin should
bring forth a Son who was to be the Redeemer (...) the World. And I could
mention others who^^ Names are better known, who have been too e^travagant in
this kind, carrying the Notion on to^ far, and strongly fancying every thing
almo^^ which they meet with in Pagan Story, to have some reference to, and be
taken from the hol^ Scriptures. But I shall very industriously avo^^ this
Vanity and Folly, and only represent to the curious and critical Reader those
Passages in Pag^^ Writers, which with great Probability and Reason we may
conclude to have been taken from the Books of the Old Testament. I shall
endeavo^^ to let you see the Sacred History of the Bible, eve^ through the
Fables and feigned Stories of the Heathens, and thereby confirm you in the
belief of the Truth and Reality of that Sacred History whence they were taken.

1. To begin first where all things began, the Creation: this, as it is
particularly described i^ the first Chapter of Genesis, is plainly to be found
in Pagan Authors, who without doubt had it from this first Entrance of the
Scripture. For thoug^ a Man by the Light of Nature may know that the World had
a Beginning, yet this particular way of its beginning, as it is there set down,
could not be attained to but by Divine Revelation: wherefore it is rationally
to be asserted that the Paga^^ took this Notion from God's Revealed Will in
Scripture; and at the same time they do hereby attest the Truth of that holy
Book. The gen^r^^ Opinion of the ancient Gentiles was, that the World was made
out of a preceding Chaos, which they represent to be a rude, disordered, and
indigested Mass of Matter, reduced to no Shape and Form. Sanconiathon, the
Phoenician Historian, so much praised by Porphyrius, the Philosopher in
Praepar. Evang. l. 1. c. 5.
Eusebius, makes mention of this Chaos, as the Source of all things, in his
Fragments of Phoenician Theology. The ancient Poet Orpheus held that this Chaos
was the first Principle of all things. And Theogon.
Hesiod agrees with him, affirming that the Chaos was that out of which all
Bodies were made. (...), etc. It is described by Metamorph. lib. 1.
Ovid after this manner; Ante mare and terras, and quod tegit omnia Coelum,
Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb,
Quem dixere Chaos, etc.
Where in forty or ^ifty pair of good smooth Verses, he most excellently
describes the Origin of all things, and makes the very Chaos beautiful. This
is the same with Hyle, the first original Matter of all things, the Poets
Demogorgon, which was borrowed from the shapeless Lump of the Chaos. And in the
Phoenician Language we may find it in the very sound of the words Thoth and
Bau, which are but a small Variation from Tohu and Bohu in the Hebrew Text, the
same with Chaos among the Greeks and Latins. This is founded on those Words of
Moses, Genesis 1. 2. The Earth was without form, and void; and Darkness was on the
face of the Deep. This dark and formless Heap of Water and Earth mingled
together, contained in it the fi^ Elements of all things that were made
afterward^ hence sprang the World as it is now shaped (...) modelled. From this
Account which Moses giv^ here of the Creation, the old Pagan Theologer i. e.
the Pocts, made the Ocean to be the Origi^ of all Generation; which is no other
than the (if you give the plain meaning of it) that the moist and fluid Matter
gave beginning to all Bod^ that are. Orpheus owned this Hypothesis, calli^^ the
Ocean the Parent of all things, in one of (...) Hymns: and out of some other
Pieces of (...) Works, the same might be proved. Homer (...) the like,
asserting the Ocean to be the Antiente of the Gods: (...). And again, -- (...).
Iliad. On which Words the Scholiast gives this Reason (...), etc. i. e. Water
was held to (...) the first Element, and from that the other three sprang.
Which Opinion is taken from the Scripture account of the first Principles of
the World, viz. from Moses's making the dark Deep or Water to be the Production
of the first Day, and consequently to be the Source of all things that were
framed afterward. Hence it was that some of the Stoics held the Chaos to be
no other than Water, as Philo informs us. (...). De mundi Incorruptib.
They think (says he) that Water and the Chaos being the same, this latter
has its Denomination from (...), which signisres flowing ^ pouring out. Hence
Not. Quaest. l. 3. c. 13.
Sene^a declares it to be (...) Opinion of this Sect of Philosophers, that
(...) is the first Principle of all things. The choliast upon Pindar, thinks
that his (...) alludes to this ancient Opinion; but I cannot ^y any thing in
defense of that. In Thalete.
We are certain ^at the former Quotations are very plain and to ^he purpose:
and now I will bring another as conderable as any, viz. of Thales, the Founder
of ^he Ionick Philosophy, and one of the first that ^ade Disquisitions on
Nature: he expressly main^ain'd that all things were produced of Water, as
Diogenes Laertius, Tully, and others relate of ^im. Especially the Words of
this latter conerning him are remarkable, Aqua dixit esse initium rerum, Deum
autent ^am Mentem quae ex aqua ^ncta fingeret. De Not. Deorum, l. 1. c. 25.
Thales assirm'd says he) that Water was the beginning of Things, and that God
was that Mind which made all things of Water. Which seems more particularly and
sig^ally to refer to what Moses says, speaking of the ^rst Original of the
Universe, that the Spirit of God ^oved on the Face of the Waters, Genesis 1. 2.
giving ^s to understand that Water and Slime were the Material Cause and First
Principle of all things, and that God was that Spirit or Mind who made ^he
World out of those first Waters. And the Barbarick as well as Greek
Philosophers held this, ^itness the Brachmans among the Indians; as Stra^ ^
quoted by Philo says. And the (...). De vita Mosis.
Egyptians ^hought so too, and therefore worshipped this E^ment, as that
Learned Jew observes. Helmont (as well as Thales and other Philosophets of ^
patronizes this Opinion, maintaining that all ^ dies are from one Element; they
are materi^ simple Water disguised into various Forms by (...) Plastic Virtue
of their Seeds. And an Robert Boil Esquire.
Ho^ rabble Person of late has amas'd several things ^ gether for the
maintaining this Hypothesis, and let the World see what may be said for it,
tho^ he is not peremptory himself. This without do^ the Ancients borrowed from
the Mosaical His^ of the World, which acquaints us that at the (...) Creation
Genesis 1. 2, 6, 9.
all things were contained in Water and lay brooding there two days together; ^
accordingly it makes Water to be the primiti^ Matter or Vehicle of the Universe.

To the Chaos and Water the Ancients added an^ there concurrent Principle,
namely Night. The the World had its Beginning from Night and ^ os, was an
universal Tradition of the Pagans, no only Poets, as (...). In Hymn,
Orpheus, Linus, Hesiod, Homer (...) others, who frequently talk of Chaos and
Nig^ or Erebus, and tell us that all things were begott^ by them; but
Philosophers also, (if we must disti^ guish between these and the Poets, who
were Philosophers too) as Epicharmus, Thales, Plato, and ^ the Greek
Theologizers, who speak of those T^ as the Original of all things in the World.
Metaphys. l. 14. c. 6.
A^ stotle relates, that the Persons skilled in antie^ Theology, believed all
things were made of Nig^ Which questionless is of Mosaic Extraction, and
sprang first from those words in Genesis 1. 2. Darkness was on the Face of the
Deep. The Deep is their Chaos, and the Darkness is their Night or Erebus; for
the ^nown and usual Signification of (...) is Caligo, Darkness. Or perhaps this
may be borrowed from [Ereb] Vespera, the Evening, mentioned in Genesis 1. ^. as
the first Beginning of Time from the Creation: whence the old Notion of (...).
He siod. Theogon.
Ether and Day being begot by the Night. And hence the Pagans, who had seen
something of these Writings, came to have this Sentiment, that Night and
Darkness were the first Principles of the World. This is the same with what
Moses here delivers, only it is expressed in different Terms.

And so as to what is said in the Mosaic History concerning Genesis 1. 4, 6, 7.
God's orderly dividing, separating, and digesting of this confused Chaos and
dark Mass, the Old Philosophers have agreed to this likewise. Anaxagoras is
reckoned commonly in the number of the ancient Atheists, but he little deserved
that Name; for (as Plutarch says of him) (...)* etc.
he was the first that denied Fortune or Fate to be the Cause or Principle of
the fair Order and Harmony of the Universe, and first set up a Pure and Immixt
Spirit or Mind, who separated the homogeneous Parts from the whole Mass and
confused Mixture of things. And Diogenes Laertius gives these as his very
Words, (...). In A^axag.
All things were in a heap and jumble at first: afterward came the Eternal
Mind, and disposed and ordered them in an excellent Manner. This Aristotle
meant, when he said, that Lib. 8. (...).
in infinite Matter a Mind or Intelligence produced Motion, and separated the
Parts: which Mind is called by Simplicius on the Place, (...), that (...) Mind
which made the World. So Materiae infinitae particulas simile, inter se, and
minutas, primum (...), postea in ordinem adductas ^ Mente Divi^^ Tusc. Quaest.
l. 4.
Tully (...) that those Particles of infinite Matter (...) were alike in
themselves, and were very small ^ subtle, and at first very confused, were a
(...) wards brought into Order by the Divine (...) This was the Work of God in
the Creation. (...) I ask, whence had they this Notion concer^^^^ the Origin
of the World? It is not a Princip^^ in Philosophy; therefore they had it
somewh^^ else, which is the thing I am proving. (...) Speculations and Theories
concerning the Rise (...) the World, were not their own, but were Tra^^^tional
Principles, i. e. they received them (...) the Ancients, and these had them
conveyed (...) them from the Bible. Their Philosophizing (...) this Matter was
from that Divine Penman Mos^^ the Sum of which was this, that God first of
(...) produced a Chaos, i. e. the rude Beginnings (...) Earth, swallowed up and
even overwhelmed wi^^ the Watery Abyss; out of which dark, confused an^
indigested Materials he made all things both (...) Heaven and Earth as out of
the first Matter, which by a Divine Skill and Power he separated and divided,
till it arose to this excellent and comple^^ Frame wherein it appears at this
day. Thus the ancient Philosophy of the Gentiles was borrowed from Moses's
Description of the Creation; thus the Writings of the first Heathen
Philosophers bear witness to the first and antientest Penmen of the Old
Testament. And if you ask, how the Pagans came by this Information from the
Holy Writings? be pleased to stay but till we come toward the Close of this
Discourse, and then I hope (...) shall give you a good and satisfactory Account
of this Question, and let you see by what means the Pagan Writers arrived to a
Knowledge (though ^ndeed dark and obscure) not only of these Particulars already
named, but of a great number more which I shall now proceed to add.

II. The Production of Adam and Eve is attested by the same Persons. That the
First Man was made of the Earth, or the Clay of the Ground, is delivered by the
most Authentic Authors among them. I will not insist upon the constant Opinion
and Persuasion of the Athenians, who held they were sprung from the Ground they
lived on, and were not descended from other Nations: Which perhaps arose,
first, from the Tradition concerning the making the first Man out of the Earth.
Plato, and several good ancient Demost^enes in Epitaph. Isocrates in Panegyr. ^
C^e. Ora^. pro Flacco.
Authors, testify that this People of Greece held themselves to be (...), i. e.
born of the Earth: and in memory of this they wore Golden Grasshoppers, and were
called from those Animals Tettigophori, because this sort of Creatures is
thought and believed to have its Rise from the Earth. And there were said to be
not only in Attica, but in Thessaly and Arcadia, some of these Autochthones,
People that were begot out of the Soil. Yea, the old Britains, our Ancestors,
were said to be such, as Diodorus the Sicilian and Caesar tell us, nay seem to
believe. They were Aborigines, i. e. they had their Original from the very
Ground they lived on. Which Notion, as I conceive, was either from the Gia^^
called Sons of the Earth, or from Adam and (...) who we are certain were formed
out of the Ear^^ These were the true (...), the ancient A^^rigines, born from
their own Soil; the Earth w^ their Parent. This Terrestrial Extraction of t^
First Man is mentioned in In his Protagoras, Critias, Menexenus, Politics.
several Places by Pl^ And Empedocles (as Censorinus tell us) and (...) Eleates
(as (...). In Zen.
Laertius relates) held the sam^ There is a Passage in Cornelius Tacitus, which
I (...) persuaded refers to this; for speaking of the Original of the Germans,
he says it is recorded ^ their ancient Annals and Monuments, which a^ in Verse,
that Celebrant carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos memoriae and annalium
genus est) Tuitonem deum, terra editum and filium Mannum originem ge^ it is
conditoresque. De morib. Germ.
the God Tuit, and his Son Mannus born of the Earth, were the Founders of that
Nation, Tuit, or Thuet, is the same with (...): Mannus, or Man, is Adam the
first Man, (for Man in the German Language is Vir) who was the Son of God; and
the reason is here given, because he was made by him out of the Earth; (for I
conceive there is a Transposition in the Words, i. e. et should be placed
before terra editum; which Words belong to the next, viz. filium Mannum.) Hence
it appears that this Notion of Man's Original from the Earth was among the old
Germans. who derived it first from the Mosaic Records. I will at present omit
several Quotations out of the Greek Poets* who were the first Divines and
Philosophers among the Pagans, (as Orpheus, Hesiod, Homer) who testify this
very thing. From these the Latins borrowed it, as Iuvenal, who speaking of the
first and antientest People of the World, describes their Original thus;
Compositique luto, nullos habuere Parents. Which Words are a plain Reference
to Adam's (...) made of Clay, or Earth. But Ovid, who was ^ell acquainted with
all the ancient Notions of the Gentiles, is more clear and open, and Metamorph.
lib. 1.
relates the (...) Passages in the Mosaic Story concerning the Original of the
World, and that in Words coming ^s near to Moses as may be. In the close he
tells how Man was made after the Creation of all other things: Sanctius his
animal, mentisque capacius altae,
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset;
Natus homo est.
This is Moses exactly. Deerat adhue answers to Genesis 2. 5. [there was not a
Man.] Quod dominari in caetera posset, is the same with what we read in Genesis 1.
26, 28. that Man was made to have Domi^on over the Fish of the Sea, and over
the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves on the Earth. Here
are two of the chief things which ^re delivered in the beginning of that Sacred
History in Genesis, viz. that Man was made last of all, and to have Rule and
Dominion over all the Creatures. Sanctius animal excellently expresses that Man
was made for Religion; (...), as In Timaeo.
Plato calls him: or, he is styled Holy, because made after God's Likeness;
which follows presently after, Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum. The
word finxit here is the proper Version of the Hebrew [Iitzer] which is used in
Genesis 2. 7. T^ Lord God formed Man. Deorum answers to Elob^ in the plural
Number; and so Moses introduce^ God speaking, Let Us make Man, Us in the pl^
ral. In effigiem Deorum, is the true Translation of (...) in the Image of God,
in which Man is said to be created, Genesis 1. 27. So that there is another grand
Truth which the Pag^ took from the Holy Writings, viz. that God created Man
after his Likeness, or in his own Image Genesis 1. 26, 27.

Thus you see this Interpreter of the antie^ Theology agrees with Moses: yea,
it is evident without any fanciful straining, that he not only took the Things
themselves, but the very Word and Expressions from the Divine Writings. O^
applies and attributes this Formation of Man ^ Prometheus, the Name certainly
of the Wise God: for (...) with the Greeks (from whom ^ borrowed this) is
Sapiens, Providens, Sagax. A^ this Prometheus formed Men of Clay, which agree
with the Formation of Adam recorded by the I^ spired Writer. Wherefore both I
psum corpus nostrum quod de limo figulatum, etiam (...) fabulas nationum
Veritas transmisit; utrumque originis ^le^tum consite^^^^. De came Christ.
Tertullian an^ De hominis fictione (...) quoque, quamvis corrupt, tamen non
aliter (...) nempe hominem de luto a Prometheo sactum esse dixerunt: ^ cos non
sesellit, s^d nomen artifieis. (...). l. 2.
Lactantius think it reasonable to believe that the first Formation and Origin
of Man's Body, which the fabulous Poets speak of, was transmitted from the
sacred and inspired Verity; and that the thing is the same in both, though
disguised by the Poets in other Words and Names. And when Ovid adds, that he
took Fire from Heaven to animate his lumpish Clay, you must pardon this
innocent Addition; for, as you shall observe all along, it is the way of these
Men to put in something of their own, to disguise the Sacred Stories with their
own Inventions and Fables: though truly here we are no^ able to interpret this
very appositely, and to applaud the Poet, who knew that dull and inert Matter
could not actuate and enliven it self, but that there was need of some Heavenly
and Divine Principle to set it on work, some active Ray of Life from above to
inspire it: And what is this but the Breath of Life mentioned in Genesis 2. 7. by
which Man's Body was enlivened and envigorated? for when it is said there, that
God formed Man out of the Earth, it is immediately added, He breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul. From which manner of
Expression, Nismath hajim, and that other in Genesis 7. 22. Nismath tuach hajim,
the Breath of the Spirit of Life, the ancient Sages among the Gentiles (who
were no strangers to this and other Texts, as I shall show afterward) derived
two Notions: the first whereof was this, that the Soul is Breath, and
accordingly in Greek and Latin it has its (...): spiritus, a spirando: animus
and anima, (...), ventus.
Names from breathing. This (...), this Spiratulum vitae, (as the Vulgar Latin
renders it) by which Man's Body was inspired, was the occasion, I guess, of
these Denominations of the Soul from Breath, Wind or Air: and that of the Poet,
Divina^ particula aurae, (which is spoken of the Soul) seems to refer to this.
Another Notion which they derived from this metaphorical Expression of
Breathing or Asslation, was, that the Soul, the Rational Soul of Man, is a part
of God: for as Breath is something that comes from within a Man, so Souls (that
are set forth by Breath) are the Emanations of God; they come from him, and are
Parts of him. The Soul, say the Platonists, (...) Plutarch. Platon. Quaest.
^ not only the Work of God, but a Portion of him. Which it is likely was
Plato's meaning, when he said the (...). In the done.
Soul is a sharer of the Nature of God. But this was more especially the
Stoics apprehension of Humane Souls; they are (says the Royal Philosopher)
(...). Antonin. (...)
a Part, a Piece, an Effluvium of the Godhead. With whom Arianus agrees,
telling, that (...). Lib. 1. cap. 14.
our Souls are so linked to God, that they are Particles of him, and as 'twere
plucked from him. But he is very extravagant when he adds, in pursuance of
this, that as to our Souls, we are not inferior to, or less than God himself.
(...).
Epictetus himself, and Dei pars. Epist. 92.
Seneca, prononnce the Soul to be a Piece, a Part of the Divine Essence. Cicery
speaks like one of this Sect, (as he frequently does) when he says, A nature
divina (...) animos and delibatos habemus. -- Humanus animus (...) ptus est ex
mente divina. Tusc. lib^ ^
our Souls are taken out and plucked off from the Nature of God, and are
certain Segments of the Divine Mind. And because it was hold by some
Philosophers, that some of the Inferior Animals, as Bees, had Souls resembling
those of Men, therefore they asserted that they likewise Esse apibus partem
divinae mentis. -- Virg. Georg.
were parts of the Divinity. All this comes (if I mistake not) from that
forenamed Passage in Moses's History concerning the Production of Man, God
breathed into him the Breath ^f Life: which was interpreted as if humane Souls
were partial Effluxes or Aporrhae's of the Divine Essence it self.

The making of Eve out of Adam, was also obscurely intimated in what Plato
says in his Symposium, namely, that the first Man was (...), a Mixture of both
Sexes. Which Fable of his was from the Jewish Tradition, that the first Man was
made an Hermaphrodite; that he had two Bodies joined together, one of a Male,
another of a Female; and that God afterward split him into two distinct
Bodies, whence arose Man and Woman. If the Jewish Rabbis (who were better
acquainted with Scripture) talked after this doting rate, Plato may well be
excused, who perhaps had it only on Tradition, and had not the Means to correct
his Mistakes which they had. But this is plain, that this Fable is a Corruption
of the Sacred Story, which speaking of our First Parents, says, Genesis 5. 2.
God called their Name Adam; as if their having but One Name, signified they
were but One Person: and again in the same Verse, Male and Female created he
them; as if the first Man, who is spoken of in the Verse immediately foregoing,
consisted of a double Sex. But it is evident that the Words relate to both; and
the reason why the Name Adam is given to both, is because they were both of
them from the Earth, one immediately, the other remotely: but afterward we
read that they had distinct Names, Adam being appropriated to the Man, and Eve
to the Woman. And this ridiculous Fable which Plato had picked up, might be
occasioned likewise from a misunderstanding of that Text, Genesis 2. 21, 22.
God took one of the Man's Ribs, and out of it made he a Woman. Because the
Woman was formed out of the Man's Side, they inferred that Adam was at first
both Man and Woman, and that the Woman at her first Make stuck to his Side.
Which is a gross mistaking of the Text, but confirms the Truth and Antiquity of
that Book of Moses, which assures us of Eve's Formation out of Adam, which was
the thing that gave rise to this erroneous Tradition.

May we not think that Adam's Dominion over the Beasts, which was accompanied
with his Calling them, and giving them Names, was the Foundation of what the
Poets talk of Orpheus's drawing the Beasts after him, and making them Tame, and
causing them to stand still, and as it were answer to their Names? Or else it
was a Representation of the Beasts and all sorts of Animals coming into the Ark
at Noah's Call, which is a Confirmation of another known Passage in the Mosaic
Writings. But I am not positive here, and in some suchlike Passages which
occur in the Poets: tho in others I shall heap up several plain and evident
Circumstances, sufficient to convince the Reader that they have reference to
something spoken of in Scripture. As to Adam's giving of Names to all things,
mentioned Genesis 2. 19. it appears that Plato was not a stranger to it; for in
his Or, (...).
Cratylus, where it is disputed whether Words signify by Institution or from
Nature, he first denies the Language of his Grecians to have been the Original
one, (as in In Timaeo.
another place he calls his Countrymen the Greeks, Youths and Striplings of
yesterday, and consequently their Language was not the antientest) and then he
hints that Hebrew was the Original Tongue; which is meant by what is said, Genesis
11. 1. that the whole Earth was of one Language, and of one Speech. And though
he conceals the Name of the Jews or Hebrews, yet when he expressly affirms in
this Dialogue, that the right Doctrine of Names, and their Interpretation, are
to be fetched from the (...).
Barbarians, as the more ancient, we are not to doubt that he means the Jews or
Hebrews: for all agree that they were called Barba^^^^ by the Greeks (as these
were so by them.) And hence I gather that Plato and other Heathens knew, and
perhaps had read, that Adam gave Names, proper and significant Names, to all
Creatures; which Moses particularly makes mention of, and must be the very
thing that is here meant by Plato, when he acknowledges that the true
Etymologies of Things, and the Interpretation of Names, are to be derived from
the Barbarians.

The First and Innocent State of Man (and that with some of the Circumstances
of it which could be known only from the Book of Moses) is spoken of by the
ancient Writers among the Heathens. Thus you will ^ind that (...). v. 108, etc.
Hesiod gives us an admirable Description of it. In Plato's Atlanticus, or
Critias, are plainly to be seen the Footsteps of the Old and Primeve State of
Man, when the (...) (...) (as he says) prevailed, when the Diving (...)
Heavenly Nature was not corrupted by the (...) And in his Politics (where he
likewise speaks ^ the Primitive and Pure State of Man) he tells ^ that in those
first Times Man got his Living with ^ out Trouble and Labor, that he fed only
on ^ Fruits of the Earth, and that Nakedness was ^ Attendant of that first and
Golden Age of ^ World, alluding to Genesis 2. 25. They were both ^ ked, the Man
and his Wife. So an Diodor. Sic. l. 1.
Ancient W^ ter acquaints us, that the Egyptians find in t^ old Writings, that
the first Men and Women ^ naked, which is according to what is read in t^ place.
In the Sibylline Verses, which are borrow from the Scripture, tho same
Allegories and D^ scriptions are used in setting forth the happy A^ of Man,
that you find used in that holy Book. ^ the Happiness of Paradise is obliquely
described b^ Odyss. 10.
Homer, and the Felicity of the First Age by Georg. lib. 1. ^ neid. 8.
Vagil. And without question the Blessed State ^ Paradise is referred to by
Metamorph. lib. 1.
Ovid in his descript^ on of the Golden Age, or Saturn's Reign. The^ we may see
represented the Simplicity and Innocence of our First Parents, the Peace and
Tras quillity, the Contentment and Satisfaction which were peculiar to the
State of Integrity. (...) it self, the Seat of this Happiness, seems to have
been known by the ancient Pagans: for it is probable their Writers understand
this, when they te^ us of the Elysian Fields; for Gardens (such as w^ Paradise)
and pleasant Fields are the same with them. These you may see described by
Plato ^ his Phaedo, where he tells us that they are blessed with a mild and
gentle Air, pleasant Streams, a constant Spring, fragrant Flowers and Fruits
ever growing. Of these Virgil speaks in his sixth Aenead. And they are the same
with the Fortunate Islands which the Greeks write of, a Place of extraordinary
Delight, and where none but Good and Virtuous Men inhabit. Or, if we must
parallel it with a Garden so expressly called, we have Alciuous his Garden, or
Orchard, in Odyss. n.
Homer; which was taken from the description of Paradise, says Justin Martyr
in his Oration against the Gentiles. Or, the Garden of Adonis, which is so
celebrated, may refer to that of Eden, and is easily derived from it. Or, (...).
the Garden of Jupiter, in Plato's Symposiacks, may aenigmatically refer (as
tha^ Learned Father Origin deemeth) to that of Paradise. So likewise may the
pleasant Orchards of the Hesperides, in which were Trees that bore Golden
Apples: and it may be some confirmation of this Notion, that near the Fountain
of the River Ti^gris (on which Paradise was seated) we read of a Place that
bears the Name of Hispercitis and Hisperatis. It is not unlikely that these
diverse Gardins were transplanted from that in Eden. It is not unlikely that
some or all of these Greek Fables were founded in Truth, and arose from what
the Inspired Book tells us, that God placed Man in a Garden, the Garden of
Eden, which signifies Pleasure or Delight: for it is added, that here grew
every Tree that is pleasant to the Sight, and good for Food, Genesis 2. 9. And as
this Garden was the Platform of those before mentioned, so the Tree of Life in
this Garden gave rise to the Poets Nectar and Ambrosia, brosia, which are no
other than the Food and Repast of these Earthly Gods, these Divine Creatures
that inhabit here. The former of these (according to (...), qu. (...). Suidas.
one Derivation of it) made the Drinkers of it ever youthful: and (...)
another Etymology speaks this Drink to be such as suffers the^ not to Die.
These were the very Blessings of the Tree of Life; it had a property to keep
off Old Age, and to preserve Man's Life a long time, The latter, namely Qu.
(...)
Ambrosia, had the same Virtue; it was said to keep those that ate it, free
from Mortality. This therefore, no less than the other, seems to refer to, and
be borrowed from the Tree of Life, which should have made the Eaters of it
Immortal, and secured them in a State of Blessedness for ever. Thus the
Production of Man, and sundry things referring to his Blessed State in
Innocence, which are found in the Writings of the Heathens, were taken from the
Sacred Fountains: and consequently the Writings of these Heathens do in some
measure attest and confirm to us the Truth and Certainty of the Holy Scriptures.

III. The Fall of Adam, and the several particular things relating to it, are
to be found in these Pagan Records. First, the Forerunner of it, viz. the
Degeneracy of the Angels, is plainly spoken of by that Ancient Philosopher
Empedocles, as Devitand. are alien.
Plutarch relates; for whom else could he mean by his Demons, to whom he gives
the Name of (...) ( Heaven-fallen Creatures) than these Apostate Spirits, who
were thrust down from the Regions of Happiness above, and became Devils by
their own voluntary opposing of God, and declining his Government? Next, we
have good Records among the Pagans of the Fall it self of Adam and Eve,
especially of the latter, because she was first and most eminent in the
Transgression, (as the Apostle speaks) and was the cause of the Man's defection
from his Duty. She is represented by Iliad. 1.
Homer's Ate, whom incensed Jupiter thrust down from Heaven, threatening that
she should never be restored to that Place again. Though some have thought that
this might refer to the Apostate Angels (of whom before), because it is common
with the Poets to imply Many when they mention but One Person; and so here,
though One be said to be cast down from Heaven, yet it may intimate to us the
Fall of all the cursed Crew of Wicked Angels. But it is more natural, I think,
to apply this Story (it being of the Female Sex) to our Grandmother Eve: for
what the Poets tell us of Ate, viz. that she was the firstborn Daughter of
Jupiter, and that she was that pernicious Woman that brought Mischief on the
whole Race of Man, exactly agrees to her, so that there is no need of
explaining it. It is not to be doubted that our first Parent Eve was also meant
by Pandora, whom Hesiod and others of the Ancients mention, acquainting us,
that out of her deadly Box which she gave to Epimetheus, flew all Evil into the
World, and thereby she became the Original of all the miserable Occurrences
that happen to Humane Kind. Eve was this Pandora who gave that fatal Gift of
the Fruit of the Tree unto her Husband, as it is expressed in Genesis 3. 6. and he
himself afterward with unspeakable Regret, and too late an Insi^^^ into his
Condition, (whence he justly merits (...) Title of Epimetheus) repeats the
same, She (...) me of it, ver. 13. and with it imparted all Evil (...) Mankind.
Wherefore from that Unhappy (...) and from her General Bestowing of all Evils
on (...) World, she had the Name of Pandora among (...) first Greek Poets, who
had arrived to some not(...) of this Unfortunate Woman's Miscarriage, (...) had
from the Inspired Writings learned, that f^^^ her sprang all the Miseries and
Calamities of t^^^ Life, and even Death it self.

As for Original Sin, the early Corruption (...) Depravation of Man's Nature,
which was t^^ Fruit of our first Parents Transgression, we c^^ not but observe
that it is taken notice of by t^^ Gentiles of old; who call it the. (...)
Sopater.
Congenite S(...) the (...). Hierocl.
Domestic Evil of Mankind, the (...) Arist^
Not(...) Repugnancy of Man's Temper to Reason: and for Pythagoreans, quoted by
Iamblicus, style it a (...)
(...) a Mortal kind of Life, a many-headed Be^^^ etc. The Moralists are full
of such Notions, (...) complain of the Infirmity of Nature, that it is very
much vitiated and hurt; that the Fountains a^^ polluted, the Springs defiled;
and that Man is propense to all Evil, and averse to what is good and virtuous.
The Greek and Roman Philosophers do all complain of the low and degenerate
Condition of Man: but this is chiefly done by the best of them, as the Stoics
and Platonists. sen^^^ (to mention no other of the first of these) f^^^ quently
in his Epistles and other Discourses, ^nowledges, and sadly reflects upon the
Lapse of Man's Nature. And as for the other Sect of Phi^o^ophers, they
abundantly lament this degenerate ^tate of Man. Porphyrius de Abstin.
Simplicius in Epicter. Hierocles in Pythag. Garm.
Three of them especially talk most passionately and feelingly of the Defect of
a former Innocence, of the Departure of Souls from God, of the strong
Propensities of Humane Nature to Evil, by a detrusion into terrestrial Bodies.
I speak not this, as if I did not think they might partly have these Notions
from the inward Sense they had of this Innate Evil; but from what I have
suggested, (and shall afterward) it seems probable to me that there was a
Tradition among them concerning the First Cause and Author of this Evil. In
Politic.
Plato himself speaks very sensibly of this Loss of the first State of Purity
and Happiness, and relates the Defection of Man from his Primitive Condition,
from whence In Atlantic.
he says flowed all Mischiefs into the World. And I propound it to be thought
of, whether his Doctrine of Pre^xistence was not a way used by him to disguise
the Fall of Man. This Philosopher held that Men's Souls were created Happy, and
that afterward they Apostatized; for which they were ever after imprisoned in
Bodies. Now this I say, that from Moses's Writings (with which he was
acquainted) he might learn the Story of Man's Fall, and then wrapped it up in
this obscure manner, which was a ^sual way with him, as his Writings show. It
was (as I conceive) his knowledge of the Apostasy of our first Parents, that
gave rise to his Doctrine of the Preexistence of Souls: That is the thing which
is couched in this Ingenious Hypothesis of his, which afterward so prevailed
among those of (...) Sect. The meaning of his Opinion is, that M^^ kind was
fallen, and their Souls were become d^^generate, and that they were punished
for wh^^ Adam their Representative did long ago.

If we enquire further, we shall find that (...) Gentile World was not ignorant
of the seve^ (...) Circumstances of Man's Fall; as first, that it was by the
Devil's means. It was an ancient Tradition among the Pagans, that a sort of
Malignant Spirits, Malicious Demons, envied Men's Happines^ and did what they
could to molest them, and (...) hinder them of Felicity. The Pythagorean a^^
Platonic Philosophers speak often of these Envio (...) and Mischievous
Spirits; the Original of which we can conceive to be no other than what Moses's
History says of the Devil's tempting our first Parents, Genesis 3. 1, etc. This
is couched in another Opinion which prevailed among some of the Pagans, viz.
the Notion of Two Principles, the one the Cause of all Good, the other of all
Evil (...), and (...) they were styled by the Mani ^hees, who had it from Manes
their Founder, a Persian; and he received this Opinion from his Countrymen the
Persians, who were Gentiles. These two Opposite Principles, the one for
conferring of Good, the other for procuring (as also the averting) of Evil,
were called by that People Oromasdes and Arimanius, and were both worshipped by
them, as Proem. ad vir. Philo^.
Diogenes Laertius and others assure us But this was not only the Persuasion
and Practice of the Magi, who were the Philosophers of Persia, but Plutarch
shows the Antiquity, and almost Universality of this Opinion of Two Different
Principles, among the rest of the Philosophic Tribe. It prevailed among the
ancient Grecians, whose two distinct Principles were Jupiter Olympius and
Hades. The Egyptians too had their Typho, the Evil Principle, and Isis, or
Osir^^, the Good one. The Chaldeans had the same Notion of a Contrary Cause of
Good and Evil, holding some Planets (which were their Gods) to be productive of
all the Good, others of all the Evil among them. This ancient Tradition of the
Pagans so generally received, was, I suppose, derived from what is recorded in
the first Entrance of the Bible, viz. that God was the bountiful Author of all
Good to Man, not only creating him of nothing, and giving him his Being, but
placing him in a State of Happiness, and conferring all Felicity upon him: but
on the contrary, the Devil was the first Author of Evil, tempting our first
Parents to Sin, whereby they lost all their Happiness, and fell under a Curse,
and were expelled out of Paradise; and afterward all Evils and Mischiefs came
upon the World for their sake. Hence arose among the deluded Heathens that
Twofold Principle God and Demon, or rather Two Opposite Gods; for the true
Tradition was corrupted into an absurd and irrational Opinion among the
Gentiles of two Anti-Gods.

There was also this Circumstance of the History of Man's Fall among the
Heathens, that the Devil appeared in the likeness of a Serpent. Preparatory to
which is that which Plato says, (as he is quoted by Praepar. Evang. lib. 12,
14.
Euscbius) that in Saturn's days the Folks could talk and hold discourse with
Beasts as well as Men; which is an Allusion to the noted Colloquy between Eve
and the Serpent, and her Seduction by en^^^^taining Discourse with him. I
should guess th^^ Eve is disguised under the Fable of Pro^erpina, (...)
Daughter of Jupiter, whom Plato stole away ^^^ravished, or as others tell us,
whom Jupiter (...) in the form of a Serpent. The plain meaning (...) which is,
that Satan in the likeness of a Serpe^^ deceived Eve. The Devil's taking the
Shape (...) this Animal, and his circumve^ting thereby (...) first Parents, is
intimated by the Heathens in the obscure Writer Pherecydes, where (...) is the
Title of that Great one who opposed Saturn. The Truth which lies at the bottom
of that fabulo^ Story, is, that the Apostate Angels or Devils o^^posed God at
the beginning of the World: t^^ Ringleader of which Cursed Spirits was he th^^
in the shape of a Serpent assaulted our first Parents; this was that (...),
that Demoniacal Serpen^ * You will find Cont. Celf. lib. 6.
Origin asserting that this was taken from Moses's relation concerning the
Serpent i^ Paradise; and not this from that, as Celsus, mo^^ egregiously
failing in Antiquity and Chronology, maintained. De Prap, Evang. lib. ^. cap.
10.
Eusebius also is of the same Opinion, affirming that this Ophioneus refers to
the Devil in the form of a Serpent; and adds (to make it probable) that
Pherecydes was conversant with the Phoenicians, who worshipped their God under
the form of a Serpent, the Devil affecting to be adored in that Shape which he
first assumed. And not only in Phoenioia, but in other Countries, Dragons, or
Serpents, or Snakes, (for these are promiscuou^ly used for one another) were
reckoned among the Secret Mysteries of the Gentiles. These had so great a
Veneration for Serpents or Dragons, that some of their Temples had their
Denomination thence, and were styled Draconian, says Lib. 14.
Strabo. The Babylonians worshipped a Dragon, as the Apo^ryphal Writings
relate. The Egyptians worshipped Opbioneus, as Praep. Evang. lib. 1. cap. u^^.
Eusebius testifies: and in their Hieroglyphics they ^hewed that they were
wonderful Admirers of Serpents: for the Heads of their Gods were incircled with
Serpents and Basilisks, says Horus; the Crowns and Dia(...) of their Kings
were set with Asps and Suakes; Serpents being the Emblems of Dominion and
Principality, yea of Immortality and Divinity, faith the same Author. And,
which is yet more to our purpose, Eusebius observes that the Egyptians, as well
as the Phoenicians, used to call Serpents (...). Ibid. cap. 7.
Good Demons: which is a plain Relick of the Devil's assuming the Form of some
goodly Serpent, and appearing like a good Demon or Angel of Light, when he
accosted our Mother Eve, and laid siege to her Integrity. And to pass from
Egypt to Greece, there were here also some Remembrances of this notable thing:
for the Images of Serpents were set over the Gates of Temples and Conse^rated
Places; and generally they -- Pinge duos angues: sacer est locus; extra Meite.
Painted ^erpents or Dragons in all Holy Places, as the Ge^^^^ of those Places:
for they persuaded themselves that the Genius of the Place appeared in the
shape of a Serpent. Among these Grecians the Devil was commonly worshipped in
this Primitive Figure, ^ore especially at Delphos, whence (as a Learned ^ritick
has remarked) Apollo is called Pythius, and Pytho, from (...) a Serpent. I
might add wh^^ Pro^rept. seu Exhortat. ad Gent.
Clement of Alexandria reports, that the Heathen at their Feasts of Bacchus
were crowned with Se^^pents, and used to carry a Serpent in Processio^ and cry
with a loud Voice, Eva, Eva; for Hev^^ or Hivia (says he) in the Hebrew
signifies a S^^^pent. This latter was partly a Mistake of his, (...) it is in
the Chaldee that it signifies so, and is (...) Word used by the Chaldee
Translators in Genesis (...) and other places, for a Serpent; and so we are then^
informed what a Reverence was paid to Serpe^^ by the Ancients. Or, what if I
should offer t^^^ Conjecture, that Eva, or Evia, or Hevia, are plain
Remembrance of our Mother Eve, or H^^^^ or, according to the Hebrew
Termination, He^^^ or Havah? Which is the more probable, bec^^^^ the
proclaiming of this Name is joined with t^^ carrying of a Serpent, which we
know that unh^^^py Woman was too well acquainted with. A^^ perhaps the word
Evantes, which is used by Aeneid. 6.
V^^gil to signify those madding Frolicks, had its Or^^ginal hence. Thus there
is a double Memorial i^ that Pagan Festival Solemnity, to wit, of a R^^markable
Person, and as Remarkable a Thing r^^corded in Sacred Story. Now I ask, whence
ca^ this Memorial of Serpents to be observed so ge^^^rally among the Pagans?
Whence was it that t^^ Old Heathens were such Adorers of these Cr^^^tures? How
came it to pass that the Devil (...) worshipped by them under this Form? Whe^^
did this Custom prevail among the Phoenicians, ^^^bylonians, Egyptians and
Grecians? Nay, De Haeres. cap. 17.
S. ^^^gustin acquaints us, that some Heretic Christi^^ made it a great part
of their Religion to worship a Serpent. And if we should leave the Ancients,
and come down to latter Ages, I might here alledg what Colloqu. Mensa^*
Luther ^aith he heard a Merchant affirm, namely, that in the Indies he had
^een People worship a Great Snake with the highest Reverence and Honor
imaginable. Of all this there cannot be a better Account given than that which
I have already offered. It is questionless a remembrance of what happened in
the beginning of the World, and is recorded in the Book of Genesis, that Satan,
who had been a kind of God, a Glorious Angel, (and therefore passed for such a
one still among the Ignorant Heathens) appeared in a Serpentine Figure to Adam
and Eve in Paradise.

And this reminds me of another Circumstance of Man's Fall, viz. the Place,
which was Paradise, or the Garden of Eden; which (as I said before) seems to be
represented by the famous Gardon of the Hesperides. This I know has been a
commonly received Notion; this Poetical Passage has been usually applied to
this purpose: but ^et us not think it the less true, because of the Commonness
of it^ If any Man seriously weigh what is reported of this Garden, he will
think it not improbable that the Fall of Man is couched in this Poetic Fable*
For this Garden yielded Golden Fruit, i. e. very choice and excellent Fruit,
and such as was as ^empting as Gold was afterward; which plainly points to the
Forbidden Fruit in Paradise, which was so desirable and delightful, so tempting
and charming. And this Fruit, these Golden Apples, were kept and watched by a
Dragon or Serpent; which plainly refers to the Devil in the form of a Serpent,
who was always watching about the Tre^ not to keep the Man and Woman from
eating ^ it, but to solicit and tempt them by all means (...) do it. What they
add of Hercules's staying (...) Dragon, is an addition of their own Fancies,
(...) must always be expected in their representing (...) these Stories, (as I
have intimated before:) (...) the Issue was, that the Golden Fruit was stolen
a^^^ that is, in plain Terms, our Parents did eat of (...) Forbidden Fruit.
This was a downright Stea^^ or Robbery; for it was taking away that whi^^ was
not their own, and which they were strict^^ commanded not to take away. Thus
Paradise (...) removed by the Poets out of Asia into Africa, (...) whatever
Place it was where the He^perides (...) their Garden. This Fiction of theirs
was ma^^ out of Genesis, which speaks of the Garden (...) Eden, of the Serpent,
and of the Forbidden Fr^^^ which were the occasions of Man's being tempt^^ and
deceived. Whence it is clear that the (...) Poets, Philosophers and Sages among
the Heath^^^ were not ignorant of the very things which Mo^^^ the In^pired
Writer gives us an account of. (...) the first Transgression of Man, and the
Orig^^ of it; the Depravation of Mankind, and the ^^^serable Consequences and
Effects of it, as the C^^sing of the Earth, and the Barrenness which e^s^^^
upon it, with the Infirmities and Diseases that M^^ Bodies were thereupon
incident to, are to be (...) described in the Writings of those Pagans,
esp^^^^ally of that Ovid Metamorph. lib. 1.
Renowned Poet before mention^^ who was so thoroughly skilled in all the Pagan
T^^^ology. And this proves what I designed, that (...) most considerable
Passages of the Sacred Hist^^ of the Bible are asserted by the Writers among
the Gentiles.

IV. From the Fall of Man till after the Confusion and Dispersion at Babel,
there are many considerable things spoken of by Pagans, which they could not
have any notice of but from the Old Testament. Enoch's being taken up by God
(together with the Translation of Elias afterward) gave occasion to the
Stories of their H^roes being Translated; of Astrea and others leaving the
World, and ascending to Heaven alive, and being turned into Stars and Celestial
Signs: as also the Apotheosis among the Gentiles might be founded on this.
Again, the Testimony of the Pagans concerning the Long Lives of the People of
the first Age of the World, was plainly, without any Disguise, taken from the
Sacred History. All that have committed unto writing the Antiquities either of
the Greeks or Barbarians, attest this Longevity of the Men before the Flood,
says Antiqu. I. 1. c. 4.
Josephus. And immediately he subjoins: Manetho the Egyptian Writer, Berosus
the Chaldean, Mochus, Hestiaeus, Ierom the Egyptian, who have treated of the
Egyptian Affairs, agree with us in this. Also Hesiod, with Hecat^us, Hellanicus
and Acusilaus, Ephorus and Nicolas, tell us that those People of old lived a
thousand Years. Which is a Confirmation of the Truth of what we read so often
in Moses's Account of the first People of the World, viz. that they commonly
lived seven, eight, or nine hundred Years. The Greek and Latin Poets relate
likewise that there were Giants in the first times of the World: which most
probably was borrowed from Genesis 6. 4. where Moses* speaking of the Times before
the Flood, tells us that there were Nephilim, Giants in the Earth in th^^^
Days. And from what is said in the same Vers^* The Sons of God came in unto the
Daughters of Me^ and they bare Children to them, arose the Fiction (...)
Orpheus, Hesiod, and other Greek Poets, that the^^ Heroes were partly the Race
of Gods; that t^^ Giants were the Sons of Heaven and Earth; that is, according
to the plain and intelligible Language of Scripture, they sprang from the Sons
of God an^ the Daughters of Men. This I verily think is the Foundation of what
Poetic Writers tell us concerning the old Heroes especially, viz. that they
were the By-blows of the Gods; that they were begot by some Deity upon a Woman,
or were the Product of some Goddess and a Man.

To proceed. Berosus the Chaldean Priest and Historian, relates how wicked and
debauched the Old World was, how Noah told them of it, and of their approaching
Ruin by the Universal Flood, which is the next thing to be spoken of. The Fame
and Memory of this Deluge, and of Noah's Ar^, were among the Pagans
everywhere. Not only the fore^aid Berosus (quoted by Cont. Appion, I. 1.
Josephus), but Nicolaus Damascenus (quoted by the same Antiqu. Jud. I. 1. c. 4.
A^^hor), Abydenus the Assyrian (cited by Praepar. Evang. l. 9.
Eusebius), Alexander Polyhistor, Melo, Hieronymus Egypti^^, Apollodorus, and
all the Barbarian Historians, as Josephus says, i. e. according to his way of
speaking, all the Pagan Historians have made mention of Noah's Flood. If the
Credit of these Writers now named be called in question, (as I confess they are
by some) there is abundant mention of that Flood, and of several Circumstances
belonging to it, in others, whose Writings are not suspected. In Lucian's Dea
Syria are most of the Particulars which are recorded in the sixth and seventh
Chapters of Genesis concerning that Deluge: as first, the Natural Cause of it,
the excessive Rain or Fall of Waters from Heaven, and the opening of the
Fountains below: then the Moral Cause of it, the Corruption and Wickedness of
the World. The People at that time kept not their Oaths, entertained not
Strangers, were hard-hearted to those who were in Distress; they were every
ways vicious and profligate, and thereby merited this great Judgment. Next,
there is mentioned the Preservation of Noah and his Family, with the Manner of
their being preserved, namely by sheltering themselves in a Great Ark; and thus
he and his Wife and Children were reserved for a Second Generation. This befell
Noah because of his great Prudence and singular Piety, as this Author adds.
With him entered into the Ark two of every sort of Animals; and being shut up in
that safe Custody, they all sailed together without any Harm, nay with a great
Friendship and Concord. Lastly, Noah's erecting an Altar after he came out of
the Ark, is expressly taken notice of. These are the things, says he, which the
Greeks relate out of their Archives of the Flood. All which you will find to be
like the Narrative of Moses, only Deucalion is put instead of Noah. De solert.
animal.
Plutarch (another credible Writer) speaks of the sending of the Dove out of
the Ark, as a sign of the abating of the Flood, or rather to discover whether
the Waters were decreased: and he adds, that it returned (...) to the Ark
again. But this Author, as well as t^^ former, disguiseth Noah under the Name
of ^^^calion, it being the usual way of the Grec^ans (...) affix new Names to
Persons. From the Do^^ bringing an Olive Branch, we find in all Ages (...) this
has been ever the Symbol of Peace and (...) cord, of Agreement and Friendship.
Lib. 30. cap. 36. and lib. 29. c. 16.
Livy (...) us it was so among the Carthaginians, and am^^ the Greeks. Hist.
lib. 3.
Polybius says it was the same am^^ the most Barbarous Nations: for when (...)
was passing the Alps, those People came and (...) him with Olive-branches in
their Hands; (...)
T^ (as he subjoins) being a Badg and Sign of Frie^^^ship among all those
Barbarous People. When more probably was this derived than from the ^^story of
the Flood, written by Moses? From the same Authentic Narrative we learn that
^^^sent forth a Raven (and that first of all indeed) out of the Ark; but it
seems to be said that he returned not again, Genesis 8. 7. to which the following
Fable of the ^aven or Crow seems to relat^^ Aelian. Hist. ^. 1. c. 47.
Apollo was pleased once upon a time to emplo^ this Bird on an Errand, and send
him out to fi^^ fresh Water, and fetch it to him; but he retu^^^ed not till
after the time that Figs were ripe: an^ he staid, and sat on a certain Tree
which he sp^^^ till they ripened. Immemor imperii sedisse sub arbore ^ertar,
Dum fierent tarda dulcia poma mora.
Fast. l. 2.
Ovid tells us it was an A^ple-Tree: and others (as Aelian reports) say (...)
Messenger of Apollo made no ^aste, because he (...) the Corn very fair, though
not yet fit for Harve^^ and this tempted him to neglect his Master's Com^^nds,
and not mind what he sent him about: for which Apollo turned him into such a
Black Bird as (...) is. The Main of this Fable is the thing we are to look
after, and that is, that the Crow was sent abroad to find and discover Water,
and that he returned not again. This seems to be taken from the Sacred Story,
even that of Noah's sending forth the Raven, or Crow, to discover the Fall or
Increase of the Waters of the Deluge. To this purpose perhaps is that which
Servius.
one says is observed of the Crows by the Ancients, that they are Forgetful
Creatures, and oftentimes return not to their Nests. See this more fully
illustrated and proved by a Learned Critic of this last Age, De Corvo q^em ex
arc^ e^^i^t Noe.
Monsieur Rochart. Thus there are both plain and obscure Passages in Heathen
Writers, which keep up the Memory of the Flood, and of several remarkable
things which attend it. Only they have corrupted the True History, and the
Chronology of it, by confounding the Names of Noah and Deucalion. Yea, they
tell us of Ogyges's Flood (as well as that of Deucalion) which was in the time
of Ogyges King of At^ica, when Inachus reigned among the Argives, which was
about the time of Abraham; and so they place it about five hundred Years after
Noah's Flood, A. M. 2140. but others ^ay it was six hundred Years after it.
This Ogygian Flood drowned the Country about Athens and Achaia in Peloponnesus:
whereas the latter, viz. Deucalion's Flood, (which was in Greece likewise)
happened in Thessaly where Deucalion reigned; and it drowned that Country, and
some part of Italy; Deucation and his Wife Pyrrha securing themselves at the
same time in a Vessel, and at (...) landed safely on Parnassus. This some tell
us (...) about three hundred, others say four hundre^ Years after the Flood in
Ogyges's time. But th^^ some have placed these Two Floods at such a di^stance
from one another, and consequently have made them two distinct ones, yet others
confoun^ them together, and make them one and the same And it is most probable
that they were so, an that both have reference to Noah's Flood: for nothing is
more usual with the Fabulous Poets, tha^ to split one Story into two or more,
and to confound the Truth with different and disguised Names. There is reason
to believe that Ogyge^ and Deucalion were but feigned Names of Noah* and that
the Flood which is said to have happened in their days, was but a
Representation of the Universal Deluge in Noah's time; and that Ararat, or
Caucasus, is to be understood by Parnassus. They that know how common it is
with the Greek Poets to alter the Names of Persons and Places, and to
substitute others in their room, will not be backward to credit this. But it is
easy to see through their Poetical Fictions and Disguises, and particularly here,
that they had a notice of the History of the Flood, which the Holy Scripture
has given us a plain and true Account of. I might here observe what Metamorph.
lib. 1.
Ovid says concerning Deucalion and his Wife, viz. that as soon as the Deluge
ceased, they betook themselves to their Devotions, and solemnly worshipped the
Gods: which questionless refers to what the Sacred Story relates, that Genesis 8.
20. 21.
Noah erected an Altar (the first that we read of) to sacrifice to God, and to
praise him for his Deliverance out of the raging Deluge. And I might observe
here (in order to what I shall prove afterward) that Parnassus, the place on
which Deuca^^^^ Ark rested, was a Mountain Macrob. Saturn. l. l. c. 18.
dedicated to Bacchus, where he had his Rites performed to him: whence by the
by it may be gathered, that Noah (who is the same with Deucalion) and Bacchus
were the same Persons, which I shall make good in another place.

It might be made appear from other Particulars, that the Tradition concerning
Noah, the Flood, and the Ark, which was derived from the Holy Scriptures, has
been spread abroad among the Pagans. Oedyp. Egypt.
Kircher thinks that Nisroch, 2 Kings 19. 37. Isa. 37. 38. is as much as Numen
Arcae, the Ark-Deity or Idol, and was the Image of No^^'s Ark, worshipped among
the Assyrians. It may be it was an Idol in the shape of a Boat or Ship, and
made perhaps of the Relics of the Ark. I could mention that Ianus, said to be
the most ancient King of Italy, coined Money which had on it the Figure of a
Ship: which it is very likely refers to the Matter in hand. The Impress of the
Ship is a Memorial of the Ark, which was so noted among the Ancients: and Ianus
is Noah, as you shall hear afterward. We may plainly discern likewise, in
another Name given to Noah by the Poetic Writers, how there is preserved the
remembrance of the chief and most notable things which are recorded of him. He
was called Prometheus, (not but that this same Name may be applied to some
others; for this too must be observed, that the Greek Poets set forth different
Persons by the same Name, as sometimes one Person by different Names, as you
shall see in the quel of this Discourse;) he was, I say, called (...) metheus
by the Greek Poets: for according to the description of this Person you cannot
but ackno^^ledg, that Noah was covertly meant by him. F^^ (1.) It is said the
Flood was in Prometheus's ti^^ which none will deny agrees to Noah. (2.) P^^^
metheus is said to have repaired and restored M^^^kind: which is another plain
Parallel, and nee^ not to be insisted upon. (3.) Prometheus is said (...) be
the Son of Iapetus, i. e. of Iapheth: and it i(...) no wonder that the Names of
Father and Son an^ confounded by the Poets. That they have hit s^ near the
Historical Truth, is a thing that is worthy of our Consideration. (4.) Even
where the Fiction runs higher, we still see some Footsteps (...) Truth. They
feign that Prometheus was by Iu^^ter's Order chained to Caucasus, where an
Eagle, some say a Vulture, feeds upon his Entrails. Here is, according to the
usual Mistake of the rambling Poets, one thing put for another: Mount Caucas^^
is put for Mount Ararat, or the Gordiaean Hills, (...) which Noah's Ark rested.
And one Fowl is p^^ for another: they change the Raven and Dove into an Eagle
or Vulture. And as to the being chained and fed upon, that is purely Poetic
Invention, and is not to be regarded. (5.) Prometheus had his Name from his
excellent Wisdom and Foresight. This exactly agrees with Noah, he was (...), i.
e. one that is wise before the Evil comes. Being warned of God, he foresaw the
General Destruction which was approaching; and by preparing an Ark, he
preserved himself and his Family from it. Judge now whether Noah was not the
Heathen Prometheus, and whether this and other such Fables among the Gentiles
had not their first rise from the History of the Bible. Berosus in his Chaldean
Antiquities, speaks of Noah's three Sons; though it is true he adds others, as
Tethys, Typhaeus, etc. Iapheth, one of his undoubted Sons, (whom only I shall
mention at present) he is often mentioned among the Old Grecians; who refer
their Original to Iapetus, or Iaphetus, making him the antientest Man: thence
(...) is (...) in Suidas and Hesychius. Thus among the Pagans we find
unquestionable Monuments of the Truth of the Bible.

The next remarkable thing after the Flood, was the Attempting to build the
Tower of Babel: and this is not omitted in Pagan Records. Berosus's Chaldee
History mentions it, but with such Additions as these, (if I may call them
Additions, seeing they have some kind of ground in the Sacred Story) That it
was built by Giants, and those Giants were Perhaps (...) Gigas, is a Corruption
of (...) terrigena; so Giants are expressed, Prove. 9. 18. where Rephaim is
translated (...)
Terrae filii, out of the Earth; and that they waged War against the Gods, and
were at last dispersed, and that the Building was quite beaten down by a great
Wind. The Erecting of this Tower of Babel is mentioned by Hestiaeus, and by one
of the Sibyls, says Josephus in his Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Antiquities; and by Abydenus and Eupolemus, as Eusebius testi^ieth in his
Evangelical Preparation. It is likely that Belus's Tower, mentioned by
Herodotus, is the Tower of Babel. That it was made of Brick and Slime, as you
read in Genesis 11. 3. is attested by Justin, Q. Curtius, Vitruvius, and others;
for what these Writers say of the Walls of Babylon, is applicable to that. And
as for the Poets, the History of the Babel-Builders is turned by them into t^^
Fable of the Titans, whom they feign to ha^^ heaped Mountain upon Mountain, to
scale H^^^ven, and fight the Gods; and by name they m^^^tion -- Tum partu terra
ne^ando
Eoumque Japetumque creat, saevumque Typhoen,
Et conjuratos coelum rescindere ^ratres.
Ovid.
Iapheth, one of Noah's Sons, as a dough^ Giant among them, (for they picked up
any Na^^ that they had by Tradition, and clapped it in Homer tells us they cast
up three Hills on one ^^nother, (...). Odyss.^
Ossa on Olympus, and shady Pelion (...) Ossa, hoping thereby to make their way
to t^^ Heavens: but this proved succesless, and the bo^^ Invaders were
scattered and broken by Thunder from Jupiter. All this Grecian Fable of the
Th^omachy of the Giants, was derived from what the History of Moses relates in
Genesis 11. 3, etc. that Nimrod, a great Hunter, a Giant-like Man, with his sturdy
Fellows, attempted to build a City and Tower, whose Top should reach up to
Heaven; which the Pagans interpreted to be Defying of the Gods, and making War
with them. And truly they did not come short of the true Meaning of their grand
Design; which was to defy Heaven, and to exalt and magnify themselves: Though I
grant it was Hyperbolically spoken when they said, Let (...) build us a City
and Tower to reach up to Heaven; for they could not dream of performing this in
reality, because they knew the Height of the late Flood (which lifted up the
Ark fifteen Cubits above the highest Mountains) was short of Heaven: besides,
they would not have built on the Plain, (as they did) but on the highest Hills,
if they had had any such Project in their Heads. Nor was it to be a Refuge from
the Waters of another Flood; for they had God's Word for it that no such (...)
should ever be again, Genesis 9. 15. But their Design is plainly set down, chap.
11. ver. 4. Let us make us a Name, lest we be scattered abroad on the face of
the whole Earth; i. e. Let us go about this Work, that we may have here a Place
to six in; that by erecting this vast City and Tower, we may have room enough,
and live together in one Body; and make our Lusts our only Law, and act as we
please, without the Control of others: and that afterward, when by reason of
our great Numbers, and Increase, we must be forced to remove, we may by this
famous Monument be known; and when we leave this World, we may hereby purchase
a Name in future Ages, and even survive after Death. Thus their Intentions and
Enterprises were profane and impious, and no less than an arrogant Contempt of
God. But some of the Poets interpreting the foresaid Words in a gross Manner,
as if those daring Sinners did actually scale the Heavens, have presented us
with their Conceits upon this remarkable Occurrence; but as to the main, it
must be acknowledged that they confirm the Truth of the Sacred History. And
even this last Particular, the making them a Name, seems to be transcribed into
the Fable, when they tell us, that after the Giants, who were begot of the
Earth, had fought the Gods, their Mother Earth (being incensed at the Defeat of
her Sons) brought forth Fame: This was the Giants last Sister, according to
that of the Poet; Illam terra parens ira irritata Deorum,
Extremam (ut perhibent) Caeo Encelad^que sororem
Progenuit.
We read that when these Builders were hot (...) their Work, God on a sudden
defeated their Projects by confounding their Language, v. 7. and thereby
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face (...) all the Earth, v. 8. Of
which Confusion or (...) of Languages, there is this Remembrance (...) the
Greek Tongue, That in it Men are call^^ -- (...). Hom. Iliad. (...)
(...): which Epithet was given them, (...) (...), i. e. (...). Eustath. in loc.
Eustathius, on the account of the Division (...) Tongues which the World
suffered at Babel; (...) this (says he) was the common Opinion of t^^ ancient
Christians. Then, as to the Division of (...) Earth among the Sons of Noah, set
down in the (...) Chapter of Genesis, it is not to be doubted (...) the Fiction
of dividing the World among (...) Brethren, the Sons of Saturn, was taken from
(...) So that there are some Remainders and Foot(...) of the Sacred Truth to be
observed, which way (...) ever you look. This I might further show in t^^
Account which Moses's History gives of the (...) Plantations, upon the Division
of the Earth among Noah's Sons, as in the Posterity of Iavan, whe^^^ were the
Iavans, or Greeks, called (...) But because I shall afterward have an occasion
(...) speak of this, namely, when I treat of the P^^fection of Scripture,
showing it to be the most A^tient and Complete History in the World, I wi^^
defer it till then, and at the same time let you (...) that the Mosaic History
gives us the best Account of those First Planters; and also that in several
(...) those Names, are to be read the Names of Co^^^tries and Nations, which we
meet with in Pag^^ Authors.

CHAP. IV.
Several things relating to the Patriarch Abraham, the Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the Oppression of the Israelites in Egypt, the History of Joseph, the
Passover, the Conducting the Israelites through the Red Sea, their Travels in
the Wilderness, the Brazen Serpent, attested by Heathens. An Enquiry into the
rise of the Report concerning the Jews worshipping an Ass's Head, and also
their worshipping of Clouds.

BEtween the Confusion of Tongues, and the Giving of the Law by Moses, there
are many observable Passages in the Old Testament, which are also taken notice
of, and attested (tho in an obscure and oblique Manner) by Pagan Wri^ers. The
great Patriarch Abraham, is mentioned by Berosus, Heeataeus, Nicolas
Damascenus, Eupolemus, Alex. Polyhistor, as Josephus and Eusebius acquaint us
in their Writings before named. The wise Men of Gr^^^^ asking their Gods whence
the Knowledge of Arts came, received this Answer, (...); where by the Chaldean
it is not unlikely was meant Abraham, who was the great Father of Knowledge and
Wisdom, and of whose Race were so many Wise and Learned Persons. In the name of
this great Man, the Heathens used to perform their Conjurations and Magical
Exploits: The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, were
words usually pronounced in their Charms and Spells, says Origin. Nay, Contra
Cells. lib. 4.
he tells us, that (...) being so frequently repeated in the Old Testament,
gave occasion to the Pagans to think Abraham was some God. I find also that the
Pagan Writings make mention of the same, or the like Custom that this Patriarch
used ^ making of Covenants, viz. the cutting or dividing of one or more Animals
into two parts, and passing between them. Thus in Genesis 15. 9. when God made a
Covenant with him, he commanded him to divide a Heifer, a Goat, and a Ram into
pieces, and to pass between them. Whence afterward this Ceremony was made use
of when a League or Covenant was entered into between Man and Man: and the
Parties did as it were declare by that Action, that they wished to be cut
asunder in that manner as the Beasts were, if they brake the Covenant which
they made. Of this Custo^ you likewise read in 1 Samuel 11. 7. Ier. 34. 18, 19.
And to this perhaps belongs what is recorded in Genesis 21. 28. Abraham took Sheep
and Ox^^, and gave them unto Abimelech, ( viz. to be dissected and divided,
according to the foresaid Usage, and that in order to Sacrifice) and both of
them made ^ Covenant. Which gave rise to the like Practice among the Pagans
when they were to make solemn Agreements and Covenants. Lib. 2, and 5.
Dictys Cretensis relates this Custom used by the Grecian^ and Trojans in the
time of the War between them. From L. 40. c. 6.
Livy and L. 10. c. 6.
Curtius we learn tha^ the People of Macedon and Baeotia did the like, cutting
a Dog in pieces. In Tox^^i.
Lucian has something concerning the Scythians to this purpose: and Suidas
tells us this was the Federal Usage of the Molo^si. Thus these Gentiles
borrowed their Way of Covenanting from the old Patriarchs. It is not improbable
that Abraham's Feasting the Angels, yea, the Son of God himself, (Genesis 18. 8.)
gave occasion to the Poets to speak of the Gods being feasted by Mortals, as
they tell us of Philemon and Baucis, their entertaining of Jupiter and Mercury;
which is but a corrupt Representation of Abraham and Sarah's Treating their
Heavenly Guests. And here I might add, that from this and other Instances in
the Old Testament, of the frequent and visible Appearing of God and Angels unto
Men, as to Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Gideon, Manoah, and several others; and from
their assuming of Bodies of Humane Shape in order to that, there arose a Notion
among the Pagans, that their Gods forsooth vouchsafed sometimes to come down
and visit them in the likeness of Mortals. Thence Homer and other Poets so
commonly talk of the Apparition of the Gods in sensible Shapes, and bring them
in after that manner. Thence it was that the People of Lystra, in the lesser
Asia, cried out that the Gods were come down to them in the likeness of Men,
(Acts 14. 12.) and upon this Apprehension, they were preparing to offer
Sacrifice to them, and had got the Priests ready with their Oxen and Garlands
for that end. Nay, thence it was that some of the Poets made those mad Fables
of the strange Metamorphosis of their Gods: as how Apollo took on him the Shape
of a Hawk, of a Lion, and of a Shepherd; how Bacchus appeared like a Grape for
Erigone's sake; how Neptune changed himself into a Flying Horse for Medusa's
Love, and into a Steer, a Ram, a Dolphin for others: How Jupiter turned himself
into a Shower of Gold (the most powerful Courtship) for Danae, into a Bull for
Europa, into a Swan for Leda, into an Eagle for Ganymede, into a Saty^ for
Antiope, into a Flame for Aegina; besides other scandalous Transformations:
yea, even (...) len Saturn became a prancing Steed for (...) the Daughter of
Oceanus. All which wild and frolic Conceits of the Poetic Tribe concerning
their Gods transfiguring themselves, and maki^^ themselves visible in several
Shapes and Fashion had their first foundation in those forementio^^ Instances
recorded in the Old Testament; wh^^^ without doubt were known to the
Neighbour^^^ Nations, and were transmitted as wonder^^^ things to others that
were next to them. We are not to attend to the extravagant Addition which the
hot-head Poets made to the True Relations: But we are to observe the main thing
o^ which these fanciful Superstructures are built. They seem to me to be
founded on the Holy Scripture; they seem to be borrowed from what we r^^^
there, viz. that Angels, those God-like Spirits, transformed themselves into
Humane Likeness, and frequently visited and conversed with M^^ here on Earth.
This Sacred Truth lies veiled (...) those Fabulous Histories; and though they
(...) added many things to it, viz. new and incredible Circumstances, yet we
have no reason to di^^^^lieve the Substance of the History because of t^^^^
Additions.

Again, Sacrificing of Men, especially of (...) Sons, which some Pagan Stories
relate, might h^^^ its original from Abraham. It is recorded by (...) phyrius,
says Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. c. 9.
Eusebius, that Saturnus an anti^^^ King of Phoenicia, that he might appease
the G^^^ and save his Kingdom from imminent Danger, (...) divert Evil and Ruin
from his Country, offered his (...).
Only Son on an Altar. This Saturn is the Ancient Patriarch Abraham, and his
only Son is Isa^^; and Phoenicia was mistaken for Palestine. (...) (says
Plutarch in his Life) was bid in a Vision to sacrifice a Virgin; but it so
happened that a Mare-Colt came running through the Camp, whilst they were
disputing whether the Vision should be obeyed, and by the advice of the Augur
was taken and sacrificed instead of a Virgin. I only propound this; May we not
conceive that this was done in imitation of what they had heard by Tradition,
that when Isaac was to be offered, a Ram came in the way, and was sacrificed
instead of the pious Youth destined to that Slaughter? And several other
considerable Passages relating to the Patriarchs, might be collected out of the
Writings and Practices of the Heathens of old: but I proceed to other Matter.

The History of the Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, is expressly attested by
Abydenus and Nic. Damascenus, (as you will find in De Verit. Christ. Relig.
Grotius, for that Learned Man disdains not their Testimony) and by more
Authentic Authors, as Diodo^us Siculus, Strabo, Solinus, Tacitus, Pliny, who
have preserved the Memory of this terrible Judgment of God on those Cities. All
these Profane Writers testify that those Places were destroyed by Fire. But
Solinus and Tacitus say it was particularly by Thunder and Lightning. And
Strabo insinuates they were swallowed up by Subterraneous Fires breaking forth,
and causing an Earthquake at the same time. They might be destroyed by ^oth
these: for the latter is probable from this, that Eruptions, both of Fire and
of Water, generally attend great Earthquakes: and we know that the Lake
Asphalties was produced at th^^ time; which shows that the Earth opened her
self whence gushed out an Inundation of Water, th^^ is here stagnated, and
become a ^ilthy Lake. And we are sure they were destroyed by the former,
because the Sacred Writ, whence those Autho^ took their Story, testifies as
much: for I conce^^ that is denoted by the raining of Fire and Brimst^^ from
the Lord out of Heaven, Genesis 19. 24. Sho^ers of Liquid Sulphur, (which by the
by I guess came to have its Name at first among the Greeks from this so noted
Accident; Sulphur was called (...), q^^od a Deo sit, because it was from the
Lord out of Heaven) continued Showers, I say, of this sulphurous Matter,
accompanied the terrible Lightnings and Thunderclaps: and by this means Lot's
Wise beoame a Pillar of Salt, ver. 26. i. e. being thus struck with Thunder and
Lightning, her Body presently became Hard as a Statue. This sometimes is the
Product of those dreadful Meteors: Thunder (say both Seneca and Cardan) makes
the Bodies of those who are struck with it, Stiff and Immovable. This was the
surprising Effect upon this poor Woman: She turned her Head toward the smoking
City, to see that strange Spectacle; and behold! she became a more wonderful
Sight her self. -- Stetit ipsa Sepulchrum,
Ips^que Imago sibi. --
She became her own Monum^nt and Statue; she stands a Pillar of Salt, of
lasting and durable Remembrance, not only in the Sense that we read of a
Covenant of Salt; Numb. 18. 9. i. e. firm and perpetual, but in the most
literal Sense, a Pillar of Real Salt, (into which her Body was turned by virtue
of the Sulphurous Vapors and Steams) which dissolves not, but is so hard that
it may serve even for Building; of which Not. Hist. l. 31. c. 7.
Pliny speaks. Therefore Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian, and the two
ancient Christian Poets Prudentius and Sedulius, deliver it as their Opinion,
that this Unhappy Woman was converted into a Mass or Solid Body of Hardened
Salt, such as the Mineral one is. This being so remarkable a thing, it could
not but be snatched up by the Inquisitive Poets among the Greeks; and
accordingly they tell us of Niobe's being turned into a Stone for her
refractory Contempt of some Goddess's Commands. This Fable, as may be
conjectured, was taken from Lot's Wife turned into a hard, and as 'twere stony
Pillar, for her disbelieving the Threatenings of God to the Sodomites, and for
despising the express Command of Angels, who bid her not look hehind her, ver.
17. And (now we are upon conjecturing) what think you of the Fable of Orpheus's
Wife, his dear Euridice? To fetch her back again to Life, he went to Hell; here
he persuaded Pluto to give him her again, but upon this condition, that he
should not look back to her all the while she was coming. But it seems the kind
Man turned to look on his Wife as she was following him: whereupon she was
remanded back to Hell. Here seems to be an Allusion to Lot's Wife, and to her
looking back, and to the sad Effect of it. Orpheus is Lot, Euridice is his
Wife, Sodom is Hell, and the Fire and Brimstone there are a sufficient reason
of that Appellation. But there is a changing of the (...) in the Man's looking
back instead of the Wo^^^^ and in adding a great deal of other Poetic S^^^
besides; which is either to fill up the Fable, or ^ disguise the True Story,
which is common am^^ the Pagans, as has been observed before. (...) Wife
turned into a Saline Pillar, was remaining ^ Antiqu. l. 15. c. 19.
Iosephus's time, if he may be credited: and ^ do not know any reason to the
contrary. T^^ we are certain of, upon the Faith even of Prof^ History, that the
Sulphurous Lake of Asp^altites ^^^mained in Strabo's, and afterward in Pliny
and (...) citus's time, a Monument of the Divine Vengea^^^ upon the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah; God tur^^ing those fruitful and pleasant Places into a
sti^^^ing and almost poisonous Lake: which is parti^^^larly taken notice of by
those and other Historians, who mention how bad the Fruits are the grow about
that Lake, and therein verify what ^ referred to in Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Their Vine is
of the V^ of Sodom, and of the Field of Gomorrah. Whi^^ is a further Proof to
us of the Truth of the Holy Scripture, concerning the burning of Sodom and the
neighboring Cities.

I proceed. It is not unlikely that the Vailing of the Bride in use among the
Pagans, was tak^^ from the ancient Usage of the Patriarchs; for we read in Genesis
24. 65. that Rebekah was brought to Isaac covered with a Vail. Whence among the
^ews Marriage had the Name of Chupphah, from Chi^phah to cover. And hence this
modest Practice passed into other Countries; and we are told by credible
Authors, that among the Greeks and Romans the Wife was brought to the Husband
Veiled. Some think that the Custom mentioned among ^ Heathens, of erecting
Stones and Pillars, came ^ from Jacob's taking a Stone, and setting it up ^
Pillar, Genesis 28. 18. and 35. 14. Yea, the (...) and (...), Lapides Boetulici,
in use a^^^g them, had their Name from Bethel, the place where Jacob erected
the Stone. Joseph Sca^^ (that incomparable Critic) shows how they ^^^^mbled
one another, these (...) being Con^^ Stones, erected by the Pagans for some
Ho^^. Purpose and Religious Remembrances. They ^^ed to anoint these Stones:
wherefore such a one (...) is called by Contr. Gent. l. 1.
Arnobius, lubricatus Lapis, and ex^^ ^ unguine irrigatus; and by Strom. 7.
Clemens Alexan^^^^us, (...): which confirms the former No^^on, that these were
borrowed from that at Be^^; for it is expressly said, that Jacob poured Oil upon
the Top of it, Genesis 28. 18. Let it be queried whether the Gentile Custom of
anointing Stones used for Landmarks, (of which Herodotus and others speak) was
not grounded on the same Practice of the Patriarchs.

Some have thought the Sacred History's relating that Jacob's Sons came out of
his Thigh, (for so it is according to the Hebrew in Genesis 46. 26.) gave occasion
to the Fable, that Bacchus was born of Jove's Thigh: for though, according to
the Idiom of the Eastern Speech, that Phrase [to come out of his Thigh]
signifies no more than to be born of him, or to be his Son; yet the Greeks not
understanding the Oriental manner of speaking, mistook the Place, and made a
Fable out of it. There are two very Mr. Mede, Mons. Bochart.
Learned Men who approve of this, and therefore I thought good to mention it;
but I ^ confess I look upon it only as an ingenious Fa^^^ and therefore I am
not ready to press this eq^^ with some of the other Particulars I have off^^
before.

It will not seem improbable, I suppose, that ^ Practice among the Heathens of
closing or shut^ the Eyes of the dying Person, and this by one ^ was the most
beloved of him, was derived (...) Genesis 46. 4. Joseph shall put his Hand upon
thine E^^^ Accordingly we find this last Office of Friend^^ spoken of in Homer,
and other ancient Writ^ both Greek and Latin.

The Gentile Story of Busiris's sacrificing of (...), has a very solid
Foundation; for we (...) easily perceive that this arose from the true (...)
unquestionable History in Exodus, where we (...) of a New King over Egypt, who
set over the Is^^lites Taskmasters, to afflict them with their Burd^^^ and who
made their Lives bitter with hard Bond^^ Exodus 1. 11, 14. and this was He that
made (...) Edict of drowning the Hebrew Children, ver. 22^ This great Oppressor
of Israel was that Bus^^ whom the Gentiles speak of as a noted Tyrant (...)
Egypt; and several agree that that was his t^^^ Name. The Israelites, who came
out of Cana^ into Egypt, were the Strangers, and are truly called so. The
sacrificing of them is the cruel a^^ bloody handling of them. That Egyptian
Oppressor and Tyrant might rightly be said to sacrifice his Strangers, when he
used the poor Hebr^^ so inhumanely.

Ioseph's Great Fortunes and Noble Acts in Egy^ are celebrated by professed
Historians, as well as Poets, among the Pagans; and therefore I need not
mention these latter. And of the former s^^^ is sufficient to name Justin, who
acquaints us that Joseph was the youngest of his Brethren, and ^ his excellent
Wit and Parts were dreaded by (...); which very thing moved them to sell him
^to Egypt, where in a short time he became a ^at Favorite of the King. He goes
on and tells That this Brave Man was very skilful in doing Wonders, and was the
first that found out the Meaning and Interpretation of Dreams. The Scarcity or
Dearth which happened to Egypt, he foresaw many Years before it came. That Land
had perished, if the King had not by his Advice laid up Corn in store. He was a
kind of Divine Oracle, and consulted by the World, because of his infinite
Sagacity, his transcendent Knowledge and Wisdom. Any (...) that has read the
Sacred History, may see ^^at this Character was borrowed thence. And it ^s a
very notable and illustrious Confirmation of the Truth of the Mosaic History,
and in that of the whole Sacred Scripture. Minimus inter fratres aetat^
Josephus fuit, cujus excellens ingenium fratres veriti clam interceptum
peregrin^^ mercato^^bus vendiderunt. Hist. l. 36. c. 2.


Next, I will mention this, that the Annual Custom of the Egyptians (which In
Haere^i Nazaraeorum.
Epiphanius speaks of) of marking their Trees and their Flocks with something
of a Red Color, as a kind of Preservative against any Harm and Mischief that
might befall them, was from the Israelites Practice of old in Egypt, when they
sprinkled the Lintels and Pos^s of the Doors with Blood, Exodus 12. 22. which
preserved them from the last and worst Plague which befell the Egyptians. In
remembrance of this, o^ rather in a superstitious Imitation of it, the People
of Egypt afterward set a red Mark on their Ho^^ and Goods: And that this Custom
was borrow thence, will appear the more probable by (...) dering that this was
done by them at the entr^ of the Vernal Equinox, as Epiphanius relates, w^^^^
was the very time (as we learn from Exodus 12. ^ when the Israelites
distinguished their Houses that Bloody Token. Again, I might offer it ^
enquired into by the Learned, whether the ^ (...), the Sacrifices for Passing,
which we^^ use among the Grecians, especially the Laced^ nians, and are
mentioned by Xenophon, Thucy^^ and Plutarch, be not an Imita^^on of, or an
A(...) sion unto the famous Jewish Pesach, which is ^ (...), transitus, the
Passover, viz. when the ^ stroying Angel passed over the Israelites Ho^ and
did the Inhabitants of them no harm. Mi^^^^ not this give occasion first to
those Grecian ^ (...), Passover-Sacrifices, especially consider^ that that
Jewish Feast is called not only (...) but (...) by Philo, Cyril of
Alexandria,^^ gory Nazianzen, and others?

The Conducting of the Children of Israel ^ of Egypt, and their miraculous
Passing through (...) Red Sea, and the overthrow of the Egyptians ^ it, could
not but be famous among the Pag^ though they endeavored to stifle, or at
least^ mince it: whereof Hist. lib. 30.
Justin only tells us that t^^ King of Egypt followed the Jews when they (...)
Egypt, but was forced to return back by reason ^ a great Tempest which arose of
a sudden. T^^ Fame of Moses's dividing the Red Sea, was kept ^ among the
Gentiles; as Lib. 3.
D^odorus Siculus witn^^^seth: There is, says he, a Report spread among the
Ichthyophagi, a People inhabiting the Shore near the Arabian Gulf, (which is
(...) Name given to the Red Sea among Geographers) namely, that all that Place
where that Gulf is, was dried up, the Waters flying back: but after the Bottom
had appeared for some time, the Place, by a reflux of the Sea, was ^^rn'd into
its former Condition. So he. And ^^^^in he gives a most remarkable Testimony to
^ Truth of those words in Exodus 14. 21. The (...) caused the Sea to go back,
and made the Sea dry (...), and the Waters were divided; and in v. 27, ^* The
Sea returned to its Strength, and the Waters ^red the Host of Pharaoh. It seems
the Ichthyo^^ handed this Report to the Historian, not the Egyptians; though he
had Converse with these a long time, and they had Correspondence with the
^yophagi: but the Egyptians were so cunning (...) to conceal their Disgrace and
Misfortune: and hence it is that there is so little said among the Pagans
concerning this matter.

As to the Red Sea it self, Mare Erythr^um, there is in that Name a Remembrance
of a known Person spoken of in the Old Testament, viz. Esau. For as to what
has been said by some, that this Sea had its Name from its Red Color, proves
an arrant Falsehood. Coral at the bottom of it, which some talk of, is not red
enough to give it such a Color. And the Weed which grows in it, whence `tis
called Iam Suph, Mare algosum, (as Iunius and Tremellius always render it) or
Mare junci, (as others, as if it were the Rush or Reed-Sea) cannot give it the
Denomination of Red, because (whatever some say of this weedy Stuff at the
bottom of it) the Water of this Sea is of the same Color with other Seas, as
all Travelers attest. Yea, though that be true which has been lately (...)
gested by some inquisitive Persons, that this W^^^ called Suph is a kind of
Saffron, of which when (...) taken out of the Sea, is made a red Color call^
Sufo by the Ethiopians, used for dying Cloth (...) India and Ethiopia; yet
seeing the Sea it self is (...) dyed with it, but retains the Color of other
S^^^ I cannot think it is called the Red merely beca^^ of that Weed or Sedg
used by Dyers. Oth^ have said it has this Epithet, because the Sto^^ Cliffs,
Banks, and Sands of it, by Reflection a^ Repercussion of the Sun's Rays, give
such a T^^ cture or Color to the Waters: but this also (...) a mere Fancy, and
has been confuted by tho^^ who have purposely writ of this Particular S^^ (
viz. that Part of the Ocean on the East whi^^ strikes in with a Bay into the
Arabian Shores, a^^ parts Asia from Africa in those Places;) and ^ those who
have seen it, and tell us it differs not from other Seas. In brief, all
impartial Writers agr^^ that it cannot be called so from its Red Color, because
it has nothing of that to be seen in it. Why then did the Learned Seventy
Elders of the Jew^ translate it (...), the Red Sea? The Reasons we may conceive
to be these; because, first, the Hebrew word Suph gave some occasion for it, it
being (as I said before) that kind of Sea-weed which was used in dying of Cloth
with a red Color, and so may be translated red; as murex is purple, because
murex is that Shell-(...) of the Liquor whereof Purple is made. But the chief,
and indeed the only proper Reason (for the other was but an Occasion) of this
Version of the Seventy, is this, because (...) has reference to One that was
(...), i. e. Red, and this was no other than Edom or Esau; for in express words
the Scripture says, Esau is Edom, Genesis 36. 1. ^ow Edom in Hebrew is the same
that (...) is ^ Greek; whence Philostratus says, Mare Ery^aeum was called so
from Erythras: with whom ^gree Strabo, Curtius, and other Historians, who
relate that it was named so from Erythraeus, a King of that Country, or Coast,
where this Sea is. This ^rythras, or Erythraeus, was Esau, who was called Edom,
(it signifying the very same with (...)); ^^d that for these two Reasons, (both
which are ^^^igned in Scripture, and therefore we cannot ^^^stion the Truth of
them); First, Because he ^as ruddy at his Nativity, he came out red, Genesis 25.
25. whence you read in the same Verse that ^e had his Name. Secondly, Because
he was an ^xcessive Admirer and Lover of Red Pottage: thus ^^is expressly said
in the 30th verse, Therefore his Name was called Edom, because he was so eager
(...) be fed with that red Broth. This Edom gave De^omination to the Land where
he was great and ^^led, and accordingly it was called the Land of Edom, Number.
21. 4. and is so in other places: and the Sea adjoining to this Land, received
its Name from him too; therefore you find them both joined together in this
place in the Book of Numbers, They journied by the way of the Red Sea to
compass the Land of Edom. As we know Seas are denominated from the Persons and
People they belong to; as the British, the German, the Indian, the Ethiopian
Sea; so it is here, the Red Sea has its name from Edom, (who is Esau) i. e.
Red; who by the Greeks was accordingly styled Erythras or Erythrae^^, which
signifies the same. Thus these Pagan Nomenclators have left us some Remains of
Sacred History in this and other Names that they have imposed upon Persons and
Things.

The coming forth of the Israelites from E^^ is attested by Berosus, Strabo,
Numenius, and (...) The last of these (whom we have quoted b^^ as a substantial
Witness to the Verity of the (...) saick History) tells us, that Dux exulum
factus sacra Egyptiorum furto abstulit.
Moses, who led ^ People out of Egypt, stole from the Natives of (...) Country
some of their sacred things: which any (...) may see is founded upon what we
read in E(...) 31. 21. and 12. 25. They went not out empty, (...) took with
them Vessels of Gold and Silver, and G^^^ ments. It is expressly attested by the
same P(...) Historian, that the Jews traveled in the De^^^^ of Arabia, and
that Moses came to Mount Si^^^ with other things relating to their Travels
thro^^^ that Place. All which are Authentic Evide^^^ of the Truth of
Scripture-History.

Lib. 2. cap. 75.
Herodotus's Relation of the fiery Flying-Serp^^^ in Arabia, is a Confirmation
of what we meet wi^^ in Numb. 21. 6. where we are told that the Isr^^^ elites
were stung and tormented with Fiery ^^^pents in their Passage through the
Wilderne^^ As to the Brazen Serpent, mentioned in the sa^^ Chapter, whereby the
Israelites were healed, is may be no far-fetched Imagination to think th^^ the
Magical Images and Sculptures among the Heathens, especially the Egyptians,
which t^^ Greeks called (...), and the Arabians ((...) ruptly from the Greek)
Talisman, were Imitati ons of this. They were certainly for the sa^^ purpose,
viz. to avert Evil and Mischief from P^^^^sons: therefore Gaffarel thinks these
Talisman we^^ the same with the Averrunci, among the old Romans: and some of
the old Hebrew Doctors ha^^ (...) them the name of Scuta Davidis, on the same
^^ount. It is not improbable that the Images of (...) and Mice, which the
Philistian Magitians (...) use of, were from the same Original, and (...) the
first and earliest Emulations of the Ne(...) For as to what Pandect. Turc. cap.
130.
Leunclavius says con^^^ning the later Invention of the Talismans, viz. (...)
they were not till Apollonius Tyanaeus's time, (...) that he was the Inventer
of them, is founded ^^olly on their being called Respons. ad Orthodox.
(...) by Justin Martyr; which (supposing (...) wise the Author, out of whom he
took it, not (...) be spurious) imports only this, that they were ^^^pared and
used by him, not that they were his ^vention. Some tell us that the
Telesmatical ^gure of a Stork or Scorpion, made under a cer^ain Configuration
of the Heavens, has driven ^way Storks and Scorpions, just as the Figure and
^imilitude of a Serpent drove away the venomous ^iery Serpents, and cured those
that were stung (...) them. But I need not stay here to show the ^ast
Dissimilitude between the one and the other: ^^r the Brazen Serpent, set up by
Moses, was not a ^elesme, i. e. a Statue or Figure that has its ^ower and
Efficacy from the Influence of the Stars, ^^d the Shape of the Thing it self.
It cured not (...) Art or Nature, but by Divine Institution. It ^as erected by
the immediate Appointment and Direction of God himself, and was moreover a Type
and Representation of the Cruci^ied Jesus. ^^t the Telesmatical Images among
the Pagans ^ere made on purpose to take the Influence of ^^e particular Stars,
and operated (as they said) (...) virtue of the Likeness of the Figures to the
Things themselves. We may more truly say they were acted by some Evil Demons
that desig^^^ both to amuse and deceive the World, and (...) make these
Telesmatical Preparations service^^^^ (as generally they were) to superstitious
and idolatrous Ends. But that which I am chiefly to ^^^serve here, is this,
that it is probable these T^^mans of the Pagans were derived at first from the
Brazen Serpent. This is certain, that many of the^^ Magical Rites were founded
on the Religious Practices and Ceremonies which the Jews by God^ Order observed.

Some have thought that the Report among (...) Pagans (which Plutarch, Tacitus,
Apion mention) of the Jews worshipping of Asses, had its Origin^^ from what we
read in the Old Testament, an^ particularly from something which happened (...)
the Wilderness, (which makes me mention it in th^^ place) viz. their
worshipping a Calf, which is a sorry vile Creature as well as an Ass; and so
the^^ might be a Mistake of one for the other, as ha^^ been usual in Reports of
this nature. And what is said by Tacitus concerning the Asses, may be applied
to the Calf, viz. Effigiem animalis quo monstrante errorem s^timque d^^^^^rant
penetrali sacraverunt. Hist. lib. 5.
that a Herd of the^ showed the Israelites the Way to a Fountain, where they
quenched their Thirst in the Wilderness* and thence the Effigies of the Animal,
which mo^^ particularly did them that Favor, was worshipp'^ by them. Now this
easily agrees to the Gol^^ Calf: for the holy Book acquaints us that the
^^raelites in the wide Wilderness were Wandere^^ and Thirsty; wherefore they
desired a Guide ^ lead them, and Water to quench their Thir^ Accordingly the
Calf was designed by them to be t^^^r Conduct in their Journey: This would find
^^t Springs of Water, and lead them to it; this would be their Oracle, and
standing Testimony of God's Presence with them. Hereupon therefore (...)
imagine the reproachful Imputation laid upon the Jews of adoring an Ass, had
its Rise, there being only a Mistake of one Animal for another. And truly that
is Mistake sufficient here, since we are able to give an account of this
reproachful ^aunt, without substituting one Animal in the place of another. But
before we do so, let us (seeing we are fallen into this Subject) take notice
what other Opinions there are concerning this ancient Report of the Jews
worshipping an Ass. There are (besides that which I have named) several
Apprehensions of the Learned about it. Some think that there being in Palestine
a great many Asses, and those of very great account, for their very Princes rid
on that sort of Animals, thence the Pagans, who hated that People, feigned that
they worshipped their Asses. And a poor Fiction indeed it had been, if 'twere
on that account: for if they had not rid upon them, but have kept them ^p, they
might rather thence have gathered that they paid an Adoration to them. But I
suppose few Readers will believe there is any Ground here, and therefore I let
this pass. N. Fuller. Miscellan*
Another very busy Critic guesses this Report to have risen from Genesis 36. 24.
This is that Anah that found the Mules ^he reads it eth hajamim, the Waters) in
the Wilder^ss, as he fed the Asses of his Father Zibeon. Whence, ^^^th he, the
Pagans tell us that Moses found out Waters by help of the Asses which he fed;
and thence Asses were honored. But neither is the^^ here any Ground for such
an Inference: for (...), there is no probability that the Gentiles took notice
of such an obscure Place of Scripture as (...) 2dly, Anah and Moses are here
confounded: (...) j^mim is put for jemim; And lastly, the wh^ Sense and Import
of the Text are perverted: (...) Anah is mentioned in this place with Infamy,
(...) the Words are to be understood thus, This is Anah who was the first that
caused and provok^^ Horses to engender with She-Asses; whence a new Species
against Nature is begot into the World^ this is that base Man, of an incestuous
Fancy, (...) Inventer of this unnatural Brood of Animals. This I take to be the
meaning of those words, (...) is that Anah that found out the Mules in the
Wilderness. There is Tanaquil Faber. Epist. 6.
another Author who thinks th^^ Pagan Fable is founded on an Allusion to a
Word, as thus, A Jewish Temple was built in Egypt ((...) imitation of that at
Jerusalem) by Onias a High Priest, as Antiqu. Jud. l. 13. c. 6. and De bello
Jud. l. 7.
Josephus relates: now, the word (...) being akin to (...), the Alexandrines
and some merry Greeks, who hated the Jews, thought they were facetious, when
they said (...), an Ass, was worshipped in the Temple of the Jews. But here is
contained nothing of the Circumstances (as the finding a Place of Water, and
quenching their Th^^^, etc.) belonging to the Fable: besides that, a M^^^ and
an Ass are unhappily confounded by this Author. Briefly, this is a mere Strain
of Fancy, an^ can never find acceptance among Persons of (...) and composed
Thoughts. There is yet another Opinion which I have met with somewhere, viz.
that the Gentiles thought the Jews worshipped an Ass because of that Law in
Exodus 34. 20. concerning the redeeming the firstborn of an Ass. This Animal
being exempted from Sacrifice, when Calves and Lambs and Kids were not, it
might seem to be some excellent thing, and therefore was worshipped. But
according to this way of inferring, the Pagans might have reported that the
Jews worshipped a Dog, there being a particular Prohibition against offering it
in Sacrifice. Besides, this Account (like that before mentioned) has not any
of the Circumstances with which the Fable is clothed in Pagan Writers, as that
it was an Ass's Head that was worshipped, and that by means of it a Spring of
Water was found out, etc. which we ought particularly to consider when we are
giving an account of this Pagan Taunt against the Jews.

Lastly then, to offer a Conjecture of my own, I am strongly inclined to think
this Calumny of the Heathens against the Jews arose from the History of Samson,
in which is particular mention of the Iaw-bone of an Ass, and of the strange
things done by it, Judge. 15. 15, 16. Samson (as you shall hear anon) was famous
among the Pagans, his Actions were noted and celebrated among them. And this
particular Action and Exploit of the Iaw-bone, wherewith he slew a thousand
Men, being singular and wonderful, was well known to them; especially it came
to be famous and talked of, when there was this surprising Miracle added to it,
that when Samson was exceedingly tormented with Thirst, and like to die for
want of something to quench it, God clave a hollow Place that was in the Iaw,
and there came Water thereout; and when he had drunk, his Spirit came again,
and he revived, ver. 18, 19. Here was the Iaw-bone of an Ass, which was a
considerable part of the Head of an Ass. The minding of this gave the first
occasion to me to think that the Tradition among the Pagans was taken from
this: for if you consult those Writers who make mention of it, you will find
the Report was, that the Jews worshipped the Head of an Ass. So we read in a
Appion contr. Jud.
virulent Writer against the Jews, that that particular Part, and no other, was
set up in the Temple of Jerusalem, and Religiously venerated by that People;
and that Antiochus took it down, and carried it away with him, (it being of
Gold, as he would make us believe, and therefore worth the carrying) when he
rifled the Temple* Minutius Felix takes notice of this particular Reproach of
the Christians, (for you must know to a Heathen a Jew and a Christian were the
same; for the first Christians being Jews by Birth, the same Calumny was fixed
on both) that they adored the Turpissimae pecudis capur. ^ Octavio.
Head of that most vile Beast. Which also Petronius In Catalectis.
Arbiter testifies in those words; Iud^^us licet and porcinum numen adoret,
Et coeli sum^ias advocet auriculas.
From the first Verse it appears that the Gentiles thought the Jews worshipped
Swine, perhaps because they abstained from eating their Flesh; for among the
Gentiles, what they did not eat, was generally worshipped. And in the next
Verse there is is a mistake of coeli for cilli, i. e. asini, (as some Critics
have well observed) for (...) is the Dorick word for an Ass: so that as before
the Poet charge the Jews with worshipping of Swine, so here he alludes to
that flying Story among the Pagans, that that Nation reverenced an Ass's Head;
for auriculae is put here for caput, which could not stand in the Verse; the
prominent and most conspicuous Parts of the Head are put for the Head it self.
And if they worshipped the Ears, because a part of the Head, then they paid the
same Honor to the Cheeks, to the Jaws, and to the Jawbone, which is a more
solid Part. None of the Authors of the foregoing Opinions have attended to
this, that it was the Head of an Ass, (not an Ass in general) that was said to
be worshipped by the Jews; and thence arose their Mistakes. Let it (...) be
noted therefore, that this was the scurrilous Reflection of the Pagans on the
Jews, that they gave Religious Honor to the Head of an Ass: and let it be
observed at the same time, that it was an Ass's Head which Samson found, and so
bravely managed, though it was one particular Part of it, viz. the Iaw-bone,
with which he did execution on his Enemies. Wherefore I offer it as a probable
Assertion, that the Report concerning the Jewish People reverencing of an Ass's
Head, took its rise from that prodigious Exploit of Samson, that strange
Execution which he did with the Iaw-bone of an Ass. This gave occasion to the
Israelites to extol and magnify that mavelous Weapon, and at the same time
the Providence of God in administering such an unexpected Engine to him, and
enabling him to do such great things with it. The neighboring Gentiles soon
heard of this, and spread abroad this Rumor, that the Hebrews celebrated and
worshipped the Ass's Head or Jaw; and it is likely they thought they really did
so, because they themselves used to make any thing the Object of their
Adoration: or because an Ass (...) a contemptible Creature, they said this as a
(...) to the Jews, And then if you remember the (...) son which is assigned by
the foresaid Histori^ (...) why they worshipped an Ass, you will be furth^
confirmed in this Notion which I now tend^ The Reason, as you have heard, was
because t^ Creature* (as they said) was instrumental in (...) out a Fountain of
Water, whereby they all^y^ their Thirst in the Desert. They worshipped an (...)
says (...). Symp^
Plutarch, because it directed them to a Sp^ of Water. Which excellently agrees
with (...) the Inspired History tells us, that there was a (...) Place in the
Iaw, whence Water came forth; (...) therewith Samson quenched his Thirst. This
(...) the Pagan Story parallel with this in the Book (...) Judges, from whence
it is most probable they (...) borrowed it. And whereas it is said by some (...)
the forecited Authors, that this was done in t^^ Wilderness, they may be well
excused herein; (...) it is only a mistake of the Place: (Yet by the by (...)
is a Pagan Confirmation that the Israelites (...) once in the Wilderness,
according as the Scripture relates: yea and what Tacitus adds further
concerning the Jews at that time, viz. Nihil aeque quam inopia aq^ae satigabat.
Hist. l. 5.
their want of Water in the Wilderness, one of the most remark-able things that
happened to that People in their Travels, is yet a greater Proof and
Confirmation of the Reality of the Sacred History.) I could add, that this
happened not long after this People had been come out of the Wilderness, and so
the^ was no great mis-timing of the Story. The, whereas it is said by the
Historian last named, (...) the J^ws dedicated this Animal to their Temple,
(...) is added perhaps of his own Head, which is (...) ^^common Practice among
the Gentiles, (as well Historians as Poets) when they are relating t^ings
concerning those whom they have no Kind^^ss for. This is the best Account I am
able to give of this Gentile Tradition, which was of so ancient ^ Date: for I
question not but that the Contr. Appion. l. 2.
Jewish Writer was overseen, when he says Appion the Grammarian of Alexandria,
was the first that raised this Lie. And Monsieur Bochart talks as vainly, when
he tells us, that Appion had the occasion of this Fable from the mistake of the
words (...), pi jao, (the Mouth, or Word of the Lord;) for (...), asinus, in
the Egyptian Tongue; for Appion, forsooth, was an Egyptian, and (...) was
anciently read Iao. Supposing this latter to be true, yet ^e could not learn
hence that an Ass's Head was placed in the Jewish Temple, and afterward re^oved
by Antiochus. Wherefore I see no Dependence or Connection between these things,
and consequently this great Critick's Notion may be looked upon as groundless,
as any one that is conversant in that ingenious Man's Writings, knows there are
many such. The short is; we must take this old Obloquy against the Jews as it
is represented by the Pagan Writers (with whom we have to do at present) with
its proper Circumstances: and if we do so, I conceive we cannot refer it to any
Passage in the Old Testament so pertinently as to this which I have propounded.
If I am not mistaken, this ancient Calumny is derived from that part of the
History of Samson which I have mentioned; which shows the Antiquity and
Authority of the Sacred Writings, and that the scr^^pture-History is the Ground
of the most of the ^^^bulous Passages and Reports in the Writings of (...)
Heathens.

I could mention here also, that the Jews we^ accused of Pagan Writers to have
worshipped (...) Clouds and the Heavens. Juvenal. Sat. 14.
Nil praeter Nubes and Coeli numen adorant. Which the Satyrist speaks of the
Jews. A^ Lib. 16.
Strabo reports the same. Some have thoug^^ that the Coelicolae, the
Heaven-worshippers, mentioned in that Title of the Lib. 1. in Pa^atit. ad tit.
5.
Codex, De Iudaeis (...) Coelicolis, has relation to this Matt^r: but I thin^
it is evident from the Title it self, that the Ie^ and Coelicolae were not the
same, but two different sort of People; else it would not have been [Of the
Jews and Coelicolae], but [of the Jews or Coelicolae.] Moreover, he that looks
into the Lib. 16. Tit. 8.
T^eodosian Code, from whence Justinian took this, will be convinced that the
Jews are not meant by Coelicolae; for there they are said to be an unheard^of
Name, and a new Crime: whereas they had that Name in Augustus's time, according
to Strabo. There have been different Opinions concerning the rise of this Pagan
Contumely, viz. that the Jews adored the Heavens and the Clouds. Some think it
commenced from the superstitious and idolatrous Practice of that People in
worshipping the Host of Heaven, as we read they did. But I cannot assent to
this, because it is unreasonable to imagine that the Pagans would jeer the Jews
for that which they visibly practiced themselves. Others ^ay this arose from
the Devotion of the Jews, who ^sed to look up toward Heaven when they made
their Prayers to God. But this was in common to them with the Pagan
Worshippers, who naturally had this Posture of Devotion, and cast up their
Eyes, and spread out their Hands toward Heaven: therefore this could not be
the occasion of this Imputation. But there is another Opinion which I find most
applauded, and it is this, that this Obloquy of the Heathens proceeded from
their mistaking the use of the word Shamajim, Heavens among the Hebrews, and
even in the Scripture it self, where sometimes it signifies God himself. This
is the Conjecture of the Learned De D^s Sir. Syntag. 2. cap. 17.
Mr. Seldom: hence, says he, the Gentiles inferred that the Jews made Heaven a
Deity. But I apprehend this Inference could not be made by them, because
Shamajim is used in this sense but in one place in the Old Testament, viz. in
Dan. 4. 26. the Heavens do rule, where the Heavens import God himself. But I
cannot believe that the Pagans thought the Jews were Worshippers of the Heavens,
because in this one single place, and no where else, God is called Heaven. And
though I grant the Jewish Rabbis used the word Shamajim thus, making God and
the Heavens Synonymous in some places of their Writings, yet they do it no
where so as there might be occasion for this Mistake.

Having thus told you what I conceive did not give rise to this Pagan
Accusation, I will acquaint you what I take to be the true and only occasion of
it. Here then you must observe that that which is the chief thing in the Jeer,
is, that the Clouds were worshipped; Nil praeter Nubes, etc. (...) adoring of
these the Railery arises, and the (...) are but mentioned by the by, as being
(...) Place where these Clouds are. This being pr^^sed, I offer it as a
probable Assertion, that (...) Piece of Pagan Railery was borrowed from (...)
we often read in Moses's History, that God led (...) Israelites in their
Journey from Egypt, and thro^ the Wilderness, by a Exodus 13. 21. Numb. 14. 14.
Cloud that went be^ them. To this they often looked up; the C^^duct of this
they daily attended to with gr^ Reverence: the Report of which, occasioned t^
Charge of the Pagans against the Jews, that the^ were Cloud-Worshippers. This
is undeniable, (...) that miraculous Leading of that People by a (...) could
not but be very famous among the Neig^bouring Gentiles, who soon communicated
(...) news of it to others that were about them; and (...) this Report came to
be frequent in the Mouths (...) most Pagans. And truly when they related the
the Cloud was adored by the Jews, they were (...) mistaken; for it was no other
than the Symbol (...) God's Presence: it was a secondary and remo^ Object of
their Reverence and Devotion, as the Ark, and more especially the Mercy-Seat
was. Only here they showed their gross Ignorance in concluding that if the Jews
worshipped one Cloud, they might as well pay the same Respect to another, yea
to all: whence we are told by the Poet that they worshipped nothing else but
Clouds. Though truly I am willing to take this Author i^ another Sense, and I
will go yet further, and offer this to be considered, viz. whether the
wonderful Fire, as well as the Cloud, which went before the Israelites in their
Travels, be not here mentioned by this Poet, seeing Farnaby in his Notes, and
others before him, acquaint us that this Verse in some Copies is read thus; Nil
praeter Nubes, and Coeli lumen adorant. Where by Nubes we understand (as I have
said before) the Pillar of the Cloud which was the Israelites Guide in the
Daytime, and by Coeli lumen the Pillar of Fire or Light which conducted them
in the Night. It is very likely that this latter reading of the Verse is the
truest, and accordingly you have a plain and obvious Account of what we
undertook to enquire into, viz. the Cloud which the Jews were said to worship,
and of something more, namely, the Light of Heaven which this Writer says they
showed the same regard to; which is no other, I conceive, than that Fiery
Pillar which continually appeared to the Israelites in the Night, and directed
them in their way: and it is most appositely here called Coeli lumen, the Light
of Heaven, according to the very style of the Old Testament, where it is styled
a Light of Fire, Psalm. 7^. 14. and where we are informed it was set up in the
Heavens on purpose by God to give them Light, Exodus 13. 21. This, I say, is the
plain Account of this Poetic Passage, and I do not see any Objection that lies
against it. Wherefore I take it to be as notable a Testimony as any we have
from the Pagan Writers of the Truth of the Mosaic History, and other Records
of the Old Testament.

CHAP. V.
From the Writings and Practices of Strangers it is ^^vident that there were
such Jewish Usages and C^^remonies as these, viz. The Observation of (...)
Seventh Day: Washings and Purifications: Pa^ing of First Fruits and Tithes:
Abstaining from certain kinds of Food: Peculiar Garments for the Priests:
Bearing the Tabernacle and Ark: T^ High-Priest's going once a Year into the
Holy of H^lies: Sacrifices, with several things that belonged to them: The
Mercy-Seat and Oracle: The Urim a^^ Thummin: the Scapegoat: the Water of
Iealo^sy: the Feast of Tabernacles: Nazaritism: Vnle^vened Bread: Circumcision:
the Law of Cherem: Lots: Cities of Refuge: New Mons: Iubilee* Mysteries and
Types. Ample Testimonies out of Profane Authors are added concerning Moses.

VI. THe Mosaic Ceremonies, and the prevailing of them (as very ancient) are
vouched by the very Practice of the Pagan World. To instance in some, (for it
would be too tedious to mention all) and first in the dividing of Time into
Weeks or Seven Days, and the observing a Seventh Day as sacred: thus Hesiod
called it (...), the Seventh Holy Day, because among the Gentiles this was a
Day of Solemn Worship, set apart for Religious Offices. It is observed by In
Alexand. Severo.
Lampridi^ of Severus the Emperor, that he used to go to the ^pitol, and
frequent the Temples on this Day. Yea, the very word Sabbath was used by some
of them: thus In Tiberio, cap. 32.
Suetonius says, Diogenes the Gram^arian used to hold Disputations at Rhodes
on the Sabbaths. And from In Pseudolog.
Lucian, we learn that the Seventh Day was a Festival, and a Play-day for
Schoolboys. From these, and several other Instances which we may find in
Strom. l. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus and Praepar. Evang.
Eusebius, it might be proved that the more Solemn Services of Religion among
the Gentiles, and their Cessations from Work, were on the Seventh Day of the
Week. Now, no wise Man will assert that this Custom was founded on Nature; for
no Light of Reason could dictate this Division of Days into just seven, and no
more: therefore it is reasonable to think that the general Agreement of the
World in this Arithmetic, was derived from the Jews, who were particularly
signalized by their Observation of the Seventh-Day, which was enjoined them by
God himself, as in Exodus 20. 9. Six Days shall thou labor, and do all thy
Work; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shall
not do any Work, etc. And in other places the Institution and Observation of
this Particular Day are mentioned. Or, I might have traced the Original of this
yet higher, and found it dated from the very Creation, from the beginning of
all things, when we read of God's resting on the Seventh Day, Genesis 2. 2. and
his Blessing the Seventh Day, and Sanctifying it, v. 3. From whence, without
doubt, the Custom among several Gentiles of observing some Seventh Day in the
Week, had its first rise.

Again, the Gentiles took their several (...), Lustrations, and Purifications
from the (...) of which the Books of Moses treat. When (...) Contents of these
Writings, or the Practice of (...) Jewish People came to be known to the Pa^
they presently set themselves to imitate them, (...) most of the Washings and
Purifyings used by (...) Jews, came to be part of their Religion. The Jew^
Priests washed their Hands and Feet before the went about their Sacred Office,
before they sa^^ficed and touched Holy Things: and they had (...) the Temple
Lavers for that very purpose. Like^wise they used Aspersion toward others, and
we^ enjoined to cleanse and purify them from the Defilements which they had
contracted. In a wo^ every Thing and Person belonging to the Jew^ Service and
Worship were hallowed and cleans (...) by certain ways of Purification
prescribed by (...) Law. Hence we read of frequent Washings (...) Sprinklings
among the Pagans: Virg. Aen. 6.
Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,
Spargens rore levi, and ramo felicis olivae,
Lustravitque viros.
And Constat Diis superis sacra factarum corporis ablutione purgari: cum vero
inferis litandum est satis (...) si aspersio sol^ contingat. Saturn. l. 3. c. 1.
Macrobius assures us that the Gentile De^tionists, when ever they addressed
themselves (...) their Gods, whether Celestial or Infernal, prep^^red
themselves beforehand by using of Wat^^ more or less. Hence it became a Maxim
amo^ them, that (...). Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
all Sacred Things must be sprinkled wi^^ pure Water. And they had Vessels for
this purpose* which contained that Consecrated Element. It might be proved from
good Authors (as you may see in the Learned Dr. Spencer) that they for the most
part sprinkled the Worshippers as they went into their Temples. The truth is,
these Rites of Washing and Purifying, which were used both by Jews and
Gentiles, are so like one another, that we cannot but conclude either the
Gentiles took them from the Jews, or these from them. The latter is in no wise
probable, because it is unworthy of God, and of the Religion which he
instituted among the Jews, to imagine that he would take Example from the
Pagans, and make their Religion the Standard of that which he gave to his own
People, (though it is true the Jews often imitated the Pagans in their Customs
and Rites, but never by the Command and Order of God, but absolutely against
it:) therefore the former is most likely and reasonable, viz. that the Pagans
in way of Imitation took their Ceremonies of Washing and Lustration from the
Jews. The same Argument may be used in all the Particulars which we shall
mention afterward under this Head: by this we may prove that those Ceremonious
Observances, commanded the Jews, were not originally from the Gentiles, but
first of all were enjoined by the True God. But concerning these Purifications
which we are now speaking of, see what was the ^udgment of Justin Martyr of
old; who producing the Prophet Isaiah's words, Wash ye, make ye ^^an, chap. 1.
ver. 16. and commenting upon them, adds this, (...), etc. Apol. 2.
When the Devils heard of this Washing, spoken of by the Prophet, they caused
this to be the effect of it, namely, whenever they go into their Temples, or
approac^ near them, or are about to be employed in their Sacrifices and
Offerings, they sprinkle Water (...) themselves. This Learned Father was
clearly of the Opinion that this Rite of Aspersion which the Gentiles used, was
stolen from the Jewi^^ Church, and not that this stole them from the Heathens.
With whom agrees a late Learned Antiquary, who, speaking of the particular
Mosaic Lustrations, or Purgations used by the Jewi^^ Priests, viz. of Washing
themselves before they entered into the Temple, says thus, Mr. ^heringham in
Cod. Jom. cap. 2^.
This kind of Purgation was taken from the Jews by the People of other Nations,
who when they entre^ into their Temples, had their Lustrations and Rites of
Washing in Imitation of the Jews.

Thirdly, The Gentile Custom of offering First^fruits and Tenths was borrowed
from the Jews, and the Old Testament. That it was a general Usage among the
Pagan Worshippers to offer their First Fruits to some of their Deities, is
amply testified by De die Natal. (...).
Censorinus. And that the Custom of paying Tithes was as general and ancient,
might be proved from the respective Histories which speak of this Matter. This
was a considerable Part of the old Romans Religion, who (as Plutarch writes)
were wont to bestow a tenth Part of the Fruits which the Earth yielded them,
and of other Goods and Profits, on their Sacred Feasts, Sacrifices and Temples,
in honor of the Gods: but this was not every Year, or by any compulsive Law,
but freely and out of Gratitude. He tells us that Camil^ faithfully paid to
Apollo the Tenth of his Boot^ and Spoils taken from the Enemy; and that
Lucullu^ grew rich because he religiously practiced that laudable Custom of
paying Tithes to Hercules. That the Greeks also paid Tithes, appears from that
Dictate of the Oracle to them, -- (...): and from that Delphick Inscription, In
Aeneid. 8*
(...): From whence Apollo was called (...). Among the Persians also this Custom
prevailed; for Cyrus (as Herodotus says) offered Tithes to Jupiter after a
Victory obtained. And this might easily be proved of other Nations: it was
grown into an universal and fixed Custom to offer the Tenths to some God or
Goddess, post rem been gestam, as In Aeneid. 8*
Servius speaks, after any considerable Success either at home or abroad.
Insomuch, that at last it came to be an indispensible Part of the Gentile
Religion; and thence (as Suidas observes) (...) among the Greeks, was as much
as (...), consecrare. Now this Sacred and Religious Rite of Dedicating just a
tenth Part to their Gods, is no Law of Nature. Though this might put them upon
offering part of their Increase to those from whom they thought they received
the whole, yet this particular Quota is no Dictate of Nature. They were not bid
by the Law of exact Reason to consecrate the Tithe of all to the Gods. It is as
reasonable and accountable to give a ninth or eleventh Part to them as the
Tenth: Therefore this must proceed from some positive Law and particular
Institution. And hence I gather that the Pagans received this Rite and Custom
from the Jews, who were under a Law of Tithes by the special Command of God, as
the Scripture informs us. And though a late Dr. Spencer, de Leg. Hebr.
Author of great Learning, reckons Tithes to have had their Rise from the Pagan
World, yet he cannot but be sensible that the contrary is universally embraced
by the Learned. Seldom particularly proves that the Phoenicians and Egyptians,
and others, who were near Neighbors to the Jews, received that Custom from the
Jewish Nation; and that afterward it was transmitted from those neighboring
Heathens to others farther off, as the Greeks, Romans, etc. Or, if it could be
found that some Heathens before the Jewish Dispensation offered Tithes, we
might reasonably assert that some of the Patriarchs before the Law gave
occasion to the Heathens to do so. But this can no where be found; but on the
contrary, the antientest Instance of giving Tithes is that of Abraham: we read
that after a great Victory he devoted the Tithes of all the Spoils to the
Priest of the most High God. From this and the like Practice, the offering of
Tithes among the Heathens took its beginning.

Fourthly, Abstaining from certain kinds of For among the Jews, caused (it is
probable) the sam^ Custom among other Nations. The Distinction (...) Clean and
Unclean Meats was derived from the Jews to the Egyptians: thus Lib. 2.
Herodotus and Sympos. l.^^
Plutarch report that these eat no Swines Flesh; yea* if they do but touch it,
they wash themselves. S^ it is related concerning the Phoenicians, Cretian^ and
Syrians, that they abstained from this sort (...) Flesh. These last also eat
neither Fish nor Pigeons* Some of the Greek Philosophers observed this
Difference of Meats very strictly, as Diogenes, Pythagoras, Apollonius,
Tyanaeus; as Laertius, Plutarch and Philostratus assure us. The Old
Pythagoreans abstained from several kinds of Food, especially they refrained
from eating of Fish. What God tacitly forbad in Sacrifices, as the Brain and
the Heart, (for neither of these are commanded to be sacrificed unto God) those
Philosophers openly forbad at their Tables. And they derived from the Hebrews
their not eating things that died of themselves, or that had Blood in them. In
many other Usages it might be showed that the Pythagorean Way was an Imitation
of Judaism.

Fifthly, The Heathen Priests Garments were in imitation of those which the
Jewish Priests wore. The Pagan Pontiffs wore a Mitre on their Heads, as Lib. 3.
Philostratus testifies: and a White Vest, or Linen Ephod, was the usual
Apparel of their Priests in their Holy Service, as Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Valerius Maximus and others inform us. A worthy De Legib. Hebraeorum.
Writer before mentioned, asserts that the Priests Vestments of Linen were a
Ceremony taken from the Egyptians, and quotes Authors to prove that the
Egyptian Priests used such a sort of Vesture. But it is more probable that the
Egyptians and other Nations had it from the Jews. I am not singular in this: it
was the Sense of the Ancients (as (...). Epist. 192.
] Photius intimates) that the Worshippers of Idols, in imitation of God's
Priests, clothed theirs with a peculiar sort of Garments, which were after the
fashion of the Ephod. With which agrees the Learned In Comm. in Act. 7. 43.
Bochart: The Egyptians (says he) being in many things followers of the Jews,
permitted their Priests to wear no other Vestments but Linen ones. And again in
the same Place he says, Plutarch does greatly philosophize concerning the
Linen Garments which the Egyptians wore, but more subtilely th^n solidly, he
being ignorant that many Rites and Usages of this nature were derived from the
Jews to the Egyptians. And Demonst. Evang.
Huetius is po^itive in this Notion, saying, The Priests of Is^, i. e. the
Egyptian Priests, wore Linen, and therein imitated the Linen Garments of the
Hebrew Priests.

Sixthly, The carrying of the Heathen Gods in little Tabernacles, Tents, or
portable Temples, (as you read of the Tabernacle of Moloch, Amos 5. 25. and
Acts 7. 43.) was taken from the Jews carrying the Ark, which was the Symbol of
God's Presence. So In Comm. in Act. 7. 43.
Gaspar Sanctius: The Tabernacle (says he) of Moloch was a certain Bier on
which Moloch was carried about in solemn Pomp; whom the Jews, after the fashion
of the Gentiles, carried with them, whithersoever they went, in a Religious
Manner, and for Protection-sake, making him the Companion and Guide of their
Travels: even as the Jews of old ( observe that) carried the Ark, and in it the
Divine Oracle, through the Wilderness. Thus Dr. De animal. Sacr. Pars 1. lib. 2.
Godwin: The bearing or taking up of this Tabernacle ^ay seem to have its
Original among the Heathens from an unwarrantable Imitation of Moses's
Tabernacle, which was nothing else but a portable Mos. and Aaron. l. 4. c. 2.
Temple, to be carried from place to place as need required: For ( as he goes
on) it cannot be denied that many Superstitions were derived unto the Heathen
from the true Worship of God which he himself had prescribed unto his People.
But the worthy Author afore-cited is of another Opinion, telling us, That the
Tabernacle of Moloch was the first Original of tho Tabernacle of God. God saw
that the Pagans took up on their Shoulders the Tabernacle of Moloch, and
thereupon made a Tabernacle for himself, and an Ark to be born upon Shoulders.
Thus he. And if you would see the Parallel between Moloch's Tabernacles and
God's Tabernacle, take it from that Learned Pen thus: De Legibus Hebraeorum,
Lib. 3. cap. 3. Dissertat. 1.
Moloch's Tabernacle was portable; therefore God's was so. Moloch's Tabernacle
contained in it his Image: so the Tabernacle of Testimony had in it the Ark,
and a pair of Images, viz. the Cherubims. In Moloch's Idolatrous Temple Moloch
showed himself present by his Image, and by giving Answers thence: Accordingly
in the Jewish Tabernacle the True God inhabited, and exhibited frequently a
sensible Testimony of his Presence. The Idolatrous Tabernacle was called the
Tabernacle of Moloch, i. e. the King: Semblably the Mosaic Tabernacle was
accounted and held to be the Palace and Mansion of the Highest King, i. e. God.
The Tabernacle dedicated to Moloch, represented the Sun placed in its Celestial
Tabernacle: In imitation of this, Moses's Tabernacle was a Representation of
the Heavens and the Stars, and the whole World. Seeing the Learned Author was
pleased to publish this Parallel to the World, I hope it is no Offense to
repeat it here, and with submission to so accomplished a Person, to deliver my
Thoughts freely of it. He will not permit it to be said, that the Devil apes
the Almighty: this he discards and brands as a Lib. 3. cap. 2.
Vulgar Error. But I crave leave to ask this Question, Is not this more
tolerable, yea more credible, than to say that the Cursed Fiend is imitated by
God himself? Can we think that the True God is so careful and precise in
following the Idolatrous Gentiles? Can we believe that he so exactly emulated
every Point of Idolatry belonging to Moloch's Tabernacle? Surely this cannot be
thought worthy of that All-wise Being, this cannot be consistent with what we
read of him. Wherefore let us consult the Place in Amos; Have ye offered unto
me Sacrifices and Offerings in the Wilderness, forty Years, O House of Israel?
But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your Images, the Star
of your God which ye made to your selves; chap. 5. 25, 26. Here God reproves
and upbraids the Israelites for their gross Idolatry, and particularly for
bearing the Tabernacle of Moloch. Whatever Disputes there be about other things
in these Words, this is undeniable, and beyond all Controversy, that bearing
the Tabernacle of Moloch was a piece of Idolatrous Service, it being opposed
here to offering Sacrifices and Offerings unto God. With this Idolatrous
Worship of theirs Gods was provoked and incensed, and tells them in the next
Verse, they shall go into Captivity for this very thing. Is it then probable
that this bearing of the Tabernacle of Moloch was the Original of worshipping
the True God in the Tabernacle? Is it reasonable to believe that he made this
manner of Worship his Own, and instituted it as one of the chief and ^rincipal
Parts of the Solemn Religion of the ^ews? Were all things to be done by the
Jews in their Religious Service, according to the Pattern in ^^e Mount? How
then can the bearing of the Taber^^cle of Moloch among the Gentiles, be the
First Pattern (as that Learned Author expressly says) ^f Tabernacle-Worship
among the Jews? God was Psalm. 95. 10.
grieved with the Generation of the Jews in the Wilderness, as he says
himself; he was exceedingly displeased with them for this their Idolatrous
Worship: but behold! he soon changed his Mind, and took a liking to this Way,
and set it up among the Israelites, and caused it to be the Choicest and most
Sacred Piece of Divine Worship. Thus God's Worship was a Transcript from
Moloch, instead of being the First Original Pattern. I must needs confess I
cannot prevail with my self to ^ntertain such Thoughts as these, and to frame
such a Notion of God. I rather choose to embrace that Vulgar Error, (as he is
pleased to style it) that a great part of the Ceremonies which the Pagans used
in their Religion, was taken from the Worship prescribed by God himself in the
Old Testament, and particularly that the Tabernacle of Moloch, i. e. the Seat
in which he was carried up and down to be worshipped, the (...)
(...) of that Idol, (as St. A^ts 7. 43.
Luke calls that of the God Remphan) was in imitation of the Jewish Tabernacle,
or portable Temple, wherein Jehovah was present; and that from the Ark in that
holy Place, the Gentile Worshippers borrowed their Chests, and Boxes, and
litttle Houses, wherein they carried their Gods up and down. I shall afterward
have occasion to account with the Learned Author who oppo^ this, and the
Doctrine which leads to it; the fore I shall add no more here.

Seventhly, The Heathens followed the U^ of the Jews in some things which were
done their Consecrated Places and Temples. It was a (...) stom, says an
Quaedam fana semel anno adire permittun^, quaedam (...) toto nefas visere.
Minut. Faelix.
ancient Writer, to go but on^ Year into some of those Places, and it was (...)
unlawful to visit some of them at all. In Baeoticis.
P^nias instances in particular Temples which (...) opened but one Day in a
Year: and of Or^us's (...) says, (...). Eliac. 2do.
None was permitted to enter into it (...) the Priest. This any Man may see was
borro^ from the Divine Constitution among God's Peop^^ that the High Priest
only was to go into the (...) of Holies, and that but once in a whole Year. T^
this likewise I may adjoin, that the Adyta a^ Penetralia among the Pagans, were
taken from t^^ Holy of Holies among the Jews. Those Pla^ (which were the same
also with their Delu^ were (as Secreta Te^plorum. In Aen. 2.
Servius explains them) Secret R^cesses in their Temples; they were hidden a^^
remote Apartments that were inaccessible to all (...) their Priests, and
therefore they had the name (...) Adyta, as Pergami in occultis and remo^
Templi, qu^ praeter Sacerdotes adire fas non est, quae Gr^ (...) appellant. De
Bell. Civ. l. 3.
Caesar observed. This is a pl^ Imitation of the Sanctum Sanctorum, that In^
Part of the Sanctuary among the Hebrews, w^^ there (as has been said) the Chief
Minister (...) Religion only could have access.

Eighthly, The Pagan Sacrifices, and many Rites, Usages and Circumstances about
them, were borrowed from the old Patriarchs and Jews, of whom the Old Testament
gives us the Rela^ion. The Sacrifices of the Gentiles are sacrilegious
Imitations of the Hebrews, says Cont. Faust. l. 22. c. 17.
St. Austin peremptorily; and at several other times he professedly declares
that many of their Religious Observances were from the Jews: I might observe
that their Immolation, (so called from a Cake of Flower which the Priest, when
he came to sacrifice, laid on the Head of the Beast) and their Libation, or
Tasting the Wine, and Sprinkling it on the Beast's Head, and likewise their
Eating and Drinking part of the things which were sacrificed, making merry with
the Remains of what was offered, were plain Imitations of what the Hebrew
Priests did. The using of Salt in Sacrifices is another thing which may be
mentioned here; for this also was derived from the same Fountain. Hence Homer
gives Salt the Epithet of (...), Iliad. 1.
Divine: and Plato observes that Salt is well accommodated to sacred things;
wherefore it is called by him In Timaeo.
(...) or, as Sympos. l. 5.
Plutarch transcribes it, (...), most acceptable to the Gods. Of what Authority
and Worth Salt is, you may learn, says Maxima salis authoritas e sacris vete^m
intelligitur. Not. Hist. l. 31. c. 7.
Pliny, from its being constantly used in holy Things by the Ancients. Whence
had they this Notion and Practice but from the Hebrews, among whom Moses, or
rather God, ordered all things that were offered in Sacrifice Lev. 2. 13.
to be seasoned with Salt: and thence it is called, in the same place, Salt of
the Covenant, because they were bound as by Covenant to use it in all
Sacrifices: to which our Savior refers, (ap^plying it to another Sense) Man 9.
49.
Every Sacrifice (...) be salted with Salt. To pass to some other
Ci^^cumstances relating to the Gentile Sacrifices, (...) which sprang from the
Old Testament: In i^tation of the Perpetual Fire on the Altar among (...) Jews,
the Assyrians and Chaldeans kept a Fire (...) ways burning, and accounted it a
very sacred (...) choice Treasure. This is Nergal which we (...) mentioned in 2
Kings 17. 30. according to the o^ pinion of a very Mr. Seldom, de Dis Sir.
Syntag. 2. cap. ^.
excellent Man. And so^ think this sacred Fire was kept in that City whi^^ they
called Vr, from Vr, ignis. The Persians (...) had their Perpetual Fire, which
they religious^^ (...) kept, as (...). Lib. 15.
Strabo relates. So it was ordered (...) the Greeks, that (...) should be kept
(...) the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, and in that (...) Minerva in Athens:
this Fire was called by the^ (...), whence the Latin Vesta. And the Roman^ as
well as the Grecians observed this Custom^ a Continual Fire was kept in the
Temple of Ves^ at Rome, as Virgil, Ovid, Valerius Maximus, and several other of
their Writers acquaint us. The Virgins (thence called Vestal Virgins) who had
the care of it, suffered it not to go out, unless in time of Civil War: at all
other times they continually attended and watched it, constantly repaired and
recruited it. If by any strange Accident the Fire was extinguished, it was not
to be rekindled by ordinary Fire, but by the Rays of the Sun; which was done by
Instruments on purpose. This Sacred Fire thus perpetually kept burning, and
which was in order to the Sacrifices, was in em^^^tion of God's express Command
to his own People in Lev. 6. 13. The Fire shall ever be burning on the Altar:
it shall never go out. And if you remember the Original of this Fire, namely,
that it came down from Heaven, when Aaron the first time offered Sacrifice in
the Desert, you will be farther confirmed that the Pagans had this Usage from
the Jews: for herein also they imitated them, as was suggested before; they
renewed this Fire from Heaven whenever it chanced to go out. The Vestal Fire
was borrowed from Celestial Heat, not kindled by any Earthly Flame: which shows
that the Jews Heavenly Fire, which they kept always burning, and wherewith they
set on fire their Sacrifices, gave occasion to this of the Heathens. And what
if I should say that (...) (of which Vesta is but a Corruption) is of Hebrew
Original, and is as much as Esh Iah, Ignis Domini, i. e. the sacred Fire of
God's own appointing? Next, the making of Leagues and Covenants by Sacrifice
and by Blood, which was an usual Custom among the Pagans, was derived from
Scripture-practice, of which there is Genesis 21. 27. Exodus 24. 6, 7, 8.
mention more than once. We read that among the old Romans their Solemn
Compacts were both made and confirmed with the Ceremony of Striking, Killing
and Cutting up the Sacrifice; whence perculere, ferire foedus, to strike a
League, was no uncommon Phrase. More especially the Killing and Sacrificing of
a Swine were most in use among them, as appears from Decad. 1. lib. 1.
Livy and -- Cae^^ jungebant foedera porca. Aen. 8.
Virgil. And this Custom was in use among the Grecians, as is to be seen in
Homer often; and thence (...) was the word to signify not only the Ceremonial
Libations at their Sacrifices, b^ so the Compacts which were made at such a
tim^ and (as In Iliad ^.
Eustathius observes) the Sacrifices (...) the name of (...), i. e. Covenants
given the^ This Practice was in other Nations, (though (...) a mixture of some
other Ceremonies and proph^ Usages): when they swore to one another, a^^ made
Bargains in a solemn Mann^r, they used (...) slay some Animal and sacrifice it;
and this w^^ reckoned as a Testimony of their mutual Agreement. For as a
Sacrifice was a Federal Obla^^on, whereby Men made a League and Cove^^^^ with
God, and entered into Communion and Friendship with him; so the same Ceremony
wa^ used as a Signification of Humane Friendship, as ^ Token of Covenanting
between Men and M^^ And because Sacrificing was accompanied with ^ friendly
Eating and Drinking with one another, therefore also it has been the Custom of
all the World (of which it is unnecessary to produce Instances) to make Leagues
of Friendship, and to contract Covenants in that sociable way. Eating and
Drinking together have been not only a Sign, but a Pledge of Amity and good
Agreement. Which you will find to be originally derived from the Practice of
the Ancient Patriarchs, and others in the Old Testament. Thus Genesis 26. 30.
Jacob and Lab^, Genesis 31. 46.
Isaac and Abimelech, 2 Samuel 3. 20.
David and Abner, entered into League and friendly Correspondence, and confirmed
their Alliances with one another. To which I will only add this, that Salt,
which was used in Sacrifices (as you heard before) was a Symbol of Friendship
and Covenanting; and with ^eference to this (besides the Reason before na^^d)
was called Salt of the Covenant: whence, a^ong the Pythagoreans, Salt was a
Representa^ive of amicable Correspondence; and the Dura^on and Lastingness of
it was fitly signified by ^his, which is a Preservative against Putrefaction.
(...) short, among the Heathen Nations this was ge^erally a Token of
Friendship, and was used to express a Familiarity and Agreement among Persons.
This we may conjecture was derived from the Jewish Practice, and particularly
from Melach Be^rith, the Salt of the Covenant. Shall I add under this Head,
that it may be the Greeks giving the name of (...) to the Gifts and Presents
which were consecrated to their Gods in their Temples, had its rise from those
Sacrifices and sacred Gifts called in the Old Testament Terumoth,
Heave-Offerings; which had that Name because they were heaved or lifted up in
honor of God, to whom they were brought? for those From (...), sustollere,
suspendere.
(...), in Imitation of these, were called so from being lifted and hung up on
some high Place in their Temples to their Gods. It seems these Heathen
Devotionists would have their Heave-Offerings, their Elevated Presents, their
Exalted Gifts, which were borrowed from the Jews.

Ninthly, The Heathen Oracles, and giving of Answers in difficult Cases, were
of Jewish Extraction. They were borrowed from God's Holy Oracle in the inmost
part of the Tabernacle, and afterward of the Temple. You may easily trace them
to the Mercy-Seat, whence God gave Answers to the High Priest. This we may
learn from the Name which is given it, viz. Debir, 1 Kings 8. 6. Psalm. 28. 2.
which in Latin is Oraculum. This hints to us (...) the Thing it self, as well
as the Word, is tak^ from the Jews. There is an Dr. Dickinson 's Delphi
Phoenicizantes.
Ingenious Man h^ labored to show that the particular Shape or fabric of
Apollo's Temple at Delphos, and the (...) of that Place, with the Ceremonies
used there, (...) from the Old Testament. Though he has so (...) things which
may seem a little too fanciful, ye^^ the main may be true and solid, viz. that
the P^gan Oracles were fetched from the Divine Ones (...) Scripture. Under this
Head I will add, that (...) not improbable that the Poetical Conceit of sphi^^
which used to utter Riddles and aenigmatical Sayings, was taken from the Sacred
Oracle of the Jews, and from the Cherubims which were over the Prspitiatiory
whence Answers were given by God. For the Sphinx was (as the Poets feigned) a
multifor^ Creature, but had a Humane Face, and moreover had Wings: and so
likewise those Sphinxes which were placed without the Egyptian Temples, were
pictured with Wings. This is exactly according to the Representation which has
been given of the Cherubims; they were of a mixed and various Shape; but it is
generally agreed they had the Countenances of Men, and that they were winged:
and it is well known that these Creatures hovered over the Mercy-Seat, which was
the Place of the Holy Oracle. So that upon these accounts, it seems to me very
likely that some part of the Sacred History, concerning the Oracle and
Cherubims, lies disguised under these Poetical Fictions: but let every one
think as he pleases.

But the Devil especially brought in Oracles in imitation of the Ephod, and its
Vrim and Thum^im, that great and celebrated Oracle among the Jews. This
questionless was not unknown to the Gentiles; for a Proof of which, there are
some alledg what Lib. 1.
Diodorus the Sicilian, and Var. Hist. l. 14. c. 34.
Aelian deliver, viz. that the Chief Judge, or Lord-Chief Justice (who was also
the Chief Priest) among the Egyptians, wore at his Neck an Image hanging at a
golden Chain, and made of precious Stones, and the Name of it was Truth. The
Egyptians ^^d this, say De veri^. Christ. (...) l. 1.
Grotius and De 70 Interpretib.
Vossius, from the H^brews, as many other things; for Thummim is rendered Truth
by the Septuagint: and thence it is likely the Image of Truth, which hung at
the Neck of the Egyptian Highpriests, alludes to the Precious Stone, or rather
that Set of them which hung at the Breast of the Jewish High Priest, in which
were the Vrim and Thummim. Indeed thus far I am willing to grant, that the
Egyptians might borrow the word (...) hence, and apply it to that excellent
Jewel which was made of a True Right Saphir, and therefore they used the word
Truth: but I cannot proceed, and say (with some) that there is any proof hence
that the Thummim was an Image. I grant that the Egyptians might have heard of
the Vrim and Thummim, and it may be fancied them to be some little Images made
of Precious Stones, the Vrim and Thummim being ^^dged in the same place with
the twelve famous Gems which the High Priest wore; and from t^ence perhaps the
Mistake was propagated a^ong the Gentiles, that those Oracles of the Jews were
a sort of Images: I say it is probable that this false Notion concerning the
Divine Oracles of the Hebrews, was propagated among the ^^^thens: and in
pursuance of this, I will add (...) Conjecture, viz. that the Ancilia among the
Romans, which were said to be from Heaven, (...) in which the Fates of the City
were contained (...) lodged, (which really were but one, though (...) to be
many) had some reference to the Jews (...) and Thummim, that Divine and
Heavenly (...), on which the Fates of all Persons depen^^^ who repaired unto
it, and consulted it; and (...) was indeed but one single Oracle, (as I have
(...) in another place) though by the different (...) it seemed to be more. And
these Ancilia (...) from Heaven, being in the Shape of short (...) or Bucklers
that are to cover the Breast, seem on (...) very account to have reference to
the holy (...) Plate; in which, you know, the Vrim and T^^^mim were deposited.
And further, to (...) this Notion, let it be remembered that those (...) were
always in the keeping of the Salii, a (...) sort of Priests; and the Badg of
their (...) was a brass Plate or Covering on their Breasts, (...) they wore
over a rich Partie-coloured Vest: w(...) latter seems to be in imitation of the
Jewish (...) Priest's gaudy Vestment, as the former of the (...) Plate, wherein
the Vrim and Thummim were (...).

Thus, without any straining, it appears that (...) Pagans had some notice of
that Great Ora^le of (...) Hebrews, though they were very much (...) in
conceiting it to be some pretty Image, or (...) strange thing sent from Heaven.
Whereas (...) most facile and obvious Account that can be (...) of the Vrim and
Thummim, is, that they were not Things, but Words, i. e. they were those (...)
words, URIM and THUMMIM, written or ^^graven in some small Plate of Gold, and
put into (...) High Priest's Pectoral. And I am apt to think (...) some of the
more understanding Gentiles had (...) apprehension of this, and that thence we
read so often in Authors of the (...), which (...) an Imitation of the Hebrew
Letters or Writing which made up the Vrim and Thummim. From (...) sacred
Scripture in the Ephod those Ephesian (...) were borrowed, which they used in
Magi^^^ Art, and whereby they did any thing that they (...) a mind to do. In
all Businesses they fled to (...), and consulted them. so that they were a
(...) of Oracle unto them. This I conceive was (...) Allusion to the Hebrew
Oracle which consisted of (...) or Writing.

T^nthly, The Scapegoat, (Gnazazel, from gnez (...) Goat, and azal he w^nt, as
much as to say the W^ndring Goat) dispatched into the Wilderness with (...)
Sins of the People, and repeated Curses on his Head, (...) occasion for the
like Practice among the Gen^^^^. Thus the Greeks used in a formal manner to
dismiss some Animals with a Curse; whence (...) devoted Creatures were called
(...) by them, because they were thus sent away. The ^^mans did the like
sometimes upon occasion: so (...) speaks of some Horses that Caesar (...)
consecraverat, ac vagos and sine custode dimi^era^. (...) Iul. c. 81.
had ^^us dealt with when he passed the Rubicon. After (...) same manner the
ancient Arabians devoted to (...) Gods Sheep and Goats. But the Practice of
(...) ^gyptians is most remarkable of all, who (as (...) relates) used to heap
Execrations on the (...) of a devoted Beast or Sacrifice selected for (...)
purpose, that if any Evil hung over them, it might be turned on the Head of
that Sacrif^^ (...), etc. Lib. 2. (...)
They curse, says he, the Heads of the Sacri^^^^ with these words, If any
Mischief threaten the (...) in particular, or all Egypt in general, let it
(...) light upon the Head of this Animal. And when (...) had loaded him with
all their Imprecations, (...) used to hurry him headlong into the River (...)
be drowned, or they sold him to a Greek or (...) other profane Man, to derive
all those Maled^^^^ons from themselves to the Belly of that Per(...) This
Egyptian Expiation was taken from (...) or the Scapegoat, Lev. 16. 21, 22.
where (...) said, Aaron was to lay both his Hands upon it, (...) ^^^^rael,
putting them on the Head of the Goat: and (...) he was to send him away by the
hand of a ^it Man (...) the Wilderness: and the Goat was to bear upon him (...)
their Iniquities into a Land not inhabited. (...) is the word used by the LXX
to express (...) Hebrew word Azazel; and accordingly the (...), that were
thought to avert (...), and the A (...), which were (...) offered by the
Heathens to avert impendent (...) are related to this.

Eleventhly, From the Water of Iealousy in (...) among the Jews, (Numb. 5. 12,
etc.) where^w^^^ they tried the Honesty of a suspected Wife, (...) like Custom
came to be used by the Gentiles. (...) Pausanias, lib. 7.
old Greeks tried their She-Priests, or Nuns, (...) were suspected of Whoredom,
with a (...) which they tendered to them to drink; and if (...) Party were
guilty, she presently was struck (...) They had also (as we learn from Vit.
Apollon. l. 1. c. 4.
(...) ^other Water, to try Perjury, which might be of the same Original.

Twelfthly, We read in several Authors, (some of whom you will find quoted in
Lib* 7. c. 29.
Caelius Rhodigin^^) that Branches were used in the superstitious Rites of the
Gentiles, and in the Worship of their Gods. Among the Athenians particularly
there was a Festival which took its Name from Branches: and Plutarch and others
tell us, that they went about with Boughs in their Hands in honor of Bacc^^^.
If we compare this with what the Jews did in the Feast of Tabernacles, (as the
Lev. 23. 40.
Scripture testifies, and as Antiqu. l. 3. c. 10.
Josephus relates) namely, that they sat under Booths which they shadowed with
Branches; that they sacrificed to God, holding in their Hands Boughs of Myrtle
and Palm; and that they went up and down many days with these in their hands,
we may gather hence, that this Hebrew Rite was borrowed by the Gentiles, who
were very apish; especially if we take notice that the Jews and Gentiles kept
this sort of Feast at the same time of the Year. For the Feast of Tabernacles
was celebrated on the ^ifteenth Day of the Month Tirsi, i. e. about the
beginning of our September: then it was that they feasted, and made merry, and
expressed it by all signs of rejoicing; and then it was also that the Pagans
kept their great Feast in honor of Bacchus. I know Sympos. 4. 3.
Plutarch derives that from this, and so makes the Jews imitate the Gentiles,
as some of late have done: but I hope I have suggested sufficient reason
already (and may do more afterward) to antidote against this vain Conceit.

I pass on to other Particulars: the (...) mong the Jews nourished their Hair
for a time, (...) then dedicated it to God; which was done by cutti^^ it off,
and offering it in the Temple or Tabe^^^cle and then burning it with the
Sacrifice, (...) 6. 18. That the Pagans imitated them in this (...) evident:
thus concerning the Greeks In Theseo.
(...) testifies, that they dedicated the First Fruits (...) their Hair to
Apollo, Aesculapius, Hercules, (...) and other Gods. The Romans likewise the
(...) time they shaved their Beards, and cut the Hair (...) their Heads,
offered them to some Deity, as (...) be proved from In Nerone.
Suetonius and other (...) And not only the Greeks and Romans, but the
Ass^^rians and several other Nations took up this O^stom, as you may satisfy
your selves abundantly from Meursius in Graec. Ferial. l. 3. ^ipsii Comment. in
Tacit. Montague against Seldom 's Hist. of Tit^es. Casaubon in Theophrast.
charact. Heinsius in Sil. Ital.
some Critics who have handled this Subject.

Several other things I might mention, as the Jews putting away all Leaven at
the Passover: whence perhaps Leavened Bread was not permitted to the Gentiles
at some certain times; yea it was not lawful (says Aulius Gellius) for
Jupiter's Priests to touch Leaven. From the Jews the Custom of Circumcising
went to several Nations, and not from them to the Jews, as Lib. (...) 7.
Strabo, Orig. contr. Cells. l. 1.
Celsus, and others conceited. But Ibid.
Origin confutes this Mistake, and shows that God himself first instituted this
Ceremony; that Abraham and his Race first practiced it, and in imitation of
them the People of the next neighboring Countries took it up, as the Arabians
and Egyptians. Of these latter, and the Ethiopians, the Persians, Phoenicians,
the Tro^lodytae, and those of Colchos, Lib. 2, and 3.
Herodotus, Lib. 3. c. 32.
(...), Lib. 16, and 17.
Strabo, testify that this Rite was used by them. Philostorgius relates the
same of the ancient Arabians. Pythagoras was circumcised, says (...). However,
this is certain that this Jewish Practice came into use among several Nations,
and it was originally from Abraham (who was first circumcised) and his Stock,
who were Jews. I might add here, that the Jews at circumcising the Child gave
it a Name: thence the Pagans took up the same Custom of giving Names to their
Infants. Hence Dies Nominalis went along with Dies Lustricus, and this was
about the eighth or ninth Day among the Romans; which seems also to be in
imitation of the Jews. Bigamy was forbidden to the Live. Decad. l. 1. 10.
Pagan Priests, as it was to the Jewish ones. So in compliance with the Mosaic
Law, it was unlawful for their Dio. Hist. lib. 54.
Priests to touch any dead Corpse. From the same Sacred Fountain was their Aqua
Lustralis, used in sprinkling of Sepulchers, and to purify those who had
touched them, or came near them. From the Law of Cherem, the Anathema, the
Thing or Person devoted to Death, Lev. 27. 28, 29. seem to be derived the Pagan
(...), and Devota Capita. The neighboring Gentiles heard of the devoting to
utter Destruction certain Cities and their Inhabitants; and it is likely they
heard that this was done by the special Command of God. Hence they apishly and
superstitiously imitated this Usage, (as you have seen they do in other things)
and devoted certain Men to Death and Destruction, to please and propitiate
their Gods. And this is the more credible, because the very word (...) (which
was sometimes confounded with (...)) was used by the ancient Greeks to signify
those miserable and execrable Wretches who were thus destined to the Infernal
Ghosts. When any great Plague or Calamity broke in upon the Pagans, Men, as
well as Beasts, were devoted to Slaughter, and given up as Propitiatory
Offerings to their Deities: and these, I say, were by them termed (...),
Accursed, Devoted, Execrable Creatures, which answers to the Jewish Cherems,
which were Things or Persons devoted to utter Destruction. This Pagan Usage was
but a Transcript of the Hebrew one.

Perhaps the use of Lots among the Gentiles had its Original from what the
Sacred Writings relate of this Practice. In Lev. 16. 8. two Goats (in order to
some Sacred Design) were chosen by Lot. Ioshuah found out Achan to be an
Accursed Criminal by this means, Josh. 7. 14, 18. The first Assignation of
Portions in the Land of Canaan, was by casting Lots, Josh. 13. 2. Saul was
chosen King of Israel thus, 1 Samuel 10. 21. By the same Method Jonas was
discovered to be the Cause of the Tempest, Jonas 1. 7. From which ancient
Instances of Lottery it is probable the Gentiles borrowed the like Usage, and
made choice of their Military and Civil Officers, and transacted other Matters
in this way. In (...), etc.
Homer some of the Great Commanders are made after this fashion, as Eurylochus
and others. Some of the Athenian Magistrates were annually called to their
Places by Lot; whence they were stil^d (...). Particularly this was the manner
of choosing Judges at Athens, as you may see in Antiqu. Lect. lib. 22. c. 18.
Caelius Rhodiginus. Yea, some were chosen into the Priesthood with this
Ceremony, and therefore had the name of (...), as Aristotle tells us in the
fourth Book of his Politics. They used Lottery on other accounts, as you may
see in Suidas in the word (...). This also was in use among the Old Romans
sometimes; and not only in the Election of Public Officers, but in other
Affairs: more especially in their Divinations these Lots were made use of, as
it were easy to prove. All which it is likely had its first Rise from the Old
Testament, and the Practice of the Ancients recorded there.

Is it not reasonable to think that the Cities of Refuge among some Pagan
Nations, whither Offenders fled for Protection, had their Origin from those so
expressly mentioned in Numb. 35. 13, 14, 15. Hence we read that Cadmus, when he
built Thebes, founded a Place for all sorts of Criminals to repair to: and
Romulus at the building of Rome erected a Sanctuary for Offenders to fly to.
Further, I could observe that the New Mons were celebrated by the Athenians
and other Grecians. Concerning the first Quaest. Romans
Plutarch is very positive: and as to the rest, that Hesych.
Proverbial Saying, (...), in use among them, shows that they solemnly observed
the first Day of the Month. The Romans likewise had the same Custom, as is
manifest from that of Fast. l. 1.
Ovid, Vendicat Ausonias Iunonis cura Calendas. And these New Mood Festivals
are referred to by Horace more than once, as you may see in Advers. lib. 15. c.
19. and l. 24. c. 45.
Tur^^bus. All which is of Hebrew Extraction. I could take notice that the
Latin Iubilare, and Iubilatio (which are found in Varro and other old Romans)
which signify great Rejoicing and Shouting for Joy, are from the old Jewish Law
of ^ evit. 25. 9, 10, 11.
Iubilee, a Time of exceeding Gladness, being the Year when Servants and
Debtors were restored to their Liberty and Possessions, which occasioned great
Rejoicing. And I could propound more Instances yet to prove that several
Customs among the Heathens were extracted from the Holy Scriptures, and that
Heathen Worshippers shaped New, Strange, and Profane Rites, and Ways of Worship
out of the Passages they ^ead or heard of there; and that most of the Heathen
Usages are corrupt Imitations of the Jews.

I will add to the several Particulars this one more, which though I will not
confidently pronounce was borrowed from the Jews, yet I propose it as a thing
very probable: It is this, that the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians were in
imitation of that People; for they were brought up under Shadows, Types and
Symbols, dark Representations, and mystical Rites: which might give occasion to
the Egyptians to teach Religion and Morality by Hieroglyphick Figures. I am not
positive here, (nor would I be any where else, unless I had good Grounds to go
on) because I am not altogether certain that the Hieroglyphick Learning began
after Moses. But there is great probability that it did, and consequently that
it was derived from what they observed among the Jews. This is the Persuasion
of the Inquisitive Obelise. Pamph. lib. 2. c. 7.
Kircher, who without ^^y hesitation averreth, that the Symbolical and
Hieroglyphick Learning was imbibed from the Hebrews. Nay, to go yet farther,
now we are come thus far; there are those who conjecture that a great part of
the Ancient Gentile Philosophy was collected from the Holy Book of Scripture.
Among the ancient Persians the Mosaic Religion might be ^iscovered in many
Instances which might be given of their Principles: and an Ingenious Huet.
Demonst. Evang. P^op. 4.
French Author has lately proved that their Zoroastres was the same with
Moses. And as for the Pythag^rick and Platonic Philosophy, which consists much
in Figures and Numbers, in Dark and Symbolical Precepts, it is evident that it
was made up out of the* Sacred Hebrew Writings. The Platonists Books concerning
God, the Genii, the Spirits and Souls of Men, though stuffed with many Errors
and Superstitions, discover a great Resemblance and Affinity with those things
which the Bible delivers about the Nature of God, Angels, and Humane Souls.
Eusebius particularly insists on this, and derives the Platonic Doctrines from
the Scriptures. Hence both he and Clement of Alexandria take notice of what
Numenius, the Pythagorean Philosopher, said of Plato, namely, that he was
(...). Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. lib. 11. c. 6. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
the Greek Moses. And indeed most of the ancient Sages and Philosophers were
obscure and mystic in their Style, and way of delivering their Notions, as the
Sacred Writers are observed to be very often. Hence it is said by the ancient
Father whom I last quoted, That 'O (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
the way of Philosophizing among those Pagans, was after the manner of the
Hebrews, that is, Aenigmatical. But as to the Matter, as well as Style, the
chiefest of the old Greek Poets and Philosophers, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod,
Thales, Anaxagoras, Parmenides, Empedocles, Democritus, Socrates, (besides
Pythagoras and Plato before named) agree with Moses. We may say of them all, as
an Historian says of the first of them, (after he had set down several
Particulars of sound Philosophy in his Poems) (...). Cedr^^* Hist. Compend.
They have pronounced many things concerning God and Man, which are consonant
to that Truth which we, who are taught by the Holy Writings, profess. This may
give light to what an Egyptian Priest told Solon, Plato in Tim^^o.
Yo^ Grecians (says he) are but of yesterday, and know nothing of the Rise and
Antiquity of Arts: there is not one of you that is Old, and there is no
Learning among you that is Ancient. His meaning was, that all their Knowledge
was borrowed, and that the Sacred Mosaic Philosophy and Theology were the
oldest of all. From this the Heathens took theirs, though sometimes they
express it in different Terms. Thus we have gone through the Mo^aick Records,
and in many Instances showed the Derivation of Gentile Philosophy, Principles,
Pra^tices and Usages, from those Sacred Writings; and consequently we have
evinced the Truth and Antiquity of these Records.

Before I leave this Head of my Discourse, I will here add the Testimony of
Pagan and Profane Authors concerning this great Lawgiver Moses, the first
Penman of Holy Scripture: which is still in prosecution of what I undertook, to
show that the Writings of the Old Testament, and with them their Authors and
Penmen, are attested by Profane Writers. It appears, first, from what these
have said, that there was such a Person, and that he was what his Writings
represent him to be. This is he that is called by Orpheus (...), alluding to
his Name Mosheh, Exodus 2. 10. which was given him because he was drawn out of
the Water. He is celebrated by Alexander Polyhistor, Philochorus, Thallus,
Appion (cited by Orat. contra Gent.
Justin Martyr,) by Manethon and Numenius (alleged by Contra Cells. lib. 4.
Origin and Praepar. Evang. lib. 9. c. 6.
Eusebius,) by Lysimachus and Molon (quoted by Cont. Appionem, l. I.
Josephus,) by Chalcidius, Sanchoniathon, Justin, Pliny in Porphyrius. Moses is
placed by Lib. I.
Dio^orus the Sicilian in the Front of his famous Lawgivers, only a little
disguised under the Name of (...), who is there said to have received his Laws
from Mercury. And why from Mercury? Perhaps because some Chronologers acquaint
us that the Great Mercurius, styled Trismegistus, (the antientest Philosopher
among the Egyptians) was either contemporary with Moses, or is thought to have
lived about his time. But St. Augustine tells us in his Noted Book de Civitate
Dei, that this (...) was Nephew to another M^r^urius, whose (...) was Atlas the
famous Astrologer; and he it was belike that flourished in Moses's time. Wh^^^^
(if I may be suffered to give my Conjectur^) (...) Poets did very ^itly relate
how Atlas bore up (...) Heavons; when in the mean time they meant (...) Moses,
who giving us the Authentic Records (...) the World's Creation, and beginning
his History with the Production of the (...), is the T^^^ Atlas that supports
the Spheres: nay, he may be rightly said not only to bear up the Heav^^s, (...)
the Earth, and to keep them from sinking into their first Chaos, by
transmitting the Account and Memory of them to all Posterity. I question (...)
but that Moses was represented by He^^mes Trismegistus; for (...) is no more
than a very Great, i. e. an Excellent Man; and such none ca^ deny Moses to have
been. (...), i. e. Interpreter, is appliable to none better than to Him, who
was the first Sacred and Inspired Interpreter of the Mind of God in Writing.
Letters were invented by this Hermes, says De Myster. Egyp^.
Iam^lic^us from his Ma^^^^ In Phileb.
Plato. Moses being the first Writer, may well be said to be the first Inventer
of Letters. Di^dorus also tells us that this Moses was the first that gave the
Egyptians (he should have said Jews, but those Mistakes are common with him and
other Pagan Authors) (...). Ibid.
Written Laws; and that ^e was A (...). Ibid.
a Man of a great Soul, and very powerful in his Life. And in another place he
says, he was (...). Eclog.
one that excelled in Wisdom and Valor. Geograph. lib. 16.
Strabo makes honorable mention of this Great ^^rsonage, yea speaks not only
of him, but of the Religion established by him, with great Respect. He ranks
him among the best Legislators, and highly praises his Laws, and gives them
the Preeminence before all others. He recites some of his Sayings and Deeds,
telling us that he left Egypt, and came into Syria, because he disliked the
Egyptians for their making and worshipping of Corporeal Gods, of the Figure and
Proportion of Brutes; and that Moses professed that God could not be
represented by any Image or Likeness whatsoever. There are Dionys. ^onginus
(...). Trogus Pomp. and ex ^o Justin. lib. 36. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
other Gentiles who speak of Moses, and his Laws and Constitutions; and they
would have been more favorable in their Testimonials concerning him, if their
Heathen Principles had not biased them to a more undue Character. Which is
taken notice of by Philo in the Life of Moses: Though (says he) some Pagan
Historians speak of him, yet they say but little, and that not truly neither.
Out of Envy, it is likely, or because of the great Disagreement between his and
the Laws of other Lawgivers, they vouchsafe not to remember him. But that
Testimony which we have is sufficient, and we may thence be satisfied that
Moses was the most Authentic Historian, and the Antientest Lawgiver; and we
may gather from what they say, that his Laws were the first, and gave beginning
to all other^* The famous Lawgivers and Politicians among the Grecians, as
Lycurgus and Solon, had the main of their Politics from Moses's Laws, whence
afterward the Romans took some of theirs. And as Moses received his Laws
immediately from God, so in imitation of him the greatest Lawgivers said they
had theirs from some Deity; as Numa from Aegeria, Minos from Jupiter, Lycurgus
from Apollo, Zabeucus from Minerva, etc. Still this establishes our Notion,
that the Writings and Practices of the Jews gave rise to many things among the
Pagans, which I will yet farther pursue.

CHAP. VI.
Profane Writers testify the Truth of these Particulars mentioned in the Old
Testament. viz. The Gigantick Race of the Canaanites: The Sun's standing still:
Jephthah's Sacrificing his Daughter: Sampson's loss of his Hair: The Foxes
which he made use of against the Philistines: Elias's rapture to Heaven: Some
passages relating to King Solomon, King Hiram, etc. The Sun's going back in
King Hezekiah's time: Nebuchadnezzar's Transformation into a Beast: His Dream
of an Image with a Golden Head, etc. Next, it is proved that the Heathens had
their Deities from the Old Testament: Their Saturn was Adam: Their Minerva was
Eve: Their Jupiter, Cain: Their Vulcan Tubal-Cain: Their Bacchus (as also their
Saturn and Janus) Noah: Their Apis, Joseph: Their Mercury and Bacchus, Moses:
Their Hercules, Joshua and Sampson: Their Apollo, Jubal: Their Ganymed, Elias,
etc.

^venthly. SOme other things which the Old Testament acquaints us happened,
after (...) giving the Law by Moses, till the Babylonian (...), are to be found
among Profane Writers. We read, in Numb. 13. 33. of the Gigantick race of
Canaanites, who are called the Sons of Anak, (...), in Deuteronomy. 9. 2. Ios. 11.
(...). they are called Anakims. Is there not some prob^ that the (...) daridae,
or (...) (and there were more than C^stor and Pollux that were called by that
name, De Not. deor. lib. 3*
Tully will inform you) who by the Greeks w^^ called (...) (as Tull. ibid.
Plu^arch. in Theseo. Theodor^t.
several Authors acquaint (...) had their Name from those Great Men who w^^^
the Offspring of Anak? These being driven Iosua^ out of Palestine, when he
overcame (...) Country, it is likely went into Greece, and from them the (...)
of Athens and Sparta descended and hence it was that the Name of (...) was
given, not only to the Tyndaridae, but all Great M^^ and Princes. I will add,
that it is probable the word gave Origination to (...), which signi^^^ Great and
Principal Men, such as those (...) were.

From that Miracle in Ios. 10. 13. of the (...) standing still, perhaps the
Poets Fiction arose, concerning the Night doubled or trebled by Iupit^^ for
Alcmena's sake. For (as has been sugges^^^ already) this sort of Men, when
they get a Story by the end, make what they please of it, and turn it into
quite another thing than it was at first. The rumor of that strange Accident
had come to their Ears, and they presently turned it into a Fable. And who
should stop the Course of the Su^ but Jupiter the Supreme God? And after the
ra^^ that they represented their Gods, that which is further added is apposite
enough, for they are not ashamed to tell us that they are Lewd and Obscene, and
indulge themselves in all Lustful Practices. Now, when the Sun stood still in
one Hemisphere, the other wanted his presence and light, and ^o they had as it
were a double Night, for the Sun's ^^aying here so long. But you shall have
another fable shortly, that will speak to the same purpose.

Porphyrius tells us, that Sanchoniathon had his Historical Narrations and
Secrets from one Ierombaal, Priest of the God (...); which shows that that
Hi^torian had his Matter from the Sacred Scriptures, the Hebrew Fountains of
Truth, though he oftentimes corrupts them. And it is evident that they had
partly learnt the Name of the true God, from the Hebrews, or their Writings;
for (...) was Jehovah the true God, whom the Jews Worshipped, as I shall ^^^w
more afterward. Besides, from the same ^pring they had some knowledge of that
Eminent ^^dge of Israel, Gideon; for Ierombaal, who is the ^ame with Ierubbaal
(as Bochart has proved) is Gi^on, as is expressly said in the 7th of Judge. V.
I. This was a Man of great Renown, and the Fame of his Noble Acts had reached
to the Nations round about. He might pass with them for a Priest, as well as a
great Warrior, seeing he built an Altar ^^to God, and Offered a
Burnt-Sacrifice upon it, and ^t the same time thre^ down the Altar of Baal, and
^ down his Groves, Judge. 6. 25, 26. which made a great noise (you may be sure)
among the Heath^^s.

Again, from Iephthah's Daughter's being Sacrifi^^^ (which could not but be
famed among the Neighboring Gentiles, and afterward spread it self ^^^ther)
the Greek Poets made the Story of Iphi^^^^a's being Sacri^iced by her Father
Agamemnon. That this is taken from that, and is the same Story, (only with the
alteration of the Names) is ^^^ar from this following Parallel. 1. The
Chrono^^^^ of Iephthah and Agamemnon is the same. They were at the same time,
i. e. when the Trojan W^ was, or at least, when it is supposed to have b^^^ for
Dion, Chrysostom, and some others are bold (...) say, there was no such Trojan
War, no Sack^ and Burning of that City, no Rape of a Gre^^ Woman: But the whole
Tale of it was the m^^ Invention of the Greeks, the prime Fiction they (...) up
with. It was all from the Scripture, viz. (...) History of Iephthah's Warring
with the Ammo^^^^^ and Ephraimites. But this is too high a flight, (...) I am
not ready to follow it. The Wars of T^^^ as they are represented by the Poets,
are too (...) to be made out of so little a Story. Notwit^standing this, it is
not improbable that the Story (...) Agamemnon and his Daughter, are the same
Relation with that of Iephthah and his. It is the general agreement of
Chronologers, that these were at the same time, yea, the beginning of the
Tr^jan War falls exactly in the very entrance o^ Iephthah's Government, says a
late Horn. Ar^. No^.
Writ^^. Hence it was easy to mistake one for the other, o^ rather one gave
occasion for inventing the other. 2. Iephthah and Agamemnon are both of them
represented to be Great Captains, and Warriors, and so agree in that common
Character. 3. Th^^^ Daughters are said to be the only Daughters of their
Parents. 4. They were both Virgins. 5. They were both of them devoted by their
Fathers when they were Warring against their Enemies. 6. One is said to wander
up and down the Mountains with her Companions. The other is feigned to be
turned into a Hind by Diana, and to range in the Woo^s, and Mountains. Or, some
say Diana pitied t^^^ Virgin, and not suffering her to be Sacri^iced, sent her
away to be a Priestess of hers. This is Poetic Fiction, but the main agreement
here, is in the Reprieve granted after their being destined to Sacri^ice.
7thly, and lastly, Iphigenia, the Name of Agamemnon's Daughter is no other than
Iphthigenia, i. e. Iephthigenia, or, in plain English, Iephthab's Daughter. So
that the very Name hinteth to us that the bringing of Iphig^nia, Daughter of
Agamemnon, a King of the Greeks, and General of their Armies, unto the Altar to
be Sacri^i^ed, for the saving of the Grecian Fleet, was borrowed from the
Sacred Story of Iephthah, a Judge or King of Israel, and Captain General of
their Forces, his Sacri^icing his Daughter, in pursuance of the solemn Vow
which he made upon his return after his Conquests over his Enemies. And this in
the close might be added, that whereas Humane Slaughters were grown
commendable, and fas^ionable even among the better sort of Heathens, by the
instigation of the Devil, it is not unlikely that some of them were imitations
of this Great and notable Example of Iephthah.

From Sampson's being shaved, was the Fable (...) the Fatal Hair of Nisus, King
of the Megar^nses, which being cut o^ by a desperate Lover, ruin befell that
Nisus. The Story in brief is thus; Nisus (who all agree Reigned about the same
time that Sampson was Judge of Israel) had an ex^^llent Head of Hair, Ovid's
Metamorph. lib. 8.
-- Cui splendidus ost^o
Crinis in^^re^at magni siducia regis.
Concerning which it was told him, that as long as he wore that, and kept it
entire, he should pr^^sper, and be Victorio^s, and none should be (...) to
expel him out of his Kingdom. But his (...) happy Daughter Scylla fell in Love
with (...) who was then his actual Enemy, and War'd against him: She to procure
Minos's Love, takes (...) Course the Poet speaks of there, -- Fatali Nata
Parentem Crine suum spoliat. She cuts off her Father's Hair when he was asleep,
and gave it to Minos, who overcame her Father, and took his Kingdom from him.
The very mentioning of this Story is sufficient to let you (...) how it agrees
with that of Sampson, only there was a Wife, and here a Daughter in the ca^e,
which is a mistake not unusual among the Poets* Sampson vexed and injured by
the Philistines, ti^ Foxes (of which that Country afforded store) (...) the
Tails with Firebrarnds between them, Judge. 15. 4. and sent them among their
Corn, and thereby burnt it down. Whence seems to be framed the Fable of the
Carseolan Fox, which Ovid speaks of in his Fasti, Book 4.

In Praetus's sending Letters by Bellephoron to I^batas, in which Bellephoron's
Death was designed, and contrived, (of which ^liad.
Homer, and othe^^ speak) there are perhaps to be seen the footstep^ of the
Story of Vriah's carrying the Letter of (...) Death to Iodb, 2 Samuel 11. 14.
There is but little difference between Iobatas, and Ioab.

It was famed that Elias went up to Heaven i^ a Fiery Chariot, with Horses,
according to what (...) read in the 2 Kings, 2. 11.
Sacred Story; whence the Greeks mi^took (...) (according to the Septuagint) or
(...) for (...), and applied it to the Sun, and its Course through the Heavens.
Those Fiery Horses and Chariots, they understood of those of the Sun, and
accordingly they fancied there are really such things, and their Poets
frequently talk of them. Sermon. 2. de Elia.
St. Chrysostom was the first mentioned this, and afterward In lib. Regum,
quae^t. 28.
Venerable Bede. But let the Curious inquire whether there be sufficient ground
for it from that Prophet's Flaming Vehicle, in which he was rapt up to Heaven.

With Pagan Poets, let us all along mix their Historians, and from them we
shall be sati^ied, that there were such Persons in being, and such things done
in the World, as the Holy Scriptures speak of. King Solomon and King Hiram's
Letters to one another (of whose Correspondence you read in ^ Kings, 5.) are to
be seen in the Tyrian Annals, and at this day, says Antiqu. l. 8. c. 2. and
contr: Ap. l. 1.
Josephus, and Man may have the sight of them from the Keepers of those Public
Writings. He sets down the words of Menander, who Translated those Chronicles
out of the Phaenician into the Greek Tongue, which expressly mention the great
Friendship of those two Kings, and the latter's sending Materials, and Workmen
for the Temple. He quotes Dius, who wrote of the Phaenician Affairs, and
attests the same thing of Solomon, and Hiram. Antiq. l. 8. c. 7. l. 9. c. 14.
l. 10. c. 1.
He tells us that Menander speaks of the great Famine and want of Rain in
Elias's time; and that he speaks of Salmanesser King of As^yria, and that In
Eu'erpe.
Herodotus mentions Senacherib King of (...) same Country, and his being
discomfited. Antiqu. l. 10. c. 11.
T^ same Author takes notice that Nebuchadnezzar (sp^^ken of in Daniel) is
mentioned in Berosus, in (...) gasthenes (who writ of the Indian Affairs,) in
D^ocles (who treats of the Persian) and in Philostr^^tus's History of the
Phaenicians, and Indians.

To proceed, it is Recorded that the Sun (...) back in King Hezekiah's days, by
the special Command of God, who (as you read in 2 King^ 20. 11.) brought the
shadow ten Degrees backward by which it had gone down on the Dial of Ab^^ The
Degrees in this Dial are to be understood ^ those in the Heavens, say some:
Others think the Degrees were Lines Engraved on the Dial. So many Hours, or so
many Half-Hours, or so many Quarters are thought by others to be meant. The
Miracle was here, says a Grot. in loc.
Learned Man, that the shadow on the Dial went back, not that the Sun it self
did so. But this is a great mistaking of the Miracle; for it is expressly said,
Isai. 38. 8. The Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down:
The Sun it self, as well as the shadow, moved backwards. Again, it is undeniable
that this Glorious Luminary of Heaven really went back, and consequently that a
very considerable duration of time; it may be ten hours were added to the
ordinary day: for the King of Ba^ylon sent an Ambassador on purpose to
Jerusalem to enquire about this Prodigy, and to know what caused so long a Day,
and such a Change of the Course of Nature, 2 Kings, 20. 12. This argues that
those at Babylon saw this unusual Motion of the Sun, for as to the going back
of the Shadow on that Dial, they could not see it. This shows it was a real
thing, and consequently Miraculous, and Portentous, and that it was not the
shadow only on the Dial that went backward so many Lines or Strokes, without
the Sun's going back in the Heavens, as some have fancied. The Chaldean
Astronomers could not but hear of, as well as see this Prodigious sight (for it
was as sensible to them, as to the King of Babylon) but out of ill will and
malice they labored to suppress this Retrograde motion of the Sun: whence it
is (as Consent of Scripture.
Mr. Broughton has observed) that though they reckon up several Eclipses which
happened about this time, yet they say nothing of this Miraculous going back of
the Sun. Yet (as a Seldom de Dis. Sir. Prol. cap. 3.
knowing Person has observed) there is a Mystical Remembrance of the Shadow on
Ahaz's Dial, and the length of that Day, among the Persian Priests, in their
Religious Rites performed to Mithra. But what those other Pagans would conceal,
their very Poets have delivered down to us in a Fable, telling us that the Sun
being angry at Hercules's Birth, made the Night unusually long: For if the Sun
make an extraordinary Day in one part of the World, it follows that there must
be a Night of an extraordinary length in another part of it. We find also, that
the foresaid Persians (in memory as it were of the Sun's prodigious going back
in King Hezekiah's time) Celebrate a Tripple Sun, viz. Going forward, returning
back, and again going forward, as Tirinus observes out of Dion.

Some have thought that the Pythagorean Metempsychosis had its Original from
Nebuc^adnezz^^^ Transformation into a Beast, which the Book of Daniel speaks
of. That he was really turned into a Beast, as to shape, it is not improbable,
for we read of People among the Scythians called Neuri, that were constantly
every year for some days together turned into Wolves, and then returned to
their former state again. Lib. 4.
Herodotus, who relates this, says it was con^idently reported by the
Scythians. The same happens every year to some People in Livonia (the Posterity
of those Neuri) says a Casp. Peucer. de Divinat.
Credible Author, who made it his business to inquire narrowly into this
matter: and he adds the like Examples in some other Countries. Wherefore it
cannot be utterly dis-believ'd that Nebuchadnezzar was thus Bestialized, and
remained seven years so, as the Sacred History informs us. Or, if by reason
only of Melancholy he thought himself a Beast (as Physicians have reported
that some have imagined themselves to be Wolves, others to be Dogs, others
Cocks, and have really believed they Worried, Barked, and Crow'd, which are the
Actions proper to those species of Animals) this was foundation sufficient for
the amazed Pagans to proceed upon, and to make some fanciful matter out of it.
Hence therefore some of the Heathen Metamorphoses (which the Poets are
frequently talking of) were coined; and hence, as I have said, the Pythagorean
Transmigration, i. e. the passing of the Souls of Men into Brutes, had its
birth. Which is the more credible from this consideration; that this Wonderful
Transformation of that Great Monarch happened at, or about the same time that
Pythagoras was at Babylon, whi^her ^e Traveled on purpose to gain the Eastern
Learning. Hence he brought the Report fresh with him, and being of a fanciful
Genius, thought the best way to solve that strange occurrence, was to assert
the Metempsychosis; for the Corporal Transformation he thought argued also the
Change of Souls.

Nebuchadnezzar's Dream (Dan. 2.) of an Image with a Golden Head, Breast and
Arms of Silver, Brazen Belly, and Legs of Iron, which represented the four
Monarchies of the World, was the foundation of the Poetical Division of Time
into four Ages, which they distinguish according to those four Metals; first
the Golden-Age, which began with the beginning of the World, and lasted to
Saturn's being turned out of his Kingdom. This signisies the happy State of our
Forefathers in Paradise, for Saturn is Adam, as you shall hear afterward.
Secondly, there is the Silver-Age, which lasted from Saturn's Exile and being
deposed, 'till Nimrod, or Jupiter Belus, who is the same. In this Age all Arts
were found out, they say, and this truly in part is testified by Genesis 4.
Scripture. Thirdly, they tell us of the Brazen-Age, which began under Nimrod,
or Jupiter Belus, and lasted to the first year of the return of the Heraclidae.
In this Age Tyranny grew up, and Wars began, and Slaughter was rife, as the
Poets relate; and not untruly, for we find the same in Sacred History. The
fourth Age is of Iron; it began from the return of the Heraclidae into
Peloponesus, and lasts to these very times, and so (...) (...)
He^iod, Aen. 8.
Virgil, M^tamorph. l. 1.
Ovid, and other Gree^ and Latin Poets speak of these Four Ages, comp^ring them
to those Four Metals, which without dispute was from Nebuchadnezzar's Dream,
and Daniel's famed Interpretation of it. These were spread over all the East,
and so it was easy for the Poets (as well as others) to light upon them, and
to make thence their Comparison of the Four Ages to the Four Metals.

Eighthly, The Heathens had their Gods from Scripture. I have partly showed
already that some of the Patriarchs, and other Persons in the Sacred Records,
are described by the Poets under other Names than what the Holy Writ gives
them. Now I will show that they are often represented under the Names of Gods
by the Poets; especially it is evident to an inquisitive Eye, that the Book of
Genesis afforded the Pagan World the greatest part of their Ancient Gods and
Goddesses, First, to begin with Adam, he without doubt was Saturn, of whom the
Poets relate that his Father was Coelus, and his Mother Tellus, that he Ruled
over all the World, and was Supreme Sovereign; that under him was the
Golden-Age, that afterward he was expelled his Kingdom, and deposed from the
Power and Dominion he had, and that he found out Agriculture. Answerably to
which, Adam is called 3. Luke 38.
the Son of God, which in the Language of the Poets is Son of Coelus: besides,
he was formed by God out of the Earth and so might be said to be both the Son
of Go^, and of the Earth. Adam was the first Ruler and Sovereign Lord, under
him was the Golden-Age, or happy State in Paradise, which all Men might have
enjoyed if he had not fallen. But he fell, and lost his Empire, and was
expelled that Blessed place. He was the first that Tilled the Ground, and
taught Men Husbandry. Besides, I have this to add, that Saturn is the same with
Time (for by the Greeks (...) with the change of a Letter is called Es^ idem
(...). Macrob. Sa^ur^^ I. 1. c. 12.
(...), and so they are Synonimous) and Adam well deserved that Name, being the
Eldest of all Men, and because Time began from him. This is very plain, I
think; and moreover the Name of Saturn might be given to Adam from Satar,
latere, because after his fall from that happy state he had been in, he
withdrew himself like a Guilty Malefactor, he fled for it, and hid himself in
the Garden, Genesis 3. 10. Hence Saturnus is the same with Latius, as Vossius
observes, and the Place which of old was called Saturnia, was afterward called
Latium, as Virgil and others testify. Thus the first Founder of Mankind, Adam,
was the first and eldest Saturn, the top of all the Heathen Deities.

And that Eve, the first of the Fair Sex, the Mistress of the World, and the
Mother of all Mankind, was made a Goddess by the Pagan World, is not to be
questioned, (yea, though she has been represented by them (as has been said
before) in a far other Character, for I have often intimated that it is the way
of the Poets to make a great many things out of one, and to represent the same
Person after a different, if not a contrary manner*) And yet I do not at
present remember that Vossius, or Bochart, or any other Mythologist (which is
something to be wondered at) assign her any Goddessship at all among th^^ Pagan
Divinities. Nay, Vossius, who maintai^^ that Naama^ (Genesis 4. 22.) an obscure
Woman, the Daughter of Lamech, was Deified by the Heathens, omits our Mother
Eve, the Empress of the World, the common Parent of all Mankind. I shall
therefore do her the right to assign the Rank which I think she held, and the
Name which was given her among the Heathen Goddesses. To know this, we need
only inquire who among them was the Goddess of Wisdom, and of all the Arts, and
who invented the things which were most proper for the Female Sex to find out.
This (without any curious search) was Minerva, and no other, and therefore I
doubt not but Eve was this Minerva. The three great Inventions attributed to
the Goddess of this name, are Spinning, and Weaving, and the use of Oil; i. e.
as I understand it, the use of it in preparing and ordering of Wool, for it is
likely that those who worked in Wool of old, made use of Oil then as well as
we do now. These are the staple Inventions of that Goddess; and as for the rest
that the Poets talk of, they are mere fantastic Flourishes of Poetry, and are
not to be minded.

Now, considering what I have said, what Woman in the World can we more fitly
imagine to be meant by Minerva, than Adam's Wife Eve, who questionless was
endu^d by God with eminent Qualities and Excellencies for the good of the
World, and especially with such as were most useful in one of her Sex, and who
was the Mistress and Guide of all the rest. She was certainly Noted and
Celebrated for some Art or other which she found out: And it is as certain that
no Invention is more worthy of a Woman, than Spinning, and Weaving, and working
of Wool, and making of Clothing; for this last comprehends the other two, and
was the peculiar Invention of Minerva, as Lib. 6. cap. 14.
Diodorus Si^ulus, and others assure us, when they mention the things found out
by her. This is called (...). Apollon. l. 1.
Minerva's Work or Business. She was the first that invented the making of
Apparel, says another Aristid. in Hymn. in Jov.
Ancient Author. It is true, all Artificial Works that were considerable, were
ascribed by the Ancients, to this Goddess, but Spinning and Weaving were more
eminently said to be from her. Our Mother Eve, who had the Wit and Skill to
discover these, and to improve them by her living so long in the World, might
well pass among her own Sex at least, for the wisest Woman that ever was, and
might be entitled the Mistress of all Arts and Sciences, that is, in the
Language of the Poets, the Goddess of Wisdom. Whence I conclude, that our first
Parent Eve, was Minerva, the First and Original Spinster, from whom her Sex
derive that commendable Title. Only I will add this, That when the Poets tell
us, that Minerva was Born of Jupiter's Brain, and without a Mother, they seem
to refer to Sacred History; which acquaints us, that Eve was not Born after the
manner of other Women, but was taken out of Adam's side. He that knows how they
are wont to mistake and adulterate the passages in Holy Writ, and to take one
thing (and ^o one part of the Body) for another, will not be averse to credit
this, and consequently that this is some con^irmation of our present Notion,
that Eve passed for a Goddess among the Genti^^s, and was called Minerva by
them, that is, (as Arnobius and some others interepret it) Meminerva, because
she that had so good an Invention, had doubtless as good a Memory, which is so
requisite to that.

Cain, the Eldest Son of Adam, was the first Ancient Jupiter: (for I deny not
that there were other Younger Jupiters among the Pagans) This first and oldest
Jupiter, the Son of Saturn, is said, to have invented the founding of Cities;
and we know, that the first City in the world, was built by Cain. This Jupiter
by the Athenians, was styled (...), a Founder of Cities, and (...), an incloser
or strengthner of Cities, says Pausanias; which well agrees to the First
Builder. Besides, this Cain Married his own Sister, and so the same is said of
Jupiter; he Married Vesta, Saturn's Daughter, who was the Goddess of
Architecture, and therefore was a proper Wife for him, who was the first
Architect. Moreover, we are Dio^or. Sic. l. 4. c. 25.
told, that Jupiter Traveled over all the World, which, in other terms, is
Cain's being a Vagabond. The Old Vulcan, the Smith of the Gods, was TubalCain;
for by a common Aphaeresis, and change of Letters, one of these Names is easily
made the other. And here let me insert that which will be useful to observe in
the like cases afterward, viz. that the Greeks and Romans, when they take any
Names from the Jews, they do not always set them down according to the Hebrew
Termination, nor with all the Letters of the words; they take the liberty to
omit some, and to alter others. Thus it is here in the words before us, and
thus we shall find it in others that are to be mentioned afterward, as we have
found it in some already. This Tubal-Cain, or Vulcan, may be said to have found
out Fire, or rather the use of it in his Employment, as he was an Arti^icer in
Brass, and Iron, Genesis 4. 22.

Noah was famous of old, and if Gods were made of Men (as certainly they were)
he could not miss of being made one; accordingly the most ancient Bacchus was
Noah, who first Planted Vines, and taught the making of Wine, Genesis 9. 20. I
will not insist on the derivation of Bacchus from Noachus, which some Learned
Men approve of, though Theolog. Gentil. l. 1. cap. 19.
Vossius will by no means allow of it, but thinks it too hard an Origination,
because the Greeks did not pronounce (it is likely) Noah, but Noi, for the
former was after the Points were brought in by the Masorites. But in answer to
this Great Critic, I will say these three things; First, he goes upon a false
supposition, that the Masorites invented the Hebrew Points, which I have
already proved to be an Error. Secondly, as I have already noted, the Pagans
are wont to change the Terminations of Hebrew words, and indeed to shape them
after their own way, and as they please. Thirdly, harder Etymologies please him
sometimes: to go no farther than the same Chapter, he there makes (...) to be
qu. (...), taking no notice of the (...) and the (...) though they be
considerable Consonants, and no Terminations neither. Notwithstanding then, the
suggestion of this great Master of Criticism, we may subscribe to the common
Opinion of Etymologists, that Bacch or Bacchus (with the change of a Letter or
two, which is very usual, or perhaps with the mistaking of one Letter for
another in the beginning of the word, Nun and Beth being somewhat like in
shape) was derived from Noa^^, and that from this Old Patriarch's Planting of
Vin^s presently after the Flood, and his unhappy feeling the strength and
virtue of the Grape, arose the Poets Tippling Deity, who is said by them to be
-- Ovid.
Genialis consitor uvae, The first Planter of the Grape, and the Inventer of
Wine. And for the same reason, those who think Ianus is derived from (...)
Vinum, hold that Noah was represented by this Ianus another God among the
Poets. This is true, that it is no unusual thing to set forth the same Person
by different Names, as if they were different Gods. And that Ianus comes from
Iajin, and so is as much as Vinosus, and may have reference to Noah on that
account is probable from this, that that part of Italy which Ianus possessed,
and where he is said to be Worshipped was called OENOTRIA, from (...) Vinum. Of
the Antiquity of Ianus that Old Writer Fabius Pictor gives this Testimony,
which agrees well with Noah; In Annalib.
In Ianus's time there was no Monarchy, for the desire of Ruling had not yet
harbored in the breasts of Men: (accordingly we read that Nimrod afterward
was the first Monarch and Absolute Ruler:) He taught People first to Sacrifice
Wine, and Meal. And the Epithet Bifrons, which is given to Ianus, intimates
that he was Noah, for he might truly be said to have had two Faces, because he
looked backwards, and forwards, he saw the times both before and after the
Flood, he beheld the former and the latter World. God honored him so far as to
make him (as (...). De Abraham^.
Philo speaks) both the end and beginning of Mankind. Others more fancifully
say he was called Ianus, a Ianua, from his opening a door as it were for the
preservation of Mankind: And Initium aedium dicitur Ianua, initium mensium
dicitur Ianuarius: sic Noachus erat in^^^um al^erium generis humani.
other such Conceits of the Name there are.

Again, this Noah was represented by Saturn, and here you must not wonder that
Saturn denotes both Adam, and Noah, for there is great resemblance between
these two, the one being the Parent of the World before the Flood, the other of
that after it; and for this Reason perhaps Noah is called by the Persians the
second Adam. Besides, the Poets confound many in one, and to make amends,
sometimes divide one into many. But that Noah was meant by Saturn, is the
Opinion of some of the Learnedest Critics, as Goropius, Becanus, Vossius, and
Boc^art, the last of which has Geograph. Sac. 1 part. l. 2. c. l.
offered about a dozen probable Arguments (as he deems them) to make it good. I
will mention to you some of them: Saturn is said to be the Husband of Rhea, i.
e. of the Earth: So Noah is said to be Ish haadamah, Genesis 9. 20. Vir Terrae,
which the Heathens might interpret to be a Husband of the Earth, and thence
ince^ted this into their Fabulous des^ription of Saturn. Or, if you mean by
those words that Noah was a Humble Man, and led a mean Life, then the Saturnian
Reign agrees with it, in which Men were strangers to Pride and Luxury, and
lived a mean, but peaceable and contented Life. Or, take it as it is
Translated, a Husbandman, one that looked after the Cultivating of the Earth,
and so it fits both Noah, and Saturn, or rather shows these to be one and the
same Person, who was employed about the Earth, and the Fruits of it, whereof
the Vine was one of the chiefest. Saturn devoured his Children, i. e. says
this Author, Noah Heb. 11. 7.
Condemned the World to perish by the Flood, whilst he himself escaped. Or, it
may be applied to his shutting up his Children in the Ark, among the Beasts, as
if he intended they should be devoured and destroyed. Saturn vomited up his
Sons again, in like manner Noah restored his Sons to the Earth, after they had
been shut up in the Ark, and kept so long on that other Element. Saturn was
driven out of his Kingdom by his Son, after he had first cut off his Father's
Genitals: which refers to Cursed Cham, Noah's Son, who saw his Father's
Nakedness, and told it with derision to his Brethren, Genesis 9. 22. The Pagans
mistook this Text: for whereas the word is (...), he told or revealed, they
perhaps read it (...) he cut, whence they report that Cham or Ham (whom they
called Jupiter) made an Eunuch of his Father. And truly, that Jupiter Hammon
was the same Ham, Noah's Son, may be gathered from the place where Ham and his
posterity were Seated, namely in Africa. Here, in the Deserts of Lybia, was the
Famous Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, who had his Name from that Wicked Son of Noah,
who in this place vented his Blasphemies (which passed for Oracles with some,)
and thereby debauched the Minds of the generality of that Age; and in process
of time he came to be Worshipped there under the Name of Jupiter Ham, or
Hammon. I know some have thought Hamon is Chamah Sol, because he is reckoned
the same with the Sun: And others derive it from Hamon Multitudo (as Abraham's
Name is Compounded of his former Name Abram, and Hamon, a Multitude, whence he
is called a Father of many Nations, Genesis 17. 5. So that Abraham is but an
abbreviature of Abrahammon.) But there is great reason to think that this
Hammon is the same with Ham, Noah's Son, whose Posterity were Inhabitants of
Africa, whence Egypt is called Psalm. 105. 23. 106. 22.
the Land of Ham. This Affrican or Egyptian Hammon is mentioned (as Bochart
thinks) in Ezekiel. 30. 15. I will cut off the Multitude of No, in the Hebrew,
Hamon of No. And so in I^r. 46. 25. Amon of No, i. e. Amon the God of No: And
in Nahum 3. 8. No of Amon: But the main Argument to prove Noah and Saturn to be
the same is yet behind, which is this; that Saturn by the Heathens is said to
have had three Sons, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, and that he divided the World
among them. This Fable of dividing the World among three Brethren, the Children
of Saturn, did plainly arise from the dividing the Earth between the three
Brethren, the Sons of Noah. Of these three was the whole Earth overspread, Genesis
9. 19. By these were the Nations divided in the Earth after the Flood, Genesis 10.
32. The Hot Country of Africa was Cham's division, who might have his Name
given him from a foresight of the place where he and his Race were to Inhabit,
the Land of Cham, from (...) Caluit: this is no unlikely derivation. Again,
Iaphet (another of Noah's Sons) was Neptune, as Bochart endeavors to show, for
the Isles and Peninsulae fell to his share, Genesis 10. 5. And Vossius is very
positive in this, that the Antientest Neptune (for there were Neptunes as well
as Jove's many) was this Iaphet, to his Lot fell Europe, for* Iapetus or Iaphet,
is reckoned the Parent of the Europeans: These are the true Hor. lib. 1. Ode 3.
Iapeti genus. Shem was Pluto, and what may be said for it, you may see in the
forenamed Writer. From the whole there is some reason to believe that Noah,
the Father of those three Sons, among whom the World was divided, was one
Person at least that was represented by the Heathen God Saturn.

In the next place, it is not difficult to prove that the Egyptian God Apis, or
Serapis, was no other than Joseph, the Renowned Ruler in Egypt under King
Pharaoh. This Person had abundantly merited of all Egypt, and infinitely
obliged the whole Country, by laying up Corn in store, and thereby providing
for them against the time of Scarcity and Famine. For this singular Benefit to
them, they erected an Ox or Cow to preserve his Memory, for in that Figure Apis
or Serapis appeared, and was Worshipped by the Egyptians. And under what Symbol
more fitly than that of an Ox could Joseph be represented? For not to mention
the Fame he got by his Wonderful Interpreting Pharaoh's Dream of the Fat and
Lean Kine, whence perhaps that sort of Animals was afterward in great
reverence and esteem on this account, as carrying with them some thing Mystical
and Hieroglyphical, which made them the more acceptable to this People, who
were then inclining to hearken to such things. Not to mention this, I say,
Joseph might most appositely be signified by that Animal which is made use of
in Ploughing, in order to the Sowing and coming up of the Corn, that Creature
which is serviceable to the treading out the Corn (for that was another great
employment of the Ox in those days.) Therefore the Holy Spirit in Scripture
seems to refer to this in Genesis 49. 6. which Text (speaking of Ioseph's
Brethrens wicked Design to kill him) calls him an (...).
Ox, or Bull, according to the 70 Interpreters; and so according to the Hebrew,
if you read it Shor, and not Shur. And, in Deuteronomy. 33. 17. Joseph is compared by
Moses to an Ox, or Bullock. Which manner of expression denotes him to be a
Great and Eminent Person, as well as it has reference to the particular thing
I am now speaking of. Shor (which is the Word here, and is Synonimous with
Alaph Bos) signi^ies a Prince, a Great Man, a Potentate, as knowing Angelus
Caninius in Instit. Ling Sir. ^^seph Scaliger in Eusebius. Nor.
Critics have observed. Because an Ox is reputed the Prince and Head of
Animals, you will find that in a Metaphorical way Princes and Captains are so
called in Genesis 36. 19. Psalm. 22. 12. 68. 30.
Scripture. Whence among Profane Writers also they are thus named sometimes:
for a Bull or Ox is a Symbol of Superiority, or Government, says Dion. Orat. 2.
Diogenes. On this account the Famous Patriarch Joseph, who was Constituted by
Pharaoh the Chief Ruler and Prince of Egypt, has this Name given him. But
there is something more particular intended here in this Title, for it has
respect to Joseph as he was Grand Proveditor of that Country: for there could
not be a better Symbol of Provision of Corn and Bread than this Creature. Hence
is that of Solomon, Prove. 14. 4.
much increase, (i. e. as the Hebrew imports, plenty of Corn and Grain) is by
the strength of the Ox. And it may be to this which I am now insisting upon,
viz. that Joseph was represented by this sort of Animals, Ier. 46. 20. refers,
Egypt is like a fair Heifer. The Egyptian Serapis then in the form of a Cow or
Ox, was a true Hieroglyphick of Joseph, especially when we add, that a Bushel
was placed on its head, as says Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 23.
Ruffinus, to signify that Joseph was the giver out of Corn, that he caused it
to be measured and proportioned according to the needs of those to whom he
dispensed it. By this Wise as well as Liberal Act his Fame grew great among the
Egyptians, and other adjoining Nations, and at length they Worshipped him as a
God by the Symbol of an Ox, which they styled Serapis, as not only Ruffinus,
Augustine, Suidas, Julius Firmicus of old, but Vossius, Bonfrerius, Pierius, and
Kircher of late have maintained. And I am inclined to think that the word
Serapis was Originally Sorapis, a Compound of Sor an Ox, and Apis an Egyptian
word perhaps of the same signification. And this is the more credible, because
the word Apis alone is sometimes used for Serapis. Some have thought that
Mercury was a Name given by the Pagans to this Joseph, he being Hermes, an
Interpreter, for it is particularly recorded that he Interpreted Dreams, Genesis
41. and 42, and was a Diviner, Genesis 44. 5. whence he was called Zaphnath
Paaneah, i. e. a Revealer or Interpreter of Secrets, Genesis 41. 45. But I rather
think these words are better rendered by St. Ierom (who tells us he learnt the
meaning of them from some that well understood the Egyptian Tongue) Salvator
Mundi, and so they refer to Ioseph's timely Saving that part of the World from
perishing by Famine. In this sense he was a Savior, and he was for this made a
God. Thus the Ancient Patriarchs were the Poets Gods; the first Fathers whom
the Bible speaks of were the Pagan Deities.

To proceed, Moses also was the Person intended by Mercury, as is excellently
well proved from a numerous company of Circumstances, and very naturally, and
without any forcing, by a late Huetius, in Demonstr. Evang.
Learned Frenchman, to whom I refer you. It has no less ingenuously been
proved by De Theolog. Gent.
Vos^ius, and some others, that Moses was represented in Liber or Bacchus, for
they show out of Pausa^as, how it was a Tradition, that as soon as Bacchus was
Born he was shut up in an Ark, and exposed to the Waters, as Moses was. Liber
was called (...); so Moses, besides the Mother that bore him, had Pharaoh's
Daughter, who took him and nourished him for her own Son, Exodus 2. 10. Acts 7.
21. Liber was Fair and Beautiful, and excelled others in Comeliness, as Diodorus
says, and as the Candida formosi venerabimur ora Lyaei. Sen. in ^^dip.
Poets represent him: semblably Moses was noted for his singular Beauty, Exodus
2. 2. Acts 7. 20. and the Jewish Historian tells us the King's Daughter Adopted
him, because (...). Joseph. Antiq. l. 4. c. 5.
^e was of Divine Shape, as well as of a Generous Mind. The very same is
Recorded by a Quem tormae Pulchritudo commenda^^r. Iu^tin. l. 36. c. 2.
Pagan Historian, which let me observe is a great Confirmation of the Sacred
History. Orpheus styles Liber (...), which answers to Moses's being
Legistator: and he attributes to him (...) because of the Two Tables of the
Law. Moreover, Liber is called by the said Poet (...), and (...), and (...),
and by In Bacchis.
Euripides he is named (...); which may be occasioned by a mistaking of those
words in Exodus 34. 29. Moses's Face shone, which is rendered by the Latin,
cornuta erat facies sua, the Hebrew Karan, (whence (...) cornu) being the
ground of that mistake, and causing Moses to be Pictured with two Horns.
Lastly, says Vossius, though Moses found not out Wine, as Bacchus, yet in
regard of This too he may have the Name of Liber, for he was the Conductor of
the Israelites to a Land not only flowing with Milk and Honey, but abounding
with Wine: and he it was that encouraged the faint-hearted Israelites by the
sight of that Bunch of Grapes which was the burden of two Men, Numb. 13. 20,
23. This is the Sum of what Vossius says. This Moses was so eminent and signal
a Person, and his Actions so well known to the Pagan World, that Monsieur Huet
thinks and endeavors to prove that he was represented not only by Mercury, and
Bacchus, but by Apollo, Aesculapius, Pan, Priapus, Prometheus, Ianus, and by
those Egyptian Deities especially, Osiris, Apis, Serapis, Orus, Anubis.

The Neighboring People of Phoenicia and Egypt could not but hear of Iosuah
and his Acts, and thence made their Hercules out of him; and from them he was
sent down to the Greeks, who you may be sure would augment the Stories which
they heard. I say Joshua was the Pagans Hercules, for he fought with Giants,
whose great Stature at first frighted the Israelites. In the Land of Canaan,
which he Conquered, were the Sons of Anak, Men of a vast size, Numb. 13. 33,
34. Bashan more signally is called the Land of Giants, Deuteronomy. 3. 13. Whilst
Joshua was fighting with these Canaanitish Giants Jos. 10. 11.
the Lord cast down great Stones from Heaven upon them: The remembrance of
which (says Vossius) is kept among the Gentiles, and applied to Jove assisting
Hercules in the very same sort when he grapled with Giants, and was put hard to
it.

Samson as well as Joshua was the Greeks Hercules, and from the one the History
or rather Fable of the other is taken. First, as Vossius observes, the times of
both agree: Hercules, and Samson were Contemporary, as appears from comparing
the Greek and Jewish accounts of time. When these hit together, there is a
presumption at least. Again, Hercules slew the Nemaean Lion, which answers to
what we read of Samson, Judge. 14. 5, 6. A young Lion roared against him, and
the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have
rent a Kid, and ^e ^ad nothing in his hand. Hercules subdued many Tyrants, and
Oppressors; that is the meaning of Hydra's, Centaurs, Stymphalides, etc. Thus
Samson was raised up on purpose to suppress and vanq^li^ those who had
miserably oppressed and (...) the Israelites. Hercules was sent Captive by
Jupiter to Eurysthaeus, and put to many Labors to (...) deem his Freedom: so
Samson served the F^^^listines, and undertook Great and Wonderful thi^^^ for
his and his Countrie's Liberty. Hercules w^^ of great strength of Body, and
that Samson was so, we have several remarkable Instances. Hercules was
E^feminate, and most vilely served O^phale; our Samson was enslaved to a Woman,
and was undone by Dalilah. Hercules and Sams^^ agree in their Deaths, for they
were both of them Spontaneous and Voluntary. From such sho^^ hints as these we
may gather that the Fable o^ Hercules, one of the Heathen-Gods, or Heroes a^
least, was meant concerning Samson the Famous Judge of Israel.

What think you of Ionas's being signified i^ some Circumstances by Hercules,
who when he returned from Col^his with the Argona^tes, as Lycophron in his
Cassandra tells us, was devoured by a great Fish, which the Scholiast on that
place says was a Whale? And Hercules lay three Days and three Nights without
any considerable harm in the Belly of this Whale, whence he is called by that
Poet (...), of which the Scholiast gives the true reason, because (says he)
all that time it was as it were Evening with Hercules, the Belly of the Fish
being Dark and Shady. Ph^vorinus gives the like account of the foresaid
Epithet, telling us that all the while he was in the Caverns of the Whale it
was Night. And both Cyril and Theophylact take notice of the likeness of this
Greek Fable of Hercules, to the Story of Jonah. I will only allege this one
thing more, that those Argonautes before mentioned, are said ^o have Sailed in
the Euxine-Sea, which was the very Sea according to Antiq. l. 9. c. 11.
Josephus, on whose ^hoar Jonas was vomited up. This must be granted, that the
Fame of what befell the Prophet Jonah, namely, how he was swallowed by a Whale,
and preserved three Days and three Nights in its Belly, and how he was after
that cast upon the Land whole and sound, might easily be conveyed to the
Grecians by the Phaenicians their Neighbors: thence they went to work after
their old rate, and fixed it upon some body among themselves: and whom could
they more fitly apply this History to than to Hercules, the great Adventurer by
Sea as well as by Land, and who was made the Author of all Great and Wonderful
things? The Fabulous Greek Poets caught up every Prodigious Occurence and
attributed it to him, but first they represented it with strange and uncouth
Circumstances, and molded it as they pleased. Thus the Gentiles framed new
Gods and Heroes out of the Names and Persons they met with, or heard of out of
the Scriptures. So it is, the Gods of the Pagans were made out of Men in Holy
Writ. The Gentiles Worshipped these Famous Hebrews under other Names and
Titles, which they were pleased to fasten on them. Behold! the Servants and
Favorites of the true God were Dei^ied by these Idolaters: Holy Men were
Canonized and Worshipped by the very Heathen World.

There are some other Particulars which mig^^ be named under this Head, (though
they are (...) so plain and evident as these already mentioned as that the
Ancientest Apollo was Moses's (...) Genesis 4. 21.
who invented Music, that the Poets Gany^^^ snatched up into Heaven by
Jupiter, and turned i^^^ that Sign which is called Aquarius, refers to (...)
who was taken up to Heaven, and before that h^^ command over the Waters of
Heaven, keepi^^ back the Rain for three years, and afterward b^ Prayer causing
those Waters to descend: That the Story of Phaeton was grounded on this
Prophet's Fiery Chariots, that Lucifer's fatal Defection is meant by Phaeton's
proud Attempt, and Fall; that the Dissoluteness of the Pagan Gods, of which the
Poets often speak, refers to the Degeneracy and Corruption of the Sons of God,
complained of in Genesis 6. 2. And particularly that their Lewd and Wanton Gods
might be from a misinterpreting the 4th v. the Sons of God came in unto the
Daughters of Men. Sometimes out of Things as well as Persons they coined Gods.
The Poets observing the RainBow to be a Sign of the change of the Air and
Weather, (either to be fair or foul) might make it the Messenger of the Gods,
who was sent out by them when there was any Change of the present Affairs nigh
at hand. But when I remember that observable Passage concerning the Rainbow,
in Genesis 9. 9. that it should be a Token of the Covenant between God and Man, I
am inclined to think that this was not unknown to some of the inquisitive
Heathens, who pried into the Sacred Writings of Moses, and thence looked upon
that Remarkable Meteor as some Sacred and Divine thing, and according to their
fanciful way advanced it to the Office of Internuntia Deorum, as they expressly
called it, and (...), as Homer styles it, a Messenger between God and Men;
particularly a Messenger of Peace and Reconciliation with the new World, ^n
Angel of that Covenant. This is their Iris, which is from (...), i. e. (...);
or it is perhaps from the Chaldee Ir an Angel. Again, there are ^trange Fiery
Apparitions mentioned in the Old Testament, as the Burning-Bush, and the
FlamingChariots before spoken of; and we read that God appointed Holy-Fire to
be kept always on the Altar. Hence perhaps it was that Fire was made ^ God, and
Worshipped by the Chaldeans and Persians, and was in such request among the Old
Romans, that (as you have heard) they ordered the Vestal Virgins to keep it
unextinguish'd. Thus the Heathens had their Gods and Goddesses from the Holy
Book; which it may be that Sagacious Author of the Book of Maccabees meant,
when he said, 1 Mac. 3. 48.
From the Book of the Law the Heathens sought to Paint the likeness of their
Images. We have found in this Discourse, that their Images or Gods have been
made like to those things which they meet with in the Sacred Writings. I have
showed you the Resemblance and Agreement between them in many Considerable
Circumstances.

CHAP. VII.
From the Names of the True God the Gentil^^ had the Names of their False ones;
as jo^^ and Jao, from J^hovah and Jah; (...) from Adonai, Baal Berith and
Sabazius fr^^ Epithets given to the True God. Also, t^^ Pagans giving the Title
of Gods to the^^ Kings, is derived from the Sacred Writings. Anchialum in
Martial, has reference to the form of Swearing in the Old Testament. The
Authors particular resolution of that mistakes word. The use of the word Horns
in Pr^phane Authors, is borrowed from the Sacred Style. Several other words,
Phrases, and Forms of Speech, among the Pagans, are taken thence. There are
some footsteps and relics of the Sacred History in the most remote Countries
of the World. Objectio^^ against the foregoing Discourse answered.

Ninthly. THE Heathens had the Names of (...) Gods, and the pronunciation of
th^^ sometimes, from the Names and Titles of the True God. They seem to have
derived something from what the Jews practiced, concerning the Great
Tetragrammaton, which was called by them Hashem, the Name emphatically, the
Name appropriate to God, the unexpressible Name; for the Jews tell us, that
this Name which we read Ie^ov^^, was pronounced by the High Priest only, and
that but once a year, in the Temple, at the Fe^^ of Propitiation, so that it
was not known by the People how it was pronounced. When they met with it in
their Bibles, instead of it they read Adonai, or Elohim. Hence a great many
Conjectures have been about the right pronunciation of this Name. It was read
Iave or Iahave by the Samaritans, but this is laid aside, and Mercer and
Drusius read it Ieheve. Some think that Iehejeh Erit was the word used at first
by the Jews, and that afterward it was corruptly changed into Ieheveh, the Iod
being turned into Vau. The true Punctation of the Proper Name (...) was
anciently Iahavoh, says the Dr. Bright.
Learned Prefacer to the First Volume of Dr. Lightfoot's Works, but he is not
pleased to give any Reason for it. Whether Galatinus was the first that read
and pronounced it Jehovah I will not here inquire; but this is certain he had
it from the Masorites, according to whose Points it is (...), and without
question those Hebrew Critics had it from the best and ancientest Copies. This
was the first and truest reading, and some Men's varying from it has proceeded
from their Belief of the Jewish Conceit and Tradition, that their Forefathers
knew not how to read or pronounce the Tetragrammaton. But though it is true
they seldom or never spoke it, yet this did not proceed from their ignorance of
the right pronunciation of it, but from a Supersti^ious Reverence and Fear of
Profaning that word, by taking it into their Mouths. But the Holy Scripture it
self warrants the Pronouncing of this Name, for in Genesis 22. 14. Abra^am calls
the place where he would have Sacrificed Isaac, Iehovah-jireh: now a Place
cannot be called by its Name, unless the Name be pronounced. So Gideon built an
Altar, and called it Iehovah-S^alom, Judge. 6. 24. Besides, the Jews themselves,
as precise and nice as they are in this matter, compound many Proper Names of
it, though with some abbreviating of it, as Iehochanan, Iehonathan: whence it
is evident that they knew how to pronounce this Name of God, but from the
reverend esteem which they had of it they refused to do it. The Rabbis
foolishly pretend Scripture for this, Isa. 45. 15. Verily thou art a God that
hidest thy self, applying these words to the concealing of his Name. And they
corrupt another Text to maintain this their Superstitious Fancy and Practice,
Exodus 3. 15. This is my Name, le gnolam, for ever: they read it legnalem, to be
concealed. Now, I say, to this Practice of the Jews, viz. their obscure and
uncertain Pronouncing, or rather their not knowing how to pronounce the Name of
the true God, the Heathens seem to refer, when they call him the Unknown, and
the Incerti Judaea D^i. Lucan. Ph^rsal. lib. 2. Inc^rtum N^^en, Trebel. Pol. in
vita Claudiani.
Uncertain God, and Inn^mi^atus deus. In vita Caligulae.
the God that is not to be named. Socrates exhorted the Athenians, says Justin
Martyr, to the knowledge of the (...) Apolog. 1.
Unknown God, that is, the God of the Jews. The Inscription on the Altar
erected at Athens, To the Unknown God, shows that they gave the True God that
Name, for the Apostle interprets it of Him, Acts 17. 23. Thence that in Lucian,
N^ (...). I^ P^ilopat.
By the Unknown God in Athens. And Hesychius tells us that there were a sort of
Gods called (...), Worshipped by these Athenians, and the Feasts kept in Honor
of these strange Deities were called (...); especially the Hebrew God was
numbered by them among the strange ones; therefore when the Gentiles were
speaking of this God of the Jews, they added, (...). Dion. Hist. l. 36.
whosoever he be: as much as to say, he and his Name are not known. And in
imitation of this, perhaps some of the Pagans would have their Gods to be
Unknown. S^tur^^. l. 3. ^. 9.
Macrobius Acquaints us particularly concerning the People of Rome, that they
would have their God, under whose protection the City was, concealed; and he
pretends this reason for it, because if the Name of their Tutelar God were
known, the Enemy would make use of it, and call him out by their Magic Art.
But the true reason might be their fond imitating of the Jews (whom in many
other things they were wont to follow:) hence they were not to know the Name of
the Tutelar God of Rome; he was (...). Roman. Q^aest.
Unknown, and Unutterable, as Plutarch testifies.

But as the Jews pretended, out of a superstitious humor, that the Name (...)
was not unknown to them, when they knew well enough the right pronunciation of
it; so the Gentiles, though they called the God of the Jews the Unknown God*
and seemed to be ignorant of his Names, yet it appears that they had some
knowledge of them, and that they Entitled their Gods by the Names of the God
of the Jews. Which I prove thus; the Tetragrammaton was ^ot unknown to the
Chaldeans, as is clear from (...). 36. 15, 18, 20. where we read that the
Idolatrous Rabshakeh (who at that time spoke in the Jews Language, v. 13.) knew
it, and often pronounced it. And this Name of God is found among the Grecians
also, though altered and corrupted. From Saturnal. I. 1. c. 18.
Macrobius we learn that Iao was the Chief God of all among the Gentiles, for
which he quoteth the Oracle of Apollo Clarius.

(...). Know this, that the Supreme God of all is Iao.

A most Illustrious Attestation to the Holy Writ, and the Great Name of God
contained therein. Jehovah was corruptly pronounced Iao, and Io was a contract
of Iao, as in the Songs and Hymns wherein they Sung Io Paean. This latter word
(as Rous's Archaelog. Attic. I. 2. c 2.
one conjectures) is from Panah to look, or behold: and so Io Paean is as much
as Jehovah Penoth, Lord look upon us. For it is probable that Io, Iao, and
(...) and (...) (for all these were in use) were abreviatures of Jehovah, as
Iah among the Jews was an Abridgment of this. Several of the Irenaeus, Clem.
Al^xandr. Eusebius, etc.
Ancient Fathers are positive that Jehovah was written by the Greeks, who were
not well acquainted with the pronunciation of it, (...) Accordingly, says
Porphyrius the Philosopher, cited by P^aep. Evang. I. 1. c. 5.
Eusebius, Sanconiathon received the account he gives of the Jews from a Priest
of the God (...) And it is testified by l. 5. c. 5.
Diodorus, that Moses received his Laws from the God that is called (...). The
Mistake arose from the ignorance of the Name Jehovah. Whence it appears that
(...) is the same with Iah and Jehovah, and that the former is but a mistaken
pronunciation of these latter.

I will add that Plato's (...), came from Moses's (...), Exodus 3. 14. according
to the Septuagint, and (...) I am, according to the Original. And the same
Philosopher's To (...), answer to Jehovah, which is a Name of Existence.

Nay, that is more remarkable which we meet with in (...). D^^^. and Osiris.
Plutarch, who assirms that the Inscription on the Temple of Minerva in Egypt
was thus, I am all that is, and was, and shall be. Which is a plain reference
to God's Name in Exodus. And he speaks of another Inscription of (...) in the
Temple at Delphos, which he thus applies to the peculiar Essence and Existence
of God, is the complete Appellation of God: in our answering and speaking to
God, we say, Thou art, attributing to him this true, certain, and only
Appellation, which agrees to him alone, which is called Being or Existing. And
afterward he expatiates concerning the uncertain, labile and flux Nature of
Man, and all things in Comparison of God, who is most properly said to be,
Eternally Existing. This is Ehejeh, (...), I am, of which Name of the True God
these Gentiles had some notice, and that from the Hebrews, and imitated in the
Names that they gave to their false Deities.

Iovis, the old Nominative Case for Jupiter, (as Priscian says, and so it is
used by Ennius and Varro) is borrowed from this Name Jehovah. Jupiter is no
other than Iovis-piter, or Iovis-Pater, Father Jove, or Iehove, and so answers
to Jehovah, who has the Name of Father given him often in Scripture. And it is
likely that heretofore some contracted the word Jehovah, and read or pronounced
it Iovah, as the Jews pronounced Judah for Iehudah. Nay, Jove or Iova, the
Abreviature of Jehovah was perhaps used by Moses himself; which I gather from
what Josephus says of the Name Written on the High-Priest's Mitre; viz. That
it had four Vowels, and consisted of four Vowels alone: This seems to have been
Iova, which consists of just so many Vowels, though two of them are used as
Consonants, unless you will say they pronounced I and V. as Vowels, thus, Ioua.
We may then reasonably believe that the Name of the Heathens God Iovis came
from the corrupt pronouncing or contracting the word Jehovah, or (which comes
nearer to it) Iehovih, for so you will find it Written in Deuteronomy. 3. 24. 9. 26.
And that Iovis is of Hebrew Original, and derived from the Tetragrammaton, is
confessed by Varro, who thought that Iovis was first of all the God of the
Jews, as Deum Judaeorum Iovem putavit. De Consens. Evans. lib. 1.
St. Augustine quotes him. And though the Pagans altered the Name, and made it
sometimes exceed, and at other times come short of four Letters, yet this did
not extinguish the sense and notion among some of them, that the Original Name
was a Tetragrammaton, For it is likely that the Pythagoreans (...), the Number
Four, by which they used to Swear, (especially they confirmed the most serious
Truths with this Oath) was taken from the Jews Tetragrammaton. The Excellent
Hierocl.
Commentator on Pythagoras's Golden Verses, and particularly on this passage in
them, talks at large why God is called (...) Quaternarius, so that it seems the
Pythagoreans applied it to God. Whence a Seldom de Dis. Sir.
Learned Antiquary of our own concludes, that (...) was Jehovah, and he
conceives that Pythagoras (who speaks of it in his Verses) had this Mystery of
Quaternity from the Hebrews, who had in great veneration the Tetragrammaton,
the Name of God of Four Letters. It was easy for this Philosopher, who
conversed in his Travels (as is acknowledged) with Hebrews and Chaldees, to
arrive to the knowledge of this Name.

Let me suggest this in the next place, that since the Name Jehovah was
commonly pronounced Adonai by the superstitious Jews, it might hence come to
pass that this Adonai, with a very small change, gave the Name to one of the
Poetic Gods among the Heathens, viz. Adonis. To confirm which, add what
Hesychius says, that (...), i. e. (...).
Adonis is as much Lord among the Phaenicians. He mistakes the Phaenicians for
the Hebrews here, as is very usual. Whence then can we with greater probability
think that Name was given to a Pagan God, than from its being of so near
affinity with Adonai, the Name of the True God among the Jews? Again,
Baal-Berith, i. e. the Lord of the Covenant, was the Name of a God or Idol of
the Phaenicians, Judge. 8. 33. Which seems to be an imitation of the Title of
the True God, who as soon as the Deluge was past Genesis 9. 9.
made a Covenant with Mankind, and after that we find him Genesis 17. 9.
Covenanting with Abraham, and afterward Ex. 34. 27.
with the whole People of the Jews: and frequently in Scripture we see he is
making a Covenant with his Servants, so that he is the true Baal-Berith, the
Lord of the Covenant. The Phaenicians borrowed this out of the Jewish and
Sacred Writings, and applied it to one of their Gods: whence it was propagated
to other Nations, and (...) Foederator, the Covenanter, was the Title of
Jupiter.

Among the Names which the Gentiles give to their Gods, I may reckon (...), or
Sabazius, (for it is sometimes Latinised) to be one. That this was the Name of
jupiter especially, you read in Strabo, Valerius Maximus, Apuleius. That it was
a Title also given to Bacchus is witnessed by Aristophan. in Avib Diodor. Sic.
lib. 36. Lucian. Council. D^or.
others. In allusion to this, the word Sabos is often heard in the Orgia, i. e.
the Sacred Rites of Liber, as Sympos. 4.
Plutarch acquaints us. And from In Vesp.
Aristophanes we learn that (...), and (...) were words of Acclamation and
Rejoicing among the Pagans, at their Great Solemnities, and Festivals. Now this
Name seems to be of Hebrew Original, and refers to the Iudaick Sabbath, that
Sacred Festival in which God was most solemnly Worshipped by that Nation: And
this Plutarch was sensible of, viz. That there was an assinity between (...)
(before mentioned, the word used in the Gentile Festivities, especially by
those that kept the Bacchanalia) and the Jewish Sabbath; only in this he erred,
not knowing the derivation of the Hebrew word, that he thought this was taken
from that, (...) from (...); as he expressly says. Or perhaps this Name (...),
which was given to their false Gods, was taken from that of the true one; and
Jupiter Sabazius is as much as Jehovah Zabaoth, which both Chapter 48. v. 2. 51.
15. 54. 5.
Isaiah and Chap. 10. 16. 31. 35. 50. 34.
Jeremiah frequently repeat as the proper Name of God: Jehovah Zabaoth, the
Lord of Hosts is his Name. Some have thought the word Tzebaoth is placed here
by way of Apposition, as if it should be rendered Dominus Sabbath, and thence
Epist. 136. ad Marcellam.
Ierom reckons Sabbath among the Names of God. But questionless this word is in
the Plural Number, and in regimine, and so the true rendering is Lord of
Sabbath, i. e. of Hosts. Yea, you will find the Hebrew word retained even Lord
of Sabbath, ^^m. 9. 29. Iam. 5. 4.
in the Greek, as if there were something more than ordinarily remarkable in
the Hebrew. The Pagans, who got the sound of this word (as very famous among
the Hebrews) took it by it self for God's Name, and thence (it is likely)
framed the word (...). This shall suffice in brief for a proof of what I
undertook, that the Names of the God of Israel are applied by the Heathens to
their Idol-Gods. The Pagans call their Deities by Titles which are given to the
True God Jehovah. This makes good what I aimed at, that the Heathens had these
as well as other things from the Sacred Scriptures: and it is certain they
could have them from these only; which is a proof of the verity and antiquity
of those Holy Writings.

Speaking here of the Heathen-Gods, and their Names as borrowed from Scripture,
it may not be impertinent to observe, that even the Title of Gods given by the
Pagans to their Kings and Princes, was derived from the same inspired Writings
I grant that it partly proceeded from their sottish Opinion that they were Gods
indeed: But it is as true, that it might be derived to Profane Writers, from
the style of the Holy Ghost in the Old Testament, where Magistrates are called
Gods. Thus in Exodus 22. 8. the Gods and the Rulers of the People are
Synonimous. Moses was to Aar^^ instead of a God, Ex. 4. 16. i. e. according to
the Chaldee and Arabic, a Judge or Prince. God himself honors the Rulers of
the Sanhedrim with the Title of Gods, Ps. 82. 6. I have said ye are Gods. So in
Psalm 138. Gods in the 1st verse are Kings of the Earth in the 4th. It might be
observed that Elohim and Adonai, the usual Names of God himself, are attributed
to Great Men in the Sacred Writings. In short, as God is often called King in
Scripture, so Kings are called Gods, and thence the expression is conveyed to
the Pagans, and frequently used by them. Among the Eastern People Melech,
Moloch, and Malcham, (for these words are indifferently used) signify both God
and King. And perhaps it was in conformity or relation to this Notion, that
they commonly inserted the Names of their Gods into those of their Princes,
though it might be also as a good Omen, or for Honor's sake. From their Gods,
I say, Princes compound their Names, as Belshazar, from Bell: Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebuzaradan, and Nebonasser, from nebo an Assyrian God; Evilmerodach, from
Merodach a Babylonian God^ and many others. Among the Persians we read the Name
of God was bestowed on their Emperors: Thus Xerxes was styled the (...).
Dionys. Long. (...).
Persian Jupiter. One of the Antiochus's had the Surname of (...). We shall
find likewise that other Nations complied with this Notion. What if I should
say that the (...), mentioned by Pythagoras in his Golden Verses, are these
Terrestrial Gods I am speaking of; viz. Great Princes, Celebrated Heroes, Wise
Rulers, Divine Men, or Earthly Deities? Plato tells us in his Politics that a
Good King is (...).
like some God chosen out from amongst Men. Princes and Commanders are styled
by Homer (...) and (...), born and bred of the Gods. But especially among the
Romans this sort of Language was common. Rome was no less than Heaven, and the
Emperor was God. (...) is applied to the first Caesar by Lib. 4.
Strabo. The next (viz. Augustus) is called Deus Caesar by Propertius. Edictum
Domini Deique nostri, is Martial's Language. At Rome the Royal Palace was
reputed a Temple: the Mount Palatine was Sacred and Venerable, because the
Emperor's Seat was there. Magistra^^m pot^stas proxime adDeorum Immortalium
numen accedit ^ro Rabirio.
The Sovereignty of Magistrates approaches next to the Majesty of Heaven, says
the Grave and Renowned Orator. And with him agrees the Pithy Moralist, who
tells us that Non alio nomine populus Rectorem (...) quam si Dii Immortales
porestatem visendi sui ^atiant. Senec. de Clement. l. 1.
the People are to look upon their Governors under no other Character, than as
if the Gods were come down to visit them. We may say here, as the Philosopher
in another Case, and hic Dii sunt, there is a kind of Divinity in Rulers, they
are Earthly Numen's, they are Created and visible Deities: And being so styled
first of all in Scripture, the Title has come down to the Pagan World, but
has been infinitely abused.

Having taken notice of several References in Profane Authors, to express
Passages and Usages Recorded in the Old Testament, I will here super-add one
which I meet with in Martial's Epigrams: And I will the rather insist upon it,
because the place is obscure, and has yielded matter of great Controversy
among the Learned. The Epigrammatist writes to a Jew, and tells him he will not
credit what he says, though he Swears by the Temple of Jupiter, or of any
other Deity: Wherefore he puts him upon Swearing by Anchialus.

In Verpum. lib. 11. Epigr. 94.
Ecce negas, jurasque mihi per templa Tonantis:
Non credo; jura, Verpe, per Anchialum.
There have been great disputes about this Anchialus, some thinking it to be
Sardanapalus's Statue crected in Anchiala, a City of Cilicia, and there
Worshipped: Of this Opinion is Dom. Calderinus: Some taking it for a Man or a
Boy, some for a City or Town, and others for a Beast, as Vossius the Elder
conceits it refers to the Jews Worshipping an Ass, because (...) is Asinus. But
he might as well have understood by this word a Horse, or a Man that carries
Burdens, for that is the import of (...), or rather (...). Besides, Angarius
and Anchialus are too different in sound to be thought to be the same:
Wherefore I dismiss this. The rest of the Modern Critics agree in this, that
the Poet directing this Epigram to a Jew, refers to something in use among that
People, and particularly something mentioned in their Bible (for that would
make the Jest the more biting, as he imagined) viz. The Form of Swearing by the
True God which is used there. But these Authors differ about the Form. De
Emendat. Temp. in Prolegom.
Joseph Scaliger derives it from the Hebrew Fountain (...) i. e. si vivit Deus,
which was a form of Swearing with the Hebrews: hence, says he, Martial was
mistaken, and thought they swore by Ancbialus, whereas the Oath was Am chi
alah, i. e. If God lives. Our Learned Farnaby likes this Criticism very well,
and has inserted it into his Notes on this place. But by the leave of so Great
a Critic, there is I conceive something faulty in it: For though I am most
willing to grant, that there is in this place a reference to the Form of
Swearing which was used by the Jews in the Old Testament; yet I am not forward
to assent to this interpretation of the word Anchialum, which this Noble
Philologist presents us with, and that for these Reasons; first it is not Am
but An that must answer to the beginning of the word Anchialum. However, this
may be born with, being an easy change of a Letter. Secondly, there is no such
Hebrew Word as am. There is im si, but then it should be Imchialum, not
Anchialum. Thirdly, Ala is not an usual word for God among the Jews, because it
is an Arabic, not an Hebrew word, and 'twas never made use of in that Nation,
and it is not once mentioned in the Holy Bible, wherefore I cannot believe they
solemnly Swore by it.

For the same Reason I am apt to reject th^^ other solution of this place in
Martial, which a very Petit. Var. Lection. l. 1.
Excellent and Choice Writer has offered. Anchidlum or Anchialon, says he, is
composed of these three words [An] non, [Cha] vivit (and without the Vowel
under it Chi, and perhaps they might vulgarly pronounce it so) and (...) or
[alon] deus: For this (says he) is an Oath of a Jew who denies the Crime which
he is accused of, he Swears thus, An chi alon, i. e. Non: vivit deus. But I
cannot on due Consideration think that this is a true account of this Passage;
for first Alon was not a Name in use (nay perhaps not known) among the Jews.
This Author indeed says it may be gathered out of Plautus, that God's Name was
pronounced Alon, but we are not to consider what pronunciation the Name had
among other People, i. e. Foreigners, but what was in constant use among the
Jewish People: for the Poet refers here to that. Wherefore there being no such
Name among them, it could not be used by them in an Oath and consequently it is
not here meant, when Martial is jesting with the Circumcised Poet. And as for
the word Eljon, which it is true is often used in Scripture, and of which this
Alon seems to be a corruption, it is an Epithet rather than a Name of God, and
therefore was not (it is likely) put into a Formal Oath. Again, the word an,
which this Author makes one of the ingredients of this word which the Poet
uses, has no such lignification as he pretends it has. Indeed ajin, and the
contraction of it in is non, but an has no other signification but ubi, or
quorsum, or quous (...) as any Man may satissie himself, by consult^^^ the
places where it occurs.

But another Seldeq de ^ur. H^red, Hebr.
Person of infinite Literature (who (...) is of Opinion that it is an Oath, and
a Jewish (...), that is here meant) tells us, that per Anchialum is a
corruption of (...), i. e. ulciseatur is qui vivit in aternum: For we read,
says he, that Chi olam is one of Gods Great Names, Dan. 4. 31. and we read
also of Swearing by this Name, Dan. 12. 17. wherefore Martial's Verse should
have been written thus, Non credo: jura, verpe, iperan Chi olam. (...) Let him
who lives for ever ( viz. God) take ^^^geance on me, viz. if I forswear my
self. This is a Criticism worthy of so Learned an Antiquary. (...) I have
something considerable to object against a; as first this iperang which he here
brings in is ^^^^ether redundant, for we read not that they ^^^d this word in
Swearing, therefore there was (...) reason to insert it here, and to make it
part of the form of a Jewish Oath. Moreover, Chi^^^^ is mistaken for Chi gnolma
in Dan. 4. 31. which will not come into the Verse. But chiefly I make bold to
dissent from this Worthy Person's Opinion, because I think I have an easier and
(...) to propound.

That which I offer is this, that this word An^^^^^ contains in it these three
words, an, chi, (...) The word an is an abreviature of (...), which is an usual
Interjection, sometimes translated now, Psalm. 118. 25. and sometimes oh, ((...)
exclamatory Syllable,) Ex. 32. 31. yea, in all or most of the places where we
find it, it bear this last signification, or borders very near upon it. It is a
particle used among the Hebrews (...) express the Affections and Emotions of
the (...) (as Mercer has well observed) which are frequently accompanied with
Exclamations. And by enquiring into the Texts where it is used, it will appear,
that it is also an Interjection of Asseveration and is as much as sane,
profecto, certe. To th^^ purpose it is rightly rendered truly, Ps. 116. 16.
wherefore it is no wonder that it is used it Swearing. I find that this
Passionate Expletive (...) of the same signification in the beginning of Word
or Sentence with [ na] in the end of them whence perhaps the Greek word (...)
and Latin (...) (both used in Oaths) are derived. This I have said to show the
fitness of this first word in this place. The two others are Chi and Elohim,
which being joined together are the same that [God lives,] which you will find
to be the very expre^^ words which are used in the Old Testament when they
Swore, as in 1 Samuel 2. 27. 1 Kings 17. 12* 18. 10. Chai Elohim, God lives: but
we rende^ it [as God liveth] and perhaps very significantly because an Oath is
generally expressed by a defective Speech: some word is left out, and our
Translators supply it. This we are certain of, that (...) is usual in the Old
Testament to Swear by God Life, and in these very terms, The Lord live^^ God
lives. Yea, God himself Swears by his Life Am. 6. 8. As I live, says the
Lord. Thence God in the Old Testament is called the Living God Which Epithet is
so commonly given him, and was without doubt so frequently used by the Jews,
that it came by that means to be well known to the Gentiles, which I should
guess gave rise (...) the Greek Name of Jupiter. The Heathens Named him (...),
the Living God, (...). And I am apt to think that from the Nominative (...)
(which is of the same Original) the Name Deus comes, for it is probable that
heretofore it was pronounced as one Syllable, and so was as much as (...),
which is the same with (...), for you see the is turned into in the three next
Cases, as (...), etc. Therefore even Deus 15 the Living God. But to proceed,
God's Life is himself, and therefore it is no wonder that God's People the Jews
Swore by it. Chi Elohim was the constant form of words which they used, and it
was taken (as you have heard) out of the Holy Scriptures. So then An chi elohim
is no other than Verily, truly the Lord lives: the word an being presix'd by
the Jews to express their affection and concern about the thing which they
asserted or denied with a Solemn Oath. Now, when the Jews pronounced this Oath
in these words, those that were ignorant of the Tongue, thought it was all but
one word or Name. Our Witty Poet who was not skilled in the Hebrew, was guilty
of the same mistake, and put the Jew upon Swearing by Anchialum, which was a
misunderstanding of An chi Elohim: which words when they were pronounced fast
and indistinctly, seemed unto those who were not skilled in the Hebrew Tongue
to sound like Anchialum. Therefore Martial says, Iura, verpe, per Anchialum,
i. e. per an chi Eloim, or with an usual Synalaepha, An ch' Eloim, which
likewise is an instance of what I asserted before, that Transpositions,
Abbreviatures, and Corruptions of words are very usual, and that their right
Terminations are laid aside very often. Or, perhaps the Name (...) El (which is
also the usual Name of God in the Old Testament,) is here intended: For that
also was used in Oaths, as appears from Job 27. 2. Chai El. As God lives. And
without doubt it was used by the Jews, as well as Eloah and Elohim, in
Swearing: yea, some Hebritians have thought that these words are derived from
the Verb Alah juravit, because they are used in Swearing. An chi El, Verily God
lives, was a common form of an Oath, no less than An chi Elohim, and thence
the ignorant Hearers among the Pagans thought that the Name of the Jews God was
Anchiel, or Anchial: And Martial here having occasion to use it in the
Accusative Case, adds the usual termination to it, and makes it Anchialum.
Swear to me, says he to his Brother Poet, who was a Jew, by a Jewish Oath,
Swear by the most Solemn and Sacred Oath that you have in use among you, and
that is, (as I have heard) Anchial or Anchiel, which is no other then An chi
El, Verily God lives. With great deference and respect to the judgments of the
foresaid Learned Critics, I propound either of these to be the ^airest and
easiest solution of that controverted place of Martial. It is not Chi Alah, nor
Chi Alon, nor Chi gnolam, but Chi Elohim, or Chi El (take which you please)
that is referred to here by the Poet: for these are the very words used in
Scripture, and we read that one of them especially is the express form of
Swearing among the Hebrews. Which is the thing I alleged this passage for,
viz. To let you see how Pagan Writers have frequent references to the Book of
God, and particularly the Name of the True God, and to the Customs and Usages
there spoken of, and thereby do in some measure give testimony to the Truth and
Reality of those Writings.

I would offer to the Learned another Notion in prosecution of the Subject I
have been so long upon. I am of the Opinion that from The frequent mention of
Horns in the Old Testament, the Heathens borrowed the like expression, and
applied it in that very sense in which it is used in those Holy Writings. The
Hebrew Keren (whence the Greek (...), the Latin Cornu, and the German and
English Horn,) signifies Might, Strength, Fortitude, as also Joy, Safety,
Prosperity; whence you read of the Horn of Salvation, 2 Samuel 22. 3. Psalm. 18.
2. and the exalting, lifting up, and setting (...) the Horn, 1 Samuel 2. 1. Ps.
75. 4, 10. Ps. 89. 17. Ps. 112. 9. Lam. 2. 17. Zach. 1. 21. On the contrary,
cutting off the Horn, signifies debasing, degrading, a mournful, unsafe,
afflicted Condition, (...) is clear from Ps. 75, 10. Ier. 48. 25. Lam. 2. 3.
And defiling the Horn, is of the same import, (...) 16. 5. From the
signification of the Verb Kuran, we may be partly confirmed in this sense of
the Noun Keren, for it is said of Moses's Face that it shone, Ex. 34. 29. it was
very Bright and Glorious. The vulgar Latin renders it, it was Horned, and
thence (was said before) Moses is ^sually Pictured with Horns. But we must
un^^rstand it spoken Metaphorically, viz. of those ^ays or Beams of Light which
darted from his face, and which were as 'twere Horns of Light. So in Hab. 3. 4.
by Horns is meant Brightness or Light, and it is so expressly interpreted in
that rerse. The Radiency, the Splendor of Moses's Face was very great, and is
rightly called by the Apostle, the Glory of his Countenance, 2 Cor. 3. 7. So
that hence we may gather that the word imports Outward Glory. And as this word
Keren signifies more generally Power, Grandeur, Ourward Glory, and Prosperity,
so it more particularly denotes Kingly Power, Sovereign Dominiou and Empire,
the Greatness and Splendour of Crowned Heads. (Whence, by the way, I propound it
as probable, that from the Eastern words Karan and Keren are derived the Greek
(...), Dominus, Imperator, and the Latin Corona.) Thus Horn is applied in 1 Samuel 2. 10. He shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the Horn of his
Anointed. And in the Psalms you will find that this word has particular
reference to David as King, Ps. 89. 24. 91. 10. So in Ps. 132. 17. it is spoken
of him as the Lord's Anointed, and it is joined with a Crown in the next verse.
In the Book of Daniel this Language is very common, in the 7th and 8th Chapters
a Horn and Horns signify Princely Dominion, and the Persons that exercised it:
and in the latter of these Chapters those two Horned Beasts, a Ram, and a Goat,
are Representatives of Kings, and Kingdoms. It is in express words said in two
places, Horns are Kings, Dan. 7. 24. 8. 7. Now, from this particular style and
idiom of the Ancient Holy Book of the Scriptures, the Heathen Writers learnt to
speak after the same manner. Not only in a general way was the word Horn used
by some of their Authors, to Tunc pauper cornua sumit. Horat.
express Vigor, Spirit, Strength, and Power, but more especially and signally
they mak^ use of it to signify Supreme Power and Dignity, such as that of
their Gods, and of their Kings. Thus -- S^^^t Corniger illis Jupiter. -- ^ucan.
l. 9.
Corniger was the Epithet of Jupiter Hammon, and we may inform our selves from
several Writers that he was commonly pictured with Horns: which had its rise, I
conceive, from the like representation of Great Ones in the Old Testament, as
you have heard. I know other Reasons are alleged, as that of Servius, who
thinks this Jupiter had that Title, and was represented Horned, because of his
Winding Oracles, because his Answers had as many crooked Turnings as a Ram's
Horn. Macrobius, and some others tell us, that this Hammon, was no other than
the Sun, whose Beams are Cornute, whose Rays are in the fashion of Horns. If
the Moon had been meant, then I confess, the Epithet of Horned had been very
Natural: But I don't think, that the Metaphorical Horns of the Sun (which are
its Rays) were thought of here by the Ancients. Wherefore, I look upon these as
mean and trifling Reasons. But the true occasion, if I mistake not, of their
describing Jupiter Hammon with Horns, and of representing other Gods, as Pan
and Bacchus, after the same manner, was this, that they complied with the Style
of the Sacred Writings, (as was an usual thing with them) which set forth Great
Power, Magnificence and Glory, especially Kingly Power and Greatness, by the
expression of Horns. This suited well with their Gods, who were Great Folks,
and generally Deified Kings. We read, that a Ram and a Goat are Symbols of
Regal Strength, in the Prophetic Writings; in imitation of which, it is
probable, Jupiter Hammon was worshipped in Afsrick, in the shape of an Image
which had partly the proportions of a Ram, and partly of a Goat. And from the
same Original, (viz. the Holy Scriptures) it was, that Anciently the Pagan
Kings and Monarchs were represented and styled Horned, as we may satisfy our
selves from several Authors. It is well known that Alexander the Great was
called (...), bicornis: of which some give this Reason, because (say they) of
the amplitude of his Empire, which was extended to both the extreme Horns of
the World, East and West. Others say, he would have been thought to be the Son
of Jupiter Hammon, who was Cornute, and accordingly they drew Alexander so. And
there are other Reasons assigned by Scaliger de emendat. Temp. Ho^^inger,
L'Empereur.
Authors, why this Great Conqueror had the denomination of (...), but they
seem to be far fetched, and not to give us the true and genuine account of it,
which I take to be this, viz. That this Title was derived to the Gentiles from
the frequent Language and Phraseology of the Old Testament, which expresses
Kingly Power by Horns, and more especially from the Prophecy of Daniel, where
the Grecian Monarchy is deseribed by a He Goat, an Horned Animal, and the first
King of that third Monarchy, viz. Alexander the Great, is signified by Keren
Chazuth, a Notable Horn, Dan. 8. 5. a Great and Visible Horn, as the Hebrew
word properly signifies: And again, he is called in the same Chapter the Great
Horn, v. 21. All Interpreters agree in this, that Alexander the Great is meant
here, although they differ in expounding other parts of the Chapter. Hence this
Mighty Monarch would in his Pictures and Coins be (...), represented as Horned,
yea, his choice Horse, which he most prized, is known by this Character. And
from this Great Man his Successors learnt to stamp their Coin with Horned
Images and Impressions. Hence ^lexander is called Dulcarnain, in the Alcoran by
Mabomet, which is equivalent to (...), for that I suppose to be the meaning of
that Eastern word: And 'till some others give a better Interpretation of
Chaucer's [at Dulkernoon] I presume to say it signifies as much as to be in a
^aze, to be at ones wits end, to be dilemma'd, to be pushed at on one side and
the other, as 'twere with a double Horn. So much for that Name given to that
Great Monarch, of which many Writers have disputed, and I have made bold to put
in among the rest, and to offer my apprehensions concerning that Epithet. I
refer it to the Old Testament, which was not unknown to some of the wisest of
the Gentiles, who thence borrowed many Words and Phrases, and more Customs and
Practices. Hence Horns came to be significat^ve of Kingly Greatness and Power.
Hence it was a Custom among the Persians to wear a Ammian. Marcellin. l. 19.
Rams Head of Gold for a Diadem. Hence Attila, King of Hunns, was portrayed
with Horns, as is to be seen in Ancient Medals. And that Horns were a Badge of
Regality and Dominion, is clear from what we read in Lib. 5.
Valerius Maximus, viz. That when on a sudden Horns were seen to appear on the
head of Genitius Cippus, as he was going out at the door, the Response was,
that he should be King, if he returned into the City.

I have now almost finished my Task, I mean, so far as it respects the Old
Testament. Let me only add this after all, That many things in Homer,
Euripides, Sophocles, Theognis, etc. may not only be reduced to, but seem to be
borrowed from David's Psalms, Solomon's Proverbs, the Book of Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus, (which are but an imitation of these) and other parts, both of
the Canonical and Apocriphal Writings. This has been partly showed by Mr.
Gataker in Anto^in. Dr. Duport in Homer.
some of late, but might be carried on much further. I do not think every
Saying that is like another in Scripture, was taken thence. That of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 9. (which he takes from Isai. 64. 4.) Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man, is very like that
passage in Empedocles, (...),
(...). --
but no Man can think there was any reference to it. I do not say, that
Lucretus's Cedit item retro, de terra quod fuit ante,
In terras: Et quod missum est Aetheris oris, etc.
was copied out of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 7. Toen, shall the dust return to the
Earth as it was; and the Spirit shall return unto God who gave it. I know many
Sentences may happen to be alike, yea the same in Sacred and Profane Writers:
The Moral Subject they Treat upon might afford the like matter and words
sometimes; but in comparing the Hagiographa, and those Writings, you will find,
that that there is more than this; the Genius of the Style is the same, the
manner of Expression, the forms of Speech, the particular Phrases and
proverbial Sayings, which had their first rise among the Hebrews, are the very
same. This is excellently showed by the Learned Hugh Grotius in his
Annotations, and it plainly discovers whence the Pagan Writers had those
things. Some of the Profane Poets, borrowed their strain of Love-Songs and
Epithalamiums, from Solomon's Canticle: Especially Theocritus, (as In Cantic.
Solo^.
Sanctius has observed), from whom the rest learnt that way of Verse, has not
a few passages in his Idyllia, expressly taken out of that Sacred Song. And in
that Dialogue of Plato, which he entitles Symposium or his Eroticks, there are
several things, which you would guess are allusions to Solomon's Love-Dialogue,
or Epithalamium. And to heap up several particulars together, it was said by
Solon in his Discourse with Cra^sus, (as both Herodotus, and Diogenes Laertius
report) that the (...). Herodot. l. 1. c. 32. Laert. in Solone.
Term of Man's Life, is threescore years and ten, as if he had had it from the
Pen of the Holy Psalmist, Psalm. 90. 10. The Acclamation or Shout which was used
among the Heathens in War, when there was an occasion of Joy and Thanksgiving,
was Aeschil. in Prometh.
(...); which you may ea^ily conceive was a corruption of Allelujah. Some Prove.
31. and the four first Chapters of the Lamentation.
Chapters and Psalms 25. 34, 37, 111, 112, 119, 145.
Psalms of the Old Testament, are disposed in an Alphabetical Order; which gave
rise to that sort of Verses, called Acrosticks: Such are the Arguments of
Plautus's Comedies, and the Elogium of Christ, in one of the Sibylls, which you
will find also in Tully. This piece of Wit and Fancy, was borrowed from the
Holy Writings, which were Endicted by the Sacred Spirit. And here, when I am
speaking of the Pagans borrowing from the Hebrews, I might even observe to you,
that the very Greek Alpbabet is taken from them; which the Grecians themselves
in part confess, for they say they had their Letters from the phani^ians, who
were near Neighbors to the Hebrews, and who indeed are usually mistaken for
these.

I will add in the last place, that the Old Testament, has left some remains
of it, in most remoto Countries of the World, as China, India, America, as our
Modern Travelers will inform us. In all these parts, there are evident and
apparent footsteps of the History of the Bible. Mastinius in his History of
China acquaints us, that the Chinese have Records concerning the Universal
Flood, and that there are among that People several Memorials of the Old
Patriarchs; and accordingly Horn. Arca Noae.
one has given us a brief account out of him of Cain, Enoch, and Noah. That in
India, the footsteps of Mosaic Doctrine remain among the Brachmans, is proved
by Demonst. Evang. Prop. 4.
Huetius. The highest Mountain of Zeilan, an Isle in the East Indies, is called
by the Inhabitants Ursin. Analect. lib. 4.
Adam's Top, and there is Adam's Cave, where he lamented himself after his
Fall. The Ceremony of putting their Hands under one another's Thighs, when they
solemnly Swear to one another, of which we read in Genesis 24. 2. 47. 29. is
Avenarius in verbo Jarek.
observed among some of the Indians at this day. The Americans, says ^^osta,
have Traditions of the Deluge, and make mention of it in their Discourses: And
Huetius ^^eweth, that several Rites and Laws of Moses are observed by them. The
Ancient Patriarchs left behind them, remembrances of their Actions, even in
these places; their Memory is still preserved and retained in many Names,
Customs, and Practices, that are among them. The Name Joseph is often found
there, and Hallelujah is used in their Songs, as De Orig. Americ.
Hornius observes. The People of Peru report, Aug. Cara.
that all their Earth was overwhelmed with waters, and lay covered with them a
long time, that Men and Women perished, excepting only a few, that betook
themselves to some Vessels of wood, and so preserved themselves. Those of
Mexico tell (...). Go^^
that there were five Suns heretofore, that gave light to the World, and that
the first and oldest of them perished in the waters, and at the same time, the
Men that were upon the Earth were drowned, and all things were destroyed. And
several other such passages, the Inhabitants of the New Foundland, received
from their Forefathers, some of whom perhaps were Jews, for Spes Israelis.
Manasseh Ben Israel thinks the Ten Tribes who were carried Captive, came into
the West Indies, (as well as into some parts of China and Tartary) and there
have left footsteps of old Judaism. But whether these were Relics, or only
Apeings of it, I will not stand to dispute.

Thus I have abundantly made good, that the Heathens borrowed from Scripture
and Inspired Men. Their Priests took their Religious Ceremonies, yea their very
Gods: their Poets took their Fables; their Historians, their more serious
Narratives; their Philosophers, their Notions and Opinions; their Common
People, their Words and Phrases, their Usages and Customs, from the Writings of
the Old Testament, and the Doctrine, Rites, and Practices of the Jews therein
Recorded. So that it is evident, that Pagans bear Testimony to the Contents of
the Old Testament, and that Profane Writers attest the Truth and Authority of
those Sacred Writings.

If any Object, that I have showed my self arbitrary and lavish, in some of the
Derivations of Words, which I have offered, and that there is not sufficient
ground for the Etymological part of my Discourse; I bri^fly Answer, I have
purposely and industriously all along, taken care to avoid this imputation. For
I have sometimes taken notice of, and been ashamed of the great Extravaganc^ of
some Writers in this very point. Thus Calepine derives Canis a Canendo, as if
Barking and Singing were the same thing. Herm. Hugo de Scribendi Origin.
One derives Scribo from (...) and labors to make it out. Such an Extravagant
Etymologizer is Avenarius in his Hebrew Lexicon, who fetches (...) from Mashal
dominatus est, and (...) from Tsaniph, and Scorpio from Gnacrab, which is the
Hebrew Name of that Animal. Yea, he deduces Turk from Kedar, by a Metathesis.
And Monsieur Bochart is not far behind him, for he is oftentimes very bold and
presuming in his Etymologies, he making it his business to fetch all from the
Phaenician Tongue; which to accomplish, he makes any thing out of any thing. I
have not ventured to Etymologize after the rate of these Men (though they are
all of them very Learned Heads), but I have with singular care, throughout my
whole undertaking, endeavored to preserve the Honor of Grammar and Criticism,
which so many have violated; and not to put off the Reader with far fetched
Derivations of Words and Names, without observing the due Laws of deducing and
forming them. I have never presumed to derive one word from another, where
there was not a fair Grammatical Analogy between them, and some agreement in
their sound, and some considerable probability of their being nearly allied to
one another.

In the next place, if any Object, that I have gathered many things from the
mere sound and likeness of words, which is an uncertain and Arbitrary thing,
and there is no conclusion to be made thence; I Answer, it is true, the sole
Affinity of words is no firm and undeniable Argument of their Origination. The
significations of words in different Languages, may sometimes be coincident,
yet we are not certain thence of their Derivation. This I am most ready to
grant; nay farther, that it is folly to derive one word from another, merely
because of the likeness of them; as if, because the Pentateuch is divided into
Parashah's, therefore we must derive Parishes from thence, they being such a
part of a City or Town set out, as divided and separated from the rest: You may
as well derive Montgomery from Gomer, and say it is the Montanous Country where
Gomer Lived. Who thinks, that the English word Evil, comes from the Hebrew,
Evil, a Fool? It would be ridiculously quibbling, to fetch the Proverbial
Saying, As lean as a Rake, from the Hebrew, Ra^^ tenuis, macer, gracilis fuit;
or to make a bad one in English, to have assinity with Abaddon. It would be yet
more intolerably ridiculous, and might be looked upon as a School-Boy's pun, to
derive a High-Man, from one of the three Giants called Ahiman. Wherefore, I do
not contend, that all accidental likenesses in words, are a foundation to
ground Etymologies and Derivations upon. I know some are very foolish and
trifling here; they find such and such words in different Tongues, agreeing in
sound, and thence they infer they are akin, if they can but make out any kind
of resemblance in their signification. If the Hebrew word bad, (which has many
significations) had one like the English (bad), they would presently say, that
this came from that. If Siccus had been of the same signification with
Aegrotus, we should have said the English word Sick was thence. If (...) had
signified any thing like Caelum, or Ether, we should have derived Sky thence.
If (...) had been as much as imperare, gubernare, some would conclude regnum to
be derived from it. And* several other words I could instance in, which you
shall find in another place. I grant then, that there is a great deal of
uncertainty in Etymologies, and we are not to lay any huge stress upon them.
But though this be true, yet where we find there is agreat probability that
words are related to one another, where there is good ground for it, we are to
take notice of it. Though there be in Goropius B^chan^^ and some others before
mentioned, many frivolou^ Etymologies, and fanciful Derivations, yet this has
not made Wise Men disregard the Alliance and Cognation which are between words,
especially between the Hebrew and other words. Thus it is most probable, that
the following Greek, Latin, English, and French ones, are derived from the
Hebrew. Greek,
(...), Mysterium.
Lat.
Uro. Mensura. Gibbosus.
Engl.
Fig. Dumb. Cable.
French, Harasser, and English, Harasse.
From. Mister, idem. Ur, ignis. Mesurah, idem. Gibben, idem. Fag, ficus. Dum,
siluit, obmutuit. Chebel, funis. Haras, diruit, destruxit.


I cannot peremptorily aver, that these are of Hebrew Original, but no Man
alive is able positively to assert the contrary. Yea, there are many words in
the Derivation, of which all generally agree; few or none deny, or so much as
doubt, that the Latin Gubernare, and the English (...) Govern, are from the
Greek (...), and all of them from the Hebrew Gabar, Gubernavit, vicit: T^^er,
from Turris, and both from Tur (Syriak) the same: Camel, and Camelus, and (...)
from (...) the same: Tornace, to Turn, from (...) and that from Tor, ordo,
cursus: Vinum, Wine, (...) from Iajin, the same. And it is granted by (...)
that (...), Saccus, a Sack, come from the (...) ( Sak) of the same
signification. And (...) signifies the same in all Languages, and therefore it
cannot be denied that the Moders ones had it from the Learned ones, and that the
Ancientest among these, which is the Hebrew, communicated it to the rest. Who
questions whether these English and Latin words come from the Greek? Viz.
Strangulare, to Strangle, Comere, to Comb, Discus, a Dish, Pix, Pitch. Anchora,
Anchour, Linum, a Line, Linen, Chorda, Chord, P^na, Pain* Tumba, a Tomb, Hora,
an Hqur, Lampas, a Lamp.
from (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...).
And many other words there are whose derivation is plain and easy, and
therefore is most readily acknowledged. There is reason then why we should
enquire into the Original of words, and track them to their fountain head. And
this is that which I have done in the foregoing Enterprise: where there was a
great likelihood that the Greek or Latin were derived from the Hebrew, I took
notice of it, and improved it to my purpose. I have not offered any thing that
is strained and forced: The Derivation of those words which I had occasion to
look into in this Discourse is very plain and obvious, and such as any
unprejudiced Man will not boggle at, as Thoth and Bau, Erebus, (...), Python,
I^petus, (...), (...), Iphigenia, Belus, Jerombaal, Jobatas, Hamon, (...), and
(...), Jovis, Adonis, Anchialum, (...),
From Tohu and Bohu. Ereb. Pathan. Iaphet, Anakim. Bethel. Iphthigenia, or
Iepthigenia. Bell, or Baal. Ierubbaal. Ioab. Ham. Iah, and Jehovah. Jehovah.
Adonai. An chi Elohim. Allelujah.


I appeal to any Impartial Critic, whether there be not ground for these
Derivations. They are Natural, plain, and easy, and the main substantial
Radical Letters on both sides are preserved: besides, there were always
Concurrent Circumstances to determine me to believe this to be the true
Origination, as that the Matter spoken of was alike, that the Gentiles had
notice of these things or Persons. from the Jews, and particularly that they
had made many of their Gods from F^mous Men, and that those Hebrew Persons,
whom we mentioned, were some of the most Famo^s in the whole World, and other
things occurred to me of the like nature.

And as for Bacchus and Noachus, or Bacch and Noach, though I am not very
earnest in pressing the affinity between them, yet those who consider what a
number of words is changed and corrupted by time, will not wonder that some
Learned Writers have thought those words to be the same Originally. There are
many Greek and Latin words which might be produced, wherein one or more Letters
are put for others, and such alterations are made, that the words have lost
their native sound, and s^em to be quite other words. I could render this the
more credible, by instancing in many words in our own and other Modern
Languages, which are corrupted in common Discourse, and are much unlike the
words from whence they are derived: And yet we readily acknowledge that they
are Corruptions of such and such words. And if there be these alterations in
the same Tongue, you may imagine how much more it is in the transferring of
words into other Tongues: You may conceive what a change of Letters and
Syllables, what Transpositions, or Contractions, besides the altering of the
Terminations, there must be to make an Oriental word become an European one.

That Iphigenia should be as much as Iephthigenia, that Iova should be put for
Jehovah, that Vulcan should be from Tubal-Cain, and An^hialum from An chi
Elohim, is no marvel at all, if you consider how common an Aph^resis and
Syncope, i. e. the taking away a Letter or Syllable from the beginning or
middle of a word, ^re.

In my reading, and observation, I have met with these in the Eastern Tongues.
Ammon, Hoshea, Job, Iezer, Iemini, Ram, Dumah, Coniah, Siris, Apis, Belinus,
Hamet, Mummy
For Ben-ammi, Genesis 19. 38. Jehoshua, Numb. 13. 16. Jashub. Genesis 46. 13. Number.
26. 24. Abiezer, Number. 26. 30. Ios. 17. 2. Benjemini, 2 Samuel 20. 1. Aram, 1 Chronicles. 2. 9. Mat. 1. 3. Edumah, or Edom. Isai. 21. 11. Jeconiah, Ier. 22. 24.
Osiris. Serapis. Abelion. Seldom de Dis. Syris. Muhamet. Amomum. This being the
Herb which they mingle with other Spices for Embalming.
So in the Greek, (...) is put for (...) indolentia: (...) for (...) nomine
carens: (...) and (...) for (...) stellio; (...), for (...) arena. In the Latin
likewise, Amarum comes from the Hebrew Marar, or Marah, amarus fuit. Nomen
comes from the Greek (...); Tego from (...), fallo from (...), Syria, from
Assyria, (so called from Assure the Son of Shem,) Natolia, from Anatolia, (from
(...), the East) the Name which Geographers gave to Asia the Le^s. In Plautus
you read of Conia, for Ciconia, Rabo, for arrhabo. And in the Latin
Italianized, Puglia, from Apulia, a Country in Italy; Rimini, from Ariminum, a
City in the same place. And in the French, perhaps Galliard, a Dance, is
derived from (...) exsultare, and Gallant, from (...), ornare, the first Letter
being cut off. In our own Tongue also I have observed many words, of which I
have given you an account in the end of this Work,* because I will not stay to
interrupt you now. And all this I have done for the sake of the Objectors, to
let them see there is good reason for the foregoing attempt, and that it was
not unworthy of our Task to regard the sound of words, and to take notice of
their likeness to one another, and to observe what Alterations and Corruptions
they have undergone, and thereby to arrive at the first and Ancient
signification of them (though it be something difficult to do so, beca^se when
words are abbreviated, or otherwise altered, it is not easy to tell what they
(...), and whence they came;) which thing I hope we have attained in part, in
our endeavors to prove that the Heathens borrowed the Names of their Gods from
the Holy Scripture, and that other Pagan words are of the same Original.

Another Objection or Cavil is, that as I have showed a great deal of
Arbitrariness in words, and in the derivation of them, so I have showed no less
in the Things and Matters which I have been treating of Many of them are
founded on mere imagination, and are altogether precarious. In answer to this,
I must needs say, there are some who in this Theme show themselves too Curious,
and Fanciful, they stretch things too far, and what they assert has no other
bottom than their own bold imagination. The Fathers are not altogether to be
excused in th^^ matter. Those that have impartially perused Clement of
Alexandria's Stromata, Justin Martyr's Exhortatory Orations to the Gentiles,
Eusebius's Evangelical Preparation, and some other Writings of the Ancients,
cannot but observe that they are something extravagant in this kind; and they
have a conceit that several Verses in the Poets, and other Passages in the
re(...) of the Heathen Authors, are taken out of the Bible, where there is
little or no ground to believe any such thing. Some Persons fancy every thing
to be borrowed from Scripture, these Men would vouch that the Story of Romulus
and Remus's being cast into Tiber in a Basket of Osiers, and Faustulus's
finding them, and bringing them to his Wife, who nourished them, refers to
Moses's being exposed in an Ark of Bull-rushes, and taken up and Educated by
Pharaoh's Daughter. Had Orpheus's going to Hell been after Christ's time, they
would have said it referred to Christ's Descending into Hell. I am as forward
to blame such Men as the Objectors are, and it never entered into my thoughts,
that every thing which has a Resemblance to what we meet with in Scripture is
therefore taken from it. But this must not prejudice ^ober enquiry, and true
Improvement of this Notion which I offer. Because some foolishly think that all
or most of the passages among the Poets relate to the Bible, shall we say
therefore none were taken thence? Because some things are made out by mere
invention and wit, shall we affirm that every thing is so? This is fond and
ridiculous. Wherefore, I have been very Cautious in this Subject, and have kept
my self within bounds. I have not promiscuously propounded things, but have
used Choice, and pitched on those particulars only which carry some probability
and likelihood with them. Some observing that the (...), Incubare.
Hebrew word used by Moses in Genesis 1. 2. signi^ies to hat^h, as a Bird does her
Eggs by sitting upon them, have thought that the Pagans had thence the notion
of the World's being an Egg; and to this purpose some things are offered to
show that they had ^uch an apprehension. And to pass by the Ancients, we are
told by Abraha. Roger. Janua, etc.
Late Writers, that some of the People in the Southern parts of the East Indies
have the same Notion of the Origin of the World. The M. Mart. Hist. Sinens.
Chinoise say all things were from an Egg: yea, their Nieuhof. Leg. Bat.
first Man had the same rise. But why might it not pass for an Egg in a plain
Philosophical way, as at this day there are some Philosophers who tell us that
all things are from an Egg, all Living Creatures at least are propagated by
Eggs, ye^ Man himself? Thus the World may be thought to be a Great Egg. But I
rather think it was from the Oval or Round Figure of the World that they
represented it by an Egg: and you must know it was believed that this sort of
Figure had some perfection in it, and so on that account they took the more
notice of it, and this Spherical shape of the Universe was much admired and
Celebrated by them: yea, it was thought to be Sacred and Divine: so that by
this means the World came to be a very Worshipful Egg. But I cannot satisfy my
self that it was said to be so from the forecited place of Scripture, where
it is said the Spirit of God moved on (or hovered over) the face of the Waters.
I do not think that a single word used in a Metaphorical way is foundation
enough for this Notion. Therefore I have not made use of it in the foregoing
part of my Discourse, but I rather reckon it to be something akin to the fancy
of that Dr. Brown. Vulg. Errors.
Ingenuous Writer, who tells us, that the Generation of Castor and Pollux out
of an Egg, was founded on this, that they were Born and brought up in an
Upper-Room, according to the import of the word (...), which sometimes has
this signification. But, did not this Learned Man mistake (...), for (...),
which indeed carries that sense with it?

Some have thought that the Story of Darius Hystaspis being chosen King of
Persia, by the Neighing of his Horse, was grounded in the History of Mord^cai,
and the King's Horse which he rode upon, for this Darius they take to be
Ahasuerus. But I have omitted this (as well as several others) because it has
little or no foundation. Besides, that they greatly disparage Mordecai by such
an application as this, for Darius got the Kingdom of Persia by his trusty
Groom Oebares, rather than by his Horse, for he Communicated the Design to him
over Night, who took effectual Care to have his Master chosen Emperor the next
Day. And chosen he was; a jockey made him a Monarch. I have not had the
considence to say that (...)
Homer's (...), refers to the History of Judge. 3. 31.
Shamgar's Smiting the Philis^ines with an Ox-Goad, (which is in Greek (...),)
and doing such wonderful Execution with that Weapon: though it is the conjecture
of no meaner a Man than De Sa^r. Animal. pa^s prior. l. 2. c. 39.
Bochart, that that Fable was borrowed from this real Truth. I have not
pretended to a^firm that the Story of Arion, (which Pliny and Ovid relate) viz.
That he being cast into the Deep by the Seamen of the Ship wherein he was,
struck up with his Harp, and the Dolphins presently came about him, and he
mounted upon one of their backs, and so escaped; that this Story, I say, was
taken from the Hi^^ory of Jonas; though there is a very Huet. Prepar. Evang.
considerable Writer, who makes no question of it, and to advance the belief of
it, would have us observe, that (...) signifies both a Minstrel and a Prophet.
If I had inserted into the Parallel of Samson and Hercules, that Hercules's
Pillars, spoken of by Geographers, refer to the two Pillars, of the House,
which Samson took hold of and pulled down, it might justly have been objected,
that I stretched the Parallel too far; and yet I must tell you, that there are
no contemptible Authors, (among whom Vossius is one) who have made one, a
Reference to the other. I have purposely avoided such far-fetched Conceits, and
have all along declined the suggestions of those Writers, who have let their
imaginations run too high. This I considered, that among the Poets especially,
there are many things which are the pure product of their Luxuriant Fancy, and
have no ground at all in the things themselves. It is their way (as I have said
before) to insert their own whimsies, to lard True Story with their own wild
Conceits and Capricio's, which we must never mind; for they are only Poetic
Flourishes, and therefore must not be thought to refer to any real thing. The
fixing this on my mind, kept me from running into those Extravagancies, which
some have been guilty of, whilst they imagined, that the Poets in all or most
of the particulars, with which their Fables are stuffed, allude to so many
express passages in True History. I attended to the main thing in their
Writings, which I saw came so near to Scripture; the rest I passed by, as mere
Poetic Flash and Foolery, and not to be taken notice of. In short, I have
always trod where there is some tolerable ground and footing; and I have
omitted several particulars which others insist upon, merely because they have
so sandy a bottom. So little Reason have any to blame me for indulging of
Fancy, in this present undertaking, where I have endeavored in abundant
instances to make it probable, that the Pagans borrowed from the Sacred
Writings.

CHAP. VIII.
The Antiquity of the Writings of the Old Testament asserted. The way o^
communicating Scriptural Truths and Historie^ to the Pagans, viz. by the
Commerce which the Jews had with other Nations; by their being dispersed over
all the World; by the Translation of the Bible into Greek; by the Travels of
Philosophers and other Studious Men among the Heathens. How the Sacred Truths*
but especially the Historical part of the Old Testament, came to be
misunderstood and corrupted, viz. by the confusion of Tongues; by being
Transmitted to Barbarous People; by length of time; by passing through many
hands; by the Superstition and Idolatry of the Receivers; by the affectation of
Mysteries and Abstrusities; by the Grecian Humor of Inventing and Romancing;
by Men's being Timorous; by Ignorance of the Jewish Religion and Affairs; by a^
Averseness and Hatred to the Jews. It was thought by some dangerous, to insert
the Holy Text into their Writings. What designs the Devil had in corrupting the
Scripture, and mixing it with Falsities i^ the Books of the Pagans.

BUT not withstanding all I have said, there are some who will by no means
entertain this Discourse, but with great earnestness and violence oppose it. I
am obliged therefore in the next place, to fortify it by Reason. I will
discover to you the Foundations on which my Opinion is built, and give you a
Rational Account, how it comes to pass, that the Heathens bear witness to the
Old Testament. This I will do, first, by showing you how they came by these
Traditions and Truths: Secondly, whence, and how they disguised and corrupted
them.

For the First, It is not likely the Gentiles could light on these things by
Natural Reason, for those discoveries concerning the Creation, and the
Paradisiacal State of Man, and the particular mann^r of his Fall, and several
other things which I mentioned, are beyond Nature's Ken, they are not such
things as fall within the cognizance of Men, as they are Rational Creatures;
therefore they must be particularly Revealed to Mankind: And the Authentic
Body of Divine Revealed Truth being the Bible, we cannot but infer, that those
things were borrowed from that Sacred Volume. And as for Matters of Fact,
relating to the Old Patriarchs, and other Eminent Men in former days, on which
I have asserted, that many of the Pagan Stories and Fables depend, these were
Recorded in those Sacred Books first of all, and therefore these Books are the
Fountains from which the Heathens took these Relations. This Argument, I take
to be unanswerable, namely, that the Old Testament is the First and Antientest
Book that ever was extant, and therefore, when the Pagan Writers mention things
in this Book, they took them thence, or from those Persons who had them out of
these Writings. Here then it is necessary, to insist a little on the Antiquity
of this Holy Volume. That Moses's Writings were long before all others, is
proved by several of the Tatianus, Tertullian, Clem. Alexandr. Just. (...).
Eusebius. Praep. Evan. lib. 8. and 10. Cyril Alexandr. (...) Julianum, Jul.
Africanus.
Fathers of the Christian Church. You may reckon the Date of his Books, to be
about A. M. 2460, which was above 400 Years before the Trojan War, before which
we do not hear of any Writers whatsoever: Yea, it was above a Thousand Years
after it, that the Antientest Historian (unless you will reckon those Fabulous
ones, Dares Phrygius and Dictys Cretensis) appeared. Without controversy,
Moses was the Oldest Historian either Natural or Ecclesiastical. The Antiquity
of his Works is beyond all other Books; they all begin long after him. And as
for some other Books of the Old Testament, they were before the Writings of any
Heathens. To begin first with the Antientest Egyptian Writers, some tell us,
that in Moses's time flourished those Excellent Philosophers, Zoroastres, and
Mercurius Trismegistus; but when yo^ come to Examine this, you find no less
than four Zoroastres's, and to which of these the Writings are to be
attributed, and what date they bear, i^ uncertain, so that we can conclude
nothing there. There are also great Disputes about Her^os or Trismegistus,
namely who he was, and when he Lived* and at what time the Writings that go
under his Name were written, and whether they be genuine. Kircher holds them to
be such, but Casa^bon attemp^^ the contrary. His (...) is quoted by (...)
^artyr, Lactantius, and Augustine, and therefore (...) Ancient: but his
Antiquity cannot be proved (...) be equal with that of the Holy Writers.
Manetho, or Manethos, who writ the Egyptian History, lived but in Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus's time. Then, for the Phaenician Antiquities, which San^athon writ
in the Phaenician Tongue, and which Philo Biblius (who lived in Adrian's time)
^^rn'd into Greek, (of which Version Eusebius has ^^eserv'd us a Famous
Fragment) though Scali^^ has labored to prove them Supposititious, (...) some
others reckon them not as such, and ^^rticularly the Learned Bochart has
Comment^^ upon them, as true and Genuine Writings. (...) as for the An^iquity
of this Phaenician Histo^^^n and Theologer, though it may be acknow^^dg'd to be
great, yet without question he was ^oses's junior by many hundred years. And so
was the Author of the Babylonian or Chaldean (...); for Berosus, who is said to
compile ^^^m, lived at the same time that Manetho did. And though perhaps Friar
Annius has imposed (...) the World by the Name of this Author, as Ludovicus
Vive^, Melchior Can^s, Raphael V^lateranus.
some think, and accordingly bring several Arguments to prove this new Berosus
a Cheat, (...) it does not follow that the old one, of whom both Josephus, and
Eusebius have preserved the fragments, was such. Some Greek Writers plead great
Antiquity next; Orpheus, and Mu^^^s, the Ancientest of them all, are said to
have Eusebius. Chronic.
Lived in Gideon's days, which was about 200 years after Moses. And 200 years
after this Lived Dares Phrygius, and Dictys Cretensis, who wrote the Trojan
War. And 100 years after this, Homer wrote his Poem, who Flourished not 'till
at least 150 years after David the Divine Poet. This is observable, that the
Greeks, as soon as they had gained any knowledge of Letters, and Arts, fell to
inventing of incredible Stories, and writing of mere Fictions. Whence Praep.
Evang. l. 10.
Eusebius complains, that there were nothing but mere Fables in the Greek
Histories (if they may be called Histories) before the beginning of the
Olympiads, that Famous Greek Epoche, or Computation, which began from the
Instauration of the Olympic Games by Iphitus: but when this was, is not very
clear, for some say it was in the time of Azariab King of Judah, above two
hundred years after the Death of Solomon, others say in the Reign of Vzziah
King of Judah, A. M. 3173. Others fix it A. M. 3189, eight years before the
Birth of Romulus and Remus, four hundred and seven years after the Destruction
of Troy. Others place the Olympiads lower, about A. M. 3228, others A. M. 3256,
about seven hundred and fifty years before Christ. Varro's Division of Times
into Unknown, Fabulous? and Historical, the last of which he begins not 'till
the Greek Olympiads, proves this very thing. The most Ancient Greek Historians
were Archilo^us, Aristeas, Proconnesius, Hecataeus Milesius, Charon
Lampsacenus, etc. but nothing of their Writings is preserved. Herodotus is the
Ancientest Greek Historian we have extant, and therefore is called the Father
of History: but he begins his Historical Relations but a little before the
Prophetic Histories of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel make an end.

You will find this Argument prosecuted by Strom. lib. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who shows that the Learning and Knowledge of the Hebrews
was before that of the Greeks, as much as the Jewish Nation was before the
Seven Wise Men, and the Sacred History before the Argolick. He shows that
Thales, and Solon, two of their Wise Men, lived about the forty sixth, and the
fiftieth Olympiad, and Pythagoras about the sixty second, than which the Jews
were much older by the confession of Philo Pythagoreus, Aristobulus
Peripateticus, and Megasthenes. He compares the Age of Moses with Bacchus, the
Seven Wise Men, and some of the Grecian Gods, and proves that he was above six
hundred years before any of these. He demonstrates from Chronological
Computations, that H^ggai and Zachary were Elder than Pythagoras, and that
Solomon was much Seniour to the Wise Men. And all this is in order to this,
that the Greeks, (as well as the Chaldeans and Egyptians) had their Knowledge
from the Hebrews, and not these from them. Seeing then that the Ancientest
Pagan Writers are short of the Holy Scriptures, seeing all Authors and Writers
are after Moses (for he indeed was before all the Great things that are in
Pagan History, 400 years before the Trojan War, which is the first starting of
History with the Greek and Roman Authors. His Laws had the precedence of all
others whatsoever, yea, the very name of Law was scarce extant at that time: in
all Homer you cannot find the word (...) they had no written Rules to direct
their Manners by, the will of their Princes was the only Law,) since these
things are thus, the Transcendant Antiquity of the Writings of the Old
Testament is hence undeniably proved. These are the ancientest Memorials in the
World, these are the oldest Monuments of Truth, and consequently the Jews were
the first People that had these things set before them, and, as a consequent of
that, all others took from them. From this comparing the Antiquity of Writers,
it is clear that Moses's Laws and the Customs of the Patriarchs were not
borrowed from the Pagans (as some have imagined,) but that the Chaldeans,
Phaenicians, and Egyptians, yea, that the Arabians and Persians (as might have
been shown, and as the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now a worthy Prelate of our
Church, has proved in his Admirable Discourse on this Subject) and that the
Greeks and Latins have derived their Mysteries from the Hebrews, and that all
the Gentile Theologers borrowed their Great Truths from the Books of the Old
Testament: for these being the ancientest and first Records, it is most
reasonable to believe that those that came after them took from them, and that
these Sacred Writings yielded matter to those others. This is the first Reason
to prove that the Pagan Historians, Philosophers, and Poets were beholding to
the Scriptures.

Secondly, I will prove it from the way of Communicating those Scriptural
Truths and Histories to them. 1. This happened by reason of the Commerce which
the Jews had with the Neighboring Nations, Chaldeans, Phaenicians, Egyptians,
and others. Especially in King Solomon's time there was a great Commerce
between the Hebrews, and these latter: and then it is probable the Egyptians
learnt many things of the Jews. As Solomon Married a Wife thence, so it is
likely they affected some of the Rites and Manners of his People, and espoused
their Customs and Usages, together with their Notions and Opinions. It must be
remembered also, that the Chaldeans, Phaenicians, and Egyptians were the Nations
which Greece Traded with, and so this Country had an opportunity of receiving
the Jewish Traditions and Customs at the second hand: and hence it is that you
have the footsteps of them so frequently in the Greek Authors, as well Poets as
others. Nay, to speak more generally, Judea was very well ^ituated for the
propagating of Laws and Usages to all other Nations, for it was placed in that
Climate of the World which was fit for this purpose, viz. in the middle of the
then Inhabited Earth: To which convenient situation perhaps the Psalmist
refers, in Psalm. 74. 12. God works Salvation in the midst of the Earth. And
so that of Ezekiel concerning Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the
Nations, Chapter 5. v. 5.

Secondly, A great part of the Hebrews being dispersed over all the World by
Divine Providen^e, had an opportunity of Communicating these things to the
Gentiles. The main Body of them were sent into Assyria, and Babylon by
Nehuchadnezzar, where they had converse with those S^rangers seventy years: and
a part of them were carried at the same time into Egypt with Jeremiah. It is
not to be doubted that they carried with them the Holy Writings which were then
extant, and out of them they daily imparted the passages of the History of the
Creation of the World, and Noah's Flood, and the Propagation of Mankind, and
other the like particulars contained in those Books. Afterward, when they were
beaten by Pompey, and made Slaves, they were carried Captive into Egypt, Syria,
Greece, Rome. Besides that, in the times of the Maccabees some had freely left
their Country, and went into Egypt to make Proselytes there. When they were
thus scattered into these Foreign Countries, it is no wonder that the People in
these parts attained to some knowledge of the Sacred Books, and of the
Traditions of the Jews. They must needs hear and learn something of those
Matters, Conversing familiarly with the Jews.

3. The Jewish Notions and Customs might easily be Communicated to the
Gentiles, seeing Moses's Writings were Translated into Greek in the time of the
Persian Monarchy, if not before it (as Praep. Evang. lib. 9. c. 3.
Eusebius reports from Megasibenes a Man well Skilled in History, and who lived
with Seleucus, as Eusebius in the same place affirms:) seeing there was a Greek
Translation of a considerable part of the Old Testament before Alexander the
Great's time, as Strom. lib. 1.
Clemens of Alexandria Testifies. And accordingly Demetrius Phalereus,
Library Keeper to King Ptolomeo, Surnamed Philadelphus, in an Epistle to him,
which Praep. Evang. lib. 8. c. 3.
Eusebius cites, says, that before the Septuagint Version many things were
Translated out of the Bible. But this is most certain, and agreed to by all,
that upon Alexander the Great his Conquests, the Jews and Greeks had converse
with one another, and were no longer Strangers, being now United under the same
Empire. And, as an effect of this, soon after Alexander the Great, all the Old
Testament was entirely Translated into Greek by Seventy two Jews, whom the
foresaid King of Egypt appointed for that purpose. Hence the knowledge of those
things contained in the Sacred Writings could not but be communicated to the
Gentiles.

4. This Communication was made by the Travels of Philosophers, and inquisitive
Men among the Pagans. Of Pythagoras we are told by In vit. Pythag.
Laertius, that when he was young, and being very desirous to Learn, he left
his Country, and was initiated into all the Mysteries not only of the Greeks,
but Barbarians. And particularly he testifies that he Traveled into Egypt, and
Chaldea. Of the same Philosopher it is asserted by Origin, Clem^ns the
Alexandrian, Porphyry, and others, that he went into Chaldea in the time of the
Captivity, where he had the opportunity of conversing with the Jews. Ludovicus
Vives thinks that he Traveled also into Egypt, and was acquainted with Ioremiah
there. Mr. Seldon likewise holds that he went and visited Judea, and there
Conversed with Ezekiel, with whom he was Contemporary, and learnt the
Tetragrammaton, and other Mysteries of him. Concerning Plato, it was believed
by many, says De Civ. Dei. 1. 8. c. 11.
St. Augustine, that he took a journey into Egypt, and was there the Prophet
Iere^niah's Auditor, and read the Prophetic Writings; and though this Father
himself was not inclined (as he declares) to believe this, because he thinks
that Philosopher was born after that time, yet he most readily assents to this,
that he had many things from the Books of the Old Testament; and to prove this,
De Doctrine. Christ. 1. 2. c. 28.
he cites several passages out of that Heathen Writer. It is most evident to
all that have conversed with this Author's Writings, that there are sundry
things in them above the strain of common Philosophy, as concerning the
Creation of the World, the Formation of the First Man out of the Earth, the
Innocent and Happy State of Mankind, the loss of that Primitive State, and the
vile degeneracy of the Sons of Men, with many other Particulars which are
fetched from the Sacred Writings. I might mention likewise how loftily he
speaks of God, and his Nature, how admirably he Discourses of the Soul, how
clearly he asserts a Future Life, and the Rewards and Punishments of another
World, how feelingly he treats of Virtue and Goodness, how Divinely he writes
concerning Religion, which he represents as Pure and Spiritual, and Purged from
the Heathen Superstitions. This Sublime and Extraordinary Knowledge the
Ancients think he gained by Traveling into Syria, Judea, and Egypt, and
holding converse with those that understood the inspired Writings. And it is
their Opinion, that though he Conversed with some of the Jewish Nation, and
imbibed their Sentiments, yet he carefully avoids mentioning their Name,
because they were odious to other Nations, and consequently those structures of
true Theology which are in his Works would have fared the worse for it. But
though he would not speak this out plainly, yet he seems to utter it in a
disguised manner: Perhaps he hinteth that he received those Notions from the
Jews, when he mentions (...) and (...), for the Syrians and Phaenicians, who
were the Neighboring People to Judea generally passed for Jews. That other
Great Philosophers, as Solon, Democritus, Heraclitus, etc. Traveled into Egypt,
and Babylon, is testified by Diogenes Laertius in their Lives. The same is
attested by Lib. 2. Cap. ult.
Diodorus concerning Orpheus, Musaeus, Homer, Lycurgus, and other Wise
Grecians, viz. That they went and visited those Foreign Parts, and thence came
furnished with the Knowledge of those things which they had learnt in those
Countries. The like is confirmed by the testimony of some Eusebius. Praep. Evang.
l. 10. Cyril. Alexand. contra Iuliarum. 1.
Christian Fathers, who also add that those Chief Philosophers of Greece, when
they sojourned among the Egyptians, learned many things of their Priests, which
they had from the Tradition of the Jews who had been among them: And there they
perused the Mosaic Writings, which were of great account among some of them.
Hence the Religion, Rites, and Practices Recorded in those Books were divulged
and spread abroad in the World. Indeed it is very probable in the Nature of the
thing it self that this would happen: for the Jews being a People so Renowned
for Religion, and their Fame and Glory being every where Celebrated, it could
not be but that foreign People, especially the most Philosophical and
Inquisitive among them, should be desirous to confer with the Bible, or Jewish
Authors, and to know their Laws, Ways, and Customs, and that whole Nations
should be forward to imitate and make use of them. This is more than
Prophetically intimated, in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. where it is said, that when the Nations
shall hear all those Excellent Statutes given to the Jews, They shall say,
surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People. If the Pagans
should so admire and value the Jewish Customs and Ceremonies, they would (as
the consequent of that) imitate and practice them. Thus you have a Rational
Account of the Consonancy of Pagan Writings and Customs to the Sacred
Scriptures, you see how they were derived from these Fountains.

In the next place, I am to enquire, how the Scriptural Stories and Truths came
to be corrupted; whence it is, that they are mixed with Obscurity and Falsity
in the Writings of the Pagans, how it comes to pass, that one thing is put for
another, and that it is so hard oftentimes to understand what they deliver. I
will give you an Account of this, in these following particulars,

1. The confusion of Languages did not a little contribute to these Mistakes,
Corruptions and Falsities. When the World was of one Tongue, the notices of
things which were imparted by Speech, were very clear and intelligible; when
they all joined in one Language, they could easily apprehend one another, and
there could arise no mistakes, by Ambiguity in the variety of words. But upon
confounding the first I anguage, and dividing it into many, there followed a
great disorder among Mankind, for then it became difficult to understand one
another. The Words being confused, the Conceptions and Things which were
conveyed to Men by those words, were also confused, obscure, and uncertain. The
variety and multiplicity of Words, begot mistakes and confusions; among so many
millions of words, it was impossible, but that there should be a great many
ambiguous and equivocal, and thence the Phrases, Sentences, and Speeches, must
needs be so too. This is one Reason, why the Sacred Truths of Scripture were
corrupted, when they came into the Hands of the Heathens. The Eastern words and
forms of speaking, were misunderstood by the Grecians; the Hebrew Dialect and
Idiom were mistaken by the People of another Language and Country: The Oriental
Expressions were misinterpreted by the Europeans, who were Strangers to the
literal and proper Sense of them. Hence arose Fables, Fancies, and groundless
Conceits, which they mixed with the Spiritual Verities, and almost defaced and
extinguished them.

2. The Sacred History of Scripture, and the Traditions of the First Ages of
the World, were easily corrupted, because they were Transmitted to Ignorant and
Barbarous People. God was pleased not to vouchsafe that Light and Knowledge to
the Gentiles, which he bestowed on his own People, but he thought fit to leave
them in that darkness and blindness, which their gross Sins had brought them
to, and which were now become the just Punishment of them. Many of them were so
besotted, that when they heard of those Holy and Mysterious Truths, they were
not able to bear them, they could not apprehend the true meaning and import of
them. But because some of them, who were the most Cont^mplative, would be
exercising themselves about them, they resolved to make something of them, or
out of them: And accordingly, when they committed them to Writing, they applied
them to some Person or Thing, which was known and famous among them; and thus
an Historical passage in Holy Scripture, became a Story of their own, or a
Divine Truth was turned into a Fable. By this means, the things which they
borrowed from the Word of God, came to be D^praved and Disguised.

3. The long tract of Time and diversity of years, have partly introduced this
corruption and alteration. For length of time blotted out some of the former
Accounts, and defaced the Memoirs of things. The Ancient Names of several
Persons and Places are worn out, and others (quite different from them) are
used in their stead. The true Original, Occasion, and Meaning of many things
were forgotten, and in place of them, New, but False Relations, crept in. Then
came to pass at last, (when the right Notions of things were worn out) that Men
of Poetry and Invention, thrust upon silly People their own Fancies and
Conceits, and persuaded them to accept of the most unlikely Stories for Truth.

4. The Historical passages of Scripture, and the strange Events which happened
among the Jews, being spread abroad, and passing through many Hands, or rather
Mouths, could not but for that Reason be corrupted. By the great diversity of
Relators they were changed, some adding to them, and others diminishing them,
so that at the last, they were quite different from what they were at first.

5. As Superstition and Idolatry increased, the greater Corruptions there were
of True History, Men making that to Administer to their Idolatrous Worship. So
that in those Countries, especially where there were the fiercest Bigots for
the Pagan Devotion, there was always a more plentiful coining of these Fables,
under which were hid very useful Truths, taken out of the Old Testament.

6. This must be added, that it was the Custom of the Ancient Pagans, to wrap
up their Notions in obscure and dark Terms, and to represent them in an
Aenigmatical way. Contr. Cells. lib. 4.
Origin thinks Plato in one of his pieces, has something of that Paradise,
which Moses in the beginning of his Writings speaks of, and he gives this
Reason why he thinks so, viz. because it is Plato's usual way to describe
things obscurely, and to disguise the greatest and most excellent Verities,
under the vail of Mysteries and Fables. And this was the guise of others,
besides Plato, especially of the Pagan Poets; they affected obscurity and
difficulty of Style; whence sprang several of the Fabulous Histories of the
Gods, and other odd passages in their Writings. And so, when they took some
things of moment from Scripture, or from those who were acquainted with those
Sacred Records, they clothed them with their dark and Mystical Expressions, in
so much, that it was hard to know whence they had them.

7. The Grecian Humor, was to Invent and Romance; their Poets especially (who
were their first Writers) were famous for this. They abused, mangled, jumbled,
and confounded the Stories in Holy Writ, they turned those Sacred Things, into
Magical Pranks sometimes, and from the Names of Holy Persons spoken of in the
Old Testament, they took occasion to invent new Deities, and shape new Gods.
Their frequent practice was to piece out Scripture with their own Fancies, and
to add something of their own heads. This is owing to the Greek Vanity, it is
to be ascribed to the Levity and Capriciousness of these Fabulous Men, whose
very Genius led them to affect Banter and Fictions. The Poets dealt with Sacred
History, as the Legendaries do with the Lives of Saints; they have some general
ground for what they say, but they make plentiful additions to it; there is
perhaps something of Truth at bottom, but then you have their own Inventions
besides. Thus the Grecian Writers counterfeited all along the shape of Real
Truths, in most of their Fables, there was a medly of Falsehood and Truth
together.

8. This is also certain, that the Pagan Philosophers, did out of fear
sometimes disguise the Notions of Truth, which they received from Scripture.
Plato, says Justin the Martyr, had learnt in Egypt the True Doctrine
concerning God, One only God, with several other Sacred Truths, but, lest some
Melitus or Anytus should Accuse him, he would not divulge them to the People:
For fear of incurring Socrates's Misfortune, he either concealed or disguised
all. He dreaded the Poisonous Cup, and so would not discover those Sacred
Things, but rather chose to lap them up in Poetic Conceits and Fables, in
Mysteries and Riddles, which his Writings are full of. And this it is likely
was the Case of other Philosophers and Writers among the Gentiles, they were
Timorous, and dared not Transgress the Public Laws, and incur the punishment
due to Innovators in Religion; and therefore they spoke ambiguously and
obscurely, and corrupted those Truths which they had received from the Holy
Fountains.

9. Some out of mere Ignorance of the Jewish Religion and Affairs, misrepresent
and corrupt those things. This is seen plainly in Strabo, and Diodorus the
Sici^ian, who (as was hinted before) make the Jews to be Egyptians, and Lib. 16.
Strabo particularly says of Moses, that he was an Egyptian Priest. So
Herodotus, because the Hebrews had lived among the Egyptians, says those
things of the former, which belong to the latter, and so perhaps, vice versa. I
remember he particularly says, that Lib: 2. cap. 36. and 104.
Circumcision was first of all used among the Ethyopians and Egyptians, and
from them went to the Phaenicians and Syrians, and thence some thought Abraham
received this Rite, and commended it to his Posterity. It is as easy to
observe, how grossly the Latin Writers were mistaken; it was a common thing with
them to confound Jews and Christians, and to make no distinction between them,
as I have showed on another occasion. Hist. lib. 5.
Tacitus's description of the Nation and Religion of the Jews, together with
the Original of them, shows that that Excellent Historian, was extremely
ignorant of the Affairs of that People. They were at first called Idaei, faith
he, from the Mount Ida, and afterward by an addition of a Letter, they had the
Name of Iudaei. Their Sabbath was Consecrated to Saturn, he says; and many
such false and fabulous passages are to be found in the Account which he gives
of them. So Justin shamefully errs in several things belonging to the Jewish
History; he makes Abraham the third King of the Jews, Israel the Fourth, Joseph
the Fifth, and Moses (whom he reckons to be Ioseph's Son) the Sixth. In his
whole Thirty Sixth Book, where he describes the Original and Increase of the
Jewish Nation, he has almost as many mistakes, as words. The rest of the Pagan
Historians exceedingly mistake, when they Treat of that People, because they
did not rightly inform themselves, and endeavor to have a perfect Account of
the Jewish Matters. Thus Josephus himself excuses in part the Heathen Writers,
when they speak of things done in Judea, imputing their Errors to want of
Knowledge and Information. Yea, he wonders not that the Jewish Nation was not
known to some of them, and that they write not a word of it; for the most
diligent Historians, Contr. Apionem. l. 1.
says he, were ignorant of France and Spain; and he instances in Ephorus, who
he observes had so little knowledge of Spain, that he took it for one single
City, and no more. We might observe likewise, that little or nothing is
mentioned of this our Isle of Britain, either by Greek or Roman Historians,
before Casar's Commentaries. And in the same place he takes notice, that
neither Herodotus nor Thucydides, nor any that were of that Age make mention of
Rome, although it had been in great power a long time, and had waged so many
Wars. He adds, that all Things of the Greeks are new, and of yesterday, giving
this as one Reason, why the Greek Historians make no mention of the Jewish
Affairs. They were themselves but upstarts in respect of the Jews. But though
they knew but little of them, yet they feigned many things, and represented
them as they pleased. Especially their Poets? who were very ignorant of the
Jewish Institution, and of the true meaning of the most things which they had
from those of that Nation, or from their Books, yet took the liberty to invent
and add, and to mingle their own Conceits and Fancies, with that little which
they had heard or knew of them.

10. Some, if not most of the Heathens, out of Averseness and Hatred to the
Jews, perverted those things which had any Relation to that People. This was a
Nation that was separated from all others, and was different from, not to say
contrary to, the rest of the World in many things; wherefore they grew odious
and detestable, and the Pagans wilfully Misrepresented and Traduced them, and
delighted to load them with all sorts of Calumnies. All Writers bandied against
the Jews and Christians, they were all in League against these, however they
disagreed among themselves. Hence it is, that whenever they present their
Readers with any thing concerning them, they generally show that Ill Will which
they bore to them. Thus Manethon the Egyptian Historian, though he has many
things that agree with what the Scripture says of the Jews, yet he
mis-represents several particulars, and adds others in disgrace of Moses and
the Israelites. And indeed from Egypt was the rise of those Malicious Calumnies
against them, for the People of that Nation were sensible of, and retained in
their Minds the many Plagues that were inflicted on them for their sakes, and
the last Mortal Farewell in the Red Sea, and they expressed their implacable
prejudice against them, by reproaching them, and they taught others to do so
too. Thus Hist. lib. 36.
Justin (or rather Trogus Pompeius, whom he Epitomizes) tells us, that the Jews
were expelled Egypt, because God had Revealed to the Egyptians, that the Plague
which then raged among them, could by no other way be allayed, than by that
Nation's being turned out. Diodorus the Sicilian, and Hist. lib. 5.
Tacitus write, that the Jews were thrust out of Egypt by the Inhabitants,
because they were Scabby and Leprous. Apion, with a detestable Impudence, rails
against this People, and, out of mere malice, invents and forges Lies to
disgrace them. He not only repeats the foresaid Calumny, viz. That they were
expelled out of that Country, because their Bodies were overrun with Leprosy,
but he adds several others, and miserably perverts the History of Moses. Not.
Hist. 1. 30. c. 1.
Pliny avoucheth, that Moses was a Magician; and Lib. 16.
Strabo reckons him among Astrologers and Diviners. So Joseph is said to have
been skilled in Justin. Hist. 1. 36. c. 2.
Magic Arts. Though perhaps it might proceed from Ignorance only, that some of
the Pagan Historians reckon these in the number of Magicians, for they had
heard of what wonderful things these Great Men had done in Egypt; the one, when
he grapled with the Egyptian Sorcerers, the other, in Interpreting of Dreams,
and they concluded they were effected by Magic; accordingly, they represented
them as Persons of that Character. But even the mistakes of these Gentile
Writers, concerning them and others, show, that they had heard of such Men, and
the things they did, and they are a Testimony of the reality of the History in
general. Then, as for the Pagan Poets, the same prejudice and Hatred reigned in
them, and discovered themselves in Lies and Fictions about the Jews, and what
is related concerning them in the Old Testament. When they refer to any passage
in the Sacred Story, they maliciously desile it with their own Inventions; they
distort and falsely deliver the circumtances, and they blend it so with their
own ridiculous Fancies, that they turn it into a Fable.

Again, if we may give credit to Joseph. Antiq. Iud. 1. 12. c. 2.
Deem(...) Phalereus, (Library Keeper to King Ptolo(...) and who was the Man
that first excited him to promote that notable work, of Tran(...) the Old
Testament into Greek) there was this Notion among the Pagan Writers, that this
Holy Book was not to be profanely handled, nor the Matters of it made common
by every one that undertook to write; yea, that (...) inserting of them into
their Writings, was I gross Profaning of them, and had met with ^ suitable
punishment. Thus, one Theopompus, who had inserted some passages of the Bible
into his Writings, was struck with Madness; and another named Theodectes, who
made use of some place of Scripture, in a Tragedy of his, was almost deprived
of his sight for it; but the former, when he was made sensible of his fault,
was restored to a right mind again, and the latter, upon acknowledging the like
Offense, recovered his Eyesight. This was related, says Josephus, to King
Ptolomee by the foresaid Demetrius, a very serious Man, and it was assigned as
a Reason, why the Contents of these Sacred Writings, which were so Divine and
Admirable, were but rarely mentioned by the Historians and Poets. These
Examples had struck a terror into some of them; having heard how some
Prophaners of these Holy Things, were Animadverted upon, by a Divine Hand, they
were afraid to Record any passages in the Old Testament. Therefore, some of
them chose rather, to disguise the Sacred Stories, and to stuff them with
Fabulous Narrations, that they might scarcely be known, to have been borrowed
from that Holy Book.

Lastly, the Devil has a design in all this. Tert^lian's Cmnia adversus
veritatem de ipsa veritate construc^ sunt, operan^ibus (...) mulalionem istam
spiritibus Erroris. Apolog cap. 47.
Words are remarkable; when he had said that the Things which are contrary to
Truth, (i. e. the Heathen Fables, Rites and Usages) are made out of the Truth
(i. e. the Holy Scriptures) he further adds, that this Imitating of the Truth,
is wrought by the Spirits of Error, that is, the Devils, who affect sometimes
to Ape God and what he does. This is most apparent, that they are a Mimical
fort of Creatures, and show themselves sometimes diligent Emulators of the most
Holy Persons and Things. Their great Subtilty and Craft, are to be discerned
here, for when they brought the Hebre^ Rites and Ceremonies of Gods own
appointment, into the (...) Worship and Service, they did this to Profane
them, and ^o make them contemptible and ridiculous. They did it, that those
Divine and Sacred Things might be despised, and that they might be turned into
Superstition and Idolatry. So likewise, they cunningly mixed something of
sacred Truth with Fables, that thereby they might make the things that are True
to be suspected. Satban is desirous to pervert and even erase the whole Sacred
Scripture and Ancient Truth, but because he sees he cannot effect this, he
therefore contrives how he may disguise the Scripture-Stories, he sets the
Poets to work to make them into Fables, and thinks by that means to take off
our Esteem of those Inspired Writings, and to diminish that Credit which we
ought to give to those Sacred Truths. He pushed on those Grecian Wits, to
obscure and deface the Old Names in Scripture, that the Original of them might
not be known. He out of direct malice, moved those fanciful Men to invent
Fables, to defame the Primitive Stories, to blemish the Sacred History, to
obscure and pervert the Truth. The Poets turning the Scriptures into Fabulous
Narrations, was the way to invalidate the Testimony of them, and to make them
seem a mere Poetic Fiction, a Dream, a Fancy, that has no real bottom. It is
no wonder then, that the Devil imped their Fancies, and assisted their
Inventions, and helped them to change the Truth into a Lie, that thereby he
might rob God and the Scripture of their Honor. This, I say, might be a device
of that Evil Spirit, (as he has Devices and Wiles of all sorts) to elude the
Authority of Sacred History, and to take away the Credit of Divine Truth.

Again, as that Crasty Spirit designs by this means to disparage, yea, to null
the Truth, so he thinks hereby to gain assent to Falsehood, and to promote the
greatest Impiety imaginable; for when Truth is mixed with Falsehood, he hopes
that this latter will be entertained for the sake of the former. And when Lewd
and Vicious Practices, are founded in those that are Innocent and Religious, he
expects, that these should justify those. Perhaps, when he added the Sacred
Ceremonies of the Jews, to the profane Worship of the Gentiles, he thought
thereby, to take away the difference between them, and to render them alike; so
that Men should not be able to distinguish, between a True and False way of
Worship.

Thirdly, the Devil's Design in introducing several Sacred rites and Customs,
into the practice of the Heathens, was to conciliate to himself a greater
Authority and Esteem, a greater Glory and Repute among them. He commends those
things to the Pagans which were Religiously used, and even by God's own People,
and prescribed by God himself; this he does to inveigle the Pagan World, and to
bring them to Admire and Worship him.

Wherefore, an Answer may easily be returned to that Objection, of a late
Learned Writer, Dr. Spencer, de Legib. Hebreorum. lib. 3. cap. 12. Dissert. 1.
What advantage can the Devil have by his imitating the Divine Worship? He ever
Acts for some end that may be prositable to himself; but how can this prove so,
seeing it would be more advantageous to him, to institute a Worship and
Ceremonies, that are Diametnically contrary to those in the Divine Law, that by
those, as by so many proper and peculiar Characters, his Herd might be
distinguished from the Flock of the Shepherd of Israel. The Answer, I say, to
this, is very easy and obvious, for there can be nothing more Advantageous to
that Evil Spirit, than his emulating of Divine Worship, and appointing
Ceremonies suitable to it, for by this means, his Kingdom is most sensibly
advanced, and that with the greatest Artifice and Craft imaginable, because
this Vile. Fiend is Adored, even whilst the Divine Worship of the True God
seems to be earried on. It was the Subtilty of this Great Mimick, to approach
as near to God and True Religion, as he could, to make use of those things,
which by God's own express Command were used in his Worship. This is a cunning
way of gaining Proselytes, and increasing the number of his Worshippers. Thus
he Acts for some End, and that a very Profitable one too; certainly much more
Profitable to him, than if he had Instituted Proper and Peculiar Ceremonies of
Worship, for these would too palpably have distinguished his Herd, from the
True Flock; whereas, those bring them into a kind of Rivalty with it. Besides,
this fond Emulation in the Devil, is a gratifying of his first Proud
Inclination, and aspiring to be like God. He is still Ambitious of Divine
Honor, otherwise certainly, he would not have desired to be Worshipped by the
Son of God himself. And he would be Worshipped in the same way, that God is,
with the same Signs and Badges of Adoration. Hence most of those Sacred Rites
enjoined by God himself, and made use of, in his Worship by the Jewish Church,
were transferred by Satan to his Idolatrous and Impious Worship. This is the
effect of his Haughty Spirit, which thirsts after Divine Honor, even such as
is given to the only True God.

Thus I have amply showed you, how it came to pass, that the Rites and
Practices, and the greatest Truths contained in the Holy Scripture, were
corrupted, disguised, misapplied, and abused by the Pagans. I have given you
the Reasons and Arguments which may convince you of this, and render you an
account of the manner of it.

CHAP. IX.
The Author's Assertions Confirmed by the ample Suffrage of the Ancients and
Moderns. Consectaries drawn from the whole, viz. That we cannot with any show
of Reason admit of the Opinion of those who hold that the Jews borrowed all or
most of their Religious Rites from the Gentiles: That from what has been
premised, we may take notice of, and admire the singular Providence of Heaven:
That we are ascertained of the Antiquity, Reasonableness, and Certainty of our
Religion: That we are reconciled to the writings of Profane Authors: That we
are assured of the Truth and Authority of the Scriptures of the Old Testament.

I Will now add unto Reason and Evidence the Suffrage of the Learned and Wise,
whether Ancients or Moderns. It was averred long since by Demetrius Phalereus,
that Great Historian and Philosopher, in an Epistle of his to King Ptolomey,
that the Gentile Philosophers took many things from the Holy Scriptures, as you
will find him cited by Eusebius in his Evangelical Preparation. This is an
early Testimony to the truth of what I have asserted: By this it appears, that
the Notion which I have offered, is above two thousand years Old. Contra
Apionem.
Josephus, the Learned Jew, who lived about half a thousand years after,
attests the same, and professedly proves that both Philosophers and Poets
borrowed from the Sacred Fountains of Scripture. This is abundantly testified
by the Christian Fathers, as Tatianus, who has a set Ad Gentiles.
Oration on this Subject, that what Learning the Greeks gloried in, was
received all of it from the Barbarians, (as they called the Jews) Ad Autolyc.
lib. 2.
T^eophilus Bishop of Antioch (who lived likewise in the Second Century)
asserts this in defense of Christianity, proving that whatever the Pagan Poets
writ of Hell, and the pains of it, and several other Subjects in Divinity, was
stolen from the Writings of the inspired Prophets; and that the Christian
doctrine, which is in a great part taken from them, is the Ancientest Religion.
Paraenes. ad Gracos. Apolog. 2. pro. Christainis.
Justin the Christian Philosopher and martyr speaks to the like purpose, and
proves that all the true Notions in Theology among the Pagans, sprang from
Moses, and the Holy Writings, and he instanceth in, and enlarges on many
Particulars, showing that Orpheus, Homer, and Plato, had several of their
Words, Phrases, Opinions, Traditions, Descriptions from the Prophetic
Writings. He maintains, that the Fables of Bacchus, Hercules, Aesculapius, etc.
were made out of the depraved sense and meaning of the Holy Writ. At another
time he pursues the same Argument, and attempts to demonstrate, that all the
Great and Brave things in the Philosophers and Poets Writings are from the Holy
Book. Clement of Alexandria is very copious on this Theme: The Scope of the
first Book of his Stromata, is to show, that the Philosophy of the Hebrews was
many Generations older than that of the Gentiles; and in prosecution of this,
he endeavors to evince (...).
that the Opinions of the Greek Philosophers and others, were taken from Moses,
and other Hebrews. And in the Second Book of his Stromata, he farther insisteth
on this Subject, and proves, that the Greeks were Notorious (...)
. Plagiaries, and stole their Philosophy from the Barbarians: And so he goes on
in the following Books to prove, that all the good Notions among the Greeks
came from the Hebrews, that whatever Excellent Truths the former taught, they
had from the latter, they Sacrilegiously took them from the Holy Patriarchs and
Jews. This is the sense of the forty seventh Chapter of Tertullian's
Apologetick, he there maintains that Quis Poetarum, q^s Sophistarum qui non
omnino de Prophetarum foute potaverit?
both Poets and Philosophers were beholding to the Prophets, and derived all
their best things from them. Yea, Omnia adversus veritatem de ipsa veritate
constructa sunt.
those very Arguments which the Pagans bring against the Christian Truth, are
fetched from it, as I observed from him before. I have mentioned Origin
already, but if you consult his Fourth Book against Celsus, you will find this
more largely asserted, viz. That the Pagan Rites and Stories were taken from
the Scriptures. Eusebius likewise has been quoted before, but if the Reader
think good to peruse the Author, he will see this Argument insisted on in Praep
Evang. lib. 9. 10, 11, 12, and 13. partim.
four or five Books together, where he proves that the Greeks had some
understanding of Moses's Theology, and followed the Jewish Writers in several
things, which he makes good by alleging several passages out of Theophrastus,
Hecataeus, Porphyrius, Numenius, Megasthenes, etc. And afterward he goes on,
and more designedly clears this Proposition, that what is good in the Writings
of the Gentile Philosophers, is all stolen from the Hebrews, and that the Wisdom
of the Greeks especially came from the Jews. I might add the Testimony of De
Doctr. Christian. lib. 2.
St. Augustine, who shows that the Platonists borrowed from the Scripture: And
of De Cur. Graec. affect. Sermon. 2. de Principiis.
Theodoret who agrees with him in this, and farther proves that other
Philosophers had their Theologick Notions from Moses, and the Prophets. Thus we
see this is an Old and Received Truth.

Nor does it want the S^ffrage of the most Learned Modern Writers, some of
whom, without any order of time, I will briefly mention. Stuckius is very plain
and peremptory, and speaks the Sum of what we have delivered in the preceding
Discourse, Tota gentium antiquarum religio profecta ^uit ex (...), etc. De
Sacrif. Gent.
The whole Religion of the Old Pagans (says he) proceeded from a depraved,
perverse, and preposterous kind of imitating that Ancient and truly Divine
Religion which the Patriarchs and their posterity the Jews had such a reverence
for, as being prescribed them by God himself.

Villalpandus on the Pentateuch professedly declares, that the Sacrifices and
other Usages among the Gentiles, came from the Jews. Who can deny, says Natal.
Comes, Mytholog. lib. ult.
another, that the Laws which were given to those Holy Men the Hebrews, came
first to the Egyptians, and then out of Egypt went to Greece? The De Theolog.
Gentili.
Elder Vossius has in almost innumerable places assorted this, that the
Gentiles made a great number of their Fables out of the Histories which are in
the Sacred Writings; Geograph. Sacra. and De Animal S. Scripturae.
Bochart has with great Wit and Learning traced and discovered the footsteps
of Scripture-History among the Heathens in their Mythology. It is the Opinion
of Arca Noae.
Marcus Marinus, that the Theological Sentiments concerning Divine Things, were
the same among all the Ancient Hebrews and Patriarchs, but afterward they were
depraved by the Greeks, and Converted into Fables. Diatribo de Voto Iepth^.
Lewis Capell has these express words, In the Old Fables of the Greeks you may
perceive some shadow and Image, some dark and flying footsteps as 'twere of
several of the Histories in the Bible: Which might be demonstrated by a
manifold induction of particulars. It is the declared judgment of Jacob.
Tirinus in Vet. and N. Test.
another, that the Gentiles were wont to transferr the more remarkable
Histories of the Old Testament, and the Divine Miracles related therein, to
their false Gods: And he instances in several. And because I have asserted in
the foregoing Discourse, that the Sacred Mysteries and Rites of God's own
appointment have been profaned and abused even to Magical purposes, I will
adjoyn here the Testimony of De honest^ disciplin^. 9. 5.
Petrus Crinitus, who expressly tells us, that the Egyptians and others, made
and invented Magical Ceremonies out of the Scacred Rites and Observances of the
Jews, and that they were wholly indebted to these for them.

Kircher, and Isaac Vossius have done their part in this Subject, but Huetius
in his Evan^^lical Demonstration has outdone them, and ^ost that have writ on
it. Among our own Countrymen, these deservedly are to be numbered, viz. Sir
Walter Raleigh, who among several other passages has these Remarkable ^ords;
History of the World, Chap. ^. Sect. 3.
The Heathens did greatly enrich their Inventions, by venting the stolen
Treasures of Divine Letters, altered by Profane Additions, and disguised by
Poetica^ Conversions, as if they had been conceived out of their own
Speculations. Next to this Worthy Knight the Famous De Dis Sir. Proleg.
Mr. Sel^^^ may be mentioned, who avers, that the ^ost impious Customs among
the Gentiles had ^^eir Original from Scripture-History, which (...) confirms by
several Examples. You will (...) the Reverend Diatrib. Anti-Bellar (...)
Bishop Montague (though ^^is Author's Adversary in another point) ^greeing
with him in this. The Heathens says he, of Old, made use of many things which
were taken from the Divine Polity in the Old Testament, but were afterward
cloak'd and disguised by the Malice and Fraud of the Devil. The Judicious Dr.
(...) has two distinct Chapters of the Gentile Stories and Fictions being
^orrowed from the Bible. I will mention a passage or two out of some other
places of his Works, Vol. 1. Book 1. Chap. 10.
If Moses (says he) was forty days in the Mount to receive Laws from Gods own
mouth, Minos will be Jupiter's Auditor in his Den or Cave for the same purpose.
In emulation of Shiloh, or Kirjath-jearim, whilst the Ark of God remained
there, the Heathens had Dodona: And for Jerusalem they had Delphi, garnished
with rich Donatives, as if it had been the intended parallel of the Holy City.

And he has these remarkable words in the same place, Any Judicious Man, from
the continual and serious observation of this great Register of Truth (he means
the Scriptures) may find out the Original of all the principal Heads, or Common
places of Poetical Fictions, or Ancient Traditions, which cannot be imagined
should ever have come into Man's fancy, unless from the imitation of the
Historical Truth. A Worthy Prelate, whom I have already Named has give^ us his
suffrage most freely in this cause, and has undertaken to defend it in the
close of his Origines Sacrae. I could produce half (...) hundred more Authors
of good Note an^ Learning, but I forbear, because I have done sufficiently.
From these I have quoted, you may see that what I have maintained in this
Discourse is no idle fancy, no notion taken up by shallow Heads, but that the
deepest Judgments, the most Judicious and Impartial Pens have adopted it for a
Truth. We have it upon the Authority of all these Excellent Persons, and many
more in former, in later, and even in our present times, as well as upon the
plain Evidences, Reasons, and Arguments before alleged, that the Ancient
Philosophers and Poets borrowed from the Bible, that many of the Gentile Fables
are founded on the most Sacred Verities, that the Scripture is the Source and
Fountain from whence many of their Opinions, Customs, and Practices sprang,
that most of the Gentile Theology arose from the mistaken and depraved sense of
the Holy Writings of the Old Testament.

From the whole let me offer these three or four Consectaries. 1* We cannot
with any show of Reason admit of that Opinion which holds that the Jews
borrowed all or most of their Religious Rites and Ceremonies from the Gentiles.
This, though it bids desiance to that Reason and Testimony which I have
produced, has had some Abbettors and Patrons. Thus Con. Cells. l. 4.
Origin acquaints us that Celsus stiffly maintained that the Mosaic History was
borrowed from the Fables of Heathens. And with him other Heathens at that time
concurred; and, to defend their Idolatrous Traditions and Usages, asserted that
Scripture History was a corruption of some of their Fables. The Story of the
Flood they said was taken from Deucalion, and Paradise from Alcinous's Gardens,
and the Burning of Sodom and Gomorrah from Phaeton's setting the World on fire,
etc. But Origin shows the absurdity of these allegations, from the Antiquity of
those Relations in Sacred Scripture, and thence proves that the Greeks had
these from the Jews, and not on the contrary. He makes it evident that the
Jewish Nation had the Original Traditions, and that others were corrupted and
changed from these by the Heathens. This Pagan Conceit, which was taken up on
purpose as an evasion against Christianity, is revived by some Writers of late,
but by none more designedly and industriously carried on and improved than by a
late Learned Man of our own, who has delivered such admirable and choice
things on occasion of pursuing this subject, and has snewed himself so Great a
Master of all kinds of Literature, that we can scarcely be displeased with his
Notion that (...) at the head of all. I will not pretend t^enter the Lists with
this Great Champion being conscious to my own inabilities, but this I will do,
I will set some Great Men upon him (though I have partly done it already) and
leave him to grapple with them* Josephus the Learned Jew, was a Competent Judge
in this matter, viz. Whether the Jews ^orrow'd their Sacred and Religious Rites
from the Gentiles, or whether (on the contrary) these borrowed from them. Let
us bear what he says, (...), etc. Cont. Apion. l. 2.
There has been a long time, says he, among most Nations a great Zeal and
Emulation toward our way of Religion and Worship. There is not a City among
the Greeks, or Barbarians, yea, not any Nation which has not received from us
the Custom of Resting on the Seventh day, and of Fasting, and of Lighting up of
Candles. And several things which relate to Meats forbidden us by our Law, are
also observed by Foreign Nations. Here this Knowing Person acquaints us that
the Gentiles were followers of the Jews, not these of them; and particularly
mentions some ^ites which they received from them. With this agrees what two
considerable R. Himman, and R. So^^^^.
Rabbis have said, viz. Our Law is the Law of Truth, and all Nations glory in
it, and every one of them has taken a Branch from our Law, and in it they
glory: For the Laws that are among the Gentiles, are as it were Branches cut
off from our Law. Whence it undeniably follows, that the Jewish Laws and
Ceremonies were not taken from those of the Pagans.

Christians agree in this with the Jews Thus Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue
with a Jew, expressly declares, that as Circumcision had its Original from
Abraham, so the Sabbath, and Sacrifices, and Offerings, and Feasts had theirs
from Moses, and not from the Gentiles. And Tertullian, speaking of the Devil's
seducing and perverting of Heretics, tells us, that he does the like also
among the Pagans, for -- qui ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum divinorum in
Idolorum mysteriis aemulatur. De Praescript.
he apes the most Sacred and Divine things even in the Idolatrous and
Mysterious Worship of the Gentiles, and makes use of them therein to profane
and impious purposes. This has been the general sense of the Christian Church,
whether Papists, or Protestants. Upon those words in Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Estius
concludes (and all Understanding Men may do so too) that Ex eo ^^xtu manifestum
est ^^rem^nias Judaicas non esse petitas ex Gentilitate, sed ab ipso Deo
institutas.
from thence it is manifest that the Jewish Ceremonies were not taken from
Gentilism, but Instituted by God himself. Among the Reformists you will see
this more plainly attested Consensus omnis inter Judaeorum and Gentilium ritus
ortus est ex Diaboli studio, qui pleraque depravavit, and in suam venerationem
transtulit. P. Fag. in Number. 7. 89.
All that consent, says one, which is between the Jewish and Gentile Rites,
arises from the Devil's study to deprave many things which are in the Jewish
Worship of God, and to transfer them to his own. And another thus, Calvin in
Ex. 25. 8.
It is a wicked and detestable thing to imagine that the Rites commanded in the
Mosaic Law were as it were Play-games and Sports only in imitation of the
Pagans. Therefore, that those Rites may have that honor and dignity which is
due to them, we must hold this as an infallible Truth, that all the things in
the Jewish Worship were according to the Spiritual Pattern which was showed to
Moses in the Mount. To which I add Cocceius's notable words, In John 9. 30.
I admit not that the Jewish Law is an imitation of the Gentile Ceremonies: For
on the contrary, it is certain that it was made to draw off the Israelites from
many of the Pagan Rites, by those several Laws which were in it, contrary to
those Rites. So it became a Hedge or Partition Wall between the Jews and
Gentiles, that they might not come near one another as to their Ceremonies, for
from a likeness in these, there would have followed a mutual Converse and
Communion, and consequently a Depravation. As to Particular Rites among the
Gentiles, as that of Sacri^ices, and using of Salt in them, Spanhemius refers
the Original of them to the Jewish Law, and the practice of God's People,
adding that Per (...), a Daemone Dei simi^, id ipsum ad impios and
idolololatricos cultus traductum videtur. Du^. Evang. Pars 3. Du^. 91.
This Jewish Custom was by a fond imitation in the Devil, who sometimes is Gods
Ape, made use of in the impious and idolatrous services of the Pagans. So as to
the Ark of the Testimony, which the Learned Dean says was in imitation of the
Heathens; the contrary is expressly vouched by Riter ^^^. in Oppian. (...) c. 4.
another worthy Writer in such plain terms as these, Having thought of the
whole matter ( viz. the Arks or Chests, which he had said before were used in
the Religious Mysteries of the Pagans,) my Opinion concerning them is this,
that the Devil, as he was ever an Ape, and a Ludicrous imitator of God's Works
and Institutions, so here particularly he had a mind to set up these his Arks
against the Ark of the Covenant made by God. And hear what a late Learned
Author, often commended by the Worthy Dean himself, says ^uet. Demonstr. Evang.
Chests or Arks used at the Greek and Egyptian Feasts, especially in the
Eleusinian Solemnities, with the Toys shut up in them (of which Clement of
Alexandria speaks) these were Images or Imitations of the Ark of the Covenant
among the Jews. All these Allegations and Testimonies (together with those
before) are absolutely repugnant to the Learned Doctor's assertion, which he so
often repeateth, that many of the Mosaical Laws about Religious Rites and
Ceremonies were taken from the Rites and Usages among the Pagan Idolaters.

But this Author is so Considerable and Worthy a Writer, that it may be thought
his single Authority is able to counterpoize (if not outweigh) the joint
Suffrage of the Persons before named: wherefore I will make bold to Combat his
Notion with a plain Text of Scripture, which carries irresistible Authority
with it. The express words of it are these (in Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32. Take heed
to thy self, that thou be not snared by following them (i. e.) the Heathens,)
and that thou enquire not after their Gods, saying, How did these Nations serve
their Gods? even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy
God: for every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done unto
their Gods. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it. Observe here, the Jews were forbid to follow
the Customs and Rites of the Gentiles, and (in order to that) to enqui^^ ^^ter
their Idolatrous Service, and the manner of it. They must by no means (...) the
true God, as the Nations served their false Gods and Idols. The Reason (...)
this is r^nd^ed, because every abom^nation to the Lord which he hates, was
done by them to their Gods. The Rites and Ceremonies which they used in
Worshipping their Gods, were abominable to the God of Israel: Wherefore it is
absurd to think that he would appoint his People such Religious Rites and
Services as were abominable and hateful to him: unless you will say, that which
was abominable in the Heathens, was not so in God's own People. But this
increases the absurdity rather than takes it away. No Man of sober thoughts can
talk after this rate; for if God disliked those things in the Idolatrous
Worshippers, it is certain that he did much more so in the true ones. Wherefore
he instituted such a Service as was most opposite to the Heathen way of
Worship, and had not the least affinity with it. Hence it is added, what thing
soever I command you, observe to do it; as much as to say, you must not follow
the directions or example of those Pagaus in your Worshipping of me, you must
do nothing in my Service but what I expressly Command you, neither adding
thereto, nor diminishing from it. How then can any Man with Reason assert, that
the Jews borrowed their Rites in Religious Worship from the Gentiles? A Person
of so bright an intellect, as our Learned Author is, cannot but see the force
of this Text, and be convinced that it ruins his Hypothesis, which he was
pleased to take up it may be only to give proof of his own Skill to the Learned
World, and to try that of his Opponents. So much for the first Corollary from
the preceding Discourse.

2. From the Premises we may learn the Excellency of our Religion, viz. 1. That
it is the Ancientest Religion in the World. We may plainly see the Footsteps of
it in the oldest Times that were. The memory of it is among the most Celebrated
Monuments of Antiquity. The Truths of it are to be read in the Histories of the
First Ages, yea, in the Fables of the Old Poets, in the rusty and antique
fragments of the Primitive Times of the World. 2. See the Reasonableness (which
is another Excellency) of our Religion. Many of the Scripture-Truths were
received by the Philosophers and Sages among the Gentiles, who had no other
Conduct than that of their Rational Faculties. These Masters of Reason
entertained some of the Grand Principles of our Religion, and approved of them,
and acknowledged them as Rational. 3. See the Certainty of our Holy Religion.
It is attested not only by Friends, but Enemies. It has even the Approbation
of Heathen Writers, who have* Recorded, and thereby confirmed some of the most
remarkable things reported in the Sacred Writings, as the Creation of the
World, our first Parents Happiness, and afterward their Fall, Noa^'s Flood,
the long Lives of the first Persons, the Building of the Tower of Babel, the
Confusion of Languages, the Renowned Acts of several of the Patriarchs and
first Worthies, etc. It is a great establishing of our Faith, that those Pagans
derived so many things from Scripture. The Gentile Writers vouch a great part
of our Religion. Wherefore we must needs embrace it when it is attested by such
Disinteressed Persons.

3. We ought to take notice of the Wonderful Providence of God in this matter.
Behold, the Scripture is attested by those who never owned its Authority, yea,
the very Enemies of these Holy Writings rati^ie the Truth and Certainty of
them. The Heathen Poets, whilst they Corrupt Divine Truth, assert it. Their
very Lies and Fictions bear witness to the Sacred Verities: their Fables
confirm the Infallibility of the Bible. This is the Lord's doing; here the
Great and Overruling Wisdom of God is seen. Here his Almighty Power in ba^^ing
Satan's Contrivances and Designs may be discerned. He (as was said before)
intended the Corruption of the Scriptures, the silencing of the Truth, the
Exalting of himself, and the Advancing of his Kingdom. But the All-Wise and
Powerful Moderator of the World disappointed his Designs, and made this thing
we are speaking of serviceable and beneficial to Religion; he made it become an
Argument of its Antiquity, Reasonableness, and Certainty, against the Cavils of
Atheists, and Infidels.

4. Henceforth we are reconciled to the Writings of Profane Authors. We have
this considerable advantage by reading the Works of the Ancient Heathens, and
by perusing their Stories and Fables, that we shall find some Greater Thing
couched in them than the bare Narrative. For these Writers borrowed many things
from the Holy Book; their broken Stories are oftentimes an imperfect account
of Scripture Relations. Sundry things in their Writings are gathered out of the
Divine Volume, but are strangely wrested, pervertrd, and obscured, by having
new Names, and ^eigned Circumstances affixed to them. Almost all the Gentile
Fables, and Theology, flowed from a depraved sense of the Sacred Writings. The
Poets disguise true Stories with many Fictions, and some Relics of Divine
Truth are buried under their ingenuous Fancies, and Fabulous Narrations. Ovid
Transcribed the Greek Theology from Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, and other Ancient
Poets, and these had it from the Bible. The very Poetic Fictions refer unto
real Story, and are drawn from the Divine Source of Truth. So that we are
reading the Holy Scripture in a manner whilst we are turning over Pagan
Writers. In these we meet with Truths Transplanted from the Sacred Book, we
find many passages stolen from the Hebrew Fountains. It is not to be denied
then that Scholars, and Students, yea, the very Candidates of Sacred Theology,
may with great profit pry into these Writings of the Pagans, for here are the
footsteps of Divine Verities. Profane and Sacred Learning are to be joined.
The Gentile Monuments illustrate the inspired ones. We may, notwithstanding the
disguise which Poets have put upon the Stories, see the foundation of them, and
perceive that those vain Figments^ are grounded on some Solid Truth, and that a
Sacred Treasure lies hid under those confused Fables. For this is not to be
denied, that Palestine afforded Greece matter of fancy, and invention; the
Pagan Poets were befriended by the Jews, Athens was indebted to Jerusalem,
Parnassus was beholding to Sinai, and Helicon to Jordan. You see then the
advantage we may reap by being acquainted with Profane Writers, whilst we look
further than the outward shape which they have given to many things, and search
into that Truth which lies hid under it, even the Sacred and undoubted History
of the Old Testament. Thus we may make them serviceable to far higher and
better ends than they are intended. This is the best improvement that can be
made of them, to see the true Source of what is written by them, to understand
whence they borrowed their matter, and to confirm our selves in the belief of
the Truth of the Sacred Writings, by perusing these which are Profane.

5thly, and lastly then, See the Authority, Truth, and Certainty of the Holy
Scriptures of the Old Testament, which is the main thing I have been aiming at.
I had proved this before by several Arguments, and those perhaps on some
accounts more Forcing and Convictive than this: but I thought good to add this
to them, as no contemptible way of proving the Antiquity and Authority of the
Sacred Book. The Truth of the Historical part of the Old Testament is evidenced
from Heathen Writers, not only Historians, but Philosophers, and Poets. A Man
may, by comparing these with the Sacred Volume, find out the Original of the
Pagan Traditions, and Fictions, and observe the Lineaments of true and
unquestionable History among them. Hence we shall have no reason to doubt that
there were such Persons and Things in being, as are spoken of in the Old
Testament, and that the Passages and Transactions there mentioned were real,
and true. This admirably serves to evince the Authority of those Writings, this
proves the Truth of the Records of Holy Writ, and that they ought to be
received as the Oracles of God, i. e. as Infallible.

CHAP. X.
The Authority of the Books of the New Testament, confirmed by Pagan and Jewish
Writers, who speak of a King or Lord that should come out of the East, and
particularly out of Judaea. An Enumeration of the Opinions of the Learned
concerning the Sibylls, with the particular Sentiment of the Author, viz. That
the Contents of their Verses were horrow'd from the Old Testament, and that
those Women were not Prophetesses, but only related what they found in the
Inspired Writings, or heard of thence. A full Answer to the Objections of those
who hold the Sibylline Writings to be Spurious.

NExt I am to show how the Scriptures of the New Testament are vouched and
confirmed by an External Testimony, i. e. how professed Pagans and Jews,
Enemies to Christianity, have related and asserted the very same things that
are set down ^n those Evangelical Writings. First, I will begin with that which
is of a middle nature, between what I have been discoursing of before, and what
^ am now to engage in, (which therefore may apt^y serve as a Transition from
one to the other,) I ^ean the belief and report recorded in Pagan Writers, that
a King or Lord should come from the ^ast, and do great and mighty things. This
was de^ived from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and (...) belongs to the
former Discourse: but beca^se it is mentioned by Historians that were after
Christ's time, and the Application is with all reason to be made to Him, (I
rightly bring it in here.) It was, I say, a constant Report that prevailed
about the time of our Savior's Birth, and afterward, that some eminent Person
or Persons should rise out of those Eastern Nations, and be Lords of the World.
We find Pluribus persuasio inerat, antiquis Sacerdotum liter^^ contineri, eo
ipso tempore fore ut valesceret Oriens, profectique Judaea rerum potirentur:
quae ambages Vespasianum and Titum praedixerant. Hist. l. 5.
Tacitus asserting this, and that great Politician and Statesman would needs
have it fulfilled in Vespasian and Titus, because they were called out of Judea
unto the Empire of Rome. Suetonius agrees with this Author, and tells us, that
Percrebuerat orient toto vetus and constans opinio, ess^ in fatis, ut eo
tempore Judaea profecti rerum potirentur. I^ Vespas. c. 4.
it was an ancient and constant Opinion among the Eastern People, that some
should come out of Judea about that time, and have the universal Sway, and
Reign over the World. -- (...). De bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
Josephus the Jewish Historian relates the same, and acquaints us, that it was
the common rumor and vogue among the Jews that one of their own Country should
be an Universal Emperor; which he, as well as the forecited Authors, applies
to Vespasian, because he conquered the Jews, and with Titus came from Judea in
Triumph to Rome. Other Jews thought this common Fame was meant of Herod,
asserting him to be the Person foretold by the Prophets, and to be the
expected Messiah: These were the Herodians mentioned in Mat. 22. 16. Thus,
though through Ignorance* they knew not how to fix this Rumor aright, yet out
of Flattery, they could apply it to their Princes. But it is most evident that
this Fame of an Universal Monarch arose from the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, which frequently speak of a great King and Ruler that should come
out of the East, and particularly out of Judea. Out of thee (Bethlehem) shall
He come forth unto me that is to be the Ruler in Israel, Mic. 5. 2. Which is
interpreted of the Messiah by the Jewish Sanhedrim, whom ^erod gathered
together, demanding of them where Christ should be born, Mat. 2. 4, 5. That
Prophecy of Micah speaks plainly of a Jew, one that by birth ^as of Judea, yea
of Bethlehem; and therefore it was most falsely applied to those Roman Emperors
before-named, who came not out of Judea, but ^ut of Italy; not from Bethlehem,
but from Rome. And as for Herod, he was not a Jew, but an Idu^ean; he was not
born in Bethlehem, but in Ascalon. ^ut in our Blessed Savior this remarkable
Prophe^y is exactly accomplished, he being a Jew by ^^rth, and of the City of
David, and constituted ^y God a matchless King and Governor over his People.
Behold, a King shall Reign in Righteousness, (...) 32. 1. And in several other
places of this Prophecy Christ is represented as a King, and his Coming is
expressed after that manner. There was ^iven him Dominion and Glory, and a
Kingdom, that ^ll People, Nations and Languages should serve him. His Dominion
is an everlasting Dominion, which shall (...) pass away, and his Kingdom that
which shall not (...) destroyed, Dan 7. 14. Which is expressly applied to Christ
by the Angel from Heaven, Luke 1. 33. And in many other places of Scripture
this Divine Person, who was to come to redeem and save Mankind, is set forth as
a King, or Great Lord and Prince, one that should ^ear Sway in the World, and
wield his Scepter over all Nations. Hence this Rumor was spread among the
Eastern People, and especially about the time of Christ's birth, that a Great
Lord or King should arise in those parts, and spread his Dominion over the
World. Hence those Pagan and Jewish Writers before^ mentioned, speak of this
Great Ruler and Monarch, who is no other than our Lord Christ, the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords. This they had from the Prophesies of the Bible, where
it is so often foretold that a King shall arise, and gain an Universal Empire
over Mankind. To this we may refer that which In Augusto Cap. 94.
Suetonius reports (and he quotes his Author for it,) that a few Months before
Augustus was born there was this public Prodigy, viz. a Proclaiming of this,
That Regem populo Romano naturam parturire.
Nature was bringing forth a King to the Roman People. Whereupon the Senate
being allarmed and frighted, made a strange Decree, That no one born that Year
should be Educated. This Prodigy, without doubt, referred to Christ, whose Birth
was in Augustus's Reign; this was the King that was to be born to all the
World, which was then in a manner subject to the Roman Empire, and therefore
might be called the Roman People.

So the Sibylls Oracles or Prophesies are of a middl^ nature and Consideration,
and therefore are justly to be treated of in this place: As they were borrowed
from the Scriptures of the Old Testament they belong indeed to the former part
of this Discourse; but as they attest the Truth of the mai^ things in the
New Testament, they are reducible to this. I will consider them first as they
are taken out of the Scriptures of the Old Testament. This may seem to be
strange at first, because the Opinions of Writers have run an other way; but
after I have plainly laid the matter before you, I doubt not but the thing
which I offer will easily gain your assent, and then it will rather seem
strange that it was not taken notice of and embraced before. There have been
these four Opinions among the Learned concerning the Sybills Oracles or Verses.

1. Some say they are Counterfeit, yea, that some Christians (but Heretics)
have imposed upon the World in this matter. This I will account for afterward,
because it will more pertinently be handled under the Second Consideration,
viz. as they are used as an Attestation of the Truth of the New Testament.
Indeed this Opinion rudely takes away the Subject of the Question, and
therefore must be considered in the last place: in the mean time we suppose the
thing spoken of to be real, and not counterfeit.

2ly. Then, some have asserted that the Sibylls were divinely Inspired, and
consequently that their Verses are Sacred and Divine. Justin Martyr, Ar^obius,
Lactantius, and some other ancient Fathers cry them up as equal to the holiest
Prophets. As God, say they, spoke by the Prophets to the Jews concerning Christ
before he came, so he fore^told him to the Gentiles by the Sibylls, and the
same Prophetic Spirit was in the latter that was in the former. Baronius,
Bellarmine, and the Roman Doctors generally think the same of them, and
therefore they use their Testimony as very Sacred, and altogether Irrefragable.
By the way, I might observe, that they are sometimes quoted by these and others
of the Church of Rome to assert and countenance some of their Popish Doctrines:
(So that it seems Popery was a Religion before there were any thoughts of it in
the World, and before it had a Being.) But here Authors are divided again, for
some hold these Gentile Prophetesses were Good and Holy Person, others that
they were not. The former Opinion is grounded on that Tenent of the Jewish
Doctors, that never any vicious and unhallowed Persons were honored with the
Prophetic Spirit, and that those Irradiations and extraordinary Impressions of
the Holy Ghost were made only upon Men of holy Lives and innocent Behaviors.
Besides, these Prophetic Women speak of One only True God, and they inveigh
against the False Gods and their Altars; which is a sign they were good and
religious People. Others have a contrary Opinion of them, and think they were
Irreligious and Profane, for that Opinion of the Hebrew Doctors before spoken
of is not always true, though it be generally so. We read of Baalam, the
Sorcerer of Mesopotamia, that he prophesied concerning the future State of the
Jews, and concerning the Coming of Christ. Saul was a very bad Man, yet was
endued with a prophetic Spirit. Caiphas, one of Christ's Judges, was stirred
up by the Holy Ghost to prophecy concerning our Savior's Death. And why might
not God inspire Heathen Women, though they were Wicked, with a Spirit of
Prophecy? And that they were such seems to appear from their Verses, wherein
there are some things very Fond and Superstitious, (and so indeed they may be
quoted by the Roman Catholics in defense of their Cause.) This shows that they
were not possessors of true Virtue and Goodness. But then I ask this, can we
think that the choicest Mysteries of Religion were revealed to them, if they
were Wicked and Profane? Would God vouchsafe so great and peculiar a Privilege
to the worst of Persons?

3ly. Therefore, some hold that these Pagan Prophetesses spoke not by a good,
but evil Spirit. The Devil revealed these things to them, says Comment. in 1.
Epist. ad Corinth. 11. cap.
St. Ambrose, and helped them to foretell these future Events. And some have
turned those foresaid Instances this way, telling us that Baalam, Saul and
Caiphas, prophesied by the assistance of some Evil Demon. So the Heathen
Oracles spoke truth oftentimes, though their Answers came from the Infernal
Spirits. That these Sibylls received their Skill from Satan may be discerned
(say some) in the Errors and Superstitions which are in their Books, yea the
Idolatries of the Gentiles are countenanced by them in some passages which
occur in their Predictions. But then this may be said to baffle this Opinion,
that the foretelling of such future Contingencies is not in the power of that
Evil Spirit. Moreover, it is unlikely that these Gentiles (were they informed
by a Divine Intelligencer, but especially when they were acted by a Diabolick
one) should have as clear, nay a clearer foresight and discovery of Christ to
come, than the Jews, God's own People, and the holiest Men among them had.

4ly. It is the Judgment of De Orac. Si^yl.
the Learned Isaac Vossius, that the Sibylline Verses (so called) were made and
collected by the Jews. This he asserts only concerning those Writings of theirs
which were extant before Christ's coming: for the Jews being dispersed over the
World, and knowing that Daniel's Seventy Weeks were expiring, were stirred up
by God to compose these Verses, thereby to signify to the Gentiles the
approaching of Christ. But of the other Works of the Sibylls, viz. those that
were afterward quoted by some of the Fathers, he has not the same opinion and
esteem, but thinks they were made and compiled, or in plain terms forged by
some Christians, particularly the Gnostics. This is a very odd account of the
Sibylls, and shows that the Learned Author of it was in a great straight: He
was first willing to reject the Christians from being the Composers of those
Writings (which some had asserted,) and yet it seems afterward he retracts
that Sentiment, and is not unwilling to believe that the Christians themselves
forged and counterfeited these Sibylline Oracles. But if the Jews were the
Authors of some part of these Writings, then I ask, how came they to insert
things savouring of Heathen Superstition and Idolatry? And if the Christians
were Compilers of an other part of these Verses, how came they to insist in the
steps of the former, and to add some things (as is said) in favor of those
Pagan Corruptions? But I dismiss this as a divided and dist^acted Opinion:
Besides that I cannot see why the Jews might not as well have produced the Bible
to the Gentiles (for it had been translated into Gre^k, a Tongue intelligible
to the Pagan World, a long time before our Saviors Coming:) that had been more
Authentic than any other Writings whatsoever of their own Composing.

In the Fifth and Last place, I take leave to propound an other Opinion, which
is this, I hold that these ancient Writings or Oracles were not made by Jews,
but Pagans, and particularly by those Women called Sibylls, who made them in no
other sense than this, that they took them out of the Holy Scriptures of the
Old Testament, and turned them into Verse. This is that which I assert as most
consonant to Reason; and it is a farther Proof of what I have been so long
insisting upon, viz. that the Pagans borrowed from the Bible. I am not
sollicitous whether these Women were good or bad, whether they were moved by
God or by an Evil Spirit. There are some Inconveniences in asserting of either
side. But there is a plain and easy way different from both, viz. that we are
not to look upon them as Prophetic Persons, as if they had a Gift of
foretelling all those things they speak of. No, they only extracted what they
writ from the Scriptures, from the ancient Prophesi^s therein contained,
especially from that of Isaiah. And so indeed in some sense their Writings may
be said to be Divine and Inspired; for whatever these Pagans foretold was no
other than what they took from the Inspired Prophets in holy Writ. They are
Instances of the like nature, with those that I have so often produced in the
foregoing Discourse, namely, Gentile Poets, that made use of several passages
in the Sacred Volume, and inserted the main Substance of them into their
Verses. And as those Heathen Poets mingled profane Notions and Fables with the
Sacred Doctrine and History (which I showed before) so here it is as true that
these Pagan Versifiers mixed some things that were Superstitious with their
Prophesies of Christ and his Kingdom, which they derived from the
Old Testament. It is well known that there were Female Poets among the Pagans,
as Sapho, etc. and therefore we need not scruple to believe that the Sibylls
writ in Verse. Indeed the looseness and neglectfulness of the Style shows that
it was done by some easy Poets. That they were Pagan Women is clear from the
frequent Allegations of the Fathers, who represent them always as such, and
produce the Writings of these Pagans as a proper Confutation of the Gentiles
whom they dispute against. And the Heathens themselves acknowledged them to be
such and no other, as is apparent from what you shall h^ar afterward
concerning Erythraea and the Cumaean Sibyll. Now, concerning these Poetic
Pagan Women, I assert that they were no Prophetesses, no more than Hesiod and
Ovid and other Pagan Writers beforementioned, and that they, like these, took
some things out of the Old Testament, (which also were much famed and talked
of) and digested them into Numbers. It is undeniable that in their Verses there
are very notable Testimonies concerning our Savior; there are mentioned many
considerable Circumstances of his Birth, Life, Miracles, Passion, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and his coming to Judgment* but there is no more
Reason to think that these were spoken by them from a Prophetic Spirit, than
to believe that Orpheus and Homer were inspired when they refer to some things
that are in the Books of Moses. If these had been Prophesies in a strict sense
they would have been communicated by God to his peculiar People (to whom were
committed his Oracles) rather than to common Pagans. It is ce^tain that these
were too Choice Secrets to be r^^eal'd to them. Wherefore it is reasonable to
conclude they were taken out of the Prophesies of the Old Testament, which were
spread abroad among the Gentiles. The Sibylls only recite those Prophesies, but
by no means are you to think that they were Prophesies of their own. It is
true, the Pagans hearing of these Predictions, and not knowing the rise of
them, attributed them to their Prophetesses the Sibylls; and so they passed for
the Sibylls Oracles, as if those Women made and ^ndited them of their own
Heads. But they are the Oracles of the Holy Prophets, and not of any Persons
among the Pagans. The Sibylls are not the original Authors of them, but they
were borrowed from the Sacred Volume of the Bible. This is the true Account of
the Sibylls Writings, and by this we are rid of all the hard Consequences which
may be drawn from the foregoing Assertions. We need not trouble our selves to
enquire whether they had these things by Divine A^^lation, or by the help of
some evil Demon. We need not dispute whether they could be endued with the
Gift of Prophecy, and yet be Pagans in their Persuasions and vicious in their
Lives; or whether, if they were acted by a Diabolick Spirit, they could foretell
things of this sacred nature. For there is no necessity of maintaining either
of these, because we can solve the matter before us without supposing any thing
of this kind, viz. by holding that these Sibylls* as many others before them,
took these things from the ancient Prophets in Holy Scripture, and dressed them
up after their own fashion. All things agree very well with this Opinion, and
we are pressed with no Absurdities, insomuch that I have wondered sometimes that
this has not been thought of by the Inquisitive. This is yet a farther
Evidence of what I so largely pursued before, that the Gentiles insert into
their Writings several particular^ of the Old Testament: and at the same time
it is a Confirmation of the Truth and Certainty of the Evangelical Writings,
which is the next thing I offered.

Secondly then, I will consider the Sibylls Oracles and Verses, as they are a
signal Attestation and Confirmation of the Authority of the New Testament.
Behold here the main things relating to our Blessed Savior, plainly spoken of
by these Pagans, whose witness in this case is very considerable. They declared
in these Writings that there should be a great Change in the World, and that a
New Governor or King should arise, and be very Eminent. Cic^ro frequently takes
notice of this passage of the Sibylls, and the Roman Senate was mightily
alarmed with it, and was afraid their Commonwealth would be turned into a
Monarchy. Yea, Lentulus began to take heart from this Prophecy, (if you will
believe Tully and Salust) and fancied he was the King the Sibylls spoke of. And
others afterward imagined that Julius Caesar, or Augustus, or (as some
thought) Vespasian or Titus were intended: whereas the plain truth is, that the
Sibylls had only divulged in their Verses the ancient Prophesies concerning the
Coming of the Messiah, which were found by them in the Holy Writings of the
Jews, and began to be known at that time to the World. If we had no more to
allege but this, this were sufficient to prove the Authority of the Sibylls
Writings. They tell us in their Mystic Verses that a Little Child should throw
down Idolatry with his hand, and stop the Mouths of the Delphick Demons: this
was no other than the Ble^sed Babe Jesus. It were endless to transcribe
particular passages in these Writings, as concerning Christ's Miracles,
Lactant. Instit. l. 4. c. 15.
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Which is only a Paraphrase on that Prophecy concerning our Blessed Lord in
Isai. 35. 5, 6. and many other Texts in the same Prophet, which speak of the
miraculous Acts which he was to exert here upon Earth. So what is said of his
Sufferings, Idem l. 4. c. 18.
(...),
(...)
is borrowed from that Prediction in Isai. 5^. which is no other than a
Description of the Messias's Sufferings. And that passage re^^ting to the
Resurrection, and his coming to Jugdment, Idem l. 7. c. 20.
(...),
(...)
is founded on some peculiar Texts in the Old Testament which speak of the
Messias's last Advent and glorious Reign. Certainly it is of great moment that
these Persons attest these things, the very same which were predicted in the
Old Testament, and which are recorded in the Holy Writings of the Evangelists
and Apostles. This may be serviceable to refute the Objections and Cavils of
the most professed Adversaries of Christianity. Accordingly the ancient
Christians, especially the Fathers, made use of these Heathen Writings against
the Heathens themselves, beating them with their own Weapon. Peruse Athenagoras
and Theophilus of Antioch, and you will ^ind these Women's Verses highly
commended by them. Peruse Orat. ad Gent. and alibi.
Justin, and Stromat. l. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and you will see that they frequently quote those
Writings, and rely on them in their disputes against the Pagans for
Christianity. So does Tertullian, so does Origin, arguing out of these Pagan
Books for the Religion which they had espoused. In Imitation of these Learned
Fathers, Constantine the Great, in Ad Sanct. Caet. c. 18.
one of his Orations, speaks very reverently of the Sibylls Predictions, and
vindicates them as no contemptible Proof of Christianity. Instit. l. 4. c. 15.
18.
Lactantius and Arnobius allege them to prove the same. St. Augustine quotes
the Acrosticks of Sibylla Erythraea, and turns them into Latin. Thus the
Fathers used to convince the Gentiles out of the Sibylline Oracles, and the Old
Christians constantly read these Writings, and appealed to them in their
Discourses with the Heathens. From which practice of theirs the Gentiles (as De
Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 23. Cont. Faust. l. 13.
Origin testifies) styled the Christians Sibyllists; yea, the ancient
Christians were so addicted to the reading these Books of the Sibylls, that
they were strictly Cont. Cel^. l. 5.
forbid by the Laws to do it for the future upon pain of Death. And Justin
Mart. Orat. ad Gentil.
we are told what was the Reason why the Emperors prohibited the reading of
these Books, namely, because they thence fetched many things that made for
their Cause. These Writings of Heathen Women were in those days reckoned to be
a notable Testimony to the Truth of Christianity. Whence it appears that they
were no Forgeries, for the Anci^ntest and Learnedest Fathers (as well as other
Christian Brethren) would not have quoted them to confirm the Christian
Religion if they had been such. But we see they did frequently allege them to
that end, and especially in their Disputes with the Gentiles. As they made use
of the Heathen Philosophers and Poets for attesting the Sc^iptures of the
Old Testament, (as has been showed you) so they cited these Gentile
Prophetesses (for such they supposed them to be) to assert the Writings of the
New Testament. It may be said that it does not absolutely and nec^ssarily
follow, that, because the Fathers used the Sibylls Verses to confute the
Pagans, therefore they were true, for they might suppose them to be such,
though they did not expressly declare it. In answer to which I return, that it
cannot but be granted that there is a great probability of these Sibylline
Writings being true, because they are quoted by the Fathers: For 1. Many of
these knowing Persons use their Testimony. If one or two only did so, we could
make no conclusion from thence; but since it is certain that great numbers of
them (not only those before named, but others) expressly appealed to those
Books, we cannot with any Reason slight their Allegations. 2. If these Books
were quoted by the Fathers but seldom and rarely, there would not be so great a
Motive to attend to them; but seeing we find them not only once, or twice, but
very often made use of by them, it argues that they deliberately did it, and it
invites us to give the greater attention and credit to them. 3. They quote them
not as on Supposition only, but as True and Genuine, and such as may and ought
to be depended on. 4. The Fathers were Persons that were Competent Judges in
this Case. Many of them were Men of Sagacity and of a Critical Genius, and were
not easily to be imposed upon. They had also time and leisure to examine these
Writings, and to enquire whether they were forged or no; and we are sure it was
their Concern to do it, for their Religion depended much upon it. Wherefore
those who blast the Authority of the Fathers in this point, have little reason
to do so. They were no credulous Fools, and such who took up any thing on
trust; they were able to discern these Writings to be Counterfeit, (if they had
been such) as well as any other Persons.

But notwithstanding this, there have been of old, and are of late, several Men
that reject the Sibylls Writings, as Spurious and Counterfeit. And who should
forge them but Christians? Here then I am obliged to answer that Cavil, that
the Writings which go under the name of the Sibylls were ^orged by Christian
Heretics. This, it seems, was an old Objection, for Origin acquaints us that
it was made by the Arch Pagan Celsus. And Lactantius after him, says that this
Objection was renewed against the Sibylls Books by some other Pagan
Adversaries, viz. that they were forged by some Christians themselves. Behold
also the Moderns concur^ing with the Pagans to defame the Sibylls. Scaliger is
very warm against them, and holds that the Fathers were much deceived about
them. Exercitat. 1. ad Apparat. Annal. cap. 10.
Isaac Casaubon against Baronius, endeavors to prove the credit of the Sibylls
to be suspected. Becman Exercit. 14. cont. Photin.
is against the authority of these Writings, and says they are Supposititious.
David Blondel uses all ways to prove them to be Forgeries and Impostures: and
he holds they were the Fictions of some busy Christians, who had the boldness
to impose upon the World by these Cheats and Romances. As many of the ancient
Christians and Fathers, says he, received counterfeit Gospels, Acts and
Epistles; so they were cheated and abused by ^hese spurious Pieces of the
Sibylls. The Learned Dalle is of the same Opinion, and tells us that the
Predictions concerning our Savior and his Kingdom were put out under the names
of the Sibylls ^y some Ch^istians, who were fallen into Here^^e. They had a
mind to use a kind of pious Fraud ^o establish some part of Religion, they
thought it to cheat the World for their good, and so they ^^blish'd these
Writings under the names of those ^rophetesses. Histor. Literar. p. 33, 34*
The Learned Dr. Cave, who is ^ot wont to dote on these Moderns, follows them
(...) this Opinion very closely, and leaves the anci^nt Fathers of the Church
for their sake: He pe^emptorily tells us that the Sibylls Verses were made and
feigned on purpose by the Ch^istians to up^old their Religion and Faith; and
they are da^^d by him from the Year 130, in Adrian's Reign* (...) is the first
flight of them, he says. But all ^^is is Suspicion and Prejudice, and bold
Affirma^^ves, but no proof; which will evidently appear, (...) you consider
(besides what has been said alrea^y) these following things: 1. Some of the
Si^^lls Verses were extant before Christ's coming into the World, as is
con^essed by ancient Christians and Pagans, and by all the Learned Antiquaries.
The Acrosticks, which are concerning the Last Judgment and the Consummation of
the World, (of which I spoke before) which consist of so many Verses as there
are Letters in these words, (...), the first Verse beginning with I the second
with, etc. these, I say, are mentioned by Tully in his Second Book of
Divination, (and are in an other place inserted into his Works, as Eusebius
testifies in the Life of Constantine, and says they are translated into Latin
Verse by him) where he adds that this is not a Poem of a mad and frentick
Person, for the Composure and Contrivance of the Verse argues the contrary, and
shows attention of Mind, Skill, and Diligence. These Sibylline Verses, the
Initial Letters of which point at our Lord Christ, are mentioned not only by
Tully, but by De ling. Lat. lib. 5.
Varro, who also lived before our Savior's time. If then they were extant and
famous before Christ's Birth, it is impossible they could be invented by the
Christians. Whence it is plain, that all the Writings of the Sibylls were not
obtruded by Christians, unless you will say there were any such before Christ.
Again, Virgil's Fourth Eclogue is not denied to be the same now that it was at
first; and yet there he Comments on the Cumaean Sibyll's Oracle, which is a
clear Prediction of Christ. Accordingly, in Constantine's Oration, Vltima
Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas:
Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo:
Iam nova progenies Coelo demittitur alto,
Iam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna.

part of this Poem is applied to Christ, and looked on as a Prophecy of him,
although the Poet makes use of it in a way of Panegyric to the Emperor
Augustus, and to Asinius Pollio, his good Patron; yea, he ridiculously applies
it to Pollio's Son, who was born that Year. He understands those words borrowed
from the Sibylls Oracle [ Iam redit and Virgo] concerning Astraea; but the
sense was much higher* there being a reference in those words to the Sign
mentioned by the Evangelical Prophet, A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son,
Isai. 7. 14. Of that golden Age which was to come, he says, -- Incipient magni
procedere menses. What Magnitude is in Bodies, that Diuturnity or Length is in
Time; and so here is intimated the duration of Christ's Reign, Whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. 7. 27. Or those
Days and Months shall be Great, because they are the Lord's, to whom whatever
appertains is Great; whence every thing that is in its kind the greatest is
called God's. Several other things in that Eclogue are transcribed out of that
Sibyll's Verses, and were meant of Christ's Coming, and the happy state of the
World which should accompany it, which are frequently spoken of in the
Old Testament, whence the Sibyll borrowed these Prophesies. No Man can have the
face to say that These, made use of here by the Roman Poet, were obtruded on
the World by Christians, seeing Christianity it self had its rise afterward.

I might go on still and show that the Sibylls Oracles (or some of them at
least) were mentioned by Authors before our Savior's time, as by Plato in his
Phaedrus; by Or the Author of the Book De Mirabilib. Auscultationib.
Aristotle, who particularly names the Cuman Sibyll; by Lib. de Divinatione.
Chrysippus, who makes mention of her of Delphos, by Lib. 4.
Diodorus the Sicilian Historian, and In Phocaicis.
Pausanias, who speak of the same. Dionysius Halicarnass. takes notice of
another, and Eratosthenes has written of the Samian Sibyll; and Euripides
quotes her of Lybia. Thus we are assured from the Testimony of these Writers,
who lived before Christ's Nativity, that there were such Persons among the
Heathens, noted for their Enthusiastic and Prophetic Genius, as they
supposed. Now, what Man, in his Wits, dares say that the Christians forged the
Verses of these Sibylls, when there were no Chrstians at that time?

2. Let it be considered how signally it was ordered by God's Providence that
some of these Books of the Sibylls should be evidenced to be true and genuine.
Before Christ's Coming the Verses of these Poetic Women were inquired into by
the Gentiles; they were searched and compared with other Copies, and the
Spurious ones were rejected, and the rest kept and safely laid up, so that the
Christians might allege them (as they did) without suspicion of Imposture.
These Books were first offered to Tarquin King of the Romans at that time, who
bought some of them and deposited them in the Capitol, and appointed Officers
on purpose to take care of them, as is related by several credible Dionys.
Halicarn. Valor. Maximus, A. Gellius, Pliny, Lactantius.
Writers. In that place the Books continued till the Capitol was burnt, which
was about fourscore Years before Christ's Birth. And after it was rebuilt,
Messengers were dispatched by the Senate into Asia and Greece to search for
these Sibylls Verses, and accordingly a thousand of were brought and laid up in
the new Capitol. Others afterward that were carefully collected were placed in
golden Boxes in the Temple of Apollo; and when ever there was any great Affair
on foot these Oracles were consulted, as appears from several good Historians.
Both Annal. lib. 5.
Tacitus and In Augusto. c. 31.
Suetonius testify, that when these Writings had been sought out and fetched
to Rome, they were by Augustus's command diligently examined and reviewed by
the Senate, and by the Quindecemviri, that the true Copies might be known from
the False. Wherefore there is not the least color of Reason to think that
these Books which were thus searched into, and examined so strictly, were
Counterfeit; much less is there any possibility that these ancient Writings
could be Figments of the Christi^ns; for they could not feign them before they
were in being.

3. Nor is there any ground to think that the Volume of the Sibylls Verses, now
extant, as to the main, is not the same with that which was before our
Savior's days, or that Heretical Christians corrupted it, and added to it. For
first, if they did so, why is it not showed what Heresy, what ^alse Doctrine
they upheld, and maintained by these Additions and Supplements of theirs? I see
nothing of this made out by our Adversaries. Again, If these Writings had been
the forgeries of Christians, the Heathens would have certainly, at one time or
other, laid open this Cheat, and let the World know there were no such Verses.
But none of them ever pretended to do any thing of this nature; wherefore no
Man of consistent. Thoughts can imagine that these Writings were the mere
Invention of some Christians. Nay, I could add from good Authors, that not only
Heathens, but Jews, made frequent use of these Celebrated Books, and several of
them were brought to embrace the Christian Faith by reading the Contents of
them; and truly when they saw many things fulfilled which are here spoken of
and fore told, it could not but induce them to think well of Christianity.
Whence it is plain, that they had no suspicion of these Writings; they had no
such apprehension as some since have formed* viz. that they were a Cheat, and
that some Christians were the Authors of it. And then, as for using of Pious
Frauds to vouch Christianity, there is as little ground for that; for seeing
they had such a Cloud of Witnesses of all sorts to attest the Truth of the
Christian Religion, it was altogether superfluous and unnecessary to
counterfeit any. Or, if we should suppose any such thing, and grant that some
ill-minded Christians inserted some things of their own into the Sibylls
Writings, yet it does not follow thence that all is Spurious and Counterfeit. I
know some condemn all, and others allow every thing that goes under the name of
the Sibylls Oracles But I know no cause for either, but the usual one, namely,
that Writers must run directly counter to one an other. This is their practice
generally, but it is no good one, and I have no Inclination to follow it. I
take an other way, the middle one. I do not think that all the Verses that bear
their names are theirs, and genuine; and I am far from thinking that all are
Counterfeit. What if we grant that some things in the Collection of the Sibylls
W^itings (as in many others) are alt^ed and super-added? Can we conclude from
thence that every thing in them is changed and corrupted? No surely. There were
Counterfeit Gospels written, but these do not prejudice the others which are
True: So there are many Pieces go under the names of the Fathers, which are
Spurious, but we do not reject the rest of their Works because of them. Thus
perhaps it may be here; some Christians might add a few things, they might
insert some Verses that mention those individual Acts, and particular Works of
our Savior, with some Circumstances which are no where mentioned in the
Prophesies of the Old Testament. This perhaps they might do; I cannot wholly
deny it, but this is no Argument that the main of these Books was not composed
before Christ's time, and is Genuine and Authentic. Nay, we are certain that
the date of them was long before: I hope I have sufficiently demonstrated that;
Therefore let us not condemn the whole for the sake of a small part. We are
certain that many things quoted out of them by the Fathers, and which are the
clearest Attestations of the Sacred Truths of the Bible, are not Supposititious
and Forged. We are certain that some of their Writings were extant before there
were any Christians to corrupt and adulterate them; and many of the particular
Passages quoted by the Fathers in these Writings are now to be found, and are
the very same that they were then, and consequently they are now as good a
Testimony of the Truth of Christianity, as they were at that time.

But it is also Objected, that the Number of the Sibylline Books is unknown,
and we can neither tell how many the Sibylls or their Writings were; and as for
their Quality and Condition of Life, these are uncertainly delivered. Nor do we
well know their Names, as appears from this, that Cumaea in Virgil is put for
Cumana, and other Mistakes there are. It is true, the Opinions were various
concerning these things; their Names and Verses are often confounded, and it is
hard to distinguish them from one another. This is granted, and even by
Baronius in Apparatu. Poslevinus, Montacut. Exercir. 4. in App rat. Baron Acts
and Monuments. Chap. 3. Isaac Vossius de S^b^ll. O^^c
those who have with great Eagerness maintained the Credit and Authority of the
Sibylls; they acknowledge that it is much controverted, What and how many these
Prophetic Persons were, and in what Times they lived, and in what Countries
they we^e bred Some say there was only One; they think it was with the Sibylls
as with the Jupiters and Hercules's, and other Gods, who were many, and yet but
One. De Divinatione.
Boisardus is perswad^d, that the same Sibyll traveled into diverse Countries,
and took her Name from the different places she le^t her Verses in. And so a
lat^ Author Mr. Petit.
tells us there was but one Sibyll. There were two of these Prophetesses, says
Martianus Capella; three, says Not. H^^t. l. ^4. c. 5.
Pliny; four, says Aelian; seven, says Plinian. Exercitat.
Salmasi^s. Lactamius out of Varro, (that great Roman Antiquary) concludes them
to be Ten, and names them thus, The Delphick, (who was the Eld^st) the
Erythraean, the Samian, the Cumane, the Cumaean the Hellespontiack or Trojan,
the Lesbick or Iabyck, the ^hrygian, the Tiburtine, the Persian or Chaldaean.
Isidorus, Suidas, O^up^rius de Sibyll.
Others add two more, viz. Epiro^i^k and Egyptian, and make them a complete
Douzen. Thus the Reckoning is not alike; but this is no Argument against what
we have asserted. It is not material how many the Sibylls or their Writings
were; it is frivolous to insist upon this. They might all of them been put into
one, if Authors pleased; or they might divide them into more, as the way at
some Coffee Houses now is to deal out Pamphlets. Wherefore there is no reason
to reject them on this account, seeing we have proved that their Books (were
they more, or fewer) are owned as to the main by the Fathers and Primitive
Christians to be true, and seeing they were frequently made use of by them as
sufficient Witnesses to the Truth of a great part of the Christian Religion.

And as for those Moderns, who have rejected these Witnesses, we may, with
reference to them, take up that Lamentation of a late Vossius de Sibyl. Orac.
cap. 11.
Learned Writer, (who himself is partly guilty of the Fault he complains of)
Verily the Christian Religion has no Enemies more set against it than
Christians themselves; for you may observe, that there is searcely any Prophecy
or Testimony to be found concerning Christ among the Ancients, which many even
of the most Learned Men have not endeavored to weaken, yea utterly to destroy
and annull. This is a very deplorable Thing, but it were easy to prove it most
true in several Instances: You will meet with some of them in the following
part of this Discourse, and more particularly in the Testimony concerning
Christ which Josephus gives. But this which is now before us, is as Signal a
one as any that can be named; for the Sibylls Verses are very express
Attestations conce^ning our Savior and his Great Undertakings. Yet how
strangely do Christian Men endeavor to enfeeble, yea, to baffle and subvert
these Testimonials concerning our Lord? They tell us they are the Forgeries of
Jews, and the Impostures of Heretical Christians, and all manner of Objections
they invent against them; yea, a late Servatius Gallaeus.
Writer pronounces these Sibylls to be mad and frentick People, and so there is
no heed to be given to what they say. When it has pleased God to afford us
such a remarkable Confirmation of our Religion from the Mouths of Pagans, is it
not unpardonable Ingratitude thus to vilisie and reject it? Is it not an
Argument of a vile and perverse Spirit to use all means, and those very
shameful ones too, to disprove that plain Evidence which these Sibylls bring,
and to shut their Ears to that repeated Testimony which they give to
Christianity and the Blessed Author of it? In short, the Pagans had their
Temples, and Priests, and Sacrifices, and Oblations, and Prayers; and they had
also their Scriptures, i. e. the Sibylls Books. In these was discovered the
Council of God; for the Sibylls, according to the import of their Name, were
Interpreters of God's will to the Heathens. In these were expressly foretold
the Birth of the Holy Jesus, and many other remarkable things relating to Him:
By these Oracles the Gentiles were pre-admonished of Christ's Coming; it seemed
good to God to prepare them for the Gospel, by these Forerunners and
Messengers, as he did the Jews by their extraordinary Prophets. And they are
useful to Us as well as to the Gentiles; we may be fortified in the Belief of
our holy Religion by what they delivered. They give a plain and clear suffrage
for Christianity and the Founder of it. The ancient Christians thought their
Writings to be Authentic Records, though now some are pleased to slight and
vilify them. They looked upon them as good Evidences of the Christian Faith,
and of the New Testament which contains it; and there is still the same
Reason that we should esteem them as such, especially since the Objections to
prove the falsity of these Books are very mean and weak. Therefore (to
conclude) till they can produce better Reasons against these Testimonials, I
think we may safely and reasonably make use of them.

CHAP. XI.
It is proved from particular unquestionable Testimonies of professed Enemies
of Christ, that there was a Person of such a Name, and that all the great and
eminent Circumstances of his Birth, Life, and Death, are really true. As to his
Birth, they attest the particular time of it, the general Tax or Enrolling, the
wonderful Star, the Murdering of the Infants of Bethlehem. Then, as to his
Life and Actions, Abgarus's Letter to our Savior, and our Savior's Answer to
it, are proved to be an Authentic Evidence. What the Emperor Augustus did in
relation to Christ, is consider^d. The Defection of the Sun's Light, and the
Earthquake at our Savior's Passion, are not wholly passed over in silence by
Heathen Writers.

HAving thus premised those Particulars which are of a middle kind, between the
former part of the Discourse and this; I will now wholly insist on such things
as are more Appropriated to the Subject I am Treating of. This then, I will
prove from Witness^s who are professed Enemies of Christ, (i. e. Pagans and
Jews,) that there was a Person of such a Name, and that all the great and
^minent Circumstances of this Persons Birth Life, and Death are really true.
First, The Pagan Historians p^esent us with his Name. Tacitus, telling how the
Christians suffered for the firing of Rome, which Nero laid to their Charge,
says, the Emperor inflicted the most exquisite Punishments on those Persons,
Quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat; Auctor nominis ejus
Christus. Annal. l. 15. c. 44.
who being detestable for their Villainies, were commonly called Christians,
from the Author of that Name Christ. Here this Historian expressly sets down the
Name that these Persons were known by, and His Name, from whom they took it.
This was Christ; though, as we lea^n from Sed exponenda hujus nominis ratio
est, propter ignorantiam errorum, qui eum immutata litera Chrestum solent
dicere. Institut. l. 4. c. 7.
Lactantius, this Name was sometimes a little altered, for by changing of a
Letter they pronounced it Chrest. Thus we read in Iudaeos impulsore Chresto
assidue tumultnantes, Claudius Roma expulit. In Claud. c. 25.
Suetonius, that Claudius banished the Jews from Rome, because they were always
raising Tumults by the Instigation of one Chrestus. The Annal. aer. Dom. Anno
54.
Learned Usher indeed is of Opinion, that here is not meant Christ our Lord,
but some other whose true and right name was Chrestus. But (with Honor first
paid to that great and justly admired Antiquary) it is more likely that Christ
our Savior is here meant, because Lactantius (as you have heard) tells us he
was called Chrestus, and because it is clear from Apolog. 2. ad Senate.
Tertullian, that the Christians were called Chrestiani; and so Sed cum
perperam Chrestianus pronuntiatur a vobis, Adv. Gent. c. 3.
Justin Martyr informs us that the Christians were called (...): yea, he seems
to say that the Gentiles did not give them a wrong Name when they called them
so, for they were truly (...), very Good-natured, Sweet, and Benign Persons.
But questionless it was a mistake in the Pagans, and the Historian
abovementioned was guilty of it. Some think he mistook not only our Lord's
Name, but the time of this Fact which he mentions, imagining that Christ lived
in the Reign of Claudius; but this was too gross an ove^ sight for so knowing
an Historian, especially he, living so near our Savior's Time. But to
understand this Author a^ight, we must know, that it was common with the Pagan
Writers to confound the Names of the Jews and the Christians, and to say that
of one which appertained to the other; (nor is it a Wonder that Christians for
a time were called Jews, because the first Christians were of the Jewish
Nation) Accordingly by the Jews here (who he says were expelled out of Rome)
are meant Christians, who were looked upon by the Gentiles as Seditious and
Tumultuous Persons, because their Master and Founder was reckoned such a one.
And so when this Writer says they raised Tumults impulsore Chresto, the
meaning is, they were set on by His Example; He, though dead, had a great
Influence upon them, and stirred them up to do what they did. Or, if you will
understand Jews here in the strictest Sense, viz. such as profess Judaism, then
it may refer to Theudas's Insurrection, who, though he was an Egyptian, as some
gather from Acts 21. 38. yet he headed the Mutinous Jews; which gave just
occasion to the Emperor to banish all of that Nation and Religion from Rome.
And because (as I have said) the name of Jews and Christians was promiscuous
among the Gentiles, thence Chrestus, i. e. Christ is said to be their
Ringleader and Impulsor. Pliny the Younger mentions the Christians and Christ
by name, for Epist. 97. lib. 10.
he tells the Emperor that some that were brought before him upon Suspicion of
being Christians, were found to be Persons of another Persuasion, for upon his
Solicitation they refused not to Curse Christ. This was the Appellation he was
known by to the Gentile Historians, and this is the very Title which the
New Testament so often gives him. Thus far then the Pagans bear witness to the
Gospel.

But from the Name I pass to the Person and his Actions, and most of the great
and notable Circumstances which accompanied his Birth, Life and Death. First,
we will speak of those four remarkable things which attended his Birth. namely
the Particular Time of it, the General Tax, the Wonderful Star, and the
Murdering of the Infants of Bethlehem.

First, Those known Adversaries of Christianity, the Jews and Gentiles,
testify that Christ was to come at that very Time when he came. It was the
universally received Tradition of Elias, that after four Thousand Years the
Messiah should be born; for though that Celebrated Saying or Prophecy in the
Talmud of Two thousand Years before the Law, and two Thousand after it, be not
exactly true, for there were about Two Thousand five Hundred Years from the
Creation to the Law, and from the giving of the Law to Christ there were not
above Sixteen or Seventeen Hundred Years, yet the Prophecy may be made use of
to convince the Jews, that the Messiah is come, and it is a plain Indication of
the Time when he was expected by them, even that Time when he bles^ed the World
with his Presence on Earth. Hence it is that (when Christ was brought to
Jerusalem to be offered in the Temple) as soon as Simeon beheld him, he
forthwith acknowledged him, and cried, out Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.
This is that Simeon to whom the Jewish Doctors had reference, when they said,
The Disciples of Hillel shall not fail till the Messiah comes; for this Simeon
called the Just, was one of the chief of those Disciples. In Sanhedrim.
Rabbi Hakiba, the Wisest of all the Talmudical Doctors, interprets those words
of Haggai, Chap. 2. v. 7.
The Desire of all Nations shall come, of the Messiah; and it is confessed by
all the Learned Jews, that he was ardently desired and expected, not only by
that People, but by all Nations, just at that time when our Savior came; for
this was the Great Lord of the World, who was then looked for by the Gentiles
out of the East; this was that Universal Monarch, who was expected to rise out
of Jury, of whom I spoke before. This was no other than the Messiah, the
Christ, whom all the World longed for at that time by a gene^al Consent; and
that was the fullness of Time, spoken of by the Apostle, that blessed Time when
the Son of God was born of a Woman. So that the holy Records of the Gospel, and
those of Pagans agree in this.

Another Ci^cumstance of Christ's Birth, which the New Testament takes notice
of, is the Tax that was made by the appointment of the Emperor Augustus; and
this also is recorded by the Gentile Writers, which is a Confirmation of the
Truth of the Evangelical History. It came to pass in those days, (says Chap.
2. v. 1.
St. Luke) that there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the
World should (...) Taxed, or Enrolled, as the Greek Word properly denotes.
This was no Mony-Tax, but only a setting down or Enrolling of every Person
according to his Quality, Age, and Station in the Place where he was. It was a
taking in Writing the Names of every individual Man, it was a numbering the
People, and Registring the true value of their Estates, Incomes and Revenues,
and way of getting their Livelihood. A late Bynaeus de Natali J. Christi.
Writer (...) of Opinion that the design of this Census was to know the number
of Soldiers, and what ^ighting Men Iudaea afforded; whence it is, says he,
that Profane Writers say not any thing of it, it being not considerable. But
he forgot that the Virgin Mary went to Bethlehem with her Babe to be Enrolled
there. Or rather he did not forget this (for he makes mention of it afterward)
but he considered not that Women and Children are not ^sually listed for
Soldiers. It is more agreeable ^hen to Reason and Truth to assert that this
Decree of Augustus was for the purpose afore-menti^ned, namely, that he might
have a particular ^ccount of the Number and Quality of all his ^ubjects. The
Emperor had Precedents among the old Roman Kings for this, for Plutarch tells
us, that Numa Pompilius, and Florus relates how S^rvi^s Tullius took an Account
of the Age, Family, Patrimony and Offices of the R^mans, digesting them into
particular Classes, and setting them down in the Censual Tables. Augustus, by
such a Census as this, knew the Strength of his Empire, and what the Riches of
the People werein the several Provinces, and so when there should be occasion
for a Subsidy he could take his measures hence. For tho this Tax, which St.
Luke mentions, be not a Pecuniary one, yet it was in order to it. This
Registring, this Enrolling of every Person was to this purpose, that they might
more easily be taxed or sessed by the Head. And whereas it is said all the
World was Taxed or Enrolled, it is to be restrained (though not to Iudaea only,
as some imagine, yet) to the Roman Empire. All that were under the Dominion of
the Roman Empire, at that time, were book'd and registered to the purpose
aforesaid. This being a thing so well known we may expect that the Pagan
History, as well as that of the Gospel should take notice of it; and
accordingly we find Dio, Josephus, and Tacitus, making mention of it.

I know some are unwilling to grant that it is the same Tax mentioned by St.
Luke, because it is said, this Taxing was first made when Cyrenius was Governor
of Syria, Chap. 2. v. 2. Now it is Recorded by Josephus and others, that
Quintilius Varus (not Cyrenius) was President of Syria at that time of Christ's
Birth, and the same Authors relate that Augustus taxed the Empire in that
President's time. How then can they speak of the same Taxing which St. Luke
Records? And Moreover, as for Cyrenius, he was, according to Antiqu. Jud. lib.
18. c. 1.
Josephus, commissioned by the Emperor to make a Tax, not about the time of
Christ's Birth, but a good while after. Whence it follows, that Augustus's
Taxing of the World, or ordering Cyrenius to manage it, which is mentioned by
the Evangelist, is different from that Tax which the foresaid Writers speak of.
Some answer the first Difficulty thus, (...) is put for (...), Cyrenius for
Quintillius Varus, by the neglect and fault of the Transcriber. This is the
Opinion of Steuberus in his Preface before Helvicus's Tables, and also of
Ludovicus Capellus. But this is an ill way of solving the Difficulty, because
it disparageth the Holy Text, and argues it to be corrupted. If we admit of
th^se over-sights and mistakes of the Transcribers, we must impeach the S.
Scriptures of Error. Therefore the true Answer is this, That Quintilius Varus
was the ordinary President of Syria, he was the Governor Residentiary, but
Cyre^ius (or Quirinus, or Quirinius, as he is called by Annal. lib. 3.
Tacitus and In Tiber. c. 49.
Suetonius) was the Governor Extraordinary, that is, he was sent thither by
Augu^stus to make a general Tax there. Not that he ^as the settled Ruler of
that Province, but was on^y appointed, at that time, to take care of that
bu^^ness; and afterward (upon Varus's Death) he ^as made President in ordinary
of Syria. This, I conceive, is the true reconciling of this Passage of St.
Luke, with what you read in Profane Authors. It is rightly said, that Cyrenius
was Governor of Syria, because he went with extraordinary Power from the
Emperor to govern and preside in that particular Affair. This amounts in a
manner to what Drusius and Petavius say in this Case. viz. That Varus and
Cyrenius were joined in the Work; or one began it, and the other carried it on
and ^^nished it. And then, as to what is said concerning the disagreeing of St.
Luke, and the Jewish Historians, about the time of Cyrenius's Taxing, which the
former says was in the Year when Christ was born, but the latter nine Years
after Herod's Death; in the Reign of Archelaus; I conceive this differrence
betwixt them is easily adjusted. Which is done not by Distinguishing between
the Taxes; as Beza, Sc^liger, Cas^ubon, Grotius.
some tell us long Stories of a twofold Tax, one under Augustus, without any
Exaction of Tribute, the other, under the same Emperor, but with gathering of
it; in the first, Christ was born, but the other was a considerable time after.
St. Luke speaks of one, say they, and Josephus of the other, and so they are
different Taxes, and thus there is an end of the Controversy. I do not deny,
that there were two Taxes under Augustus, for (...) ( the very word used by St.
Luke,) Hist. lib. 20.
Dion, as well as A^tiqu. l. 18. c. 1.
Josephus, affirms this; nay, Suetonius In Augusto, Cap. 27.
l^ts us know that this Emperor caused a Census of the Roman Empire to be made
thrice. That he did it more than once, is implied, in that the Evangelist calls
this Taxing under Cyrenius the First; (for I do not attend to Cloppenburg in
Syntagm. Bynaeus. Jacobus Perizonius.
those who think that (...) is as much as (...), or that the Preposition (...)
is omitted by an Elipsis, so that it should be thus, (...), before he was
President or Governor; and then the meaning is, that this Tax was before
Cyrenius was President, which is a plain perverting of the Grammar and Sense of
the words, and therefore not to be regarded. It is called the first, because it
was the first that was under Cyrenius. That is plain; but this is that which I
assert moreover, that they are not different Taxes which are spoken of by St.
Luke, and the Jewish Historian, but they are the same; only the Inspired Writer
relates it barely, but the other with some additional Circumstances. They may
seem to differ, because one is called an Enrolling, and the other is
represented as a Mony-Tax; but if you consider, that one was in order to the
other, that the taking Men's Names was but a preparative to the actual levying
of Tribute, you will soon apprehend the Mistake in the forementioned
Historian, and see that he speaks of the very same thing. Nay, though he
represents it in part, as a pecuniary Census, yet you will find it called by
him Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 1.
(...), the same word which the Evangelist uses. Or, if they seem to differ,
as to time, yet they may be the same notwithstanding that; for it has been
observed by Apparat.
Baronius, and several Learned Critics, that Josephus is often faulty as to
the Timing of things, and so he is here, and by that means confounds one thing
with another; but to a considerate Enquirer, it is evident, that he and St.
Luke do not disagree, but that the Relation which this latter gives us is
confirmed by the former. Eusebius was clearly of this Opinion, and was not
afraid to assert, that Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 9.
the Taxing which Josephus speaks of, is the same that St. Luke writes of. Nor
are we to attend to a Du Pin, Tom. 2 Cent. 4.
Learned Doctor of the Sorbon, when he charges this upon him as a mistake and
falsehood, unless he had backed his charge with good reason.

As for Tacitus's Testimony, that is denied by none, but it is granted, that he
speaks of the first Tax, under which Christ was born. He gives this short
Description of the Books of Taxes, which were made at that time, Opes publicae
eo continebantur, quantum civium sociorum* in armis, quot classes, regna,
provinciae, tributa aut vectigalia, and necessitates ac largitiones; quae omnia
manu sua perscripserat Augustus, Lib. Annal. l. 1.
The Public Revenues (says he) were contained in them, the number of the
Citizens and their Fellows that were in Arms, how many Ships, Kingdoms and
Provinces there were within the compass of the Roman Empire, was exactly set
down, and consequently what Taxes and Impositions there should be, what was
needful to be laid out, and what to be contributed in the several parts of the
Empire: And all this Augustus writ over with his own hand. Thus the Roman and
Jewish History accords with the Sacred one in this matter; it confirms the
Relation of St. Luke concerning Christ's being born under the first Census.
Wherefore it is falsely said, that Augustus's Taxing all the World, i. e. all
the People of the Roman Empire is not mentioned by any Historians, either Pagan
or Jewish. It is true, this is matter that seems more proper for the Diaries of
the Emperors, than for the Ann^ls of History; which may be the reason why it is
not taken notice of by many, nor insisted upon by them. But we see it is not
forgotten by some, but particularly recorded by them, as is evident from what
has been propounded. The same may be farther evidenced from the Censual Tables
at Rome, wherein all Persons that were subject to the Roman Empire were
enrolled according to Augustus's Decree. By reason of this universal Registring
of Persons, it came to pass, (through the wonderful Providence of God) that the
Holy Iesus's Name, with the Time of his Birth, and the Place of it, and his
Stock and Lineage, were Recorded in these Public Rolls, as some of the
Ancientest Fathers openly declared, and appealed to these Records at Rome for
the proof of it. Tertullian testifies, that this Tax under Cyrenius was set
down in these Tables, and Testem fidissimum Dominicae nativitatis Romana
Archiva Custodiunt. Cont. Marcion. l. 4. c. 7.
as a most faithful Witness of Christ's Birth was kept in the Roman Archieves
in his time. Justin Martyr does the same in his public Defense of Christianity
to Antoninus Pius and the Roman Senate: There is a Town, says he, called
Bethlehem in the Land of Judaea, five and thirty Furlongs off of Jerusalem,
where Christ was born, as you may learn out of the Censual Tables made for that
Tax which was under Cyrenius your first Procurator in Judaea. So he, both Cont.
Julian, l. 6.
Cyril and Romano censu statim ascriptus ut natus est, lib. 6. c. 22. Dicendus
utique civis Romanus census professione Romani, Ibid.
Orosius take particular notice of this, namely, that our Blessed Lord and
Savior was registered as a Subject of Caesar, and as a Citizen of Rome.
Moreover, that Women and Children, as well as Men, used to be Enrolled in the
Census, is testified by Dyonisius Halicarn. (Lib. 1.) speaking of that which
was in Servius Tullius's time. And Cicero (de Legib. lib. 3.) acquaints us that
this was usual. To conclude then, this Taxing was a thing known and open, and
the Heathens themselves (as Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian) did not deny it. Thus
the Public Records of Rome vouch the History of the Gospel. Therefore the
Fathers appealed with great Confidence to these Authentic Tables, as knowing
that these were a notable Confirmation of the Sacred Records, and particularly
of what St. Luke delivers concerning the Tax which Augustus made.

The Third remarkable Circumstance of Christ's Birth was the appearing of a
wonderful Star, Mat. 2. 2. 7. 9. which is also taken notice of by Heathen
Writers. There are great Disputes among the Learned about this Star, which
appeared to the Magi when our Savior was born. Some have said it was an Angel,
some a fixed Star, others a Planet, and it has been thought by some to be a
Comet, or some lower Meteor. The true decision of the quarrel is this, That
this strange Apparition was none of these, and yet it had something of all
these in it. It is probable some glorious Angel presided, as an Intelligence,
in this shining Body, and directed its Course and Motion. It might pass for a
fixed Star or a Planet in respect of its height, if you consider at what
distance it was seen. Mat. 2. 2.
We have seen his Star in the East, said the Wise Men, i. e. they being in the
East (in Chaldea, Persia, or Arabia, for it is questioned from which of th^se
they came) saw his Star at Beth^ehem or Jerusalem. Or if this Interprotation be
not admitt^d, but that the meaning be thought to be this, that they saw that
Star, it being then in the East, in those parts where they were, in those
Eastern Countries where they lived, and that they came along by the conduct of
it to Judea, then this a^gues its orderly Motion from East to West, and so
shows its res^mblance to the ordinary Stars. It had also something of a Comet
in this, that Mat. 2. v. 9.
it came and stood over where the young Child was, that is, as I conceive, it
directly darted its Beams in a Line, as it were, upon that very place where the
Holy Babe was; its glorious Train which came from it spread it self toward
that quarter, and so this heavenly Light showed where the House was that was
blessed with such a Guest. In this respect also it had the nature of a Meteor,
that it was partly in the lower Region, and there hovered for a time. But if we
strictly consider the nature of this Apparition, we shall find, that it really
was none of these which I have named. It was not an Angel, (although guided by
one) whatever some fanciful Men have imagined, for this is not the way of the
Holy Spirit's speaking here, as you may see in this very Chapter, where that
particular sort of Messenger is called in plain terms an Angel of the Lord, v.
13. and so again, v. 19. It could be neither fixed Star nor Planet, because
both its Motion and Appearance were interrupted. They saw it when they were in
the East, but it disappeared afterward, or moved an other way when they came
to Jerusalem, otherwise they would not have asked (as they did) Mat. 2. v. 2.
Where is he that is born King of the Jews? It is evident hence, that it did
not show 'em where Christ was when they came at first to Jerusalem; but
afterward it appeared again, and not only so, but conducted them to the place
where the Blessed Babe lay. It was no Comet, for the length of its duration
proves this, it being seen two Years before Christ's Birth. Mat. 2. v. 16.
Herod sent forth and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all
the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which
he had diligently enquired of the wise Men, that is, according to the time the
Star had appeared, of which he was particularly informed by the Wise Men. H^nce
a Dr. Lightfoot.
Learned Man infe^s, that these Eastern Sages came not to visit Christ till two
years after he was born. But this does not follow thence, for the Star might
appear a Year or two before Christ was born, and give those Sages an Intimation
of some strange thing that was to come to pass; and it is likely that after it
had appeared a good while, and they were thoroughly confirmed in their
Persuasion, that some great thing was to happen, as signified by this new and
unexpected Luminary in the Heavens, they set forwards toward Judea, which they
knew was the Scene of the greatest Wonders in the World, and they were a long
time on their Journey from those remote parts which they left, (perhaps
sometimes making a halt, or sometimes going back, accordingly as their
Apprehensions and Surmises were concerning this new Phoenamenon in the
Heavens,) two Years or thereabout might be spent from the time of the first
appearing of this heavenly Light till their arrival at Jerusalem. From this we
gather that it was of great Continuance, such as is never known to be the
duration of Comets.

Some think this new Star appeared only to the Magi, because (say they)
otherwise Herod would not have so diligently enquired of them concerning its
appearing, for he might have learnt that of his own Subjects. But to understand
this aright, let us observe the words, Mat. 2. v. 7.
Herod, when he had privily called the wise Men, enquired of them diligently
what time the Star appeared, i. e. either first what was the time of its usual
Rising, for it did not appear always, night and day: Or secondly, Perhaps the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and other Jews, did not observe it, it being no great
and large one; but these Magi, who were skilled in the Stars, and took notice
when a new one showed it self, knew the time of its rising; therefore Herod
enquired of them. Or thirdly, He enquired what was the time when the Star began
first to appear. And that This is the true meaning, is evident from what is
said in the Sixteenth Verse of this Chapter, viz. That Herod slew the Children
from two Years old and under, according to the time which he had enquired.
Where you see these two are joined together, and answer to one another, the Age
of the Children, and the time since the appearing of the Star. Herod had been
told by the Wise Men that this had appeared about Two Years; therefore he
ordered all Children born within that time to be slain. Hence it is plain, that
the time of the Stars first showing it self, which was in those Regions where
the Wise Men inhabited, was the thing which Herod made enquiry about, and in
which he could not be satisfied by his own Subjects. But it does not follow
from this that the Star was not seen by them at all, nor by Herod himself,
because his enquiry was not about the present appearing of it, but only
concerning the time of its first Appearance. Besides, if it was seen of none
but the Magi, then it could not be expected it should be taken notice of in the
Writings of ^^her Pagans; but we find that it is taken notice of, which is the
chief thing I am concerned in at present. The Sibylls in their Verses
prophetically speak of it, or rather (as I have showed before) borrow it from
the Old Testament, wherein is There shall come a Star out of Jacob, Number. 24. 17.
Baalam's Prophecy concerning the Star, which though it is chiefly meant of
Christ himself, yet it may not exclude this unusual Star which ushered him into
the World. But Virgil, who Transcribes the Sibylls Verse, applies it in
Court-flattery to the Emperor Augustus. Eclog. 4.
Ecce Dionoei processit Caesaris astrum. After its Appearance it is mentioned
by Chalcidius a Platonist in his Comment on Plato's Timaeus, where speaking of
the wondrous Presages of Stars mentioned in Writers, he says, Est qucque alia
fanctior and venerabilior Historia quae perhibet de ortu stellae, etc. Apud
Marsil. Ficin. Tract, de stell.
There is another more Holy and Venerable History, which tells us of the
appearing of a certain Star, which did not denounce Diseases and Death, but the
descent of a God to converse with Mankind, which when the Chaldean Sages saw
they took it to be the forerunner of a Deity, and they forthwith sought him
out and worshipped him. This Star is mentioned by Not Hist. l. 2. c. 25.
Pliny, under the name of a Comet, (So all extraordinary Stars were called)
which appeared in the latter end of Augustus's Reign; and he adds, that that
one Comet is adored and reverenced all the World over. But hear what he says
farther in the same place, speaking of the several Species of Comets, Fit and
candidus Cometes, argenteo crine ita refulgens ut vix contueri liceat,
specieque humana, Dei Effigiem in se ostendens.
There is a bright Comet has appeared, which by reason of its Silver looks,
was so refulgent, that it could scarcely be looked upon; it had the shape of a
Man, and at the same time showed in it the Effigies of a God. He might mean the
Star which appeared at Christ's Nativity, and which brought the Wise Men to
visit him; for there might be (it is probable) a Rumor abroad in Pliny's days,
that in Augustus's Reign a Comet appeared in Judea, which had the Image of him
whom the Christians called God Man. However, they are very strange words which
this Writer utters, and deserve your Consideration. Macrobius, an Enemy of
Christianity, speaks of the coming of the Magi from the East to Jerusalem; and
Julian the Apostate confesses the appearing of a new Star, though he trifleth
about solving the manner of its appearing. This Testimony of our Adversaries is
sufficient.

Again, Herod's murdering the Babes of Bethlehem, is mentioned by Profane
Writers, as well as by the holy Evangelist, Mat. 2. 16 Dion in the Life of
Octavian Caesar has left a brief Memorial of it. But you will find it
recounted more particularly by Macrobius, who not only tells us of Herod's
killing the Children of Bethlehem, but of slaying his own Son. It seems this
bloody Man had put to death two of his Sons ( Alexander and Aristobulus)
before, and now his Son Antipater also is dispatched about the time of the
slaughter of the Infants, and upon the same account and jealousy, to secure
the Sovereignty of Judea to his other Sons (who were born after he was King)
for whom he designed it. He adds, that the Tidings of both (that is, Herod's
killing the Infants of Bethlehem, and his own Son together with them) being
brought to the Emperor Augustus, his witty remark or reply was this Quum
audisset Augustus inter Pueros, quos in Syria Rex Judaeorum intra bimatum
jussit intersici, filium queque ejus occisum, ait, Melius est Herodis Porcum
esse quam Filium, Saturnal. l. 2. c. 4.
It is better to be Herod' s Hog than Son, (because Herod being as to his
Religion a Jew, would not have killed his Hog.) Or; if it be granted, (and I
shall not be very unwilling to do so) that Augustus could not hear of this,
because Antipater was no Child, but grown up in years, and was not at Bethlehem
when the slaughter of the Children was, but Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 17. c. 10.
was slain five days before his Father's death, (which yet was not long after
this) Admit this, I say, yet all that can be said is, that Macrobius represents
not the Story aright as to all its Circumstances, especially the Time; but
notwithstanding this, he gives Testimony to the main thing (which is, that we
are to attend at present) viz. the slaughter of the Children by the Command of
Herod, especially of such who were born (...), Mat. 2. 16. Intra bimatum,
Macrob.
within the space of two Years, which is the thing St. Matthew expressly
records. Tertullian appeals to the Censual Tables and public Acts at Rome for
the Truth of this, which shows it was a thing well known to those Pagans. Nor
were the Jews backward to assert this, as you will see in In Breviario Temporum.
Philo, who relates that Herod's Son was killed with the Children. If it be
objected here that the famous Jewish Historian says nothing of this Massacre
of the Innocents at Bethlehem, I answer, 1. Nor is there any mention of it in
the other three Evangelists. This is no uncommon thing for one Evangelist to
record that which none of the others so much as make mention of. 2. Many things
in the Old Testament, and those of great Fame, are omitted by this Author, who
designedly took upon him to give an Account of all the great Occurrences among
the Jews. He has nothing of the History of Job, nothing of the Golden Calf,
and other matters worthy of our Observation; wherefore let us not wonder that
this Historical Passage in the New Testament concerning the Infants of
Bethlehem is not mentioned by him. 3. It is sufficient, that this Murder of
the Infants is testified by one of his own Nation, and by Heathen Men, as you
have heard. It is probable that other Gentile Historians had delivered the
same; for it had been recorded some where, as appears from Macrobius, who
received it from those Authors.

Secondly, after Christ's Birth we are to consider his Life, and some notable
things which accompanied it, and to show that these also are attested by those
that were professed Enemies of Christianity. That there was such a one as Jesus
who lived in Judea in Tiberius's time, and did great and wonderful things, and
was followed by many of the Jews, and was acknowledged by them to be the
Messiah, and sent from God, and was famous for those Wonders and supernatural
Effects which he wrought in the sight of the People, is not disowned by the
greatest Adversaries of the Christian Religion. Hierocles freely confesses it,
as you may read in Eusebius. Celsus, Julian and Porphyry, deny not the Miracles
done by Christ and the Apostles, as several of the Origin cont. Celsum. Cyril
cont. Julianum. Augustine. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
ancient Fathers assure us; they confess the matter of Fact, that he cured the
Blind and Lame, etc. but they ascribe it to Magic. In short, they give assent
and testimony to the chief Passages of the Evangelical History concerning our
Savior, (though they cavil at others, and strive to consute them) They frankly
acknowledge that there was such a Person as Jesus of Nazareth in the Reign of
Tiberius, who declared himself to be the Messiah, and sent from Heaven to
Redeem and Save Mankind, and who Preached those Doctrins which are recorded in
the Gospels, and acted those mavelous things which are set down there. This
Testimony of the Pagans is irrefragable and undeniable. And such is that of the
Jewish Writers, who frequently make mention of Christ, and acknowledge there
was such a Person, and that he lived at that time in which we say he did, and
that his doings were no less than miraculous, and exceeding the power of
Nature. This the Jews, who then, or not long after lived, report concerning
Him, as you may see in the Talmud Hierosolym. Sanhedrin, cap. 7. Talm. Bab.
Sanhedrin, Gem. 43. 1.
Talmuds. To this purpose Buxtorf in his Talmudick Lexicon may be consulted,
and our Learned Lightfoot in his Harmony and Horae Hebraicae, where he has
abundant Proofs concerning the matters of Fact mentioned in the Evangelical
Writings, even out of Talmudick Authors. This is an other Confirmation of the
History of Christ the True Messiah.

Besides this, I will mention some things which happened among the Pagans at
that time when Christ was on Earth, as an Assurance to us that there was such a
Man, and that he did such and such things. Thus I might produce Eutropius,
Hist. Compend. Nicephor. I. 1. c. 40.
Publius Lentulus, the Roman Proconsul his Letter from Jerusalem to the Senate
of Rome, describing our Savior as to the Color, Shape, and Proportion of his
Body. I do not know any reason why we should doubt of the Credit of this
Testimony, unless it be his, that it is not taken notice of by any very ancient
Writer. The Chronicles of Edessa I might ^ext mention, which tell us of
Abgarus's or Ag^rus's Letter to Christ, and Christ's Answer to ^im. Eccles.
Hist. ^ 1. c. 13.
Eusebius, who sets both down, acquaints is that he transcribed them out of the
public Tables and Records of the City of Edessa, and that the Originals were
extant at that time when he wrote his Ecclesiastical History. There is some
probability of this from what the Evangelist says, that Mat. 4. 24.
Christ's Fame went throughout all Syria, and so Abgarus, who was a King in that
Country, and whose Residence was in Edessa, might come to a knowledge of our
Savior, and be de^irous to hold a Communication with him by Writing. And what
though the Evangelists are wholly silent about it? This is not to be wondered
at, for they omitted abundance of Passages belonging to our Savior's Life, as
appears from John 20. 30. 21. 15. As for the Author of the foresaid Relation,
his Authority is unquestionable in this matter, for he is universally
acknowledged to be an honest and faithful Historian; and here he declares to
the World that he saw the Originals of these Epistles in Syriack at Edessa, and
translated them thence into Greek. It is indeed the peculiar Excellency of this
Historian, that he produces the ancient Monuments for what he delivers. This
makes him a Writer worthy to be credited: For what can be more desired than the
citing of the Authors and unquestionable Witnesses from whence he had his
Relations, and the inserting of Extracts faithfully taken out of them, as is
usual with those that write Annals? Observe it, he took these Epistles out of
the Syriack, in which they were writ; and that is the reason why other Authors
and Writers before him speak nothing of them, they being ignorant of the
Tongue; but he having Skill in it, found out this choice Piece of Antiquity.
Afterward these Letters are mentioned and appealed to by Darius Comes in an
Ep. 263.
Epistle of his to St. Augustine. And Tom. 3. F. 1. Number. 4.
Ephrem, who was a Syrian himself, and was well skilled in the Syriack
Writings, yea, and was a Deacon of that very Edessa where these Epistles were
kept, makes mention of them particularly, and asserts the Authority of them.
Therefore those excellent Men, Exercitat. ad Baron. 13. cap. 31.
Casaubon and Orig. Eccles. Tom. 1.
Montague, are strongly inclined to embrace them as true and genuine. A late
worthy and industrious Writer, Dr. Cave Histor. L^tera^.
looking upon them as such, reckons our Savior and this Abgarus among the
Ecclesiastical Writers of the First Age; and In his Apostolici.
farther professes, that upon a diligent enquiry into these Letters he cannot
discern any flaw or falsehood in them, he cannot find any appearance of Fraud
and Imposture; he sees nothing unworthy of our Blessed Lord in the style or
contexture of that Epistle which is attributed to him. Yea, next to the Bible
he thinks these are the most remarkable and venerable piece of Antiquity that
respects Christianity. As to those Objections which are started against the
Authority of these Epistles by a Da Pin Bibl. Patr. page 1.
Learned Divine of the Sorbon, it must be said that they are unworthy of him,
for they are very frivolous and groundless, and he might have used the same
Arguments against many parts of the Evangelical History, and the passages that
occur there.

But suppose, after all, that these Epistles were not really written by Christ
and by Abgarus, yet (notwithstanding this) they are no mean Testimony for us.
If we should only grant that Eusebius ^ound them among the Records of Edessa,
this is ^ery considerable. Though, I think, there is good Evidence of the Truth
of these Writings, yet I am not mightily concerned whether these Writings were
real or feigned, that is, whether Abgarus did send such a Letter to Christ, and
whether our Sa^^our returned an Answer to it. This is sufficient, that
Eusebius, who translated them out of Syriack unto Greek, was wel^ satisfied
that there were such Records at that time in Edessa. Whether they were
Spurious, or not, is not so material; for, whether they were such or not, they
give a Testimony of the Person whom we speak of, they certify ^s of this Truth
that such a one really was at that time when these Records bear date. For
suppose the People of Edessa forged them, as being ambitious to retain the
Memory of their Prince* and to celebrate it by this particular Memorial
inserted into their Records, yet this makes not a little for our purpose; for
though we should grant the Letters to be Supposititious, (as some Learned Men
have concluded them to be) yet the Registring of such may be true; though they
^eigned these in a poletick Remembrance of one whose Name they intended to
transmit to Posterity, yet the Recording of them is thus far an Attestation
given to Christ, that hereby his Person and Worth were acknowledged by these
Edessens so long ago* But I pass this by.

I could relate here what was done by Pagans in Testimony of their
acknowledging and approving of Christ. Thus the Emperor Augustus refused the
Title of Lord, says Hist. Romans lib. 55.
Dio; and it is not improbable that he did it on our Savior's Account. Paulus
Orosius, lib. 6. cap. 20.
Some indeed tell us that it was upon another occasion, viz. when at a Play
Dominus aequus and bonus was pronounced, and thereupon the People, as if the
words were said of Augustus, with great signs of Joy showed their Approbation
of them, the Emperor labored by signs to stifle their Flattery, and the day
after put forth an Edict, forbidding any to call him Lord. Such a thing as this
might happen, and yet the first and truest Motive to his refusing that Title
might be with reference to our Lord Christ, who was born not long before. The
reason to believe it is this, that this Emperor was much changed after Christ's
Birth, and after the Fame of him was spread abroad, he became a great favourer
of the Jews and their Religion, as Philo the Jew acquaints us in the Account
which he gives of his Embassy to Caius in behalf of his Countrymen of
Alexandria. He there relates several particular kindnesses which he showed to
the Jewish Nation; and all grant that Philo is a very credible Author in this
case. And though In Octavio. cap. 93.
Suetonius gives an Instance of his Aversion to the Jews and to Jerusalem it
self, yet it is likely this was before the other, and so it inhanseth the
Emperor's after-Esteem and Favor for that Nation and People. If you thus
consider that he was now much altered, it is not hard to believe that his
putting out the foresaid Edict was done in honor to Christ: He would not be
called Lord after our Savior was come into the World, who was Lord of Lords
and King of Kings. And this may appear to be the more probable if that be true
which is farther related of Augustus, that about the close of his Reign he
inquired at Apollo's Oracle, who was to adminster the Affairs of the Empire
after him, and received this Answer, (...)
(...)
(...)
A Hebrew Babe, a God himself, and King
Of blessed Subjects bids me quit this place,
And trudge again to Hell; wherefore, great Sir,
From these our Altars silently be gone.
Whereupon the Emperor left off Sacrificing, and returning to Rome, built in
the Capitol an Altar with this Inscription, Ara Primogeniti Dei. But because no
very ancient Historian reports this, and Nicephor. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 17.
Cedrenus, Suidas in verbo [ Augustus]
those that do are thought to be sometimes fabulous, therefore I offer it not
as if I much relied upon it. Nor do I on that other passage in In verbo [Iesus]
Suidas, viz. that one Theodosius a Jew ascertained a Christian whom he
discoursed with, that Christ was chosen one of the Priests of the Temple upon
the death of another, and that they writ him down (as the Custom was to
Register the Names of those that were elected Priests, and to assign also their
Parents Names) The Son of God and of the Virgin Mary. The Book wherein this was
recorded was kept in the Temple till the Destruction of Jerusalem, and it was
well known to the Priests and Rulers of the People. This is a remarkable
Testimony, but because it wants evident Authority, I will not insist on it.
That which I have said already may suffice toward the proving what I
undertook, that Christ's Life is attested even by Pagan Witnesses

Thirdly, his Death, with some of the most considerable attendants of it, is
related by Persons of the same Character. Thus the great Roman Historian
expressly voucheth this Article of our ChriChristian Belief, Tiberio imperitante
per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat. Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
C. 44.
that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, and that in the Reign of Tiberius.
Lucian, who was famed for his Taunts and Scoffs at the Christians, calls their
Great Master and Founder, (...) De morte Peregrini.
The Man that was fastened to a Gibbet and hung up upon it in Palestine. And
this is confessed by Jews as well as Pagans; the particular manner of his
Suffering, namely on the Cross, is acknowledged by the Talmudick Writers very
often; and by the Jews in Contempt and Scorn our Savior is blasphemously
called Talui, suspensus, He that was hanged. The Eclipse at Christ's Passion,
mentioned by the Evangelists, and that as an There was darknes^(...) over the
whole Earth, Mark 15. 33. over all the Earth, Luke 23. 44. And so (...), Mat.
27. 45. should be rendered, and not (as it is) over all the Land, i. e. Judea
only.
Universal One, is left upon Record also by Heathens. Dionysius, an Athenian by
Birth, before he was converted to the Faith, when he was a Student in Egypt,
was an Eyewitness of this miraculous Eclipse, which he gives an Account of in
an Ad Polycarp. Epist. 7.
Epistle that he wrote, ^ssuring us that it was seen, not only by himself, but
by Apollophanes, who was at the same time with him at Heliopolis in Egypt. They
were both greatly astonished, concluding some strange thing was happening to
the World; but D^onysius Suidas in voce (...).
said to have cried out in such Language as this, Either the God of Nature
suffers, or the Frame of the World is like to be dissolved. This is that
Dionysius who is called the Ar^opagite, Acts 17. 34. For returning home after
his Travels, he was chosen into the Senate of Areopagus, and thence has that
Name, and was converted to the Christian Faith by St. Paul. Cont. Cel^. lib. 2.
Origin, dealing with Celsus the Philosopher, proves this Eclipse at Christ's
Passion out of Phlegon Trallianus, (one of Trajans freed Men) who it seems was
a great Chronologer; and Chronicon. A. D. 33.
Eusebius mentions the same Author, and quotes his words, which are these; In
the Fourth Year of the 202 Olympiad, there happened a great Defection of the
Sun, such as was never known before. The Day at the Sixth Hour was so turned
into dark Night that the Stars appeared in the Heavens. And he adds, There was
an Earthquake at the same time in Bithynia, which over-turned several Houses in
the City of Nice. Thus that Writer. What could be more Accurate seeing Christ's
Passion was in the last Year of the 202 Olympiad, which was the 18th year of
Tiberius's Reign? Or, if according to Scaliger, this be not very punctual, (for
the Eclipse at our Savior's Death, he says; was in the beginning of the 203
d. Olympiad) yet it is granted that a Years difference here is of no great
moment, especially when the time is so circumstantiated and fixed by what
follows, for the Hour of the Day assigned by Phlegon, plainly shows that he
relates the same thing which St. Mark does, who expressly affirms the Eclipse to
have happened at the Sixth Hour, Mark 15. 32. Besides the Earthquake, the
Companion of the Eclipse, is said by this Phlegon to have been at the same
time, which agrees with St. Matthew c. 27. v. 51. all which proves that this
Pagan Writer refers to the very same Eclipse mentioned by the Evangelists.
Chronic. an. 33. Christi.
Eusebius ^citeth the same Testimony, and also adds the like suffrage of an
other Gentile Writer, who (though not named by him) is Apolog. ad gentes cap.
21.
Thallus, as Grotius proves from Julius Africanus, who cites this Author for
this very purpose, and sets down his words; and the same Testimony you will
find mentioned by Origin. Moreover, Tertullian appeals to the Roman Archives
about this portentous Eclipse, and tells the Pagans that they had this recorded
in those Authentic Tables, yea, that at the very moment when it happened it
was inserted into those public Records. Lucian the Martyr appealed to the same
public Acts of the Romans, as Eccl. Hist. l. 9. c. 6.
Eusebius repors; he bids them consult their own Annals, and lets them know
that those would certify them of the Truth of that Eclipse. Shall I add to all
these what Adrianus Gressonius in his History of China says, that those People
have registered it in their Annals, that at that very time, about the Month of
April, an extraordinary and irregular Eclipse of the Sun happened, at which
strange and unusual thing Quam-vutius, the Emperor of China, was exceedingly
troubled. Thus this Prodigy which was taken notice of at Christ's Suffering on
the Cross is attested by Pagans, which is some accession to this Truth related
by the Evangelists. And it is the more considerable, because we are certain
that That Eclipse was not natural, being in the Opposition of the Moon, i. e.
when the Moon was Full; for it was the day before the Passover, which fell on
the Ex. 12. 2, 6.
Fourteenth Day of the first Month, called Nisan, (which answers to our March,)
when the Moon was Full, and opposite to the Sun. Now, it is known to be against
the Rules of Astrology that the Sun should be eclipsed when the Moon is at the
Full; whence we must conclude this Eclipse to have been Miraculous, and
altogether against the course of Nature, and that it could be the Hand of God
only, to testify Christ's Divinity. Lastly, We cannot but think that this
wonderful Eclipse was seen and observed by the Enemies of Christianity, and
acknowledged by them to be a real Prodigy when we consider that the Evangelists
expose this Relation to those professed Enemies of the Christian Religion, who
if such a thing had not happened could have presently confuted the Reporters of
it. Can it enter into our Thoughts, that these Writers were so foolish as to
imagine they could impose upon the Faith of Men in such a matter as this, which
was publicly to be seen, and which every one might take notice of? This is an
unreasonable and groundless Surmise.

In the next place the Earthquake at Christ's Passion (which as you have heard,
was attested by Phlegon) is now more distinctly to be considered. That Author
indeed says that it was in Bithynia, but it might be in other Countries
likewise. He did not intend to relate how far it reached, but what he knew, and
in what place it was most observed, he sets down. And this being joined with
the Relation of the Eclipse, is an Argument, (as has been hinted before) that
it refers to the Earthquake at Christ's Passion, which not only shook the Land
of Judea, but other remote Countries, as the Lesser Asia, wherein this Bithynia
was. For as the Eclipse was Universal, so was the Earthquake, it is probable,
and the whole Earth felt the shock of it, though to some Places only it proved
destructive, as to this in Asia particularly. With which concurs that of Not.
Hist. l. 2. c. 84.
Pliny, who tells us of an extraordinary Earthquake in Tiberius's Reign, which
over-turn'd Twelve Cities in Asia, to help and relieve which the Emperor
remitted their Tribute, say In Tiber. c. 48.
Suetonius and Hist. lib. 57.
Dion. Concerning that Earthquake at our Savior's Passion, Eusebius quotes the
Testimony of Thallus mentioned before; and the same is alleged as an
Authentic Witness by Apo. cap. 21.
Tertullian and Cont. Cells. l. 2. and Tractat. 36 in Matthew.
Origin.

Some Learned Men are pleased to relate here, as appertaining to Christ's
Passion, the Story they meet with in De Defect. Oracul.
Plutarch, and quoted out of him by De Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 9.
Eusebius, of the Death of Great Pan lamented by the Demons. This falling out
in the Reign of Tiberius, and about the time (as some conceive) when our
Savior Suffered, is applied by them to Him and his Death, and they think it is
to be reckoned among the Pagan Testimonies. But I am not so well satisfied as
to that, but rather think it may more pertinently be made use of to show how
our Savior dispossessed the Devils, and silenced the Pagan Oracles, which were
given by them. Accordingly we find that Plutarch, from whom we have this Story,
brings it in upon occasion of the Oracles ceasing, and he gives this as an
Instance of it; The Demons, says he, that assisted at those Oracles are
departed, a Proof whereof we have in this Pan.

Lastly, Of the rending the Veil of the Temple, mentioned by Mat. 27. 51. Mark
15. 38. Luke 23. 45.
Three of the Evangelists, the Antiqu. l. 2.
Jewish Historian expressly testifies, and he is as good a Witness as we can
desire in this Affair.

CHAP. XII.
After particular Testimonies, now more general ones are produced, as that of
Pontius Pilate in his Letters to Tiberius. The respect which this Emperor and
others bore to Christ. Josephus's famous Testimony concerning him, as also
concerning others mentioned in the New Testament. Attestations of Pagans
concerning St. Paul, St. Peter, and the Truth of some Passages in the Acts. All
Christ's Predictions about the Destruction of Jerusalem confirmed by Heathens
and Jews. What Pliny and Trajan relate of the Christians. Mahomet bears Witness
to Christ.

THus you have particular Testimonies as to those Three great Things, our
Savior's Birth, Life, and Death. Now, in the next place, I have general
Testimonies to produce. There are some Pagan and Jewish Witnesses that confirm
all these, yea, and more than what has been hitherto testified, namely
Christ's Resurrection. As other Governors and Deputies of Provinces used to
send an Account to the Emperors and Senate of the most remarkable Things that
happened in their Provinces, so Pontius Pilate, Procurator of Judea, did the
like, and his Relation is the more valuable, because it is the Testimony of a
Person who Condemned our Savior to death. His Letter, or Letters rather (there
being two of them) to the Emperor Tiberius soon after Christ's Death, give an
Account of his Life, Miracles, Crucifixion, and rising to life again. And as
Public Acts were wont to be transmitted and reserved in the Imperial Archives,
so these were kept there, whence the Christian Fathers had them. Hegesippus (an
ancient Champion of the Christian Cause) made use of them against the Pagans,
as we are informed from Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius. (...), Apol. Adv. Gentes.
Justin Martyr tells the Roman Emperors, that as for the Death and Sufferings
of Christ they were to be seen in the Acts of, or under Pontius Pilate, and
refers them to those as satisfactory and undeniable. Tertullian with great
boldness alleges the same Records as a sufficient Confirmation of the History
of Christ in his Apology, c. 5. and 21. Whereupon Dr. Pearson, Epise. Cistr.
Praecect. in Act. Apost.
one of the Learned Men of our Age concludes that this ancient Father found
this among the Acts of the Roman Senate, where all things of this nature were
set down. It is not to be questioned, says he, that Pontius Pilate sent this
Account to Tiberius; if we consider that this was the constant practice of all
the Governors and Deputies of Provinces to transmit the Relation of every
remarkable Occurrence to the Emperors by whom they were placed in those
Stations for this purpose, viz. to inform them concerning the Affairs of those
particular Places. Now, the Crucifying of our Savior, and his Rising again,
were certainly very considerable and remarkable Passages, and therefore it is
not to be doubted, that Pilate, as Procurator of Judea, sent the Emperor a
Relation of them. On which account this Judicious Writer asserts the Authority
of these Letters; and there are other Arguments which he uses to enforce the
Truth of them, which are worth the consulting. Thus it plainly appears from the
forementioned Fathers, that there were such Letters from Pilate to Tiberius,
and that there was such an Account of our Savior extant at that time;
otherwise they would not have made their Appeals to them in their Apologies,
otherwise they would not have called upon the Emperors to consult their own
Records which testified of Christ and his Actions. Wherefore I look upon Bib.
Patr. 1. Cent.
Du Pin's Judgment as flat here, who says, That though this Relation cannot be
absolutely charged with falsehood, yet it is to be reckoned as doubtful.
Tiberius annuntiatum sibi ex Syria, Palaestina, quae veritatem illius
Divinitatis revelarat, detulit ad Senatum cum praerogativ^ suffrag^^ sui.
Senatus, quia non ipse probaverat, respuit. Caesar in sententia mansit,
comminatusque periculum accusatoribus Christianorum, Apol. Ibid.
Tertullian adds, (and from him Eusebius) that Tiberius would have put Christ
into the number of the Gods, upon Pilate's Writing such strange things to him
concerning Him; he referred the Matter to the Senate, desiring them to rank Him
among those that were Worshipped and Deified, but the Senate refused it, because
they themselves did not first order and approve of it, for it was an old Roman
Law, that no God should be set up by the Emperor unless first approved of by
the Senate; for this reason only they rejected Christ from being admitted among
the Gods. However, the Emperor still retained the same Reverence and Esteem of
Christ, as a most Divine Person, and in Honor to him favored the Christians,
and by Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2. Chronic. ad annum 22 Tiberii.
Edict ordered that none should accuse and disturb them merely for their
Religion, and the name of Christians, annexing a severe Penalty on such as
dared to transgress this Edict. Nay, Tertullian and other Fathers assure us,
that he had so great a Reverence for Christ, that he intended to erect a Temple
to him. This was from that Information which Pilate sent him concerning our
Savior. I might mention the Kindnesses which other Emperors had for Christ, as
no contemptible Testimony to that purpose which I design this Discourse for. In
Alex. Severo. cap. 43. and 51.
Lampridius reports that Alexander Severus Worshipped our Lord, and had his
Picture in great Veneration, and that he had thoughts of erecting a Temple to
him, and taking him into the number of the Gods. Which Adrian likewise, he
says, intended to have done, but was hindered from it by being told that all
would turn Christians, and the Temples Consecrated to the other Gods would be
forsaken. These are ample Attestations of Pagans concerning Christ, and (which
is greater) they are their Approbations of him.

Next, I produce the Testimony of a Famous Jew, whom I have so often made
mention of, who forty or fifty Years after some of the Evangelical Writings,
gave an account of the Jews Affairs, and of Christ, and of many things relating
to Him. Among other Passages he has this memorable one; (...), etc. Joseph.
Antiqu. Jud. lib. 18. c. 4.
At this time, says he, there was one Jesus, a Wise Man, if I may call him a
Man, for he did most wonderful Works, and was a Teacher of th^se who received
the Truth with delight. He brought many to his Persuasion, both of the Jews and
Gentiles. This was Christ, who though he was by the Instigation of some of the
Chief of our Nation, and by Pilate' s Doom hung on the Cross, yet those who
loved him at first did not cease to do so, for he came to Life again the third
day, and appeared to them, the Divine Prophets having foretold these and
infinite other Wonders of him; and to this day remains that sort of Men, who
have from Him the name of Christians. Both Eusebius and St. Ierom allege this
Famous Testimony of Josephus concerning Christ, as an undeniable Confirmation
of the Christian Religion. And the latter of these Writers places this Jew
among the Ecclesiastical Writers of the Church, because he speaks of our
Savior with this great respect. A Tanaquil Faber. Epist. 44.
late Writer has a great many idle foolish Cavils against this so notable a
Memorial of Josephus concerning our blessed Lord. He thinks it strange that
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Clemens Alexandrinus writing against the Jews
make no use of this Testimony, especially that the first of these in his
Dialogue with Trypho (where his design is to convert that Jew to Christianity)
omits it wholly. But to him that considers things aright this will not seem
strange; for if he looks into these Fathers, he will find, that their grand
enterprise and design were to convince the Jews out of the Old Testament, which
they professed they heartily believed and embraced; and therefore those learned
and pious Writers fixed here, and were not solicitous to go any farther. What
need was there of flying to human Authors when this divine and inspired Volume
furnished them with abundant Arguments and Proofs against Judaism? It would
have been unnecessary and superfluous to allege the Testimony of this Person,
though never so credible, when they had so many infallible Authors to vouch
them and the Religion which they had espoused. Again, this late Critic tells
us that this Testimony is against Iosephus's mind, he being a Jewish Priest, a
legal Sacrificer, and most tenacious of the Jewish Religion. He was of the Sect
of the Pharisees, and one of the Princes of the Mosaic Church, therefore it is
unlikely that he would leave any such thing upon record in his Writings. Those
that know Iosephus's Sect and Life cannot believe, says he, that these words
were his. Yes, they very well may, for he does not absolutely assert our
Savior to be the true Messiah, but only that he was the Person who was called
Christ, and that excellent Worth, and even Divinity appeared in him; and he
farther bears witness that this excellent Person, who was of old prophesied of,
was not treated according to his transcendent merits, but was barbarously put
to death by his Countrymen, and yet that in a miraculous manner he was
revived, and thereby gave an undeniable proof of his Innocence and Integrity.
All this, though it be a most remarkable Attestation of our Savior, yet might
have been said (as really it was) by a Jewish Sacrificer, by a strict Pharisee,
by a tenacious asserter of the Mosaic Riligion. The whole Testimony is but the
result of an unprejudiced and honest Mind, such as this Historian was Master
of. And if it be true what this Criticizer mentions, and attempts to prove out
of Origin, that Josephus had before this writ against Christ, the Testimony
thereby becomes the more remarkable, because it is a great argument of the
irresistible power of the Truth, and that there was a wonderful change wrought
in this Person. And truly this Objector himself mentions that which may induce
us to believe it; for we read, says he, in Iosephus's Book which he writ of
his own Life, that he having gone through all the Jewish Sects, was admitted at
last into the discipline of Banus, a Disciple of John the Baptist. Thus this
Author answers himself, and what he had before objected, namely, that this
Historian wrote against his own mind, if these words of his were true. It is
not likely that he spoke contrary to his Persuasion, if he was entered into the
discipline of John Baptist, who had been Christ's forerunner, for thereby this
Author imbibed a good opinion (to say no more) of the Founder of Christianity.
What this Critic farther says, that if this Testimony were Iosephus's, he
would have said a great deal more than he does, is very f^ivolous, and not
worth taking notice of. And so is that, that the Style plainly betrays the
Cheat, it being frigid and lax, putid and inert, (as he says) whereas it is
evident to any competent Judge, that the Language is nothing of this nature,
but is like the rest of the Historian's Style. Lastly, we are beholding to him
for finding out the Author of the Cheat, who he affirms is Eusebius, as if he
had lived before or at the same time with Josephus, that is, as if one of the
Fourth Century was contemporary with him that flourished in the First. He
peremp^o^ily tells us that Eccl. Hist. 1* I. c. 11.
Eusebius clapped in this Passage merely out of design, namely, to gratify a
party of Christians, and to carry on the Cause. And that we may give credit to
this, he falls very severely on this worthy Man, and both ignorantly and
maliciously finds fault with him. This is the course that our angry Critic
takes; but no sober and judicious Person can allow of it, for it may be plainly
discerned that this Writer was resolved upon it to run down this Testimony of
the Jewish Historian by any kind of artifice whatsoever; but when we come to
examine the Methods he takes, they are found to be of no force; what he offers
for proof is groundless, precarious and inconsistent. After all that he has
said, this Jewish Testimony, and the Credit of its Author, remain impregnable.
What though we have granted that in some things he is faulty (and where is
their an Historian that is not?) what though he omits some remarkable
Occurrences, and mistakes the order of Time, of which he could not come to a
certain knowledge? Notwithstanding this, his Testimony in this matter may be
valid, nay, we have all the reason imaginable to believe it is such, for he was
capable of attaining to a full knowledge of what he here writes. There is then
no ground to think that he imposed upon his Reader, or spoke against his
Persuasion, but on the contrary it is reasonable to look upon him as one that
freely uttered his mind, and showed himself to be Ingenuous, Faithful, and
Impartial. Such was he esteemed to be by those Eusebius, Jerome, Isidore
Pelusiot-Sozomen. etc.
ancient Writers who had oceasion to make use of his Testimony, and such was
his Character with all those Persons who have since used the same in
Confirmation of the History of the Gospel. And truly it is a full and pregnant
Ratification of it, an attesting no less than the Life, Death, and Resurrection
of our Savior. This latter especially being attested by a Jewish Priest, is
considerable. This Person knew nothing of that Cheat which the Jews labored at
first to put upon some, and therewith to stifle the truth of Christ's rising
from the dead, namely, that Mat. 28. 13.
his Disciples came by night and stole him away. He tells us plainly and
expressly, that Christ was restored to Life on the Third Day after he was put
Death, which is exactly according to the Narrative in the Gospels. I will
conclude then with the words which a Pious Father uses, after he had recited
Iosephus's Testimony of Christ, (...); ^^idor. Pelus. Ep^^t. l. 4.
If our very Enemies, says he, dare not oppose the truth, who will show
himself so obstinate as not to give credit to those things which are as clear
as the Sun, yea, much clearer? If Jews and Pagans bear witness to Christ, we
Christians are obliged to listen to their Testimony, and to abominate the
practice of those who endeavor (and that with no little art and pains) to
enervate and destroy it.

Again, Josephus confirms the Truth of the Evangelical History, by relating
several other things which are recorded there. Thus Antiqu. Jud. I. 18. c. 7.
he speaks of the putting John the Baptist to death, whom he hugely extols,
telling us that he was an excellent Man, and stirred up the Jews to piety and
virtue, holiness and purity, both of Body and Soul; and that Herod caused him
to be killed because he feared his Authority would hurt him, and occasion a
defection among the People. He also relates how this Herod cast off his own
Wife, and took Herodias, who was his Brother's Wife. This Author makes
honorable mention of Antiqu. l. 20. c. 8.
St. James, whom he calls the Brother of Jesus Christ, and relates his
Martyrdom, and declares that the taking away his Life was so flagitious a Sin,
that it was in revenge of that that the Jews were destroyed, their Temple and
City burnt, and all other Evils befell that Nation. He fully agrees with St.
Luke in mentioning Antiqu. Jud. l. 19. c. 7.
Herod's Speech to the People, and their impious Flattery, and the immediate
Judgment of God upon this Wicked Man, by whose command that holy Apostle was
put to death. It is true, Josephus says not that he was eaten up of Worms, but
this is included in that he says he was seized with a sudden pain and disease,
and died in great torment of his Bowels, which without doubt, were gnawed and
devoured by those Worms St. Luke specifieth. Because this Writer relates that
Herod the Great, the Infant-slayer, Antiqu. Jud. lib. 17. c. 8. De bello Jud.
l. 1. c. 21.
was infested and plagued with noisome Vermin in his Body, therefore some say he
is guilty of a great mistake here, and speaks that of this Herod which St. suke
faith of the other, viz. Herod Agrippa. But I do not see any reason for this
imputation of Guilt, because Herod the Great as well as the other Herod, might
dye of that filthy disease, though it is not mentioned by St. Matthew or the
other Evangelists. Wherefore we have no reason to think this Historian was
mistaken, and disagrees with the holy Writers. As to the main you will find him
concurring with them, not only in this, but in other matters recorded by them,
and consequently you will find him attesting the verity of the History of the
Gospel, and you will conclude that he is a very substantial Witness for the
Christian Religion.

Having produced these Testimonies concerning St. John and St. James, I might
add somewhat relating to St. Paul. That Insurrection mentioned in Acts 21. 38.
where you read that the Tribune of the People said to St. Paul, Art not thou
that Egyptian who before these days did raise a Tumult, and leadest into the
Wilderness four thousand Men? That Insurrection, I say, is the same with that
taken notice of by Antiqu. l. 20. c. 6. De bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12.
Josephus more than once, which was begun by an Egyptian, who pretending to be
a Prophet, gathered together great numbers of Jews, the attempt and issue of
which are recorded by this Historian; and so it is a Confirmation of what St.
Luke here records with reference to St. Paul. I will here add also a Pagan
Testimony concerning this Apostle, viz. concerning his being caught up to the
third Heaven, mentioned by himself in 2 Cor. 12. 2. This is referred to in one
of In Philopatr
Lucian's Dialogues, where one Triphon professes himself to be Paul's
Disciple, and would make Critias such a one, and convert him to the Christian
Faith. Paul is there described thus, (...).
That Bald-pate, that Hawk-nos'd Galilean, who mounts up through the Skies into
the third Heaven, and thence fetches those goodly Notions which he preaches
to the World. He is called a Galil^an, because that was the common name of a
Christian, and he is said to be Bald, as that holy Man is Nicephor. Hist.
reported to have been when he was old. His Hawk-nose alludes to his high
flight, and mounting up into the Air like a Hawk, when he ascended to Heaven.
And this ascending into the third Heaven, is a plain Description of him,
because none of the Apostles, or other Christians, ever did so but he. And what
is added next, that he learnt there all his fine and goodly Notions, it may
refer to what that Apostle says in the same place, that V. 4.
he heard unspeakable words, which it is not possible for any Man to utter. I
could observe, that in the same Dialogue this Author bears testimony to the
Faith received and professed by the Christians, whilst there he sco^^ingly
brings in a Catechumen asking this question, By whom would you have me swear
to^ you? And then his Instructor answers thus, (...).
By that God who reigns on high, who is Great, Immortal, Celestial, by the
Son of the Father, by the Spirit proceeding from the Father, One of three, and
Three of one. Thus from this Pagan Scoffer, (who could laugh and speak truth
together) we are informed that the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity (which the
New Testament so expressly declares) was professed by the Primitive Christians.

To this I might add the Inscription on the Athenian Altar, taken notice of by
St. I found an Altar with this Inscription, To the unknown God, Acts 17. 23.
Paul, and which wants not the Testimony of Profane Writers. This is mentioned
by Pausanias in his Atticks, and hinted at by Lucian in his Philopatris.
Thucydides says there were no less than twelve Altars erected in the
Marketplace in Athens with this Inscription (...), and (...). In vit. Apollon,
Philostraius makes mention of the same. Laertius takes notice of the (...). In
Epimen^de.
nameless Altars at Athens, and particularly of one erected, To the unknown and
strange God.

To proceed, some have produced a Letter of Seneca (Nero's Tutor) to St. Paul,
with St. Paul's Answer to it. This is mentioned by De Scriptor. Ecclesiast.
Ierom, who reckons Seneca in the Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, because
of this Epistle to the Apostle; and Epist. 14.
St. Augustine also takes notice of it. But I am not so fond as to take in all
sorts of Testimonies, without any distinction; but I rather look upon those
Epistles as Spurious, the style plainly showing that one of them at least (that
to Seneca,) is so. But because this Seneca was a grave and serious Philosopher,
and was against the Superstitions of the Romans, and was far better than the
Pagans of that time, hence some thought he was a Christian, and was so
persuaded to be by St. Paul, and then it was easily believed that they
conversed together, and had Correspondence by Letters.

Concerning St. Peter likewise I will only leave this, and submit it to the
censure of the Readers; his encountering that Arch-Sorcerer, Simon of Samaria,
(who is spoken of in Acts 8.) and his dismounting him by his Prayers from his
Chario^, though they are not mentioned in the infallible Records of the
New Testament, yet are registered by Clemens the Roman, Arnobius, and
Epiphanius. For it seems, this Magician would needs be flying in the Air, and
by such artifices bring credit to his false Doctrins; but St. Peter, by the
extraordinary assistance of the Spirit, and the Efficacy of his ardent
Addresses to Heaven, baffled this soaring Magician, and brought him down from
his heighths, and laid him prostrate and dead on the Ground. Which very thing,
I conceive, is attested by Suetonius, in whose Writings this Simon goes under
the fabulous name of Icarus, the famous Flyer among the Poets. Icarus primo
statim ^conatu juxta cubiculum ejus decidit, ipsumque cruore respersit, In
Nerone, cap. 12.
This Person, faith he, at his very first attempt fell down near the Emperor's
BedChamber, and besprinkled him with his Blood. The Representation of Icarus in
that Play which Nero exposed to the People might be a mistaking of the true
Story of Simon Magus, whose downfall happening at Rome in that Emperor's Reign
in the sight of all the People, might well be remarked in his Life by this
Historian. But this is propounded in way of Conjecture only. Thus I have
briefly showed what some Heathen Witnesses testify concerning St. John, our
Savior's forerunner, and concerning those chieif Apostles St. James, Paul,
and Peter, who are so often spoken of in the New Testament. Which is a farther
Confirmation of what I have undertaken to make good, viz. that the Truth of the
holy Writings of the New Testament is vouched by those who are the greatest
Adversaries of them.

I pass to another Historical matter recorded in these Sacred Writings, viz.
the Universal Famine, foretold by Agabus, Acts 11. 28. which if you will
credit Pagan Historians, happened in accordingly the fourth Year of Claudius's
Reign, and was over all the World in the sixth Year. Hist. lib. 60.
Dion Cassius, who had compiled his History out of the Fasti of Rome, through
the several Years, speaks of this Famine under that Emperor, and mentions his
great care of the City, that the Inhabitants might not be starved. So In
Claudio. cap. 18.
Suetonius commends him for his Diligence and Providence in furnishing the City
with Provision. Antiqu. l. 20. c. 2, and 3.
Josephus also mentions this grievous Famine in Claudius's days, with some
particular Circumstances and Accidents which agree with what is delivered by
St. Luke concerning the relief which was sent at that time by the Disciples at
Antioch, to the Brethren in Judea, that being a Place where the Famine
exceedingly raged. Thus we find that of Eusebius to be true, who speaking of
this dreadful Famine recorded in the Acts, tells us, that (...). Eccl. Hist* l.
2. c. 8.
even those Writers, who were averse from the Christian Religion, have
delivered the same in their Histories.

The next thing I undertake is to treat of Christ's Predictions concerning the
Overthrow of Jerusalem, and some things which were to follow upon it, and to
show that they are expressly confirmed by Heathens and Jews, In the 24th Chapter
of St. Matthew, and the 21st of St. Luke, (which speak of the Destruction of
Jerusalem, both City and Temple, and the whole Nation, yea, with some
remarkable Consequences of it; though I know these Chapters have been, and may
be applied another way, viz. as a Description of the forerunners of the end of
the World, and the day of Judgment, as I shall show elsewhere, there being a
primary and secondary meaning of this Chapter, as well as of some other places
of holy Scripture) there is, I say, first foretold, That many shall come in
Christ's name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, v. 5. And again, v.
11 Many false Prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many; i. e. they shall
pretend to be Messiasses and Deliverers of the People, though indeed they are
very Impostors. Of the truth of this Antiqu. l. 20. c. 2. and 3, 6. 7. and de
bell. Jud. 2. c. 11, 12.
Josephus will inform you, who relates that there was a vast number of these
Pretenders and Mock-Saviours that drew the People after them, particularly he
tells us of a certain Egyptian in Felix's time, and of Theudas when Vadus was
Procurator, and of Judas the Gaulanite; which two last, some think, are not the
Theudas and Judas spoken of by Gamaliel, Acts 5. 36, 37. but others are of
Opinion that these are the same with them, only that Josephus mistakes a
Gaulanite for a Galilean, and is also mistaken in the time, for he says Judas
was in the the Reign of Archelaus. If so this Impostor cannot be meant in this
24th of St. Matthew. But I will not stand now to dispute whether there were two
Iudasses and two Theudasses, or whether St. Luke's and Iosephus's Judas and
Theudas are the same. It is sufficient for my purpose, that these and other
Seducers and Disturbers arose, and stirred up the People to Sedition, and drew
many after them in expectation of the Messias's coming, and partly pretended
that they themselves were He. So it was after the Destruction of Jerusalem,
there rose up Ionathas Barchochebas; who being the most famous of those
Impostors is taken notice of by De bello Jud. lib. 7. c. 31.
Josephus and others, as a great Ringleader of the Jews in Adrian's time. He
confidently professed himself the Messiah, applying Baalams Prophecy to
himself, Number. 24. 17. A Star shall rise out of Jacob: His name Barchochab,
which signifies the Son of a Star, being not a little serviceable to this
Imposture. He prevailed on a great number of People to adhere to him by his
inviting Promises, and persuading them he was to be their Deliverer. Yea, he
brought over a great part of the Learned Jews to him, not only in Judea, but
in Greece, and Egypt; but he and his Party being vanquished by the Emperor, the
Jews no longer called him Barchochab, but changed his name into Barchozab the
Son of a Lie, a false Prophet, a lying Impostor. Diverse others in those days
took upon them the name of Messiah, and said they were to restore the Jewish
Nation, and to that end led People after them into the Deserts, for in such
places the pretended Prophets and Leaders drew up their forces as the fittest
rendesvouz for them, as Josephus faith in several places; which gives an
Account of our Savior's words in this Chapter, verse. 26. If they shall say
unto you, behold he is in the Wilderness, go not forth to them.

Again, Wars and rumors of Wars are foretold to be the forerunners and
attendants of that fatal time which should befall Jerusalem, v. 6. Of this we
have plentiful mention in the Pagan and Jewish History. Those were properly
rumors of War when Caius threatened the Jews, and offered to set up his Image
in the Temple, of which Tacitus, Josephus, and Philo speak, telling us in what
Consternation the Jews, both in Alexandria and Judea were at that time. There
were actual Wars when those slaughters were committed on the Jews in Caius's
time at Alexandria and Babylon, of which Antiquitat. Jud. l. 18. c. 11, 12.
Josephus makes mention. Likewise, when Joseph de bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 13.
upon the cruelty of Cestius Florus the President of Judea, there was a
Rebellion of the Jews against the Romans in the Twelfth Year of Nero's Reign,
and an open War followed that Rebellion, which was the first occasion of their
final Overthrow by the Roman Armies, who came soon after, and sat down before
their City. Or by Wars and Commotions (for so St. Chap. 21. Verse. 9.
Luke words it) are to be understood those Civil Wars and Intestine Broils
among the Jews themselves, of which we read in De bell. Jud. lib. 5. c. 1, 2.
Josephus and other Jewish Records of those Times. There we may be informed
concerning the Tumults of the Seditious and the Zealots; the former were those
that endeavored to cast off the Roman Yoke, and in order to that raised
Tumults, and fostered Sedition and Faction, which produced mutual slaughters
and bloodshed; the latter were a sort of Men that pretended to be Inspired with
an extraordinary Zeal for their Religion and Country, but showed no other
Effects of it but Rage, Rapine, and inhumane Slaughters. Besides the fury of
these Zealots, (these Jewish Rapparees and Assassins) and the Domestic
Quarrels and Ravages caused by the Factious, there were also Foreign Assaults
and Invasions from their Enemies abroad. De bell Jud. l. 2. c. 23, 24.
Josephus records how the foresaid Cestius first of all approached their City,
and drew a Line about it, but the main shock and fatal blow they received were
from Titus's Armies which laid siege to them, of which you shall hear farther
afterward. The short of what is now to be said is this, that if any Man
consults the Jewish and Heathen Writings, which relate what was done about that
time in Judea by the Zealots* and the Factious, and by the Romans, he must say
our Savior's words concerning those days were true, Ye shall hear of Wars, and
rumors of Wars; for Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against
Kingdom, v. 6, 7. Not to mention that History tells us that the Roman Empire
was strangely alarmed with Wars about the latter end of Nero's Reign; Kingdoms
rose against one another both in the East and West, and Blood and Slaughter
began to be very rampant.

In the same Verse he fore-tells there shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and
Earthquakes; and so it happened. as Josephus assures us, for he (as has been
said already on another account) mentions the great Famine in Claudius's Reign,
(foretold in the Acts) Antiq^. l. 20. c. 5.
and another after that in the same Emperors time. But that long Famine,
attended with Pestilence, in the time of the Siege of Jerusalem, exceeded all
the rest, the dread and horror of which were such, faith De bell. Jud. l. 7. c.
7, and 8.
Josephus, as were never known to Greeks or Barbarians. Among other dreadful
passages, he relates how a Noble Woman was forced by extremity of Hunger to
eat her own Child that sucked her Breast. And hereby the words which our Savior
afterward speaks in this Chapter were verified, Verse. 19.
Woe to them that are with Child, and to them that give suck in those days, and
those in Luke 23. 29. The days are coming in which they shall say, blessed are
the Barren, and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps which never gave suck.
As to the Earthquakes which happened, they have been recorded by some of the
Gentile Writers, and particularly that in Claudius's Reign, as Chronicon.
Eusebius lets us know. Those horrible Earthquakes which were felt, and those
Thunders (as I may so say) which were heard under Ground by the Inhabitants of
Campania after the Siege of Jerusalem, are accurately described by Hist. lib.
66.
Dion Cassius, who also informs us that the Mount Vesuvius in that Province
began first to burn about that time, to the great Horror of the neighboring
People. It follows v 9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and
shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my name sake. There is
abundant testimony given to this by Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny, and other
Profane Writers. The Annal. l. 15. c. 44
former of these relates what exquisite Punishments, what severe Torments were
inflicted on the Christians by Nero for their burning of Rome, though indeed he
set it on fire himself. And the other ensuing Persecutions in his Reign, which
the Christians underwent, are sufficiently testified by the Enemies of
Christianity.

Let us now approach toward Ierusalem's last fatal Siege, the immediate
forerunner of its Overthrow. When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed wi^^
Armies, then know that the Desolation thereof is nigh, Luke. 21. 20. And more
particularly and distinctly this close besieging of Jerusalem is expressed in
Luke 19. 43. The days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.
Which Hist. Roman. lib. 66.
Dion Cassius amply and particularly attesteth, saying, That Titus Vespasian
cast a Trench round the City, and so closely kept them in with his Army that
none could escape, no not through those Vaults under the City Walls, which were
made for conveying Water into the City; for even those were stopped up by Titus.
And from the De bell. Jud. 1. 6, and 7.
Jewish Historian (who was personally present at the Siege, and knew very well
all the Occurrences of it) we learn that the Romans made three Trenches about
Jerusalem, and built a Wall or Rampire round about it in three days, so that
none could pass in or out. The Army which shut them so close up is called the
Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy place, v. 15. It is true,
Chrysostom understands this of Titus's Statue set up in the Temple; but
Josephus (who is very full in Relations of this matter) says nothing of it.
Others understand it of the mad and abominable pranks of the Zealots, who
seized the Temple, and acted strange and unaccountable things. But it is most
probable that this Place is meant of the Pagan Idolatrous Roman Army, which
stood in the ^uly place, i. e. environed Jerusalem, ca^l'd the holy City, and
at last made their way into it. That this is the true meaning, appears from
comparing this Evangelist with another. What St. Matthew here faith, When you
see the abomination of Desolation standing in the holy Place, is explained by
St. Luke thus, Chap. 21. Verse. 20.
When you see Jerusalem encompassed with Armies, i. e. the abominably
Desolating Armies, the Armies consisting of Ethnic Idolaters, who were an
Abomination to the Jews, and who not only threatened but brought Desolation and
Destruction on the City and Temple, the Roman Armies, whose Banners or Ensigns
were in the shape of Eagles, Job 39 29, 30.
rapacious devouring Creatures. In allusion perhaps to which our Savior
uttered those words, Wheresoever the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together, v. 24. that is, wheresoever the Jews, destined to slaughter
and death, were to be found, wherever these walking Corpse, (these Carkases)
were to be seen, thither the Roman Armies, as God's Executioners should fly,
and like preying Eagles fall upon them, and devour them. Most remarkable is
that which Christ farther says in Luke 19. 44. They shall lay thee even with
the Ground, and shall not leave in thee one stone upon another. Which De bell.
Jud. l. 7. c. 18.
Josephus will acquaint you was fulfilled by Titus's demolishing the whole
Temple, and Walls (excepting a small part of these latter, which he ordered
should remain: And particularly he commanded three Towers, besides part of the
Wall, to be left standing, that Posterity might see by those Relics what
stately and strong Place the Roman Army had taken, and partly also that these
might be a Garrison for his Soldiers) and by laying level the whole compass of
the City, as well as the Temple, that those who came thither should scarcely
believe it was ever inhabited. To accomplish this more effectually he made his
Soldiers pluck up the very Foundations of the City and Temple, that is, the
uppermost parts of the Foundation which they could conveniently come at, and
then tear up the Ground with a Plough: (for as it was a Custom among the Romans
to make use of the Plough when they laid the Foundations of a City, so they dug
up the Ground in the like manner when they destroyed it.) The Jews themselves
Record this; we find both in the Talmudick Chronicles, and in R. Ma^monides (as
Dr. Hor. Heb. in Matthew.
Lightfoot assures us) that Jerusalem was ploughed up after the Destruction of
it. At which time there was a literal accompli^hment of that Prophecy of Mica^,
c. 3. v. 12. Sion shall be ploughed as a Field. Afterward, in Adrian's Reign,
the Jews rebelling under the Conduct of Barchoc^ab, as has been said, the
Emperor caused all the remaining footsteps of the City and Temple to be defaced
and demolished, and commanded the three Towers, which by Titus's Order were
left standing, to be pulled down, and then strewed the City with Salt. Nay, the
very name of the City was extinguished, for Adrian, after this total
Desolation, causing the City to be built anew, (but much more contracted than
before) called it by his own name, Aelia; and here he set up the Heathen
Worship, and in de^iance and abhorrence of Judaism, erected the Image of a Sow
over one of the greatest Gates of the City. And after this, when Julian out of
that hatred and malice which he bore to the Christians and their Religion, set
the Jews on work to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib.
3.
lo a terrible Earthquake spoilt all, and those Stones of the Foundation which
lay unmoved before were now thrown out of their places. Then were those words
of Christ in the beginning of this Chapter exactly fulfilled, There shall not
be left here. one Stone upon another that shall not be thrown down, v. 2.
Lastly, I will add this, that this direful and tragical end of the holy City
was ushered in with several strange Spectacles and Signs, according to our
Savior's Prediction, not only in this Chapter ( v. 29.) but in Mark 13. 24.
Luke 21. 25. And even these are particularly mentioned and described by Jewish
and Pagan Authors. Jerusalem was compassed with Armies in the Sky as well as
with those below. Of these strange Sights the chief Roman Historian speaks,
saying, Visae per Coelum concurrere acies, rutilantia arma, and subito nubium
igne collucere Templum, etc. Tacit. Hist. l. 5.
There were Armies seen in the Air encountering one another, that their Weapons
were exceeding bright and glistering, and that the Temple seemed to be all of a
Light by the continual flashings of the Clouds. And he proceeds to enumerate
other prodigious Accidents which were the pre^ages of Ierusalems Destruction.
Thus the Twenty-fourth of St. Matthew, and the other parallel Chapter in St.
Luke, which treat of the forerunners of Ierusalems Destruction, and the
Destruction it self may be particularly made good out of mere Heathen Writers,
who knew nothing of Christ's Predictions concerning it. But not only of these,
but of all the other strange Apparitions, Voices, and portentous Events De
bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
Josephus gives us a particular Account in an entire Chapter on this Subject.
There you will find that the Prognostics of Ierusalems Destruction, the Signs
and Tokens in Heaven or Earth, which the Evangelists speak of, are faithfully
Recorded by that Jewish Historian.

I have yet another Evidence to exhibit, and that is concerning Christ's
Followers and Servants in the Age next after him; whence it will appear from
the Relation given by a professed Heathen what the Christians were. And by a
fair and rational Deduction, we may gather what manner of Persons they were at
the very first, and consequently that the Evangelical History represents them
aright. Lib. 10. Epist. 97.
Pliny the younger, Writing to Trajan, gives an account of the Religion and
Practice of these Persons; for he being Proconsul of Bithynia in that Emperors
time, and appointed by him to inspect the carriage of the Christians, he was
careful to inform himself of that matter, thereby to gratify his Master who
had employed him. Accordingly he tells how strangely that Religion increased
and gathered strength every day in that Province, and that not only great
Cities, but Towns and Villages were filled with the Professors of it, and in
proportion to this, that the Pagan Worship daily decreased. He testifies how
resolute and constant they were in their Profession, for he says he had some
Persons before him under Examination, who were accused of being Followers of
Christ, but he presently found them to be no Christians, because they were so
ready upon his Suggestion to adore the Emperors Image, and even to curse Christ
himself. Which was a sufficient Evidence to him, he says, that they were not
Revera Christiani.
Christians indeed; for he had been imformed, (he tells the Emperor) that
Persons of that Character could not possibly be forced to any thing of that
nature, but that they were immovable and unshaken in their Religion. Lastly,
he gives some account from their own Mouths and Confessions of their way of
Religion, and how devoutly they served God, and that they worshipped Christ as
such. Then there is also Trajan's Rescript to Pliny concerning the Christians,
wherein he expresses it to be his pleasure, that these Persons should no longer
be under the Inquisition, i. e. they shall not be sought for to be punished,
notwithstanding their stedfastness and Pervicaciousness (as Pliny had
represented it) in their Religion; for he was satisfied of their good moral
Qualities, and that they were neither perjured Persons, nor Sacrilegious, nor
Adulterers, nor Homicides, nor Malefactors of any sort. This Character and
Account which were given at the beginning of the Second Century by the Emperor
himself, and by Pliny, who had certain knowledge of the Christians, may create
a Persuasion in us that they were at first the same holy and Innocent Persons,
and that their Religion wonderfully increased and flourished, and that all the
Severities which were used toward them, were not able either to stifle them or
their Religion, and consequently may assure us that the History of the
New Testament rightly and truly describes them, and gives a faithful Account of
Christianity, and the Author of it. After this ample Testimony, it would be
needless to insist on what In Epictet. l. 4. c. 7.
Arrianus and De different. pulls. lib. 3.
Galen, and several other credible Writers have delivered concerning the
manisold Sufferings of the first Christians; and that invincible Patience,
Resolution and Constancy, wherewith they underwent them.

After all that has been said, I will conclude with the Testimony of that Arch
Infidel Mahomet, who has these express words in the Alcoran, Azoar. 1.
The Spirit of God has given Testimony to Christ the Son of Mary; a Divine
Soul was put into him. He is the Messenger of the Spirit, and the Word of God.
His Doctrine is perfect, etc. And again, Azoar. 12.
the Gospel is called the Light and Confirmation of the Testament, and the
right way to fear God. And moreover, Azoar. 67.
he brings in God speaking and declaring thus, that he had sent Christ, the Son
of Mary, and that he had given the Gospel to no other end but that they might
obtain by it the love and grace of God, And in other places the Miracles of our
Savior are owned and confessed to be true. Thus even this Great Impostor, and
Enemy to Christianity, bears Witness to the Blessed Jesus; Thus the Alcoran
acknowledges the Gospel to be Divine and True.

CHAP. XIII.
The Testimonies beforementioned briefly summed up. An Objection, viz. That
some remarkable Passages relating to the History of Christ in the
New Testament, are not so much as mentioned by either Jewish or Gentile
Historians, fully answered by considering that, I. A great part of our
Savior's Life was spent in privacy. 2. No Historians, either Jews or Heathens,
take notice of all Occurrences. 3. They wilfully conceal or mis-represent some
things out of Design: This showed in several Particulars. 4. Pagan Historians,
out of mere Contempt, omit many things which the Gospel Records. 5. Yea,
sometimes out of mere Hatred and Spite. 6. Some Pieces of Pagan History are
lost. 7. Some of these that are extant are defective.

THese are the Testimonies of professed Adversaries to Christianity, whereby
the History of Christ and his Followers is abundantly confirmed. Even those who
are averse to the Gospel attest, and sometimes approve of the chief things
related in those holy Writings. Among the Jews we have Philo, an excellent
Platonist of Alexandria, who flou^ish'd soon after Christ, and lived in the
times of the Apostles, We have Josephus a Jewish Histor^an, some say a Priest,
who writ about forty Years after, and had great opportunities of acquainting
himself with the Christian as well as the Jewish Affairs. We have the Talmudick
Doctors and Writers, some of which lived near those Times, and give their
suffrage most freely to the matters of Fact recorded in the Gospel. Among
Pagans we have their Emperors, Augustus, Tiberius, Caius Caligula, Trajan,
Adrian, Alexander Severus; we have their Deputies and Officers, Lentulus,
Pilate, Pliny; we have their noted Historians, Philosophers and Learned
Writers, as the aforesaid Pliny, the Proconsul in Asia, in his Epistles; his
Uncle of the same name, (who flourished in Vespasian's time) in his natural
History; Cornelius Tacitus, a famous Roman Orator and Historian, in his Books
of History and Annals: Plutarch, a Priest of Apollo Pythius, loved by Trajan,
and made Consul by him, in several of his Teatises; Lucian in his Dialogues,
(all which four flourished in the Emperor Trajan's time,): Suetonius in his
Caesar's: Dion Cassius in his Roman History, the former of which lived in
Adrian's time, whose Secretary he was, the latter in Alexander Severus's,
toward the middle of the Third Century. We have, besides all these, those four
sworn Enemies of Christianity, Julian, Celsus, Porphyrius, Hierocles, whose
Writings attest the Truth of many things which the New Testament speaks of. We
have Macrobius (if we may reckon him an Heathen Author) in his Saturnalia, and
Lampridius in his Lives of the Emperors. We have their Women also, the Sibylls,
whose Testimony concerning Christ is not contemptible. Lastly, as we have the
joint assent of Jews and Gentiles, so of M^^omet himself, in the Azoara's of
his Law, which give suffrage to the Evangelical Writings. Thus we have all the
Witnesses that can be d^sired and expected; and we have all the Evidence and
Proof that can be had.

These things need not to have been insisted on, or so much as mentioned, if
some Ill-minded Men, who pretend to knowledge in History, had not questioned
several Relations in the NewTestament, because they say they are not to be
found in the History either of Pagans or Jews- To obviate the Cavils of these
Men, I designedly undertook to show you the Concurrence of Scripture and
Heathen Authors, to discover the Harmony between the History of the Gospel, and
the Accounts which are given us in Jewish Story. In these you may meet with the
most considerable Passages which you read in the Books of the New Testament,
viz. The Tax in Augustus's time, the appearing of the Star. Herod's putting to
death the young Children at Bethlehem, the Account of our Savior's Persons,
Life, Actions, etc. all which have been particularly insisted upon. I have
showed you that all these memorable things are related by the Enemies of
Christianity, as well as by the Evangelists and Apostles themselves, who had so
great love of it.

But here it may be Objected thus, granting that these remarkable Passages
related in the NewTestament, are mentioned in Pagan and Jewish Historians, yet
others as remarkable are not. Now, if there were such things, and if they were
publicly known, What was the reason they were not recorded by those who made
it their business to transmit such Occurrences to Posterity? Why do not the
Pagan Historians of that Age mention Christ's and the Apostles Miracles, and
all the great and notable things mentioned in the New Testament? This very
thing disparageth the Evangelical Records, and causes us to suspect that they
are fabulous: for if they were not, other Historians, yea, all the Historians
of those Times would make mention of them, as well as the Evangelists do. I
will stifle this cavelling Objection, by offering these following things to
your Consideration, which will fully satisfy you, that there is no ground at
all for this which they allege.

I. This is to be considered, that from the time soon after Christ's Nativity,
till the Eighth Year of his Age, there could be no History expected concerning
him, for he was all that time in Egypt; therefore you have not one word of him,
for all that space of time, in the four Evangelists. And if these say nothing
of him, there is no reason to expect that other Historians should. When he
returned into Judea, he lived retired from that time till he was Thirty Years
old; only it is said that he went to Jerusalem with his Parents, and disputed
in the Temple with the Doctors; and then presently he came home to Nazareth,
and there lived obscurely. Here was no matter for History thus far. And
afterward he was but three Years and a half employed in Action, so that it is
no wonder the Pagan and Jewish Writers could afford to say but little of our
Saviou^ and his Doings, there being so great a part of his Life spent in
privacy.

2. You must remember this, that there are many considerable Things and
Persons, (besides those we have been speaking of) which some chief Historians
among the Jews and Heathens take no notice of; therefore you are not to marvel
that some of those things before mentioned are not spoken of by them. That
Obscurity of the Sun at Julius Caesar's death, which lasted a whole Year, is
not recorded by any but Ovid, Virgil, and Pliny; yet ten Historians or more in
the after Age wrote Caesar's Life, and gave an Account of his fatal End, and of
several things that followed. The like Prodigy Ced^enus reports to have
happened in Iustinian's time; but there were almost twenty considerable Writers
from Iustinian's time till Ced^enus that mention no such thing. Or, if these
Examples be not Authentic (as truly I cannot say much for them) I will produce
those that are so in all Men's Judgments. You may observe, that those Writers
who have undertaken to compile all the laudable things and Manners of diverse
Nations, and have even praised the Brachmans and Gymnosophists, and ransacked
the most remote parts of the World, for things excellent and observeable, yet
have said nothing of the Essenes, who far out-did all of them, and were in the
face of the World, most eminent and conspicuous. Neither Strabo, nor Tacitus,
nor Justin, nor Aristaeas, who have particularly spoken of the Jews, say any
thing of these. Nay, Josephus a Jew, and who, in his two Books against Apion
has heaped up all that is Great and Noble of that Nation, has nothing there
(though, as you shall hear anon, he has something in his other Writings) of
this famous Sect of Philosophers among them; shall we therefore be quarrelsome,
and deny there were Essenes before or in Christ's time? Again, I could observe
to you that the Romans are not so much as mentioned either by Herodotus or
Thucydides, or any other Greek Writers of that time, though they were in the
same quarter of the World, and growing great and formidable. It is somewhat
strange, but is very true, and is taken notice of by Josephus against Apion,
though this Author (as you have heard) was himself desective in the like case.
Suetonius writ the Lives of the first twelve Roman Emperors; yet if you compare
his Relations with the things set down in others, you will find, that he has
passed by many considerable things, he has omitted sundry matters which were
very obvious. Let us apply this to our present purpose: What if none of the
Heathen Historians, who have related the Roman Acts, had spoken of that famous
Census or Tax in Augustus's time? What though the Eclipse at Christ's Passion
had not been taken notice of by Historians? (though both this and the other are
recorded) yet it would not have followed thence that there were no such things;
for you see it is not unusual with Historians to pass by some Persons and Things
which are very remarkable, and worth recording. If then, some matters spoken of
by the Evangelists be not mentioned in other Histories, we cannot with any
Reason thence conclude that the Evangelists recorded that which is false. No
such thing can be inferred, for even among Pagan Writers there are many
peculiar historical Pa^sages mentioned by some of them, which none else speak
of. Tacitus and Valerius Maximus, and others, have Narrations which are not to
be found in any others, and yet they are not suspected of falsehood. Why then
may we not credit those things which the New Testament Records, although no
Gent^le Historians say a word of them? Nay, we have observed this before of the
Evangelical Historians themselves, that they do not all Record the same things.
Though all of them mention some Passages, yet there are others which are spoken
of only by one or two of the Evangelists; and there are some Things or Persons
which none of them make mention of, and yet they are as remarkable as some of
those which they have committed to Writing. Thus the Gospels speak of the
Pharisees and Sadducees, yea, of the Galileans and Herodians, and yet say not a
word of the Essenes, who were a considerable Sect, as was noted before. We are
not to be troubled then that some things occur in the New Testament, which are
not to be met with in very approved Authors. No History, Sacred or Profane,
relates every thing. The Evangelists themselves pretend not to this, you must
not expect all Christ's doings in their Writings, for one of them, who wrote
last of all, closes his Gospel thus, John 21. 25.
There are many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be
written every one, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain the
Books that should be written.

3. We are to know this, that both Jewish and Pagan Historians concealed or
misrepresented some things which relate to Christianity, and that wilfully and
out of design. I begin with the first sort of Historians, and offer this
Instance; we read in Philo and Josephus the Character of the Essenes, (whom I
mentioned before) viz. that they were the most Devout Men of all the Jewith
Nation, that they were a retired People, and given to Husbandry, that they were
famed for their mutual Love to one another, and that (as an effect of this)
they had all things in common, like those Primitive Christians spoken of in the
Acts, or like the Colidei or Culdees among the Scots in the first Ages; that
though they were the devo^^est Worshippers among the Jews, yet they (...).
Philo. lib. quod omnis probus liber.
offered no Sacrifices, but composed their minds wholly to 2 severe Sanctity,
that they were celebrated for their great Austerity of Life, for their
Temperance, Chastity, and Self-denial; that (...). Joseph. de bell. Jud. l. 2.
c. 7.
their bare Word was of more force with them than an Oath, and that they
avoided all Swearing, counting it far worse than Perjury; that they (...). Ibid.
were generous Despisers of all those things which affright and trouble others,
and that they vanquished all Torments and Persecutions with For^itude and
Steadiness of mind. And as for Death, if it was to be undergone with honor and
repute, they judged it ^o be better than Immortality. This is the true, but
admirable Character of that People, and both these Authors tell us that they
were Jews. It is true, there were such People as Jewish Esse^es, and Josephus
neckons them as one of the three Sects of Philosophers among the Jews. But it
is probable that this excellent Character, or all of it at least, belongs not
to These, but to the Christians of Alexandria at that time. Philo then in his
Treatise of a Comtemplative Life, where he pretends to describe the Essenes,
wri^eth in praise of these Jewish Christians, who were under the Tuition and
Conduct of St. Mark, Bishop of Alexandria; for this Evangelist Preaching the
Gospel in Egypt settled a Church here. This was the Opinion of that Learned
Father Catalog. Script. Ecclesia^t.
St. Ierom; That Church, says he, did at that time Judaize, and therefore
Philo the Jew thought it to be for the praise of his Nation to describe their
excellent Order, Life and Institution. For this Reason this Author is numbered
by that Father among the Ecclesiastical Writers, namely because he has left an
Encomium of these Christians, who lived thus religiously under St. Mark the
Evangelist. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 16.
Eusebius is of the same Judgment, and says what Philo writes of the Essenes
is to be understood of those Primitive Christians who were disciplined under
St. Mark. Epiphanius and Chrysos^om were of this Persuasion, and so were some
others of the Fathers* Baronius holds they were old Christian Monks, and a
great number of Protestant Writers agree in this, that they were devout
Christians bred up as Disciples under that holy Man. This is the more credible,
because it is said of them that they used no Sacrifices; this plainly shows
they were no Jews as to their Religion, although Philo and Josephus were
willing to represent them as such, in honor of their Nation, they being so
much admired for the Piety and In^egrity of their Conversations. And the rest
of the Character is a plain Description of the Primitive Christians, as they
are represented in the History of the Gospel, i. e. as having for a time all
things Common, as being Exemplary for their brotherly Love, as Persons of
singular Moderation and Self-denial, as those who were bid not to Swear at all,
as those who underwent the severest Persecutions with an undaunted Courage and
Fortitude, and resisted even unto Blood, and loved not their Lives unto the
Death. Now the Jewish Writers for Politic Ends, would not give this Account of
them as Christians, but as Jews, that the Credit of it might not redound to
Christianity, but to their Own Religion and way of Worship.

Then, for Pagan Historians, they also out of Design omit some things, and
insert others that are very false. Thus, as D^ ass lib. 4.
Budaeus has well observed, Pliny the Natural Historian, could not be ignorant
of the Eclipse at Christ's Passion, it being recorded in the Roman Archives,
and he being a diligent Searcher in those Acts; but he would not insert that
into his Writings which he knew Princes were desirous should be concealed; for
the Doctrine and Religion of Jesus were to be as little plausible as could be
among proud and voluptuous Men, whom the Christian Religion so much abhors and
condemns. To have mentioned that Prodigy, might exalt that Religion too much,
and the Eclipse might make it shine the brighter, and be more admired and
reverenced by the World. For this Reason it is probable the Heathen Writers
neglected to record this so prodigious an Accident, it making for a new
Religion contrary to their own. I will give you another notable Instance, which
is this, when M. Aurelius Antoninus's Army was in great streights, and wanted
Water, they were suddenly and unexpectly supplied with Rain, but at the same
time their Enemies against whom they fought were overwhelmed with Hail and
Thunder. Hist.
Dion, In Marco Aurelio.
Julius Capitolinus, In Marco*
Claudian, Lampridius report this thing, but say it was from the Emperor's own
Prayers to Jupiter, and from the Enchantments of the Jewish Magicians. But the
plain truth is, that the Christian Soldiers by their Prayers procured this
extraordinary and unexpected Rain for the relief of their Thirst, and brought
down Thunder and Storms upon their Enemies. The relating of this would have
been too great an Honor to the Christians, and to their Religion, and the
Master of it; wherefore the Pagan Historians out of Policy would not ascribe
this Wonder to the Prayers of the Christians, but to those of the Emperor, and
tell us the very words he used. But they have not wholly concealed the Truth,
for (as you have heard) they impute this wonderful Accident partly to the
Enchantments of the Jewish Magicians. We know how common a thing it is with the
Pagan Writers to mistake Jews for Christians, and so the Jewish Magicians here
are no other than the Christians in that Army, who because they brought to pass
such a wonderful and astonishing Thing, are said to be Inchanters and
Magicians. These religious pious Christians were employed in the Expedition
against the Germans and Sarmatians, and when the Army was ready to perish with
Thirst, obtained and fetched down by their effectual Prayers great showers of
Rain for themselves, and destructive Thunder and Lightning on their Enemies
Camp, and thereby procured a Victory over them, whence the Emperor got the
Names of Germanicus and Sarma^icus. This is alleged and made use of in the
Cause of Christianity by Apollinaris, in his Apology to the Emperor, as Eccles.
Hist. l. 4. c. 26.
Eusebius resti^ies. And this is mentioned by Tertullian, as a thing every
where known in his Apology to the Senate; and he tells them there that the
Emperor's own Letter to them, not long before sent to them out of Germany,
acknowledged the same, viz, that God wrought a Miracle for the sake of the
Christians who were in his Army, and he owed the Victory wholly to their pious
Addresses to Heaven. This Father would never have said this to the Romans, if
there had been any possibili^y of con^uting it; yea, if it had not been a thing
certainly known by them. This Story of the Thundering Legion you have also at
large in Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 5* and in C^ronico.
Eusebius, who assures us that this Name was given them for this very reason,
because by their ardent Prayers they procured Thunder to fright and disperse
their Enemies, and Rain to refresh themselves. And if what some have
endeavored to prove were true, viz. that this was the name of a Legion in
Augustu^'s time, and was named so from the Tunderbolt which it carried in the
Shield, yet I do not ^ee any reason to disbelieve this ancient Author; for why
may not a Name be given on different accounts? Why may it not be called the
Thundering Legion, for this reason which he mentions as well as for that which
others Assign? I don't perceive that these are inconsistent. Eusebius goes on,
and adds that the Emperor hereupon recalled his Edicts against the Christians,
and by a new Decree appointed a severe Punishment to be inflicted on the
Accusers of them. The Gentile Historians say nothing of this, and will not let
us know that that miraculous Event was by means of the Christians. A Victory
gained by the Prayers of Christians would sound ill. This would have been too
signal a Testimony of the Truth and Prevalency of Christianity, therefore it is
suppressed. For the same reason you may reckon Christ's Mriacles are omitted in
Pagan Historians, if you suppose they came to their Ears. It is their cunning
to write nothing of these, for hereby they would at the same time commend
Christianity, and disparage their own Way. Besides, some of them were afraid
to own the miraculous Acts of Christ and his Followers, for they saw that this
sort of Men were persecuted and put to death; so that they dared not relate the
Wonders they did, lest they should be suspected to favor Christianity, and by
that means become liable to Capital Punishment. Or, if they feared not this,
yet they were afraid to displease the great ones, as I said before. If they
knew any thing would be ungrateful and unacceptable to their Masters they
passed it by. Thus when it was given out by the Sibylline Oracle in the Year
before our Savior was born, that Nature did then bring forth a King to the
World, the Roman Senate thereupon ordered that no Child born that Year should
be brought up, as appears in In Octavio cap. 49.
Suetonius. Which was sufficient to give check to the Roman Historians, and so
it is not to be wondered (as the De Orac. Sibyll.
Learned Vossius observes) that the killing of the Children of Bethlehem by
Herod's command is not mentioned by any but the Evangelists, he might have
said, unless by Macrobius; that act of his being somewhat akin to the Edict of
the Roman Senate.

4. I adjoin this, that the Christian Religion, and the Professors of it, were
generally looked upon by Profane Writers as very contemptible, so that some of
these scorned to record those things which had any relation to them. Hence it
is that Christ's Miracles, and other things appertaining to Christianity, are
not so much as mentioned. They would not vouchsafe to record such mean sorry
things, and which indeed some of them took for Fables and mere Falsities. On
this account likewise it cannot be expected that the Roman History should at
any time particularize the Christian Affairs, unless when War and Tumults
supposed by them to be caused by the Christians invited those Writers to it.
Then the Roman Glory is concerned to let the Conquest be told, and to have an
Account given of the Particulars. But other Things relating to Christianity are
deemed low and mean, and are passed over in filence, as not of any Concern and
Moment. The Pagan Historians do purposely omit the Acts of the Christians
because they think them not worth the reciting.

5. To speak more plainly, Prejudice, Hatred and Malice, may be assigned also
as the Causes why some of the most remarkable Passages in the Evangelical
History are not mentioned by Pagan or Jewish Writers. It is no wonder that
Valerius Maximus, who has made a Collection of the memorable Acts and Sayings
of other Nations as well as Rome, and dedicated them to Tiberius, yet has not
a word of Jewish Acts, much less has inserted any Christian ones. His
Aversness to the Christian Religion may solve this very well, unless you will
say that Christianity was but just risen at that time when he wrote, and the
materials of History concerning it were not yet brought to him. But this cannot
be said of Tacitus, who lived in the next Age, and who was a great Hater of the
Christians, and was very Per flagitia invisi. -- Haud perinde in crimine
in^end^^ quam odio humani generis convicti sunt. Annal. I. 15.
severe upon them in his Writings, on which account he cannot be thought to
have related things impartially concerning them. Suetonius was Genus hominum
superstitionis novae and male^icae. In Nerone, cap. 16.
bitter against them, and who then can look for any ^air Account from him? The
same may be said of Lucian and Pliny, who though they deliver some Truths (and
not inconsiderable ones) concerning the Christians, yet their Aversness to them
and their Religion (which by the latter of them is called Epist. 79. lib. 10.
Pervicacia and inflexibilis obstinatio) would not permit them to speak what
they knew of them. Plutarch, of all that lived and writ about that time, was
the civilest to the Christian Religion; he no where jeers or slanders it, or
makes any Reflections upon it, which made Theod^^^t think he was almost a
Christian, and had a favor for their Religion. But the rest (some of whom I
have named before) hated the Christians, yea their very name was odious to
them; hence when they speak of Christians or Christianity they mingle Calumni^s
and Lies with what they say. Christians with them pass for fond and
superstitious People, nay for flagitious and profligate, nay sometimes for
Diabolical Impostors and Wizards, and the most execrable sort of Persons under
heaven. I might here mention Zosimus, a fierce Pagan, and therefore shows it in
his History when he speaks of the Christians. Being a great Hater of these
Persons he does upon all occasions speak ill of them, and particularly of
Constantine the Great, because he was the first Emperor that threw off
Heatheanism, and embraced Christianity. He tells us that he Murdered his
Empress, his Son, and other near Relations, and that he was smitten with
Leprosy for these unnatural and horrid Crimes; in brief, he relates the
Particulars of this great Man's Life contrary to all ancient Historians that
have written concerning him. The ground of which was no other than this, that
he had entertained a particular Grudge and Prejudi^e against the Emperor, and
bore a hatred to Christianity it self; so that whatever he wrote concerning
them ^avor'd, of ill will and malice. It is not then to be marvell'd at, that
such Men mis-represent many Passages which relate to the Professors of
Christianity, and fa^si^ie all reports concerning them. They can by no means
speak well of a People that they hate. A Religion that they so abhor can have
no Persons Good of it, they think. You must not expect they will relate Truths
which they have a dislike of. This is one reason why Pagans are def^ctive in
their Historical Narrations; why many things spoken of by the Evangelists, are
not mentioned by them, or are vilely misrepresented. This is the cause why so
few of Christ's Actions, and the Affairs of Christians are taken notice of; and
why thos^ that are, are so miserably perverted. Prejudice and Envy, Spl^en and
Malice, are the Source of this Miscarriage.

6. I add this, that many pieces of History are lost, as has been acknowledged
and complained of by the Learned; whence it is that many Occurrences which we
meet with in the History of the Gospel are not to be found in the Writings of
the Pagans. We have but a few of these left us in comparison of their number at
first; and those that we have are but Relics of those Histories before
written. Particularly the Stupendous Acts of our Savior, and the Monuments of
the bravest and noblest things done in that Age wherein He was born are now
missing. All Dio's History from the Consulships of Antistius and Balbus unto
the Consulships of Messala and Cinna, that is, for the space of Ten Years, Five
Years before Christ's Birth, and Five after it, is quite lost, and so is Livy's
History of that time. In vain therefore does any Man think to find the
remarkable Passages referring to Christ's Birth in these Writers; much more
vain is it to look for these things in those Writers whose Histories are
altogether missing at this day. Thus to instance only in the Universal (...),
which makes the greatest noise with the Objectors, that without doubt was set
down by some Roman Historians, but their Writings either by Negligence, or by
Fire, or by the Invasion of the Barbarous Nations into Italy, or by age and
length of time are lost. It is clear that some did make mention of it;
otherwise whence had In verbo [(...)]
Suidas all that which he relates of the Twenty Persons that were sent to make
the (...)? God perhaps would in his Providence approve the loss of these, that
holy History might be partly embraced by Faith, and not owe its Authority
wholly to Human Testimony. But such as is remaining I have produced, and that
is enough to satisfy any sober any confiderate Person.

Lastly, I remark this in the close of all, that there are two of the most
celebrated Roman Historians from whom we can expect nothing that has Relation
to Christ's Birth, or any great Occurrence that happened about that time. For
Livy wrote but to Augustus's beginning, which was before Christ, and for that
reason no Man can rationally think, that such Notable Concomitants of our
Savior's Nativity as the General Taxing, and the Appearing of the Star, could
be recorded by this Historian. And as for Tacitus (who is the other Celebrated
Historian) there is as little reason to expect any of these notorious Matters
in his Writings, because he goes not back so far as Augustus. His Annals begin
with Tiberius, and continue to the death of Nero: and his Books of History
begin where his Annals left off, and go on to the end of Titus Vespasian's
Expedition against the Jews, and there have their Period. L. Florus is but an
Abbreviator of Livy, and therefore we can look for nothing there. So Velleius
Paterculus, though he goes something farther, is an Epitomizer, a Scantling of
an Historian. As for Justin, who flourished in the Emperor Antoninus Pius's
time, he was but an Epitomizer of Trogus Pompeius, and goes no farther than he
went; therefore we cannot expect any thing of him concerning the Christian
Affairs. Thus you see what are the boundaries of these Chief Historians, and
what you may look for (or rather not look for) from them, and also you have the
Reasons given you why but few things which have reference to the History of the
Gospel are found recorded in Pagan Writers. But all that could be rationally
looked for, is recorded, as I have showed you, by the best Historians among the
Pagans.

These are the several Considerations which I undertook to offer, and I
question not but that they will fully satisfy the Scruples and Objections
before started, and abundantly clear up this Truth to us, that we have
sufficient Testimony from Pagan and Jewish Writers concerning the
Gospel-History. This Proposition is evident, that the New Testament is
confirmed by Profane Writers, that the Evangelical Records are attested by the
authority even of those who were without. These have transmitted to us many of
those things which are registered by the holy Evangelists. The Memoirs of these
things are in Profane Story, in the Writings of those that opposed the
Christian Religion.

Thus I have finished what I attempted, that is, I have proved the Truth and
Authority of the Scriptures from the suffrage and attestation of Strangers. I
have let you see that the Confession of our Adversaries agrees with that of our
best Friends. We appeal to the Jews, and to the Gentile-World; even these bear
witness to the Sacred Writings. And their witness cannot be rejected by any
reasonable Person, because (...). Chry^o^t. in Psalm. 45.
a Testimony is least to be suspected when it comes from an Enemy, yea, because
such a Testimony is reputed Satis ^^mum te^timonium e^ ad probandam veritatem
quod ab ipsis prohibetur inimicis* Lactant. In^t. I. 4. c. 12.
firm and solid, because it is A^ (...). Basil. M. hom de Nativ. Christ^.
worthy to be believed, because (...). Greg. Nyss. de Anim.
it is most valid for the Commendation and Establishment of the Truth. This
then rend^rs the Books of the Old and New Testament, worthy of all Acceptance,
viz. that they are vouched by Profes^*d Adversaries. And this is that which I
have been urging in this Discourse, viz. that Jews and Pagans testify the same
things which the Inspired Writers deliver. A great part of the memorable
Passages set down in these Sacred Writings are left on Record in those others.
This is a mighty Confirmation of the Truth of these holy Books, this is a clear
Evidence that they are not forged and supposititious, but that the Matters
contained in them are real and certain, that they give a just and faithful
Account of the things they treat of; in brief, that they are the Word of Truth,
and endited by the Spirit of Truth. And thus much in pursuance of the First
General Head concerning the Holy Scriptures, viz. the Truth and Authority of
them.

FINIS.
ADDENDA
Refer this to Page 261. Line 15.
THe English Iay, from the Hebrew Aja^, pica, cornix. To abash is taken from
the Hebrew ^ush puduit. And from the Greek we borrow many words with the
omission of a Letter or two in the beginning, as Licourice for Glicourice, from
(...); Emonies vulgarly so called, for Anemonies, from the Flower (...), whence
the Latin Anemone. Sciatica for Ischiatica, ab (...), the Hip or Huckle-bone:
Scaroticks among Physicians for Escharoticks: Scar, from (...) crusta cauterio
in carne facta: Sol, from (...); Rice from (...), oryza: Star, from (...): Box,
from (...): Maur^s, a Moor, from (...) obscurus: Tan^ie, from (...): To gaze
from (...), admiror, stupeo. Gay from (...), elegans: and perhaps Trull from
(...) laena. And I have taken notice of several Words from the Latin, with the
first Letter, or more, cut off in the beginning, as Uncle from avunculus, qu.
avuncle: Tills (as they are called in some Countries) from Lentils, Lenticula:
Story from History, Historia: Bishop qu. Pischop, from Episcopus: Spain from
Hispania: Sparagus for Asparagus: A Plaster from Emplastrum: Stum from mustum:
Dropsy from Hydrops: Gypsy for Egypsy, of Latin original: Pouch for Capouch, (a
Cowl or Hood, whence the Capuchin Friars have their Name) from Caputium, a Hood
worn on the Head: Picked (i. e. sharp at the end) qu. spiked, from Spica an Ear
of Corn: Or if it comes from a Pike, then that seems to come from Spiculum a
Pike or Spear, and that is from Spica, it is likely: Sides men corruptly for
Assisting-men, it being their Office to Assist the Churchwardens (unless you
will rather understand by them Testes Synodales, Synods-Men, who were anciently
joined with the Churchwardens.) There are other English Words derived after
the same manner from the English, Saxon, and French: Thus Poppy, with the p
left out in the beginning and middle, seems to give the denomination to Opium,
(which is now a Word that may pass for English, and signifies the Juice of
Poppy) as if Popium were the Word: Sterling for Easterling: Bour, or Bowr, from
Arbor: Spittle, or Spital, for Hospital: Valis for Avail: Vantage for
Advantage: Say for Essay: Grees (Stairs) for Degrees: Cantle (in Heraldry)
quasi Scantling: Prentice vulgarly for Apprentice: Stover (for Cattle) from the
French Estover: Squire for Esquire, a Gall. Es^uyer: Quiry, or Querry, for
Equerry, a Place, a Stable where Race-Horses are set: To Ply for Employ.

Instead of Sacristan we corruptly say Sexton: For God be with you, we say,
Good By: For Koningstable or Kingstable, we say, Constable, the Officer that is
appointed and established by the King, or to conserve the King's Peace. We
vulgarly a say Spice for a Specimen, Hogo for Haut-goust, Carfax for Quatre
voix, the place were Four Ways meet in Oxford. Some have thought that Elphs and
Goblins with which they frighted Children heretofore are derived from the famed
and so ^alked of Feud between the Guelphs and Guibilines. Saragosa in Spain is
most corruptly pronounced for Caesar Augusta. The Emperor of the Abyssines is
called Prestor-Iohn, for Prestegian, or Protegian, as some think, but this is
disputable. Maldon in Essex, by the Saxons called Malodune, is a Corruption of
Camalodunum, the old Colony of the Romans here. Godmanchester in Huntingdon
shire, is so written in stead of Gormonchester, from one Gormon a Danish Prince
that had this part of the Country allotted to him. But Charter House for
Chartreuse, (the Covent heretofore of the Carthusians). and Shingles (the
common word for St. Anthony's Fire, because it incompasses the Body like a
Girdle) for Cingles; and Good Morrow for Good Morning are not so great
Depravations of the Words.

Refer this to Page 254. Line 25.
If (...) signified any such thing as furtum, we might perhaps think the
English Felony came thence. If (...), or stola, signified Sedile, we should be
inclined to fetch Stool th^nce. We should have derived Smoke from the Greek
(...) if it had signified any thing like, fumus, and so a Spade from (...) and
Spado. Nay, If (...) denoted any thing like Placenta, or laganum, we then
should have vouched even our English word of that sound to be derived from it.

FINIS
BOOKS Sold by Richard Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christian's Love to it. The Second
Edition. Octavo.

Search the Scriptures. A Treatise showing that all Christians ought to Read
the Holy Books; With Directions to them therein. Twelves.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the Daily Public
Prayers. Twelves* All Three by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, now Lord Bishop of Ely.

The Old Religion demonstrated in the Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof. By I. Goodman, D. D. The Second Edition. Twelves.

Imprimatur,

April. 6. 1694. CAROLUS ALSTON, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfection OF THE BOOKS OF
THE Old and New Testament.

Vol. II.

Wherein the Author's former Underta king is further prosecuted, viz. an
Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts which contain some Difficulty in them,
with a Probable Resolution of them.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John
Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Imprimatur,

Cantab. Oct. 19. 1693. Geo. Oxenden, LL. D. Procan. Jo. Beaumont, S. T. D.
Regius Theologiae Professor. Nath. Coga, S. T. D. Aul. Pembr. Custos. Jo.
Covell, S. T. D. Coll. Christi Prefect.


TO THE Right Reverend Father in God SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.
My LORD,
I Once more presume to prefix your Lordship's Name, which is so Great and
Celebrated, to my Obscure Papers, thereby to create them some Credit, and to
derive a Repute upon my self. Your Matchless Pen has purchased You a lasting
Renown, and Your Exemplarly Life and Practice have added a farther Glory to
You. So that all the understanding World counts You worthy of dou^le Honor. If
You had lived in the Primitive times, You would have been one of the most
Eminent Fathers of the Church in those Days, as You have the Honor to be now
in these. And Your Strict Life would have entitled You a Saint. You do all the
Parts of an Excellent Man, and a Christian Bishop: You perform Great and Worthy
things Your self, and You countenance even the lower and meaner Attempts of
others. In a word, all that are intelligent proclaim You the Chief Glory of our
English Prelacy.

My Lord, I do not apprehend that this can offend You, for He that is eminently
Virtuous and Learned, provokes the World to speak his Worth: and they would be
infinitely blameable if they robbed him of his due Praise. Therefore I must
confess I do not see the Reasonableness of those Writer^ that tell their
Patrons they will not praise them, lest they should offend their Modesty. I
would not dedicate my Labors (as mean as they are) to a Person of a mean
Figure in the Learned World, or in the Accounts of the Religious. For the
Design of the Dedication is to let the World know, that such a Person is really
Praiseworthy, and that even to a Wonder; that he is one that ought to be
extremely honored and venerated for his Transcendent Excellencies, and that he
is to be a Pattern to the rest of Mankind. And yet, my Lord, You see I do not
enter on the Task of Enlarging on Your Lordship's Praises: the Reason is not
because it is unlawful or unfit, but because it is too Great for me.

Not to give Your Lordship any farther Trouble, if I have offended by this
repeated Presumption, I have this to plead in my Excuse, that Your Merits as
well as my Own Inclinations have made me Criminal. And seeing my Fault bears
the Name of Duty, I despair not but that it will meet with a Pardon, and that
Your Lordship will aceept of this poor Oblation from,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Devoted Son and Servant, J. EDWARDS.


THE PREFACE.
WHen I had by my long Forbearance satisfied the World that I was not fond of
showing my self in Public, and offering any Discourses in Print, (at le^st
with open Face) I at last prevailed with my self to venture visibly to the
Press. And truly I think I may appear now with the more Confidence, because I
have a great while deliberated on what I have done in this Nature. Though I was
very shy at first, yet now being entered into thi^ employment, I believe I
shall make a Practice of it* till, it may be, I shall be thought by some to run
into another Extreme. But I shall not consult or attend to the Opinion of a few
prejudiced or envious Folks, but go on with my Work which I designed. And if it
be said that some of the Texts, and Other Subjects which I discourse upon, have
been often treated of by others, my Answer is, that I ^m glad they have, for
then it will appear what I have done; then the Reader will see, I hope, that I
am no Filching Pl^giary, no Apish Imitator, no Rash and Cred^lous Swearer unto
other Men's Opinions; that when I handle the same Matter which others have
before me, I present the World with something beside Different Phrase and New
Method; that by offering a fresh Critical Gloss upon several Dubious and
Difficult Passages in the Old and New Testament, I have cleared up the S^^se of
them; and in short, that I h^ve made some Remarkable Observations on the Best
Book in the World. If I have not performed this, (which the Judicious only can
be Judges of) I ^m sure I have ende^vour'd it, and have all along made it my
grand Design and Business to ^elp my Readers to understand the Bible aright,
which certainly is of the highest Concern next to the Religions Practice of it.
In order to the pursuit of this I had sufficient Warrant to break out of my
Retirement, to appear barefaced, and to salute the Public. Besides, I thought
my self obliged to give the World some Account of the spending of my Time, and
to let it be seen that I have not wholly thrown away my Hours. Moreover, I have
a great and passionate Desire to serve the Church, to vindicate our Holy
Religion, to advance the Cause of Christianity, to demonstrate the transcendent
Worth of the Holy Scriptures, (which are the Standard of all Excellent Notions
and Regular Manners) and to promote and set forward the Glory of the ever
Blessed Trinity.

I am sensible what Multitudes of Writers there are already, how many Printed
Discourses are published, that might well be spared (to say no worse). We are
told that Tully's Offices w^^ the first Book that was printed in Europe; which
was a Good Specimen of that new-invented Art. It had been a happy thing if the
Press had proceeded as well as it begun, if Books of use and Worth only had
been handed into the World by it. But it is to be lamented that there is
another Use too often made of this Invention, whilst too many Men that are
Masters of no other Conceptions than those that are flat and useless, or else
erroneous and pernicious, take the Pains to let the World know as much in
Print. Others scribble to satisfy a certain Itch of Writing that they have got;
and the Press seldom cures the Distemper, but rather increases it. Other
mercenary Souls make their Pens wag for Bread, and they may generally be known
by this Property, that the Front belies the Fabric, the Title does not tell
what is in the Book, but only sets it to sale: so that indeed it is a mere
Pretense and Show, and stands as R. B's Sham-name is wont to do of late in the
Title Page. But none of these Miscarriages have discouraged me from appearing
in Public, and pursuing those Good Ends I before mentioned, which alone are
sufficient to legitimate the Press, and to License the Author's Undertakings.
And if the Question be, Why more Books still? the Answer is made by another
Question, Why more Men still? As long as the World increases, Writing will do
so too; for all Men are not alike, their Notions and Conceptions are not the
same; wherefore for these different Readers there must be different Books. St.
Augustin's arguing of old is useful and seasonable at this Day; Vtile est
libros plures a pluribus fieri, diverso stilo, non diversa fide, etiam de
quaestionibus iisdem; ut ad plurimos, ad (...) sic, ad alios autem sic, res
ipsa perveniat. De Tri^. l. 1. c. 3.
It is of great Advantage to the World, says that Learned Father, that there
should be many Books composed by many Men, in a different Style, though not a
different Faith, about the same Questions and Subjects, that so hereby the
thing it self, and the Truth enquired into, may the better be conveyed to the
Readers, to some of them in one manner, to others in another. For this is
certain, that all Persons are not convinced and wrought upon by the same
Arguments: wherefore there is liberty to use all kinds of Topics. Thus the
Excellent Grotius acquaints us that he picked out the Best and most Convictive
Arguments (as he thought) to prove the Truth of Religion, and particularly the
Christian; and yet some of them, as Signatures, Fire Ordeal, etc. are neglected
by other Learned Men; for Evidences work more or less, according to the
Diversity of Men's Genius's and Dispositions. Hence the Judicious Doctor
Jackson, in his Preface to the Reader, before his First Volume, confesses that
the Grounds an^ Motives which he makes use of, and which most of all prevait'd
with him, may have little or no Operation upon others. Whereupon is founded the
Usefulness, yea Necessity of propounding diverse sorts of Arguments, that if
some of them prove not forcible and persuasive, others may* So is it in
Illustrating and Commenting upon the Holy Text: the Diversity of
Interpretations is requisite and useful; and it may be the Mind of the Holy
Spirit cannot be penetrated into without these different ways of Enquiry. The
Wise Man is a Physician of the Law, say the Jewish Doctors, i. e. whereas the
Unlearned and Unskilful corrupt the Text, and deprave the Sense of it, he comes
and heals it by restoring it to its genuine and proper meaning. But in
effecting this it is not necessary that he should tie himself to the same
Methods and Arts of Cure which others have used before him. Some
superstitiously confine themselves to one Man's Critical Determination on the
Place; as Bishop Montague says of Mr. Seldom, they take a Grammarian for a
God. They do so in the worst Sense, they deify Criticism, they idolize an
Expositor, and fall down to his particular Interpretation. But we must be more
Catholic and Generous if we are desirous to have right Apprehensions of the
Sacred Text, and if we would be intim^tely acquainted with the Divine Truth
contained in it.

This justifies the Variety of Comments and Critical Researches into the Holy
Scriptures: and this furnishes me with an Apology for thrusting my self in
among the Writers of the Age. And being now of that Number, I have this (...)
say farther to the Reader, that though I am sensible of my own Defects, and
particularly of the Miscarriages and Mistakes that may occur in this Work, it
reaching to so great a Variety of Texts and Diversity of Matters; yet on the
other hand, I hope I shall find him as sensible of the Arduousness of the
Undertaking, and the Liableness of himself and others, to fall short in so
Weighty and Difficult a Subject. In fine, in these and all other my Endeavors
which I shall expose to the public View, I covet only the Approbation of the
Candid and Wise; and I shall make it my Business (I will not say to merit, but)
to purchase it.

ERRATA.
PAge 41. line 31. read there. P. 54. l. 4. r. purposed. P. 61. l. 4. r. Air
instead of Fire. P. 67. l. 3. after Counsel, insert [So Theocritus, -- (...).
P. 69. l. 2. r. an other. P. 94. l. 12. after as in, insert Exodus 20. 18. the
People saw the Noise of the Trumpet. P. 145. l. 15. r. bony. P. 155. l. 2. r.
Nephritick. P. 178. l. 15. dele by. P. 269. l. 32. r. have no. P. 278. l. 11.
r. to be. P. 280. l. 17. after Belly, insert as it i^ generally thought. P.
300. l. 1. after ordinary, insert or profan^. P. 333. l. 8. after more, insert
according to the different reading of them. P. 385. l. 1. r. it as. P. 402. l.
11. r. this. The H^br^w requires Correction, which is left to the Learned.

A CATALOGUE of the Texts of Scripture which are expounded and resolved in the
ensuing Discourse, according to the Author's PARTICULAR Judgment.
GENESIS.
CHAP. 15. ver. 7. I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees.
Page 371.
NUMBERS.
Chapter 12. v. 1. He had married an Ethiopian Woman. p. 375. Chapter 23. v. 21. He
has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen Perverseness in Israel.
p. 96. Chapter 25. v. 9. Those that died in the Plague were twenty and four
thousand. p. 369.
KINGS.
Book 2. chapter 6. v. 25. The fourth Part of a Cab of Doves Dung was sold for five
Pieces of Silver. p. 288.
CHRONICLES.
Book 2. chapter 14. v. 5. He took away out of all the Cities of Judah the High
Places and the Images. p. 358.
JOB.
Chapter 1. v. 5. It may be my Sons have cursed God in their Hearts. p. 342. Ver.
11. He will curse thee to thy Face. ibid. Chapter 2. v. 9. Curse God and die. p.
337. Chapter 4. v. 18. His Angels he charged with Folly. p. 269.
PSALMS.
Psalm. 120. v. 5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshec, and dwell in the Tents of
Kedar. p. 115. Psalm. 133. v. 3. As the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that
descends upon the Mountains of Zion. p. 331.
ECCLESIASTES.
Chapter 12. v. 2. While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the Rain, Ver. 4. And the Doors shall be
shut in the Streets, -- He shall rise up at the Voice of the Bird. Ver. 5. The
Grasshopper shall be a Burden; and Desire shall fail. Ver. 6. Or ever the Golden
Bowl be broken, or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the Wheel broken
at the Cistern. p. 139.

ISAIAH.
Chapter 59. v. 19. The Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard. p. 205.
St. MATTHEW.
Chapter 10. v. 14. Shake off the Dust of your Feet. p. 189 Ver. 34. Think not that
I am come to send Peace, etc. p. 363.
Chapter 12. v. 40. Jonas was in the Whales Belly, Gr. (...). p. 281. Chapter 13. v.
32. Which indeed is the least of all Seeds. p. 117. Chapter 24. v. 34. This
Generation shall not pass away till all these things are fulfilled. p. 391. Chapter
26. v. 64. The Son of Man. Why our Savior is called so. p. 221.
St. LUKE.
Chapter 22. v. 36. But now he that has a Purse, let him take it, and likewise his
Scrip: he that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment, and buy one. p. 126.
St. JOHN.
Chapter 20. v. 10. Then the Disciples went away again unto their own home, Gr.
(...). p. 82.
ACTS.
Chapter 7. v. 15. Jacob went down into Egypt and died, ^e and our Fathers. Ver.
16. And were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the Sepul^^re that Abraham
bought for a Sum of Money of the Sons of Emmor ^he Father of Sychem. p. 361.
Chapter 13. v. 20. After that he gave them Judges about the Space of four hundred
and fifty Years, until Samuel the Prop^et. p. 402. Chapter 23. v. 5. I wist not
that he was the High Priest. p. 128.
CORINTHIANS, 2d Epist.
Chapter 2. v. 5. He has not grieved me, but in part. p. 99.
COLOSSIANS.
Chapter 1. v. 15. Who is the firstborn of every Creature. p. 215. Ver. 18. The
firstborn from the Dead. p. 217.

THESSALONIANS, 2d Epist.
Chapter 3. v. 1. That the Word of the Lord may have free Course, and be glorified.
And Other Texts which refer to the Olympic Games. p. 180.
HEBREWS.
Chapter 9. v. 4. Wherein was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aaron's Rod that
budded, and the Tables of the Covenant. p. 365. Chapter 12. v. 24. The Blood of
Sprinkling, which speaks better things than that of Abel. p. 389.
TIMOTHY, 1st Epist.
Chapter 1. v. 8. The Law is not made for a righteous Man. Chapter 4. v. 8. Bodily
Exercise profits little. p. 167.
TIMOTHY, 2d Epist.
Chapter 4. v. 13. -- Especially the Parchments. p. 420.
St. PETER, 2d Epist.
Chapter 1. v. 20. No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation.
The rest of the Texts are interpreted according to the Sense of Other
Expositors.
OF THE STYLE OF THE Holy Scriptures.
CHAP. 1.
There is a primary or literal, and a secondary or mystical Sense in the Sacred
Writings. A brief Explication of both. Several Instances of them in the Old
Testament. Episcopius's Opinion concerning the fulfilling of some Passages of
the Old Testament by way of Accommodation, animadverted upon. Instances in the
New Testament of the double Sense of Scripture. The Nature of Parables,
especially of those that our Savior uses, fully discussed. The several
Reasons of this parabolical and mystical way of instructing the People. The
Parable of the Ten Virgins particularly illustrated. A double historical Sense
in the 24th Chapter of St. Matthew. The like in other Places asserted by Dr.
Jackson. Whence the peculiar and transcendent Excellency of the inspired
Writings is inferred. A just Censure of those Writers who vilify the Letter of
Scripture, and mind nothing in it but the mystical Interpretation. Dr. Bufnet's
allegorizing, and at the same time ridiculing the 3d Chapter of Genesis,
rebuked. The great Mischiefs of excluding the literal Sense of Scripture. The
other Extreme, viz. of resting altogether in the literal meaning of the Bible,
condemned. Erasmus, Calvin, Grotius, taxed for this. Rules to be observed for
knowing what Places are to be understood in a primary literal Sense, and what
in a secondary or mystical.

HAving in a former Discourse treated of the Authority of the Sacred Writings
of the Old and New Testament, I am now obliged (according to what ^ then
undertook) to give a particular Account of their Style: By which (taking it in
a large and extensive Notion) I understand the Sense and Import of the Holy
Writ, as well as the Composition of the Words. The Style of Scripture
comprehends the Divine Meaning no less than the Phraseology of it. Accordingly
I will reduce all that I intend to say upon this Subject, to these ensuing
Propositions:

I. There is a mystical as well as a literal Sense of many Passages of these
inspired Writings: and we are carefully to attend to both.

II. The Style of Holy Scripture has several things in it which are according
to the Phrase and Strain of other applauded Writers: which therefore we ought
to be acquainted with, that we may the more easily understand the sacred Penmen.

III. As there are many things in the Style and Composure of the Bible common
to it with other Authors, so there are some things peculiar and proper to it,
which we are more especially concerned to take notice of, that the Singularity
and Propriety of them may be rightly understood by us.

IV. The Style and Expression of Scripture are such, that there are many
Passages in it which are obscure and difficult. And here a particular, but full
Account must be given of that Obscurity and Difficulty. And likewise I shall
make it my Task to remove them by a particular Explication and Illustration of
those Texts which shall be alleged.

The first Proposition. This is to be laid down in the first Place, that there
is both a literal and a mystical Sense in Scripture. The literal Sense is when
the Words are taken as they originally and properly signify. The mystical one
is when the Words are to be understood in a more sublime Sense than the bare
Letter of them imports. This mystical or spiritual Sense of Scripture is
according to some, threefold; 1. Tropological; when one thing delivered in
Scripture signifies some other thing pertaining to the Conversation of Men.
Thus those Texts of the Mosaic Law, wherein is forbidden the eating of certain
Animals, have partly respect unto the Manners of Persons. Both Jewish and
Christian Expositors have thought that it was designed in those Prohibitions,
that some moral Instruction should be taught that People from the Consideration
of the natural Inclinations and Qualities of those Creatures. 2. There is an
Allegorical Sense, when things spoken of in the Old Testament are Figures of
something in the New: or, when particularly they have a respect to Christ or
the Church Militant; as the Rock, and the Manna mentioned in Moses's History of
the Israelites. 3. An Anagogical Sense is said to be in some Places of
Scripture; and this is when the things related are applicable to the Church
Triumphant, or the Life everlasting: Thus the entering into Canaan, and the Holy
of Holies in the Temple, in the highest Sense of them, are meant of Heaven and
the State of Eternal Happiness. But because there is a great quarrelling about
the applying of this triple Distinction to the several Passages in Scripture,
which are said to bear a mystical meaning; and because some learned Divines of
the Protestant Persuasion disallow of this Distribution of the mystical Sense
of Scripture, I will avoid all wrangling, by assigning only those two general
Senses of Scripture, viz. the literal and mystical; and by leaving it to every
one's Liberty, either to omit the particular Subdivisions of the latter, or to
apply them as they see occasion.

Or rather, if I may be permitted to vary from this received Division of the
Sense of Scripture, I would divide it thus, into a primary and a secondary
Sense: the former is literal, the latter is ^ystical; and yet not so, but that
sometimes (as you shall see afterward) the secondary Sense is literal too: for
there are two literal or historical Meanings in some Places; but the latter of
them may be called mystical also, because it is not so plainly understood as
the other. The literal Sense of Scripture is the main, and indeed the only
Sense of the greatest part of it: for some particular Places only have a
mystical Signification. This is the most genuine, proper and original meaning;
and therefore I call it the first or primary one. But the mystical Sense is
derivative, improper, indirect, and not that which was first and chiefly
designed; and therefore I call it the secondary Sense. The former of these is
that plain meaning of Scripture which the bare Letter and Words themselves
denote to us: The latter is when some other thing is signified in the Words
besides what the Letter of them seems to import. The one is obvious, and lies
uppermost in the Text, and is the soonest perceived: but the other is more
remote, and lies deep, and is not so easily discovered, but is of great Use and
Moment, yea generally of greater than the other more familiar and obvious
meaning: wherefore it is our Concern to acquaint our selves with it. The Bible,
like that Book in Ezekiel, chapter 2. 10. is written within and without: it has an
inward, secret and mystical Signification, as well as one that is external,
open and literal: and we can never arrive to a true Understanding of this Holy
Book, unless we have some Insight into both.

I will instance first in the Writings of the Old Testament, and show that
there is a secondary or mystical Sense lodged in several Passages of them.
Indeed the holy Language it self, in which these were wrote, is big with
Mysteries. I have observed that there are more Words in this Tongue that
signify to hide or conceal, than in any other Language whatsoever: There are a
hundred synonymous Words at least for this one thing. Whether this Criticism
have any Weight in it or no, I shall not be much concerned; but this is
unquestionable, that many great Mysteries are wrapped up in this abstruse
Tongue in the holy Volume. The Jews, who were conversant in these Writings,
acknowledged there was not only a literal but a mystical Interpretation of
them, which latter they called A d^rash inquirere.
Midrash, because there was no attaining to it but by a diligent Inquisition.
The Hebrew Doctors say in a proverbial manner, there is not a single Letter in
the whole Law on which there do not depend great Mountains. Their meaning is,
that there are vast Mysteries and profound Sense in every Word almost in the
Sacred Writings: Which is the meaning of another Adage of theirs, viz. that
(...)
the Law has seventy Faces. It has many various Aspects, different
Significations and Senses: for there are mystical as well as literal
Interpretations of the holy Text. Thus the Entrance of the Bible, the Beginning
of the Book of Genesis, though it be historical, and sets down Matter of Fact,
as the wonderful Creation of the Heavens and Earth, and of Man, and the rest of
the Inhabitants of this lower World, yet it was thought by the wisest Jews,
that there was a farther Reach in it, and that both Moral and Divine Mysteries
were couched in the several Particulars of that Narrative which Moses gives
there of the Origin of the World; for which Reason this first Entrance into
the Pentateuch was forhad to be read by the Jews till they were thirty Years of
Age. It is agreed among the best Expositors, that in those Words in Genesis 3. 14,
15. The Lord said unto the Serpent, I will put Enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed: Besides the primary or literal Sense,
viz. that there shall be an irreconcilable Enmity between Mankind and the
Serpentine Brood, and that Man having an Antipathy against that Creature, shall
labor to destroy it, by ^ruising his Head, because there his Venom lies
whereby he does harm; and the Head is to be first attacked if we would destroy
this mischievous Creature, as Josephus Antiqu. l. 1. c. 2.
gives the Sense of this Place. Besides this (I say) there is another; for
Satan is meant by the Serpent, as well as the Creature of that Name, (for Satan
appeared in the Shape of a Serpent, or rather actuated a living Serpent;) and
Christ is meant by the Seed of the Woman, for he is emphatically and
exclusively called so, because he was not the Seed of Man, but was after an
extraordinary manner born of a Virgin. So that this Text is justly styled,
(...), the first Dawning of the Gospel, or the most early Promise concerning
the blessed Messiah, the Christ, the Lamb of God that was to take away the Sins
of the World.

So likewise we are certain from the Authority of the Apostle in Heb. 7. 1,
etc. that what is said in Genesis 14. 18. of Melohisedek, King of Salem, Priest of
the most High God, is not only literally spoken, but ought to be understood in
a higher and mystical Sense of Christ, who was the true Melchisedek, that is,
King of Righteousness, and King of ^eace. This mystical Interpretation of that
historical Passage is vouched by the inspired Penman, who wrote the Epi^tle to
the Hebrews. Again, Gal. 4. 2^.
it is written, viz. in Genesis 16, and 21. that Abraham had two Sons, the one by
a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman: This is the Letter or History. Now
observe the figurative Interpretation of it; which things, says the Apostle,
are an Allegory, for these are the two Covenants: that is, these two Mothers,
Hagar and Sarah, denote the two Covenants, the Law and the Gospel, the one from
the Mount Sinai, which gendreth to Bondage, which is Hagar; for this Hagar is
Mount Sinai, in Arabia: that is, the Law was given on Mount Sinai, and brings
Servitude and strict Observances with it; this is represented by Hagar; for the
Name of Hagar signifies the Mount where the Law was given, and answers to
Jerusalem that now is; that is, the present State of the Jews. The Hagarens, i.
e. the Arabians, and all that spring from Ismael, (as Historians tell us, no
less than the Apostle intimates here) are bound by their own Laws to be
circumcised, and observe therein the Mosaical Law, like the Jews; and so they,
like Hagar their Mother, are in a servile Condition still, are in Bondage with
their Children. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of
us all; that is, Sarah (which denotes the State of the Gospel, that new City
which Christ brought with him from Heaven, of which all Christians are free
Denizens) is a free Woman, and signifies that we Christians, Gentiles as well
as Jews (for she is the Mother of us all) are free from all Moses's Rites, and
are justified without them, Gal. 4. 22, 24, 25, 26. Thus it appears from the
Apostle, that besides the historical Sense, there is a higher and nobler in the
Old Te^tament, and particularly in that Place of Genesis, where the two
Mothers, Sarah and Hagar; and the two Sons, Isaac and Ishmael, were designed to
signify the different State of those in the Church of God: they respect the Law
and the Gospel, the Mosaical and Christian Dispen^ation. There was this,
besides the bare historical Sense. From the same Divine Writer, we learn that
the Pillar of the Cloud, the passing through the red Sea, the Mannah, the Drink
out of the Rock, and the Rock it self, which you read of in Chap. 13. v. 21.
chapter 14. 22. chapter 16. 15. chapter 17. 6.
Exodus, had a spiritual meaning; and therefore some of these especially are
expressly called spiritual: they did eat the same spiritual Meat, and drink the
same spiritual Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed
them, and that Rock was Christ. 1 Cor. 1 c. 1, 2, 3, 4. Hence it is evident
that this historical Part of the Book of Exodus is likewise symbolical, and
capable of a spiritual Construction, though still the Truth and Reality of the
History remain entire.

So what we read in Numb. 22. 9. ( viz. that Moses made a Serpent of Brass, and
put it upon a Pole, that if any Man bitten with a Serpent beheld it, he might
live, i. e. be cured of the venomous Biting) has a secondary meaning in it, as
our Savior himself interprets it, namely, that the Son of Man should be lifted
up, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life, John 3. 14, 15. The lifting up of the brazen Serpent upon a Pole in the
Wilderness, signified the lifting up of Christ upon the Cross, for the healing
and saving of all that look up to him with an Eye of Faith. Thus when we read
that God swore (in Numb. 14. 28.) that the murmuring and unbelieving lsraelites
should not enter into Canaan, which the Psalmist calls their Rest, ( Psalm. 95.
11.) the primary historical Sense is well known; but besides this there is a
secondary or spiritual one, which our Apostle has acquainted us with in Heb.
4. 1, etc. Whence you may gather, that in the History of the Israelites entering
into the Promised Land, and of the greatest Part of them that came out of Egypt
being shut out, there is a secondary meaning included, viz. that Believers
shall possess the Heavenly Canaan, they shall enter into their everlasting
Rest, that Heb. 4. 9.
Rest which remains to the People of God: but Unbelievers shall Ver. 1.
come short not only of the Promise which is left of entering into this Rest,
but the Rest it self. Thus you will find that Place in Numbers interpreted by
the in^allible Apostle. Again, this mystical or secondary Sense is observable
in those Places in the Mosaic Law which speak of the Rites and Services, and
Levitical Priesthood, which the Jews were under, as you may infer from Chap. 7,
8, 9.
three Chapters together in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the Apostle
applies those things in a higher Sense ( viz. to Christ himself, and his
offering himself upon the Cross) than ever was intended by the Letter.

But this double Sense of Scripture is no where more remarkable than in the
Book of Psalms. The 22d Psalm, though primarily it be meant of David when he
was in great Distress, and forsaken of God, yet secondarily, i. e. mystically
it is to be understood of our Blessed Savio^r when he was in his Passion, and
hung upon the Cross; and accordingly you will find the first Words of it
applied by himself, Matt^. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
And other Passages of this Psalm, the 8th, 16th, 18th Verses are taken notice
of by the Evangelist, as fulfilled at that time, Matthew. 27. 35, 43. Now it is
certain they could not be fulfilled unless they had been meant, in this
mysterious Sense, of Christ. The latter Part of the 16t^. Psalm is spoken in
David's Person, and is, without do^bt, in the first and immediate Sense of it
to be understood of him, and of his Hopes of rising after Death to an endless
Life. But it is as clear from Acts* 2. 25, etc. that it was spoken of Christ
the Son of David, and who was typified by that holy King and Prophet; for St.
Peter says there in his Sermon to the Jews, David speaks concerning him, I
foresa^ the Lord always before my Face, for he is on my right Hand, that I
should not be moved. Therefore did my Heart rejoice, and my Tongue was glad:
Moreover also my Flesh shall rest in Hope. Because thou will not leave my Soul
in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption. Thou will
show me the Path of Life, etc. Which are the four last Verses of that Psalm
before-named; and you may see in the following Words of this Chapter, what the
mystical Interpretation of them is, according to that Apostle who had the
Spirit to direct him to the utmost meaning of those Words. Part of the 68th
Psalm, though it be David's Thanksgiving for the present Mercies he received,
yet undoubtedly it is a Prophetic Praising of God for the glorious Ascension
of Christ into Heaven, as it is expounded by that infallible Interpreter,
Ephesians. 4. 8. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
captive, and gave Gifts unto Men: which refers to the abovesaid Psalm, but is
applied to Christ's Ascension by the Apostle here. The 45th Psalm is originally
a Song of Loves, an Epithalamium on the Nuptials of King Solomon and the King
of Egypt's Daughter, but in a remote and mystical Sense it is meant of the
Majesty and Glory of Christ's Kingdom, and the admirable Benefits which accrue
to the Church in the Times of the Gospel. And many other Psalms might be
produced, wherein the double Sense beforementioned is clearly to be discerned.

To proceed; Though the whole Book of Canticles be in its literal Capacity no
other than Solomon's Wedding-song, yet it is to be looked upon in the more
sublime Acception of it as a Dialogue between Christ and his Church, setting
forth all those divine Amors which are mutually experienced by them. And that
this Part of Holy Scripture, called the Song of Solomon, is of a higher Strain
than the bare Letter imports, and that it contains great Mysteries and
Abstrusities in it, may be gathered from that extraordinary Reverence which the
Jews paid to this Book: For Praefat. in Cantic.
Origin tells us, that this (as well as the Beginning of Genesis) was not
permitted to be read by them till they had attained to some Maturity of Years.

I come next to the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, who has many things concerning
Christ and his spiritual Kingdom or Church; but it is to be acknowledged that
some of them in the first and literal Sense, may and ought to be interpreted
otherwise. Yea, the learned Grotius and Hammond are of the Opinion, that that
famous Prophecy in Isa. 7. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son,
and shall call ^is Name Immanuel, has a double Sense. The Words literally and
primarily respect a strange and wonderful Birth in those very Days. Secondarily
and mystically they are spoken of the Messiah, who was to be born miraculously
of a Virgin. Whether this Opinion be true or no, we are certain that there is a
mystical Meaning to be added to the literal; or rather (as I said before) it
might be more expressive to say, a secondary Meaning is added to the primary
one, in sundry Passages which we meet with, not only in this Prophet, but in
Ieremia^ and Ezekiel. Concerning the former of these the Jewish Historian has
these Words; Antiqu. l. 10. c. 6.
Jeremiah (says he) in his Book, foretold the Captivity which the Israelites
were to undergo in Babylon, which was just then approaching; and also the
Slaughter and Destruction which we of this Age have seen. There was a twofold
Sense, according to this learned Writer, in some of this Prophet's Predictions:
Yea, there was a double literal or historical Sense, which was the thing that I
asserted before. Whence you see I had reason to make the Distinction of a first
and a second Meaning of Scripture, rather than of a literal and a mystical,
though I bring the mystical Meaning (when there is such an one) under the
second. As to the latter of these Prophets, when we find him relating strange
things acted in Visions and Dreams, which are things only imaginary, and
represented to the Fancy, we must not think them true in a strict literal
Sense, for they are only or most commonly done in Appearance, and many times
will not admit of a real Performance as they are related and described: But we
are to look upon them as Enigmatical Representations, and to fix only a
mystical Sense upon them, that is, to understand them as signi^icative of some
greater and higher thing than they represent in themselves. Which may be one
Reason why, among the Jews, those that had not arrived to some considerable Age
Hieronym. Prol. in Ezekiel.
were not allowed to read the Beginning and End of the Prophecy of Ezekiel, in
which Parts chiefly those more mystical Visions are inserted.

I might pass to the other Prophets, and mention some Places in which we must
needs acknowledge a secondary Meaning, as in that of Daniel, chap. 9. 27. For
the overspreading of Abominations (or, with the Wing, or Isa. 8. 8.
Army of Abominations) he shall make it desolate: which was meant without doubt
of Antiochus's desolating Armies, which were so abominable to the Jews, and
who, as we read, 1* Macc. 1. 54.
set up the Abomination of Desolation upon the Altar. But yet our Savior
himself, the best Expositor of the Place, lets us know that this was meant also
in a prophetical and secondary way of the Roman Armies that sat down before
Jerusalem, and after a long Siege made their way into the City and Temple, and
so might be said to stand in the holy Place: Matthew. 24. 15.
When ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation, says he, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, stand in the holy Place, then, etc. It is manifest therefore that
Daniel spoke of both these destroying Armies. His Words are to be taken in a
twofold Sense, a primary and secondary one: In the former they speak of what
happened to the Jews when Antiochus's Army invaded them: In the latter they
speak of what befell them when Titus Vespasian came against them, and destroyed
their City and Nation. This is the double Sense, and therefore you may observe
what our Savior inserts, Whosoever reads, let him understand. As much as to say,
when you read that Passage in the Prophet Daniel, you are to understand
something more than ordinary in it, you must take notice of a hidden Sense in
those Words: they speak not only of what was to come to pass in Antiochus's,
but in Vespasian's Reign, which was about 250 Years after. The abominable
desolating Armies of both are here meant. You see then here is a double literal
Sense; and that was the Reason why I chose rather the Division of the
Scripture-Sense into primary and secondary, and of this latter into historical
and mystical, than that received one of literal and mystical, because both the
Sense sometimes may be literal. This ought to be carefully observed by all
those who are desirous to attain to a right Understanding of the Holy
Scriptures. And it is the want of attending to this that has often hindered
Men's due Apprehensions of several Texts. We see here in the Instance before us,
that the Letter of this Text in Daniel may be applied both to the Syrian and
the Roman Armies. I might produce those Words in the Prophecy of Hosea, Out of
Egypt have I called my Son, chapter 11. 1. Which are to be understood not only of
the Patriarchs of old (God's Children or Sons) being brought by God out of
Egypt, but of Christ the Son of God, called out thence after the Death of
Herod, Matthew. 2. 15. This Place of Hosea must be understood of both.

Hither may be referred some other Places of the Old Testament made use of in
the New, where it is said, This was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet; then was fulfilled that which was spoken Matthew. 13. 35.
John 15. 25, etc.
, and the like. The Places speak not primarily of those things which they are
alleged for, but secondarily they do, and so are truly said to be fulfilled. I
know Episcopius, and some others before him, tell us, that these Scriptures are
said to be fulfilled when there happens something like them, when there is a
Representation or Similitude of the things; when there may be a fair
Accommodating of one Event to another, then this Phrase is used. But a
judicious Writer says well; Dr. Iac^son, Vol. 2. Book 7. Sect. 2.
No Prophecy can be truly said to be fulfilled only by way of Accommodation or
Allusion: for there is no allusive Sense of Scripture distinct from the literal
and mystical ones. This then is a new way of fulfilling Predictions of the Old
Testament, and was never heard of among the ancient Expositors of Scripture.
They never dreamt of a way of Accommodation, but understood by those Words a
strict Completion of those Texts in the Old Testament; for it is said, they
were fulfilled. But how? Namely, there being a double Sense in those Texts, the
Evangelists take notice, and leave upon Record that they were accomplished and
fulfilled in the secondary or mystical Sense. And this I take to be the true
Import of the Apostle's Words, 2. Pet. 1. 20. No Prophecy of the Scripture is
of any private Interpretation, though I know there is another Exposition
generally given of them by those that comment on these Words: But freely and
impartially scan them, and you will find this to be the genuine Sense of them;
Scripture-Prophecies are not fulfilled according to the literal or proper
Signification of them only; they frequently have a mystical Sense: with the
literal is joined a typical one, or one literal one is added to another. This
is the secondary, and, as 'twere, the improper Sense; but the other is the
first and more proper one; for that is the word here used, (...) of proper
Interpretation. And if you consult the Greek of the Text, you will see there is
Reason to translate it thus, (...).
Every Prophecy of Scripture is not of proper Interpretation; i. e. there are
some Predictions that contain a secondary as well as a primary meaning in them:
they are fulfilled according to both these, and therefore cannot be said to be
(...), of proper Interpretation. This Exposition of the Place is confirmed by
the Reason that follows, for the Prophecy came not of old time by the Will of
Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; i. e.
these Predictions were of an extraordinary Nature, there was a deeper and
farther Meaning in them than is in the Writings of Men; they are not bounded by
a single Sense, and therefore neither are they to be interpreted so. This might
be made good from several Instances besides those a^ore alleged. Many other
Places in the Old Testament might be mentioned to prove that the same Texts are
to be taken in a different manner; that there is sometimes a double meaning in
them; which is plain from the Quotations in the New Testament: for the
Evangelists and Apostles quoting of them is a clear Proof that there is a
primary and secondary Sense of those Texts, and that this latter is sometimes
historical, and sometimes spiritual; for we see these inspired Writers of the
New Testament take no notice of the first literal Sense of those Places, but
understand them wholly in the secondary way.

If we look into the Books themselves of the New Testament, we shall discover
there likewise this double Meaning in several Places: Witness the many Parables
which are used by our Savior, and which are recorded by the Evangelists. It is
true the Old Testament is not destitute of this ^ort of Enigmatical
Instructions; but because those in the New are most numerous, and because our
blessed Master himself has thought fit to express himself in this parabolical
way, therefore I choose to speak of it here. Parables, as the Greek Word
signifies, are properly (...), confer, comparare. (...) Clce^o and other
R^etoricians a Parable is called Collatio, (...) differen^ium inter se
Colloca^io.
a comparing of things together; setting one against another; a making use of
one Thing or Narrative to set forth and represent to us another of a higher
Nature. Therefore in a Parable the Ancients used to observe two Parts, (...)
and (...); the former being the Groundwork and Plot, as it were; and it might
be either true or feigned: and the latter was the Application; or, if you will,
the Moral of the other. The (...).
Hebrew Word used for a Parable will give us further Light into it. It
signifies first any Sentence or Saying that is by way of Similitude or
Comparison, and so answers to the Greek Word, and is rightly translated (...)
by the Septuagint: for the Verb Mashal, from whence the Noun comes, signifies
to compare, and lay things together, and li^en one to another. Wherefore (...),
which is synonymous with Mashal, signifies any Compari^on or Similitude, as in
Matt^. 24. 32. Now learn a Parable of the Figtree: When his Branch is yet
tender, and p^tteth forth Leaves, ye know that Summer is nigh. So likewise ye,
etc. Here C^^ist explains the Etymology and Import of a Parable; in its first
and more simple Signification it is only a Simile, as you see here in these
Words; and so it is taken in several other Places of the New Testament. But
this is not all; it signifies such a comparative Saying, Speech or Narration,
as is obscure and intri^ate, and contains some greater and higher Meaning than
the bare Words offer to us. Thus what is darkly and ^iguratively expressed is
called a Parable, in Matthew. 15. 15. And so the Rabbis call any Figure or
Allegory (...).
the way of a Parable. But most properly and strictly a Parable is a feigned
declaring of a thing, as if it were done, when indeed it is not really done,
but something else is signified by what is so declared. Now put these things
together, and a Parable may be defined thus: it is such an artificial Speech
wherein one thing is compared and likened with another, but with some Ob^curity
and Intricateness; and we are to understand what is said, not according to the
usual So^nd and literal Meaning of the Words, but with reference to some other
thing thereby mystically signi^ied, as ^s evident in the Parables of our
Saviou^ If you ask why he so often delivered things, and consequently why Part
of the Scr^pture is written in this mystical way: I answer;

1. It had been the Custom and Use of the Ancients to express themselves after
this manner; and our Savior in this, as in some other things, was pleased to
follow their Example. That the allegorical and mystical way of Teaching was
ancient, and used not only by the Poets, but Philosophers of old, is
sufficiently known. Orpheus represented his Mysteries in a kind of Fables.
Pythagoras by Numbers and Symbols. Plato by Emblems and All^gories: And Esop
(the famous moral Fab^list) is the antientest Book in Prose that we have
extant. H^raclitus gained the Name (...), because of the Obscurity of his
Writings, by reason of his dark and enigmatical Representations of things. Only
Epicurus took the word (...) for his Motto, and pretended to great Plainness
and Perspic^ity. But generally all the antientest Greek Sages were wont to ^et
off their Opinions with a Mixture of Fable or Allegory. This Symbolick Way of
Learning was in use among the Gymnosophists and Druids, as In Pro^^m.
Laertius witnesses. De ^na^. Deor. cap. slt.
Phornutus faith the same of all the Ancients. Both Greeks and Barbarians used
it, says Strom. 5.
Clemens of Alexandria. This was partly the Fashion of the old Egyptians: they
used to wrap up the Mysteries of their Religion, and of their Civil Affairs
likewise in Hieroglyphick Figures: as Pier. Hieroglyph. Egypt.
God, who sees and sustains all things, was represented by an Eye and a Staff:
the Periodical Revolution of the Year by a Serpent, with his Tail in his Mouth:
a King by a Be, which is noted for its Honey and its Sting, to tell us that
Reward and Punishment are both necessary in Civil Government. When they would
represent Erudition or Learning, they pictured the Heavens pouring down Dew,
which perhaps was borrowed from Moses; Deuteronomy. 32. 2. My Doctrine shall drop as
the Rain, my Speech shall distill as the Dew: For it is not improbable that the
Egyptians had many of their mystical Symbols and Expressions from the Jews, as
I have showed in another Place. The Parabolical Way is not unlike to this, it
conveying the Notions of things to us by fit Representations, by apt Symbols.
And our Savior thought good to comport with this manner of Speech, which he
knew had been in use with the greatest Masters of Learning; and he vouchsafed
to imitate them, because he could so innocently do it; because (as you shall
hear by and by) this was a very convenient and profitable way of imparting
Truth to them.

2. This Instructing by Parables and Allegories was used not only by the
ancient Philosophers and Sages among the Gentiles, but (as a Clem* Alexand.
Strom. l. 5.
learned Father has amply showed) by the holy Prophets and Men of God, and
other eminent Persons among the Jews of old. There are interspersed in the
Writings of the Old Testament several Parables and Speeches which are of a
Parabolical Nature, as Iotham's Parable of the Trees that went forth on a time
to anoixt a King over them, Judge. 9. 8. This indeed is properly an Apologue,
which in strictness of Speaking differs from a Parable in this, that the
Similitude is taken from a thing that is not only false but impossible; for
such is this (...), this speaking of Trees, which is here represented. And such
is that other Apologue, viz. of the Thistle's sending to the Cedar, 2 Chronicles.
25. 18. and an Overture of a Marriage between them, which is mere Fiction, and
a bold attributing of humane Action to irrational and senseless things. There is
not a third in all the Bible of this sort. But among the Parables used of old
by God's People, we may reckon that Aenigme or Parabolical Riddle of Sampson,
which he put forth at his Marriage Feast, Out of the Eater came forth Meat, and
out of the Strong came forth Sweetness, Judge. 14. 14. Nathan's Parable of the
Ewe-Lamb, 2 Samuel 12. is a very notable one, and is famous for the admirable
Effect it had. In Isaiah's Prophecy we read the Parable of a Vineyard, chapter 5.
1, etc. and several Visions and Types in a Parabolical Manner. In Jeremiah we
have a great many Typical Representations and Parables, as of the Linen Girdle,
and of the Bottles filled with Wine, chapter 13. of abstaining from Marriage, chapter
16. of a Potter, chapter 18. of a Potter's Vessel, chapter 19. of good and bad Figs,
chapter 24. of a Cup of Wine, chapter 25. of Bonds and Yokes, chapter 27. In Ezekiel there
is the like way of expressing great and important Truths, viz. in a Symbolical
way: There you have the Types or Parables of a Siege, chapter 4. of a Barber's
Razor, chapter 5. of a Chain, chapter 7. of Ezekiel's removing, and of the Vine-tree,
chapter 15. of two Eagles and a Vine, chapter 17. of Lions Whelps taken in a Pit, chapter
19. of a boiling Pot, chapter 24. Thus you see it was the ancient Custom of the
Prophets and holy Men to deliver their Instructions in way of Parables. Yea,
this was the Guise and Genius of the Country: the Eastern People used to wrap
up their Observations on Nature and the Manners of Men in this mystical way.
Our Savior vouchsafed to comply with the Practice of his Countrymen, but
especially he thought fit to conform himself to the manner of Speech and
Delivery which the Prophets used, and with which the Jews were acquainted,
Accordingly he delivered himself very often in a figurative and mystical Style,
and uttered many excellent divine Truths in the dark way of Parables.

3. He did this sometimes to hide his heavenly Matter from undeserving Persons,
that Pearls might not be cast before Swine, nor Evangelical Truths be exposed
to the wilful Despisers of the Gospel. This Account our Savior himself gives
in Matthew. 13. 10. When the Disciptes had said unto him, Why speakes^ thou unto
them (i. e. to the Multitude) in Parables? He answered and said, Because it is
given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but unto them it
is not given. And v. 13. Therefore speak I to them in Parables, because they
seeing, see not; and bearing, they hear not, neither do they understand. Some
Parables which our Savior propounded were so dark and obscure, that none but
the refined Minds of his Disciples could comprehend them. Others, who had
wilfully blinded their Understandings, were not able to see into the inward
meaning of them: Yea, our blessed Lord designed to hide his Mysteries from
those profane Persons, and therefore disguised them in these dark Shadows.

4. This artificial and allegorical Representation of things was to stir up our
Diligence, and to make the Truths, when found out, more acceptable. If all
Divine Veritles were propounded in an easy manner, so that upon the first
Proposal they were obvious to us, this would nourish our Sloth and Idleness:
but when we see that our Blessed Instructor delivers some things which cannot be
understood without Difficulty and Pains; this may invite us to be diligent in
searching into the Mind of God, and to use all our Endeavors to attain to a
Knowledge of it.

5. This may be assigned as another Reason why Christ was pleased to Discourse
in Parables, viz. that what he said might be the better fixed on their
Memories; for so it is, that what comes in the way of Story or Narrative, does
dwell longer with Men than another sort of Discourse. As they listen to it with
greater Attention, ^o generally it makes a greater Impression upon them, and
consequently is remembered and retained the longer by them: which is one
singular Advantage of delivering things in this Parabolical manner.

6. Pa^ables are not only useful to fasten Divine Truths on the Memory, but to
move the Affections, and to beget in us a Delight in those excellent Truths.
For it is very entertaining and pleasant to hear the most Heavenly Matters
expressed and set forth by those which are earthly and worldly; because hereby
at once both our Minds and our corporeal Senses are gratisied. We are let into
Celestial and Spiritual Mysteries by those Objects which are sensual and
bodily: we attain to an Insight of those things which are supernatural and
extraordinary, by a Representation of those which are merely natural and
common. This certainly must be very delightful, and have a mighty Influence on
the affectionate Part of Man: this must needs stir up his Desires and Love, his
Joy and Satisfaction. For this Reason, among others, it is probable Christ made
use of this pathetick and winning way of Discourse: He borrowed most of his
Parables from very vulgar things, such as were well known to his Hearers, and
which they had a very sensible notice and feeling of; that by that Means he
might work the more powerfully on them; and by discoursing of worldly things
bring them to an affectionate liking of the things of God, and the great
Concerns of another Life: that by a wise and artificial representing the
Objects which were daily before their Eyes, they might be able to discern and
approve of the invisible Excellencies of a future State. Our Savior was a very
popular Preacher; he purposely made choice of that way of Discourse to the
People, which he knew would be most taking and moving with them: And such was
this his Preaching in Parables, which for the most Part consisted of familiar
Comparisons and Similitudes, and set forth divine and spiritual things by those
which were bodily and sensible, yea ordinary and vulgar, and which they daily
conversed with. Such was his Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew 25. 1, etc.
which is a plain Allusion to those things which were common at the Jewish
Marriages in those Days: for they at that time had borrowed many of the nuptial
Rites from the Romans; as first of all the Use of Torches and Lamps, because
they celebrated their Weddings at Night, at which time they prepared a solemn
Supper, and brought home the Spouse, and carried her to that Entertainment at
the Bridegroom's House. Again, the Custom of going forth to meet the Bridegroom
(which is the most considerable Part of this Parable) was well known at that
time: The Bride-maids used to go out with burning Lamps or Torches in their
Hands to meet the Bridegroom, and to conduct him to the House where the
Marriage was, and from whence they came with their Lights. To this that of the
Comedian refers: Plaut. in Casina.
Primum omnium lucebis novae nuptae facem. And that of Claudian, on the nuptial
Solemnities of Honorius and Martia; De Nupt. Honor.
-- Alii, funalibus ordine ductis,
Plurima venturae suspendunt lumina nocti.


And who knows not that those Words of another Poet, Virgil. Eclog. 8.
-- Novas incide faces, tibi ducitur uxor have reference to the Custom of
bringing home the Spouse late at Night with Torches and Flambeaus? Nay, when a
much antienter Poet (and he an inspired one) compares the Sun's glorious rising
to Psalm. 19. 5.
a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, i. e. the ushering the Bridegroom out
of his Chamber with Lights and Torches, (which is a very elegant Simile, and
apposite to his Purpose) we may thence inform our selves, that this Practice
was of very ancient Date. Moreover, the tarrying of the Bridegroom (which this
Parable mentions) was known and common in those Days: this happened generally
by reason of the many Solemnities that were observed, and the leading about of
the Bride, which took up much time; the young Maids or Virgins gins staying at
the Marriage-house, expecting the Bridegroom and Bride; so that ^ometimes it
happened when they sat up late, that they all slumbe^'d and slept, However some
of them used to keep their Lamps trimmed, whilst others suffered them to go
out. Then when the Bridegroom and his Bride were solemnly brought home at
Midnight, (as was usual) they that were ready with their Lamps, went in with
them to the Marriage, i. e. the Nuptial ^east; but the Door was shut upon the
rest: for it was the Custom, that when the Bridegroom and Bride returned, they
presently went into their Chamber, and shut the Door with their Companion^; and
if any of the Bridemaids were never so urgent, and cried, Open to ^s, the
Bridegroom gave Order to let none in, he knew them not, for they had forfeited
their Right to enter into the Bridal Chamber by their Negligence and
Drow^iness, by their not watching the exact Time of the new-married Couples
Return home on the Wedding-night. Thus this Parablo was suited to the Cu^toms of
the Jews at that time: Nay, the very Number of the Virgins (mentioned by the
Evangelist) that brought and lighted home the Bridegroom, has reference to the
particular Usage at those Weddings: for from that Passage in Statius, in his
Epithalamium on Stella and Violantill^; -- Procul ecce canoro
Demigrant Helicone Deae, quati^ntque novena
Lampade solennem thalamis coeuntibus ignem,


We may gather that the Number of those Bridal Virgins was wont to be te^ or
eleven: And sometims five only (to which Number the Virgins are unhappily
reduced in this Parable) attended the Nuptial Solemnities. Accordingly Quast.
Romans
Plutarch lahours to give Reasons (such as they are) why no more were made use
of for this Purpose. The whole Parable is made up of the Rites used by the
Eastern as well as the Roman People at their Marriages: and all the particulars
of it were such things as were commonly known to them, because every Day
practiced by some of them. In like manner the Parables of the Candle, Luke 8.
16. of the So^er and the Seed; of the Tares; of the Mustardseed; of the Loves;
of Leaven; of the Net cast into the Sea; (all in one Chapter, Matthew. 13.) of
the Labou^ers in the Vineyard, chapter 20. I. of the Householder that planted a
Vineyard, and let it out to Husbandmen, chapter 21. 33. are Representations of
usual and common Occurrences, and such as the Generality of our Savior's
Hearers were daily conversant with; and for that very Reason were made use of
by him, as being most moving and affecting. Coll^q. Men's.
Luther had an odd saying, (as he had many an one) that Esop's Fables: is the
best Book next to the Bible. His meaning, I suppose, was, that that fort of
instructing, viz. by way of Apologues, by annexing an useful Moral to a Feigned
Story, was a very excellent and profitable manner of teaching, it being so
familiar and delightful; and upon that account so conducible to enforce and
illustrate any Moral or Religious Truth. This and much more is the Excellency
of the Parables which our Blessed Master clothed his Divine Doctrine in: he
chose this way of delivering things to them, on purpose to work the more
powerfully on their Affections. A fit Parable moves the Mind with a wonderful
Force and Efficacy, it representing Matters to us in their livelie^t Colors
and most natural Shapes, and applying them to the particular Circumstances we
are in* so that it seems to say in the final Close of it, as that Parabolical
Prophet to David, T^ou art the Man. It comes up close to us, and with great
Plainness and Freedom tells us our Case, and affects us proportionably. To have
Dominion or Authority, and to speak in a Parabolical way, are expressed by the
Mashal.
same word in the Hebrew. This is most certain, that our Savior reduced this
Criticism into Practice, and by this moving way of Preaching let the World see,
that Mark I. 22.
he taught as one that had Authority. Thus I have briefly showed you the Nature
of Parables, and given some Account of our Savior's so frequently using them.
I shall only add that useful Rule of St. Chrysostom, which is to be observed by
us if we would rightly under^tand the Nature of the Style of Scripture in this
mystical way of expressing it self: (...), etc.
We must not, says he, over-curiously fifth every Word and Passage that we meet
with in Parables, but our main Business must be to understand the Scope and
Design at which they aim, and for which this sort of Discourse was composed;
and having gathered this out, we ought to enquire no further, it is in vain to
busy our selves any longer. And that of Maldonate is a very good Rule; For the
right interpreting of Parables we m^st know this, In Matthew. 11. 16.
that it is in vain to observe any Accuracy in comparing Persons with Persons,
and to be curious in suting particular things to things: but we are to look at
the grand Matter, and as it lies before us in gross. So he. For this is to be
remembered, that there are several Circumstances inserted into Parables, merely
to adorn and set off the Matter, and to make the Representation and Similitude
more graceful. Therefore we must not insist on every Particular, and think that
an Argument may be drawn from all the Circumstances which we meet with in such
Di^courses. No; the main thing, which is the Design, is to be attended to in a
Parable. If we observe this Rule, we shall gain a sufficient Knowledge of our
Savior's Meaning in his Parables: but otherwise we shall busy our Heads to
little Purpose, and mistake the true Design and Intention of our Lord in this
kind of Instructions.

There are other Pa^sages in the New Testament, wherein a secondary or mystical
Sense is to be observed, as the 24th Chapter of St. Matthew; one part of which,
according to most Expositors, speaks of the Forerunners of Ierusalem's
Destruction; and the other Part of the Signs of Christ's Coming to Judgment.
But if you look narrowly into the whole Chapter, you will observe that these
Forerunners and Signs of both Sorts are intermixed, and so promiscuously
placed, that it is difficult to tell precisely which precede the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and which the Day of Judgment. Which gave me this Hint first of all,
that this whole Chapter, or the greatest part of it is to be understood (as
those other Places of Scripture beforementioned) in a double Sense, viz. a
primary and a secondary. In the former you must understand our Savior speaking
of those Prodigies and Calamities which should befall the Jews before the final
Overthrow of their City and Temple. In the latter you must conceive him
foretelling the dreadful Signs and Concomitants of the last Day, wherein not
only Jews, but all the World are concerned. Here is a twofold Meaning of
Chri^t's Words, here is a double litera^ or historical Sense: and the latter of
them being not so obvious and evident as the other, (and that is the Reason why
it has not been found out) may be called the mystical Sense, for it is so
indeed in comparison of the other. Whereas then Expositors are divided in
interpreting this Chapter, some referring some Passages in it to the
Devastation of Jerusalem, and others interpreting other Parts wholly of the Day
of Judgment, we may compromise the Matter, and reconcile the different
Interpreters, by asserting, that both the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the
Calamities of the Last Day, are understood by both Parts of the Chapter,
excepting only one or two particular Expressions, which may seem to refer
altogether to one of these. In short, the Forerunners and Harbingers of the
Ruin of the Jews, and of the last Coming of our Savior are the same. So that
while he speaks of one, he also foretells the other. This shows that there is a
double meaning, a simple and a compound one, in the very same Words of this
Chapter.

When the Apostle in Ephesians. 5. had spoken of the married State, and of the Duties
of Husband and Wife, and particularly of the Love of the one, and the
Submission of the other, he tells us, in the Close, that this Part of his
Epistle has a higher Meaning than every ordinary Reader of it would find out:
for besides the literal Import of the Words, there ^s a more sublime and
spiritual one. This is a great Mystery, says he, and I speak concerning Christ
and the Church, v. 32. Those Words in Genesis 2. 24. mentioned immediately before,
have a mystical as well as a literal Meaning: they are to be understood of the
sacred Union of Christ and his Church, as well as of the conjugal Union of Man
and Wife. For Marriage is an Emblem of the sacred and inviolable Tie between
Christ and Bel^evers; and accordingly whilst the Apostle discoursed in that
Part of the Chapter concerning the Love and Submission of Husband and Wife, he
lets us know, that it is to be understood in a secondary Sense of Christ's Love
to his Church, and of the Church's Subjection unto Christ. And diverse other
Passages in St. Paul's Epistles have, besides their literal, a spiritual,
inward and mysterious Acception. Even as to this the Apostle's Words are true,
viz. that he speaks the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, I Cor. 2. 7.

Thus I have abundantly proved the double Sense, which is to be found in many
Places of the Sacred Writings; and it were easy to evin^e it from many more
Instances, if it were requisite. I will only here in the Close produce the
Words of a very profound and judicious Man, a worthy Light of our Church, that
I may not be thought to be ^ingular in what I have asserted under this Head.
Dr. Iackson, Vol. 2. Book 7. Sect. I.
Many Passages, says he, as well in the Prophets as other Sacred Oracles,
admit of Amphibologies and ambiguous Senses: and the same Prophecies are
oftentimes ful^illed according to both Senses. And he instances in several.
Again, a little after he has these admirable Words: Sect. 2.
Seeing our sacred Oracles were given many hundreds of Years before the Events
foretold by them, and since exhibited, had any seminal Cause or observable
Original out of which they were to grow; the greater the Variety of their
Senses or Constructions is, the more admirable Proof does their Accomplishment
exhibit of that infinite Wisdom which did dictate them unto the Prophets. And
he instances in such Prophecies as were fulfilled in a double Sense, and at two
different times, as Isa. 9. 23. Ier. I. 6, 8. and others which had a first and
second Accomplishment. This is the very thing which I have been asserting, and
which I hope I have made sufficiently evident. The historical Books of the Old
Testament are not bare Narratives and naked Stories of what is past, but in the
largest and most comprehensive Construction of them they refer even to the
Affairs of future Times. So that what Thucydides called his History, (...).
a Possession, or Treasure that was to last for ever, a Monument to instruct
all the Ages to come, we may most truly and justly apply to the historical Part
of the Old Testament. It is of never-failing Use to the World: Whatever is
recorded here concerning the Transactions of Divine Providence toward the Jews
and other People, is typical and representative of what God now does, and will
always do to the End of the World. In the several Particulars of the sacred
Story we may read the Condition and Lot of the Church in all succeeding Ages;
for what is to come is but a Transcript of what we find here. And as for the
Doctrinal Part, it is mysterious and allegorical in many Places: there is a
hidden and invisible Treasure lies under the visible and outward Letter. Many
of the Precepts, Prohibitions, Threatenings and Promises reach a great deal
farther than the Words simply and absolutely denote: and spiritual and heavenly
Matters are couched in those Texts which primarily speak of earthly and
temporal ones. Lastly, when you read a prophetic Passage in the Bible, the
bare thing there literally expressed is not all that is intended, but there is
oftentimes much more implied. As Ezekiel tells us of a Wheel within a Wheel; so
it is as true there is a Prophecy within a Prophecy in the Holy Scriptures. One
and the same Prediction there is to be fulfilled more than once. In short, the
Bible is not like other Books: In the History, Doctrines and Prophecies, both
of the Old and New Testament, there are secret and hidden Meanings besides
those which are plain and obvious, and which lie uppermost in the bare Letter.
This is the peculiar and transcendent Excellency of the inspired Writings: This
one thing alone may invite us to study this sacred Volume, and with incessant
Labor penetrate into the inmost Sense of it, and acquaint our selves not only
with the literal Meaning which first comes to our View, but with that which is
more remote and mysterious.

Here then we must carefully avoid these two Extremes, viz. of laying the
Letter of Scripture aside, and of resting altogether in the Letter. First, some
despise the Letter of Scripture, and mind nothing in it but the Mystery. Of
this sort were the Cabalistick Jews, who depraved the most substantial Parts of
the Old Testament, by interpreting them in a mystical Sense only. Some of the
Christian Fathers were too guilty of this, especially Origin, the Prince of the
Allegorists. St. Hilary in his Commentaries on St. Matthew, and on the Psalms,
explains several Places in this mystical way, whereby he fastens on them a
Sense very different from that which they naturally have. Indeed his Comments
are generally taken from Origin. St. Ambrose, in his Exposition of the
Scripture, is generally allegorical. Optatus, Bishop of Milevi, is too often
faulty, as to this, in his Books against the Donatists. But it is to be
observed, that none of these Fathers do utterly exclude the literal and
historical Meaning. And as there have been Cabalists and Allegorists of Old, so
some high-flown Men of late have run all the Bible into moral and mystical
Interpretations; and in the mean time have either disbelieved or slighted the
historical and literal Sense. I cannot wholly condemn those who have
endeavored to present us with Mysteries in all the several Steps of the
Creation, in the whole six Days Works, and in every particular Instance of the
Mosaic Philosophy. For this, without doubt, is not wholly external, material
and sensible, and to be interpreted only according to the most obvious
Signification of the Words: it is most true even here, that Moses has a Vail
over his Face; and there are certain Mysteries and Allegories contained under
the very History. But though we are not to be mere Sons of the Letter, yet we
have no Reason to think that the Mosaic Philosophy or Hi^^ory are made up of
Allusions and Metaphors, and are altogether mysterious. This were to soar aloft
with our modern Chemists, to dote after the rate of a Rosy-crucian, whose
Brains are so enchanted, that they turn all into Specter, Dreams and
Phantasims.

But especially that Part of the Beginning of the Book of Genesis which gives
an Account of the Fall of our first Parents, must not be turned into mere
Mystery and Allegory: for it is sufficiently evident that Moses speaks of
Matter of Fact. Wherefore a Dr. ^u^net. Archaeolog. P^^^osoph. 1. 2. c. 7, 8, 9.
late Writer cannot be enough r^^uked for his Attempt of turning all the
Mosaic History concerning Adam and Eve, the Serpent, Paradise, eating the
forbidden Fruit, and all the Passages relating to them, into Parable, yea into
Ridicule; for he makes himself hugely merry with the several Particulars
recorded by Moses. Yea, his Fancy was so low and grovelling, that he picks up
any vulgar Stuff to present the Reader with. Upon those Words, They sewed
Fig Leaves, and made themselves Aprons, he triflingly cries out, Behold the
first Rise of the Tailors Trade! And then that trite and popular Cavil is
fetched in to embelish his Book, Where had Adam and Eve Needle and Thread? And
again, this he says exceedingly troubles and puzzles his Brain, How the
Woman's Body could be made of one single Rib. Such is the profound Wit and
Philosophy of this Allegorical Gentleman! who, because the Scripture sometimes
speaks (as I shall have occasion to show afterward) after the manner of Men,
and in compliance with their common (though mistaken) Apprehensions, he here
stretches this too far, and extravagantly tells us, That all the Account given
by Moses, not only of the Origin and Creation of the World, but of Adam, and
the first Transgression, and the Serpent, and the cursing of the Earth, and
other Matters relating to the Fall, is not true in it self, but only spoken
popularly, to comply with the dull Israelites, lately ^lavish Brickmakers, and
^^elling strong of the Garlic and Onions of Egypt. To humor these ignorant
Blockheads that were newly broke loose from the Egyptian Taskmasters, and had
no Sense nor Reason in their thick Sculls, Moses talks after this rate; but not
a Syllable of Truth is in all that he says. This is very strange Language from
a Reverend Divine, who thereby destroys the whole System of Theology, and of
Christianity it self: for if there were none of those things before mentioned;
if in a literal and historical Sense there was no such thing as that first
Diso^edience of Adam; if there be nothing true concerning the Temptation and
the Apostasy of our first Parents, and the Evils and Misery that ensued upon
it, then it will follow thence that Mankind had no need of a Savior and
Redeemer; then Christ's Coming in the Flesh was in vain; then all Christianity
falls to the Ground; then when the Writings of the New Testament speak of 1 Timothy 2. 14.
Eve's being deceived, and being in the Transgression; when they acquaint us
that 2 Cor. 11. 3.
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtility; and that Romans 5. 19.
by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; and that in I Cor. 15. 22.
Adam all died: all is mere Romance and Fiction; there was nothing of these in
Reality. And then likewise we have as good Reason to believe that the other
Parts of the New Testament which speak of our Savior and all his Undertakings,
are to be understood in the same manner, that is, they are but a cunningly
devised Parable; they may have some moral meaning, as Esop's Fables have, but
they contain nothing of real Fact. This is the natural Result of allegorizing
the 3d Chapter of Genesis. By dealing thus with this Part of the Bible he has
baffled all the rest, he has wretchedly subverted the whole Scheme of our
Religion; he has spoiled the whole Fabric of Christianity; and he has made
the Scripture useless and insignificant. So that by this one Attempt of his he
has shaken, not to say overturned, the Foundations of Religion, he has taken
part with the known Despisers of all revealed Theology; he has encouraged and
patronized the wild Conceits of Scepticks; he has strengthened the Hands of the
Profane; he has abundantly gratified the whole Tribe of Atheists and Deists;
he has won their Hearts for ever. And indeed we cannot but observe what fort
of Men they are that applaud his Undertaking, viz. the Wits of the Town (as
they are called) Men disposed to very ill Thoughts of Religion and the
Scriptures, yea Men generally indulging themselves in Immorality and
Debauchery. These are the Persons that promote his Notions, and cry up his
Writings. This Theorist is become much more pleasing to them than Mr. Hobbs.
This new Archaeologist is far more taking than the Leviathan, because he nips
the Bible more closely, and also because he is not (as the other) a Layman, but
a professed Divine, and that of the Church of England. This makes his
Enterprise so acceptable to these Men; for now they have a Clergyman to vouch
them; they have the Warranty of a Churchman. I will not question, or so much as
suspect the Prudence of our Ecclesiastical Governors: but in my Judgment, if
there be no public Censure passed upon such a daring Attempt as this, by a
Member of our Church, Atheists will have just Ground to laugh at our
Discipline, as well as they do at our Doctrine.

To excuse himself, he says, this way of speaking is used in the Writings of
the New Testament, and confessed to be Metaphorical and Symbolical; and why not
then in Genesis? I answer; Because though there are some Expressions of that
Nature, as the Trumpet sounding, and the Books opened at the Day of Judgment,
which are but metaphorical, it is likely; yet it is easy to discern it: And in
other Places it is intimated, and sometimes plainly declared, that the Passages
are metaphorical and my^^ical, as in the Parables of the Prophets and of our
Savior. But it is quite anoth^r thing which we are speaking of, viz. not an
Expression or two, but a whole entire History delivered in plain Words, and
with all its Circumstances as Matter of Fact; and there is not the least
Intimation of any other Sense: yea many of the Particulars are mentioned in
other Places of the Old and New Testament, as direct Matter of Fact. Wherefore
when he attempts to solve his Undertaking by alleging some Passages in the New
Testament of Christ and his Apostles, he cannot but see that it is very foreign
to his Business. Again, in a short Appendix to his Book (where he seems to
retract in a manner what he ^ad said, having been informed (he ^aith) that it
was displeasing to pious and wife Men) he excuses himself by alleging the
Fathers; who, it is true, present us with several allegorical Interpretations
and Descants on some Places of Scripture, and particularly on the 3d Chapter of
Genesis: but this is nothing to his purpose, because those ancient Writers do
not deny the literal Sense, which he does. He is not content to allegorize that
Chapter, but he wholly rejects the literal Meaning, and confidently avers that
Moses all along tells a Story that ^ath nothing of Truth in it, and is not
spoken according to the Nature of the things. So I grant, that some of the old
Jewish Do^t^rs moralized M^ses's History, but they did not slight, much less
^upersede and lay* aside the historical Sense. And moreover, he has neither
the Fathers nor the Rabbis as an Example of ridiouling the Mosaic History,
which yet he does throughout his whole Discourse on that Chapter, showing his
little Talent of Jesting and Dro^ling. So that in brief, it might become
Hudibras better than a Doctor of Divinity. I appeal to any that are acquainted
with the ancient Monuments of the Church, whether he does not perfectly tread
in the Steps of the old Adversaries and Blasphemers of Christianity, Julian,
Celsus, etc. The former of these speaking of, and deriding what is said in
Genesis concerning Adam and Paradise, and eating the forbidden Fruit, etc.
positively declares that (...). Cyril. con^. Julian. lib. 3.
these are altogether fabulous. And again afterward, (...).
What Difference is there, says he, between these and the Fables of the
Greeks? What Dr. Burnet says amounts to the same; for when he expressly says,
Moses delivered nothing of the Physical Truth concerning the Creation of the
World, etc. but wisely dissembles to accommodate himself to the People: and
when he tells us, that Moses said these things only to conciliate Force and
Authority to his Laws, (which are his own Words) he does as good as say, that
what he delivers is a Fable. He might in plain Terms have styled the Mosaic
History a Fabulous Tradition, as De Phys. And. 1. 8.
Simplicius calls the Account which Moses gives of the Creation. Yea, he might
as well have spoken the Language of his Friend Celsus, who called the Mosaic
Relation concerning Adam and Eve, Origin. cont. Cells.
an old Wife's Fable. Thus we see what Examples he follows; some of the
craftiest and subtilest (but yet the most malicious) Enemies of the Christians,
who laughed at their Religion whilst others persecuted it, and did more harm by
that d^riding it, than others by violent oppressing it. But lo a remarkable
Example of the Divine Justice! viz. on the bold Gentleman who lately englished
that part of the Doctor's Book which derides the 3d Chapter of Genesis, and who
committed it to the Press for the sake of some of the witty Folks of the Town,
and to please the Atheistical Rabble. This signal Act of avenging Providence is
well known to the World, and I wish the ingenious Theorist would seriously
reflect upon it, and learn thence to make Sport with the Bible no more: And I
request him not to be offended at my plain Dealing with him; for I assure him
that I have said nothing out of any disrespect or ill Will to his Person, but
wholly from a deep Sense of the great Mischief which is like to ensue upon this
late Attempt of his. I abhor the treating of any learned Man's Writings with
Contempt: yea, on the contrary I have always paid a due Respect and Deference
to them, though they are not adjusted to the Notions which I have of things.
But when I see the Holy Scriptures struck at, and Religion it self shocked and
extremely hazarded, I cannot forbear from uttering my Sentiments, and ^hewing
my just Indignation on such an Occasion. Christian Charity, which bears all
things, endures all things, cannot by any Means brook this. And I must freely
tell this learned Writer, that let his Character otherwise be never so fair,
(and it is not my Design to ^isown it or blemi^^ it in the least) it is certain
that the better this is, the worse is his Enterprise; for he seems to come
sober and demure to undermine the Bible, and destroy Christianity, as many a
Cracovian Reasoner has done before him. But truly there is little Sobriety in
jesting and buffooning, in jeering and drolling away our Religion, and that
under the Pretense of Philosophic Antiquity. Nay, let me tell him, (and I hope
by this time his own Thoughts do so too) that to trifle and droll after the
Rate that he does on the inspired History concerning Adam and Eve, is a near
Approach to Blasphemy. I heartily wish he may be apprehensive of his
Delinquency in this kind, and that for the future he may guide himself by that
wholesome Rule, viz. that we are not to quit the literal Interpretation in any
Place of Scripture, unless there be a necessity of doing so. And it is certain
there is none in the present Case; nay, there is an absolute Necessity of
acknowledging the literal and historical Meaning, unless we will subvert the
very Foundations of our Religion. He that makes this first Book of the Bible to
be wholly mystical, does not observe the Distance between Genesis and some Part
of the Revelation. We must be careful that we follow not the Masters of
abstruse Divinity so far, that we exclude the literal Sense of Scripture: for
this will prove fatal to the Scriptures themselves, and to all Religion,
especially Christianity. If we dote upon Allegories, and defy the Letter and
History of the Bible, we quite null these Sacred Writings, because we thereby
render them ambiguous and precarious, we authorize any wild Interpretations
that can be made of them. If we may leave the literal Sense of Scripture when
we please, and fly to metaphorical and mystical ones, then the Certainty of the
Word of God will soon vanish: for then we cannot tell what is true or what is
false; or if we know it, we can never confute any Error, or maintain any Truth
from the Holy Writ. For by this Means the^^will be innumerable Explications of
Scripture, and who can possibly determine which of them is to be made choice
of? If you offer any Text to prove ^uch or such a Doctrine, it will easily be
evaded if the Letter may not be our Guide; for it is but saying, The Place is
not meant as the Words sound, but must be taken figuratively and mystically.
Thus Scripture it self is* destroyed by cashiering the literal Acception of the
Words. Yea, we destroy the whole Gospel, and pluck up the Foundations of
Christianity; we deny Christ and all his blessed Undertakings for our
Redemption and Salvation: for these being Matter of Fact, are founded upon the
literal Account we have of them, upon the historical Relation of them, which we
have in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. Thus dangerous and fatal
it is to let go the literal Sense of Scripture, and to catch at a mystical one
only. By this wild Practice Men attempt to thrust Religion out of the World;
or, which is the same thing, to present us with a metaphorical and allegorical
Religion, inst^ad of a true and real one. Therefore there is good Reason why we
should not quit the literal Construction of Scripture.

Secondly; The other Extreme which is to be avoided by us, is the (...).
A^hanas. in Matthew. 12. 31.
resting altogether in the outside, the looking no farther than the literal
Meaning of Scripture. There is such a thing as mystical or symbolical Divinity;
however some have mistaken and abused it: and this, if it be rightly used, is
exceeding profitable, yea necessary; for it is no other than the Re^ult of the
mystical Sense of Scripture, which I have been speaking of. He is truly a
Divine, he may deservedly be said to have Skill in Christian Theology, who
contents not himself with the primary or literal Import of the Sacred Writings,
but dives into the secondary but more abstruse Meaning of them, who penetrates
into the hidden Mind of the Word of God. If there be a (...) Sense in
Scripture, as I have proved in several Instances, it must be reckoned a great
Oversight (to say no worse) in the Expositors of this Holy Book, not to take
notice of this Interpretation, but to acquiesce wholly in the literal Meaning.
This is observable in the Expositions which some of the Rabbis give of the
Bible: for as the Jewish Ca^alists are too allegorical, (as we took notice
before) so another Set of their Doctors is too much devoted to a literal
Interpretation. This they stick to when there is no Reason for it, yea when the
Words are plainly figurative, and must needs be taken so. Yet even then they
interpret them according to the Letter, and thence are produced some of those
foolish Propositions and childish Assertions, those groundless Fables and
Legends; yea those gross Lies and Forgeries which are found in the Books of the
Rabbis. Erasmus was faulty in this kind: his Readers may observe that he
neglected the mystical Sense of Scripture, and resolutely adhered to the bare
Letter. In which he is followed by Calvin, who generally leaves out the
secondary and more sublime Sense of many Texts of Scripture, and satisfies
himself with the literal one only. This he does in his Comment on Genesis 3. 15. I
will put Enmity between, etc. which he interprets simply of the Antipathy
between Men and Serpents, (which is the poor and lank Interpretation which
Josephus the Jew gives of it, as you have heard:) whereas those Words in the
highest Meaning of them (as the antientest and learnedest Fathers^ have
suggested) are the first and grand Promise of the Messiah made to our first
Parents, and in them to all their Posterity. Those Places, Psalm. 22. 16. They
pierced my Hands and my Feet; And ver. 18. They part my Garments among them,
and cast Lots upon my Vesture; Calvin is inclined to interpret simply, and not
concerning Christ: he would have them to be only metaphorical Expressions of
David's Calamities and Sufferings, notwithstanding it is expressly said by the
Evangelist St. Matthew, that those things were done to Christ, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, Matthew. 27. 35. And by the Evangelist
St. John, This was done that the Scripture should be fulfilled, chapter 19. 36, 37.
And so as to that Text, Ier. 31. 22. The Lord has created a new thing in the
Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. The same Author will not have this
Prophecy, (for such it is, though it seems to speak of a thing past, it being
the Custom of prophetic Writers to signify the future Time by the past, as you
shall hear afterward) he will not, I say, have this Prediction refer in the
least to Christ and the Virgin Mary: It is ridiculous, he says, to understand
it so. And some other Prophecies which are meant of Christ, he understands
otherwise, confining himself to the bare Letter of the Words. Thus this
excellent Person, out of an Affectation of Novelty, perverts those Scriptures
which the ancient Fathers quoted as spoken of Christ; and he plainly tells us,
that the Fathers abused those Places. But (which is far worse) he refuses to
expound some of those Texts of the Old Testament concerning Christ,
notwithstanding the Evangelical Writers in the New Testament alledg them as
punctually fulfilled in him, and in what he suffered. For this Reason that
renowned Man may be thought to incline to Judaism or Arianism as much as
Erasmus is thought by some; for you shall find the one as well as the other
interpreting Places of Scripture, which speak of Christ, quite to another
Sense. Dr. Iackson on the Creed.
One of the Worthies of our Church excuses the former of these Persons after
this manner, (and why may not the same Excuse serve for the latter?) It was,
says he, rather fear lest he should give Offense unto the Jews, than any
Desire or Inclination to comply with them, which makes him sometimes give the
same Interpretations of Scriptures which they do, without Search after farther
Mysteries than the Letter it self does administer. It was the Candor of this
excellent Divine to apologize thus for that great Man; and the same Apology may
serve for the other; yet certainly we ought to supply the Defect of their
Expositions on those Places, by adding the secondary and mystical Sense to
them; else we leave those Texts maimed and imperfect; yea we rob them of that
which is most considerable and precious in them, that which is the Dabar Gadol,
as the Jewish Masters call the mystical Sense, this being great in comparison
of the literal one, which is called by them Dabar Katon, little and
inconsiderable, viz. in respect of the other. This was the Fault of another
great Man, great in Name as well as Worth: Herein he disdains not to tread in
the Steps of Mr. Calvin, though in many other things he is very averse to his
Expositions. We shall find that when he treats of the Texts in the Old
Testament which speak concerning Christ, he generally interprets them in the
first and literal Sense, contrary to the Practice of all Apostolical and
Ancient Expositors, who constantly search into the mystical Sense of Scripture,
as the choicest Treasure that is to be found in it. Gold and Diamonds, and the
richest Gems, lie hid in the Bowels of the Earth. The richest and most precious
Truths of Heaven are treasured up in the Entrails of this Holy Book, they are
hid in the most inward Recesses of it. Demo^ritus could say, Truth lies hid in
a deep Pit. This is most certain of Divine Truth contained in the Holy
Scripture; besides what we meet with in the Letter and Surface of it, there is
yet a more choice Discovery to be made by searching into the Depths of it, and
by Discerning the spiritual Meaning, those deep things of God which lie covered
under the Letter and History. It is a Rule that holds good concerning the
Divine as well as Humane Laws* Qui haeret in litera, haeret in cortice.
He that con^ines himself to the Letter, sticks in the mere Bark and Outside,
and can go no further: he reaches not to the inward Sense, Pith and Mind of
those Laws. We must needs fall short of the Truth of Scripture, that sacred Law
given us by God, unless we endeavor to acquaint our selves with both these,
not only the historical, but the more sublime and mystical Sense of it. Both
these jointly make up Divine Truth. Therefore that is a good Rule in
interpreting Scripture, which was practiced by Athanasius, (...).
We (says he) do not take away the Literal Sense to bring in the Spiritual
one, but we maintain the more powerful Meaning of the Spirit by keeping up the
literal Sense. These two must go together. If we lay aside the former, the
Scripture is no longer Scripture, i. e. a written Law, made up of Letters: and
if we lay aside the latter, we do Despite to the Spirit of Grace, who has
lodged a farther Meaning in the Holy Scriptures, (which were inspired by him)
than that which is contained in the Letter. Wherefore to understand the
Scriptures as we should do, we must be careful to find out the secondary or
mystical Interpretation of the Words, as well as the primary or literal.

And that we may know when the Sense is of the former, and not of the latter
sort, it will be needful to observe these following Rules. The first is given
us by Comment. in D^calog.
R. Ben-Ezra, thus; If any Precept in Scripture be not consonant to Reason, it
must not be taken in the simple or literal Sense, as that Place, Circumcise the
Foreskin of your Hearts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. We cannot suppose this to be understood
literally, because (says he) it is so unreasonable and absurd a thing; yea
indeed it is utterly impossible, for there is no such thing as the Praeputium
of the Heart. In these and the like Places a spiritual Sense must be searched
for, otherwise we must assert that the Scripture enjoins us the doing of those
things which cannot be done. Besides, if we understand it literally, i. e. of
the circumcising or paring off any Part of the Heart, this is an inhumane and
bloody thing: to do this is to be cruel to our selves; yea, it is Self-murder:
Therefore according to a second Rule, which I am to propound, this cannot be
the Sense of the Place, and consequently the literal Meaning is not intended
here. The Rule is this, That all Precepts or Prohibitions, which, as to their
Sound, are wholly repugnant to the Moral Law, and the express Command of God
there, contain in them some mystical or spiritual Sense. By this you may judge
of the Meaning of those Places of Scripture, Prove. 23. 2. Put a Knife to thy
Throat, if thou be a Man given to Appetite: And that of our Savior* Matthew. 5.
29, 30. If the right Eye offend thee, pluck it out: and if the right Hand
offend thee, cut it off. To which I may add, Prove. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20. Heap up
Coals on your Enemies Heads. When a Person is thus commanded in Scripture, to
do some thing contrary to the express Law of God, we may conclude that Command
is to be understood in a secondary or mystical Sense, and not according to the
Letter. So when God bids Hosea take a Wife of Whoredoms, and Children of
Whoredoms, chapter 1. 2. And when it is added that he went and took such an one,
ver. 3. we must look upon it as a Parable, a mystical Saying. It was a Vision,
says St. Prooem. in Hos.
Ierom. So says Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast; and Mor. Nev. l. 2. c. 46.
Maimonides agrees with him. It is certain that this was done only in Show and
Representation, but not actually and really, because it was contrary to that
direct Prohibition in the Law, Lev. 21. 7. Thou shall not take a Wife that is a
Whore. The Meaning then of the foregoing Words is this, that seeing this People
brag that they are my People, my Spouse, my Children; go and represent the true
State they are in by a Parable, and let them know that they are as much my Wife
and my Children, and no more, than if you should take a professed Whore with
her spurious Brats, and say, that she is your lawful Wife, and they are your
lawful Children, which is absolutely false. This I conceive is the plain
Meaning of the Words. But that Command of God to Abraham, Genesis 22. 2. Take thy
Son, the only Son Isaac, and offer him for a Burnt-offering, is of another
kind; for that this is not to be understood mystically but literally, we can
prove from the History it self, which is so related, that we may plainly see it
was a Matter of Fact: and it is inserted among other Historical Passages
concerning that Patriarch; whereas the Prophetical Books, such as that of
Hosea, contain in them Visions and Representations of things spoken of as
really done, although they are not. Besides, we are certain that Abraham's
offering his Son Isaac, i. e. his binding him, and laying him upon the Altar,
and undertaking to kill him, were real things, and actually performed, because
we are ^old by the infallible Penmen of the New Testament, that they were so;
for they alledg this Matter of Fact, to prove and demonstrate the Doctrine
which they deliver, Heb. 11. 17. Iam. 2. 21. Wherefore we are sure it was a
Reality, and consequently the Words in Genesis are to be understood in a plain
Literal Sense. A third Rule, and the most useful, is this; See what Texts of
Scripture are already interpreted in a Mystical Sense by the Evangelists and
Apostles, and observe the Nature, Occasion and Circumstances of those Places,
and thereby you will be able to Discern what other Places of Scripture are to
be understood in the same manner: And accordingly you must interpret them not
after the Bare Letter or History, but in a Spiritual Sense. And so much for the
first thing which is to be taken notice of, in order to our having a right
Understanding of the Style of Scripture, viz. that there are many Places in it
that have a Double Sense.

CHAP. II.
The Scripture in many Places speaks not accurately, but according to the
Vulgar Opinion* and Apprehensions of Men. Several Instances of this in the Old
and New Testament: The Phrases, Expressions and Modes of Speaking used by the
Inspired Writers, are the same with those that we find in the best Classick
Authors. This largely proved from the Phraseology of the Old and New Testament.
More particularly the Similitudes and Comparisons in both are alike. The
Correspondence of Scripture Phrase with the profane Style showed by Grotius,
Pricaeus, Gataker, etc. There are in the Bible the same moral Notions, and
expressed in the very same Style, that there are in Pagan Writers. In both
Man's Life is a Way, a Pilgrimage, a Warfare. Other Ethick Notions, viz. that
Good and Virtuous Men are Free; and that all Vicious Persons are Slaves: that
Good Men are Wife, and all others are Fools; (to which latter the Author
reduces John 20. 10. though generally interpreted otherwise, and comments upon
it:) that Good Men are the Friends of God; that Vicious Men are Dead; that
Death is a Sleep. All which occur in the Sacred Writings as well as in Pagan
Moralists.

THE Second Proposition is this, that the Style of the Holy Scripture has many
things in it which are according to the usual Strain of other Writers and
Authors. Take this in these Particulars;

^. The Scripture in many Places speaks not accurately, but according to the
vulgar Opinion and Apprehensions of Men. Thus it is a common Observation, (but
I will not balk it here) that in the Mosaic History of the Creation of the
World it is said, God made two great Lights, Genesis 1. 16. and the Moon is
reckoned as one of them; whereas it is not to be doubted that the Sun, but
especially the Moon, is but a little Light in comparison of some of the Fixed
Stars. But this we may truly say, with an ancient Christian Writer, (...).
Philopon. in Hexaem.
It was not Moses's Purpose to act the Philosopher or Astronomer in the Book of
Genesis. But because the Sun is nearer to us than those Fixed Lights are, and
the Moon is much nearer than the Sun, therefore though they be less in
themselves than those Remote Stars, yet they seem to our Sight to be the
Biggest Lights that God has set up in the Heavens: Wherefore they are
emphatically, and by way of Eminency, called in the Hebrew, the Great Lights,
though the least of the Stars be a greater Light than the Sun or Moon. So
though it is said of the Almighty Creator and Preserver of the World, that he
hangs the Earth upon nothing, Job 26. 7. which is exactly and philosophically
true; yet in another Place of this Book we read of the Pillars of the Earth,
Job 9. 6. which is a manner of Speech adapted to the Capacity of the Vulgar,
who cannot conceive how so great and massy a Body as this Ball of Earth can
hang hovering in the Air, and be upheld without some Props. And several other
such Expressions there are in Scripture which are spoken according to the
popular Apprehensions, and the seeming Appearance of things, not the Exactness
of the things themselves. Therefore their Attempts have been to little purpose,
who would force a Philosophy out of the Bible, as if they had a mind to present
us with a Body of Philosophy jure divino. As some Grammarians and Critics
pretend to find all Arts and Sciences whatsoever in Homer's Poems, so these
fond Men undertake to discover a Complete System of Natural Philosophy in the
Sacred Writings. But this is a very vain Enterprise, because, though there is a
great deal of excellent Philosophy in several Places of Holy Scripture, yet
these Writings were never intended mainly for this End, but for one far higher
and nobler. Hence it is that you hear the Holy Writers speaking sometimes not
according to the very Nature of the things, but according to their Appearance,
and the Opinion Men have of them. Yea, they oftentimes express themselves
according to the received Opinions, although they be erroneous and false, as in
the Instance before mentioned. Theodoret gives us the Reason of it in his first
Interrogatory upon Genesis: he b^gins his Work with This, that (...).
the Holy Script (...) wont to suit its (...) of Teaching to the (...) of the
Learne^(...) d in another Place, (...). Qu^st 52. in Genef.
(...) like purpose, (...) Scripture (says he) (...) as is most (...) and fit
for Men. The (...) Ghost in it is pleased to condescend to their Capacities,
and to adapt himself to their shallow Apprehensions. Thus frequently in the
Scripture corporeal Properties are attributed to God: you read of his Face and
Back-parts, Exodus 33. 23. and that these latter were seen by Moses, which is
spoken by way of Anthropopathy, as Divines commonly speak, i. e. after the
manner of Men, in compliance with their weak Capacities. As when a Man's Face
and Fore-parts are seen, there is a considerable Discovery and Knowledge of his
Person; but when he is seen behind only, it is imperfectly: so was it when God
appeared to Moses, he showed himself to him not fully, but in part; as when a
Man turns away his Face from another, and lets him see only his Backparts. And
so in other Places of Scripture we read of God's Eyes, Ears, Hands, Feet, and
other bodily Parts and Members; but we must not forget here the old Rule of
Cyril of Alexandria, (...)* In John. 10. 34.
When Members and Parts are attributed to God, it is said after the manner of
Men, but it is to be understood in a Sense suitable to the Divine Nature. And
Dialog. 1. de Trinit.
Athanasius has the like Words on this Occasion. But the not attending to this
gave Rise to the Sect of the Anthropomorphites, who pervesly understanding
those Texts which ascribe these Parts to God, held him to be Corporeal, and of
Humane Shape: They (...) not knowing, not rightly interpreting the (...) which
sometimes speak after the Guise of (...) in condescension to (...) shallow
Understand^^^ Thus Genesis 6. 6. It (...) Lord that he (...) Man; and 1 Samuel (...)
The Lord repented (...) he made Saul King; are (...), that is, as spoken in a
vulgar manner, and after the way of Mortals, who when they repent, abandon
their former Doings. So when God is said to repent, that which we are to
understand by it is this, that he acts in a contrary manner to what he did
before. As in the forementioned Places, it repented the Lord that he made Man,
the meaning is, that he purposed to destroy Mankind, viz. with a Deluge; for so
you find it explained in the next Verse, the Lord said, I will destroy Man whom
I have created. And when it is said, The Lord repented that be made Saul King;
the meaning is, that he ^^^^osed to depose him, and set up another, as you read
he gave Order in the Words immediately following in the next Chapter. Therefore
Theodoret says well, (...). Quaest. 50. in Genesis
God's Repenting is no other than the changing of his Dispensation. And thus we
are to interpret this Expression wherever it occurs in Holy Writ, (for in
many other Places God is said to repent of what he did) as knowing that the
Phrase of this Sacred Book is oftentimes fitted to the Apprehensions and
Language of Men, and not the absolute Reality of the thing. That of St.
Chrysostom is certainly true, (...).
God accommodates himself sometimes to humane Infirmity when he speaks in
Scripture. So those Words are to be understood in Genesis 11. 5. The Lord came
down to see the City: And again, ver. 7. Let us go down: which are spoken in a
vulgar manner, and with respect to the shallow Conceptions of Mankind. And the
same Expression is used in Genesis 18. 20, 21. Exodus 3. 7, 8. Psalm. 144. 5. Isa.
64. 1. God is here said to come down, which signifies God's taking more than
ordinary Notice of the Actions of Men, and his designing to do some
extraordinary thing. The Scripture calls the Angels that appeared to Abraham
Men, because they feem'd to be such. The Man Gabriel you read of in Dan. 9. 21
because he appeared in the Shape of Man. And so in the New Testament the Angles
at our Savior's Sepulcher are styled young Men, because as to outward
Appearance they were such. Nothwithstanding what some Commentators have said
upon 1 Samuel 28. 15. Samuel said to Saul; and again, ver. 16. Then said Samuel;
I am fully persuaded that those Words are spoken according to the Appearance,
not the real Truth of the thing. The Name of Samuel is given to the Devil or
Spectre that appeared, but we are not to think that Samuel himself in Body and
Soul appeared; for it is ridiculous as well as impious to imagine that the
departed Saints are at the Command and Disposal of a Necromantick Witch, a
Cursed Sorceress, a Hellish Hag, as if she could fetch them down from the
Celestial Regions when she pleases. But this she did, she raised a Spectre, or
substituted some Person who resembled Samuel, whom she represented to Readiness
Sight, as if he were the Prophet Samuel indeed. Thence we read in this Sacred
History, that Samuel said to Saul, because he who appeared in Samuel's Likeness
was thought to be Samuel, and thought to speak to Saul. Thus a Learned Father
long since expounded this Passage of Scripture, and gives us this as the Reason
of it; (...). Greg. Nyss. Epist. de Pythoni(...).
We find this (says he) to be the Custom of Scripture, that oftentimes it
relates that which is only in appearance instead of what is true and real. And
with him agrees Theodoret. in loc.
another of the learned Ancients; The Sacred History (says he) calls the
Apparition Samuel, because Saul believed it to be the real Samuel; for the
Scripture speaks frequently according to other Men's Belief and Notions. So it
usually calls those Gods that are not really such; but because the false and
feigned Deities of the Heathens were reputed True Gods by them, therefore the
Name of Gods is given them often in the Old Testament, and sometimes in the New.

But to confine my self to this latter, here we find several things delivered
not according to the Reality of the Matter spoken of, but according to the
Sense and Notion of others: So I understand our Savior's Words, Matthew. 12. 5.
The Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, i. e. by killing of Beasts, and
doing other laborious Work, they, according to you, profane that Holy Day,
according to the Notion which you Pharisees have of keeping and breaking the
Sabbath, and according to which you condemn me and my Disciples, as Profaners
of that Day. The Phrase used by St. Mark, chapter 1. 32. is according to a very
vulgar Conceit, (...), the Sun did dip: And the same Expression is in Luke 4.
40. for the Sun seems to dive or be drowned in the Sea when it goes down. This
is the Apprehension of those that inhabit near the Sea. In such a Sense as this
must the Apostle be understood when he says, It pleased God by the Foolishness
of Preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. It is called Foolishness,
not as if it were really such, but because it was commonly reputed so by those
that were not competent Judges, because (as Theodoret excellently says) (...).
In loc.
it was by Fools called Foolishness. Especially it was denominated so by those
who thought themselves great Masters of Wisdom: wherefore the Apostle explains
himself afterward, and says, this Preaching was to the Greeks Foolishness,
ver. 23. Nay, you read of the Foolishness of God, ver. 25. which can be meant
in no other Sense than this, that this Excellent Dispensation of preaching the
Gospel, which was of God's own Appointment, was reckoned as a weak and foolish
Institution by those doughty Boasters and Pretenders to Wisdom. To them and
such as they were it seemed to be Foolishness, but really it was no such thing,
for the Apostle calls it the Wisdom of God, ver. 24. Thus the Scripture speaks
sometimes according to the Opinion of others, though it be not true. So I
apprehend those Expressions of the Apostle are to be understood, 2 Cor. 5. 13.
Whether we be besides our selves; -- or whether we be sober: i. e. we seem to
our Enemies to be besides our selves, to be distracted when we commend our
selves; and then only they think us sober when we speak submissively and in a
self-denying Style. In the same Sense we are to take Chap. 11. 1, 16, 17. where
he calls his necessary apologizing for himself Folly and speaking foolishly,
not that 'twas so in it self, but because it was accounted so by some. In
another Place he calls Epimenides the Cretian Poet Tit. 1. 12.
a Prophet, because he was thought to be such an one by his Countrymen, not
that he deserved that Name. Here likewise you will see that things are
sometimes expressed in a popular way, and according to the vulgar Sense and
Opinion; as when it is said, the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, Rev. 6.
13. which cannot be really and philosophically true; for these Luminaries, by
reason of their vast Magnitude, cannot fall upon the Earth; there is no room
for them in so small a Compass. But perhaps by the falling of these heavenly
Lights from their Stations, is meant some Great and Notable Defection in the
World, a Mighty Confusion and Disorder; so that the Fabric of the Universe was
as 'twere broken up and dissolved: Or by Stars here are meant Great Men and
Magistrates, and their falling to the Earth signifies their being displaced
from their high Station; and so it is a Metaphor, and belongs to another Place.
And many other Passages there are which I will not now particularly enumerate.
And indeed some of these are so common and obvious, that I should have forborne
the mentioning of them, but that it was somewhat requisite to touch upon them,
when I am representing to you the different and various Guises of the
Scriptural Style. It is common also in the Writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles, to speak with reference to humane Properties and bodily Actions, even
when God himself, and the most Divine things are treated of. So we often read
of Luke 22. 69. Col. 3. 1. Heb. 1. 3. and 8. 1.
Christ's sitting at the right Hand of God; whereas it is acknowledged, that a
right Hand cannot properly be attributed to God; nor can our Savior, in
strictness of Speech, be said to sit at God's right Hand; for then he could not
be said to stand there, Acts. 7. 56. Wherefore it is evident that these
Expressions are used only in compliance with the common Language of Men, who
generally prefer the right Hand before the left; and to sit or stand at one's
Right Hand, denotes great Advancement and Honor. So that when those Modes of
Speaking are applied to our Blessed Lord, the plain Meaning is, that after all
his Labors and Sufferings, he is highly dignified by God, he is exalted to
unspeakable Honor, he is advanced to such a Glorious State wherein he is
invested with absolute Power and Sovereignty, and is able to protect, defend
and reward his Church, and to confound their most powerful and malicious
Adversaries: This is to sit at the right Hand of God. So he is said to be in
the Bosom of the Father, John 1. 18. which bears the same Signification with
Matthew. 3. 17. This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; for whom we
Love, we familiarly embrace and take into our Bosoms. So in the Gospel we find
our Savior setting forth many Divine and Spiritual things by those that are
Humane and Carnal, herein comporting with our Infirmities, and delivering those
Sacred things in such Language and Expression as are adequate to our imperfect
Ideas of those things. It is a known Maxim among the Jews, and a very true one,
The Law speaks in the Language of the Sons of the Men; that is, the Words of
Scripture are accommodated to the Vulgar Speech, and in that to the meanest
Apprehensions. And this holds good not only of the Old but New Testament.
Wherefore it was unreasonably and maliciously Origin. cont. Cells. l. 6. and
Philocal. l. 1, and 4.
objected by Celsus against the Scriptures, that they were not politely and
accurately writ. Origin in answer to this tells him, that this was purposely
and designedly done, namely, that all Persons might profit by the Holy
Writings, that the Vulgar and Illiterate, as well as the Learned, might be
edified by them: We have (says he, using the Apostle's Words) this Treasure in
Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of Men.

2. It may further be observed, that the Holy Scripture resembles the Phrases
in Other Writers. If any Critic should dare to find fault with the Holy Style,
it were easy to defend it by maintaining and proving that it speaks as the Best
Authors and Writers do: the Phraseology in them is alike in sundry Places. Many
Expressions of Heathens fall in exactly with the Terms of Scripture. To be at
the Feet of one, in the Sacred Style signifies to follow, to be his Servant, 1 Samuel 25. 27. 2 Samuel 15. 16. 1 Kings 20. 10. I called him to my Feet, Deuteronomy. 33.
3. i. e. I called him to follow me, to be my Servant: and in several other
Places the Scripture speaks after this manner. The very same way of Speaking is
not unusual among profane Authors: To stand at their Feet, was among the
Romans, applied to Servants, in respect of their Masters, for they waited on
them at Table, or as they lay on their Beds with their Feet stretched out:
Whence that of Seneca, De Benefic. l. 3.
Servus qui coenanti ad pedes steterat, etc. or this was said because they
stood behind them, at their Heels. So in In Galb^,
Suetonius, Ad pedes stantes, are Servants that attend on their Masters: And ad
pedes, without any Addition, has the like Signification in Martial. This is
very frequent; and In Cicerone, Martial. and aliis.
a^ pedibus, is used in the same Sense. Thus the Holy and Profane Style agree;
which I will next make good from those Texts where there is mention of Light as
it signifies Joy or Gladness; as in Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the
Righteous; which is thus explained in the next Clause, and Gladness for the
Upright in Heart. Esth. 8. 15. we read thus, The City of Shushan rejoiced: but
Iunius and Tremellius very rightly, according to the Original, render it
lucebat, it shined, or was enlightened: And the Words there immediately
following are a Comment upon it; the Jews had Light, and Gladness, and Joy. In
conformity to this observe, that in Isa. 50. 10. the Forlorn and Distressed
Person, who is void of all Joy and Mirth, is said to walk in Darkness, and to
have no Light. We often read of Job 29. 24. Psalm. 4. 6. and 44. 3. and 89. 15.
and 90. 8. Prove. 16. 15.
the Light of the Countenance, which is no other than the Pleasant ^ire and
Joyful Aspect of it, the same with a Cheerful Countenance, Prove. 15. 13. Psalm.
31. 16. and 67. 1. and 119. 135. Dan. 9. 17.
The shining of the Face, which is often mentioned in the Sacred Writings, is
of the same import, and is a farther Proof that Light and Joy are synonymous.
In Psalm. 12. (...) and Isa. 58. 8. Light is no other than Joy. So the Candla,
or Lamp of the Wicked, Job 21. 17. is their Joy and Prosperity; and the Phrase
is again used in the same sense, chapter 2^: v. ^. And Prove. 21. 4. is pertinent
here, if we translate it according to the (...).
Septnagint and the Lucerna impiorum peccatum.
Vulgar Latin, The Light of the wicked is Sin; i. e. their rejoicing is Sin or
Vanity, as that word sometimes signifies. And so this Text is of the same
import with Prove. 13. 9. The Lamp of the Wicked shall be put out. I might take
notice, that the Voice of Mirth, and the Voice of Gladness, and the Light of
the Candle, are joined together, Ier. 25. 10. And I might remind those that are
critical, that the Hebrew word Samach is rendered laetus, bilaris suit, and also
luxit, ^laruit, as in Prove. 13. 9. The Light of the Righteous rejoiceth; or, as
that word will bear it, shines. To be merry and to shine are expressed by that
same Verb. So the Feast of Dedicaton, instituted by Judas Maccabeus, was called
the Joseph. Antiq.
Feast of Lights, because a great Happiness and Joy began then to shine as a
Light, contrary to their Hopes. With the Holy Tongue and Style agrees that of
the Greek and Romans: thus among the former (...) hilaris, is said by the
Etymologists to be derived from (...) luceo. (...) or (...) signifies Joy in
the Prince of Poets, -- (...).
(...) i. e. he brought Joy to his Companions: and thus it signifies in (...)
another place in the same Poet. So Odyss. (...).
(...) is an endearing Compellation, and is the same with my sweet Delight, my
dear Joy: And it must be confessed by those that have looked with any care into
other Greek Authors, that this word is sometimes taken in that sense, and
accordingly it is expounded (...). Hesych.
so by the Learned Glossaries. And the Latins teach us to say in their kind
and blandishing Salutation, Lux mea, as much as to say, my Joy and Delight.
Thus in the three Learned Language Light signifies Joy, as Darkness denotes
Calamity and Sorrow. And why may not our own Language be added to the rest, and
be thought to resemble them in this Particular? which may be seen in the
ancient English Meter of the first Verse of the 110th Psalm, In God the Lord be
glad and light. And who knows not that lightsome and joyful are of the same
Signification in our vulgar Speech at this day? And that it may appear that
Grammar and Criticism are no Enemies to Philosophy, it is probable that Men
have chosen to express and denote things that are joyful and pleasant by the
Name of Light, because this of all things in the World is the most Chearing and
Comfortable, according to the Suffrage of the Royal Preacher, and indeed of all
Mankind, Truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to
behold the Sun. And again, Prove. 15. 30. The Light of the Eyes rejoiceth the
Heart. It is both pleasant in it self, and renders all other things so too. It
is an old Rabinnical Proverb, When the Sun arises, the sick arises; he finds
himself better in the Day than in the Night: and ordinary Experience vouches
this for Truth. Wherefore when the Sun is gone, Men labor to supply its
Gladsome Presence by something that resembles it. Here I might embellish this
Notion by observing to you, that it was anciently the Usage in many Countries
to testify their public Rejoioings by Illuminations. It is apparent from many
Instances, that they were wont to set up Lights in their Windows and at their
Gates for this very purpose. The Romans did this on their high Days, as Sa^. 12.
Iuvenal testifies, Cuncta nitent, longos erexit janua ramos,
Et matutinis operatur festa lucernis.
The Egyptians did the like on their Festivals, says Lib. 2.
Herodotus. And that the Jews used it on their Public Solemnities, we learn
from Persius, who chastises the Romans for their Levity and Folly in imitating
the Customs of that People, -- At cum
Herodis venere dies, unctaque fenestra
Disposit^^ pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae.
When Antiochus was honorably received by the Jews, with a pretense of Mirth
at least, it is said he was brought in with Torch-light and with great Shoutings
into the City, 2 Mac. 4. 22. This was the Practice at great Triumphs and
public Reception of Princes, not only among the Jews but Christians, as we are
acquainted by Lib. 4. de Vita Constantini.
Eusebius. And Gregory Nazianzen tells us that Athanasius was received into the
City with the like Pomp. And hither we may refer the Nup^ial Torches which were
wont to be carried at Marriages, as Tokens of Rejoi^^ng. Thus Illuminations of
old were Expressions of Joy, as they are even at this day. On the contrary, as
Suidas observes, the Latin lugeo is from (...) i. e. (...) tenebr^, because
they lighted up no Candles, but sat in the dark when they mourned. Silicernium
the Funeral mournful Banquet is as much as S^luc^rnium, i. e. sine lucerna,
(...) for (as you find it quoted by Etymolog. Ling. Lat.
Vossius) (...) The sum is, Darkness is gr^evous and doleful, productive of
Sorrow and Sadness: but wherever the Light displays its Beauty, it gilds all
things with Joy and Gladness; and thence we see that not only in the Style of
Sacred Scripture, but among Profane Writers, Light and Joy are expressive of
one another.

This Agreement and Concurrence of both in their Style may be observed in this,
That the Outward and Inward Man, which St. Paul mentions, are no strange
Language among some of the Classick Authors, for you read of Salus interioris
hominis in one of Asin. Act. 3. Scen. 3.
Plautus's Comedies; where interior homo is the Soul or Life, the better part
of Man, in which sense the Apostle uses it. The very Phrase of a perfect Man
in Ep^. 4. 13. is made use of by the great Moral Philosopher Cap. 7^.
Epictetus, who opposes (...) to (...) a Perfect Man, i. e. a Man of ripe
Years to a Youth, a Man of Growth and Maturity in Morals to one that is but a
Novice or Beginner in them. Only whereas the Philosopher applies it to
Morality, St. Paul does it to Christianity. The same Apostle calls the Body a
Vessel, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. Let every one know how to possess his Vessel (i. e. his
Body) in Sanctification and Honor. And so it is called by the great Roman
Philosopher and Orator: Corpus est quasi vas animi, aut aliquod receptaculum.
Cic. Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
The Body, says he, is as 'twere the Vessel of the Soul, or some such
Receptacle of that noble part of Man. And Antoninus, in a very disparaging
manner, styles it (...).
the worser sort of Vessel; which is an Expression not unlike to that of
another Apostle, who calls a Woman (...), 1 Pet. 3. 7.
the weaker Vessel or Instrument, (for the word signifies both) an Utensil very
infirm and frail in comparison of the other Sex, which is generally strong and
robust. St. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 4.
Paul calls his Body a Tabernacle, and so does St. 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14.
Peter style his: and when St. John applies the word Joh. 1. 14.
(...) to our Savior, telling us that he came and pitched his Tent with us for
a time; the meaning is, that he assumed a Body, and dwelt here on Earth in it:
which is the very Language of the Ancient Grecians, who called the Body of Man
(...) a Tent, a Tabernacle. Yea, the whole Man is expressed and described by
St. Paul in a Tripartite Division after the same manner that he is by the
Gentile Philosophers. This Apostle represents him as consisting of three main
Parts, Spirit, Soul and Body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. which very Distribution is to be
found in Antoninus, (...), lib. 3.
(...). And in another place he divides Man after the same way, but in words
that approach nearer to those of the Apostle, (...): and explains it thus,
(...).
to the Body belong the External Senses, to the Soul the Affections and
Passions, to the Mind or Spirit the Judgment, and refined Thoughts and Reason.
And in other Pagan Writings, especially those of Plato and his Followers, the
same Division of Man is observed, and is exactly that of St. Paul, (...). This
is All that a Man is. And as this and other inspired Writers frequently use the
word Flesh to signify the depraved Nature of Man, so it has the same
Interpretation in the Incomparable Antoninus, where you will find that (...)
and (...) are the corrupt part of Man, the Carnal and Sensual Inclinations,
that part of the Soul which struggles with Reason, and on all occasions makes
head against it. I could here in several Particulars show that Porphyrius comes
very near to the Holy Style in many words which he uses. And it might be
cleared by several Quotations out of Hierocles, that he imitates the
Phraseology of the Scripture, especially of the New Testament.

Are not the Similitudes, especially those that are plain and homely, which we
meet with in the Bible, found in the best Ancient Writers? The crackling of
Thorns under a Pot is made use of by Eccles. 7. 6.
Solomon to set forth a Short and Fading Pleasure, (tho it be accompanied with
some Noise and Stir). And the very same is used by Virgil, -- Magno veluti cum
flamina sonore
Virgea suggeritur costis undantis aheni.
Homer, the great Soul of Poetry, tells us in Commendation of Nestor's Speech,
that it was (...). Iliad. ^*
sweeter than Honey: by which plain wording he sets forth that Old Counsellor's
Fluent and Elegant Language, his Excellent and Charming Art of delivering his
Advice and Counsel. Which is the very Similitude that the Psalmist, the most
Divine Poet, makes use of to express the Ravishing Sweetness of God's Law: It
is, says he, sweeter than Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. and the
same he repeats in Psalm. 119. 103. His Royal Son makes use of the same homely
Comparison, Pleasant Words (says he) are as a Honeycomb, Prove. 16. 24. And in
his Admirable and Transcendent Poem he disdains not this familiar Style, where
he brings in the Sacred Bridegroom speaking thus to his Spouse, Thy Lips drop
as an Honey-Combe, Cant. 4. 11. And in this Book of the Canticles it might be
particularly made good that the Description of the Beauty of the Bride, and the
rest of the Amorous Passages and Expressions to set forth the Soft Passion, are
such as you find in Authors that treat of that Subject, as Homer, Musaeus,
Pindar, Theocritus, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Ausonius, Claudian, and others that
have spoken of Love and Beauty. That plain and Country Simile used by our
Blessed Master, Man. 23. 37.
As a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, is expressly in Hercul. Fur.
Euripides, one of the delicatest Poets that Greece afforded, and who gave the
liveliest Characters of Things: and in this very manner of speaking he is
followed by Seneca the Tragedian. Certainly this was a very apposite
Similitude, the Hen being, as the Arabians style her, Matter Congregationis, the
kind Mother that gathers her young ones together, that by her loving Voice
expresses her Affection and Care to her tender Brood, and invites them to a
safe Refuge and Shelter in time of Danger. In brief, any Man that is conversant
in Homer, Virgil, and other Ancient Authors of greatest Note and Repute, may
observe that the Penmen of the Bible use the same Similitudes which those
Writers frequently do; they have the same plain, trite and vulgar Comparisons
which are in them.

As for the other Passages, Phrases and Modes of speaking in the Holy
Scripture, which resemble those that we find in other Authors, they are
innumerable. Grotius, that Unparalleled Critic, in his Annotations on the
Bible, shows everywhere almost the Correspondence of Scripture Phrase with the
Profane Style; he has by a vast Collection let us see how the Sacred Dialect
agrees with the Phrase of the Best Writers. Out of all sorts of Authors
whatsoever he proves the Scripture-Stile to be Proper and Elegant, which no Man
before him has done so well and so largely. He compares all along as he goes,
the Holy Style with that of Herodotus, Plato, Demosihenes, Thucydides,
Xenophon, Isocrates, Gallen, and others who are the best and most elegant
Hellenists. ^ea, he shows that the Wittiest Writers among the Greeks, as
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Euripides, Lucian, have the very same Phrases and
Expressions which we read in the Bible, and they have many more which very much
resemble them. He shows the like Correspondence between the Scriptures and
those La^in Writers who are the best Masters of that Language, and in several
Instances demonstrates that the Sacred Writers speak as the best Authors in
that Tongue do. All this he has most learnedly performed, and upon this
account alone (if there were no other) he is worth the perusal of all Ingenious
Men, especially those who are more devoted to Polite and Critical Learning.
This very same Task is excellently performed by a Johan. Pricaeus.
Learned Foreign Critic, who has abundantly made it good in his Commentaries
on the Psalms and most of the New Testament, that the Style of Scripture is
conformable to that of the best Writers, whether Jews or Heathens, whether
Philosophers, Poets or Historians He has elaborately showed that an
innumerable company of Greek and Latin Authors, the most Elegant and Refined of
both, have expressed themselves as the Holy Writers do: In a word, that Athens
and Rome spoke as they do. If he had carried this on, and accomplished the like
on the other parts of the Bible, it would have been an Unvaluable Work, and
even beyond what the Belgic Annotator has done. Something of this Nature is
performed by Mr. Bogan in his Homerus (...). Mr. Gataker in Antonin. Dr. Duport
Gnomolog. Homeric.
other Learned Men of our own, who insisting upon some Particular Authors among
the Pagans, endeavor to evince that the Scriptures are in great measure
agreeable to the Style and Phrase of those Writers. And the same might be
undertaken as to other Heathen Writers, with regard both to the Old and New
Testament. Nothing is more evident than this, that their Modes of Speech are
the same, and that they agree in their Style, and consequently that the Style
of Scripture is vouched by the best Classick Authors, and (as a Consequent of
that) that he who carps at the Phrase and Dialect of the Scripture, and finds
fault with the Style of the Bible, shows that he has not conversed with the
best Human Authors.

But to prosecute and illustrate this Theme yet further, I will be more
particular. I will show first that there are in the Bible the same moral
Notions, and expressed in the very same Style, that there are in Pagan Writers.
Secondly, I will show that there are the same Grammatical and Rhetorical
Figures in the Holy Book that we meet with frequently in those Authors. First,
I will observe to you, that the Phrases and Terms whereby some of the choicest
Notions in Ethics are set forth to us, are alike in Divine and Humane Authors:
As to begin with that common Expression, to wit, of calling our Course or
State, or manner of Life in this World, a Way. The Hebrew Word Derek, Via,
Semita, in almost innumerable Places in the Old Testament, signifies our manner
of Life: and (...) in the Greek Testament (which answers to it) is commonly
used in the same Sense. In this latter Part of the Bible the Life of Man is
particularly expressed and represented as a double Way; for our Savior has
told us, that there is Matthew. 7. 14.
a Narrow and a Broad Way. This is even the manner of speaking among the best
Moralists: they not only call the Life, Actions, and Conversation of Men a Way,
(which is usual in all Languages) but they designedly compare them to a Way, to
a Path, and to walking in it. As in Walking, says Epictetus, you take heed
that you strike not your Foot against a Stone or a Nail, and wrench your Foot;
so in leading your Life you are careful that you hurt not your selves, or do
any thing that may offend and be prejudicial to your selves or others. And
other Masters of Ethics are wont to pursue this Comparison. Yea moreover, they
make use of the same manner of Speech which our Savior does, that is, they
divide this Way into a Narrow and a Broad one. Thus in Cebes's Table the Way to
true Learning (which is the same with Virtue and Goodness, and the Moralist
means no other thing by it) is represented by him to be narrow and
unfrequented. He calls it a (...), etc.
little Gate; and he describes the Passage before it as very uncommon; he tells
us, that very few go into it; and that it appears to be a difficult, rough and
craggy Path. This is also well deciphered by Maximus Tyrius, (...), etc.
Dissertat. 23.
Imagine (says he) this Life to be a Way, a Way full of Passengers, some of
which are running, some are thrusting one another on; some labor, others rest;
some lie down, others turn out of the way and wander, for there are many
By-ways and false Paths, (these are all but different Paths of the same Broad
Way.) But there is (...), etc.
one Narrow Way, steep and rugged, and trod by very few, and this leads
directly to the very End of the Journey: and this Journey some diligent and
laborious Souls are endeavoring to perform with much Work and Difficulty, with
great Pains and Sweat. Thus that Admirable Platonist. And I could show you how
other Philosophers are delighted with this way of Expression and Similitude
used by our Lord; but I will alledg no others at present. It is enough to have
showed that the Style of the Gentile Philosophers is not unlike that of our
Blessed Jesus, our Infallible Teacher and Prophet, who thought it a fit way of
setting forth the two kinds of Life which Men lead, and the different Places
and Ends they tend to, by naming one of them the wide and broad Way; and the
other, the narrow and straight one.

And if the Life of Man be a Way, then he is a Traveller; which invites me to
speak of another Moral Notion, viz. that we are all Travelers and Pilgrims in
this World: we are upon our Journey, and must behave our selves as those that
are so. Epictetus and Arrianus use this Metaphor, and apply it handsomely to the
Life of Man, especially to the Life of a Good Man, which is a Journey from
Earth to Heaven. We are told that Anaxagoras pointed with his Finger to Heaven,
and cried out, Laert. in Anaxag.
That is my Country. And Socrates professed himself to be a (...). Stob.
Citizen of the City above: and every Man is to reckon himself to be such, he
said. Tully's Words are most admirable, Ex hac vita ita discedo tanquam ex
hospitio, non tanquam ex domo: commorandi enim diversorium natura nobis, non
habitandi dedit. Cic. de Senect.
I go out of this World as out of an Inn, not a Mansion House; for Nature has
not given us here a Place of long Continuance, but of a short Diversion and
transitory Entertainment. And he had arrived to this Notion, and expressed it
most bravely when he said, Erigamus in Coelum oculos tanquam in Patriam, in
quam nobis aliquando redeundum est.
Let us lift up our Eyes to Heaven as to our Country, to which we must think of
returning some time or other. And such kind of Language you meet with in
Antoninus and other select Moralists. I will conclude with the Words of Seneca,
Peregrinatio est vita; multum cum deambulaveris, domum redeundum est. De Remed.
Fort.
Our Life is a Pilgrimage, (says he;) when we have traveled and walked about
a considerable time, we must return home. This is the very Language and Notion
of the Sacred Writers, and of the Holy Men whose Lives they record. The Old
Patriarchs owned themselves to be Pilgrims; Genesis 47. 9. The Days of the Years
of my Pilgrimage, etc. And that you may not think it is meant only of their
traveling from Place to Place in those Days, you will find this was said by
some of their Posterity after they were possessed of the Promised Land, and
were no longer in the unsettled Condition of their Predecessors. We are
Strangers before thee, and Sojourners, as were all our Fathers, says the Pious
King, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. And in the next Words he lets us know what he means; Our
Days on Earth are as a Shadow, and there is no abiding: so that the whole Race
of Mankind are all equally Pilgrims and Sojourners in this World* they are
Psalm. 39. 12. Psalm. 119. 19.
Strangers in the Earth, as the same devout Man often acknowledges: and this
World is styled by him Psalm. 119. 54.
the House of his Pilgrimage. After the same manner St. Peter speaks, calling
this Life 1 Pet. 1. 17.
the time of our sojourning here: and he exhorts the converted Jews, to whom he
writes, to deport themselves as Strangers and Pilgrims, 1 Pet. 2. 11. which I
confess may have a more particular Reference to their being expelled out of
Judea their native Country, and dwelling in a strange Place, (whence he styles
them scattered Strangers, in the beginning of the Epistle) but notwithstanding
this the Apostle might apply it to them in the more general Notion, and as they
(with all other Christians) are Pilgrims traveling to another World. With
respect to which the other great Apostle says, Here we have no continuing
City, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13. 14. We have no fixed Habitation; we
have no settled Place of Abode; we (with other holy Men before us) must confess
we are Pilgrims, Heb. 11. 13. We belong to another Country, we are Citizens of
the Jerusalem that is above; We look (as all the holy Pilgrims heretofore did)
for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11. 10.
We are passing through this World to that Heavenly Metropolis; we are
traveling with our Caravan to that New Jerusalem, that Holy Land; and our
Thoughts, our Wishes, our Desires, our Conversation, are there already.

Again, that it may appear that Heathen Writers and the Holy Scripture have the
same way of Expression, I will show that they both agree to say, the Life of
Man is a Warfare: Thus it is called in the ancient Book of Job, chapter 7. 1. for
the word Tsaba, though it be rendered by us an appointed time, is as capable (if
not more) of being translated a Warfare: And so St. Ierom renders it, The Life
of Man is a Warfare on Earth. And again, cb. 14. 14. The Days of our Warfare
are the Term of Man's Life. Such Holy Job found it to be. The War was warm, the
Service was hot, the Battle was furious, and he was set in the Front of it.
Though this great Heroic Warrior fainted in the Conflict sometimes, yet his
Valor was very eminent, and he fought it out resolutely, and won the Day, and
was signally rewarded by the great Arbiter of Battle, the Lord of Hosts. It
cannot escape our Observation, that several Military Expressions are used by
the Holy Ghost in Scripture, to set forth the Duties and Offices of Man's Life,
and to let us know that it is a continual Combat and Fight. Yea, Tsaba,
militare, is applied to the Ecclesiastic Function and Ministry of the Levites
in the Tabernacle: their Service or Waiting is called a Warfare, Numb. 8. 25.
and in the Verse before, a warring a Warfare, if we render it exactly according
to the Hebrew. Especially this way of Speaking is applicable to the troublesome
and afflictive Part of Man's Life, which is rightly called by St. Paul, the
Fight of Afflictions, Heb. 10. 32. And with regard to this, without doubt,
those comfortable Words were spoken to Jerusalem, Her War is accomplished, Isa.
40. 2. But more eminently in the New Testament this Mode of Speech is
observable, where Christianity is represented as a Warfare, and the Christian
Church as Militant here on Earth. St. Paul is pleased to style our Savior,
Heb. 2. 10.
the Captain of our Salvation; and himself and all his Fellow Christians 2 Timothy
2. 3.
Soldiers; and those especially who were assistant to him in the sacred
Ministry of the Gospel, his Phil. 2 25. Philem. 2.
Fellow Soldiers: He exhorts Timothy 1 Timothy 1. 18.
to war the good Warfare; and Chap. 6. 12.
to fight the good Fight of Faith; and that in imitation of himself, who 2 Timothy
4. 7.
had fought this good Fight; though these latter Expressions refer more
peculiarly to the Olympic Combats, as you shall hear afterward. You read of
the Romans 6. 13.
Weapons of Righteousness, (as well as of Unrighteousness) belonging to this
Spiritual War. And these Weapons (which are called the whole Armor of God) are
particularly enumerated by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. I could observe to you
in that Exhortation of St. James, Jam. 4. 7.
Submit your selves to God; resist the Devil, and he will flee from you, that
there are three Military Terms: 1. (...), be subject to your Commander, observe
his Orders, look for the Signal of Battle from him, keep the Station that is
set you, be obedient to the Discipline of War, in all things be ruled by your
General; for (as St. Paul says very appositely when he is speaking of the
Christian Soldier) 2 Timothy 2. 4.
He that warreth must concern himself in nothing else but the pleasing of him
who has chosen him to be a Soldier. 2. (...), withstand, oppose, engage the
Enemy; be sure you give him Battle, make a resolute and vigorous Onset, charge
through his whole Body, make a Lane through his thickest Troops. 3. (...), he
shall be put to Flight, he shall certainly be routed and defeated, and never be
able to rally again; and so Victory at last crowns the Combat. But St. Paul
more briefly tells us what is the Employment of a Christian Soldier, when he
says, 2 Timothy 2. 3.
Endure Hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ: for in that one word
(...), he lets us understand that he is one that is to fare hardly, that he is
to be inured to Difficulties and Perils, to tedious Marches and continual
Watchings, to Hunger and Thirst, and infinite Fatigues, and that he must
converse with Dangers and Death: Every Battle of the Warrior is with confused
Noise, and Garments rolled in Blood. The Life of a Christian Soldier is
painful and laborious, because he is to be exercised in denying himself, in
crossing his sensual Appetite, in submitting to the hardest Duties, and
undergoing the greatest Sufferings, Temptations and Persecutions: He must be
continually sweating, toiling, striving, fighting, grappling with Foes of all
kinds, and encountering all sorts of Hardships. Thus a Christian is a Spiritual
Soldier; thus Christianity is a Holy War; thus the Life of Man is a Warfare.
And this is that which all the Great Masters of Morals inculcate in their
Writings. One of the chiefest of them (who calls the Life of Man the Pilgrimage
or Sojourning of a Stranger) gives it also the Denomination of a (...).
Antonin. (...).
Warfare. Arrianus very excellently descants on this Aphorism, that (...). Lib.
3. cap. 24.
every Man's Life is a kind of Militia; and that we are with all Diligence and
Faithfulness to discharge the Office of Soldiers, the chief Part of which is
to do all that our Commander bids us. Another famous Moralist adorns this
Subject with noble Reflections upon it; (...), etc. Max. Tyr. Dissert. 3.
Reckon upon this, says he, that God is our Commander and Chief Captain, that
this Life is a Military Expedition, that every Man is to be an Armed Soldier,
etc. Seneca has the same Conceptions of Humane Life, and once and again
resembles it to Vivere, militare est. Epist. 96.
the State of War, and the Exploits of Martial Men. As soon as we come into the
World we open the Campaign, and in a short time after we draw into a Line of
Battle, and we are continually making use of our Ammunition and Artillery, till
at length Death raises the Camp, and discharges us from our Warfare. Several
Passages might be produced out of other Pagan Writers, who frequently fall into
this Comparison, and use this Excellent Metaphor, and very finely illustrate
it: but what I have said is sufficient to show what I aim at, viz. that there
are the same Phrases and Expressions in the Holy Scriptures that there are in
other Authors.

This I will further make good in another Excellent Notion and Maxim, viz. that
Good and Virtuous Men are Free, but that all Vicious Persons are Slaves. The
Style of Scripture runs this way, not only in the Old Testament, where David
desires to be Psalm, 51. 12.
upheld by the free Spirit of God, i. e. by such a Divine and Generous
Principle as would make him act with the greatest Freedom in the ways of
Religion: and where Sinners and Ungodly Men are styled Prisoners and Captives
once and again; as in Zech. 9. 11. Isa. 42. 6, 7. chapter 49. 8, 9. chapter 61. 1. Nor
is it to be doubted whether these Places speak of such Persons, seeing our
Savior himself alleges one of them (which is of the same Nature with the
rest) to this Purpose, and tells us, it is his Office to proclaim Liberty to
these Captives, Luke 4. 18. i. e. to offer Pardon to Sinners. But in the New
Testament also (and there chiefly) this is the Language of the Holy Ghost: the
Freedom that accompanies Holiness, and the Servitude of Sin, are expressly
declared in those Words of Christ, The Truth shall make you free, John 8. 32.
Whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, ver. 34. If the Son shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed, ver. 36. The whole sixth Chapter to the
Romans treats of this very thing, the Service of Sin, and the Freedom from it
by Christ. The Servants of Sin mentioned here by St. Paul, are the same with 1
Pet. 3. 19.
the Spirits in Prison whom St. Peter speaks of, as I have proved in another
Place, and have showed the Inconsistency of other Interpretations. Whilst Men
continue in their Sins, and addict themselves to their Vices, their Spirits,
their Souls are deservedly said to be in Prison; their Persons are in Custody;
they live in Durance and Thraldom; they are continually in Bonds and Chains;
they are fettered Slaves and Vassals: They may perhaps flatter themselves, and
vaunt of Freedom, but they are Prisoners still; 2 Pet. 2. 19.
they promise Liberty, but are themselves Servants of Corruption. Whereas, on
the contrary, True Religion enstates Men in a real and substantial Freedom;
Christianity is Jam. 1. 25.
the perfect Law of Liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, where Evangelical Sanctity is, there is
Liberty. In short; no Man that loves to be vicious, and lives in the practice
of Sin, can be said to be a Freeman; for he is wholly at the command of his
Lusts: There is not a greater Slave in Algiers or Tripoli than such an one.
This not only the Sacred Scriptures but Heathen Writers inculcate. Tully
defends that Maxim, Quod omnes sapientes, liberi; and stulti, servi: and
enlarges on it most admirably. This Zeno and all the Stoics maintained, as we
learn from (...). In Zenone.
Laertius: and Isocrates more than once in his Orations to Demonicus and
Nicocles, speaks thus. So does Cap. 20.
Epictetus, who expressly asserts that Vice and Immorality are the greatest
Drudgery and Slavery. So does Arrianus, who tells us, that (...). Lib. 4. c. 1.
he is a Freeman who lives as he wills, i. e. who makes the Rational Dictates
of his Will the Rule of his Life; which none but a Good Man does. Horace's
admirable Character of a Freeman is worth the consulting; Quisnam igitur
Liber? Sapiens, sibique imperiosus,
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent:
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, and in seipso totus teres atque rotundus.
And more he has to the same purpose, which acquaints us what Apprehensions
the Moralists had of Freedom. (...),
(...), etc.

Freemen, says Euripides, are very rare in the World; for there is scarcely a
Man to be found who is not a Slave to his Wealth or Fortune, or some other
thing. A Man that extremely loves his Money is Stobae. Sermon. 22.
a Golden Slave, in Socrates's Language. Extrema est servitus cum animae
humanae vitiis deditae, rationis propriae possessione ceciderunt. De Consolat.
l. 5. c. 11.
That is the worst kind of Servitude, says Boethius, when the Souls of Men are
given up to Vice, and are fallen from the possession of their own Reason. Nemo
liber est qui corpori servit. Epist. 82.
There is no Man, says Seneca, can be said to be Free, that is a Slave to his
corporeal and sensual Part. Vides quam malam and noxiam servitutem serviturus*
sit, quem Voluptates and Dolores, incertissimae dominae impotentissimaeque
alternis possidebunt. De vit. beat. cap. 5.
You see, says he in another Place, what a base and pernicious Slavery that
Man has brought himself into, who suffers unlawful Pleasures and Sorrows,
those unconstant and impotent Mistresses, to domineer over him by turns. Thus
it is the Style of the Pagan as well as Inspired Writers, that Goodness is the
true Freedom, and that Vice is real Bondage and Slavery.

So that Other Notion, that Good Men are only Wise, and that Sinners are Fools,
is the Language both of Scripture and Profane Writers. Moses assures the
Israelites, that to keep and do God's Commandments is their Wisdom and
Understanding, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. with which is parallel Job 28. 28. The Fear of the
Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil is Understanding. But on the
contrary, he that is destitute of the true and saving Knowledge and Fear of God,
is a Fool, in the Style of Holy Writ; Psalm. 14. 1.
The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God. And the following Words
acquaint us that this Fool is one of a Vicious and Corrupt Life; Psalm. 49. 13.
This their Way is their Folly, says the same Pious King. And his Royal Son
had learned to speak the same Language; whence in the Book of Proverbs Wicked
Men and Fools are Synonymous, they are such Prove. 14. 9.
Fools as make a mock of Sin. So in the New Testament, the Man that studied
nothing but his Unlawful Gain and Pleasure, is pronounced a Luke 12. 20.
Fool by Him who thoroughly understood the right Measures of Wisdom and Folly.
This is agreeable to the Language of the Moral Philosophers in their Writings,
especially of the Stoics, whose Wise Man (it is well known) is no other than
the Virtuous. In Cicero's Paradoxes this is expressly maintained and proved.
Goodness and Integrity are (...). Dissert. 15.
a stable and solid Wisdom, says Maximus Tyrius: and others of the Platonic
School talk after that manner. (...). Hierocl.
He that lives as without God in the World; he that is irreligious and profane,
is a Person void of Understanding, says another Excellent Man. Nay, the
Stoics went further, and pronounced all Vicious Men to be Mad. The Founder of
that Sect was wont to say, as Diogenes Laertius informs us, that (...). In
Zenone.
all Fools are Frentick, i. e. all Wicked Men are so. A Man given to Vice is
compared by Dissert. 28.
Maximus Tyrius to one whose Brain is disordered with Drunkenness or Madness:
and though (as he says) he has his Intervals, and now and then makes use of
his Reason, yet his Head is extremely disordered. And Horace, who has as many
Excellent Moral Axioms as any of the Ancients, speaks after this rate: -- Quid
avarus?
Stultus and insanus. --
Which is the very Style of the Holy Scripture likewise: Madness is in in their
Heart, Eccles. 9. 3. which is explained in the words immediately foregoing, The
Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil. And from the ensuing Texts you may
see this made good, Eccles. 2. 2. Ier. 50. 38. and 51. 7. Acts 26. 11. Where
Excess of Wickedness bears the Name of Madness. Conformably to which it is said
of the Debauched Son in the Parable, that he came to himself, Luke 15. 17.
which manner of Expression lets us know that he that runs into Excess of Riot
is besides himself, and that an extravagant Sinner is a Bedlam.

And here I will make bold to interpret another Text to this purpose, (although
all those Commentators upon it that I have seen are pleased to be of another
Mind) John 20. 10. which in Greek is thus, (...), and has this Translation in
English, Then they went away again to their own home: but it seems not to be
rightly translated: For first, (...) is not then but therefore, and gives a
Reason of what went before. 2dly. There is not any word in the Text that
denotes Home, and therefore we cannot put that word into the English
Translation. (...), which is the Greek Word, signifies themselves, not their
own Home. It should have been (...), if it were to be translated they went to
their home, as you find the Greek rendered in Mark 3. 19. Luke 15. 6. 3dly. We
do not read that the Disciples or Apostles, of whom these words are spoken,
went before to their Home, or that they came from thence: How then can it be
said that they went again? Wherefore I render it thus, They therefore came
again to themselves, i. e. were reduced to a sober Mind. It is the same Phrase
with (...), which is spoken of the Prodigal; he came to himself. For sometimes
(...) is the same with (...) venire as is clear from (...), hujusmodi quaedam
in mentem mihi veniunt ut eloquar. In Gorgia.
Plato and other Writers. And so here, (...) is to come to themselves, i. e. to
be of a right and sound Mind. It is a way of speaking used by very good
Authors: In Comment. in Epictet. lib. 3. c. 1.
Arrianus and others (...) bears the same sense. Yea, the word (...), or (...),
is as much as (...), or (...) redire, as we may inform our selves from In verbo
(...).
Suidas, who tells us that T^ucydides takes the word in this sense. And so
(...) answers exactly to ad se redire, which is a Phrase among the Cic.^. Ver.
Terent, in Adelph.
Latins that signifies to come to a right Mind or Understanding. Or if you take
(...) for venire only, yet the Adverb (...) being joined with it, directs us to
this very sense which I offer; for (...), iterum ad se venire, is all one with
ad se redire, to return to himself. So the Apostles Peter and John (of whom
this Text speaks) returned to themselves, or came again to themselves, i. e. to
a found Mind and Understanding, which they had lost for some time. For
notwithstanding Christ had so frequently Mat. 12. 40. and 16. 21. and 17. 23.
Mar. 9. 31. Luke 9. 22.
told them, when he was alive, that he would rise again after his Death, yea
and had set the time of his Resurrection, viz. within three days; yet when they
saw he was dead* they had no belief of any such thing, but utterly despaired of
it. Herein they showed themselves very Discomposed Persons, this argued them to
be besides themselves, and that Conduct of Reason and Faith which might have
been expected from them. But when they went into the Sepulcher, and saw the
Linen Clothes lie by themselves, v. 6, 7. which was a plain sign that the Body
was not stolen away, for then the Clothes would have been taken away too,
because they would not have staid to strip the Body: When the Disciples saw
this, they believed, v. 8. tho (as it follows) as yet they knew not the
Scripture, that he must rise again from the Dead, v. 9. The meaning is, they
were not induced to this Belief by considering the Prophecies in the Old
Testament concerning Christ's Resurrection, but they believed because they saw.
The sight of the Linen Clothes and the Napkin lest in the Sepulcher, cured them
of their former Unbelief, and convinced them that Christ was really risen, and
had thrown off those Ensigns of Mortality, and lest them behind him in the
Sepulcher. (...), etc. therefore the Disciples came again to themselves. This
word (...) gives a Reason of what is here spoken of from what is said before.
St. Peter and St. John were healed of the former Distemper and Malady of their
Minds which they labored under, by descending into the Grave, and seeing what
was there. Now their Ignorance and Infidelity vanish, now they are brought to a
due Composure of Thoughts, which they wanted before. And indeed this is not the
first time that these very Apostles were disordered in Mind. They knew not what
they said ( Mat. 9. 6.) when they were on the Mount at Christ's
Transfiguration: one or both of these discovered how disordered they were in
their Practice as well as Notions, when they called for Fire from Heaven upon
the Samaritans, Luke 9. 54. and at several other times they acted contrary to
sober Reason and the right Apprehensions which they ought to have had of
things. But they afterward recovered themselves, and had better Notions of
things, and acted more conformably to the Dictates of a Composed Intellect.
Thus here, they recollected themselves, they came again to themselves. And thus
(...), or (...) is of the same import with (...) in De Somniis.
Philo. I conceive this may be the plain sense of the Evangelist's words:
however I propound it only by way of Conjecture, and am willing in this (as in
other things) to submit to the Arbitration of the Wise.

I will mention another Instance of this Agreement of the Style of Pagan and
Inspired Writers. It is usually among the former to honor a Good Man with the
Title of the Friend of God. (...) is usual in Homer; and among the
Philosophers, Plato especially, it is very frequent. Who are the Friends of
God, is excellently discoursed of by this brave Man in his fourth Book of Laws.
A Religious Man is a Friend of God, says Dissert. 4.
Max. Tyrius, with whom concurs another Plutar^h. contra Epicur.
Eminent Moralist, directly asserting that Good Men are the Friends of the
Deity. Epictetus and Arrianus speak of God as a Friend, and the Best Friend.
Ca^byses's Advice to his Son Cyrus was, Be thou the Friend of God, as De Cyri
Institut. l. 8.
Xenophon relates. In short, it was the common Style and Language of the best
Moralists, as Socrates, Antoninus, Seneca, Plotinus, (besides those before
named) to call a Virtuous Person a Fri^nd or one Beloved of God. Especially
this Epithet was given him if he prospered in his virtuous Enterprises, if he
found Success in his laudable Endeavors. Yea, Epictetus (that Excellent Stoic
Philosopher, and Great Master of Ethics) was honored with this -- (...).
Title, as the highest that could be, when he left the World, as we learn from
his Epitaph. The same Expression we meet with often in Scripture; the same
honorable Epithet is vouchsafed there to Holy Men. Abraham the Father of the
Faithful is particularly signalized by it, and that no less than thrice, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Isa. 41. 8. Iam. 2. 23. Of Moses it is said, that God spoke to him
as to his Friend, Exodus 33. 11. Solomon was named Iedidiah, i. e. the Beloved
of the Lord, 2 Samuel 13. 25. In that Mystical Book of the Canticles this Name is
attributed to both those entire Lovers, Christ and the Church. Cant 5. 1.
Eat O ye Friends, drink O Beloved, says the former: Ver. 16.
This is my Beloved, this is my Friend, says the latter. In which places Rang
and Dod are the like endearing Titles with Ob^b, which was the word used in the
Texts beforementioned. And this further I could observe to you, that the words
Obeb and Obebim, which are translated Friend and Friends in those places, might
be rendered so in many Deuteronomy. 5. 10. Neh. 1. 5. Psalm. 122. 6. Psalm. 145. 20.
Prove. (...). 17. D^^. 9. 4.
others where our Translators english them him, or those that love God. In the
Evangelical Writings the same Style is observable: thus those words in L^ke 12.
4. are spoken by our Savior, particularly to his dear Companions and
Disciples, where he calls them his Friends. And in three Verses together these
his faithful Followers and Associates, and with them all True Believers and
Holy Men are styled his Friends, Joh. 15. 13, 14, 15. And hear what an
Honorable Epitaph our Savior bestowed on La^arus, John 11. 11. Our Friend
Lazarus sleeps.

What is more usual in the Language of the New Testament, than to say, a Wicked
Man is dead? This my Son was dead, says the Father of the Prodigal Son, Luke
15. 24. giving us to understand, that the Profligate and Debauched are morally
dead. And so some think this Term is to be understood in the former part of
those words, Let the Dead bury their Dead, Mat. 8. 22. Of the Widow gi^en to
Luxury it is said, she is dead while she lives, I Tim. 5. 6. And to be dead in
Sin is in Scripture-Phraseology applied after the same manner, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5.
Col. 2. 13. And in several other places the like mode of Speech is observable.
To which the Ancient Philosophers were no Strangers, in whose account Vicious
Men were reputed as dead. Hence an (...), etc. Clem. Alex.
Ancient Writer of the Church observes that even in the Barbarick Philosophy
they were wont to call those Dead who abandoned the right Sentiments of things
which they had, and made their Souls slaves to the Animal Passions. Not only
Pythagoras himself was wont to place a Coffin in the room of his outcast
Scholars, as if they had been dead, but his Followers (and the Platonists in
imitation of him) had the same Practice among them. For it was an acknowledged
Notion that Virtue makes us live, and consequently that wicked Men do not
properly live, but that in true Morality they are rightly said to be dead.
(...). Plut.
There is wanting in them an inward Principle of Life, as the Spartan said
after all his trials of erecting a dead Body into a living Posture. Hence Vice
is deservedly styled (...). Hierocl.
the Death of the rational part of Man, and (...). Arrian. in Epictet.
the Mortality of the Soul. With relation to which guise of Speech intermortui
mores are in Plautus, Corrupt and Vicious Manners. And the like Phrase is used
by the Jews; the Wicked (say they) are Dead while they live: and again they
tell us, that Talm. Vaji^. ^ab.
a Dead Carcass is better than a Disciple that is void of Knowledge and true
Wisdom. And other such like Expressions there are not only among the Hebrews
but the Arabians.

Once more I will observe how the Scripture speaks as the best Moralists do,
viz. when it calls Death a Sleep. The Hebrew Verb Shacab signifies to lie down
to sleep, Genesis 19. 4. and likewise to die, ^ Sam. 7. 12. Isa. 14. 8. whence to
sleep with their Fathers is an usual Phrase in the Historical Books of the Old
Testament. Thence the Grave is called a Bed, Isa. 57. 2. Gneres is both lectus
and feretrum, the Bed of those that sleep, and the Bed or Bier of those that
are dead, (as perhaps our Saxon word grave, or grab, as other Germans write it,
is from grabatus.) The Psalmist mentions the Sleep of Death, Psalm. 13. 3. And
it seems this was the Style of the Ancient Arabs, as appears from Job 7. 21. I
shall sleep in the Dust. If we descend to the New Testament, we shall read
there that Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11. 11. and of St. Stephen it is said that
Acts 7. 60.
he fell asleep, and of other holy Men that 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
they sleep in Jesus, and 1 Cor. 15. 6, 18.
are fallen asleep in Christ. When a good Man dies, he lays himself down to
Rest, he betakes himself to his Repose: bidding the World good night, he shuts
his Eyes, and opens them no more till the Morning of the Resurrection. The like
Expression is in use among the Pagans: to sleep and to die are synonymous Terms
with them. With the Prince of Poets Sleep is not only (...). Hom. Il. 14.
the Brother of Death, but it is the very word to express -- (...) 11. 7.
Death it self. Nox est perpetuo una dormienda, says Catullus. Perpetuus Sopor
is Horace's Language: Nox perpetua is Propertius's; which is the same with
Virgil's Nox aeterna. Alluding to which Phrase is that of Tusc. 2. and Philip.
1.
Tully and other good Authors, decumbere to lie down, to betake himself to
sleep, i. e. to die. Accordingly the Poets feign the Palace of Sleep to be
bordering on the Infernal Regions of Hell and Death. Thus I have let you see in
several Particulars (and many more might have been produced) that there are the
very same Expressions in Scripture that we ^eet with in other Writers: and
certainly it is some Satisfaction to intelligent Minds to observe the handsome
Agreement between both.

CHAP. III.
There are in the Sacred Writ the same Grammatical Figures which are found in
other Writers; as an Enallage of Person, of Number, of Time. One Bodily Sense
is mentioned instead of another. There is an exchange of the Positive,
Comparative and Superlative. A Negative is put for a Comparative: this showed
in a great number of Instances in the Writings both of the Old and New
Testament. An Hendyadis is usual in Scripture. So is a Prolepsis. And an
Hysterosis. The reason which Monsieur Simon gives of this latter is refuted, 1.
By proving the Antiquity of Parchment-scrolls used in writing. 2. By showing
that they were well fastened together, so that they could not easily be
misplaced and transposed, much less be lost, as this Writer imagines.
Josephus's remarkable Testimony produced to confirm both these. The true reason
and occasion of some Transpositions in the Old Testament assigned.

IN the next place I will show you that there are in the Sacred Writ the same
Grammatical and Rhetorical Figures which are found in Other Writers. It will be
very useful to insist a while upon these, because we cannot attain to a right
understanding of the Scriptures unless we have some insight into them; yea we
shall sometimes miserably mistake the sense and meaning of this Holy Book if we
are not acquainted with the nature of the Scripture-Stile as to this very
thing. I know these Figures (some of them especially) are observed and taken
notice of by Glassius, Joach. Camerarius, Westhemerus, etc.
several Writers: but my chief Design is to give some Instances of them which
are not taken notice of by Others, and yet are very necessary to be known in
order to the right understanding the Holy Scriptures. There are several of
these I shall produce. You must know then that those Grammatical Figures or
Defective Modes of speaking which are found in the Bible, are such as these.
First, there is an Enallage of the Person, i. e. it is usual to put one Person
in Grammatical Construction for another. Thus we is instead of they, Psalm. 66.
6. your Heart for their Heart, Psalm. 22. 26. They for he, Eccles. 7. 29. they
have sought out, which refers to Man in the preceding Clause. They instead of
ye, Isa. 61. 7. They for she, as in 1 Timothy 2. 15. if they continue, i. e. if
she, viz. the Woman spoken of before, continue in Faith, etc. and she is
expressly mentioned in the Clause immediately foregoing. So in Gal. 6. 1. thy
self should be themselves, for it refers to ye in the preceding words. But the
Instances are almost numberless, wherein I might show you this Change of
Persons. It is enough to have hinted this at present, that you may continually
take notice of this in the Style of the Sacred Writers, and that you may direct
your selves in the understanding of some places, which cannot rightly be
interpreted unless we observe this Grammatical Alteration, and thereby guide
our Thoughts to the sense of the words. And this also might be suggested, that
this way of Speech is used then generally, when there is a sudden Transition
from one thing to another, or when there is a Distribution of the Matter
treated of, and sometimes when there is a Familiar and Easy expressing of
things yea at other times, when a near Concernedness of the Persons spoken of
is to be taken notice of.

Next you may observe the Change of Number; you will find it common in
Scripture to express one Number by another, especially the Singular by the
Plural. As it is said the Ark rested on the Mountains of Ararat, i. e. on one of
those Mountains, Genesis 8. 4. for it could not rest on them all. The Graves are
ready for me, Job 17. 1. instead of the Grave, and so in chapter 21. v. 32.
according to the Hebrew, tho not in our Translation. A single River is meant
when Rivers are named, as you read of the Gates of the Rivers, when Tigris only
is meant, Nah. 2. 6. That Sacrifices is put for a Sacrifice in Heb. 9. 23. is
plain; for the Apostle there speaks of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ. In
these and many (...), Mat. 12. 1. Luke 4. 16. (...), Mat. 26. 64. Man. 10. 5.
other places the Plural Number supplies the room of the Singular. And in some
other Texts the Singular is mentioned instead of the Plural, as in Job 37. 6.
Cloud for Clouds. Psalm. 9. 20. That the Nations may know themselves to be but
Man (for so it is in the Hebrew) instead of Men. Isa. 3. 12. Child (for so you
have it in the Original) for Children. Ezekiel. 31. 3. Branch (as the Hebrew has
it) for Branches. A Sheaf for Sheaves, Amos 2. 13. And the like is observable
in the New Testament, that they may shave their Head, (so it is in the Greek)
Acts 21. 24. for Heads: Loin for Loins, Heb. 7. 5. Body for Bodies, Phil. 3.
21. Heart for Hearts, Romans 1. 21. and the same Enallage is in 1 Cor. 4. 2. Thus
it is the usual way of the Sacred Writers (who in this, as in many other things
are followed by the best Greek and Latin Authors) to exchange one Number for
another* and it will be requisite for the Inquisitive Reader to observe this
manner of speaking, because otherwise sometimes he will miss of the true Sense
of the Place where this kind of Style is made use of.

I pass to the Enallage of Time, which is very frequent in the Holy Writ. In
the Prophetic Writers especially this is observable; there the Present, or
rather the Praeterperfect Tense (for the Hebrews have no Present Tense) is used
very commonly for the Future, as in 1 Kings 13. 2. A Child is born (according
to the Hebrew) for shall be born. Isa. 9. 2. The People that walked in Darkness
have seen a great Light, prophetically for shall see. Chapter 9. 6. Unto us a Child
is born; unto us a Son is given, instead of shall be born, shall be given. So
in the New Testament, in that Prophecy of Enoch quoted by St. Jude, ver. 14.
The Lord comes (or has come) with ten thousand of his Saints; (...) supplies
the place of (...). I come unto you, John 14. 18. (for so it is in the Greek)
should in Propriety of Speaking be, I will come unto you; and therefore it is
so translated in our E^glish Bibles. In such like Places things are spoken in
the Present or Praeterperfect Tense, to signify the Reality and Certainty of
them, to let us know they shall as surely be fulfilled as if they were so
already. And as the Present or Praeterit is put for the Future, so this is
sometimes used instead of that, as in Exodus 3. 14. Ehjeh, ero, is instead of
sum; and accordingly the 70 Interpreters render that Place (...); and we after
them, I am that I am. The like Enallage you will find in Isa. 30. 32. And
sometimes the Praeterit is used where the Present Time is understood, as in
Rev. 3. 20. (...), I have stood, which therefore we rightly translate I stand.
Nothing is more common than this way of speaking in the Old and New Testament,
insomuch that I need not have taken notice of so frequent a thing, unless I had
undertaken to give a short Specimen of all or most of the Observables relating
to the Scripture-Stile.

And as one Person, Number, and Tense, is put for another in the Holy Writings,
so it might be remarked that one Bodily Sense is mentioned instead of another;
especially the Use of the Sight is frequently put for Hearing, as in Isa. 2. 1.
The Word that Isaiah the Son of Amos sa^, i. e. the Prophecy which he
immediately heard from God's Month, and which he delivers in express Terms in
the next Verse. To see the Voice, Rev. 1. 12. is to hear it, unless you will
say, that seeing of the Person, whose Voice it was, is meant. Other Places
might be produced where these two Senses are exchanged, but I will only here
note, that this is common among Profane Writers: Lucret. l. 4.
Sex etiam and septem loca vidi reddere voces
Unam cum jaceres.
And another; Virgil. Aen. 3.
-- Nec quae sonitum det causa videm^^. And visa loqui is instead of audita
loqui in In Rufin.
Claudian.

Sometimes you will find a Change of the Comparative for the Positive, as in
Matthew. 18. 8. according to the Greek, It is good for thee, i. e. it is better
thee to enter into Life h^lt and maimed, than having t^o Hands, etc. And in
Mark 14. 21. Good i. e. Better were it for that Man if he had never been born.
So in 1 Timothy 3. 13. They that have used the Office of a De^con well, purc^ase
to themselves a Good Degree, i. e. a Better or Greater Degree, viz. of a
Fresbyter or Bishop. Sometimes the Positive or Comparative is mentioned when
the Superlative is understood, as in Matthew. 22. 36, 38. The great Commandment,
i. e. the greatest; and is explained there by (...) the first. Those Words in
Luke 7. 28. are generally reduced by Expositors to this Head, and therefore our
English Version is [He that is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he]:
but I do not see any Reason to bring it under this way of speaking. For
according to the Greek it should be, he that is lesser: and this is the true
and natural Translation, the meaning of our Savior's Words being this, I am
lesser, i. e. in Age, I am Younger than John the Baptist, and am Lesser in the
Estimation of the People than he is; but yet I am far Greater than he, for he
was but my Forerunner, my Messenger, as he says in the foregoing Verse. So
Theophyla^^ interprets the Words; and our own Translators in another Place
favor this Exposition, when those Words in Romans 9. 12. which according to the
Greek are [ the greater shall serve the lesser] are rendr^d by them thus, the
elder shall serve the younger. So that you see the lesser is interpreted the
younger; and there seems to be good Ground to understand it so in this Place.
And indeed this is according to the Style of the best Latin Authors, among
whom, major and minor natu, are the elder and younger. Nay, Se^ video herilem
filium minorem huc venire. Ter. in Eunuch.
minor, absolutely and without any Addition, is as much as junior* But in Phil.
1, 23. Having a Desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better,
it is not to be questioned, I think, that the Superlative is changed for the
Comparative; far better is instead of best of all. And so in Matthew. 13. 32. the
lesser of all Seeds (according to the Greek) for the least; and accordingly we
translate it so. Other Examples of this you have in Luke 9. 46. John 10. 29.
These are the Grammatical Changes which are observable in the Holy Book; and
any one that has perused the Writings of Other Authors, especially of the
Greek and Latin Poets, is not ignorant that the very same occur in them, and
that very often; so that I thought it needless to present you with Parallels
out of those Writers.

But among the several Enallages, i. e. Changings of one thing for another in
the Style of Scripture, I will in the last Place mention this, viz. that a
Negative oftentimes is put for a Comparative. The due observing of this will
help us to reconcile many Places of Scripture, which seem to jar with some
others. I will begin with Numb. 23. 21. He has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob,
neither has he seen Perverseness in Israel: Which is a Text that the
Antinomian Party lay great Stress upon; for hence they say it is evident that
God sees not any Sin in his own People, and consequently that he is not
displeased with them for it: whence it will follow that they need not be
displeased neither; their Sins (be they never so great and flagitious) are not
to be the matter of their Sorrow, seeing God is not offended with them: which
Doctrine soon opens a Door to all Licentiousness and Profaneness: but it is
easily shut again by applying this Rule, that Scripture oftentimes, and here
particularly, speaks Absolutely, but is to be understood in a Comparative or
Limited Sense. God beholds not Iniquity in Jacob, in his Chosen, as he does in
profligate Persons, and such as are given up to their Lusts; i. e. he beholds
it not so in them as to reject them utterly, and to punish them eternally for
their Misdoings. Thus if we compare God's beholding Sin in the one, with his
beholding it in the other, he may be said not to behold it in the former, i. e.
in his own People and Servants. But God hates and punishes Sin in both sorts
of Persons, and more particularly in those that are his, according to what he
declares in Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. Thus God did not behold
Iniquity, did not see Perverseness in Israel; for we are assured by the Prophet
Chap. ^. ver. 1^.
Habakkuk, that he is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot look on
Iniquity. He cannot look on it long without punishing it, as well as he hated
it always. Why then do some confidently aver, that God neither punishes nor
hates Sin in his People, nor is displeased with them for it? Thus by making use
of the foregoing Rule, we see what is the plain and natural Meaning of the
Words. In a Comparative Sense, not in an Absolute and Unrestrained one, it is
said, He beholds not Iniquity in Jacob: which is so far from favoring the
Antinomian Doctrine, that it clearly baffles and confutes it. I will pass to
another Text, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, 1 Samuel 8.
7. They did reject Samuel from being Judge, in that they chose a King over them:
yet God says, They have not rejected thee, i. e. Comparatively they have not:
they have not so much by this Action of despising Samuel their Judge, rejected
him, as they have manifested their Rejection of Me, who am their Chief Judge and
Ruler, and who set Samuel over them as my Deputy. They may be said to have
rejected Me rather than him. The Psalmist faith, Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. But though he speaks Exclusively, and in a manner
Negatively, (for it is as much as if he had said, Against thee have I sinned,
and not against any one besides) yet he is to be understood Comparatively, for
it is certain that he sinned against Others, namely, against Uriah in a signal
manner, whom he made drunk, and whose Blood he shed, and whose Bed he desiled;
yea, as he was King, he notoriously sinned against all his Subjects and People:
But because he Chiefly and Principally sinned against God who had raised him to
the Throne, and done such wonderful things for him; because he had most of all
offended God, he confesses that he had sinned against Him, and Him only, Him
and none else. A Negative is used for a Comparative. And so it is in Hos. 6. 6.
I desired Mercy and not Sacrifice; which is explained in the next Clause of
that Verse, and the Knowledge of God more than Burnt-offerings. Not is
interpreted by more. God values Acts of Mercy and Charity, and such
indispensable Duties of the Moral Law, more than all the Performances of the
Ceremonial one. So that the Antithesis here is but in way of Comparison, as we
may see in 1 Samuel 15. 22. To obey is better than Sacrifi^e.

The New Testament speaks after this manner, there you will frequently observe
that our Savior and his Apostles pronounce many things simply and absolutely,
which yet we ought to understand and interpret with a Limitation. Mark 5. 39.
She is not dead, but sleeps, faith Christ of Iairus's deceased Daughter. She
was dead, that cannot be denied; therefore this Negative must be expounded so
as to qualify the Sense: She rather sleeps than is dead: Her Departure is a
Sleep to her, and I will soon awaken her out of it, as you shall see. Thus our
Savior must be supposed to have spoken. Again, he faith, Luke 14. 12.
When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither thy Kinsmen nor thy rich Neighbors; but call the Poor, the Maimed, the
Lame, the Blind. The meaning is, rather call these than them; yea, rather
wholly omit these Feasts and Invitations, than forget to be charitable to the
Poor. If the Necessitous be not excluded from your Charity, you may feast your
rich Friends and Relations: but you must not feast Them, and neglect These;
yea, you must chiefly and most of all take care of these. So is that other
Passage of our Savior to be understood, Labor not for the Meat which
perishes, John 6. 27. i. e. labor more for that Meat which endures unto
Everlasting Life (which he immediately after speaks of) than for this. You may
labor for the perishing Meat, but let your greatest Care and Endeavor be for
that which never perishes. Still you see the Negative is to be explained by a
Comparative. And so it is in John 16. 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my
Name, i. e. ye have asked little, which is comparatively Nothing. Thus the
Apostle is to be meant when he says, 2 Cor. 2. 5. He has not grieved me, that
is, me only, as is clear from the following Words, but in part all, for so it
should be rendered according to the Greek, and a Parenthesis should be made. In
part (says the Apostle) he has brought Grief and Trouble to you all; I say,
in part, that I may not overcharge him, that I may not aggravate his Fault too
much. But, to speak Comparatively, and with respect to the whole Church, he
has not grieved me, because I am inconsiderable in comparison of all of you.
The following Texts of St. Paul are to be explained thus: 2 Cor. 5. 4. We that
are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we should be
unclothed, i. e. not for that only, or Comparatively not for that. Charity
seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. i. e. not solely and chiefly. In respect of
her generous Designs of Good for Others, she may be said not to seek her Own
Good and Advantage. From which Sense of the Words we may know to interpret
those other Texts; Let no Man seek his own, but every Man another's Wealth, 1
Cor. 10. 24. All seek their own, Phil. 2. 21. When this Apostle faith, We
wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, etc. Ephesians. 6.
12. the Sense certainly must be this, We wrestle not only or chiefly against
those, but rather, yea most against these. Though we combat with our selves
and our corrupt Natures, and with evil Men, yet our main Conflict is with the
Spirits of Darkness, the Apostate Angels, who are hourly tempting and
solic^ting us to Vice, that they may bring us into the same State of
Condemnation with themselves. So when we are told that the Law is not made for
a righteous Man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the Ungodly and for
Sinners, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 8. we must not with an Antinomian Gloss upon the Words
exempt righteous and godly Men from their Obligation to the Moral Law; for the
Negative here has not the Import of an Absolute Denial, but signifies only
that the delivering of the Law, and especially the Commination of it, were not
primarily and chiefly designed for the Righteous, for those that by the Grace
of God observe the Precepts of it, but for those notorious. Offenders
particularly enumerated in the following Words; the Comminatory Part belongs to
them. Women are bid to adorn themselves not with broidered (it should be
broided) Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or c^stly Array, but with good Works, 1 Timothy
2. 9, 10. With which we may join that of another Apostle, Whose adorning let it
not be the outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of
putting on of Apparel, but let it be the ^idden Man of the Heart, 1 Pet. 3. 3,
4. None can imagine that all outward adorning and wearing of Gold, or putting
on Apparel or costly Array, are utterly unlawful, and consequently forbidden
here; wherefore the Words are to be taken with some Restriction; they are
spoken Comparatively, that is, the Inward Adorning is far better, and much more
to be looked after than the Outward and Bodily one. Christian Women must adorn
themselves rather with Humility and Sobriety than with these. They ought not to
be so solicitous about Apparel, as about the Inward Ornaments of the Soul. Nay,
whatever Apparel is light and vain, and any ways administers to Lust, or Pride,
or Wantonness, is wholly to be laid aside, as sinful and unlawful. In the same
Chapter of the forenamed Epistle to Timothy you read, that Adam was not
deceived, but the Woman, ver. 14. We know that Adam was deceived, but yet in a
Comparative way of speaking he was not, that is, his Deception was not so gross
and inexcusable as that of the Woman. It is said of the faithful Patriarchs,
that they received not the Promise, Heb. 11. 39. i. e. in comparison of what we
have since received. They received it not in the full extent; else you cannot
make sense of the following words, God ^aving provided, etc. In the foresaid
Chapter of St. Peter it is said, Baptism does also now save us, not the putting
away the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God,
ver. 21. This not seems to be Exclusive and Negative, and thence some have made
use of this Text to null the sacred Ordinance of Baptism, which in Contempt
they call Water Baptism. But they err, not knowing the Scriptures, and
particularly not attending to the sense of this place, where not is no Absolute
Negative, but a Comparative. Not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, i. e.
not the Outward Baptism simply and only, or not that in Comparison of the
other, viz. the Inward washing and purifying by the Spirit. And many other
places it is impossible to understand aright, unless you make use of this
Observation which I have here exemplified, namely that a Comparison is commonly
in Scripture expressed by an Antithesis, or, which is all one, that a Negative
is put for a Comparative.

In the next place, I might observe to you that an Hendyadis is very usual in
Scripture, that is, two things are put severally to signify but one, as Let the
Lights be in the Firmament for Signs and for Seasons, Genesis 1. 14. i. e. (as
some Expositors think, tho I am not satisfied about it) Let them be for Signs
of the Seasons. And they who read Psalm. 17. 13, 14. thus, Deliver my Soul from
the Wicked by thy Sword, from Men by thy Hand, tell us here is (...), the Sword
and the Hand, for a Sword handled or drawn, as if the Psalmist called upon God
here to be his Champion, and to deliver him by fighting for him. That in Mat.
3. 11. is of the nature of an Hendyadis; for ^aptizing with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire, is the same with baptizing with the Holy Ghost, who is as Fire; and
so here One thing is expressed as if it were Two. Some think there is the same
Figure in John 3. 5. Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Water and the Spirit, i. e. say they, the Spirit
that is like Water, cleansing and purifying the Soul. But I conceive it may be
doubted whether this and the former way of speaking be the same; for if Water
in this place signifies Bapt^sm, as the Ancients interpreted it, then it is not
the same thing with the Spirit, but distinct from it, and consequently here are
not two things put for one. But doubtless there are in Mat. 24. 31. He shall
send his Angels with a Trumpet, and a great Sound, i. e. with a Trumpet that
has a great Sound, that makes a great Noise, or, as our Translators render it,
with a great Sound of a Trumpet. To this way of speaking may be referred John
11. 33. He groaned in the Spirit and was troubled, i. e. he groaned in his
troubled Spirit. And of this kind is Acts 14. 13. The Priest of Jupiter brought
Oxen and Garlands, i. e. Oxen crowned with Garlands, as was usual when they
sacrificed to Jupiter. One thing is here intended, tho it is expressed by two.
To this Figure appertains Acts 15. 28. It seems good to the Holy Ghost and to
us, that is, to us directed, moved and guided by the Holy Ghost. I doubt not
but an Hendyadis gives the best account of 1 Cor. 2. 4. My preaching was in
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, i. e. of the Spirit who was Powerful,
and enabled me in an extraordinary manner to demonstrate the Truth of the
Gospel, and to convince Gainsayers; and who also enabled me to work Miracles
for the confirming of what I preached. This is the same with Romans 15. 19. the
Power of the Spirit of God, by which (as he there tells us) mighty Signs and
Wonders were effected. The like mode of Speech is observable in the Apostle's
words, in 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Our Gospel came unto you in Power and in the Holy
Ghost, i. e. the Holy Ghost showed himself Powerful in the Apostles Preaching
and Miracles. Lastly, under this Head may be ranked Col. 2. 8. Philosophy and
vain Deceit, that is, Philosophy which is both vain and deceitful.

To proceed, a Prolepsis is another usual Figure in Scripture, especially in
the Old Testament. Such is that in Genesis 4. 16. Cain went and dwelt in the Land
of Nod, where it seems to be implied that Nod was the Name of that place which
he went to, and that it was named so before he went to it: whereas it is most
probable that that Place was not called by that Name at that time, for it had
its Name of Nod given to it from Cain's going thither, who was a And Genesis 4.
12. from Nud vagari, errare.
Vagabond. So there is a plain Prolepsis or Anticipation in Genesis 14. 7. They
smote all the Country of the Amalekites, tho at that time there were no
Amalekites, and therefore the Country could not be named from them. In 1 Samuel
4. 1. it is said Israel pitched beside Eben-ezer, but there was no place of
that Name then, for you will find it given afterward. Those words in Genesis 29.
20. Jacob served seven Years for Rachel, are spoken Proleptically, not as if he
did not marry Rachel before the seven Years were expired. We read in Genesis 35.
19. and chapter 48. v. 7. that Rachel was buried in Bethlchem, but it is well known
that that was not the Name of the Place till after Moses. So Hebron and some
other Names of Cities are mentioned in the Pentateuch, and yet the Names were
not given till after Moses's Death. In Ios. 4. 19. the Israelites are said to
encamp in Gilgal, but that place is called so by Anticipation, for it had that
Name afterward, chapter 5. v. 9. And other Instances there are of this nature in
the Book of Ioshuah; the Names of several places mentioned in it are of a later
Date than Ioshuah's time. The Jews conjecture is very probable that Ezra after
the Captivity, (when he collected the several parts of the Bible, and set them
in order) left out some of the ancient Names of Places, and inserted some
modern ones; that is, he added the Names of Places which were unknown, and not
used in the days of Moses or of others who writ those Books: whence it is that
we now read of the Names of Places which were not given at that time when they
are mentioned, but are only by way of Anticipation inserted into the History.

Near of kin to this is Hysterosis, another Usual Figure in Scripture, which is
when the proper and genuine Order of the Words is not kept. And this is
observable either in some single Words and Verses, or in some Chapters. Of the
former sort is Genesis 10. 1. where the Sons of Noah are reckoned in this order,
Shem, Ham and Iapheth; yet Iapheth was the Eldest Brother. It is true Scaliger
holds the very order of the Generation which this Verse sets down, and says
Shem was Noah's Firstborn, and Iapheth his youngest. But it is generally agreed
on by the Learned that this is not the right order: for first, the Septuagint
expressly say Iapheth was the Elder Brother of Shem, v. 21. Again, Josephus in
his Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Jewish Antiquities reckons them thus, Iapheth the eldest Son, Cham the next,
and She^ the youngest of all. Moreover, according to the Chaldee Paraphrast,
who is of good Repute, this is the true Order. Lastly, you will find it
observed in the following Parts of this Chapter; the Generations begin first
with Iapheth, then pass to Cham, and end with Shem. All which shows that there
is a Transposition in the first Verse, and that the true ranking of them is not
there kept. We read in Genesis 11. 26. that Terab begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran;
but the naming of Abram first of the three Brethren, does not prove that he was
eldest; but there is some Ground to believe that he was not. And as the true
Order of Words in some Verses is not always exact, so neither is the true
Series of History observed in some Chapters. Thus in Genesis 2. after God's
resting on the seventh Day, v. 1. you read of God's forming Man and Woman, v.
7. and 18. which was the Sixth Day's Work, and therefore according to the True
Order of things should have been part of the Contents of the First Chapter. So
the Division of the Earth, which is the Subject of the 10th of Genesis, is set
before the Confusion of Tongues, spoken of in the 11th Chapter, notwithstanding
this was before that, and was the occasion of it. And some Instances of this
Nature are in those Historical Books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles. The
seventh and eighth Chapters of Daniel are misplaced; they should of right have
been inserted before, viz. immediately after the 4th Chapter; for they speak of
what happened in Belshazzar's time, although the foregoing Chapter relates what
was done by Darius after Belshazzar was slain, and the Kingdom of Babylon
became his. And in many other Places of the Sacred Writings there is a
Transposing of things, and sometimes that is placed first which was done last
To which purpose the Hebrew Doctors have long since pronounced, that there is
neither Before nor After in the Law. A Mr. Simon Crit. Hist. Book 1.
late Author tells us that the Reason is, because the Books of the Pentateuch
and some others were written upon little Scrolls or Sheets of Paper, not so
well fastened together as our Books now are, and so the Order of these Scrolls
was changed. But this is an upstart Invention of this Gentleman's Brain, and
has no Foundation but his own Fancy; for as he mistakes Paper for Parchment,
(there being perhaps no such thing as the former in those Days) so he is
mistaken in his Conceit about fastening those Parchment-Writings together.

First, I say, he proceeds upon a wrong Foundation, because he asserts the
antientest Books of the Bible to have been written on Paper, whereas it does
not appear that this Invention is so old: and on the other side, there are
undeniable Proofs of the great Antiquity of Parchment, and that it was made use
of for Books to write upon. That which has occasioned some Learned Men (and
it is likely our present Author, who is most justly ranked in the Number of the
Learned) to think otherwise, was that Passage in Pliny's Lib. 13. c. 11.
Natural History, where he reports that Ptolomee Philadelph, King of Egypt,
forbad the exporting of the Papyrus (of which Paper was made at that time) out
of his Territories. Whereupon Eumenes, King of Pergamus, found out another way
of making Paper, of the inmost Skins of Beasts, which was called Pergamena,
because 'twas invented in Pergamus first. But this was a great Oversight of
Pliny, for that was not the first Use of them; they were much antienter than
that time. Lib. 2.
Diodorus the Sicilian tells us, that the Persian Annals were writ in
Parchment; which is a great Proof of its being very Ancient. Salmuth, in his
Commentary upon De Chart^.
Pancirol, thinks the Antiquity of this Membrana is proved from Iovis
diphthera, the Skin of the Goat that suckled Jupiter, in which the Antientest
Memorials of things in the World were thought to be written. And out of
Herodotus, the great Father of History, he has a very considerable Quotation,
who relates that some of the Old Grecians made use of the Skins of Goats and
Sheep to write in; and therefore (...). In Terpsichore.
they call their Books Skins. And he adds, that (...).
many of the Barbarians write in such Skins. Now we know who they were that the
Pagans used to call Barbarians, viz. the Jews; and therefore it is probable
these are meant here. It may have relation to their writing the Books of the
Old Testament in Parchment. But if This, concerning the particular Reference of
these Words to the Jews, be a Conjecture only, yet the other things which have
been suggested, are a clear and evident Proof of the Ancient Use of the
Membrana, and we have no reason to question that the Bible it self was written
in it. That it was so, we learn from Josephus, who assures us, that Eleazar the
High Priest sent away the 72 Elders or Interpreters to Ptolomee, with the Bible
written in ^ine Parchment; and he tells us in Antiq. Jud. l. 12. c. 2.
the same Place, (which is very remarkable, and to our purpose) that King
Ptolomee was astonished to see the Parchments so fine and delicate, and to
observe the whole Form of them so exactly joined together, that no one could
possibly discern where the Seams were. From which Testimony of this Learned Jew
it is evident, that there was Parchment found out and used in Writing before
the time that Pliny talks of, i. e. before Eumenes's time. And as for this
Eumenes, (who is by some Writers also called Attalus, for it appears plainly
that it is the same Man, the same King of Pergamus) he was not the Person that
invented it, nor was it in his time invented; he only procured a great Quantity
of it to be made, and so it became common in Greece and Asia: whence some (and
Pliny among the rest) thought he was the first Inventer of it. This was the
Rise of the Mistake: But the Truth of the Matter is this, (which the Learnedest
Men now agree to) that Parchments which were made of Sheepskins dressed, were
long before the Emulation between Ptolomee and Eumenes, (who both at the same
time were ambitious to procure an Universal Library;) but when this Quarrel
arose, Ptolomee forbad Paper to be sent out of Egypt, whereupon Eumences caused
Parchments to be made in greater Abundance than before, that so there might be
no need of the Paper. Again, it is evident from this Testimony of Josephus, that
the Books of the Old Testament were written in Parchment. And seeing we have
proved that Parchment was long before, it is credible that the Bible was copied
out at first into it. That Proverbial Saying, (...), shows the great Antiquity
of this sort of Writing-materials; for (...) is Membrana, and it is also a Book
made of the same, which they of old used to write in. I might take notice of
the ancient Practice of the Jews, viz. their wearing of Phylacteries, which
were pieces of Scrolls of Parchment, whereon they wrote some part of the Law,
and bound it to their Heads and Hands: whence we may probably gather, that the
Books of the Old Testament were first of all Parchment-Writings; for the Jews
were strict Observers as well as Admirers of Antiquity, and therefore their
writing some Sentences of the Law in Parchments shows that the Bible it self,
from whence they were taken, had been usually and of old transcribed into those
very Materials. Much more might be said, but I will only add, that the Jews
Rolling up their Sacred Writings (whence their Books were called Megilloth,
Volumina) is a plain Argument that they were not composed of Egyptian Paper,
which was thin and weak, and consequently was not capable of this Rolling. But
a Long and Broad Skin or Parchment would endure this without tearing, and
therefore it is not to be doubted that this was made use of. The Sense of which
(besides the common Report and Notion among the Jews) caused the Famous Rabbi
Jonathan to say in his Targum on Deuteronomy. 31. 24. that Moses writ the Law upon
Parchment: Which shows, that it was the Opinion of the Learned Jews, that the
Bible was originally written in Parchment, not on Paper. And the Talmud often
mentions this Parchment-Writing as a known thing. It is rational then to
believe and assert, that these Holy Records were written in Parchment: and
though we are informed from sufficient Authors, that other Materials of old
were used, as the Egyptian Papyrus, Leaves, as also the Inward Bark or Coat of
Trees, etc. when they wrote but few Words, yet Parchment was the old and usual
Matter on which they wrote when they had occasion to compose a whole Book:
which confutes F. Simon's Notion, that the Old Testament was written in Paper;
which, upon serious Reflection, so searching a Person as he is cannot but
discern to be a Mistake: and he knows that Charta, Writing-Paper was not
generally used till Alexander the Great's time, as Nar. Hist, l. 13. c. 11.
Pliny himself acknowledges, who quotes Varro for this, that the first use of
Paper, made of the Cortex of the Egyptian Papyrus, was found out in Egypt in
that Monarch's Reign; and that before that time they wrote upon Leaves of
Trees, on Wax, etc.

Then in the next Place, it were easy to disprove this Ingenious Author's
Conceit about the fastening, or, rather as he would have it, the not fastening of
these Parchments together, whence he fancies it was that the Transposition and
Misplacing of some Parts of the Bible happened. He tells us, that heretofore
they wrote upon Sheets or Leaves rolled together one over another, round a
piece of Wood: and these being not well joined together, there was sometimes a
misplacing of what was written in them, because their Order was altered. This
may be partly true, and I cannot deny that it so happened sometimes, that is,
when there was no Care taken to sow, or other ways to fasten the Leaves or
Sheets to the Stick of Wood about which they were rolled, or to one another.
But it was not so in the present Case; for you may be sure that they took all
the Care imaginable to secure the Order of the Sheets, and they were not
destitute of a particular way of doing it; so that their Books were
sufficiently fastened. But if he means that they were not bound as our Books are
now a days, then his new Discovery is only this, that the Trade of Bookbinding
was not set up in Moses or Ezra's Days. Or, if he means that the written Sheets
and Scrolls were loose, and not well tacked together, he wilfully speaks
against his own knowledge of this Matter; for he knows very well that the Jews
wrote in Rolls or continued Sheets or Skins, which were not liable to be
separated, as our Writings are now. He is Antiquary enough to confute himself
from what he has read concerning their manner of making their Books or
Volumes, their fixing the Sheets of Parchment at one end, by sowing or fastening
the first Sheet between two Sticks or Pieces of Wood, their joining the several
Sheets together, (as appears from the forecited Testimony of the Jewish
Historian, who says, the Parchments in which the Bible was written, were so
closely and firmly joined together, that 'twas not possible to discern the
Seams or Places where they were joined) their Rolling them up close, and their
keeping them in safe Repositories, (for they had places on purpose for all
Valuable Books) so that it was not likely* yea scarcely possible, that any of
these Scrolls or Sheets (which were not little ones, as he suggests, but of a
considerable size) should be put out of their places, much less lost: for he
goes so far as to assert, that many of these Scrolls were embezzel'd and lost,
and thence the Scriptures of the Old Testament are so maimed and imperfect. But
we know the Man and his Design, which is to depretiate and vilify the
Scriptures, thereby to advance the Credit of Tradition, and by that means to
exalt the Church of Rome (though this is not so forward to exalt him): This was
it which made him give us this Specimen of his Wit and Invention (of which, it
must be confessed, he has no small Stock); this made him attempt by these
Paper-Proofs to lessen the Authority of the Bible: Otherwise it is certain this
Parisian Critic is a Person of great Worth and Learning; and it is his
singular Commendation that he is no Furious Bigot, but is Moderate and Discreet
in many things, and is one that dotes not on the Opinions and Assertions of the
Catholic Doctors. But if you would know the true Reason or Occasion of that
Transposition which you sometimes meet with in the Holy Writings, not only of
the Old but New Testament, it is chiefly this as I conceive; The Holy Writers
study not Exactness, they are more intent upon the Thing and Matter which they
write, than upon the due Order and Marshalling of it: they are not Nice and
Accurate in giving every Occurrence or Event its right Place; whence it is that
you meet with some things in these Writings that are transposed and out of
Order: and it is left to the Diligent and Inquisitive Reader to amend and
reform those Dislocations. Those who would see farther Reasons of that frequent
Metathesis and Misplacing which are in the Sacred Books, may consult the
Learned Dr. Lightfoot in his Chronicle of the Times of the Old Testament.

CHAP. IV.
There are not only Grammatical but Rhetorical Figures in the Sacred Volume.
The Psalmist's Words, Psalm. 120. 5. are Hyperbolical, though not generally
interpreted to be such. So are our Savior's Words, Matthew. 13. 32. though
commonly expounded otherwise. Luke 19. 44. rejected* form being Hyperbolical.
John 21. 25. proved to be an Hyperbole. This way of speaking in Scripture is no
Lie. Ironies are frequent in this Holy Book, of which several Examples are
produced. Luke 22. 36: is showed to be of this sort. And so is Acts 23. 5. I
wist not that he was the High Priest. This manner of speaking is not unworthy
of the Sacred Penmen: Synecdoches frequent in Scripture; proved from several
Instances; Metaphors also common. Solomon's Metaphorical Description of Old Age
in Eccles. 12. expounded in all its Parts.

THere are not only Grammatical but Rhetorical Figures in this Sacred Volume,
the chief of which I will briefly speak of, not to say that I have mentioned
some of them already. And though (as I said of the former) they have been
observed by several Writers, yet one Reason why I mention them here is, because
I shall have occasion to reduce some Texts to these Figures which have not been
so interpreted by other Authors. First, Hyperboles are not unusual in these
Holy Writings; these are such Speeches as seem to surpass the bare Truth,
either by augmenting or diminishing it. Thus a Great Caldron, one of the
Vessels of the Temple that held a vast Quantity of Water, is called a Sea, a
molten Sea, 1 Kings 7. 23. a brazen Sea, 2 Kings. 25. 13. It is said, that the
Cities were walled up to Heaven, Deuteronomy. 1. 28. and that Solomon made. Silver in
Jerusalem as Stones, 1 Kings 10. 27. and that at his being anointed King the
People rejoiced with great Joy, so that the Earth rent with the Sound of them,
1 Kings 1. 40. Upon which Places, and some others, the Jews found that Saying
of theirs, The Law sometimes speaks Hyperbolically. The Description of Behemoth
is full of this sort of Language; He moves his Tail like a Cedar; his Bones
are as strong pieces of Brass, and Bars of Iron; he drinks up a River, he
trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth, Job 40. 17, etc. Xerxes's
Army was said Diodor. Sic. l. 11. Juvenal. Sat. 10.
to drink whole Rivers dry, in that Hyperbolical Sense in which this is spoken
of Behemoth: which proves what I have asserted, that the Scripture symbolizeth
with other Writers, or rather they with it. The like Hyperbolical Description
you have of the Leviathan, Job 41. 18, to the end. And such is that of the
Locusts, Joel 2. 2 -- 12. all which is indeed one Continued Hyperbole, wherein
he elegantly and pathetically describes them as a well-formed Army, as Virgil
in his Georgicks loftily does the Ants, It nigrum campis agmen. So all is
Poetical and Hyperbolical in Psalm. 18. 7 -- 16. As for Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me
that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar; few Expositors take
it to be of this kind. Because Mesech signifies protracting or prolonging, some
interpret the first Clause thus, I have a LONG time dwelt: and because Kedar
signifies Blackness, they understand it of the Sadness of his Condition. Others
would translate the pious King to those Places and Countries which bear the
Name of Mesech and Kedar, thinking that he was for some time confined to those
Places. And there are other Conjectures about the Words, but the true Import of
them in my. Apprehension is this; David being banished from home, expresses it
as if he were among the barb^rous Scythians, as if he were in the wild Deserts
of Arabia. Or, if you take Mesech and Kedar to be both of them in Arabia, (as
some do) then still the Sense is the same; I sojourn, I dwell, I inhabit among
the inhospitable People of Arabia, called Scenitae, because they lived in
Tents, or in that part of the Wilderness where the Israelites pitch^d in Tents
when they traveled to the Land of Canaan: There is my Abode at present, I am
no longer one of Judea. This is an Hyperbolical Speech to set forth the Nature
of those Inhuman^ and Malicious People into whose Hands he was fallen, and with
whom he was forced to converse at that time. To this sort of Speech we may
refer Psalm. 97. 5. The Hills melted like Wax. Isa. 34. 3. The Mountains shall
be melted with their Blood. Ezekiel. 32. 6. I will water with thy Blood, etc. I
will mak^ the Blood of the slain so abundant, that it shall reach upto the very
Mountains, and all the Rivers shall be ^ill'd with Blood; which is to be looked
upon as an Hyperbolical Description of Egypt's Destruction. So Ezekiel. 39. 9, 10.
[They shall burn the Weapons with ^ire seven Years; so that they shall take no
Wood out of the Field, nor cut down any out of the Forests] is an elevated
Strain of speaking, to express the Multitude of the Weapons and Spoils taken
from the Enemy, and the vast Slaughter of them. At the first View those Words
in Obadia^, ver. 4. Though thou set thy Nest among the Stars, must be
acknowledged to be highly Hyperbolical.

Neither is the New Testament without this kind of speaking; as to instance in
Matthew. 13. 32. which I grant is not reckoned by Writers among the Hyperboles of
Scripture, but I appeal to the Learned, whether it ought not. Of the
Mustard Seed there in the Parable Christ says, It is indeed the least of all
Seeds; (for though (...) be the Greek Word, yet (as has been noted before) it
is here put for (...), as is plain from its being joined with (...), and so it
is rightly rendered the least of all Seeds:) but this is not exactly true, for
the Dr. Power.
Seeds of Sweet-marjoram and Wild Poppy are far less; and the Seeds of Tobacco
are so small, that a thousand of them make not above one single Grain in
Weight: but all must give place to the Seed of Moon-wort, which c^rtainly is a
Seed of the least size that is. And Mr. Ray's Wisdom of God in the Creation, p.
100.
another reckons among the smallest Seeds of Plants those of Reedmace, and of
Hart's-tongue, and of some sorts of Mosses and Ferns. And of these latter I have
read that some of them are so small, that they cannot be seen without the Help
of a Microscope. But our Savior, to set forth and magnify the wonderful Power
of the Word of God, and the Increasing and Spreading of his Kingdom, though
from very small Beginnings, compares them to a Grain of Mustard Seed; and by a
Lessening Hyperbole calls this the Least of all Seeds, though in exact speaking
it be not so. But if this way of interpreting Christ's Words, which I now
offer, be not approved of, then you may expound them thus, that this Seed is
o^e of the least of all Seeds; or you may understand them spoken Respectively,
that is, it is the Least of all such Seeds as extend to large Productions; no
Seed so little sends forth Branches so wide, or brings forth its Fruit
after that plentiful manner Thus you may understand the Words, but in my
Judgment the resolving them into an Hyperbole is the best way, though it be not
made use ^f by Expositors. And how indeed could it, when they took the Seed of
Mustard to be Absolutely the least of all Grains whatsoever? That of our
Savior in Luke 19. 44. They shall not leave in thee one Stone upon another;
which is spoken of the Last and Final Devastation of Jerusalem, is generally
supposed to be an Hyperbolical Expression, and consequently not true in
Strictness of Speech: for can we think, say some, that the Roman Armies had
nothing else to do but to pick out all the Stones in the Foundations, and throw
them away? Those who talk thus, do not remember what was done at several times
toward the complete and total Destruction of that Place. This Passage of our
Blessed Lord seems to refer particularly and signally to the digging up the
Foundations of the City and Temple, and the very ploughing up the Ground by
Titus's Command, (which the Jews themselves do not deny) and also to that
Prodigious Earthquake in Iulian's time, whereby* the remaining Parts of the
Foundations were wholly broken up and scattered abroad. Here was an Exact
fulfilling of Christ's Prediction without any Hyperbole.

As for that Close of St. John's Gospel, Even the Wo^ld it self could not
contain the Books that should be written, chap. 21* 25. (...)* Excl. His^^. 1.
c. 3.
Eus^bius and St. A^gustin of old, and Lyra, Tremellius.
others more lately understand it thus; The World, that is, the Men of the
World could not contain, that is, conceive, comprehend and digest the Books
that should be written concerning our Savior's Deeds. Their Understandings are
weak, and must needs have been oppressed with so many Books on that Subject. So
(...), the word here used, is to be taken in Matthew. 19. 11. All Men cannot
receive (or contain) this Saying: and in this Sense it is used by Philo, who,
speaking of the Knowledge of the Nature of God, and how unsearchable it is,
says, that (...). De Monarch. l. 1.
neither Heaven nor Earth are able to contain, i. e. to comprehend it. But a
Heins. Exercit. Sacr.
modern Critic thinks (...) here signi^ies to entertain and approve of; and
accordingly his Gloss on the Words is this, The whole World would scorn, reject
and slight all the Books which should be writ of Christ, it having despised
these that are already writ. The World has other Employment, it would not read
and peruse such Writings. This seems to be the meaning of the Verb in 2 Cor. 7.
2. (...), receive, entertain, approve of us. And (...) 8.
Dionys. Halicarn. uses the word thus, saying, (...), the City admits not of,
i. e. scorns good Men. But though this and the other be the meaning of the Word
sometimes, yet it is very Rare and Unusual: besides that it is Improper and
Metaphorical; and in such a case it is more reasonable to choose and embrace
that Sense of the Word which is common and usual, as also genuine and proper;
and then the meaning is, that the World, as capacious and wide as it is, is not
able to hold o^ contain all the Books that might have been written concerning
Christ and his Works. But this cannot be the S^ns^ here, you will say, because
then our Saviour'^ Words would not be true; for the World is able, is wide
enough to contain, to hold those Books, and many more besides. I answer, I
grant this to be true in the strict way of speaking, but the Evangelist St.
John had a mind to conclude his Book with some Great Word concerning his Dear
Master and Savior, and therefore expresses himself thus in a High and
Hyperbolical manner, The World it self could not contain the Books that should
be written of him. As if he had said, Though I and other^ have recorded the
Sayings and Doings of the Blessed Jesus, yet this is nothing in comparison of
what might be said on this vast Subject. The^e is unspeakably much more
re^naining than has been told you. What he said and did was so Great and so
Admirable, that Innumerable Volumes might be filled with enlarging on that
copious Matter. I may say to you, the Whole World, as wide and ample as it is,
is not able to contain those Immense Treatises, those Infinite Discourses which
might be written in relating all the Passages that concerned our Blessed Lord,
and in commendation of them. Observ^ it, the Evangelist says, the World it
self, i. e. this Material Local World, therefore it cannot be understood of the
Men of the world, as those of the former Opinions fancied. Besides, it is
observable that he speaks not Absolutely here, but in a Qualified Manner; I
suppose, I think, I conceive the World it self cannot contain, etc. which
plainly shows that the Words cannot be meant in the former Senses. For what
Sense can you make of this; I suppose, I think that all the Men in the World
cannot comprehend the Books which should be written; or, I suppose all the Men
in the World cannot entertain and approve of them? Whether he supposed it or
not, it would be so: and this is a thing not to be supposed, but really
believed and directly asserted, if it be true. But if you admit of the plain
Sense of the Words, which I have propounded* then his supposing may be very
pertinent and consis^ent here; for it is but a kind of a Supposition. not an
Exact and Strict Truth which he here utters: it is a Lofty Strain or
Hyperbole, which he shuts up his Gospel with; I think in a manner, ^aith he,
that the Whole World it self cannot contain the Books that might be composed
and written on this Glorious Theme, which is so Various, so Voluminous. Thus
you see the Words must be understood in this way, for the others are not
reconcilable to good Sense. And indeed this manner of Style is but parallel
with other Passages in Scripture, as Genesis 13. 6. The Land was not able ^o bear
them, viz. Lot and Abraham, and their Flocks; which expresses how exceeding
Numerous they were. So some understand Luke 2. 1. There went out a Decree that
all the World should be taxed: which sets forth the Largeness and Vast Extent
of the Emperor's Dominions; not that all the World (strictly speaking) was to
be tax^d, for 'twas not all in his Power. It was said of our Savior, The World
is gone after him, John 12. 19. which only expresses the Vast Numbers of People
that flocked to him wheresoever he went. Such is the Style here, The World it
self cannot contain, etc. The Evangelists and Apostles must in a manner have
filled the World with their Writings concerning Christ; the Books would have
been so Numerous, that even the Whole World could scarcely have held them, that
is, in plainer terms, there must have been an Incredible Number of Books to
have contained all those Matters. There are many other Instances of this
Hyperbolical Manner of speaking in the Holy Writings, but my Design is only to
give you a Taste of these and the like Figurative Expressions, in order to your
being better acquainted with the Style of Scripture. There is a Paraeus in
Comment. in Epist. ad Roman. and Corinth.
Learned Modern Divine, who thinks there is no such thing as an Hyperbole in
Scripture; he will by no means grant that this way of speaking is to be found
in the Sacred Writings, because it is a kind of Lie. But all that is to be said
in answer to him, is this, that it is impossible to give any other Account of
some of the forenamed Instances, and several others, than by resolving them
into an Hyperbole; which is no Lie, nor a kind of one, because it is not
contrary to the Mind of him that speaks it, nor is it spoken to impose upon
them that hear it. Yet it is to be granted, that there is a Moderation to be
observed by us, as there is in Scripture, in using this sort of speaking. You
meet with but few Hyperboles in the Holy Writers; and as they are rarely and
sparingly used, so it is done in a fit and convenient Subject; and where there
is no likelihood of their degenerating into a Lie; and where the Story or other
subject Matter is not thereby falsely misrepresented* But it is otherwise where
Writers immoderately affect an Hyperbolick Strain, for they make use of it in
Matters where it is not fit to be used, and where the Truth and Reality of the
Subject are endangered, and where it administers to Falsehood, Thus it is in the
Poems of that Historical Poet Lucan, who is a Prodigious and Unsufferable
Hyperbolizer. And thus it is in Monsieur Balsac: An Extravagant Hyperbole goes
all along through his Letters, though to the Greatest Persons, and Men of
professed Gravity. A great Fault certainly it is in those Ingenious Pieces of
his. But there is no such thing in the Sacred Writings, there is nothing there
Romantic and Extravagant; the Hyperbole is seldom used, and when it is, it is
Modest and Becoming, Fit and Convenient, and does not in the least administer
to Levity, or impair and endamage the Truth.

Again; in this Holy Book, as well as in Other Writings, there is that sort of
Speaking which is called an Irony, i. e. when something is said in way of
Derision or Scoff, contrary to what is meant; as in that commonly observed
Place, Genesis 3. 22. Behold! the Man is become as one of us, to know Good and
Evil: which refers to Satan's Words to Adam, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good
and Evil, ver. 5. And so Man is here upbraided with his Belief of the Devil
before the God of Truth. Look you now, is not Man become a God? Yes, this
mightily appears indeed from what has befallen him; he has lost the Divine
Image wherein he was created, and is become a Wretched Sinner and Apostate. Is
not this Creature then become as one of us? or, now Hajah, suit.
he has been as one of us; he has already experienced what it is to be like
God: Has he not? Thus he is justly derided for his wilful Folly by the Sacred
Trinity. And if they think fit to speak after this manner, it will not unbecome
the Sons of Men. This Ironical way of speaking you meet with in 1 Kings 18. 27.
Cry aloud, for he (that is, Baal) is a God: either he is talking, or he is
pursuing, or he is on a Journey, or peradventure he sleeps, and must be
awaked. Thus the Prophet Elijah mocks those deluded Priests of Baal, he makes
himself pleasant with them. Even Grave and Austere Elijab laughs at the
Baalites invoking of a Deaf Deity: he plays upon their serious but idolatrous
Devotion. Whence I gather, that it is not light and unbecoming to scoff at
Superstition, and jeer Idolatry. Those Words of the Prophet Micaiah to King
Abab, 1 Kings 22. 15. Go and prosper, are a plain Ironical Concession. In this
Sense those Wo^ds are to be understood, Job 5. 1. Call now, if there be any
that will answer thee: and to which of the Saints will thou turn? And chap. 12.
2. No doubt but ye are the People, and Wisdom shall die with you. And that of
Solomon to the Youthful Sinner, Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, etc.
Eccles. 11. 9. Which manner of speaking is more particularly suited here to the
Humor and Genius of the Young Man, whose Fashion is immoderately to scoff, and
to entertain himself and others with Pleasantry and Drollery* But that he might
see that this was intended as a Rebuke to him, and that he might be sure that
Solomon was serious and in good earnest, notwithstanding this way of speaking,
it is added in the Close of the Verse, Know that for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment: And he that considers that will have no Reason to
rejoice, i. e. to be loose and inordinate in his Mirth, but rather to be sober
and retired, and to be preparing for Judgment, and to set about so great a Task
betimes, and not fondly presume on Health, and Length of Days. No Man need
question whether those Words of Isaiah, chapter 8. 9. Associate your selves, O ye
People, be not spoken Ironically: (which are parallel with Joel 3. 11. Assemble
your selves, and come all ye Heathen, and gather your selves round about, etc.)
And those in Isa. 50. 11. Walk in the Light of your Fire, and in the Sparks
that you have kindled, i. e. trust in those things that cannot help you, Spark^
that give a short Light, and soon vanish. That is a terrible Biting Taunt in
Ier. 22. 23. How gracious shall thou be when Pangs come upon thee, the Pain as
of a Woman in Travail? And so is that other, Lam. 4. 21: Rejoice and be glad, O
Daughter of Edom, the Cup (viz. of Vengeance) shall pass through to thee. Who
doubts whether Ezekiel. 20. 39. be not Sarcastical? Thus faith the Lord God, Go
ye, serve ye every one his Idols. The like Command we read in Amos 4. 4, 5*
Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply Transgression, etc. That also
in Mic. 5. 1. must be reckoned as spoken Ironically; Now gather thy self in
Troops, O Daughter of Troops, etc. i. e. O Assyrians, come and do your worst,
with your joint Forces invade us, and most severely treat our Prince and
People; yea, by all means destroy, extirpate, and even annihilate the Church of
God: whereas the Prophet, who speaks this, intimates in the whole Chapter
afterward, that the Church shall flourish, and that it shall be impossible for
its Enemies to do it harm. So that in Nah. 3. 14. Draw thee Waters for the
Siege, fortify thy strong Holds, is said in way of Derision to Niniveh, whose
unavoidable Ruin is foretold in that Chapter.

And besides many such Sarcasms in the Old Te^^ament, there are several in the
New, as that of our Blessed Lord to his drowzy Disciples, Sleep on ^ow, and
take your Rest, Matthew. 26. 45. This is a downright Irony, because Christ here
intends a different thing, nay contrary to what he says: His meaning is, not
that they should sleep, when both he and they were in so great Danger, but his
Intention rather was, that they should watch and pray, as you read, ver. 41. By
this way of speaking he corrects them for their unseasonable Drowsiness, that
they could not watch at such a time as that, when he had just before foretold
them that he was to be betrayed. That is another clear Text, Full well ((...),
fairly, as Sir Nort. Knatchbull renders it) ye reject the Commandment of God,
says our Savior to the Pharisees, Mark 7. 9. Ye do very well and laudably in
preferring the Traditions and Constitutions of Men before the express Commands
of God. This is a commendable piece of Religion indeed: Is it not? Do you think
that this will be acceptable to God? There is another Passage of our Savior
which seems to me to be perfectly Ironical, though Commentators generally carry
the Sense another way: But now (says Christ) he that has a Purse, let him
take it, and likewise his Scrip: and be that has no Sword, let him sell his
Garment, and buy one, Luke 22. 36. Which is thought by Expositors to be a plain
and direct Exhortation to the Apostles to furnish themselves with Money,
Provision, and Swords. But this cannot be meant here, because, 1. Christ had
declared against Fighting, for he tells Pilate, (John 18. 36.) that if his
Kingdom were of this World, then would his Servants (i. e. his Apostles and
Disciples) fight, that he should not be delivered to the Jews. Swords then were
to no purpose. 2. When they brought two Swords to him, his Answer is
observable, It is enough. If he had meant real Swords, he would not have said
that two of them were enough, for those could serve but two Men: They should
all of them be appointed with that sort of Weapons, and have stood on their
Guard. When therefore he says, It is enough, he does as good as say, I do not
mean Carnal Weapons: You mistake me, as you have often done, and dream of a
Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah. 3. It is evident that Christ meant not Swords
in the usual Signification of the Word, because afterward he sharply blamed
Peter for making use of this Weapon, Matthew. 26. 52. It appears that he had no
Commission from our Savior to draw his Sword. I cannot therefore subscribe to
those who interpret these Words of our Lord in the direct and obvious Sense.
But if we understand them to be spoken ^ronically, they are very intelligible,
and are consistent with what Christ says at other times. And let no Man wonder
that our Blessed Master uses this sort of Style here, for I have showed you
before, in two undeniable Instances, that he made use of it, yea even when he
was approaching to Death, as when he said to his Apostles, Sleep on, and take
your Rest. And so he speaks after the same manner here, upbraiding his
Apostles, who he knew were afraid of Suffering, and had so often been talking
of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, and of the Prosperous Times that were to
accompany it. He now in a Sarcastick way chastises their fond and groundless
Conceit, and bids them go and buy Swords, and lay in Provisions. If you are for
a Temporal Reign, says he, then sight for it. You are specially well skilled
in your Weapons without doubt, you are excellent Swordmen. This I take to be
the Sense of the Words: and truly a Man might gather it from that one Passage
before mentioned; It is enough, said our Savior to them, when they brought him
a couple of Swords. This it self is an Ironick Quip; it is as if he had said,
This is brave Armor indeed! Now you are well appointed surely. You are like to
defend me and your selves against all that come against us. Two Swords amongst
you all are a very great Armory* This plainly shows what our Savior's meaning
was, when he bid them buy Swords, he handsomely checked them for their Cowardice
and Fear of Suffering. But yet I will not deny that something more may be
included and comprised in these Words: he bids them make the best Provision
they can against the Calamitous Times that were coming: he exhorts them to be
provided with Spiritual Weapons, Faith and Patience, and the Sword of the
Spirit, yea with the Whole Armor of God. This higher and spiritual meaning may
be contained in what Christ here utters. But if you take the Words as they
sound, and in the more direct and literal Tendency of them, I do not see that
they can be interpreted in a better way than I have offered.

And as our Blessed Savior himself, so the Apostle St. Paul sometimes uses
this Figure which I am now speaking of. I am inclined to think that those Words
in Acts 23. 5. I wist not that he was the High Priest, are to be taken in this
Sense: He makes use of an Irony, and is to be understood as if he had said, Is
this the High Priest? Alas, I did not know that this was that Reverend
Gentleman. I should have showed my self more civil to him, if I had been
acquainted that this was that Worshipful Man, that Gay Pontiff to whom you pay
so great Veneration: But who would take this Person to be the High Priest, the
Great Leading Officer of the Church, who is to be an Example of Mildness and
Gentleness to all Men? His furious way of speaking and acting toward me, does
not discover him to be one of that High Character and Order: He does not show
himself to be a Spiritual Man: Surely this cannot be He: This Behavior speaks
him to be another Person. So it is spoken in a jtering way. Nor is this Sense
of the Words (as ^^me may think) too light and jocular for the Apostle, though
he was before the Sanhedrim, the most Grave and Solemn Council of that Nation:
For in several of the Instances before mentioned, we see this way of speaking
has been made use of before very Great and Venerable Persons, and in Causes
that were exceeding Serious and Weighty. And whereas the Apostle immediately
adds, For it is written, Thou shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People;
which may make it seem incredible that St. Paul spoke in a Sarcastick way,
which is speaking one thing, and meaning another: for is it likely he would
back this with a serious Text of Scripture? I answer, It is likely, for hereby
he lets them see, that there is Substantial and Real Truth at the bottom of
this Sarcasm. He lets them know, that he is very Grave and in good earnest
whilst he speaks to them after an Ironick rate: You are, says he, very well
versed in Scripture, I know; You are ready to quote that Place against me in
Exodus, Thou shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of the People. This it is, Sirs,
to be so well skilled in the Law, you cannot but be very Good People certainly,
and particularly you must be very Obedient to your Rulers, and are never heard
to use any irreverent Language toward them. It is therefore an unpardonable
Crime in me that I called your High Priest (your Painted Piece of Justice) a
Whited Wall. Yea, it is an unsufferable Fault not to know that this Person
(among all those that sit on this Reverend Bench) was the High Priest,
especially when there are two of them at a time. O! by all means every Man and
Woman is bound to know that this individual Person is the Jewish Pope, the
Supreme and Infallible Head of your Church What a dull ignorant Creature was I
that I wish not this? that I should not know that this was the Prince of this
Reverend Senate, even this Worthy Gentleman, this simoniacal Merchant that
bought his Place of the Roman Governor? How should I understand that this
Person is my Judge at this time? This, I conceive, may be the meaning of the
Apostle's Words: he prudently orders them, and jirks his Adversaries, but with
Safety to himself. And this Ironical way seems the rather to be that which the
Apostle here chooses, because you presently find (in the next Verses) that he
pursues this prudential way of speaking, and cries out in the Council, Men and
Brethren, I am a Pharisee, though he was none at that time; only he held the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, which the Pharisees maintained, and so might be
said to be of that Sect, if of any. But there is an Ironical Strain in it, and
so his Discourse is all of a piece. This is the Apprehension which I have of
these Words, but I am not very forward to urge it upon any; only I will say
this, that I had not pitched upon this Interpretation, if some of those that
are usually propounded had not displeased me. This Sense of the Words is
certainly preferable to that of Oecumenius, who tells us in plain terms, that
the Apostle (...). Comment. in Acts 23. 5.
dissembled. And St. Ierom blames him for his Conduct in this Business. Nor is
there any Ground (so far as I see) for Dr. Lightfoot's Account of these Words,
viz. that the meaning of them is either, 1. That St. Paul owns not Ananias for
a lawful High Priest. Or, 2. He owns not any lawful High Priesthood now,
Ananias being an Usurper, getting the Place by Money and ^raud. For though all
this is true, yet it is utterly inconsistent with what follows; for it is
written, Thou shall not speak Evil of, etc. where there is an Acknowledgment of
his being the Ruler of the People. Besides, I wist not, and I own him not to be
the High Priest, are two different things: So that this cannot be the right
Import of the Words. Others therefore say, the Apostle is to be understood in
the most plain and obvious Signification, viz. that he really knew not that
Ananias was the High Priest, because it is probable, say they, this Great Man
appeared not at that time in his Pontifical Habit, coming to the Council
perhaps in haste, which might incline the Apostle to think it was not He who
sat there to judge him. But no Man can prove that the High Priest came to the
Sanhedrim in haste, or that he was not in his Robes proper to his Office; and
therefore this Answer is not satisfactory. But they tell us, that in those Days
there were two High Priests, one bought the Place, and the other executed the
Office; therefore it was no easy Matter to know which of the two was the High
Priest indeed, which made St. Paul profess before the Council, that he wist not
that the Person who commanded him to be smitten on the Mouth, was the High
Priest. If he had known him (say they) to be Him, he would not have spoken as
he did of this Great Ruler of the People. But granting there were two High
Priests at that time, yet it is likely that one (who executed the Office) was
distinguished from the other in some manner that was easily discernible: So
that St. Paul could not pretend he had no notice of him. However, St. Paul knew
that this very Person who ordered him to be smitten, was one of his Judges,
(for he expressly says, that he sat there to judge him after the Law) and on
that account was a Ruler, and consequently he was not to speak Evil of him,
much less to curse him, for he was not to u^e Malediction toward any, as
himself acknowledges, Romans 12. 14. This Interpretation therefore is not to be
admitted. But if the Sense which I have before offered be disliked, then I know
no other but this, that when St. Paul says, he wist not that he was the High
Priest; the meaning is, that he remembered not, he considered not that he was
such a Person, and so was unawares surprised and precipitated into Passion, and
spoke unbecomingly of this Great Man. It was want of Considering and Attending
that betrayed him to that passionate and unseemly Language: or, being moved and
exasperated, ^e did not consider that he was before so Great a Person. This is
no improbable Interpretation, if you can be sure that these two Words, to know
and to consider, are sometimes equivalent in the Style of Scripture. But if you
cannot satisfy your selves as to this, I think you may safely recur to the
first Interpretation, and look upon St. Paul's Words as an Ironical Speech,
especially if you consider that his Style is very full of them.

This I shall make good to you from ^everal Instances in his Epistles; as that
in 1 Co^. 11. 6. If the Woman be not covered, let her also be sh^^n: If she
lays her Vail aside, and appears in the public Assemblies wihtout a Covering*
then I say, let her also be shorn or shaved, let her Hair be cut close to the
Skin, let her go like some of the Cropp'd Philosophers among the Stoics. Not
that he would have her do so, but only by this Sarcastick way of speaking he
signifie^ that one is as decent as the other. It is as disgraceful to be
Uncovered as to be shaved: for 'twas the l^^dable Custom then ^n the Christian
Churches for the Women to b^ ^ailed, and it was disgraceful and rep^oac^f^l for
any of that Sex to appear barefaced in the time of Worship. Again, those Words
in 2 Cor. 10. 12. We dare not make our selves of the Number, or compare our
selves with some that commend themselves, etc. are spoken merely in Derision of
the False Apostles and Teachers, who had gained upon the Corinthians and other
Churches by their confident Boasting and vain Brags. I dare not presume, ^aith
the Apostle* to think my self as worthy as they are, and so rank my self with
th^se high-flown Teachers. Yet we know he commends himself in the beginning of
the 11th Chapter; and again in chapter 12. 11. which shows that these Words are
said in an Ironical way. This is that which he seems to say in chapter 11. 17, etc.
That which I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly in
this Confidence of Boasting. Seeing many glory after the Flesh, (brag of their
Parts and Seize) I will glory also. For ye suffer Fools gladly, seeing ye
your selves are wise. Which is all of the same biting Strain, and is as much as
if he had said, You that are so great Admirers of the false Apostles, and are
Men of such wise Heads, and of so profound Capacities, I know it is below you
to censure such a shallow Fool as I am, who cannot forbear prating of my Gifts
and Abilities, of my great Feats and Exploits forsooth, which alas are nothing
in comparison of what your famous Teachers and new Evangelists may glory in,
and value themselves upon. But then in the following Verses he leaves off (and
'twas time to do so) this looser sort of Style, and in a plain and close manner
vindicates his Reputation and Dignity by vying with those bragging Impostors,
Are they Hebrews? so am I, etc.

That is a plain downright Irony in 2 Cor. 11. 4. If he that comes preaches
another Jesus, ye might well ((...), fairly and honestly) bear with him. As if
he had said, Yes indeed you Men of Corinth are a civil easy sort of People; if
a new upstart Teacher should bring another Gospel to you, you would do very
well to receive him and bid him welcome. Thus he in an Illusory kind of way
rebukes their shameful Inconstancy and Levity. In the same Vein* is that in 2.
Cor. 12. 13. Forgive me this wrong. He had told them in the same Verse, that
they were inferior to no Churches in any thing, i. e. in any Privileges or
Excellencies whatsoever, except it was in this, that he was not burdensome to
them; that is, he put them to no Charges for his Preaching, he preached the
Gospel gratis: For which great Wrong and Injury done to them he hopes, he
says, they will pardon him. A very smart and pleasant Irony. Thus it appears,
that this Figurative way of Speech is frequent in the Holy Writings. Some
perhaps would scarcely believe that there are so many Ironical Passages in this
Holy Book; they may think it is below the Gravity of the Sacred Style to use
Expressions of this kind: But herein they are mistaken, for the Holy Spirit in
the Scriptures uses several different ways of dealing with Mankind, and suits
himself to the various Dispositions, Genius's and Inclinations of Men: and
therefore among other ways of Address and Application he disdains not This in
particular, because it may be made serviceable to very good Ends, and be fitted
to the Purposes of Religion. Even in the Holy Tongue Lutz.
the same Word signi^ies to Deride and to Argue or Ratiocinate: Both these may
go together when there is a fit occasion for them. A Man may use his Rational
and Risible Faculty at once. Horat. Sermon. 1.
-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quid vetat?
A Man may laugh and speak Truth at the same time. This Urbanity may sometimes
be very useful. Very excellent things may be suggested in a Scommatick way. For
this Reason it is not unworthy of the Holy Ghost, it is not unbecoming the
Gravity and Seriousness of the Holy Prophets, Apostles, and even Christ
himself, to use this nipping sort of Raillery sometimes.

A Synecdoche is another common Figure in the Holy Writings, whereby the Whole
is mentioned instead of a Part, and a Part instead of the Whole. Of the former,
which is but rare, there are some Instances in Glassius, and such other Writers
as treat of the Grammatical and Rhetorical Part of the Bible, which the Reader
may consult if he please. Of the latter (which is most observable) there are
various kinds, but it will be sufficient to mention these which follow.
Sometimes the Soul, which is but one half of Man, is put for the whole Person:
All the Souls that came with Jacob into Egypt were threescore and ten, Genesis 46.
26. i. e. so many Men and Women came with him: And there are abundant Examples
of this sort, both in the Old and New Testament. Sometimes the other Moiety,
the Body, is expressive of the Whole Man, as Romans 12. 1. Present your Bodies
(i. e. your selves) a living Sacrifice. And Phil. 1. 20. Christ shall be
magnified in my Body, i. e. by me, my whole person. There is another Text which
I will name, Luke 21. 34. wherein there is this kind of Synecdoche, though I
find not that it is observed by those that comment on it: Take heed to your
selves lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surf^iting and
Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life; your Hearts, i. e. your selves. It must be
meant of the Whole Man, Body and Soul, because not only Surfeiting and
Drunkenness (which belong to the Body only) but Cares of this life (which
belong to the Soul and Mind) are expressly mentioned. Again, some Parts of the
World are mentioned for the whole, as in Z^ch. 8. 7. I will save my People from
the East Country, and from the West Country, i. e. from all Regions and Parts
of the World. And in other Places two or three of the Cardinal Points stand for
them all. To the Synecdochical way of speaking belongs the using of an Even
Number for an Odd one; or a Round Number for one that is lesser or greater. So
Cunaeus, Jac. Capellus, Beroaldus, etc.
some think the Year of Iubilee is called the Fiftieth Year, Lev. 25. 10.
merely for the Evenness or Roundness of the Number, and not because full Fifty
Years go to every Jubilee; for they hold that Forty nine Years make a Jubilee,
or rather that the forty ninth Year is the Year of Jubilee. And truly it is
adjusted to Reason and the Discovery we have concerning this Matter: for the
Jubilee is the Great Sabbath of Years, and is composed of seven times seven
Years, which is exactly forty nine, the last of which is the Jubilaean Year.
Odd Numbers are not regarded sometimes. The Scripture is not so minute and
critical as always to reckon preci^ely. It is not unusual to omit a small
Number of Years in a greater and bigger one. In Numb. 11. 24. the Elders are
said to be seventy, though two of the Number be wanting, as is plain from ver.
26. But others solve this by saying, the full Number of them was seventy two.
It is recorded that the Persian King reigned over a hundred and twenty seven
Provinees, E^th. 1. 1. But in Dan. 6. 1. the odd Number seven is omitted, and
so in other Places the imperfect Number is left out. Some Parts only of the
Twelve Tribes are called the Twelve Tribes; Acts 26. 7. Our twelve Tribes
instantly serving God Day and Night. And St. James directs his Epistle to the
Twelve Tribes, whether there were that Number extant at that time or not. So a
Round Number is used for an odd one in John 20. 24. where Thomas is called one
of the Twelve: yet there were but Eleven Apostles then. But because the Number
of the Apostles was twelve before Iudas's Apostasy; and afterward, when
Matthias was chosen in his room, the Number was filled up, therefore they are
called the Twelve by the Evangelist, but it is in a way of Synecdoche. He was
seen of the twelve, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 5. Yet there were not above
Eleven at that time. The true Account of this is, that the Greatest Part has
the Name of the Whole. And sometimes an Uneven Number is put for an Even one,
as in Mark 16. 14. He appeared to the eleven, when there were but ten present,
for Thomas was not there, and Judas had hanged himself. Thus the strict Number
of Persons and Things is not made use of sometimes in Scripture. It was
generally believed by the Ancients, that the seventy Disciples mentioned Luke
10. 1, 17. were in strict speaking seventy two: and indeed some Greek Copies
have it (...).
so, and the Vulgar Latin renders it Septuaginta duo.
accordingly. So the famous Interpreters of the Old Testament were seventy two,
(six out of every Tribe) but are generally known by the Name of the Septuagint.
This is not unfrequent in Profane Authors, and in our Common Discourse, as
those that are called the Seven Stars are according to some Astronomers but
Six. Yea, this was taken notice of long ago by In Fast.
Ovid: Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent. So we call them the Cinque
Ports, which are more in Number; for the Privileged Ports in England were three
at first; afterward two were added, and then they were called the Cinque
Ports. Yet after that, when two more were added, still they retained the former
Name: nay, another was added, which made eight, and yet they are to this Day
called the Cinque Ports. And several other Instances there are of this sort of
Synecdoche, but my Design is not to enumerate all of them, nor of any Others
that belong to the rest of the Figures, but only to give you some few Examples
of them, that you may thence know how to discern the rest, and by all together
understand the Nature of the Scripture-Stile.

But of all the Figurative ways of speaking in Sripture, there is none so
common as the Metaphorical one, which is when the Words are translated from
their proper and genuine Signification to another. Thus you read of trusting in
the shadow (i. e. the Protection) of Egypt. Isa. 30. 3. Thus the Psalmist
complains that the Plowers plowed upon his Back, and made long their Furrows,
Psalm. 129. 3. i. e. they exceedingly troubled, vexed and plagued him. So the
Jews are called the threshing, and the Corn of the Floor, Isa. 21. 10. i. e. a
People that had been extremely harassed and persecuted by their Enemies. And
that is another Metaphorical Description of Affliction; Psalm. 42. 7. All thy
Waves and thy Billows have gone over me. And a great Multitude of such like
Expressions there are every where in the Old Testament. Sometimes there is a
double Metaphor, as in Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the Righteous. The Joy,
the Comfort which is promised to Good Men, is here in a borrowed Style called
Light; and not only so, but Seed, precious Seed which is covered for a time,
(hid under Ground) but shall in due Season sprout forth: and they that sow in
Tears shall reap in Joy; which is still a farther Instance of this kind of
speaking. Sometimes there is a Continued Metaphor, as in Hos. 10. 12, etc. Sow
to your selves in Righteousness, reap in Mercy; break up your Fallowground: for
it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon you. Ye
have plowed Wickedness, ye have reaped Iniquity, ye have eaten the Fruit of
Lies. Here is a Heap of Metaphors taken from the Field and Husbandry.
Throughout the whole 23d Psalm, the Metaphor of a Shepherd is carried on with
relation to all the Particulars of his Pastoral Charge, as I may have occasion
to show at another time.

But at present I will choose to insist upon that excellent Description of Old
Age which Solomon gives in the 12th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, and which is made
up all along of an admirable Chain of Metaphors. This is that Time of a Man's
Life which is rightly called his Aetas mala. Plaut.
Evil Days, ver. 1. and that both in regard of his Mind and of his Body. The
Wise Man here ^egins with the former, deciphering that black and dismal State
of Mankind by such Expressions as these, The Sun, and the Light, and the Moon,
and the Stars are darkened, ver. 2. That Noble and Illustrious Part of Man, the
Soul, ^s the Glorious Sun and Light of this Little World: and the Meon and
Stars fitly denote the several bright and shining Faculties of it, which are
all darkened and clouded by Age. The Intellectual Part is miserably obscured and
impaired by the Clouds of Ignorance, Prejudice, and Mistake, which insensibly
increase upon those who are much declined in Years, especially if they had not
laid in a considerable Stock of useful Notions before. The Memory becomes weak
and faithless, so that they let slip many Notices and Observations which they
were once Masters of, and they cannot Retain those which are now daily
administered to them. The Imagination, another Radiant Power of the Soul, is
corrupted: they are grown Conceited and Fantastic; they are (as the
Philosopher observes of them) (...). Aristot. Eth.
suspicious of Evil, and backward to believe any Good. They nourish wrong
Apprehensions, and have a false View of things. Notwithstanding this they are
not desirous to correct their Errors and Misprisions, and to be better taught:
Horat. de Art. Poet.
Vel quia nil rectum nisi quod placuit sibi ducunt,
Vel qui^ ^urpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
Thence it was a kind of Proverb with Diogenes, (...). Diog, (...)* 1. 6.
To cure a Dead Man and instruct an Old one, are the ^ame. The Reason is*
because their Wills (another Mental Endowment) are strangely perverted and
distorted. Where the Divine Grace has not the Predominancy, they generally are
wayward and testy, froward and stubborn; they are dispeased at what others
(especially their Inferiors in Years) say or do, and nothing scarcely is
acceptable but what they speak and act themselves, because they will it, and
because they affect it* which reminds me of the gross Darkness which has
invaded another F^^ulty, viz. that of their Affections: This is wholly spent in
Self-Love, in an Eager Desire of lengthning out their Days, and in an
Extravagant. Doting on the things of this Life. They must soon die and leave
the World, (which they detest. so much as to hear of) and yet they do as 'twere
hug it the more. They are shortly to bid adieu to it, and therefore they more
^arnestly desire and pursue it, as we are most busy in saluting and embracing
those Friends that we must part with presently. Though there is a Period to all
their other Labors, yet (...). Pl^t.
they are not wearied with getting Gain. In nothing else but this do they seem
to possess their Youthful Vigor again. In brief, all their former Passions are
swallowed up in Avarice and Concernedness for the Profits and Advantages of
this present World. The longer they are here, the more enamored they are with
it; for as Lord Bacon's Essays.
One has observed, The more a Man drinks of the World, the more it
Intoxicates. Thus the Sun, and Moon, and Stars are darkened: Thus the Minds of
Aged ^ersons are vitiated and corrupted: These are the particular Defects and
Failings which they are generally liable to, (and therefore are made part of
their Character here) I mean when a Divine Principle and a Lively Sense of
Virtue and Holiness do not actuate them, when Religion has not had its due
Operation on their Hearts, and their Lives are not reformed by the Influence of
the Holy Spirit. For otherwise it is certain that Years administer to Virtue,
and are an excellent Help to Religion. The bravest and noblest Actions that
have been achieved, have been from the Counsels and Directions of Men of Long
Experience in the World; for now their Minds and Judgments are arrived to the
utmost Maturity: like Old Wine, they are the more Generous and Refined. This
Stage of Life (of all others) is most calculated for the serious Practice of
Goodness and Piety, and the very Height and Perfection of all Virtues, when it
is seasoned with Divine Grace, and assisted by the supernatural Aids of the
Holy Ghost. But the Wise Man here speaks of it under another Capacity, and as
this part of a Man's Life is generally and most commonly incident both to
natural and moral Defects of the Soul. This is the darkning of this glorious
Sun: these are the unhappy Clouds that obscure its Light. Yea, (as it follows)
the Clouds return after the Rain; for this belongs to what was said before, and
so refers to the Soul, which so frequently in the Close of Men's Days is
overwhelmed with Ignorance, Dotage, Forgetfulness, Conceitedness, Wilfulness,
Self-Love, and other Distempers which cast a Scum over this Sun, and hinder it
from shining forth. And accordingly as the Unhealthful and Sickly Years of
their Lives come faster upon them, these Clouds increase, and grow thicker and
darker, and so the Sun is overspread at last. One Mental Evil succeeds another
in this Concl^ding Stage of Men's Pilgrimage: There is a Circle of these
Maladies; as Clouds produce Rain, and Rain falling on the Earth begets new
Vapors, and from these proceed Clouds again: So it is here, there is a
continued Succession of Evils; thus the Clouds return after the Rain. Hitherto
you have the Character of Old Age, as it has respect to the Soul of Man, for
so I understand it, though Expositors are pleased to go another way. But I
would ask this, Is it not most unlikely that Solomon undertaking here the
Description of Old Age, would give so lame and imperfect an Account of it, as
to relate some Inconveniences and Defects which have reference to the Body, and
wholly to pass by in silence those that appertain to the Other and more
Considerable Part of Man? Again, I would ask whether there could be any Words
in the World that are fitter and apter to express the Defects of the Mind, the
Nobler and Brighter Moiety of Man, than these which the Wise Man here uses?
Wherefore I doubt not but this first Part of his Character is to be understood
as I have represented it to you. And indeed since my finishing this Part of my
Discourse, I have found that some others, as Rhetor. 1. 20.
Glassius, and an Dr. Smith his P. of Old Age.
Ingenious Person of our own Nation, interpret Solomon's Words after this
manner.

From the Soul he passes to the Body and Outward Man: and that it may appear
the better that this is a distinct Partition from what went before, he inserts
these Words, [ in the Day when] ver. 3. and does not repeat them any more
afterward; which shows he begins a New Head, and that these Words are only to
mark out here to us this Division which I am speaking of: which Commentators
not attending to, have mistaken the Sense of the second Verse, (which I have
been explaining) and have applied it to the Evils of the Body: Whereas Those
are now in the next Place entered upon, and I will endeavor to give you a
particular Account of them. First, he tells us, that the Keepers of the House
tremble, ver. 3. where the Body is compared to a House; and what more fitly can
be said to be the Keepers of it than (as Castalio and Grotius expound it) the
active Hands and Arms, which were made on purpose to guard and defend the Body,
and therefore on all Occasions officiously bestir themselves, and are lifted up
or stretched forth to preserve it from harm, to keep and secure it from Danger?
But even these Nimble Guards, these Stout and Brawny Keepers, shake at the
Arrival of Old Age, and with a Paralytick Trembling confess their Inability to
discharge their Office, to keep and defend the House (the Tabernacle of the
Body) from Assaults and Injuries. Yea, these once-Trusty Guardians, who were
wont to make use of Staves and other Weapons for their Defense, now use the
former only for a Support. With this they knock at the Earth at every Step, as
if they called on their Graves: Or, as the Spanish Proverb has it, The Old
Man's Staff is the Rapper at Death's Door. And the strong Man, i. e. according
to Vatablus and Grotius, the Legs and Thighs, which are placed in another
Extremity of the House, to be its Security, and which are particularly taken
notice of for their Strength, Psalm. 147. 10. and which Strong Men so much glory
in, these bow themselves, i. e. become weak and feeble with Age; yea, they
really bend and give way, they are so far from being able to support the Body
they belong to, that they can hardly sustain themselves. These bow, these stoop
toward the Place where they are shortly to take their R^st. Next, it is said,
that the Grin^^rs cease, because they are few; i. e. the Teeth with which we
grind and chew our Meat fail us at last, and are not able to do their Office,
because not only the Strength but the Number of them is diminished: yea,
sometimes the Toothless Jaws (as well as other Defects) show that Aged Persons
are a second time Children. It follows, those that look out of the Windows are
darkened: for he had compared the Body to a House, and so here he continues that
Metaphor, as well as goes on with several others. The Windows of this House are
the Holes or Sockets wherein the Eyes are placed, (the two Bonny Cavities where
these precious Lights are safely enclosed, to defend them from Hurt) which are
said to look out of these Casements, i. e. there (as Drusius and Grotius well
interpret it) they were appointed by Heaven to exert their Visive Faculty for
the use of Mankind. But Length of Years impairs or hinders their looking out:
the Visual Nerves and the Spirits which are derived to them decay; the Humors
dry up, the Coats wear out, the Muscles flag, and so it is no wonder that the
Sight is dim and imperfect, and that there is a necessity of using some
Artificial Helps to amend it. Whence Gejerus and some others have fancied, that
those that look out of the Windows are such as are forced to use Spectacles:
but this Gloss, I think, will hardly be admitted till it be proved that there
was such an Invention in Solomon's Days.

The House of our Body has a Door, and therefore it is said in the next Place,
the Doors are shut in the Streets, ver. 4. And what can more properly be called
the Door of this House than the Mouth, the Throat, the Windpipe, the Lungs,
the Stomach, all those Vessels that are to let in Air or Food? These Doors are
in the Street, that Great Passage and Hollowness in the Body which is like a
Street or Highway, and by which there are other Passages into several Parts of
the Body. These Doors are shut, when by reason of Age they are obstructed, when
they are clogged with excessive Colds and Catarrhs, when the Jaws and Throat
are inflamed, when the Muscles of them are swelled, whereby the Ways of
Breathing and Swallowing are stopped; when the Lungs are impeded by Asthma's,
and fail in their reciprocal Motion of Inspiration and Respiration; when the
Chyle is not duly separated, and the Ferment of the Stomach is vitiated; and
other the like Distempers, which the Aged are subject to, invade those Parts.
But more especially and signally the Mouth is the Door of this House, which I
confirm from what follows, when the Sound of the Grinding is low; that is, this
Door is shut, or but seldom opened, when their great Weakness and Indisposition
will not suffer them to take any Food, or but an inconsiderable Portion of it,
then the Sound of the Grinding is low. And it is low, not only because of this
Weakness of the Body, but because (as was said before) the Grinders are few,
they have not a sufficient Number of Teeth for Mastication. Hence it is that
there is none or little Grist brought to the Mill. I know some have thought,
that the Doors being shut in the Street, signifies here, that those Persons who
are of Great Age desire to keep up, and come not into Company, as before. The
thing it self, I grant, is true; the Indispositions which some Aged Persons
labor under, cause them to shut up their Doors, especially when the Winter
approaches, and they appear not till a very Warm Sun invites them to show
themselves. Then they get to the next Sunny Bank, and there lie basking in the
comfortable Rays which they feel. But if we consider that the Royal Preacher
had been comparing the Body of Man to a House, assigning its Keepers, yea its
Grinders, (the most necessary Office of old in a Family) its Windows, its
Doors, we must needs look upon this Interpretation as foreign and impertinent,
and especially when we take notice of the Design of this Inspired Writer, in
this Chapter, which is to insist upon those Evils and Maladies which belong to
such and such particular Parts of the Body, as will appear in the Sequel. Yea,
by looking into the very next Words we shall find that this Clause, which I
have been now speaking of, is to be understood in this Sense, and no other; for
it is to be joined with those Words, (because of its Affinity with them) he
shall rise up at the Voice of the Bird: which I interpret thus; his Appetite
declining, and his Stomach nauseating Food, especially all coarse Fare, all
common and vulgar Sustenance, he will yet be desirous of Dainties, some Tsippor
aviculam significat, nec de majoribus avibus dicitur. Mercer.
small Bird or Fowl; for Tsippor, which is the Word here used, signifies the
lesser sort of Birds (and particularly a Sparrow) and also such as are Tsippor,
avis quae in deliciis est. Bochart. Hieroz: Par. 2. c. 22.
pleasant and delicious. This (if any thing) is most acceptable to his
squeamish Stomach, he rises up at the Voice of the Bird, that is, at the very
naming of it; for the Hebrew Word Kol (whence the Greek (...), and our English
Call) denot^s so much in this Place. Or at the very Word, the very Sound of
that word Tsippor, the small delicate Bird, he rises up very cheerfully to eat
it, or some part of it at least. The Hebrew Verb Kum, which is used here, most
frequently signifies to stand up, or lift up one's self. This the sickly Old
Man is observed to do when some Delicious Fare is set before him, when some
choice Dish, some delightful and savory Morsel is presented to him. This is
part of the genuine Description which may be given of the Aged Persons
Condition, and therefore it is no wonder that Solomon brings it in here. A
little Food serves him, but he longs for that which is Uncommon, and may please
his Taste, and provoke his Appetite at the same time: He rises up with
Complacency at the very mentioning of some dainty Bird, some beloved Bit. This
is my Conjecture on the Place, and I do not (I must needs say) see any Ground
why it should be rejected for I have showed you that it is to the purpose which
Solomon is speaking of; it exactly agrees with the preceding Words, but the
Vulgar Exposition does not so.

To proceed, our Royal Author having represented the Defects of Old Age, as to
the Weakness of the chief Limbs and Ioints, as to the Paucity of Teeth, Dimness
of Eyes, and the Evils incident to those Parts which are called the Doors, he
lets us know next, that this Portion of a Man's Life is as defective, in
respect of Other Useful Organs of the Body, and particularly that of the Ear:
all the Daughters of Music are brought low: that is, the Ears, which were made
for Hearing, and particularly delighting themselves in excellent Notes of
Music, whether Vocal or Instrumental, are now indisposed, and rendered
incapable of that Pleasure which before they were so charmed with: Now these
Daughters of a Song are grown deaf, as the Vulgar Latin renders it. As Old
Barzillai's Complaint was not only, 1 Samuel 19. 35.
Can I taste what I eat or drink? (which refers to the former Particular we
just now spoke of) but likewise, Can I hear any more the Voice of singing Men
and singing Women? Even these Daughters of Music are brought low, their most
exquisite and ravishing Harmony is no longer delightful, they are vile and of
no account: for the Youthful and Mercurial Spirit is exhausted: in this Foggy
Cloudy Weather of Expiring Age the Quicksilver subsides in these Old
Weather-Glasses, and will never ascend again. I might add also, that the
Vessels and Organs that properly belong to the forming of the Voice, those
Daughters of Singing, are by Age disabled and weakened. Next, it is said, ver.
5. They are afraid of that which is high: The plain meaning whereof is this,
that Aged Persons dare not ascend any high or steep Place; their Breath is
short, and therefore they avoid climbing. And when they tread on low Ground,
and walk in a smooth Path, yet even then Fears are in the way, i. e. they are
afraid of stumbling and falling, because their ^eet are infirm, and their Steps
unsteady, which they therefore endeavor to fix with a Staff. To which the
Hebrew Masters allude when they say, Two are better than three: that is, the
Feet of Young Men are better to walk than those of the Old, though they are
usually three. Another Member of this Description is, that the Almond-tree
flourishes, i. e. (as it is expounded by Albes^i^ caput sicut flores amyg^^li.
In loc.
Grotius, and by the Generality of Commentators) Gray Hairs, which are the
usual Badg of Decrepid Years, appear; the Head now grows white and hoary, like
the Blossoms and Flowers of the Almond-tree, whose Fruit was called (...), the
Head, says Athenaeus, as if it had relation to this Part. Again, it is added,
the Grasshopper is a Burden, i. e. the least, the lightest thing (say Expositors
generally) seems to be heavy and burdensome to the Aged, because of their
Faintness and Weakness: Or rather, I should interpret it thus, (with reference
to what was said before, and is so noted and common an Indication of Declining
Years) the Grasshopper, as little as it is, lies heavy on their Stomachs; for
you will find in Lev. 11. 22. that the Grasshopper is reckoned among the Clean
Meats, and was commonly eaten in those Days. And this here mentioned is of that
very Species, as the using of the same Hebrew Word both here and there lets us
know. Even this light kind of Food was a Burden to their weak Stomachs. What
can be more obvious and plain than this Exposition of the Words? especially
when it follows, Desire fails; as all other Inclinations that were vigorous in
them in their juvenile Years do now flag, so this toward Food more signally
does so. And that this was thought to be the meaning of this Clause of the
Words, is apparent from the (...).
Version of the LXX and the Capparis.
Vulgar Latin, both which express Desire by Capers, a known Fruit, whereby an
Appetite is excited. So that this way of speaking is metaphorically used to
denote the Defect of Appetite in Aged Men, whose Stomachs are depraved. And
this is no wonder, because they go to their long Home, and the Mourners go
about the Streets; they are hastening to the Grave, and shall in a short time be
carried out by the Mourners to their Funerals.

But yet before this Day arrives, they have farther Evils to undergo; For,
says the Wise Man, when this great Number of Years is gone over their Heads,
they will find that the silver Cord is not lengthned, for so the Hebrew has
it; the word Rachak (which is here used) signifying elongari, long esse: and
then in the General this may be the Sense of this Clause, the Thread of Life
(that is the Precious Cord or String of Silver) begins now to be cut short;
they must not expect to stay many Days in the Land of the Living. But we may
rather follow the Interpretation of Mun^ter, Vatablus, Drusius, Grotlus.
those who apply this Passage to some particular Part of the Body, (as the
other Members of this Verse seem also to be restrained) and so the silver Cord
is loosed, (as we translate it) i. e. the Spinal Marrow, which is white like
Silver, and lengthned out like a Cord or Rope, decays and grows loose: and then
the Nerves, which are derived from it, and consequently the whole Body, feel
the ill Effect of it in Palsies and Convulsions, and an universal Weakness.
Thus it is when the Body is worn out with Age; when these evil Days come, all
things portend Ruin and a final Period. The House, as the Body is said to be,
is falling; and all things belonging to it are hastening to their Destruction.
Not only the silver Cord is loosed, but the golden Bowl is broken; by which
some think is here meant the Cranium, or Pan, in which that choice Vis^us of
the Brain is contained and secured; or perhaps the Semicircular Membrane which
is next to this Bowl, and is it self lined with a thinner Membranous Substance,
is here designed. Vatablus and Drusius, and others, interpret the Words thus,
and tell us, that these Meninges are said to be of Gold, not only by reason of
their Color, but because of their great Worth and Value, in that they are a
Guard and Covering to the noblest Part of Man's Body: Or the Brain it self may
be here meant, the Seat and Throne of the Rational Soul, and the Origin of all
the Nerves. And then observe here, that the Golden Bowl and the Silver Cord are
fitly joined together by this Divine Writer, for the latter is but an Appendix
of the former; the Marrow of the BackBone is but the Cerebrum extended, the
Brain lengthned out; or it is according to Solomon's Style here a Rope, a Cord
of Brains. But the Head and Beginning of that Medulla is that which is properly
called the Brain, the Great and Only Laboratory of the Animal Spirits, from
whence they are diffused by the Nerves into the several Members of the Body, in
order to all the Functions and Operations of Life. This gullath hazahab, this
Golden Bowl, this Lordly Dish, this roundish Mass of choice Matter is at last
broken: which is as much as to say, this upper and nobler Part of the Body
shares in the Ruins which Old Age makes: whence it is that the Clogging of the
Passages of the animal Spirits with indigested Humors, the Obstructions or
Relaxations of the Nerves, Pains in the Head, Melancholy, Giddiness,
Drowsiness, yea Lethargies and Apoplexies (which impair or wholly destroy both
Sense and Motion) are the dangerous Maladies of this Part of the Body, and are
more especially the mischievous Companions of the Aged.

And as the Animal, so the Vital Parts feel the Decays which a Long and Sickly
Life brings with it, which the Wise Man means when he adjoins, the Pitcher is
broken at the Fountain. The Pitchers (for the Plural is intended when the
Singular is mentioned, as I have showed to be frequent in Scripture-Stile) are
the Veins and Arteries, whose Office it is to carry and recarry Blood to and
from the Heart, (that is the Fountain) as Pitchers or Buckets are first let
down into the Well, and then convey Water thence. Through these Vessels the
Blood continually passes, and that swiftly, beginning its Course from the right
Cavity of the Heart, through the Arterious Vein, the Branches of which are
dispersed through the whole Lungs, and joined to the Branches of the Veiny
Artery, by which it passes from the Lungs into the left side of the Heart, and
thence it flows into the Great Artery; the Branches of which being spread
through all the Body, are united to those of the Hollow Vein, which carry the
same Blood again into the right Ventricle of the Heart. But these Vessels by
length of time become disordered and shattered, these Pitchers are broken at
the Fountain; the Heart it self, as well as they, decaying and declining in its
Office; whence proceed Faintings, Swoonings, Tremblings, Palpitations, and
other Distempers, which are the Product of an undue Sanguification.

Lastly; it is said, the Wheel is broken at the Cistern, which an J. Smith, M. D.
Ingenious Person understands of the Circulation of the Blood, (for that he
thinks is intimated by the Wheel) and its being obstructed by the
Indispositions of Old Age. But it is much to be questioned, whether Solomon, as
Wise a Man as he was, knew any thing of the Circular Motion of the Blood
throughout the whole Body. I have no stronger a Belief of his Knowledge in this
kind, than that his Ships went to the East or West Indies, though I find both
of these asserted by different Writers. However, I conceive this Circulation is
not meant in this place; for the word Bor, Puteus, or Cisterna, baffles this
Notion, for this Author makes the Cistern here to be the Left Ventricle of the
Heart; whereas the Heart, with both its Ventricles, is rather a Fountain than a
Cistern: yea, he had himself applied this Word to the Heart, in his Exposition
of the former Clause of the Verse; and there was Reason for it, because the
Waters do spring and flow in a Fountain, but they lie dead and moveless in a
Cistern or Pit under Ground, which is the same thing. Wherefore I conclude that
this Cistern must be something of another Nature; and what is that but the
Vrinary Vessels, especially the Bladder? This, without any fanciful straining,
must be acknowledged to be the Cistern of the Body, it being a Vessel situated
beneath, on purpose to receive and keep the Water that comes from the Ureters.
And here, as in those Receptacles in the Ground, the Water gathers a Sediment,
and grows muddy; the evil Effects of which are too well known to Mankind. This
Vesica then, which is made to gather and hold the Urine, is properly Bor (the
word in this Place) Puteus, Cisterna. And the Wheel is said to be broken at
this Cistern, when those Vessels and Organs which were appointed for the
Percolation of the Blood, that is, the separating the serous Humor from it,
and for the transmitting it through the Emulgent Arteries into the Ureters, and
thence carrying it to the proper Vessel (the Cistern) which is made to receive
it; when (I say) these are put out of order, and disturbed, then they cease to
perform their proper Administrations in the Body; whereupon immediately are
produced, in these dark and narrow Passages the Painful Stone and Gravel in the
Kidneys and Bladder, all other ^ephritick Distempers, Ulcers, Inflammations,
the Strangury, and sometimes a total Suppression of the Urine, together with
the undue Evacuations of it. Thus the Wheel is broken; thus the whole
Periodical Series of Operation in those Parts is spoiled and destroyed. And
perhaps this particular Phrase is here used by Solomon, because the great Work
at Wells and Cisterns (or Pits for retaining of Water for a time) was performed
by Wheels. So much for this excellent Delineation of Old Age, which is it self
a Disease, a constant and inseparable Malady, and is attended with many more.
And as the Bodies of the Aged are the Scene of Weakness and Infirmities, of
Pains and Languishments; so their Souls are usually decayed and distempered. Of
both these Solomon gives us a particular Account, (and perhaps too much from
his own Experience, for it is probable that the Miscarriages of his Youth had
enfeebled Nature; and we read, that toward the Close of his Days, he
degenerated from his former Piety;) and so we have here a Full and Complete
Description of the Defects, which too often accompany this Last Declension of
Life, which are set forth by Variety of Metaphors, which I have made it my
Business to explain to you.

CHAP. V.
The Writers of the New Testament are delighted with the Use of Metaphors. Here
is sometimes a Complication of them. Ephesians. 6. 13. etc. Take unto you the whole
Armor of God, etc. largely insisted upon. The Olympic Games and Prizes
administer religious Metaphors. The Antiquity, Names, Kinds, the Laws and
Observances of these Grecian Combats, (before, in, and after them) the Judges,
the Rewards, and all other things appertaining to these Athletick Enterprises,
distinctly considered; it is showed how they are all applied to Christianity in
the Apostolic Writings. Hence is inferred the Gracefulness of the Sacred
Style: Notwithstanding which some have vilified it, whose Character is
represented. Proverbial Sayings used by other Writers, especially the Jews, are
frequently mentioned by our Savior in the New Testament. To which is reduced
his bidding the Apostles shake off the Dust of their Feet, Mat. 10. 14.
concerning which the Author adds his particular Sentiment.

IF we pass to the New Testament, we shall there find that those Inspired
Penmen are much delighted with the use of Metaphors. We have a Complication of
them in John 15. 1, etc. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman,
etc. In 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. the extreme Dangers which Men are exposed to by the
Sin of Covetousness, are expressed by a Snare, by drowning, by piercing
through, as with Thorns and Briars. In those Words, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light, there are
likewise three Metaphors together, for Sin is called a Sleep, Death, Darkness:
yea, if we be exact, we shall find three more; for if Sin be a Sleep, then
Grace or Conversion is Awakening out of that Sleep, (and this is expressly
mentioned in the Place) if the one be Darkness and Death, the other is Light
and Life, and Rising again. But as before I chose out a remarkable Place of the
Old Testament, to enlarge upon under this Head, so I will now do the like in
the New, and insist upon that choice Passage in Ephesians. 6. 13, to ver. 18. Take
unto you the whole Armor of God, etc. which under that one Great and General
Metaphor of Armor comprehends several other particular ones. Christians are
represented as Soldiers in other Places by this Apostle, and here he lets us
know what is their Armor, what Weapons they must fight with: which are thus
metaphorically expressed.

1. They must be careful to put on the Girdle of Truth, which some Expositors
have thought is meant in opposition to Error and Heretical Persuasions: To be
girt about with Truth, is the same, they think, with holding fast the Form of
sound Words, or the embracing of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. But this
Exposition is not to be admitted, because it confounds this piece of Armor
with another that is afterward mentioned; it makes the Girdle and the Sword
(which is the Word or Doctrine of God) the same. Therefore it is more
reasonable to assert, that Truth here is synonymous with Faithfulness or
Sincerity, and that it stands in opposition to Hypocrisy. Thus Sincerity and
Truth are equivalent Terms, 1 Cor. 5. 8. and in several other Places. Wherefore
when the Christian Soldier is commanded to have his Loins girt about with
Truth; the plain Import of it is, that he ought to be established with
Sincerity and Integrity of Cons^ience. Hypocrisy enervates and dissolves the
Mind, renders it loose and unsettled; but Uprightness and Faithfulness keep it
close and entire, make it firm and steady; yea, strengthen and confirm all the
other Graces, as the Girdle of War was used to fasten their Clothes together,
and to keep their Loins firm. It is not unlikely that this Place refers
particularly to Isa. 11. 5. Faithfulness shall be the Girdle of his Reins. This
Truth also implies Fortitude, Resolution and Constancy, that they will never
revolt from the Captain of their Salvation, but fight under his Banner even
unto Death; for he that is Sincere and Faithful will do so. This is the first
Martial Accoutrement of the Christian Soldier, and it is of indispensable Use
and Necessity in the Holy Warfare: as among the ancient Warriors there was no
fighting without the Military Girdle or Belt. Whence Cinctus, simply, without
any Addition, is as much as Marcell. de Test.
Miles. And we read that it was a Alexand. ab Alex. l. 1. c. 20. Sueton. in
Octavio.
Punishment inflicted on delinquent Soldiers to expose them without their
Girdles, to make them stand Ungirt in some public Place. This piece of Warlike
Furniture, (...), was so considerable of old, that is was a word (as In Baeotic.
^ausanias testi^ies) to signify all sorts of Weapons for War. It is often
mentioned by Homer Synecdochichally for the Whole Military Armor; and (...) is
as much as to be completely Armed. The Girdle of Truth, which this Great
Commander here enjoins us, is as requisite in the Christian Warfare: there is
no Fighting without it, because this fastens all the other Parts of our
Spiritual Armor: a Sincere and Upright Heart is of universal Influence in the
Life of a Christian.

2. The next Accoutrement is the Breast Plate of Righteousness, i. e. a Holy
and Pious Conversation, Impartial and Universal Obedience to the Will of God.
This guards the Breast against all Assaults, as we see in the Example of our
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. for he had this as well as the foregoing piece of Armor
on when he said, Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our Conversation in the World. And again, I have fought a good
Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7. And in
other Places he defends himself against the malicious Cavils of others, by
appealing to his own Innocence, his Sanctity and Exemplary Life. This perhaps
may have particular reference to Isa. 59. 17. He put on Righteousness as a
Breast Plate. But this Breast Plate of Righteousness must be covered with
another, viz. that of our Blessed Redeemer, which is Complete and Perfect, and
will amply protect and secure us from all Dangers. The Inherent Righteousness
of the best of Men is exceedingly defective, and cannot shelter them from the
Divine Wrath; this Breast Plate is too narrow, too thin, too little, too mean
to cover us; but that of the Meritorious Righteousness of Christ Jesus is great
and large enough, and is able to hide all our Defects, and perfectly to defend
us from the Anger of our offended God. This Evangelical Breast Plate must be
put on by Faith, of which afterward.

3. The Shoe of the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace is an Allusion to that
Military Provision which the Infantry, among the ancient Warriors, made for
their Feet, to defend them from what was offensive in their way. For the Armies
heretofore (as appears both from Greek and Roman Authors) were wont to fix
short Stakes, or cast Gall-traps in the way before their Enemies, to wound
their Feet, and to cause them to fall. Wherefore it was usual to have Harness
for their Legs and Feet: they wore a particular sort of Shoe or Boot to secure
them from being hurt and galled. So the Christian Soldier ought to have his
Feet shod, and that with the Preparation of the Goslpel, i. e. he must be
sitted and prepared by the preaching of the Gospel for all Hardships and
Distresses. I do not much like St. Augustin's way of proving this
Interpretation, viz. by telling us, that by the Shoe the Preaching of the
Gospel was meant when the Psalmist said, Over Edom will I cast out my Cujus rei
calceamentum nisi Evangelii? De Cons. Evang. l. 2. c. 30.
Shoe, Psalm. 60. 8. which he labors to confirm from Isa. 52. 7. How beautiful
are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings? And this Pious Writer is so
fanciful as to say, that when our Savior bid the Disciples be shod with
Sandals, Mark 6. 9. he meant the open and free Preaching of the Gospel. But
waving this weak sort of Proof, yet I am satisfied, that in this place, the
Christians Military Shoe is the Gospel, and the Preaching of it: he is then
shod with the Preparation of it, when he is enabled to make his way through all
Hindrances and Di^^iculties whatsoever, by virtue of those Excellent Principles
which the Gospel has discovered to him, by virtue of those Extraordinary Helps
which this affords him. And it is ^itly added, the Gospel of Peace, because the
Consideration of that Peace and Reconciliation which the Gospel tenders through
the Blood of Christ, mightily influences upon his Spirit, and gives Courage and
Valor amidst all the Hardships he meets with in his Christian Warfare.

4. The Shield of Faith is another necessary part of Spiritual Armor. And it
is signally added, that we must take this above all, which it is probable is
said with allusion to what was the sense of the Old Warriors, viz. That their
Shield was their Principal Armor. This they prized above all the rest, and
were most careful in keeping it: of which we have several Instances in Ancient
History: and there was a Remarkable Punishment inflicted on those (says In
Pelopid*
Plutarch) who lost their Shields in Battle. Much more Valuable is this
Evangelick Armor, our Faith, a Firm Assent to all Revealed Truths, a Steady
Belief of the Promises of Eternal Life, through the blessed Undertakings of our
Lord, a Hearty Compliance with the Gracious Terms of the Gospel, which enjoins
Universal Obedience to the Laws of Christ, a Well-grounded Trust and A^^iance
in the Mercy and Goodness of God, a firm and unshaken Dependence on the Merits
of our Redeemer and Savior. This is that Hardened Shield wherewith we keep off
and beat back all the furious Insults of the Evil Spirit, that Implacable Enemy
whom we are to encounter with in our Spiritual Warfare. His Temptations are
here called Darts, with allusion still to the antiet way of ^ighting, which was
with Darts and Arrows. And they are called fiery Darts, with reference perhaps
to the Heat which those Weapons acquired by their swift flying: or they may be
said to be fiery, because they are sent in an Hostile manner* the word being as
'twere appropriated to Fighting, as among the Greeks (...) is both fax or
taeda, and pugna; and (...) is both ardens and pugnax: and among the Latins
ardere is particularly applied to War and Battle: as in Virgil, Ardet in arma
magis. -- Instant ardentes Tyrii. -- And besides, these Darts, these
Suggestions, when they are very fierce and raging, do as 'twere inflame the
Heart and Conscience, they set the distracted Soul on fire. But by Faith the
Christian Soldier is able to quench them, as the Apostle excellently phraseth
it; by a vigorous exerting of this Grace he defeats the malicious Attempts of
Satan, he stifles all his hellish Darts; alluding to the known use of the
Shield, which was to repel the Arrows shot by the Enemy. And these were
sometimes Poisoned, and thereby became hot and inflaming, to which some have
thought the Apostle here might have glanced when he speaks of fiery Darts. This
is certain that a Shield is for Defense, and such is our Faith, whereby we
defend our selves from the inslamed Darts of the Wicked, which he flings at us
with the utmost Indignation and Fury. We quench, we extinguish, we utterly
frustrate all his Assaults by a firm Trust and Reliance on our Blessed Jesus,
who baffled him himself, and will effectually teach us by the guidance of his
Spirit to do the like. 1 John 5. 4.
This is our Victory that overcomes the Devil (as well as the World) even our
Faith.

5. We are to take the Helmet of Salvation, i. e. (as St. Paul himself explains
it) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.
the Hope of Salvation, the certain Expectation of the Everlasting Reward in
another World, which is brought to light by the Gospel of Christ Jesus. The
Christian Soldier is unspeakably animated by this: he has the Triumph in his
Eye: this makes him sight with undaunted Valor and Resolution. He is safe
whilst he is covered with this Helmet: nothing can hurt him whiles he is
inspired with this Victorious Hope. Having this Armor of Defense, he de^ies
his insulting Adversaries, he fears not their Blows, he shrinks not at the
Batteries of his fiercest Enemies. This also seems to be borrowed from Isai.
59. 17. He put on an Helmet of Salvation on his Head.

6. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, is another part of the
Christian Panoply, which every Spiritual Soldier ought to be appointed with.
This is the two-edged Sword spoken of in Heb. 4. 12. and Rev. 1. 16. This our
great Captain dexterously made use of when the Infernal Spirit assaulted him,
Mat. 4. 4, 7, 10. And the same Weapon was brandished and managed by the whole
Army of Martyrs and Confessors, by all the Servants of Christ in the several
Ages of the Church. By this they have done great Execution, and put their
Spiritual Enemies to flight. They have in their most pressing Straits repaired
to the Holy Scriptures, and thence furnished themselves with those Divine
Consolations, and applied those Sacred Promises, whereby they soon vanquished
their Ghostly Assailants. And this is that Weapon which we must all of us in
our Holy War learn to wield: but let us be careful to make use of it faithfully
and sincerely, remembering that the first Piece of Armor and This last must be
joined together, for the Warlike Girdle or Belt is in order to wearing the
Sword, which is to hang at it.

The last Weapon the Apostle mentions is Prayer, Praying always with all
Prayer, etc. We must fight on our Knees, we must constantly invoke the Divine
Aid, and with importunate Cries solicit the Eternal Father that he would teach
our Hands to War, and our Fingers to Fight.

These are the Spiritual Weapons, which are called here (...), The whole
Armor, because it is fitted for every part of the Christian Combatant. He is
here armed at all Points, he is provided with Military Accoutrements for all
Assaults. And you may observe, that the Spiritual Armor answers to the Bodily
one, that is, it is both Defensive and Offensive. Our Weapons are both (...),
such as defend and preserve our selves, and also (...), such whereby we beat
off the Enemy* both which are expressed in those two Military words, Standing
and Withstanding, ver. 13. The first sort are the Girdle of Truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shoe of the Preparation of the Gospel, the
Shield of Faith, and the Helmet of Salvation: of the Second sort are the Sword
of the Spirit, and Prayer, which two likewise are both for Defense and Offense,
not only to guard our selves, but to oppose our Enemies. This is the Panoply of
the Gospel, the whole Armor of God which the Apostle here commends, and which
I have briefly descanted upon in prosecution of what I propounded, viz. to give
you some account of the Metaphorical Terms in Scripture.

In other places the Olympic Games and Prizes administer to the Apostle very
Religious and Devout Metaphors: those Grecian Combats being made use of by him
to set forth the Laborious Life and Undertakings of a Christian. I will in
farther pursuit of this part of my Discourse concerning the Style of Scripture,
let you see what Excellent and Divine things are comprised under those
Agonistick Phrases. We must know then, that the Olympic Games were of very
great Antiquity, being instituted (as it is said) by Hercules, and restored by
Iphitus, who at the same time began the Account of the Olympiads, that famous
Epoche of the Greeks which commenced A. M. 3173. in the time of Vzziah King of
Judah. They had their Name from Olympia, a City of Achaia, near to Elis, on the
Plains whereof these Exercises were celebrated, and they were in honor of
Jupiter Olympius. And there were Sports of the like Nature in other parts of
Greece, as those that were called the Isthmian, because they were begun in the
Corinthian Isthmus: and as the Olympic Plays were dedicated to Jupiter, so
these were in honor of Melicerta; others say, of Palaemon. The like Exercises
in other adjacent Towns of Greece were called Pythian, in memory of Apollo
Pythius; and others Nemaean, (called so from the Nema^an Wood, near which they
were) and these were in honor of Archemorus, the Son of Lycurgus. But all
these were in imitation of the Olympic (as being the Antientest) Combats; and
because they were so like them, they sometimes go by that Name. Great Numbers
of People flocked from all parts in Greece to these Solemn Diversions, either
to try their Skill, or to be Spectators. And I question not but St. Paul,
before his Conversion, had been present at these Exercises, and observed their
Customs and Practices: whence it is that he so often in his Writings makes use
of them. And these Games were very well known to the Corinthians particularly,
as being celebrated in their Isthmus, not far from Corinth; whence it is that
the Apostle speaking to these People, says emphatically, Know ye not that they
which run in a Race, etc. 1 Cor. 9. 24. and therefore the frequent Metaphors
taken from them by St. Paul, were the better understood by them. There were
five sorts of these Gymnastick Entertainments in use among the Grecians, which
11. PS.
Eustathius reckons up in this order, (...). And Jul. Poll. Onomastic. l. 3. c.
30.
Simonides comprehends them in this Verse, in the First Book of his Epigrams;
(...): that is, 1. Leaping, or exercising the Legs and Arms by Jumping. 2.
Running or Racing. 3. Coyting or hurling the Bar. 4. Casting the Dart, or
throwing the Spear. 5. Wrestling: to which afterward was added (...),
Pugilatus, Fisty-Cuffs: and after that they struck with Battoons and Leaden
Pellets. These five Grecian Excercises were called by one name, (...); and he
that was skilled in them all, or won the Prizes at them all, was styled (...),
(though the Epithet is sometimes taken in another Sense, as when 'twas given to
Democritus, because he was the Master of five noble Accomplishments). Of these
several Olympic Conflicts, the chiefest and most renowned was their Running or
Racing, for which the Grecians were so famous and eminent above all others; and
therefore St. Paul, who had been a Spectator of their Races, principally
borrows his Metaphors from this Manly as well as Applauded kind of Sport, as
you may see in his Epistles, which abound with Expressions taken from this
Athletick Exercise. But he sometimes alludes to Wrestling, and the other
Agonistick Enterprises which the Grecians in those days were celebrated for. He
frequently uses the Terms which are proper to these Undertakings, as when he
says, Acts 24. 16.
He herein exercises himself to have a Conscience, etc. where the word (...)
is taken from those Combats among the Gentiles, and is applied to Sacred
things. The same may be observed of (...), 2 Timothy 2. 5. and (...), Heb. 10. 32.
and (...), 1 Timothy 6. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 7. and (...), which is another Olympic
word, and is used in very many places by our Apostle. So (...), Heb. 12. 11. is
an Athletick word, and properly signifies that Exercise which Wrestlers or the
like Combatants are trained up to by long use and Discipline. And this occurs
again in 1 Timothy 4 7. (...), Exercise thy self unto Godliness, i. e. be as eager
in pursuit of Piety, as those who are trained up to the Olympic Exercises, are
in their Wrestling and other Strivings for Victory. And therefore I am of
opinion, that those next words, Bodily Exercise profits little, are to be
understood of those Olympic Games, which I find Expositors do not take notice
of, but interpret them of External and Bodily Religion, some outward
Austerities and Acts of superstitious Worship. But the Apostle (as I conceive)
refers here to the immediately foregoing Expression which he had used, (...),
which he was apprehensive was taken from the Olympic Combats; and accordingly
he adds, (...), Bodily Exercise profits a little, (for so I would translate
it) i. e. as I apprehend the words, that Athletick Exercise of their Bodies is
useful to some ends, they have some small advantage and profit by it, viz. as
to Health, increasing their Strength and Courage, gaining Repute and Credit,
winning the Prize: But alas (says he) these are mean and inconsiderable Things
in comparison of that Solid Profit which accrues by Godliness, for this is
profitable to all things, procuring all Benefits not only to our Bodies but our
Souls, advancing both the Temporal and Eternal Interest of those who study and
practice it. There are three Agonistical terms together, in Romans 9. 30, 31.
(...), to pursue or follow after; (...), to attain to; (...), to be foremost in
the Race, to come first to the Goal; but our Translators render it to attain.
And in several other places the Gymnastick words are made use of; especially in
1 Cor. 9. 24, to the End of the Chapter, and in Phil. 3. 12, to the 17. v.
which are a Continuation of the Metaphor of the Grecian Exercises so much in
use at that time. By these the Apostle sets forth the Laws and Rules of an
Evangelical Life, by which all the Followers of Christ are to direct themselves.

This then were are to take notice of, that there were certain Laws observed in
the Agonisticks, there were peculiar Rules and Orders which they tied
themselves to, which the Apostle means when he says, If any Man strive for
Masteries, he is not crowned except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5. i. e. (as
S. Chrysostom rightly explains it) except (...). Hom. 4. in 2 Timothy
he observe all the Laws of the Striving, and omit nothing required of him.
This was (...), and accordingly there was the (...), the Crier, an Officer on
purpose to acquaint the Combatants with the Laws of the Place. So in the
Exercise of a Christian Life we must strive lawfully, we must carefully act
according to the Orders of our Holy Institution, for our Great Agonotheta has
prescribed us certain Laws which we are to follow with all exactness. And these
we shall find expressed according to the Style of the Athleticks, who had Laws
to direct them what they were to do before the Combat, what in the time of it,
and what afterward.

First, They had certain Observances which related to their behavior before
the Combat, and they were such as these, as you may find them briefly summed
up by Epictetus (who compares the Life of a Good Man to these Bodily Exercises)
(...). Cap. 35.
An Olympic Gamester, says he, must order himself aright before the Contest,
he must sometimes force himself to take food, at other times he must by force
abstain from it, especially from what is dainty and delicious: he must use
himself to his Exercises, though he finds himself unwilling; and this at a set
and fixed time both in Summer and Winter: he must not be permitted to drink
cool Liquor, or any Wine, as he thinks fit. In short, he must deliver up
himself to the Master of Fences as to a Physician. Galen on the 18th Aphorism
of Hippocrates very well describes this Abstinence of the Athleticks. And
Tertullian gives this short account of their Austerities, Athletae segregantur
ad strictiorem disciplinam ut robori aedificando vacent: continentur a luxuria,
cibis lautioribus, a potu jucundiore. Exhort. ad Martyr.
They are set apart, says he, to a strict Discipline, that they may be at
leisure to mind the building up of their Bodies (as 'twere) and to make them
strong according to Art. To which purpose they are kept from all Luxury, they
are forbid all delicate Meats, and all sweet Drinks. But the Apostle has
contracted this into fewer words, yet as full and significant, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
Every Man that striveth for the Mastery is temperate in all things; (...), he
observes all the Laws of Abstinence and Continence which are prescribed him.
And there was an Overseer for this purpose, one that took care of dieting them,
and saw that they duly kept their other Rules. A Christian must herein imitate
the Grecian Combatants and Racers, he must manage himself with great Caution
and Circumspection, he must suffer himself to be ordered and disciplined, he
must strictly observe the Laws of Sobriety and Temperance, and abstain from
fleshly Lusts which war against both Soul and Body. Thus the Apostle pursues
the Metaphor in the following words, v. 27. I keep under my Body, and bring it
into subjection: i. e. I am careful to get a good Temper of Body as well as of
Mind: as the Cuffers and Wres^lers labor to beat down and keep under their
Antagonists Bodies, so I do with my own: for (...) (which is the word here
used) is a known Metaphor taken from the practice of the Grecian Combatants,
who beat their Adversaries down with their Fists, and sometimes with Clubs, and
will not suffer them to rise. In the same manner, says he, I beat down and
keep under my Body, I severely chastise it by Temperance and Sobriety. I am as
exact as those Combatants were, who before the Contest dieted themselves for
certain days, that they might attain to a good habit of Body. Again, they took
care to rid themselves of all Encumbrances whatsoever: they stripped themselves
of their Clothes, and generally came naked to the Conflict, (whence they were
called Gymnastae) that they might be the more nimble and agile. To which the
Apostle plainly refers, and applies it, Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every
weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with Patience
the Race that is set before us. In this our Christian Race, we must throw off
whatever we know will be an Impediment to us in our course, especially we must
discard those Vices which we have been most accustomed to, and which have had
the greatest Ascendant over us. And it is to be observed, that the word (...)
(which the Apostle here uses) is applied by Galen and other Greek Authors to
the Corpulency, the weight of Flesh which the Olympic Strivers were to bring
down and macerate.

In the next place, we are to order and manage our selves aright in the time of
the Spiritual Combat: And here likewise the Apostle leads us by the same
Metaphor. For,

1. The Combatants were careful to act, to strive, to labor to the utmost.
Coguntur, cruciantur, fatigantur: quanto plus in exercitationibus laboraverint,
tanto plus de victoria sperant. Tertull. Exhort. ad Martyr.
There is a Force and Violence put upon them by themselves, they are cruciated
and tormented, they are tired and worn out: and (as the same Author adds) the
more they labor in their Combats, the greater is their hope of Victory. This
Excessive Pains and Labor are expressed in the Writings of the Apostle by
several terms, as following on (for so (...) should be translated, and not
following after, that being a bad word in Racing) and reaching forth, and
pressing on (or following on) for the Apostle uses the same Greek word again.
These Agonistick terms, which are used particularly in Running, are in a
Religious manner thus applied by St. Paul, that Eminent Christian Racer, Phil.
3. 12, etc.
Not as though I had already attained, but I follow on: this one thing I do,
for getting those things which are behind, (not looking back in the Race to see
how much Ground I have ran already, but) reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I still press on. The meaning of which is, that he was extremely
Industrious and Laborious in his Christian course, he not only ran with
Patience (Patience of Body and Mind) this Race that was set before him, (as he
speaks in an Heb. 12. 1.
other place) but he exerted all other V^rtues and Graces whatsoever, he lived
in a diligent and faithful discharge of all Christian Duties. Or perhaps (...),
imports all the hardship he underwent in his Christian Race; for (...) is a
word applied to the Athletae, (as Peter Faber observes) and is expressive of
all the Fatigues in that Exercise. So in their Wrestlings and Fencings (two
other great Employments of the Grecian Agonists) they acted to the height of
their Art, to the utmost of their Strength. Their Blows were directed with the
greatest Skill, and laid on with the most lively Vigor: to which the Apostle
refers, when he says, So fight I, not as one that b^ateth the air, 1 Cor. 9.
26. (...), (which is a known word used among the Olympic Gamesters) I fight, I
fence, I cuff, says he, not as they that brandish their Weapons for Sportsake,
or to exercise their Limbs, or to divert the Spectators, as it seems was usual
before they fell on in good earnest. Whence Aen. lib. 5.
Virgil says of Dares, a Great Fenc^r, -- Alternaque jact at
Br^^^ia protendens, and verber at ictibus aur as.
But I fight, says the Apostle, as one that is actually entered into the
Combat, and is used to the Olympic Combats, where there is no vain beating
of the Air, but a serious falling on. The Champions there come not to flourish,
but to fight with one another. Accordingly they were wont to cast Dust upon one
another, that they might take the more sure Hold: and the Place was strewed
with Sand, that they might stand the more steadily to their Work. This Place
therefore was called (...), their Station, as appears from Var. Hist. l. 4. c.
1^.
Aelian. They stood here all the time they fought, and would not quit it
whatever they endured. Thence (...) and (...) are Epithets given by
Phi^ostratus and Pausanias to the Athleta^. This was the particular
Commendation of the Olympian Combatants, that they never ^linch'd from the
Ground which they first stood upon, as Aelian tells us. To which it is most
probable the Apostle alludes when he exhorts the Christians to stand, Ephesians. 6.
13. and so again, ver. 14. and to stand fast, and quit themselves like Men, and
be strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13. and to stand fast, -- striving together, Phil. 1. 27.
where (...) is an Agonick Term as well as (...). But this latter is a very
noted Word among those that write concerning the Olympic Concertations.
Further, I might remark, that it was a Rule with them generally in these
Encounters, not to leave off till they were wounded on one side or other: yea,
'twas looked upon as a shameful and base thing to yield before Many Wounds had
been given and taken. This however was agreed upon among them, that they must
draw Blood of each other: Whence that of the Apostle, Heb. 12. 4. Ye have not
yet resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin: for both the Verbs (...) and
(...) belong to the Athletick Exercises.

2. In their Running they minded the Mark that was before them, and distracted
not themselves with taking notice of any thing else. This is referred to in
Phil. 3. 14. (...), I press toward the Mark, the Goal, where the Prize is set
up to be seen: and in Heb. 12. 1. Let us run the Race that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus. And again, in the next Verse, Consider him, have an Eye to
him, who himself looked unto the Joy that was set before him. Gaze not on the
World, and what is tempting and alluring in it, but with an intense and
vigorous Aspect look on that Inheritance which Christ has purchased for you,
fix your Eye on the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls: and
thus you will rightly perform your Christian Course.

3. The Olympic Racers had certain Limits and Bounds set them, and these they
very accurately observed. There was a particular Place where the Match was run,
which was by those Greeks called (...), and is so called by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9. 24. (...), which we render those that run in a Race, are those that run in a
certain Plot of Ground set out for that purpose, for that is the proper Notion
of (...); it is a certain measure of Ground, shorter or longer, as they were
pleased to appoint it. This Stadium was marked out with a Line, from the Place
where they set forth, to the End: and of this the Apostle makes mention three
or four times in 2 Cor. 10. 13, etc. We will not boast of things without our
measure, but according to the measure of the Rule, or the Line, as it is
rendered, ver. 16. (...), (which is the Greek Word here used, and was a common
Athletick Word, as appears from Eliac. lib. 2.
Pausanias, and Onomastic.
I. Pollux, and other Writers that speak of the Olympic Strivings: and Linea
is a Term used by Statius in the same Sense) was the White Line that bounded or
marked out the Path where the Greek Racers run: in Allusion to which the
Apostle's particular Province is called by him (...), the measure of the Rule
which God had distributed him. The Apostle had first converted the Corinthians,
and therefore those he calls his Proper Line. And because each of the Racers
had his particular Path chalked out to him, thence he speaks of (...), v. 16.
another Man's Line. And Phil. 3. 16. is an unquestionable Reference to this
Grecian Custom, whereto we have already attained, (in as much as we have gotten
the Start, for so the Greek Word signisies, and are before others, and have
attained some Degrees of spiritual Proficiency) let us walk by the same Rule,
(...), the Line we are to run by, the same Path: for tho there was but One
Racer run in the same Track among the Grecians, yet it is supposed that many
Christians run together in one and the same way. I question not but those Words
in Heb. 12. 12. have a reference to what we are now speaking of, Lift up the
Hands which hang down, and the feeble Knees, and make straight Paths to your
Feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be
healed. The whole Period is perfectly Athletick; but more especially (...)
all^des to the Racers that ran right forward, a Line being drawn on both sides:
so that their Paths were straight or direct.

4. The Wrestlers and Racers were to continue in the Combat to the end;
otherwise they had no Advantage of it: which the Apostle has respect to when
he says, (...), I have fought a good Fight; (...), I have finished my Course,
2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fully Completed my Race, I have with Constancy and
Perseverance accomplished that great Work, that is, (as I conceive) through a
very strong Faith he was assured that he should do so; for when he writ these
Lines, he had not done it. And here also I could observe that (...) (which the
Apostle u^es here) and (...) (which he makes use of in other Places) are
borrowed from the Athletick Exercises, as we learn from those Writers who have
occasion to speak of them, and express them in their proper Terms. Thus I have
mentioned some of the Chief Laws and Observances among those who strove for
Masteries in the Grecian Plains. And with respect to all these our Divine
Author says, So run that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. So, in such manner, and
according to the Laws and Orders of that Exercise, see that you discharge this
Duty.

Having thus spoken of the Laws and Conditions of the Olympic Games, I will
add something concerning the Judges: for after the Combat was over, they
proceeded to judge who had got the better. These Arbitrators, or Judges, were
called (...) and (...), and sometimes (...), whose Business was to determine
whether the Agonists had observed the Laws, especially to order and appoint the
Reward: which is taken notice of, and religiously applied in 2 Timothy 4. 8. where
after St. Paul had with rejoicing professed that he had finished his Course,
(which is, as has been said, a palpable Allusion to the Athletick Enterprises)
he adds, There is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness (of which I shall
speak in the next Place) which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at
that Day; even that Judge, that (...), who gives the Prize to those faithful
Christians who persevere in their Course to the End. In the last Place, then
this Prize, this Reward is to be considered; which is called (...), 1 Cor. 9.
24. Phil. 3. 14. the very same Name that was given by the Grecians to the
Recompense of the Victors after the Athletick Strivings. This is called a
Crown, 2 Timothy 2. 5. because the Olympic Conquerors were rewarded with Crowns
or Garlands, made of the Leaves of Bays or Laurel, or sometimes of Flowers.
Generally they were decked with Wreaths of Olive in the Olympicks, of Pine in
the Isthmian Games, of Palm-Branches or Oaken Boughs, or some such sorry thing
in other Places; and yet (as the Roman Orator observes) Cic. Tus^. Quaesl.
these Masters of Exercise reckoned one of these Prizes won at those Games, as
honorable as the Roman Consulship was of old. These the Apostle well
deciphereth when he tells us, that they that strive for the Mastery do it to
obtain a Corruptible (a fading, withering) Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. To which
another Apostle opposes a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. i.
e. such a Crown as is not made of these perishing Materials. This is the Crown
of Life mentioned by St. James, chapter 1. 12. in contradistinction to the withered
dead Crown of the Olympic Strivers. This is that Crown of Righteousness which
the Righteous Judge, the Great Arbitrator of the Christian Combats, bestows at
the great Day of Recompense, 2 Timothy 4. 8. This is that Prize which St. Paul
pressed toward the Mark for, Phil. 3. 14. (alluding to the Crown, the Garland
which hung over the Mark or Goal, and was given to the Victor by the Judges)
and which he there calls the Prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus,
i. e. the Heavenly Reward to which he was called from above by God, through
Christ his Savior. It is a plain Allusion to the Judges of those Grecian
Sports, who were placed on a high Seat to behold the Performance, and then
(...) the Cri^r or Herald, called the Combatants to appear before them, and
receive their Sentence. And as soon as the Prize was adjudged to them, they
used to snatch at it, and take it from the Place (where it was hung up) with
their own Hands, as Aelian, Pollux and Cassiodorus testify. The V^riar. lib.
11. c. 35.
last of these particularly says, they did rapere praemid: which gives Light
to ^ Tim, 6. 12. Fight the good Fight of Faith, (...); and lay hold on eternal
Life, (...); imitate the Victors at the Olympic Games, who presently lay their
Hands on the Crown, and take it, and wear it. The gaining of this Prize is
called in 1 Cor. 9. 24. Obtaining: and in Phil. 3. 12. Attaining or receiving,
as it is in the Greek; and Apprehending, which is of the same Import, it being a
laying hold on, or receiving the Reward: which all are Gymnastick and Agonick
Terms.

And lastly, I might observe that (...), which is another Word used here on
this Occasion, 1 Cor. 9. 27. is ^o too: I keep under my Body, (says he) I am
always prepared for the Christian Combat, I run, I fight, I strive that I may
not be a Castaway, a Reprobate, one that loses the Prize: for he that ran, or
wrestled, or performed any other Exercise at the Olympic Games, and upon trial
was rejected; he that fell short of the Victory, was (...): As on the contrary
(...) is he that strives as he ought, and obtains the Victory. Accordingly St.
James, speaking of the Blessed Man that indureth Temptations, says, when he is
tried (when he is (...), approved of) he shall receive the Crown of Life; he
shall have the Reward of a true Christian Combatant bestowed upon him, as the
Olympic Strivers were rewarded with a Crown. Thus you see how this Sacred
Author makes use of the Olympic Sports, to set forth the Life of a Christian,
and the Eternal Rewards of it. A Good Man is styled by the Royal Philosopher,
(...). Antonin.
an Athletick that is exercised in the greatest Conflicts. Di^^er^at. 35.
Maximus Tyrius resembles the Life of Man to these. And Cap. 35.
Epictetus compares the Study of Philosophy to the Hardships of the Olympic
Agonies: and Seneca makes all Virtuous Men of the Number of the Athletae, and
that very frequently. And even St. Paul (as I have showed) resembles
Christianity it self to these Encounters and Hardships, and calls the Christian
Conflicts by the very same Names that are given to them. Yea, the Rewards laid
up in Heaven for faithful Souls, after all their Pains and Labors here, are
compared to the (...), the Garlands of those Grecian Combatants. And in the
Close of all, to add one Place more, I am inclined to think, that that Passage
in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. [ that the Word of the Lord may run and be glorified, (...)]
has respect to the Applause, the Acclamation, the Glory, which were part of
the Reward of those who got the Victory at the Olympic Exercises, and
particularly the Racing. (...), as well as (...), is a Gymnastick Word. (...)
is used by In Anachar^.
Lucian to express that great Honor and Applause which was the Recompense of
the Victors in those Combats. And Gloria is the word used by In Scorpio.
Tertullian when he speaks of these things. It is peculiarly applied and
appropriated, as 'twere, to this purpose by Classick Authors, as Annal. lib. 12.
Tacitus and Epist. 89.
Seneca. It is no wonder then that running and obtaining Glory are here joined
together by the Apostle. The Word of the Lord, i. e. the Preaching of the
Gospel, is said to run when it has its free and undisturbed Passage; and it is
glorified when it proves Prevalent and Victorious in the Hearts and Lives of
Men. If I had been Curious in citing what those Pausanias, Athenaeus, Plutarch,
J. Pollux, Lucian, Philostratus, Aelian, Pindar, Virgil, Statius, Ovid, Lucan,
Horac^.
Authors who have writ concerning the Agonisticks, have delivered on the
several Particulars above mentioned, I might have enlarged this part of my
Discourse. And it might have been beautified and adorned from what occurs in
those Dionys. Areop. Tertullian, Chrysostom, Greg. (...). Ambro^e, Basil,
Theodore^, Isidor* Pelu^.
Fathers who have spoken of the Olympic Exercises, and the Manners belonging
to them. But I was rather desirous to be brief, and to suggest something of my
own on this Subject, than to be beholden altogether to others. And in the whole
I have endeavored to avoid the Fault of that Learned Frenchman Peter Faber,
and some others, who have stretched this Metaphor too far, and have persuaded
themselves that the Apostles use it, when they never thought of it.

But this is certain, that both in the Old and New Testament, the Metaphorick
manner of speaking is very usual, as it is also among all Writers: for indeed
we may observe, that words in their Primitive and Proper Signification, are not
so much used by the best Writers, as they are in their Metaphorical and
Improper Sense. Our Business only is to discern the way of their Speaking, and
not to mistake an Improper for a Proper Signification. In the Holy Writings
especially we ought to take notice of this, and to observe when words are to be
understood in their Primitive and Genuine sense, and when not. And with the
like Caution we should observe when the other forenamed Figures are used by the
Inspired Writers, (which was the Design of my mentioning them here) that we may
carefully distinguish between a Proper and a Figurative Speech, and that (as
Cavendum est n^ figura^am locu^ionem ad l^^eram a^^^p^^s. De Doctr. Christ. l.
3. c. 5.
St. Augustine long since advised) we may not take one for the other.

There are many Other Rhetorical Figures in the Sacred Volume (as Metonymies,
Prosopopoeias, Epanorthoses, Aposiopeses, etc.) which likewise the Choicest
Authors abound with: but it shall su^^ice to have mentioned the foregoing ones,
the explaining of which is sufficient to give us an account of the Style of
Scripture, so far as it is Figurative. And from what has been said, we may
gather that these Divine Writings come not short of the most Applauded Pieces
of the Greek or Latin Orators; for here are those very Schemes and Modes of
Speech which imbellish those Authors Works; here are all the Graces and
Elegancies which enrich and adorn them. Therefore in that place
beforementioned, where Origin says, the Scriptures are not written Politely;
his meaning is, that that is not the Scope and Design of those Writings, and
that it is not the thing that is pursued generally, there being a Greater and
Higher Design; yet in many places there are very Excellent Strains of Oratory,
there are very Artificial Periods and Sentences, there are Words, Phrases and
Expressions in a very Rhetorical Dress. But where you find others that are, as
you think, Inartificial, Uncouth, and no ways Graceful, you must remember this
(to take off your prejudice against the S^ripture-Stile) that the Eastern
Eloquence is vastly different from ours in the West. The Mode and Guise of
their Oratory were unlike that of the Greeks and Romans, and of Ours at this
Day, and therefore we are not to expect that they should be fitted to it. It is
certain (though we perceive it not) that their Style was Graceful and
Fashionable: which is clear from the considering the Persons that were the
Penmen of some parts of Scripture; namely, Moses, David, Solomon, Isaiah,
Daniel, Men of great Improvements and Accomplishments, and Masters of the
Language they spoke. Neither are the Scriptures in some parts of them Defective
in the Western Oratory: they abound with the Choicest Schemes of Speech, with
the Greatest Ornaments of Language, with the Chiefest Elegancies which Greece
or Rome were famous for.

Yet, notwithstanding this, there are those who have vilified the Style of
Scripture. Some Pretenders to Criticism, but of debauched Minds, and loose
Lives, have endeavored to render it very Mean and Despicable. You have heard
of the Canon of Flor^n^^, who preferred an Ode of Pindar before the Psalms of
David: though he could not deny, as Caspar Peucer tells us, that there were
Excellent Sentences, Histories, Examples, and Figures of Speech in this Divine
Poem. Yet such was the Sottishness of Politian (for that was his Name) that he
professed he never spent his time worse than in reading this and other parts of
the Bible: and at last he desisted from reading any further, because of the
Barbarity of the Style. But observe what Character De verit. fid. l. 2.
Ludovicus Vives (a Man of his own Religion) gives him: he represents him as a
Person, who, though he had more Polite Learning than was frequent in those
Days, made but ill use of it, and employed it wholly in the worst sort of
Criticism and Playing with words. It was this Busy but Idle Critic that spoke
so contemptibly of the Bible; where, because he met with some things unsuitable
to his Grammatical and Critical Genius, he censured and condemned all. Of the
same Profane Disposition was Domitius Calderinus, who advised his Friends,
especially those that were Youthful, not to read the Bible; for it would be of
no use to them. But what it was that these two Persons were employed about,
which wholly estranged their Minds from that Sacred Book, may be guessed from
the In laudem Praeposter^^ Veneris.
Shameful Epigram which the former composed, and the In Virgilii Priapaea.
Obscene Comment which the latter made, both which they published to the World.
It is no wonder such Men disrelish'd the Sacred Truths contained in the
Inspired Writings, and found fault with the Language and Style of them: this
proceeded from their aversion to that Purity and Holiness which those Holy
Writers urge upon the Practices of Men, and which these two Vile Italians knew
were directly contrary to what they both loved and acted. Who would not think
the better of this Holy Book, because it was despised and vilified by these
Men? Who would not highly esteem those Writings which by such Dissolute
Wretches as these were scorned and trampled under Feet? If it was an Argument
that Christianity was Good because Nero persecuted it, then we may with as much
reason infer, that the Bible is an Excellent Book, because this pair of Lewd
Varlets disparaged it. This certainly was founded in the Wickedness and
Profaneness of their Lives. They could not think or speak well of those
Writings which contradicted their beloved Lusts and Vices. It was thus with
Ierom and Augustine, whilst they were wicked and unreclaim'd Persons: the
Scripture Language seemed very harsh and unpleasant to them; so far were they
from discerning any Elegancy in it. The former of these tells his Eustochium,
that he used, when he awaked in the Night, and could not sleep, to read
Plautus: and if after that he read the Prophets, as sometimes he did, their
Speech seemed to be Sermo horrebat incultus. Epist. 18. ad Eus^och.
horribly rough and ^npolished, devoid of all Fineness and Eloquence. And the
Confess. lib. 3. cap. 5.
latter of these Persons freely confesses, that before his Conversion, the
Style of Scripture was deemed by him very Rude and Unstudied, and as having
nothing Neat and Delicate in it. This is the apprehension which those Men have
of it who are not Competent Judges: and they are not so, not because they have
not Understanding enough, but because they have an Inward Abhorrence of the
Sacred Verities which they find in that Book. This is the true Reason why so
many in this Age, yea, within our own Borders, scoff at and ridicule the
Language of the Bible. The Matter of this Volume makes them dislike the Style
of it. Nothing can be Eloquent which speaks against their Vices. B^t let it
offend none that this most Excellent Book is depretiated by some Vicious, or by
some Half-witted Men, for there are no other that ever spoke against it. In the
Style of this Book of God, there are no Blemishes but what are approved of in
the Best Classical Authors, as those who were of the greatest Skill in Grammar
and Rhetoric have fully demonstrated: therefore the Bible is not a Book to be
disparaged, no, not by the greatest Grammarians and Rhetoricians. The Excellent
and Choice Wording of the Scripture is commended by St. Hom. 36. in Genesis
Chrysostom. When I read the Bible, says St. De doctr. Christ. l. ult. c. 6.
Augustine, I find that as nothing is more Wisely said, so nothing is more
Eloquently spoken than there. And particularly, I have showed that it is
beautified and enriched with many Figures. Thus I have largely proved, that the
Style of Scripture is generally of the strain of Other Approved Writers as to
its Phraseology, or manner of Expression. I proceed, and add,

3dly. This Observation, that Proverbial Sayings and commonly received Adagies
used by other Writers, are mentioned also in the Holy Scriptures. This is
abundantly proved by Scottanus, Delrius, Drusius, etc.
those who have Purposely writ on this Subject. I will remit you to them, and
at present only confine my self to the New Testament, and there to the Jewish
Proverbs only. Our Savior in his excellent Sermon on the Mount, makes use of
that Usual Saying among the Jews, which was used in a Proverbial way, No Man
can serve two Masters, Mat. 6. 24. which he applies to a higher purpose than
they designed it, Ye cannot, says he, serve God and Mammon, it is impossible
you should be Servants to these two Masters. No Man can devote himself to God's
Service as he ought, and yet at the same time prosecute with the utmost Zeal
and Concernedness the things of this World; especially the Riches or Profits of
it: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or he will hold to the
one, and despise the other: he cannot serve both with equal care and zeal.
Again, it was a Common Proverb among the Hebrews, (...)
Measure against Measure; and in the Talmud more than once it is spoken by way
of Adage, Sanhedrim: and Sota.
With the Measure that a Man measures, they measure to him again. Which is
applied by our Blessed Teacher, to Men's Censuring and Judging of others; With
what Judgment ye judge, says he, ye shall be judged. With what Measure ye mete
in this kind, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2. If you be rash and
unadvised in the Doom which you pass on your Neighbors, you may expect that
the like Sentence may pass on you. And in Luke 6. 37. this very Proverb is
spoken with reference to Giving and Forgiving; as much as to say, if you
withhold your Charity from others, either in relieving their Wants, or passing
by their Offenses against you, you shall one time or other experience the same
your selves; you shall neither be relieved nor forgiven: thus with the very
same Measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to you again. In this
Sermon he uses again another Jewish Proverb, which was to this purpose, (...)
toll ab oculis tuis trabem. Talmud.
Pull the Beam out of thine Eye, v. 5. applying it to the former Subject of
Judging others. Why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brother's Eye, but
considerest not the Beam that is in thy own Eye? Why art thou so Sharp-sighted
abroad, why so quick in discerning the least Fault in others, when at the same
time thou art Blind at home, and can not see those gross Miscarriages which
thou thy self art guilty of? This is too Evident an Argument of Hypocrisy;
therefore Christ adds, Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Ream out of thine own
Eye, abandon those Visible Enormities which are in thy own Life, and then shall
thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye, i. e. then thou
shall be more fit to judge of other Men's Failings, and to correct them for them.
Again, ver. 6. Christ uses this Common Saying which was usual among the Jews,
Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine: in which without doubt was included an Excellent Lesson, and such as was
very seasonable at that time, viz. That his Disciples (for to them chiefly he
speaks in this Sermon) should Prudently dispense the Gospel, and where they saw
it was obstinately refused by any, there they should not expose themselves to
Dangers, when they perceived that they could do no good among such Persons.
They must not throw away Pearls among such Swine that would trample them under
their feet, and turn again, and rend them, as our Savior adds there. It was an
Old Hebrew Proverb, near of Kin to the former, It is not good to throw the
Childrens Bread to Dogs: which you find made use of by our Savior in Mat. 15.
26. When the Woman of Canaan besought him in behalf of her Daughter, who was
grievously vexed with a Devil, he put her off, by telling her, That he was not
sent but unto the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; and she being an Alien
from the Commonwealth of Israel, had no right to the Privileges which were to
be dispensed to these alone. It is not meet, says he, to take the Childrens
Bread, and cast it to Dogs. But this Woman would not be put off so, but wisely
retorted his Proverb by another Common and Acknowledged Truth, that the Dogs
eat of the Crumbs which fall from their Master's Table. If she might not have
the Childrens Bread, she requested he would not deny her that Common Allowance
which fell from his bountiful Hand, and which she firmly believed he would not
keep from her. This great Faith of hers made her capable of receiving this, and
a higher Blessing from our Compassionate Master. The Talmud uses that
Proverbial Saying, An Elephant cannot go through the Eye of a Needle; but
Christ instead of an Elephant (which was an Animal that few saw in that
Country) mentions a Camel, which was a Creature well known; and he expresses
himself after a Proverbial manner thus, It is easier for a Camel to go through
the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat.
19. 24. which in plainer terms he had said in the Verse before, A rich Man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; which is explained further in
another place, It is hard for them that trust in Riches to enter into the
Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 24. It is hard, yea, it is impossible, for you may as
well draw a Camel through the Eye of a small Needle. Those are said to be
Jewish Proverbs, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above
his Lord, Mat. 10. 24. They are blind Leaders of the Blind, Mat. 15. 14. Ye
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, Mat. 23. 24. A Prophet has no honor in
his own Country, John 4. 44. These and many other Proverbial Speeches among the
Jews, are applied by our Savior, he being pleased to conform to the Language
as well as the Rites and Usages of his Countrymen. Any one that has read the
Books of the Mishnah, where the several Sayings and Sentences of the Jewish
Rabbis are recorded, knows how near they come to sundry Speeches and
Expressions used by our Savior. That was an Old Hebrew Proverb, (though used
sometimes by Pagans) The Dog is returned to his Vomit again; and you find the
same in St. Peter (1 Ep. 2. 22.) who had it originally from Solomon's Proverbs,
Chap. 26. 11. where it is used to express a Fool's return to his Folly.

To the Proverbial Sayings among the Jews, I may refer that of our Savior's
bidding the Apostles shake off the Dust of their Feet, Mat. 10. 14. or. under
their Feet, Mark 6. 11. which I have reserved for this place, because I will
more distinctly speak of it than I have of the rest. It was Christ's
Injunction, that when they came into a House or City, and found not reception,
they should behave themselves in this manner; and he further tells them what
they must say, Luke 10. 11. Even the very Dust of your City which cleaves on
u^, we do wipe off against you. Some imagine, that this shaking off the Dust of
the Feet or Shoes has assinity with the Jewish Rite of pulling off the Shoe,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 25. 9. Ruth 4. 7. which was a Ceremony of Disgrace, performed
by the Relict of the Deceased Brother to the Surviving one who refused to marry
her. But this Opinion has but few Abettors, and indeed, it is a wonder it has
had any, for there is a vast difference between the shaking off the Dust of the
Feet, and the plucking off the Shoe. Others think this Practice is of the same
Nature with shaking the Lap or Garment, which was an usage among the Hebrews;
and they would by this show that they wished or prayed that such an one might
b^ shak^n, removed, deprived of his Goods and Possession. Thus Nehemiah used
this Rite against those that exacted Usury of their Brethren, Ne^. 5. 13. And
this shaking of the Raiment was practiced by St. Paul against the blaspheming
Jews, Acts 18. 6. But this is a quite different thing from what we are speaking
of, unless we can prove that Dust and Clothing are convertible. But Hor. Hebr.
in S. Matthew. And the Harmony of the New Testament, on Acts 14.
Dr. Lightfoot refers this Passage to that particula^ Saying of the Jews, That
the Dust of a Heathen Land defiles a Man and makes him Unclean. So that our
Savior bad the Apostles shake off the Dust from their Feet, to show how they
reputed those People, viz. as Heathenish and Profane, and consequently they
were not to be conversed with. The Apostles scorned to have any thing to do
with them: and as a Sign of that, they would not carry away any thing that
belonged to that Place, no not so much as the Dust of it. But, if I may be
permitted to offer my Thoughts, there is something more in these Words than
this. It is true, this is signified that they would not hold Correspondence
with those unworthy Persons that rejected the Gospel, they would not suffer the
very Dust of the Place to adhere to the Soles of their Feet: but that is not
all. It is further and more particularly signified, that the Apostles were to
leave the Place speedily. When they are commanded to shake off the Dust of
their Feet, the more especial Meaning is, that they must stay no longer in the
Place, but be gone from it with all the Expedition they can, and they must not
carry so much as the Dust to burden them. It is something related (as I
apprehend) to that other Counsel of our Savior, in the very same Chapter; or
rather, it seems to be the same, but mentioned again in other terms, (as is
usual with our Lord) When they persecute you in one City, flee ye into another,
ver. 23. with what Speed you can depart from the Place where you are so ill
used. When you find that your Preaching is wholly despised, make no Delay, but
hasten away, that you may be in a Capacity to do good in some other Places,
where you may be kindly received. As soon as you see your Message is scorned
and rejected, shake the Dust off your Feet, and be gone away immediately. This
seems to be the genuine Tendency of the Words; for we must know that Judea
(some part of it especially) was a dry, hot and dusty Country, whence it was a
Custom among them to have their Feet washed as soon as they came into a House:
this was part of the Welcome which they looked for; and when this Ceremony was
omitted, they gathered thence that they were Unacceptable Guests. Therefore,
says Christ, if you find not this Welcome, if your Feet are not washed, and
the Dust wiped off by some of the House, do this part your selves, (that
thereby you may be somewhat refreshed) lightly shake off some of the Dust, and
go your way, and leave the Habitation forthwith. So that these Words denote
Haste and Expedition; which may be confirmed from that Saying of the Jews,
which they used in Traffic, Whilst the Dust is on your Feet (before it is all
wiped off) sell what you have, i. e. sell quickly. So Pie-Powder-Court among
us, which is incident to every Fair and Market (as a Court Baron to a Manor)
is that where Causes are tried cursorily and in haste. This Dusty-foot- Court
is so called to signify the Quickness of Dispatch in it. Thus among the Greek
Lawyers (...) (rendered by the Latins Pedaneus Iudex) was a sorry, mean,
inferior Judge, a Pedant in Law, that judged standing on foot on the plain
Ground, and had not a Chair or Tribunal: he judged, as it were, in transitu,
passing, going on foot. He was a Judge of the Court of Pie Powder, pedis
pulverisati, as our Lawyers call it, because they came to it in haste, and had
no time to wipe off the Dirt which they contracted in their Travels. Thus there
is some Analogy between this way of speaking, and that which I am now treating
of. Our Savior advises his Traveling Apostles to use Prudence, to be gone,
as fast as they could, out of those Cities and Towns where the Inhabitants were
wholly averse to the Preaching of the Gospel, and especially when they saw it
would be attended with Persecution. And we read that the Apostles put this in
practice when they were at Antioch, where they were severely handled, and saw
they should be expelled out of those Coasts, they shook off the Dust of their
Feet against them, and came to ^conium in all haste, Acts 13. 50, 51. This was
a Sign of Speed: and so the Meaning of Christ's Injunction was, that when they
perceived the Gospel was rejected, and themselves were in great Danger, they
should presently depart from the Place, and stay no longer among such vile
People. But withal, I deny not that this was to be for a Testimony against
them, as it is said, Mark 6. 11. it was to bear witness against the Despisers of
the Gospel, and the Persecutors of the holy Professors of it. And moreover, it
was a Token of Contempt and Abhorrence, and (with reference to a Jewish Saying
before mentioned) might be spoken in a Proverbial way. Lastly, it might be
showed here, that many of Christ^s Parables (of which I have treated before)
were borrowed from the Jewish Doctors. That of Dives and Lazarus is cited in
the Gemara on the Babylonian Talmud. The Parable of the Laborers in the
Vineyard is mentioned in the same Place, in the Title Beracoth: and that of the
five wise and five foolish Virgins is spoken of in the Book of the Sabbath: and
some others might be instanced in, but I will add no more under this Head.

CHAP. VI.
There is in Scripture a great and delightful Variety of Languages. Some
Chapters and Verses of the Old Testament are in Chaldee. Here are Persian,
African, Arabic, Syriac, Phoenician Words. In the New Testament there are some
Hebrew and Persian, many Latin and Syriac Words. Hebraisms, i. e. Phrases
proper to the Hebrews, are not only in the Old Testament, (where many Examples
are produced) but in the New; where (besides many other Hebrew Modes of Speech)
the Use of God's Name to augment and inhanse the Sense, the Use of the word
Sons or Children, not only applied to Persons but Things; the Import of the
word firstborn or first-begotten, and of those Expressions, the Son of Man, a
Weight of Glory, are chiefly insisted upon. There are no Soloecisms in
Scripture. St. Jerome, Erasmus, Calvin, Beza, Castellio, Dr. Hammond censured
for asserting the contrary. Sir Norton Knatchbull salves the Grammatical Part
of the New Testament, and olears it of Soloecisms. The same things which some
call Soloecisms and undue Syntax, are found in the best Classical Authors.
There are Chasms, Expletives, Repetitions, and at other times unexpected
Brevity, seeming Inconsistencies and Incoherencies in the best Greek and Latin
Authors. The Propriety and Excellency of the Sacred Style may be justi^ied from
the Writings of the most celebrated Moral Philosophers, Orators, Poets, etc.

4thly. I Further offer this to your Observation, that there is in the
Scriptures a great and delightful Variety of Tongues and Languages. There are
in the Old Testament, besides the Hebrew, (of which it is composed) many
Chapters written in Chaldee: as in Ezra, part of the 4th Chapter, all the 5th
and 6th, with part of the 7th: in Daniel, the greatest part of the 2d Chapter,
and all the rest that follow till the 8th: in Jeremiah, one single Verse, viz.
the 11th of the 10th Chapter. And besides these greater Portions, there are
many Chaldee Words dispersed up and down in several Places, as Chartummim,
Magicians, Astrologers, Genesis 41. 24. used also in Dan. 1. 20. chapter 2. 2.
Nishtevan, an Epistle or Letter, Ezra 4. 7. Pithgam, a Word or Decree, Esther
1. 20. Sethav, Winter, Cant. 2. 11. Saga, to magnify, Job 36. 24. Tiphsar, a
Captain, Ier. 51. 27. and some think Macha, Numb. 34. 11. is a Chaldaick Verb.
Other Words are of Persian Extraction, as Pardes and Pardesim, Eccles. 2. 5.
Cant. 4. 13. Orchards or Gardens; whence the word Paradise; for so the Persians
called their Orchards, Gardens and Parks, says In vita Apollonii.
Philostratus: and we read the like in In Onomastico.
Iul. Pollux. Partemim, Nobles or Princes, Esther 1. 3. is a Word borrowed from
the Persians, and is proper to that Country. So is Pur, a Lot, Esther 3. 7. and
Achashdarpanim, Lieutenants or Governors of Provinces, Esth. 3. 12. chapter 9. 3.
and Chiun, Amos 5. 26. passes for a Persian Name among some Learned Men. From
Egypt (with which the Hebrews had great Commerce) several Words are borrowed,
as Zaphnath Paaneah, Genesis 41. 45. the Title of Honor which King Pharaoh
conferred on Joseph, which some interpret a Revealer of Secrets, (as both
Jonathan and Onkelos render it, and most of the Rabbis) but others, with St.
Ierom, translate it the Savior of the World. But whatever the meaning of it
is, it is not to be doubted that it is Egyptian, for a Title given by an Egyptian
King was certainly such. And some think the same of the word Abrech, Genesis 41.
43. the Term of Applause and Acclamation which the Egyptian People made use of
when Joseph was advanced to be the Second Man in the Kingdom, and rid in Royal
State through the Streets. Zephardegnim, Frogs, Exodus 8. 3. and Zephardeang a
Frog, Psalm. 78. 45. are of Egyptian Race: and such is Ob an Inchanter, Deuteronomy.
18. 10. if we may credit the Nomenclat. cap. 15.
Learned Kircher: and Manor a Weaver's Beam, 1 Samuel 17. 7. and Sarim an Eunuch,
2 Chronicles. 18. 8. and Sarisim Eunuchs, 2 Kings 20. 18. and several other Words
were brought with the Israelites out of Egypt, or were learned by Converse.
Totaphoth, Frontlets, Exodus 13. 16. Deuteronomy. 6. 8. is a compound Word (as In Elec.
Scaliger thinks) from Tot and Photh; the first an Egyptian Word, the second
used in some other part of Africa. Atad a Thorn, Psalm. 58. 9. is also reckoned
an African or Punick Word. From Arabia others are fetched, as Raphelingius and
Golius, and other great Linguists have observed: especially in the Book of Job
they find several Arabic Words, for he was of that Country. Leviathan is of
this fort, says Bochart, and signifies a Dragon, and any Great Fish. Seranim,
Lords, 1 Samuel 6. 18. and Cabul, 1 Kings 9. 13. and many others, are looked upon
as Phoenician. Zamzummim, Giants, Deuteronomy. 2. 20. is purely an Ammonitish Word.
Gnerabon, a Pledge, Genesis 38. 17. is Syriac: and Sharbit a Scepter, Esth. 4. 11.
chapter 5. 2. (used here, and no where else) is such, rather than a pure Hebrew
Word. The Names of the Months among the Hebrews (several of which occur in the
Old Testament) are generally taken from other Languages. And many other foreign
Words are brought into the Hebrew Tongue, and mixed with it, (which was caused
by Correspondence with other Nations, of whom they were taught these Words, and
particularly by Traffic and Importing of foreign Goods, as Cum rebus exoticis
vocabula etiam peregrina importantur. Heb. Lex.
Avenarius has observed, the Things and the Names being brought at the same
time from foreign Parts) and accordingly we find them in the Writings of the
Old Testament. Here that of the Rabbis is true, (though they applied it, as I
have showed before, in another Sense) The Scripture oftentimes speaks in the
Language of the Sons of Men; it has Words which are used in other Tongues, and
borrowed from other Nations.

Thus likewise it is in the New Testament; there is a Variety of Languages in
it. For though the main of it be Greek, yet there are sundry Words there of a
different Original. Some Hebrew ones are made use of by the Holy Ghost, as
Allelujah* Rev. 19. 1, 3, 4, 6. Sabbath, Romans 9. 29. Iam. 5. 4. Amen, Romans 1.
25. Ephesians. 3. 21. and in several other Places; and (...), Mark 14. 16. and often
used in the Gospels; and in 1 Cor. 5. 7. Heb. 11. 28. is originally Hebrew.
These Words were so much in use among the Faithful, that the Apostles thought
fit not to translate them, but to retain them as they are. Again, some Words in
this Part of the Bible are Persian, as (...), Matthew. 2. 7, 16. (...), Acts 8.
27. (...), Mat. 5. 41. Mark 15. 41. and (...), Paradise, Luke 23. 43. 2 Cor.
12. 4. Rev. 2. 7. is of Persick Extract. Remphan, Acts 7. 43. is thought by
some to be Egyptian. It is certain that there are a great many Latin Words
Grecized, as Quadrans, Matthew. 5. 26. Legio, Matthew. 5. 9. chapter 26. 53. Census,
Matthew. 17. 25. Praetorium, Matthew. 27. 27. Acts 23. 35. Phil. 1. 13. Custodia,
Matthew. 27. 65. chapter 28. 11. Spiculator, Mark 6. 27. Centurio, Mark 15. 45.
Opsonium, Luke 3. 14. Romans 6. 23. Modius, Luke 11. 33. Sudarium, Luke 19. 20.
Colonia, Acts 16. 12. Semicinctium, Acts 19. 12. Sicarius, Acts 21. 38.
Macellua, 1 Cor. 10. 25. Membrana, 2 Timothy 4. 13. And (...), in the same Verse,
is a Greek Word made out of the Latin one Penula, with a Metathesis. Which
Words (and many more without doubt) came in with the Roman Conquest over the
Jews, for Conquerors carry their Language with them; and hence it is not to be
marvell'd at that many Roman Words were in use among the Jews, and that some of
them were inserted into the New Testament. There are likewise several Syriac
Words used by the Evangelical Writers, and generally interpreted in the Places
where they are: as Raka, Matthew. 5. 22. Golgotha, Matthew. 27. 33. Sabachthani,
Mat. 27. 46. Boanerges, Mark 3. 17. Talitha cumi, Mark 5. 41. Corban, Mark 7.
11. Ephphatha, Mark 7. 43. Abba, Mark 14. 33. Romans 8. 15. Mammon, Luke 16. 9.
Cephas, John 1. 42. Gabbatha, John 19. 13. Akeldama, Acts 1. 19. Tabitha, Acts
9. 36. Maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. And (...), Ephesians. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 1. 22. is also
of Syriac Original. Nor is it a wonder that we find a great Number of these in
the Greek Testament; for after the Return of the Jews from their Captivity in
Babylon, their Language was mixed of the Hebrew and Chaldee, and named the
Syriac Tongue, from the Regions where it was used. As for the Old Pure Hebrew,
the Priests and the Learned Jews only understood it, but this Mixed Tongue was
that which was generally spoken and understood by all the Jewish Nation.
Therefore in this Tongue Christ made all his Sermons to the People, and the
Evangelists and Apostles preached the Gospel to them in it. Yea, because the
Syriac succeeded in the place of the Hebrew, (the Jews having lost this, and
taken up that) therefore that Tongue is sometimes called the Hebrew Tongue in
the New Testament, as in John 19. 13. where it is said, Pilate sat down in the
Iudgment-seat, in a Place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew
Gabbatha. This is a Syriac Word, or a Dialect of the Chaldee, (which is the
same) but it is called Hebrew here, because Syriac was become the Vulgar
Language of the Hebrews; yea, was their Mother Tongue in our Savior's time. So
when it is said, that the Title on the Cross was written in Letters of Hebrew,
Luke 23. 38. it is probable that the Syriac is meant, i. e. the Superscription
was written in Syriac Words, though in Herew Letters.

5thly. It is useful to observe what a considerable Number of Hebraisms, i. e.
of Phrases proper to the Hebrews is made use of in these Holy Writings, not in
those of the Old Testament only, but in the Greek Writings of the New. Indeed
the Books of the Old and New Testament being written by Hebrews, we cannot
expect but that they should use the Hebrew way of speaking. Such is that in
Genesis 40. 13. Pharaoh shall lift up thy Head, To lift up the Head, is to Account
or Reckon, for (as some tell us) they used to cast Accounts with Nails or Pins,
stuck in a Table with Holes, and these Pins were called Heads: by the lifting
them up, or removing them out of one Hole to another, they performed their
Arithmetic. Therefore Moses expresses it thus, He lifted up the Head of the
chief Butler and chief Baker, ver. 20. that is, he Reckoned with them, and then
differently dealt with them, viz. according to their Deserts. The same Phrase
is used in Exodus 30. 12. When thou take the Sum of the Children of Israel,
Hebr. When thou liftest up the Head: And so in Numb. 1. 2. take the Sum, Hebr.
Lift up the Head. It is a peculiar Mode of Speech to signify to reckon, to
gather the Sum of all; to which answer the Greek (...) and the Latin
recapitulare, to bring all to one, Head, which were borrowed from the Hebrew
Style. To fill the Hand, Exodus 28. 41. chapter 29. 9. Numb. 3. 3. is a way of
speaking proper to the Hebrews, and we fitly render it to consecrate, because,
perhaps, when they Consecrated Persons, they delivered into their Hands the
Badges and Instruments of their Office. Another peculiar Phrase is used in 2
Kings 10. 21. chapter 21. 16. Ezra 9. 11. which, according to the Hebrew is, from
Mouth to Mouth, or Mouth to Mouth, but it particularly denotes a Place to be
full of People; and accordingly is so rendered, perhaps for this Reason, because
when it is so, they stand close together, as it were Mouth to Mouth. To give
the Hand to one, was heretofore a way of Expression proper to the Eastern
Countries, the Hebrews especially; and it was as much as to submit or yield to
one, 1 Chronicles. 29. 24. Ier. 50. 15. Lam. 5. 6. and it is applied in a spiritual
way, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. give the Hand, or yield your selves unto the Lord. The
same Phrase is used by Gentile Authors: (...) dare manus, is to confess one's
self to be overcome.

The Form of Wishing among the Hebrews is singular, and not used by others, Who
will give? Exodus 16. 3. which we translate would to God: So Numb. 11. 29. Deuteronomy.
28. 67. Job 13. 5. O that ye would! Benjamin is called a Lad, Genesis 43. 8.
though he was Four and twenty Years old, and had Children: the Idiom of the
Hebrew Tongue solves it. To this peculiar manner of phrasing things may be
referred Genesis 49. 10. -- Nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet. For so the
Hebrews modestly express the place of Generation, stiling it Ragelim, the Feet:
and so the word seems to be meant in Exodus 4. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. 57. Isa. 6. 2. and
thus the Masorites, for the word which is used for Urine, read in the Margin
the Water of the Feet, 2 Kings 18. 27. And sometimes instead of Feet, the
Hebrews use the word Thigh, Genesis 46. 26. Exodus 1. 5. and Loins, Genesis 35. 11.
and in a multitude of other places. Moreover, the peculiar way of using the
word Sons among the Hebrews is remarkable; as in Prove. 31. 5. Sons of
Affliction, i. e. the Afflicted: Sons of Destruction, ver. 8. Such as are
appointed to be destroyed, as we render it: Sons of Oil, Zech. 4. 14. i. e. the
anointed ones. So we read of the Son of the Morning, Isa. 14. 12. and the Sons
of Belial, Judge. 19. 22. 2. Sam. 23. 6. And sometimes it is applied to Things as
well as Persons, as in Job 5. 7. [ As the Sons of the burning Coal, i. e. the
Sparks, fly upward.] Whatever is the part of a thing, or whoever belongs to any
thing, or is partaker of it, is in the Hebrew Idiom called a Son.

Again, the Name of God after the Hebrew manner, is wont to be added, to
Magnify and Augment the Signification in several places of Scripture. There
have been some Instances of this sort produced by Critical Writers on the
Bible, but I will endeavor here (and afterward) to make a considerable
Addition to them. But first I will take notice of a place or two which have
been brought under this Head, but in my judgment belong not to it. Such is
that, Genesis 10. 9. He was a mighty Hunter before the Lord, where (says Drusius
in Proverb. Hebraic. Class. 2.
One) the Name of the Lord is added to heighten the sense, as is frequent in
the Hebrew Style. But two things I here urge to enervate this Interpretation:
First, It is not the bare Name of God or Lord that is here added, as in other
Texts. The exact rendering of Lipni Jehovah (which are the words here) is ad
facies, ad conspectum Domini, and is well translated before the Lord, which
signifies the bold and impudent Usurpation and Tyranny of this first Monarch.
This hardened Oppressor had no regard either to God or Man; yea, he committed
his Violences and Ravages in defiance of the Great Lord and Sovereign of the
World: this is to be a Hunter, a Persecutor, a Tyrant before the Lord: and so
you see it is not that Hebraism we are now to treat of. Secondly, There was no
need of that way of Speech here, for the Greatning and Heightning of the sense,
were before expressed by the term Gibbor, mighty: wherefore there was no
occasion to add the Name of God as a mark of Intension. If you observe the
Instances which I shall afterward produce, you will find that God's Name is
used when there was no word to express Greatness or Eminency in the preceding
words. For these Reasons, I expunge this first Text out of the Number of the
Instances which ought to be mentioned here. And after the same rate I must deal
with that other, Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord:
where the last word is asserted by a late Sir N. Knatchbull A mot at. on 2 Cor.
10.
Learned Critic to be added (in which he follows Drusius in his Hebrew
Proverbs) as an Auxesis, that is, only to augment the sense: and therefore he
says, the Candle of the Lord is no more than a most Excellent Candle or Light.
But if we consider the words aright, we shall not find such an Hebraism in
them. The Text is easy and plain, without any thing of this Nature; for the
Wise Man here acquaints us, that the Spirit of Man, his Nobler and Divine part,
the Intellect especially, that Bright and Glorious Faculty was given to him by
God, on purpose to be a Light and Guide to him, to make him capable of
enquiring into and attaining a knowledge of the Profoundest Truths, the most
remote and recondite Mysteries either in Nature or Religion: that is meant here
by searching all the inward Parts of the Belly. Thus the Sagacious Mind of Man
is the Candle or Lamp of the Lord; the word Lord here signifying to us the
Author and Giver of this Noble Faculty. And therefore I something wonder at
what this Learned Writer adds in the same place, viz. That our English
Translation [the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord] is an odd Expression,
and somewhat difficult surely to make a good sense of; whereas the same
Expression is used in the Scripture in other places, and bears a very good
sense, as you have heard. Some have thought that Musical Instruments of God, 1 Chronicles. 16. 42. and Instruments of Music of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7. 6. denote the
Loudness or Excellency of the Temple-Musick; but this Fancy arose from their
not attending to the true Reason which is given in the latter of these places,
where after Instruments of Music of the Lord is immediately added, which David
the King had made to Praise the Lord; therefore they were so called. Nor can I
be persuaded that a Man of God, which we often read of, imports only an
Excellent Man, as some have suggested; but it speaks his more particular and
peculiar Relation to God as a Prophet.

I come now to offer some Examples where the Hebrew way of Speaking, by
mentioning God to signify the Greatness or Excellency of a thing, is very
apparent and unquestionable; as Genesis 30. 8. Wrestlings of God, according to the
Hebrew, i. e. great, strong and vehement Wrestlings: 1 Samuel 14. 15. a Trembling
of God, which we rightly translate a very great Trembling: 1 Samuel 10. 5. the
Hill of God: Psalm. 36. 6. the Mountains of God, i. e. the great Hills and
Mountains. Cedars of God, Psalm. 80. 10. rendered goodly: the Trees of the Lord,
Psalm. 104. 16. i. e. exceeding great or high Trees. To which Texts (that are
generally acknowledged to bear this sense) I will presume to add another, viz.
Psalm. 65. 9. the River of God, i. e. a Vast Great River. And what is that? The
Clouds or Rain, which are poured down upon the Earth in great abundance. For if
you read that part of the Psalm, you will see it speaks of the great Blessing of
Rain, Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it, thou greatly enrichest it with
the River of God, etc. to the end of the Psalm. This Vast Mass of Waters is
according to the Hebrews styled a River of God: it is as 'twere a Great
Excellent River flowing down from Heaven: Though I do not exclude the other
sense contained in it, that it is from God, and that it is a singular Argument
and Token of God's Care and Providence. Cant. 8. 6. is a place little taken
notice of, the Flame of the Lord, i. e. (as we truly translate it) a most
Vehement Flame. So the Voice of God, Ezekiel. 1. 24. and 10. 5. that is, a very
loud and terrible Voice. The Breath of God, Job 37. 10. i. e. a Vehement sharp
Wind. And it is not unlikely that Isa. 59. 19. is to be understood thus, Ruach
Jehovah, (not, as we translate it, the Spirit of the Lord, but) the Wind of the
Lord, i. e. a great tempestuous Wind. I gather this to be the meaning from what
went before, when the Enemy shall come in like a Flood, then (says the
Prophet) the Almighty Power of God, like some Great and Vehement Wind, shall
drive it back, shall put it to flight, as we see great Waters and Floods are
oftentimes beat back (as well as violently thrust forward) by mighty Winds.
Another place which has not been observed, is Job 15. 11. Are the Consolations
of God small with thee? which are Eliphaz's words wherewith he reproves Job for
undervaluing the Consolatory Arguments which had been offered to him by himself
and his other Friends: and these Topics of Comfort were not mean and ordinary,
but of a very peculiar Nature. Job's Fault is aggravated from this, that he
despised and slighted so Great Comforts when they were tendered to him: and
Great they were, (as you read in the 9th and 10th Verses) because they were
offered by Persons of great Understanding, Age, and Experience. And the
Antithesis which is here, does show this to be the sense of the place; Are
these Great Consolations, says he, Small with thee? Do thou look for Greater
and Stronger Arguments to support and cheer thee than these are? I am of
opinion therefore that Tanchumoth El, the Consolations of God, are the same
with Great Consolations. Jon. 3. 3. is a known Text, where it is said, Nine^eh
was an Exceeding great City, Hebr. great to God. A Land of Darkness of the
Lord, Jer. 2. 31. is as much as a Land of very great and signal Darkness; for
Maphel is here compounded with Iah, to express the Superlative Degree of
Darkness. So in the words Er^l, Isa. 33. 7. Praevalidus, and Ariel, Leo fortis,
2 Samuel 23. 20. El the Name of God is added to inhanse the Signification. So
Jacob was Surnamed Israel, i. e. a Prince of God, which is equivalent with a
Great Prince, one that mightily prevailed, even with God himself. Hither
perhaps may be reduced the Sons of God, Genesis 6. 2. Great Men, of high Stature,
the Giants mentioned ver. 4. but called here the Sons of God, according to the
Idiom of the Hebrews, who set forth the Greatness and Largeness, as also the
transcendent Worth and Excellency of Persons and Things by joining the Name of
God to them. To this way of speaking, I refer Tardemah Jehovah, 1 Samuel 26. 12.
englished by our Translators, a deep Sleep from the Lord; but according to the
Hebrew, it is a Sleep of the Lord, i. e. a Great Sleep, Sopor vehemens, as
Arius Montanus renders it, a Profound Sleep, out of which a Person is not
easily awaked. Therefore a deep Sleep, or a very deep Sleep will be sufficient,
without adding from or of the Lord. To this also may be referred lechem abirim,
Psalm. 78. 25. the Bread or Food of Angels, i. e. Excellent Food: for what is
Excellent, is said to be Angelical as well as Divine. And indeed these are the
same here, for Abirim is of the same import with Elohim, and as the Name of
God, is used to augment the sense. Whence the Pagan Writers have borrowed this
manner of Speaking, as when by Suet. in Nerone.
(...), the Food of the Gods, they, in a Proverbial way, mean very Choice and
Exquisite Dainties: and by Hor. 2 Sermon. Sat. 6.
Deorum coenae, they express a very Sumptuous and Delicate Entertainment.
Virgil and other Poets (yea, Cicero sometimes) by the Epithet of Divine,
understand that which is Eminent, Remarkable, Excellent. Bordering on which is
the use of the word Sacred sometimes, whereby that which is Great is expressed:
Sacra anchora is the greater, and consequently the stronger and safer Anchor,
the last and only hope of the Ship and Mariners. And some Critics have thought
that Sacra fames is the same with ingens, insatiabilis; for those things which
are Great are said to be Sacred, and to be of God. (...) and (...) among the
Greeks are sometimes magna: So (...) ( Morbus sonticus) is a Vehement Disease,
of greater Malignity than ordinary, but more signally it is applied to the
Epilepsy. Plutarch mentions an Old Physician who called his Choice Sovereign
Medicines (...). And in Galen there is Jupiter's Trochisk. They give these
Names to their Medicaments to show the Excellency of them; for all Great and
Excellent things were by the Ancients counted Holy, and sometimes they put the
Name of God upon them. So among the later Physicians and Botanists, you may
observe that they make use of the Name of Allelujah.
God, of Oculus, manus, palma, lachryma Christi.
Christ, of the Unguentum Apostolorum,
Apostles and Saints, to set forth some things which they have a great Esteem
of. They mention the most Sacred things to extol and magnify their Simples and
their Medical Applications. All this seems to be derived from the ancient Style
of the Hebrews, by whom that which is Greatest in its kind is called Divine,
and accordingly (as R. D. Kimchi notes in his Comment on 1 Samuel 16.) the Sacred
Scripture, when it would magnify a thing, joins with it God's Name.

But it is endless to insist on the Old Testament: and therefore I will confine
my self to the New, and briefly show you that this part of the Bible, though
written in Greek, abounds with Hebraisms: (and yet here still I shall have
occasion to refer to the Writings of the Old Testament all along.) The Reason
why the Evangelists and Apostles writ in Greek, was, because this was the
Tongue generally used by all sorts of Nations, but you will find that they
accommodated it to the guise of the Hebrew Tongue; that is, they retained many
of the Hebrew Idioms, and made use of them in the Greek Language. Thus to be
called and to be are the same among the Hebrews, and this latter is frequently
in Isa. 60. 14, 18. Chapter 61. 3. Chapter 62. 12. Zech. 8. 3.
the Old Testament, expressed by the former. Accordingly these are oftentimes
expressive one of another in the New Testament, as in Mat. 5. 9. they shall be
called the Children of God: and ver. 19. he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven. 1 John 3. 1. -- that we should be called the Sons of God. To
be called here and in other places is really to be, and it is so expressed
according to the Hebrew way of speaking. There is the like signification of the
word [ arise], as in 2 Samuel 11. 20. if the King's Wrath arise: Esth. 4. 14.
Enlargement and Deliverance shall arise to the Jews: Prove. 24. 22. their
Calamity shall rise suddenly. In all which places the word [arise] signifies no
other than actual Being or Existing, according to the Hebrew Idiom. And thence
it is used so in the New Testament, as in Luke 24. 38. Why do Thoughts arise in
your Hearts? i. e. why are they there? Mat. 24. 24. There shall arise false
Christ's, i. e. there shall actually be at that time such Persons, according to
my Prediction. So [to be found] is among the Hebrews of the same import with
the forementioned Expressions, and accordingly in the Old Testament one is put
for the other, as in 1 Samuel 25. 28. Evil has not been found in thee: 2 Chronicles.
19. 3. Good things are found in thee: Isa. 51. 3. Joy and Gladness shall be
found therein: Dan. 5. 12. An Excellent Spirit was found in Daniel. In these
and other Texts (...) and (...) inventus est, are as much as (...) fuit. As in
the Writings of the Jewish Doctors you may observe that (...) is the same with
(...), ens. In imitation of this Hebraism (...) is used for sum or existo in
the New Testament, as in Luke 17. 18. There are not found that returned to give
Glory to God save this Stranger. Acts 5. 39. -- Lest happily ye be found to fight
against God. 1 Cor. 4. 2. -- that a Man be found Faithful. Phil. 2. 2. being
found in fashion as a Man. Heb. 11. 5. Enoch was not found: which is the same
with Enoch was not, as is evident from comparing this place with Genesis 5. 24. to
which it refers. That of St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2. 22. Neither was Guile found in his
Mouth, is taken from Isa. 53. 9. Neither was there any Deceit (or Guile) in his
Mouth. From whence it appears, that (...) is as much as (...) in this, as well
as the other Texts beforenamed. Which manner of Speech is borrowed from the
Hebrews, who use this way of expressing themselves, and from whom some Heathen
Authors have derived it, as may be seen in some of their Writings. Next, we may
take notice of that Hebraism in the New Testament, which I observed before to
be in the Old one, viz. the using of God's Name to augment and inhanse a thing.
Of this Nature seems to be that in Acts 7. 20. Moses was fair to God; for so
it is according to the Greek, but is fitly rendered by our English Translators [
exceeding fair:] for the Name of God being here adjoined advances the sense,
and denotes to us that Moses was transcendently and superlatively Fair, he was
a Child of Extraordinary Beauty, he was (as the French Version has it)
divinement beau, divinely beautiful, of most Astonishing and Divine Features.
The like Expression, I conceive, is that of the Apostle, when he says, The
Lord shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voi^e of the Ar^hangel,
and with the Trumpet of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. This Trumpet of God may be that
kind of Hebraism whereby the Greatness and Wonderfulness of a thing are
expressed, by adding the Name of God to it. And accordingly in Mat. 24. (which
gives us an account of the Signs of the Day of Judgment) you read that the Son
of Man shall send his Angels with a Great sound of a Trumpet, ver. 31. which is
the same that the Apostle calls the Trumpet of God. Of this sort is 2 Cor. 10.
4. (...), Exceeding Powerful, as Sir N. Knatchbull rightly translates it: and 2
cor. 11. 2. (...), I am zealous toward you with a Zeal of God, i. e. I
exceedingly affect you, in an extraordinary manner I am Zealous for you. So the
Harps of God, Rev. 15. 2. are Excellent Heavenly Music. And I will offer one
Place more (which I think may be referred to this Head) John 6. 28, 29. the
Works of God, i. e. Some Great and Eminent Works of Religion, which surpass all
others. Thus you see that God's Name is used in the Sacred Style, as an
Intensive Term, and to Aggrandize the thing which is spoken of.

So in Conformity to the Hebrew Phrase in the Old Testament (mentioned before)
we read of the Sons or Children of this or that: which signifies, according to
the Hebrew Propriety of Speech, that they are Sharers or Partakers of such a
thing, or that they are obnoxious and liable to it, or that they have great
Inclination and Desire toward it, or are Conversant in it, or much given and
addicted to it, or do in a special manner belong and appertain to it. In one or
other of these Senses the following places are to be understood, the Children
of the Bride-chamber, Mat. 9. 15 i. e. those that belonged to it, and had the
favor to be admitted into it; those that were invited to the Marriage, and
were interested in the Bridegroom and Bride; the Children of Hell, Mat. 23. 15.
i. e. those that are liable to it, and shall partake of its Torments: or it is
as much as the Children of the Devil, i. e. those who have given themselves to
him by a voluntary addicting themselves to Vice: the Children of Wisdom, Luke
7. 35. those that are conversant in it: the Sons of Peace, Luke 10. 6. such who
addict themselves to Peace, or who shall be sharers in the Blessing of Peace:
the Children of this World, Luke 16. 8. those whose Inclinations and Desires
are chiefly after this World; to whom are opposed, in the same Verse, the
Children of Light, they who despise this dark World here below, and breath and
long after the Light and Glory of another State, of a future Life: the Children
of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 36. those who have a part, a share in the blessed
Resurrection to Life everlasting: Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3.
6. those that give themselves up wholl^ to Disobediencce, the same with Sons of
Belial, beforementioned: the Sons of Perdition, John 17. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
those that are certainly liable to Perdition and Destruction: Children of
Promise, Romans 9. 8. Gal. 4. 28. those who shall share in the Promise: Children
of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. those who are liable to God's Wrath. This is the Hebrew
way of speaking: he is called the Son of this or that, who has some special
relation to it. That also savours of the Hebrew Idiom, Are ye able to drink of
the Cup that I shall drink of? Mat. 20. 22. and Joh. 18. 11. The Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? If it be possible, let this Cup
pass from me, Mat. 26. 39. And you read of the Cup of the Wine of the
fierceness of God's Wrath, Rev. 16. 19. And again, Chap. 14. 10. and Chapter 18. 6.
The Cup signifies with the Hebrews any thing good or bad that befalls a Man:
because those of the same Family or Table drink of the same Cup or Vessel;
every one has his part and share of it, better or worse, as the Drink is. And
so the Phrase denotes either the Good or Evil that happens to us, but most
commonly the latter. Or perhaps, the occasion of the Phrase was this; the
Guests had anciently their certain Quantity and Measure of Drink and Meat
appointed them at Feasts, by the Master or Governor of the Feast: from which
Custom of distributing a certain Portion, God is said to Give or Distribute his
Cup: and the Cup and Drinking are used for the Calamities and Sufferings which
he is pleased to allot them. So our Savior's Words are to be understood; the
Cup which he was to drink, and which his Father gave him, was the Sufferings
which he was to undergo. The Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness of God's Wrath,
was no other than the Plagues and Judgments which were to be inflicted on
Mystical Babylon. This manner of Speaking was taken from the Old Testament,
where you read of the Cup of God's Fury, and the Cup of Trembling, Isa. 51. 17.
and many such Jer. 25. 15* 26* Chapter 51. 7. Lam. 4. 21. Ezekiel. 23. 33. Hab. 2. 16.
other Expressions there are in the Books of the Prophets. That of the Apostle
in 1 Timothy 1. 17. is a pure Hebraism, Now to the King Eternal, or, as it is in
the Original, to the King of Ages: which is an Expression to set forth
Eternity. Accordingly the Psalmist says, Thy Kingdom is a Kingdom of all Ages,
which we rightly translate, an everlasting Kingdom, Psalm. 145. 13. In the Lord
Jehovah is the Rock, or Strength, of Ages, Isa. 26. 4. which is truly rendered
Everlasting Strength. And that in Isa. 9. 6. the Father of the Age, or of
Eternity, or the everlasting Father, (as we translate it) is something like it.
Bread is the general word in the New Testament, to signify all Food and
Provision for the sustaining of Man's Life, as in that Prayer which our Lord
taught his Disciples, Give us this Day our daily Bread, and in Mark 7. 2, 27.
Luke 7. 37. Chapter 9. 3. Chapter 14. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. and in other places: which is
according to the Idiom of the Hebrews, with whom all Food is called lechem,
Bread, because this is the most Common and Universal Food, and the most
necessary for the Life of Man: and this word with them denotes all the
Necessaries and Conveniences of Humane Life.

According to the Hebrew Style, a Sword has a Mouth, or the Edg of the Sword
is called a Mouth: Luke 21. 24. They shall fall by the Mouth (we rightly render
it the Edg) of the Sword. Heb. 11. 34. -- escaped the Edg of the Sword, in the
Greek (...), the Mouth of the Sword. So you read of a Two-mouth'd Sword, Heb.
4. 12. for it is (...) in the Greek. Which is the Hebrew Phraseology, as you
may satisfy your selves from Judge. 3. 16. Psalm. 149. 6. Prove. 5. 4. A Sword is
said to have a Mouth because it Devours: So lacham is both to Fight and to Eat.

As I observed before that Drinking was applied to Calamity or Suffering, so
now I will remark that Eating and Drinking are sometimes meant of Holy
Instruction, of Divine Grace, and the most Excellent things of Religion. Eat up
the Book, Rev. 10. 9. i. e. Study it diligently, understand the Contents of it.
Our Savior expresses his Holy Doctrines, his Gifts and Graces, the Favor of
God, and all Spiritual Comforts, yea, Himself too by Meat and Drink. I have
Meat to eat which ye know not of, says he, John 4. 32. My Meat is to do the
Will of him that sent me, ver. 34. He advises to labor for the Meat which
endures to Everlasting Life, John 6. 27. And in four Verses together in the
same Chapter, he uses this Phrase, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood
is Drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me. Ver. 53, etc. And he promises his Apostles, that they shall eat and drink
with him at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke 22. 30. All which is according to
the Language of the Ancient Hebrews, who by Eating and Drinking express things
of a Spiritual and Divine Nature, as in Prove. 24. 13, 14. Chap. 25. 27. Isa.
55. 2. and other Texts. In More Nevochim.
R. Ben. Maimon tells us, That this was the Style of the Jewish Doctors and
Rabbis: in their Writings, says he, Eating is to be understood of Divine
Instruction and Wisdom. This is observed by Philo, who lets us know that (...).
Eating is a Representation of the Spiritual Nourishment.

The using of the word Firstborn or First-begotten in the Writings of the
Apostles, is conformable to the acception of it among the Hebrews. The due
attending to which will lead us to a right understanding of some Texts which
have been generally mistaken by Expositors. I shall consider it here only as it
is applied to our Blessed Savior, which is done no less than four times: first
in Col. 1. 15. where he is called the Firstborn of every Creature. Erasmus
read it (...), the first produc^r of all Creatures: and he had it from Lib. 3.
Epist. 31.
Isidore of Pelusium, who evaded the Arians Assaults by this means. But this is
an undue Expedient, because it alters the received Accent of the Word without
any warrant, and because in other places where this Word is, and is applied to
Christ, this alteration is not admitted by those that make use of it here.
Gregory Nazianzen and others, interpret the Firstborn of every Creature thus,
He whom God the Father begot before he created any thing: He that existed
before all Creatures. But this seems not to be the sense of the words, because
to be begotten before all Creatures, and to be the Firstborn of them, are two
different things. Others think the Firstborn here is Synonimous with the
Beginner or Author, (which falls in with the Interpretation of St. Isidore
before mentioned) and accordingly they quote that as a parallel Text, Rev. 3.
14. where Christ is called the beginning of the Creation of God, i. e. the
Cause and Author of all Creatures, say they. But this (though it be very true)
is not agreeable with the sense of the word (...), which is no where found to
be taken thus. Nor is Grotius's Gloss to be allowed of, who expounds it thus,
Christ is the first in the new Creation: for the Context shows that there is
relation to no such thing. But if we consult the ancient acception of the Word
among the Hebrew Writers of the Old Testament, we shall discover what the
genuine meaning of it is in this place. The Firstborn is as much as Excellent,
Choice, Beloved, as in Ier. 31. 9. Ephraim is my Firstborn. The Chiefest and
most Eminent of Persons and Things have this Name; thus the Firstborn of
Death, Job 18. 13. is the most signal and mortal Disease, or the cruellest kind
of Death. The Firstborn of the Poor, Isa. 14. 30. is the poorest of all. I
will make him my Firstborn, Psalm. 89. 28. i. e. I will make him a Great and
Eminent Person, higher than the Kings of the Earth, as it is explained in the
next words. Answerably to this sort of speaking, Christ is said here to be the
Firstborn of every Creature, i. e. the Chief, the Prince, the Lord of all
Creatures. For we must know that this manner of Expression refers to that
Dignity and Pre-eminence which were claimed by the Firstborn under the Law.
Primogeniture carried with it the Right of Superiority and Government. In
allusion to which, our Savior is called the Firstborn (that is the Lord) of
every Creature: or (...) may better be rendered the whole Creation. He made, he
created all things; and therefore is Lord of the whole Creation. Accordingly it
immediately follows, For by him were all things created. This for gives us to
understand, that this Verse is the reason and account of what went before: St.
Paul had styled Christ the Firstborn of every Creature, and now he gives this
satisfactory account of it, because by Him all things were created; because of
this he is deservedly styled the Firstborn, the Lord and Sovereign of the
Creation. You must either conclude that the Great St. Paul did not speak
Logically and Argumentatively, or that this is the genuine Interpretation of
the place. If the Apostle's Words were to the purpose, (as be sure they were)
then this sense which I have offered is so too, which is as much as I can
desire: And that this is the meaning of the word Firstborn, is evident from
that other Text in this Chapter, ver. 18. where he is called the Firstborn
from the Dead, not (as some think) because he is the Author of the
Resurrection; or (as Grotius, with most of the Pontificians) because he was the
first that rose to Immortal Life and Glory: or (as others) because he was the
First that rose from the Dead, as it is said Acts 26. 23. viz. by his own Power:
but because he was the Chiefest of all those that rose from the Dead, because
he was the Head of them all, as it follows, that in all things he might have
the Preeminence, that it might appear that he was Lord of all. This is to be
the Firstborn of the Dead, or of the Number of the Dead; for so it should be
rendered, the Preposition (...) signifying here so much. A third Text might be
alleged, viz. Romans 8. 29. that he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren,
i. e. that he might be the Chief, the Supreme of all the Children of God; for
he was Predestined as well as they, he was set apart as the Firstborn among
Men (who were the Choicest of all) were, who were more immediately destined and
devoted to the Service of God, Ex^d. 1^. 2. And lastly, I will mention Rev. 1.
5. where Christ is called the First-begotten of the Dead, which has the same
import with those words in the Epistle to the Calossians before alleged, for
it is explained to us by what follows in the next Clause [ and the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth:] to let us see that the word Firstborn or
First-begotten, has the Signification which I have offered, it being the use
of the Hebrews to apply it to those Things or Persons that are the Chiefest and
most Excellent. In which sense likewise First Fruits are taken in, Iam. 1. 18.
where the Saints are called the First Fruits of the Creatures of God, i. e.
they are the Chief of the Creation, they are the Flower of Mankind, they are
more signally and eminently designed to set forth the Glory of God in the
World. So Christ is the First Fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. he is
the Principal of all those that rose from the Dead. This way of Speaking is
taken from the Jewish notion of First Fruits, which were the Choicest of all
their Fruits and Incomes, and from the Hebrew manner of expressing themselves,
that is, calling those things which are Chief and most Eligible First Fruits,
Amos 6. 1. Mic. 7. 1.

Moreover, I take that Expression which our Savior so often uses concerning
himself, viz. his stiling himself the Son of Man, to be a way of Speech proper
to the Hebrews, and therefore is to be explained by what we meet with in the
Old Testament. A Mr. Weemes' s Exposition of the Judicial Law.
Person well skilled in Hebrew Criticism tells us, that Ezekiel is very often
(about a hundred times) called Son of Man, because of the extraordinary Visions
and Revelations which he had, wherewith he was highly honored above others: So
that Son of Man is the same with an Excellent or Digni^^ed Man. And that this
is the frequent Language of the Psalmist, has been very lately observed and
amply proved by our Dr. S. Patrick (now a Reverend Bishop) in his Paraphrase on
the Psalms, and particularly in his Preface.
Incomparable Paraphrast on this Sacred Book. Besides several other Excellent
Discoveries made by him in that Choice Work, (which will gain him an Immortal
Honor among the Pious and Wise) he has particularly set us into a right
apprehension of This Expression so often used by the Holy Penman. From several
places in this Book (as also from others which he produces out of the Sacred
Writings) he evidenceth that Son of Man is the same with an Eminent Person; and
he is the first Writer I have met with that has established and fully cleared
this Notion. From this Discerning Author we may observe, that in Psalm. 49. 2.
there is a difference made between been adam and been ish, the former
signifying there Mean Inferior Persons, but the latter Men of Considerable
Rank and Quality: wherefore our Translators give us the sense very fully in
rendering it low and high. Or perhaps adam in this place is the same with adamah
Earth, and so the Sons of Man are opposed to the Sons of the Earth, (...), as
the Seventy render it; terrigenae, according to the Vulgar Latin. In Psalm. 4.
2. bene^ish, the Sons of Man, is applied to Princes and Rulers, for of such
that place speaks. And I translate it the Sons of Man, not of Men, (as it is in
our English Bibles) for so the Original has it: and we ought to take notice of
it, for there is a vast difference between the one and the other. Sons of Men
in Scripture are all that are of the Race of Adam, but Son or Sons of Man, are
Persons of some Dignity and Rule in the World. But sometimes indeed been adam,
is the same with been ish, and then they are opposed to enosh or ben enosh, as
in Psalm. 8. 4. What is Man -- and the Son of Man? i. e. (as I conceive) what is
the Lower and the Higher Rank of Men, that Thou visitest them, that Thou
show thy self so Bountiful to them? So Sons of Man, Psalm. 58. 1. is meant of
Judges and Great Men, as is evident from the former words of that Verse. And in
Psalm. 80. 17. Son of Man is the same with the Man of the right Hand, and the
Man that is made Strong. Again, in Psalm. 146. 3. Princes and the Sons of Man
are synonimous, for [ in Princes, in the Son of Man] are by way of Apposition
in the Hebrew, to acquaint us that they are identified. And further it is to be
observed, that this Title of the Son of Man is particularly and by way of
Eminency affixed to the Messiah, as in that forementioned place, Psalm. 8. 4.
(for we shall find that in Heb. 2. 6. it is referred to him by the Apostle in
the Secondary and Mystical sense) but more signally and directly in Dan. 7. 13.
Behold, one like the Son of Man. On which words Rabbi Saadiah is very
peremptory, and says, This is the Messiah our Righteousness. And Solomon
Iarchi, and other great Rabbis declare, that by the Son of Man is meant the
Messiah. There is reason therefore to assert, that when Christ so frequently
gives himself this Title, he takes it from the Old Testament, where it
signifies a Man of Eminency and Rule, and more especially from Daniel, who by
this Epithet expresses the Messiah, the Prince, the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
And to any considerate Man it is evident that our Savior particularly referred
to that place in Daniel, [ Behold, one like the Son of Man came with the Clouds
of Heaven] when he pronounced those words, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
Mat. 26. 64. Neither would the High Priest have thought that our Savior spoke
Blasphemy, and thereupon rent his Clothes, if he had not apprehended that he
referred to those words of Daniel, and consequently owned himself to be the
Messiah, who has the Title of the Son of Man given him because of his
Excellency, Preeminence, and Authority. And this is yet more clear from our
Savior's words, Ioh. 5. 27. where he assigns the Reason why the Judgment of
the World is committed to him by the Father, He has (says he) given him
Authority to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of Man, because he is Head
and Ruler of the Church, because all Government and Authority in this lower
World are devolved upon him, because he has all Rule and Dominion put into his
Hands. This is the true account, as I conceive, of the Expression; this Title
was attributed to him to signify his Authority and Exaltation, and not (as is
commonly said and believed, and as the Learned Annotat. in S. Matthew. 8. 20.
Grotius defends it) his Meanness, Condescension and Humility: though I will
not exclude Other Reasons which may be consistent with this, as that he is
called the Son of Man, to attest the reality of his Manhood, to ascertain us of
the Truth of his Suffering in our Humane Nature, to assure us of his Sympathy
with us, and that he is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities. I will
only add this, That whereas it is generally said by Writers, and even by the
Critical Christus nunquam hoc modo nisi a seipso appellatur. Annot. in Mat. 8.
20.
(...) among the rest, that this Epithet is given to our Savior by Himself
only, and not by any other in the New Testament, this is a Mistake, for in Acts
7. 56. he is called by St. Stephen the Son of Man, and so he is twice by St.
John, Rev. 1. 13. Chap. 14. 14. The Original of which must be fetched (as I
have showed) from the Hebrew Style in the Old Testament.

And so must that Expression which the Apostle uses 2 Cor. 4. 17. a Weight of
Glory. (...) here answers to the Hebrew cabod, a Weight, and yet is rendered
Glory, Genesis 31. 1. and the Tongue is called cabod, Glory, Psalm. 57. 8. So the
Verb cabad signifies both to be weighty, and to be glorious or honorable, Isa.
66. 5. Prove. 13. 18. And the Adjective cabed approaches to this sense, as is
clear from Genesis 13. 2. Thus it is with the word jakar, gravis fuit: but it is
understood in a treble sense, as if there were a threefold Gravity, viz. of
Weight, Price and Honor. Accordingly it signifies, 1. To be heavy, weighty. 2.
To be precious, Isa. 43. 4. 3. To be in Honor and Glory, Job. 31. 26. as also
to glorify and honor; and therefore the word is rendered by (...) in the
Version of the 70. Thus you see that after the manner of the Hebrews, Glory or
Greatness is expressed by words that denote Weight: and thence it is that (...)
is here used by the Apostle to denote that Superlative Glory which is the
attainment of the other World. And it is not improbable that (...), 1 Thessalonians. 2.
6. is to be understood thus, and should not be rendered to be Burdensome, but
Honorabiles esse. Sir.
to be Honorable, or In authoritate, in dignitate esse. Calvin, Erasmus.
to be in Authority or Dignity: which our English Translators were sensible of
when they rendered it in the Margin to use Authority. This I take to be of
Hebrew extraction, and in imitation of the use of the words ^abad and jakar.
And hence also in the Seventy's Translation of the Old Testament, (...) imports
Grandeur or Glory, and is applied in several places to a Royal Train, and to a
Mighty Host, 1 Kings 10. 2. 2 Kings 6. 14. Chap. 18. 7. 2 Chronicles. 9. 1. So
(...), a Weight or Burden, is equivalent with Honor or Splendour in Hom. 32.
Tom. 5.
one of St. Chrysostom's Homilies. I could remark that (...) gravis, and (...)
gloria, differ but in the Accents: and among the Latins honos and onus are not
unlike: Vir gravis is used by the Latin Orator for a Person of Authority and
Worth. And Graves viri in the old Roman way of Speaking, are Men of Authority
and Eminency. And Baro (which comes from (...)) is used by Ad Attic. lib. 5.
Tully as a Name of Dignity, and is as much as Patricius a Nobleman: though I
know some Critics interpret the word in another sense. Thence our word Baron,
a Lord, a Person of Greatness and Authority. And Grave answers to Baron, whence
Palsgrave, Landgrave, Margrave, Burgrave: for Grave among the Germans signifies
a Magistrate, a Ruler. And we in England heretofore used the word Grave or
Greve in the same sense: thus Portgreve was the Name of the Chief Magistrate of
the City of London till King John's time, who turned it into that of Mayor.
These things I here mention only to intimate the Affinity that is to be
observed in Languages, not only the Learned ones (as they are called) but
others, and to show you the particular cognation betwixt Gravity and Honor or
Authority, betwixt Weight and Glory, which it is probable was derived first of
all from the Hebrews.

The Writers of the New Testament sometimes make use of the word (...), in the
same sense that the Hebrews use the word gnanah, respondere; that is, not to
signify a Person's Answering or Replying to what another had said, but only to
denote his going on with his Speech, his proceeding in what he had said before.
Persons are said to Answer, though there be no Question put to them, though
there be no Reply intended, as Jesus answered, and said, Mat. 11. 25. Then
answered Peter, and said, Mat. 17. 4. The Angel answered, and said, Mat. 28. 5.
One of the Elders answered, saying, Rev. 7. 13. which is (as appears from the
Context) no more than this, They spoke, and said; for this oftentimes is the
acceptance of that word in the Hebrew Writings, and particularly in the Book
of Job, Chap. 3. ver. 2. Job answered, and said, though no body had spoke to
him, or asked him any Question. The words therefore import no more than this,
Job spoke, and said; and so our Translators render it. I might further observe,
that the Preposition (...) in the New Testament, has by an Hebraism the force
of all the Prepositions, it answering to the Hebrew (...). Lastly, I am
inclined to think that what is said of St. Paul in Acts 9. 15. is spoken after
the Hebrew manner: for the Hebrews call any thing that is Choice and Delectable
Nahum 2. 9.
(...) vas desiderii; and the Rabbis accordingly call the Law by this Name*
viz. a Desirable Vessel, or a Desirable Instrument or Utensil; for Cheli is of
a vast Latitude, and signifies whatever is for the use of Man. Answerably to
which St. Paul is said to be (...), a chosen Vessel or Instrument. It is spoken
after the Propriety of the Hebrews, with whom a Thing or Person that is made
use of to some Excellent Purpose, is not only styled a Vessel, but, to denote
yet further the Worth of it, is called a Vessel of Desire, which is of the like
Signification with a Vessel of Choice; for what is desired is chosen. Thus in a
few Instances I have showed, that the Evangelical Writers do Hebraize; and in
many more I might have done the same: For tho the New Testament has not so
many Hebraisms as is imagined by some Critics, yet it is not to be doubted
that Christ and his Apostles used them very frequently. It is evident that a
great part of the Phrases of the New Testament are according to the Hebrew
Propriety; yea, sometimes they agree more especially with the Rabinical and
Talmudick way of Writing, as In Spicilegio.
Ludovicus Capellus, and others, have endeavored to demonstrate. Thus the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. is the Title by which the Great
Sanhedrim of the Jews was ordinarily styled* says Dr Lighfoot. Raca, which is
used* Matthew. 5. 22. as a Word of Reproach, is common among the Talmudick
Doctors, (for their (...) or (...), is the same with the Syriac (...)) and
signifies a vain empty Fellow. Christ follows the Language of the Rabbis and
Talmud^sts when he uses the Word Heaven for God, as in Matthew. 21. 25. he asked
the Jews whether John's Baptism was from Heaven, i. e. from God, or of Men. I
have sinned against Heaven, i. e. God, says the Prodigal Son to his Father,
Luke 15. 18. This was the Style of the Eastern People, and of the Jews
particularly, as you find in Dan. 4. 23. 1 Macc. 3. 18. And this was the usual
Language of their Rabbis, they used Shamajim instead of God. And in other
Instances it might be showed, that the Sense of several Places in the New
Testament is manifested and illustrated by the Knowledge of the Hebrew Phrase
and Style. For which Reason it was necessary to say something of this Matter,
having undertaken to discourse of the Style of Scripture. We must remember that
there are frequent Hebraisms in these Greek Writings, the Authors themselves
being Hebrews, and they likewise making use of the Style of the Old Testament,
and fetching thence several Expressions which are purely Hebrew. Thus they must
needs retain the Hebrew Idiom and way of Speaking: and thus the Old Testament
and New agree the better; and the former gives constant Light toward the
understanding of the latter.

6thly. Though there is a Great Variety of Words and Phrases in the New
Testament; and though this Part of the Bible was not written in Attick, but
Hebrew Greek, yet this is to be asserted, that there are no Soloecisms in it. I
add this here, because some of old, and others of late, have unadvisedly
suggested the contrary, and have been so hardy and presumptuous, as to aver
that the Sacred Scripture, especially the New Testament, abounds with
Soloecisms. This is particularly said Paulus, qui Soloecismos facit in
loquendo. Hieronym. in Psalm. 81.
of St. Paul's Epistles by an Ancient Father, whose Unhappiness it was to speak
several things too daringly and presumptuously: That Coriarius Cilix. in Epist
ad Ephesians.
Cilician Currier, says he, (for so he calls St. Paul) that sorry Tradesman,
was skilled only in Hebrew, (which was as it were his Mother Tongue to him) and
therefore has many Soloecisms and Barbarisms in Greek. And the same Author, in
In Epist. ad Algasiam.
another Place, speaks to the like purpose, and taxes this Apostle for want of
Grammar and Syntax. Among the Moderns you will find Erasmus charging not only St.
Paul, but the rest of the Apostles with this Defect in their Writings. There
are many Soloecisms, Annotat. in Act. 10.
says he, in their Style, by reason of the frequent Hebraisms which are used
by them. And those worthy Reformers, Luther and Calvin, were not afraid to talk
after this rate. The former, after his bold manner, imputes false Grammar to
the Evangelists and Apostles, as you may see in his Tom. 3. p. 78.
Writings. And the latter expressly avoucheth, that Institut. cap. 7. Sect. 12.
the Greek of the New Testament is Defective, and particularly he holds that
St. Peter writ false Greek, as in 1 Epist. chapter 3. v. 20. where (...) is instead
of (...), a Dative for a Genitive Case: And he fastens this Grammatical
Soloecism on him merely to evade the Doctrine of Purgatory, which cannot but
greatly scandalize the Papists when they shall consider that this Great
Reformer is not ashamed to disparage and vilify the Scriptures, that he may
thereby evade a Popish Doctrine: yea, this must needs be offensive to all
others likewise, who cannot but see that there was not the least Reason for his
fancying the Change of one Case for another in this Place; for (...) exactly
answers to, and agrees with (...): so that if (...) had been the Word here, it
had indeed been false Greek: but now it is impossible for Calvin, or any Man
else, to make it such. Beza follows his Master, and outdoth him, for he every
where finds fault with the Greek of the New Testament, and holds that the Style
is disturbed and corrupted; yea, that there are frequent Soloecisms in it:
(...), Mark 12. 40. should have been (...), he says, and therefore he condemns
it for naughty Grammar: Whereas any unprejudiced Man may see, that there is
only an ordinary Ellipsis in the Words; the Verb (...) is understood, as it is
in several other Texts. But the unsufferable Boldness of this Writer is partly
founded on that Persuasion of his, that the Spirit did not dictate Words to the
Prophets and Apostles, but only the Matter, which I have showed before in
another Discourse to be an incredible Assertion. Castellio, though of a
different Judgment in other things from Calvin and Beza, agrees with them in
this, that there are several Ungrammatical Passages in the Apostles Writings:
Upon Rev. 1. 5. (...), he notes that (...) is put for (...). This is a
Soloecism, says he, but such do often occur in St. Paul. Cannot this Author be
content with the Credit and Reputation of having turned the Bible into neat
Latin, unless he condemns the Apostles for their false Greek? And where, I
pray, is this false Greek? Not in this Place which he mentions, and
con^equently it is not reasonable to believe that it is in any other. In this
Place any impartial Eye may see that (...) is put for (...), one Relative for
another, which is a common thing among Writers. I could show him forty Places
in the Best Greek Authors, where the like Change is made: And that (...) is
frequently left out in the most Approved Writers among the Grecians, cannot be
denied by any Man that has had any Acquaintance with them; yea, it is often
left out in the New Testament, and no fault is found with the Style where it is
so. Why therefore should we think it a strange thing that it is omitted in this
Place? Here is Good Grammar, and no Shadow of Soloecising when this Divine
Writer says, (...), that is, (...). One of our own Annotators has picked up
this false Notion concerning the Style of Scripture, viz. that it is not
reconcilable with Grammatical Syntax in some Places: two especially he takes
notice of, Ephesians. 4. 2. Col. 3. 16. In the former he observes that it is (...) in
the Greek, whereas it should have been (...), the Nominative being put instead
of the Accusative. But by this Worthy Annotator's leave, (...) may, yea and
certainly does refer to (...) in the former Verse; and so it is but inserting
(...), and then the Grammar is salved, (...), I beseech you that you forbear
one another. And if you say it should have been (...), because of (...) in the
former Verse, it is easily answered that the Apostle might express himself in
the way of a Subjunctive as well as an Infinitive, seeing it could be done by
either of them, as this Learned Critic cannot but acknowledge. In the latter
Place alleged by this Learned Man, he takes notice that (...) is misplaced
instead of (...), a Nominative for a Dative Case, which is a great Flaw in
Grammar. But this is soon taken off by referring (...) not to (...) in that
Verse, (as the Doctor does) but to (...) and (...) in the Verse just before;
for to these it has reference, and not to that, and so the Grammatical Concord
is very ^ood and sound.

In several other Places (where there have been the like Objections made) you
will find the Sense rendered entire by the industrious Pen of that Learned
Knight Sir Norton Knatchbull: Though, to speak freely and impartially, he
sometimes represents the Style of the New Testament more perplexed and
disturbed that I can believe it to be: and though he fancies Trajections in
some Places where there are none; yet, to the perpetual Honor of this Worthy
Gentleman it must be said, that he has discovered several Trajections or
Transpositions, Parentheses, Transitions, Ellipses, and Changes of Numbers and
Persons, with other Enallages, which were scarcely taken notice of before: he
has rectified some Comma's and Stops, he has set the Words and Periods right,
he has cleared the Syntax and Grammatical Construction, mended the Sense in
several Places, removed the Difficulties, showed the Propriety and Emphasis of
the Words, discovered the Coherence of the Texts: In short, he has cleared the
New Testament of Soloecisms, and particularly the Writings of the Great Apostle
St. Paul. So that though Tarsus, the Apostle's Birthplace, was in the same
Province with and a Neighbor to Solae, the Country of those that corrupted
their Language, (whence came Soloecisms) yet it appears that there is no such
thing in the Apostle's Style.

But suppose these Texts above named could not have been reconciled to the
exact Laws of Grammar, yet one would think the Transcribers might better have
been blamed than the Writers themselves: the Greek Copy should have been found
fault with rather than the Holy Ghost: the Mistake might have been imputed to
the Amanuenses, and not to the Apostles, I must profess to you plainly, that it
is bordering upon Blasphemy, to say that the Holy Spirit, from whom was the
Gift of Tongues, dictate Barbarisms and Soloecisms in these Sacred Writings,
which were immediately inspired by him. Again, suppose, or rather grant that
some Periods of the New Testament are not exactly adjusted to Grammar-Rules,
yet this will not justify the Language of those Men who charge this Book with
Soloecisms and Barbarisms; for they will be unwilling to grant that there are
such things as these in Homer and Virgil, and such approved Authors. Or, if
they will grant that there are such, then they have no Reason at all to find
fault with the like in Holy Scripture. And this is that which I maintain, and
which no knowing Person can deny, that the same things which some call
Soloecisms and Undue Syntax in the New Testament, are to be found in the most
Noted and Celebrated Authors among the Greeks and Latins. Critics have taken
notice of several of these in Homer and Pindar especially among the Greek
Poets, and in Herodotus and Thucydides among the best Historians that have writ
in that Language, and in Demosthenes among the Noted Orators. These do not
always observe Grammatick Laws; they lay them aside sometimes, and speak
Irregularly, as Heinsius in Prolegom, in Exercitat. Sacr.
one of the Greatest Critics of this last Age has acknowledged. Profane
Writers have Soloecistical Phrases, Botches, Fillings up, Repetitions. Lucian
long since observed, that Epithets are not always used by Poets, (...). Dialog.
because they are fit and convenient, and suitable to the purpose, but to help
out the Matter, to fill up the Gapings, to prop up the Ruins of a Verse. And
both Plutarch and Eustathius (who were more serious Men than the other) have
taken notice of this in Good Authors. Sometimes the Poet is at a stand, and his
Muse is restive: thus Virgil has Broken and Half-verses, which the Critics
excuse by saying that he had not time to finish his Book, or that he did it on
purpose to stop his Readers in the Career, that they might stay and consider
the thing he is speaking of. This Account they give of his Blanks and Chasms.
But Homer suffers not his Muse to make a halt, but then (which is as bad) he
fills up his Verses with such Expletives as (...), etc. and besides these
lesser Particles he uses entire Words and Phrases in many Places only to
supply his Verse. We have nothing of this sort in the Sacred Writings, nothing
that is really superfluous. But there are some Words indeed that are looked
upon as Redundant, and not absolutely Necessary, especially in the Old
Testament, which is Po^tical in many places, The Lord rained Brimstone and Fire
from the Lord, Genesis 19. 24. where the last Words [ from the Lord] seem to be
redundant. So it is in 2 Timothy 1. 18. The Lord grant unto him that be may find
Mercy of the Lord in that Day. Thus in Psalm. 90. 10. The Days of our Years are
threescore Years and ten: We may look upon the first Word as an Expletive, for
the Divine Poet means this only, that the ordinary Term of our Life extends to
seventy Years: So that the word [ Days] might have been left out. The same
Pleonasm you read in 2 Samuel 19. 34. How many Days are the Years of my Life? for
so it is according to the Hebrew: and it is the Hebrew way of speaking, and
therefore cannot be blamed. Yea, to speak strictly, there is nothing redundant
in the Style of Scripture. All those Words which seem to be Expletives, are
Significant, and sometimes very Emphatical. The Repetitions (which some think
to be needless Tautologies) are very useful as well as el^gant. What is more
frequent in Homer, the Father of Poets? There you meet with Verses and
Half-verses over and over again: and the Commentators on those Places tell us,
that his frequent using the same Words is an Argument that his Style is Natural
and Genuine, (as in common Discourse we are wont to say the same things again
and again) and that it shows the Intenseness and Earnestness of the Speaker,
that it argues the Necessity of the Matter as well as the Certainty of it, that
it is to conciliate Attention, and that sometimes it is a great Ornament and
Elegancy, besides that it was the Mode of speaking then in use, and accordingly
is to be found in all Good Authors, more or less.

Why then should we not satisfy our selves after the same manner, when we find
the same things repeated in the Bible, especially in the Old Testament, and
more particularly in the Books of Moses, which far exceed Homer in Antiquity?
That Reiteration of the Words in Genesis 1. 27. God created Man in his own Image,
in the Image of God created he him, should not offend us: nor that in Moses's
Song in Exodus 15. 16. Till thy People pass over, O Lord, till thy People pass
over: nor those many Reduplications in the Song of Deborah and Barak, I will
sing unto the Lord, I will sing unto the Lord God of Israel, Judge. 5. 3. The
Mountains melted from before the Lord, from before the Lord God of Israel, ver.
5. The Inhabitants of the Villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I
Deborah arose, that I arose a Mother in Israel, ver. 7. Awake, awake Deborah,
awake, awake, ver. 12. The Kings came and fought; then fought the Kings, ver.
19. The River of Kishon swept them away, that ancient River, the River Kishon,
v. 21. At her Feet he bowed, he fell and lay down: at her Feet he bowed, he
fell; where he bowed, there he fell down dead, ver. 27. To Sisera a Prey of
diverse Colors, a Prey of diverse Colors of Needle Work, of diverse Colors of
Needle Work of both sides, ver. 30. This Repeating and Reduplicating the Words,
is so far from being any Blemish to this Ancient Song, that it is to be
accounted a great Elegancy, and a singular Grace to it. This Anadiplosis is
deemed a very becoming Figure (and might have been mentioned with those before)
in the best Classical Writers: and there is no Reason why it should not be so
here. If the repeating the same thing be in them a Sign of the Naturalness of
the Style, and of the Seriousness and Fervor of the Speakers, of the
Weightiness of the Subject, and the like, we cannot deny it to be the same in
these Ancient Writings of the Bible. It is observable, that as in the Sacred
History of this Book, so in Homer, the Messenger, whether he be sent from God
or Man, relates his Errand verbatim, in the same Words and Syllables usually
that it was delivered to him; so that he alters it not in the least. In this,
as in several other things, that Ancient Poet comes near to the Simplicity of
the Style of Scripture. I could remark unto you also, that that excellent
Emperor Antoninus has many things in his Book which are conformable to the
Style of the Holy Writ, and seem to resemble it: His way of Writing is like an
Emperor, Short, but Pithy and Sententious. Many things are not expressed, which
must be supplied and understood. He sometimes uses Words and Phrases as he
pleases, not as Other Writers are wont. He has unusual ways of expressing
himself, and sometimes he coins Words (as it was his Royal Prerogative to do so
with Money.) He has several abrupt and incoherent Periods; he is generally
neglectful and not studied. This is some Resemblance of the Style of Holy
Scripture, where there is a Princely Brevity, wherein more is contained than
expressed: where are (as I shall show you anon) either New Words, or those
which are usual are applied in a New and unheard of manner. The Style seems in
sundry Places to be inconsistent and independent, and in most Places it is
careless, and no ways elaborate. But as no Wife Critic ever defamed the
Emperor for his particular Strain of Writing, so neither can any Man of
Judgment disparage the Penmen of Holy Scripture, whom he does as 'twere
imitate. In brief, the Bible has something in it of all manner of Styles, and
partakes of the Excellencies of all Authors: and where you see any Defect in
the strict Rules of Grammar, even there it is not unlike to Other Writers.

This may satisfy us, amidst the Cavils of some Censurers of Scripture, that it
has in it the same Phrases and Modes of Speaking, and manner of using them,
that are in the best Greek and Latin Writings. Let us come then to the Reading
of Scripture, as we see Men do to Homer and Virgil. This is a fair Request, any
Man will say, and it must needs be granted. Now, you see, that if any thing
less Grammatical or Elegant occurs in those Writers, the Course which is taken
is this, Lexicons and Dictionaries are consulted, the Masters of Grammar and
Rhetoric are advised with, Interpreters are searched into, Other Authors are
compared with these, and their Business is to reconcile them, and to make Sense
of these Poets, and by all means to make them speak well. And shall we not do
thus with the Sacred Writings? Shall we not endeavor by all those Ways to
vindicate the Credit of them, and to justify the Propriety and Excellency of
their Style, when we are able to do it by Great Examples from the Best and most
Celebrated Writers among the Moral Philosophers, Orators, Poets, Historians?
The Worthy Knight beforementined has done his Part here very laudably; he has
salv'd the Grammar of the New Testament in many Places, and has showed that
its Style (where it seems to be strange and uncouth) is parallel with very Good
and Approved Authors. And lastly, if any find fault with the Holy Writings
because they are immethodical, because neither the Mosaic Law, nor other Parts
of the Old Testament, nor the Christian Doctrine in the New, are reduced to
Method and Artificial Order, the like Answer may be given, viz. that this was
not the way of Other Writers in those Times. It is evident that it was not the
old way of the Jews; their Books of Religion and Morals were not Orderly
disposed, but generally made up of Historical Passages, and Wise Aphorisms and
Sentences. And as for the Gentiles, most of their Learning was not more
accurate and reduced. You can descry nothing in their Writings of that Method
and Order which have since been observed. But my Business here chiefly is not
to consider whether the Scripture be Methodized, but to defend the Propriety of
its Language. Or rather, it is not my Business now, because I have sufficiently
dispatched it, I hope. I have let you see that those are no impartial Judges of
Scripture-Stile, who cry out of its Barbarisms; but the Truth is, they betray
both their Ignorance and Irreligion at once, in giving such a Judgment of it;
their Ignorance, in that they show themselves unacquainted with the Best
Authors, who are not always wont to bind themselves to the strict Observation
of Grammatical Rules. To this purpose the Learned Henry Stephens's
Animadversions and Appendix at the End of his Thesaurus Gr. L. are worthy of
the Perusal of all Curious Persons that would be fully acquainted with the
Genius of the Attick Phrase and Idiom; and the reading of these will abundantly
satisfy them that the New Testament is like other Greek Writers, and that the
most Classick Greek Authors speak in the same strain that this does. This
Accomplished Critic shows that there are pure Atticisms sometimes in these
Holy Writings, and particularly that an Ellipsis, which is so frequent in them,
is a common Atticism in the best Grecians. If those who raise Objections
against the Style of the New Testament would converse with These, they might
see that those Passages which seem not so proper or elegant in Scripture, and
that whatever looks like Soloecisms, and favors of Rudeness or Defect of
Language in these Holy Writings, may be parallelled with what they meet with in
the most Applauded Authors. Their Irreligion likewise is discovered in this,
that nothing pleases them in the Holy Book; and that what is not thought
Improper or Rude in other Writings, is accounted such in These; yea, that what
are Soloecisms in a Sacred Writer, are looked upon as Atticisms and Elegancies
in a Profane One. Having hitherto been in pursuance of this, that the Holy
Scripture has many things in it according to the Strain of Other Writers, I am
to pass to the next Proposition.

CHAP. VII.
The Scripture-Stile has some things in it that are not in common with Other
Writers, but are proper and peculiar to it self. The LXX's Greek Version and
the New Testament, have words that are not extant in any other Authors. (...)
Mark 14. 3. was coined by the Evangelist: Its true Signification enquired into.
Inward Goodness or Righteousness is expressed by Terms which are unknown to
other Writers. Instances of several other Peculiar ways of Speaking. Some
Profane Authors differ from the rest as to the use of some particular Words and
Phrases. Ecclesiastical Writers have Words proper to themselves. The Difficulty
of Scripture proceeds partly from the Different Acception of Words which we
meet with there. Many Instances in the Old and New Testament. The various
Significations of the Word Spirit enumerated, and reduced to distinct Heads.
The Author confines himself to the Hebrew Verbs of the Old Testament, and shows
how Different the Senses of the same words are, and endeavors to remove the
Ambiguity of them in the several Texts which he cites, and to determine the
Sense which is Proper to those particular Places. The like he attempts in those
Texts where Hebrew Nouns of a different meaning occur.

THE Third Proposition is, That the Scripture-Stile has some things in it that
are not in common with Other Writers, but are Proper and Peculiar to it self.
For though it is true some Other Authors have words proper to themselves, which
are not found in others, (thus in Pindar, Plato, Isocrates, Homer,
Aristophanes, Hippocrates, etc. there are some particular Words and Phrases
peculiar to them alone) yet the Bible has Words and Expressions which are not
to be met with in any of these, nor in any other Writers. The Original Hebrew
has greater choice of Words than any Book extant in that Language; it is the
most Copious Vocabulary that is in the World, and all Hebrew Writers of note
borrow from this. The Septuagint have words peculiar to themselves, as (...),
etc. (...) is proper to them, and was made on purpose to answer to the Hebrew
(...): and the Writers of the New Testament took it from them. They also made
the word (...), Cant. 4. 9. to express the Hebrew word (...), Ex. 2. 5. is of
their coining, and the Apostle thought fit to use it, Tit. 2. 14. And some have
thought the word (...), as it signifies Sleep or Slumber, Isa. 29. 10. was made
by them, as if it were from (...). This word is also used by the Apostle, Romans
11. 8. The New Testament in Greek has words never heard of before, as (...),
in the Lord's Prayer, a word which was first used by the Evangelists. And St.
Luke's (...) in the Angels Salutation of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 28. is a new
Greek word which the Evangelist himself made, Beza and Caninius in locum.
as some have thought: but that is a Mistake, because the Apocryphal Writer had
used it before, Eccles. 18. 17. Yet this is not to be denied that the word is
no where to be found in any other Greek Author, i. e. any Profane one, but St.
Paul uses it ( viz. the Active (...), though not the Passive (...)) in Ephesians. 1.
6. (...) and (...) in the Passive Voice have a peculiar Signification in Mat.
5. 24. Romans 5. 10. 1 C^r. 11. 7. 2. Cor. 5. 20. which is in no other Writer,
says Grotius upon Mat. 5. 24. That likewise in Mark 14. 3. and John 12. 3. is
scarcely used by any Writer whatsoever, and therefore the Grammarians and
Critics know not well how to assign the meaning of it, some deriving (...)
(which is the word there used, and joined with (...)) from (...), and so it
denotes that Ointment to have been faithfully prepared and compounded, for
(...) (according to this Etymology) is as much as (...), true, pure not
adulterated, approved, it being rightly and faithfully made. This is according
to the Syriac Version: and it is approved of by In (...). 26.
St. Ierom and In M^re. 14.
Theophylact. Others think (...) is put here for (...), the vulgar Latin having
it Spicata, and so it is translated Spikenard by us. Beza and Camerarius are of
this Opinion, and think the Ointment had this Name, because it was made (...)
spicis nardi, that is, of the choicest part of Nard. A third fort (among whom
Casaubon is Chief) tell us, that it is the same with (...), potabilis, a (...),
and so signifies such a Liquid Ointment as might be drank. And lastly, some
have thought that (...) is for (...), as if it were called so from a place,
viz* Opis, a City not far from Babylon, whence the best Nard came.

This is Critie. Dec. 2. ^. 6.
Hartungus's Notion, but then the word should have been Opick, not Opistick.
Thus the Etymology of the Word has been disputed, but we are certain of the
Thing, the Nard it self, or rather the Ointment which was made of it, which was
very Precious, and in great Esteem of old. It was made of several Ingredients,
(as we learn from Na^. Hist. l. 1^. ^. 2.
Pliny, and other Writers) viz. the sweet Cane or Rush, Costum, Amomum, Myrrh,
Balsam, and other Simples. When this Precious Compound, this Excellent
Aromatic, which was very Costly, and used only by Rich and Wealthy Persons, was
made up as it should be, it was then (...) (from (...) ^ides) sincerely and
faithfully prepared, it had all its Ingredients, it was of the best sort. This
seems to be the most elegible Derivation of the Word: but so far as we know it
was of the Evangelist's making, for there is no such Greek Word in any other
Authors.

And as the New Testament has its peculiar words, so you may observe it has a
peculiar way of using some words which yet are common in other Writers. Thus
Inward Holiness or Inherent Righteousness are expressed by such terms as These,
(which have no such Signification in any other Writers) Circumcision, Col. 2.
11. Crucifying, Romans 6. 6. Gal. 6. 14. Mortifying, Romans 8. 13. Col. 3. 5.
Dying, Romans 6. 2, 8. Col. 3. 3. Resurrection, Ephesians. 2. 6. Ephesians. 5. 14. Col. 2.
12. Regeneration, or being born again, John 3. 3. Tit. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Renovation, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 23. the New Man, and New Creature, 2. Cor. 5.
17. Gal. 6. 15. Ephesians. 4. 24. Washing, John 13. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Rev. 7. 14. The
way of using and applying these words is proper to the New Testament. There are
other peculiar ways of speaking in this part of the Bible, which are altogether
unknown to other Writers, as the Engraffed Word, Jam. 1. 21. Children of Light
and of the Day, Luke 16. 8. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Thessalonians 5. 5. the Sword of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. 17. the Savor of Death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. the Body of Sin, Rom, 6. 6. the
Body of Death, Romans 7. 24. the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8. 2. a Law in the
Members, Romans 7. 23. Who over met in any other Author with these Expressions,
Conscience of an Idol, 1 Cor. 8. 7. the Earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5. 5. the
Unction of the Spirit, 1 John 2. 20, 27. Circum^ision of the Heart, and of the
Letter, Romans 2. 29. a Jew outwardly, and a Jew inwardly, in the same Verse? Who
ever read of the foolishness of God, and the weakness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 25?
(...), is a Phrase proper to Scripture: and so are these, to mortify the
Members on Earth, Col. 3. 5. to put off the Old Man, and put on the New Man,
Ephesians. 4. 22. to sow to the Flesh, to reap of the Flesh; to sow to the Spirit, to
reap of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 8. to walk after the Flesh, Romans 8. 1, 4. Who ever
spoke after the following rate, to eat and drink Damnation to himself, 1 Cor.
11. 29. to be justified by Faith, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2. 16. to be clothed upon
with an House from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 2? And what strange and unheard of
Expressions are those, to be baptized or washed with Fire, Mat. 3. 2. to be
salted with Fire, Mark 9. 49?

Thus the Sacred Penmen of Scripture differ from all others in their Style. And
yet herein also they agree with them, for even some of those Writers differ
from the rest, as to the use of some particular Words and Phrases. Some of them
take a word or more in a sense that it is not taken in by any Others. There are
words in Homer that are not in Aristophanes; and some in Lycophron, that are
not in either of these; and there are some in these three which are not found
in any other Writer whatsoever. Plato, (as it is Diog, La^rt. in Platone.
observed of him) uses words in a way different from other Authors, as the
word (...) for Simplex, and in other places for Pulcher, and sometimes for
Parvus. And as the same word is used by him to denote several things, so he
uses different words in the same sense and meaning, as his (...) and others.
Nay, he brings in the word (...) (as the same Author observes) to express
contrary things sometimes. There are some Ecclesiastic words (for they may be
thus differenced from others, because they have a peculiar Interpretation as
they are used by Ecclesiastical Writers) as (...) and Synaxis, which among
Christian Writers signify either the Sacred Meetings and Assemblies of the
Faithful, or the Lord's Supper: and (...) is a Temple among the same Writers,
and (...) has the same Signification sometimes: but they have no such sense in
other Authors. So (...), which is a Towel or Napkin, is used in some of the
Greek Fathers, to denote the express Image or likeness of a Person. And from
other Examples it might be made good that the Profane and Ecclesiastic use of
a word are far different. There are Thousands of words otherwise taken in the
Greek Fathers than in Classick Writers: and you in vain look for the meaning of
them in Hesychius, Phavorinus, Suidas, in Scapula, Constantine, or Stephens.
Yea, the words themselves which occur in Ecclesiastic Writers are not to be
found in Profane ones: many of them are omitted in Lexicons, Onomasticks,
Etymologicks, and Glossaries.

And shall not the Inspired Wri^ers have the same liberty, viz. to use peculiar
Words and Phrases of their own? or to use Words in a singular meaning, and
proper to themselves? If a Catachre^is, the Abuse of Words, be reckoned by the
Greek Orators an Embellishment of Speech, certainly we must account it no
Disparagement, but rather an Ornament to the Language, when the Holy Ghost in
the Scriptures alters the use of some Words. He may make use of what Words he
pleases: He that bestowed the Gift of Tongues, knows how to apply them. Hence
in these Writings you meet with some New words and Singular ways of Expression,
as I have let you see in some Instances: and many more I might have added,
wherein the peculiar Phraseology of this Sacred Book is observable. The very
Words in the Holy Style are precious. Antiquaries and Critics spend much time
in mere Phrases, but they never employ it so well as when they are searching
into These. There are several Other things might be noted as to the Peculiar
Style and Idiom of the New Testament, but this shall suffice at present. As I
have ^hew'd before that the Style of Scripture is like that of Other Writers,
so you see it is not inconsistent with what I have now asserted, that the Holy
Style is not like that of Others; that is, the Scripture has Words and Phrases
proper to it self, it has some things extraordinary, and which are unusual
with the rest of Authors. But I will insist no longer on this here, because I
may have occasion in my next Discourse ( viz. concerning the Excellency and
Perfection of Scripture) to suggest several things which will discover the
Peculiar Strai^ of the Bible.

The Fourth ^^oposi^^on is, That there are some things Obscure and Difficult in
the Style of Scripture. I will give you an account of this in these following
Particulars: 1. Obscurity and Difficulty may arise from the Different
Signification of the same words in Scripture. 2. From the Contrariety of the
same words as to their Signification. 3. From Other Causes relating to the
Matter it self spoken of, and the Time, etc. Under which Heads I intend to
prosecute that Design which I formerly was upon, viz. An Enquiry into several
Remarkable Texts of the Holy Scripture which contain some Difficulty in them. I
shall have occasion here to discover the Grounds of that Difficulty, and to
show how it may be removed. And when the Sentiments of others are not
satisfactory, I will make bold to interpose my own Judgment.

First, Sometimes in Scripture there are Words of Different Signification,
whence it comes to pass, that it is very hard to understand those places where
these words are. And it is impossible to satisfy our selves about the meaning
of them in the Texts where we find them, unless we take pains to examine the
particular Congruity of one Sense rather than another to that particular Thing
or Person to which it is applied. Yea, sometimes when we meet with such a
Doubtful Word, we shall find it reasonable to make use of both the Senses of
it, that is, to propound them both, and to leave it free to Persons to make
choice of which they please. I will give some Instances of this; as that in
Genesis 39. 1. Captain of the Guard, which may as rightly be translated (according
to Josephus, Antiq. l. 2. c. 3.) Chief of the Cooks, for the LXX render it
(...), and the Hebrew Tabbach (the Plural whereof is here used) is a Cook, 1 Samuel 8. 13. Chapter 9. 23, 24. and is so translated. The truth is, the genuine
rendering of Tabbach is Mactator, a Slayer, and so is applicable either to a
Cook or a Soldier. The double sense of the Word occasions some doubt about the
Translation, but it is of no moment at all: for we are not to be concerned
whether Potiphar was Pharao^'s Head-Cook (which without doubt was an Honorable
Place) or the Captain of his Guard, or Army (as the Vulgar Latin gives it.) So
in Genesis 41. 43. [ they cried before him Abrek] the word Abrek may be
differently rendered, viz. either according to Aben-Ezra, Aquila, the Vulgar
Latin, and our own English Translation [ bow the Knee] deriving it from barak,
genu flexit: or according to Solomon Iarchi, and the Paraphrases of Onkelos and
Jonathan [Father of the King] (for Rek in the Aramaean Tongue is ^ex, and
thence perhaps this Latin word:) or according to the Jerusalem Targum [Father
of the King, and tender in Years], or according to Symmachus, [tender Father]
(from Ab Pater, and Rech tener sen delicatue,) because Joseph was as to his
Prudence a Father, as to his Age a Tender Youth. Thus this word being of a
dubious Signification, according to the different Etymologies it has, may be
diversely translated, and every one is at liberty to choose which of these
Senses he most approv^s of. I cannot see how the Doubtfulness of such words as
this can be wholly taken away, and consequently the Scripture as to such words,
must remain Dubious and Obs^ure, that is, as to the particular and close import
of them. But it is sufficient that we have the general sense of them, as here,
though we are ignorant of the right and only Derivation of the word Abr^^h (and
after all the forementioned Surmises, it is most probable (as has been said
before) that it is an Egyptian word) yet this we are certain of, that it was a
word of Acclamation and Honor that the People used toward Joseph: and it is not
requisite to know any more in order to the understanding of the Place.

It is thus in the New Testament; it is said of Judas that he went and hanged
himself, Mat. 27. 5. So we translate it indeed, and very well, but the Greek
word (...) is of a more general import, signifying that he was strangled or
choked, which may be done either by a String (which is properly Hanging) or by
Excessive Grief, which stifled his Spirits: and accordingly we may render the
Word either of these ways, viz. Actively, [ he hanged himself] i. e. he ended
his Life with a Halter, or Passively, [he was Choaked] namely, by a sudden
stopping of his Breath, and Suffocation of his Spirits through Melancholy and
Grief. Either of these Senses may be admitted, yea both of them, as I have
showed in another place. Wherefore the best rendering of the words is, I
conceive, this, Judas strangled himself, or was strangled, because this takes
in both. It is said of the Pharisees, Mark 7. 3. Except they wash their Hands
often, they eat not: where the word (...), which is translated [ oft] has
different Significations, and accordingly may be rendered diversely. First, (...)
signifies the Fist or Hand closed, and so here is meant their way of Washing
their Hands by thrusting the Fist into the Palm of the Hand. Secondly, The
Greek word signifies also the Elbow, and then (...) is as much as up to the
Elbow, and denotes another particualar way of Washing among the Conceited
Pharisees, by letting the Water drop from their Hands (being held up) to the
very Elbows. Thirdly, The word may be rendered [ diligently,] or according to
the Syriack [ accurately,] and so signifies to us that great Care and Exactness
they used in their Ceremonious Washings. Lastly, Our Translators, according to
another acception of the word, and following the Vulgar Latin, render it often.
Any of these four ways the word may be taken: and the Dubiousness of it should
not in the least trouble us, because we understand the grand thing contained in
the words, viz. That the Jews, but especially the Pharisees, were very
superstitiously addicted to their Washings, and placed the greatest part of
their Religion in that and the like External Observances. I could instance in 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, etc. which
Text may admit of this Translation also, The Covenant of God stands sure,
having this Inscription; for (...) signifies not only a Foundation, but a
Covenant or Instrument of Contract: and (...) signifies an Inscription as well
as a Seal. There were two Parts of the Covenant, I will be your God, and ye
shall be my People: So here in the following words, The Lord knows them that
are his: And, Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
Iniquity. See further in Dr. Hammond.

Next, I will mention that of the Apostle, Heb. 12. 1. The Sin which does so
easily beset us. So we translate it, and so the word (...) signifies: but it
has three other Significations, and according to them may be differently
rendered. S. Hom. 28. in Epist. ad Hebr.
Chrysostom gives the sen^e thus, [ the Sin which may easily ^e avoided] for
(...), from whence the word comes, has (...), devita, Ti^. 3. 9.
such a Signification: and then the meaning is, that not only the great and
heavy Sins (...), the weight) but lighter and lesser Sins must be declined,
must be carefully avoided. There is another Signification of (...) (...), viz.
That Sin which has fair Arguments and Pretenses for it self. In Hesychio.
(...) is applied when there are no (...), no favorable Circumstances, no
plausible Reasons and Arguments to commend a thing: (...) then signifies that
which has Goodly Circumstances and Arguments to recommend it. Such have some
Sins especially, as those that are accompanied with much Profit or Pleasure;
against these therefore the Apostle exhorts us here to arm our selves: he would
have us in a more especial manner to beware of those Vices which are so
Tempting. There is yet another rendering of the words according to In Locum.
Theophylact; for he observes, that (...) is Periculum, Discrimen: and indeed
the Stoics generally use the word in this sense. (...) is according to
Hesychius, (...): it signifies Affliction, Necessity, Trouble. And the Fathers
sometimes use it thus in their Writings. So that the Apostle advises us here
to shun those Sins especially which bring us into great Dangers and
Difficulties, those that are accompanied even with bodily Calamities and
Judgments, as some kinds of Sins generally are. Those Vices that are thus
circumstantiated, are to be avoided with singular Caution. But, I confess, I do
not think this to be the meaning here, for the Adverb (...) joined with (...),
rather shows that the Circumstances are good. And of the other three
Interpretations, I look upon the first to be the best, because it is according
to the clearest and most obvious sense of the Greek word; and withal it agrees
with the Mind of the Apostle in the whole Verse, where taking his Metaphor from
the Olympic Races, he exhorts the Jewish Converts to run with Patience the
Race that was set before them, and in order to that to lay aside every Weight
or Encumbrance, as the Racers were wont to do, and the Sin which did so easily
beset them, compass them about, hinder and retard them in their Christian
Course, as Long or Heavy Garments are an hindrance to those that run; for any
observing Eye may see that he continues the Metaphor. Thus you see words have
Different Senses, and so may be translated differently; and hence the true
Meaning is difficultly to be reached sometimes.

I will mention one Instance more, which is to be found both in the Old and New
Testament. There we often read of the Spirit: no word is more usual with the
Sacred Writers than this, and it is as true that no word has more Various
Significations; whence sometimes does arise no small Difficulty in interpreting
some of those places where this word occurreth. Suffer me then to give a full
and ample Account of the Different Significations of it, that it may not
administer occasion of Obscurity in the Style of Scripture.

First, The word Spirit is applied to God, and particularly to the Third Person
in the Undivided Trinity, who is Emphatically called the Spirit in the Old
Testament, as in Genesis 1. 2. Genesis 6. 3. and in almost iunumerable other places;
and the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost, by way of Eminency in the New Testament,
Mat. 3. 16. John 1. 32. Romans 8. 14, etc.

Secondly, It signifies the Gifts, Graces, Fruits, Effects, and Operations of
the Holy Spirit; as 1. Any Signal Qualities or Endowments whatsoever, any Skill
or Ability to do things well and laudably. Thus Bezaliel was filled with the
Spirit of God, (Exodus 31. 3, 5.) to work in all manner of Workmanship. And
Gifts of any sort are called the Spirit in other places. 2. The Saving Graces
of the Holy Spirit, as in Jude, ver. 19. having not the Spirit, and in several
other places. 3. The Power of the Spirit to accomplish some very great and
extraordinary thing: thus Caleb had another Spirit, Number. 14. 24. i. e. he had
Power to effect those things which he could not do before. Ioshuah was a Man in
whom was the Spirit, Number. 27. 18. Thus the Spirit of God and the Spirit of the
Lord are said in Scripture to come upon, to fall upon, to be poured out, to be
put upon Persons; that is, they had an unusual and extraordinary Power to do
this or that. To be moved, and to be led by the Spirit are in the same
Signification, viz. to be enabled to enterprise and atchieve some Wonderful
Thing. 4. Those Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts which were conferred on the
Apostles and other Christians in the Infancy of the Gospel, as Healing all
manner of Diseases, Speaking strange Languages. These are expressed by this
Word in 1 Cor. 14. 12. Ye are zealous of Spirits, i. e. Spiritual Gifts, the
Extraordinary Vouchsafements of the Spirit, whereby they were able to do things
above Humane Power: Hence you read of Speaking in the Spirit, Praying with the
Spirit, and Singing with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15. And in the same Chapter
there is mention of the Spirits of the Prophets, ver. 32. i. e. the Gifts of
Prophecy which they were endued with, and enabled to exert in the Public
Congregation. Before Christ's Ascension these Gifts were not bestowed in a very
large and liberal manner, and that is the meaning of John 7. 39. the Holy Ghost
was not yet given. And even after our Savior's Ascension, the Ephesian
Christians had not heard whether there was any Holy Ghost, Acts 19. 2. that is,
they knew nothing of these Extraordinary Gifts bestowed on some in the Church.
Wherefore we read there that by the Imposition of St. Paul's Hands the Holy
Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with Tongues and prophesied, ver. 6. This
latter Clause explains the former, letting us see that by the Holy Ghost, is
here meant the Miraculous Endowments of the Spirit, such as speaking with
strange Tongues, and Prophesying in an unusual manner. Of these chiefly the
Apostle is to be understood in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit. 5.
Extraordinary Revelations and Discoveries (whether under the Old or New
Testament) are expressed by this Word. Thus it is said, there is a Spirit in
Man, Job 32. 8. which is explained in the next Clause by the Inspiration of the
Almighty. So David in Spirit, Mat. 22. 43. is David Inspired. I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all Flesh, Acts 2. 17. (taken from Joel 2. 28.) i. e. I will
bestow the Gift of Prophecy and Revealing of Mysteries upon them, for of This
it is principally understood, as you may learn from the following words, Your
Sons and your Daughters shall prophesy; and ver. 18. On my Servants and on my
Handmaids I will pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy. So in Rev. 1.
10. I was in the Spirit, is as much as if he had said, I had great Revelations
imparted to me.

Thirdly, The Dispensation and Preaching of the Gospel, especially as it is
opposed to the Law, and as it contains the more hidden Mysteries of
Christianity in it, is styled the Spirit. Thus the Evangelical Preachers are
called Ministers not of the Letter, but Spirit, 2 Cor. 3, 6. i. e. not of the
Law, but of the Gospel, not of mere Externals of Religion, but of the Inward
and Hidden Secrets of it.

Fourthly, The Spiritual meaning of what Christ speaks is called by this
Name, as in John 6. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits
nothing the Words that I speak unto you they are Spirit, and they are Life. As
if he had said, you must not understand me in a gross and carnal sense, when I
tell you that you must eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ver. 53, 54. My meaning
is not that you should turn Canibals, and feed upon Man's Flesh. No: this
Eating and Drinking which I have spoken of to you, are to be interpreted in a
Spiritual Sense, and in no other. My Words have an Abstruse and Mystical
meaning, I am Spiritually to be Eaten and Drunk, that is, by a Lively Faith
only. It is the Spirit that quickens, that enliveneth: that which is
comprehended in the Spiritual import of my Words, is the thing that is most
Active and Powerful in Religion, and in the Lives of Men.

Fifthly, By Spirit is meant the Person that is Inspired, 1 John 4. 2. Every
Spirit that confesses that Jesus is come in the Flesh, is of God. Nay,

Sixthly, He that pretends to the Spirit, but really is not inspired by the
Holy Ghost, is thus called: as in the next Verse, Every Spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God: and in the first
Verse of that Chapter, Believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, i. e.
Teachers that pretend to the Spirit and Inspiration, who are called False
Prophets in the same place, and Seducing Spirits, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Therefore
discerning of Spirits, 1 Cor. 12. 10. was that Gift in the Church whereby they
knew who were truly Inspired, and who not; who were True, and who False
Prophets. And as the Persons pretending to immediate Discoveries from the
Spirit are thus styled, so the ^eigned Discoveries or Revelations themselves,
which they boast of, are called Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.

Seventhly, The word Spirit in Scripture is meant of the Soul of Man, and its
different Functions, Operations, Dispositions, Inclinations; and in short, the
whole Frame and State of it. 1. I say that Distinct Part of Man which is called
his Soul, has the Denomination of Spirit, and that very justly, because it is
a Spiritual or Immaterial Being. Into thy Hands I commit my Spirit, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 31. 5. i. e. I trust thee with my Soul. It is called the Spirit
of a Man, Prove. 18. 14. chapter 20. 27. Eccles. 3. 21. This is the Spirit that
shall return to God, Eccles. 12. 7. Wherefore this was the Language of our
dying Savior, Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46. and of that
expiring Martyr, Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. The Souls of the
Saints are styled the Spirits of just Men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. and those
of the Wicked, the Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. And hither is to be
referred that of St. James, chapter 2. 26. the Body without the Spirit (i. e.
without the Soul) is dead. 2. The Vital Principle, which is the immediate
Operation of the Soul, is termed the Spirit, the Spirit of Life, Genesis 7. 22.
especially the more Active and Vigorous Operation of the Soul and Body is so
called, Josh. 5. 1. Nor was there Spirit in them. Whence you read of the
reviving and coming again of the Spirit, Genesis 45. 27. Judge. 15. 19. and of the
Spirits being refreshed, 2 Cor. 7. 13. and giving Spirit, i. e. Life to the
Image of the Beast, Rev. 13. 15. 3. The Understanding is often called the
Spirit, and the Spirit of the Mind; and when you read of Soul and Spirit, this
latter generally denotes the Intellectual and Rational Part of Man, and the
more exalted and refined Operations of it, as it respects Religion, Luke 1. 47.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Heb. 4. 12. 4. That Function of the Rational Soul which is
called Conscience, has this Name. A wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14.
The Spirit (i. e. the Third Person in the Sacred Trinity) bears witness with
our Spirit, that is, with our Consciences, Romans 8. 16. 5. The Will and
Affections are commonly set forth by this Expression: Thus you read of ruling
the Spirit, Prove. 16. 32. that is, subduing and well-ordering Those Faculties
of the Mind especially: You read of a New Spirit, Ezekiel. 11. 19. chapter 18. 31. of
a contrite and broken Spirit, Psalm. 34. 18. Psalm. 51. 17. a right Spirit, Psalm.
51. 10. which are principally meant of the Will, the Passions and Desires of
the Soul. And another Spirit, Numb. 14. 24. may be understood in this Sense as
well as in that abovementioned. In the New Testament our Savior pronounces
those Blessed that are poor in Spirit, Matthew. 5. 3. He tells us, that we must
worship the Father in Spirit, John 4. 23. St. Paul professes, that he served
God with his Spirit, Romans 1. 9. and exhorts us all to be servent in Spirit,
Romans 12. 11. In all which Places the word Spirit signifies either the Will, or
the Hearty Affections of the Soul, or both of them. 6. In a more general way it
signifies the Nature and Temper of a Man: Ye know not of what Spirit ye are,
Luke 9. 55. And this Large and General Acception of the Word is very usual in
the Holy Style. 7. More particularly and especially it denotes an Effectual and
Operative Inclination, Power and Ability to some particular Good or Evil:
Whence you read of the Isa. 11. 2.
Spirit of Knowledge, Isa. 11. 2.
Understanding, Ephesians. 1. 17.
Wisdom, of Gal. 6. 1.
Meekness, of 2 Timothy 1. 7.
Fear: and on the contrary, of the Romans 11. 8.
Spirit of Slumber, of Hos. 5. 4.
Whoredoms, of 1 John 4. 3.
Antichrist, and of a Isa. 19. 14.
perverse Spirit. 8. The Rational and Regenerate Part of Man is emphatically
styled the Spirit, and is opposed to the Flesh, which is the Sensual and
Unregenerate Part of Man. The Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak, Matthew.
26. 41. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, John 3. 6. The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal. 5. 7. This
is the frequent Acception of the Word in the New Testament. Yea, 9. Not only
the Holy and Godly Nature, the Renewed Disposition and Temper, but even that
which is Unholy and Ungodly, the Old and Unregenerate Principle of Man, is also
known by this Name. The Spirit, says St. James, that dwells in us lusts to
Envy, chapter 4. 5. where by Spirit is meant the Sensual and Carnal Part of Man.
And so before we took notice of the Spirit of Slumber, of Whoredoms, and the
like. Thus much of the word Spirit, as it has reference to the Soul of Man and
its Faculties. Only I will add this, that this Word applied either to the good
or evil Operations of the Mind, signifies to us the Reality and Efficacy of
them, and represents their great Vehemence; for they proceed from the Spirit of
Man, which is vigorous and active. Though this Word likewise may refer to the
Original and Source of these Actions, for there is in Men a Double Spirit, a
Good and an Evil one, the Spirit of the World, and the Spirit which is of God,
1 Cor. 2. 12. Hence in the Style of Scripture good and evil Actions are
frequently attributed to some Spirit; for they are Results either of the Good
or Evil one that inhabits in them.

Eighthly, Angels, both good and bad, are signified by this Word: First, the
Good ones, Heb. 1. 7. He makes his Angels Spirits, which is taken from Psalm.
104. 4. Are they not all ministering Spirits? Heb. 1. 14. Secondly, the Evil
ones, who in the Old Testament are called Evil Spirits, and Lying Spirits; and
in the New Testament, Unclean, Foul, Familiar Spirits, Spirits of Divination.
Rejoice not, says our Savior, that the Spirits (i. e. the Devils, as appears
from ver. 17.) are subject unto you, Luke 10. 20. The Spirit that works in
the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. is no other than Satan. I question not
but that the (...), in Ephesians. 6. 12. are no other than (...), Spirits of
Wickedness, which are said to be in high or Heavenly Places, because these
Wicked Spirits are so hardy as to encounter often with the Good Angels; they
labor to wrest the Souls of the Faithful out of their Hands, whilst they are
conducting them through the Ethereal Regions, to the Mansions of Glory in the
highest Heavens. And if they have the Confidence to grapple with those Blessed
Spirits, certainly they will not fail to assault Us weak and sinful Creatures:
Wherefore (as the Apostle adjoins in this Place) we must take unto us the whole
Armor of God, that we may be able to wrestle against these spiritual
Wickednesses, or rather wicked Spirits. So in Rev. 16. 14. Spirits of Devils
are as much as Devilish Spirits, or Evil Angels.

Ninthly, The same Word is used to express an Apparition or Seeming Shape of a
Body without real Corporeity, as in Luke 24. 37. They supposed they had seen a
Spirit. They had a Notion of a Spirit's appearing, though as a Spirit it was
impossible to be seen of it self, for being void of Matter and Quantity, it
could not be the Object of the Bodily Senses: which true Account of a Real
Spirit our Savior gives them in these Words, A Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, ver. 39. i. e. it has nothing Corporeal belonging to its Nature and
Essence.

Which brings me to the next, the Tenth Acception of the Word; and that is
this, it signifies a Spiritual Immaterial Substance, wholly devoid of all
Matter. John 4. 24. God is a Spirit, i. e. he is a Substance in which there is
nothing of Body or Quantity; he is an Intelligent and Thinking Being: which
high Privilege and Excellency no Material thing is capable of.

Lastly, A Breath, a Wind, a Blast, are synonimous with Spirit in the Holy
Style, as in Eccles. 11. 5. Thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, i.
e. of the Wind, as is evident from the former Verse, where the word Ruach is so
^endred. And in Ezekiel. 37. 9. the four Spirits or Winds are the same: and so the
word is used twice more in that Verse. Thus it is in the New Testament, in John
3. 8. The Wind blows where it lists: The word (...), which is generally
translated Spirit in the New Testament, is here translated Wind, and that very
rightly, according to the Interpretation of several of the Ancient Fathers:
Particularly the Air, the Wind or Breath, which is drawn in and sent forth by
the Lungs, has this Denomination: Thus in Job 34. 14. Spirit and Breath are
the same. And those Words in John 19. 30. He gave up the Ghost, or Spirit, are
expressed thus in another Evangelist, (...), he expired, he yielded up his
Breath, Luke 23. 46. To this refers 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume
with the Spirit, i. e. the Breath of his Mouth: which is the same with Isa. 11.
4. With the Breath of his Mouth shall he stay the Wicked. To conclude, the
(...), Spiritus.
three Words in the three Learned Languages for Spirit signify Wind or Breath,
and that in the first and original Sense of them. This alone is the Proper
Signification of the Word: but as for all the other Acceptions of it
beforementioned, they are secondary and improrper. The word Spirit is
improperly applied to the Person, and to the Gifts or Graces of the Holy Ghost:
it is improperly attributed to the Souls of Men and their Faculties, and
Operations: it is improperly spoken of Angels or Devils, or of any of those
other things ^fore-named, except the last. But these are the Different
Acceptions of the Word in the Sacred Writings, according to that Observation
which I have made of it at several times; and perhaps there are some Other
Denotations of this Word, which I have not taken notice of. I instanced in This
(whereas I might have instanced in many more) to let you see how Large and
Extensive the Meaning of some Words in Scripture is, and thereby to give you
some Account of the Difficulty and Perplexity of the Holy Style in some Places,
which yet you see we may render very intelligible and plain by a diligent
Enquiry into, and Comparing those Places where these dubious Words occur.

But still to give you a farther Account of the Different Acceptions of Terms,
I could sufficiently prosecute this, tho I confined my self to the Hebrew Words
of the Old Testament. It would most fully appear that the same words in this
Holy Volume signify Different things. I shall only propound the several
Particulars, and leave them to be distinctly applied upon occasion, by those
that have leisure to do it. It is well known that Vau is a Conjunction
Copulative, but it is of other Use in several Places, which indeed is common to
it in part with the Greek (...) in the Septuagint Version, and in the New
Testament. Sometimes it is Conversive, (as they call it) it changes the Tense:
and sometimes it is Interrrogative: At other times it is Adversative, and is
equivalent to but or although: Not unusually it has the Force of an Adverb of
Time, and is as much as when, then, now. It is also a Comparative Particle, and
is the same with so. Oftentimes it is put for the Relative Pronoun asher,
which. Sometimes it is Emphatical, (as the Greek (...) is) and is of the like
Signification with even in English. Again, it seems to be Redundant, as when it
begins a Chapter or some New Matter, without reference to any thing before.
Thus not only some of the Books of Moses, but those of Ezra and Jonah, begin
with a Vau. But it is certain that this Particle is not merely Expletive here,
as the Learned Jews acknowledge. Lastly, Many times in the Hebrew Style it is
not Copulative, but Disjunctive, and it is accordingly rendered or and nor, by
our Translators, as in Genesis 26. 11. He that touches this Man or his Wife: and
in Exodus 21. 15. He that smites his Father or his Mother: and in Exodus 1. 10.
and in several other Places of Scripture the Hebrews acknowledge that the
Conjunctive Particle is a Disjunctive; as the Aspect of Conjunction in the Sun
is sometimes among Astronomers called Opposition. Thus this Vau is of great
Latitude, which causes Variety of rendering many Places: but those that are very
Observing and Curious (as it was intended by Providence that we should be in
reading the Bible) will soon know how to make a Difference, and to discern the
proper meaning of this Particle. Likewise the Hebrew Pra^positions are of
various Signification, and one is put for another very often, which makes the
Sense not a little difficult. Who sees not that these Praefixes or
Praepositions (...) are differently used, and at one time are applied one way,
and another another? And who knows not that sometimes they seem to be
unnecessary, and to signify nothing at all? though even then without doubt they
are of some Significancy and Use. But to know this aright is not easy: a great
Learning in the Tongue is requisite to discover it.

The Hebrew Verbs also are very Equivocal, and have very Different meanings. In
their diverse Conjugations, they have diverse Significations, whence it proves a
very hard thing sometimes to know which of them is meant. A word in Kal may
bear one sense, in Piel another, in Hiphil a Third, etc. But if we apply our
selves with that Care and Industry to the searching into the Scriptures which
are required of us, we shall either be able to discern which Particular Sense
is meant in the places before us; or where we cannot attain to this, we shall
find that our Ignorance is not prejudicial to us, because the Controversy is
not about any thing which we ought necessarily to know. The Verb Chalal
signifies to begin and to profane, according to its different Conjugations. Of
the former Signification, there are Instances in Genesis 6. 1. Number. 17. 11. and
many other places; Of the latter in Number 30. 3. Ezekiel. 39. 7. and abundance of
other Texts: whence there is some dispute about Genesis 4. 26. some rendering the
word Huchal Men began, others Men profaned. Both the Chaldee Paraphrasts
understand it in the latter sense, and so do the Hebrew Rabins generally. They
take the meaning of the place to ^e this, Then the Name of God was profaned,
then Religion began be corrupted; then they called on God's Name so as to
dishonor and pollute it, viz. by their Oaths and Blasphemies. R. Soloman
Iarchi, Lib. d^ Cultu S^ellar.
Maimonides, and other Jewish Doctors understand it of the rise of Idola^ry:
they tell us, that Moses gives us an account here of the first beginning of the
setting up of New Gods. And from this Text De Di^ Sir. Proleg.
Mr. Seldom, who always adheres to the Circumcised Doctors, endeavors to prove
that Idolatry was in those days. But it is more reasonable to believe that this
was not of so early a Date, and that there was no such Vile Defection at that
time in the World. This is the Judgment of the famous Antiqu. ^^1. c. 4.
Jewish Historian and Antiquary: and most of the Ancient and Learned Fathers of
the Christian Church give their Suffrage to it; and that with good reason,
because if at this time that Generation had been guilty of this most Abominable
Crime, it would certainly have been mentioned, and that plainly: as you see
afterward, that as soon as this Horrid Sin began to be practiced in the World,
the Holy Scriptures record it, and at the same time decry it. But it is not to
be questioned that Impious Cain and his Party corrupted the True Religion and
Worship of God, and labored to bring in Universal Profaneness. Wherefore the
Family of Holy Seth, and Godly Enoch and his Associates zealously resisted
their Attempts, and took a course to suppress the prevailing Corruption.
Accordingly now they began in a peculiar manner to meet together, and to join
their Devotions mor solemnly, and to call upon God. They more especially
exercised themselves in Prayer, that indispensible act of Divine Worship. They
began more signally and openly to be Religious. Thus Men began to call upon the
Name of the Lord, or (as it may be rendered) to call themselves by the Name of
the Lord, to entitle themselves after the Name of Jehovah, as we call our
selves C^ristians after Christ's Name. They professed themselves to be the
People of God, and Worshippers of the Most High. Thus to call on the Name of
the Lord, and to be called by his Name, amount to the same, and signify that at
that particular time the Faithful invoked God, and worshipped and served him in
a more solemn manner than before: and they publicly owned themselves to be the
Sons of God, and the Servants of the Great Jehovah. Thus Men began to call on
God's Name, and thus Aben Ezra and other Modern Rabbis (who have better
considered of it) understand this Text in the plain Sense of it. And it is
likely it had never been otherwise understood, if the ambiguity of the Verb
Chalal had not given occasion; for this in the Conjugation Niphal, signifies to
profane, and to be profaned, but in Hiphil and Hophal (as here) to begin: which
some took no notice of, and so mistook the Sense.

To proceed, the Hebrew word Pathah signifies to enlarge and persuade, whence
there is some difference in the Translation of Genesis 9. 27. God shall enlarge;
others read it, God shall persuade Japheth. But yet if you take either of the
Readings with the following Words, the Sense is not varied, the meaning is the
same; for the whole Verse contains God's Promise, that Iapheth should dwell in
the Tents of Shem; that is, that the Gentiles, who sprang from Iapheth, should
be converted to Judaism, and that both they and the Jews, who came from Shem,
should embrace Christianity; and this enlarging of Iapheth's Borders should be
done by Persuasion, by the mild and gentle Methods of the Spirit, by the
Persuasive Power of the Gospel preached to them. Thus I decide the quarrel
among Grammarians and Critics about the Hebrew word, by joining both the
Senses of it together. And this we shall find to be a good Expedient some other
times. The Hebrew word Chush signifies to make haste, and to be ashamed, says
our Learned Not. Miscell. in Port. Mos.
Pocock; and thence that place in Isa. 28. 16. he that believes shall not make
haste, is otherwise worded in Romans 9. 33. he that believes on him shall not be
ashamed. If there be this Different acception of the Verb, it is impossible
without a Revelation (which we have no reason to expect) to tell which Sense is
peculiarly designed by the Prophet, for we have no Light at all from the
Context to help us. But seeing the Word is capable in this place of both
Significations, let us (as before) unite them together: for it is certain, that
he who believes will neither make haste, nor be ashamed. Kaphatz is claudere,
and also transilire, viz. e loco suo: whence you may read the word in Job 24.
24. either thus, they are shut up, viz. in Destruction, or in the Grave; or,
they are taken out of the way. The Subject Matter will permit both
Translations. The Signification of Rad is both dominari and plangere, plorare:
whence there may be a double Interpretation of that place. Genesis 27. 40. when
thou shall have the Dominion, or when thou shall have Mourned: and both
Sentences are applicable. Sacal is intelligere, and prosperum, felicem esse:
therefore it is hard to determine whether the word in Ios. 1. 7, 8. Isa. 52.
13. Ier. 23. 5. be to be rendered in the first or the second Sense. But neither
in this nor the foregoing Text is any Point of Faith concerned. The meaning of
the word Shanah is not only mutare but errare, and accordingly it is no wonder
that the word in Eccl. 8. 1. be differently rendered, and may be so in some
other places. Dam or damam signifies either to be silent, or to wait and
expect; consequently Psalm. 62. 1. may be rendered my Soul is silent, or waits
on God. Mahar is festinare, and dotare or donare; and therefore in Psalm. 16. 4.
Maharu may be either englished they hasten or they give Gifts, i. e. they bring
Sacrifices and Oblations, viz. to another God. And we may suppose these zealous
Idolaters hastened to bring these Gifts, these Sacrifices, and then both Senses
are reconciled. Palal, according to the different Conjugations it is in,
signifies to pray and to judge: thence Psalm. 106. 30. is differently translated,
viz. Then stood up Phineas and prayed, according to our Old Translation of the
Psalms, or executed Judgment, according to the later Version. We may join both
the Senses, for it is probable this zealous Man joined Prayer with this eminent
act of Justice. Ashar is to walk, and to pronounce blessed, (so discrepant are
the meanings of some words;) whence Prove. 4. 14. may be englished either go not
in the way of Evil Men (as we render it) or, bless not in the way of Evil Men,
i. e. account not, pronounce not thy self Blessed or Happy whilst thou art in
the way of Evil Men. And so Veasher in Prove. 23. 19. may be translated either
dirige or beatifica. Either of these Versions yield us a good notion of the
place. So because of the ambiguity of the word Tizachar, which may be rendered
masculum ^ascetur or memorabitur, that Text Exodus, 34. 19. may be differently
translated. The double Signification of Puach is flare, spirare, and
illaqueari: so that it is doubtful whether this word in Psalm. 12. 5. should be
rendered pusseth at him, or ensnareth him: but the Sense is not impaired by
either. Chalam is not only somniavit, but sanus fuit, convaluit: which makes
the Original Psalm. 126. 1. to be capable of either of these Translations, we
were like to them that dreamed, or we were like to them that are restored to
health: both which Versions admit of a very good Sense.

To instance in some words that have more than two Significations; Seeing the
word Pharang signifies to be abandoned and lost, and likewise to be stripped
naked, and moreover to rebel, as also to be idle, it is not to be wondered at
that a Clause in Prove. 29. 18. be rendered by our English Translators the People
perishes, by others (as Coeceius) the People is made naked, by some (as Arias
Montanus) the People is rebellious, and by others (as Pagnin) the People are,
idle. In such variety of Significations, we cannot be Certain which to take
sometimes. It is sufficient that we choose that which we find most agreeable to
the place. Batzar in Kal is vindemiavit, in Niphil abruptus est, sublatus est;
in Piel munivit, and arduum fecit. In these several Significations it is taken
in Scripture, as it were easy to show out of the Hebrew Concordances. Bagnar
according to its different Conjugations signifies to burn, to feed, to be
furious, to be stupid or brutish, to take away or remove; and this cannot but
occasion some difference in Translations. The Verb Pakad, and the Nouns that
are derived from it, are of very dubious Signification in Scripture: which must
needs cause sometimes a disagreement among Interpreters. Aman in Kal is
nutrivit, educavit; in Niphal, verax fuit, fidelis fuit; in Hipbil, credidit:
there are diverse Examples of this in the Bible. Shur is canere, intueri, munera
defer: from which triple Signification of the Word, I could show that some
Texts are capable of different Versions. Tsalal is obumbrari, opacum reddi,
Ezekiel. 31. 3. mergi, Ex. 15. 10. tinnire, palpitare, 1 Samuel 3. 11. Hab. 3. 16.
Sacan is wonderfully diversified as to its Significations: Sometimes it
signifies to help or profit, sometimes to attempt or make trial, sometimes to
accustom one's self to a thing: whence there may arise some difference in
translating some places; but in none of these is any Grand Point of Religion
concerned. Nasa has no less than Eight Significations in the Bible, as far,
portare: auferre, tollere: elevare, attollere: accipere: honorare: consumere,
comburere: condonare, remittere: pronuntaire, nominare, jurare. And many See at
the End of the Book.
Others Verbs there are in this Language which have more Senses than one, and
therefore those Texts where they occur, are not so easy as others to
understand. There is a great variety of Significations in the Greek Verbs, some
whereof (as the Verb It has 4 Significations, urere, discere, dividere,
convivic excipere.
(...)) have strangely discrepant meanings, but they are not to be compared
with the Hebrew ones, whether you respect the Multiplicity of them, or the
Unlikeness and Inconsistency of the Significations among themselves. This
therefore must be assigned as one reason why the Sense of some Texts is dubious.

As it is with the Hebrew Verbs, so it is with the Nouns; there are many of
them that have different Senses, and those such as have no Agreement or
Affinity one with another, which oftentimes occasions Diversity of Readings in
those Places where they are found. Not but that the Hebrew Tongue is copious,
as is evident from that Variety of Names which is for one thing. There are
seven Words for Gold, as St. Ierom long since observed, Zahab, Phez or Paz or
Ophaz, Charutz, Kethem, Ophir, Baser, Segor; though some think that Kethem is
the more general Name, and the rest are several kinds of Gold. There are six
Words to express Giants, as Nephilim, (from falling or falling on) Emim,
(because they are Terrible) Gibborim, (from their Strength) Anakim, Zamzummim,
Rephaim. There are as many Words to signify a Lion, as Lexicon. ex Talmud. in
Sanhedrim.
Buxtorf reckons them up distinctly, with the Places of Scripture where they
occur: Yea, Mercer adds a seventh. A Son in Hebrew is Ben, Nin, Manon, Bar,
though indeed this last be rather a Chaldee or Syriac Word. Anger has these
Denominations, Aph, Charon, Zagnaph, Chagnas. Sleep is either Tarmedah, or
Shenah, or Tenumah. Three Words there are for the Sun, as Cheres, Shemeth,
Chammah; and as many for the Earth, Eretz, Tebel, Adamah. A Virgin is called
Almah, (or Gnalma^) Naarah, Bethulah. To fear is expressed by three Verbs, viz.
Gur, Iare, Pachad. The same Hill is called Horeb and Sinai: and Zion and Hermon
are two Names of another Hill: but of these afterward. Thus the Hebrew Tongue
has many Synonimous Words.

But that which is more usual and remarkable (and which we are concerned to
observe at present) is that one Name or Word serves for Different. things,
which often renders the Interpretation doubtful. Thus Job 4. 18. we read thus,
his Angels he charged with Folly; but it may as well be read, be put Light into
his Angels; and so Tremellius and the Gallick Version have it: for [ Toholah]
(which is the Word here used, and comes from a Hebrew Verb, which sometimes
signifies to shine) denotes both Light and Folly. And accordingly Expositors
(to whom I refer the Reader) labor to defend either of these Senses. But so
far as I can discern the Meaning of this Place, the Hebrew Word has a third
Signification, which seems to be peculiarly designed here: For this Noun is
derived from Halal, the primitive and known Signification of which is laudare,
gloriari, and so Tohalah is as much as Tehillah, laus, gloriatio. Accordingly I
render the foresaid Clause thus, Nec in Angelis suis ponet laudem seu
gloriationem: for the Vau in this Place (as in several others, which I have
hinted before) is Disjunctive, and is the same with nec. And you see the Words
run this way, i. e. in the Negative, He puts no Trust in his Servants, nor
does he put Praise or Boasting in his Angels; i. e. those Glorious Spirits who
now inhabit the Celestial Regions, (for I do not think, as some do, that the
Fallen Angels are here spoken of) even these in comparison of God, who is
infinitely pure and perfect, are blameworthy and guilty. So that this rendering
of the Words amounts to the Sense of the English Version: but I do not see any
Reason to translate the Hebrew word Folly; for the Verb from whence it comes
directs us not to it, and we have Instance of it in Scripture. It is well known
that the Noun Dabar signifies both a Thing or Action, and a Word, and for that
reason the rendering of it in Scripture is sometimes uncertain. The like may be
observed of (...) in the Greek Testament, which is applicable to Actions as
well as Words, in imitation of the use of the word Dabar. But both in the Old
and New Testament the Matter spoken of will direct us sufficiently unto the
peculiar Acception of the Word. Shephattaim are either the Lots and Portions of
a Man's Life, and especially his ill Lot and Misfortune; or the Word signifies
those Pots, some say those Ranges which are used about the Fire, and are
covered over with Dust and Smoke. Accordingly Psalm. 68. 13. may be translated
thus, Though ye have lain in those evil Lots, i. e. though you have been in
great Distress: or thus, Though ye have lain among the Pots or Ranges, which
amounts to the same Sense with the former, and expresses the Distressed
Condition of the Persons spoken of. The word Belial (which is often used) is of
a double Signification; for some derive it form Boli, non, and Guol, jugum, and
then it denotes one without a Yoke, that is, impatient of Discipline, one that
casts off all Laws and Restraints. Others deduce it from Beli, non, and Iagnal,
profuit; so that it should regularly be Belijagnal, but the middle Letter being
struck out, it is Belial (which way of Contraction is not unusual, as we see in
the word Hosanna, corruptly from Hosignanna: so Path is a Contraction of
Pathah, frangere; Rab of Rabab, multiplicari; El of Ejal, potentia; Jordan of
Ieordan, as some think from Ieor a River, and Dan a City; because this River
had its Rise about that Place: and there are almost innumerable Instances of
this Abbreviating of Words, both in the Bible and See Buxtorf de Abbreviat.
Hebraic.
other Hebrew Authors.) If we thus shorten the word Belial, it is equivalent to
Inutilis, homo nequam, nullius frugls: but both this and the former Derivation
of the Word acquaint us, that it is well applied in the Scripture to very Lewd
and Profligate Persons; yea, even to the Internal Spirit himself.

Marphe in Prove. 14. 30. may be derived either from Rapha, sanare, or Raphah,
lenem esse, and accordingly is both sanitas and lenitas; and so that Text may
be read, a sound Heart, (a Healthful Constitution) or a mild Heart (a placid
and sedate Temper) is the Life of the Flesh, is a Procurer of long Life to a
Man. Both the Senses are coincident. Netseach signifies Victory and Eternity,
(as the Greek (...) also does) and therefore Isa. 25. 8. admits of this double
Version, He will swallow up Death in Victory, (he will conquer and bafflle its
Force) or in Eternity, i. e. Death shall be absorp'd, destroyed for ever. The
Sense is alike. The Signification of Bochal is probatio and munitio: thence
Eben bochal, Isa. 28. 16. may be rendered a tried Stone, or Stone of Trial, or
else a Stone of Fortification. Migreshoth may denote either Suburbs (as the
word in the singular Number Migrash often does in Scripture) or Waves: and
therefore in Ezekiel. 27. 28. we cannot certainly tell which Word to render it by,
nor is it material whether we do or no. Whether Hamon, Ezekiel. 7. 11. should be
translated a Tumult or a Multitude, is not to be decided; because if the Word
comes from Hamah, tumultuatus est, then the former Version is the genuine one;
but if from Haman, multiplicavit, then the latter. Whether Chajil, Ezekiel. 37.
10. is to be translated an Army (as we english it) or People, cannot be
determined, because the Word signifies both in several Places of Scripture.
Because Zaba denotes both a determinate Time, and military Order, that of Job
7. 1. may be rendered either thus, Is there not an appointed time to Man? or, Is
there not a Warfare to Man? And so in chapter 14. 14. you may read it, All the Days
of my appointed Time, or, all the Days of my Warfare. In all these Places there
is no point of Religion endangered, if you take the Words in either Sense.
There must needs be a double Reading in Josh. 11. 20. because the word
Techinnah signifies Grace or Favor, and likewise Prayer or Supplication: so
that we may translate it either that there might be no Favor for them, or that
there might be no Supplication for them. Both which Senses may be united thus,
that there might be none to pray for Grace and Favor for them. And so both the
Translations meet. There is a great deal of Difference between the Rain fills
the Pools, and the Teacher is filled or covered with Blessings; and yet Psalm.
84. 6. (the latter part of the Verse) may be read either of these ways, because
the word Moreh is pluvia and doctor, and Beracoth is both piscin^ and
benedictiones. These two have but little Affinity, [ he has given you the
former Rain moderately] and [ he has given you a Teacher of Righteousness:]
and yet the Hebrew Words in Joel 2. 23. are capable of being rendered either
ways, and accordingly our English Translators embrace the former, and the
Vulgar Latin the latter Sense. The Reason is, because Moreh is a Teacher and
Rain. The word beged is perfidia, Ier. 12. 1. and also vestis in above a
hundred Places. (...) is an Isle, Job 22. 30. a Region or Province, Isa. 20. 6.
a Bird or other Animal that frequents Islands, Isa. 13. 22. Cir signifies a
Laver, Exodus 20. 18. a Hearth, Zech. 12. 6. a Scaffold or Pulpit, 2 Chronicles. 6.
13. Chajah is the Soul, Life, a Beast, a Company, a Village: wherefore it is no
wonder that the Word in these Places admits of different Constructions, Psalm.
68. 30. Psalm. 74. 19. Isa. 57. 10. but the Scope of the Texts will conduct a
diligent Enquirer to the proper Denotation of the Word in each Place. Pagnam is
a Blow, a Stroke, Judge. 5. 28. a Foot or Footstep, Psalm. 85. 14. an Anvil, Isa.
41. 7. and moreover it has the Force of the Latin vice, or hac vice, this
once, 1 Samuel 26. 8.

How vastly different are the Senses of the Word Tsir? viz. Grief, Isa. 13. 8.
a Hinge, Prove. 26. 14. an Ambassador or Messenger, Prove. 25. 13. Idols, Isa.
45. 16. So the Word which we translate Frost, Psalm. 78. 47. is of a large
Import, and signifies not only Frost, but vehement Hail, and therefore in the
Margin of our Bibles is rendered great Hailstones. Avenarius renders it Thunder
or Thunderbolts: R. Chasen understands by it not a Meteor, but an Infect, and
reads the Place thus, He destroyed their Sycomore Trees with the Locusts. Tzitz
has five distinct Rendrings, a Flower, Isa. 28. 1. a Feather or Quill, or
Wing, Jer. 48. 9. a Plate, Exodus 28. 36. a Fringe, Numb. 15. 38. a Lock of
Hair, Ezekiel. 8. 3. The words Bad and Baddim signify Linen or Linen Cloth, Ezekiel.
9. 3. Branches, Ezekiel. 19. 14. Bars, Exodus 27. 6. Greatness or Strength, Job 18.
13. Members or Ioints, Job 41. 3. Liars and Lies, Jer. 50. 36. Isa. 44. 25. Job
11. 3. Here are six different Senses of one Word, and there is not any Affinity
or Resemblance between any of them. Basar (to which answers (...) in the Greek)
is subject, in the Sacred Writings, to as great a Multiplicity of Meanings, as
might easily be proved. And to conclude, the word Iad is of a vast Latitude; I
know none that equals it as to its wonderful Variety of Senses. It is to be
understood and applied at least twenty several ways in the Old Testament: but
yet, though it is sometimes difficult, it is never impossible to distinguish
the Senses, These Words and many See at the end of the Book.
more are Proofs of what I at first asserted, that there is a great Number of
Words in the Scripture of Different Significations, and that the Hebrew Tongue
especially abounds with such. For the Hebrews have but few Words, very few in
comparison of what there are in other Languages; but they make their small
Stock go as far as it can, by making one Word serve for diverse things, so that
oftentimes the subject Matter must determine the Signification. I need say no
more. Look but into the Margins of the English Bible, and there you may be
fully satisfied from the Diversity of rendering the Texts, that many Nouns as
well as Verbs have different and unlike Meanings, which we must needs apprehend
to be the Cause why some Places are Obscure and Difficult.

CHAP. VIII.
Many Hebrew Nouns whereby the several sorts of Brute Animals are signified,
admit of different Interpretations, which is one Reason why some Places of
Scripture are obscure and difficult. The Great Fish, Ion. 1. 17. which devoured
Jonas, was a Whale, properly and strictly so called: but perhaps the Belly of
this Fish is not to be understood in a strict Sense of the Abdomen or Iower
Venture, but of the Wide and Capacious Mouth of that Animal. The proper Names of
some Birds and Insects are ambiguous. The Author's particular Opinion
concerning Kirjonim, 2 Kings 6. 25. the Doves Dung that was sold at so dear a
rate at the Siege of Samaria. What the Locusts were that John Baptist fed on in
the Wilderness. The Names of Flowers, Trees, Plants, mentioned in the Bible,
are somewhat uncertain. So are the Words for Minerals, Precious Stones, Musical
Instruments. Yet this is so far from being a Blemish to the Sacred Writings,
that it is a Commendation of them. The Hebrew Measures (whether of Longitude or
Capacity) are another Instance of the Difficulty which arises from our being
ignorant of the exact Significations of some Words in the Bible. The Words
whereby the Hebrew Weights are expressed are something dubious. And so are
those whereby the Jewish Coins are denoted. Likewise there is Uncertainty in
the Greek and Roman Coins mentioned in the New Testament.

IN farther Prosecution of this I will observe, that many Hebrew Words which
signify Brute Animals (whether four-footed Beasts and other Creatures on the
Earth, or Fishes, and Birds, and Insects) admit of Different Interpretations,
and may be applied to Animals of diverse kinds. It is acknowledged both by the
Ancient and Modern Jews themselves, that they have no certain Account of the
Proper Names of diverse of those Animals which are mentioned in the 11th Chapter
of Leviticus, some of which were forbidden, others allowed to be eaten by that
People. When they come to speak of some of them particularly, they exceedingly
disagree about them, and variously determine what they are. Sus is the known
Hebrew Word for a Horse, and yet it is the Word for a Crane in Isa. 38. 14.
Reim or Reem, which we translate Unicorn, Numb. 23. 22. Job 39. 9. and Psalm.
92. 10. and in other Places, is thought by Vatablus, Munster, Drusius.
some to be the Mono^eros or Indian Ass: but De Animal. sacr. l. 1.
Bochart dislikes it, and with great Industry endeavors to prove it to be
another Beast, viz. an Oryx, a kind of wild Goat, with very sharp Horns. It is
rendered a wild Bull, Deuteronomy. 33. 17. in our Margin, because perhaps the Text
speaks of Horns in the Plural, which our Translators thought could not be
attributed to the Unicorn. But when we read there of the Horns' of an Unicorn,
(for so' it is in the Original, though it is translated Unicorns) why may we not
say that the Plural is put for the Singular, as is very usual? There is an
Unicorn properly so called, if we may credit Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 20. l.
18. c. 21. Solin. cap. 43, and 65. Strabo. Geogr. lib. 15. Aelian. Hist.
Animal. l. 6. c. 20.
Ancient Writers; and such an one was seen in the last Age, if Faith is to be
given to Sc^liger. Exercit. 205.
Modern Writers; An Unicorn, says a late Traveller, is an African Creature,
only known in the Province of Agaos, in the Kingdom of Damotes: though perhaps
heretofore it wa no Stranger in other Parts. I will not dispute here how the
Unicorn and Rhinoceros differ, or whether they do at all, which Mr. Ray denies,
and thinks he has sufficient Ground for it from Modern Voyages: but it is
enough for our understanding the foresaid Texts of Scripture, that it is the
Name of a sierce strong Animal, famous for its Horn or Horns. If it be the
Rhinoceros, its Horn arises out of its Trunk, and turns up: if it be the
Monoceros or Unicorn, properly so called, the Horn is in the middle of its
Forehead, and exalted. St. Ierom sometimes renders it an Unicorn, and sometimes
a Rhinoceros, and we may suppose it to be either.

Very strangely different are the Significations which are assigned of that
Name, which the Wise Man gives to an Animal that he commends for its going
well, calling it Zarzir Motnajim, Prove. 30. 31. which in express Terms in
English is girt in or about the Loins; which our Translators render a
Greyhound, according to R. David, and several other Hebrew Writers, who affirm
that this Creature is here meant, because it is slender in the Loins, girt up
as 'twere in those Parts. According to the Chaldee Paraphrase and Vulgar Latin,
it is a Cock: according to R. Levi, a Leopard, that being a Beast that is
slender and strong in the Loins. R. Aben Ezra, and some others, think it to be
a Be, that brisk and nimble Insect; and some fancy it to be a Starling. But
Iunius and Tremellius and Buxtorf, who render it a Horse, seem to me to bid
fairest for Truth here. Nay indeed, what fitter Epithet could there be to
express this Animal than this Zarzir Motnajim, Girt about the Loins? It is a
Creature of great Use and Service in Journeying, (...) therefore oftentimes
girt for that purpose: it is ^generous Beast, and useful in War, and therefore
^ girt for riding. Which I take to be the meaning of a Horse tied (for it is in
the Singular in the Hebrew) 2 Kings 7. 10. i. e. girt for the Battle, for the^
ext speaks of War-horses. And then, going well (for which it has particular
Commendation here) is the known Property of this Animal for the most part: so
that without any straining, we must acknowledge this to the Periphrasis of a
Horse, a Girted Animal. Iacmur in Deuteronomy. 14. 5. we translate a Fallow-Deer; but
according to the LXX, St. Ierom, and Pagnin, it is a Buffle or Wild Ox: it is
a kind of a Goat, say R. Kimchi, and Jonah, and Bochart: it is a Wild Ass,
says Forster. But what particular Species of Beasts it is, perhaps no Man can
exactly tell, nor is it at all necessary that he should Our own Translation,
which agrees with that o^ Iunius and Tremellius, seems to be most eligible If
Bochart may be credited, Cats (wild ones he means, not those that are tame) are
spoken of i^ Scripture: for though it is difficult, i^ not impossible, to
determine what sort of Creatures is meant by Zijim and Ijim, Isa. 13. 21. Chapter
34. 24. Jer^ 50. 39. yet he by the former will needs have cati, feles, to be
understood: but truly he might as well have assigned any other Wild Animal.
Koach Lev. 11. 30. is translated a Chameleon, according to the Septuagint and
Latin Version, but it is a ^izard according to Pagnin and Bochart. Et nova
velocem cingula laedat Eq^^^. Ovid de Remed.
Some think it is a Weesel, others a Frog or Toad, some a Snail: and thus they
run divisions, when perhaps there is no ground for any of them; for the Name of
Animals are very uncertain, and dubious, and therefore it is great folly to be
very solicitous, especially to be peremptory about them. Moses's Rod was turned
into a Crocodile, says the Learned Lightfoot, for he holds, that that is the
meaning of Nacash in Exodus 4. 3. The Leviathan described in Job 41. is a Whale,
say Interpreters generally, and very truly, I think: but Pagnin holds it to be
a Sea-Serpent or Dragon: and Beza, and Bochart, and Deodate, say it is a
Crocodile. And Behemoth is joined with the Leviathan, because (as one of these
Writers thinks) it was its Fellow-fish and Companion in the same place. If the
former was the Crocodile of Nile, this is (says he) the Hippotamus or
River-Horse there. But if we peruse the Description given of this Creature, we
shall find that it belongs rather, if not only, to a Land-Animal; and therefore
I take the part of the Old Interpreters, who by Behemoth understand the
Elephant, the greatest that we know of Terrestrial Beasts. If it be not that
Creature, it is not now known what it is.

A Whale is generally believed to be that Dag gadol. Jon. 1. 17.
Great Fish which swallowed up Jonas: but the Mr. Bochart, De Cero Jonae.
Author I last named, and Aldrovandus and some others hold that it was a
Carcharias or Lamia, a sort of Dogfish which has a vast Gullet, so that a Man
may pass through it, and accordingly Men have been often found in the Bellies
of this kind of Fish. But as for the Whale, it has (as all Creatures that have
Lungs, and do breathe) a narrow Gullet, (...) a strait passage is more
convenient to let out the Air, and draw it in with greater force and vehemence;
and therefore (say they) this could not be the Fish that swallowed Jonas. That
this is the particular Make of this Fish I do not deny, for Contra Cardan. de
balaenis.
Scaliger affirms upon his own Inspection and Knowledge that a Whale has a
narrow Throat, scarce half a Foot in compass. Aldrovandus and other Natural
Historians attest the straitness of these Parts. But as for the Inference which
these Persons draw from such Premises, I cannot admit of it. Nor could these
Learned Men have done so, if they had considered that Ionas's being swallowed
up by this Fish was an Extraordinary thing, and such as was in the way of a
Miracle. It is said, the Lord prepared this Fish to swallow up Jonas, ver. 7.
God in an unusual and wonderful manner effected the Deliverance of the Prophet,
by appointing this Whale to receive him, and rescue him from the raging Sea. He
fitted and prepared him to take him down into the Caverns of his Belly (...) he
so framed his narrow Throat that he was able to swallow him down whole. The
Parts were so stretched at that time, that a greater than Jonas might have
passed through. There is no reason then to object the Natural Frame and Make of
the Fish. But we may rest in the Septuagint's rendering the word, who expressly
call it (...), a Whale; and especially we may be satisfied with our Savior's
Determination, who has limited the Signification of those words [a great
Fish,] and has expressly told us that Jonas was in the Whale's Belly, Mat. 12.
40. Though the Book of Jonas mentions not a Whale, yet here we (...) ^ssured
that it was that very Fish which was made the happy means of the Prophet's
preservation. And yet here may be some Uncertainty still, for a Whale perhaps
may not be taken strictly in this place, but may only signify one of the
Cetaceous Animals, among which those are reckoned that have Lungs, as the
Dolphin, Seal or Sea-calf, Porpus, Pristis or Saw-fish, Tuny. We may hold that
some other Fish of the Nature of a Whale, but not of that particular Frame as
to its Throat, is here meant, and so the former Objection vanishes.

But I think there is a way to reconcile this, and yet at the same time we may
assert, that our Savior means a Whale properly and strictly so called; that
is, as it is credibly said to be, a Great Fish with a Little Throat, so little
besure that a Man cannot have any passage through it, and consequently that
Jonas had not. If I may be allowed to offer my particular Opinion, I conceive
that when it is said by the Prophet Jonas concerning himself, that he was in the
Belly of the Fish, Chap. 1. 17. and when it is said by our Savior that he was
in the Belly of the Whale, Mat. 12. 40. the word [Belly] is not to be
understood in a strict Sense. The (...) in visceribus.
Hebrew word in the former place is of a Large Extent, and denotes rather the
Bowels than the Belly; i. e. it is oftentimes in the Sacred Writ understood of
the Inward and Unseen Parts of any thing, which are called the Bowels. The
Greek word in the latter place is not (...) but (...), which is of a larger
Signification, and imports any middle, or any inward and deep place, as in John
7. 38. especially some remote hollow place; and so here we are to understand by
it some hollow part (...) the Fish's Body, and consequently it may denote to us
not the Lowest Ventricle, which is usually called the Belly, but the Mouth,
which is a Concave Part of the Body. And this is here most Emphatically applied
to this particular Fish, because (as we are certainly informed) it has a
Mouth, (by which I mean all that large place on both sides and in the middle
between the Lips or outward Mouth and the Passage down the Throat, all which is
of a most Wonderful and Prodigious Magnitude) it has, I say, a Mouth of so
vast a Capacity, that it may rather be called a Belly than a Mouth, and
therefore is not unfitly termed so, although in propriety and strictness of
Speaking, it is not the Belly, but the Mouth. We must take notice then, that
this is the Language and Idiom of the Sacred Writers: So Beten, venture,
signifies not always the Belly properly, but the inward Parts in general, as in
1 Kings 7. 20. and Prove. 22. 18. which latter we translate within thee. Kereb
likewise, which is another word for venture, is usually rendered medium, intimum,
intestinum: the word is used as -- (...). Hom. Od. ^
(...) among the Greeks, and as Vmbilicus among the Latins, for the middle of
any thing. That Belly or Bowels are used to signify what is inmost and hidden,
is clear from Psalm. 40. 8. Thy Law is in the midst of my Bowels, shut up and
reposited within my Heart: and so in Job 15. 35. Chapter 30. 27. The Belly in the
Style of Scripture, and in other Writers, is usually mentioned to express any
Inward Receptacle or Place to receive and contain a thing. Among Anatomists it
has been made use of in the latitude of the word, to signify not only the
(...) properly so called, but the other Cavities of the Body, the Head and
Breast. So in that Comparison which our Savior made between himself and Jonas,
you may remember that Man. 12. 40.
the Heart of the Earth answers to the Whale's Belly, to let you see that both
these words (...) and (...) are the same, and signify some dark and remote
Receptacles, where Things or Persons are laid up for a time. As Jonas was in
the Whale's Belly, so Christ was in the Heart of the Earth; to acquaint us that
as the word Heart is not understood here strictly and properly, so neither is
the word (...), as it signifies Belly. The Heart of the Earth was the Grave or
Sepulcher where our Savior lay, though 'twas not strictly speaking the Heart:
so by the Whale's Belly is meant the place where Jonas was held and imprisoned,
though it was not the Belly in the strictness of Speech. But as the Grave is to
the Earth, so is the Mouth to the Body: our Savior was hidden in the one,
Jonas was preserved in the other, viz. in the Mouth of the Whale. And the word
(...) is used in Job. 7. 38. to denote, not properly the Belly, (though we
render it so) but the inward Part of Man. Out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of
living Water, alluding to the Cisterns or Vessels of Stone, (...), called by
the Seventy Interpreters, Prove. 5. 15. out of which by certain Pipes or Cocks
they let out the Water in abundance. And further it might be observed, that
those words which express these inward and invisible Parts have their
Denomination from the hollowness of them, as Kebah, ventriculus, is from Kab or
Kabab, cavavit: and so Kobah (of the same Signification) is from the same Root,
and is so named from its Cavity, and that for this reason, because these inward
Vessels and Parts are able to hold and contain things, and also are Channels
and Passages to convey and transmit them. These are properly (...), and are
called so from their hollowness and capaciousness. Thus in the Matter before
us, though we do not restrain (...) to the Abdomen, the Belly strictly so
named, yet we take it in its proper and genuine Denotation, that is, as it
signifies that Vast and Wide Cavity of the Whale which Jonas was taken into; in
this (...), in this Capacious Hollowness was the distressed Prophet lodged
three Days and three Nights. In this Belly of Hell (for so likewise he calls
it, Chap. 2. 2. and by this Phrase we further see that the word (...), which is
the word here used by the Septuagint, is not properly taken, but signifies some
Dark Invisible Receptacle) he was both tormented and preserved: and at last, as
we read in the Sequel of this History, when the Lord spoke unto this Fish, it
vomited out Jonah on the dry Land, Chap. 2. 10. which (let me observe to you)
further intimates to us the truth of this Notion which I have presented to you,
for Vomiting is an Emission of something, not out of the Belly, but out of the
Mouth or Stomach. If Jonas had been in the Belly or Entrails of the Fish, he
had been emitted another way, not by Vomition. Thus I have briefly given my
Conceptions of that Text of Scripture, and from the whole it is evident that it
speaks of a Whale properly so called, (for our Blessed Savior positively and
expressly determines it to be such) and of the Vast Cavity of its Mouth and
Iaws, which in respect of their huge extension, may deserve the Name of a
Belly, rather than of those Parts. I know that the Almighty God, who made the
Creature at first, could afterward have framed and disposed its Throat, or any
other Passages, as he pleased: With the greatest Reverence I acknowledge this.
But if we can solve the Works of God and his Providence in a natural way, I
think we are obliged to do it, and at the same time we adore the God of Nature.
Although it must be confessed, that if we respect the Power and Sovereignty,
the Providence and Will of God, it might be the Belly of this Fish properly so
denominated, which was the Place where the Fugitive Prophet was lodged; yet
seeing Naturalists have given us this Account of the Whale, that the Passage of
its Throat is so strait, that a Man's Body cannot be conveyed through it; and
seeing we are not sure that God altered the Frame and Disposition of this Part;
and seeing likewise that the Word which the Holy Ghost uses is capable of a
double Sense, we may be invited on these Considerations to think that it was
the Vast Mouth of this Fish which is here meant. And truly the Wonderfulness of
the Occurrence is not at all hereby abated; for to preserve Jonas so long in
the Whale's Mouth, was as great a Miracle (if we consider all things) as to
preserve him in its Lower Belly.

Then as for Fowls, Birds, and Insects, there is a great Ambiguity in the Old
Testament, as to some of these. Tsippor is a common Name of all Fowls, as in
Psalm. 104. 17. and other Places: but sometimes it is more particularly taken
for a Sparrow, as in Psalm. 102. 7. So in Psalm. 84. 3. some certain Species of
Birds are signified, because the Swallow is mentioned in the same Place. Kore,
1 Samuel 26. 20. which we translate a Partridg, is a Night-raven, according to
the 70 Interpreters: It is a Woodcock or Snipe, says Bochart. de Anim. Sacr.
One whom I have often quoted. Ajah, Lev. 11. 14. Job 28: 7. is rendered in the
Septuagint and Vulgar Version, and in ours, a Vulture: but according to Arias
Montanus, it is varia a vis, i. e. a Pie: according to others it is a Crow; and
it is thought by others to be a Kite: But we need not be solicitous to know
which of these it is, for it is likely we can never attain it; or if we could,
it would be of little Advantage to us, for the Sense of these Places of
Scripture depends not on our knowing what sort of Animal this or that is.
Deror, Psalm. 84. 4. is in our English Translation a Swallow, but according to
the Greek and Latin it is a Turtle, and so Bochart endeavors to prove. Kippod,
which we translate a Bittern, Isa. 14. 23. chapter 34. 11. is according to R.
Solomon a kind of Owl; but Luther will have it to be an Eagle. Yea, some rank
it among other Species of Animals, for according to the Vulgar Latin and Pagnin
it is a Hedg-hog; according to R. Kimchi and R. Joseph, a Snail; according to
others, a Beaver. Avenarius comes nearest the Truth, who tells us it is the
Name of a Fowl unknown to us in these Parts. But this we are certain of, (and
we need not look any further) that it is some Fowl or other Animal that
frequents desert and desolate Places, because of these the Text speaks. So when
the Psalmist complains that he is like a Pelican in the Wilderness, and like an
Owl of the Desert, Psalm. 102. 6. we need not be inquisitive whether the former
word Kaath be rightly translated, or whether it should be rendered a Bittern, as
it is by Ierom and Bochart; nor are we to care whether that latter word Kos
certainly signifies that flying Creature which we call an Owl, or whether it be
an Houp, (...), Vpupa, according to Symmachus; or a Night-raven, according to
the Seventy, and St. Ierom; or a Falcon, according to R. Solomon and Pagnin; or
a Pelican, according to some others. I. R. Kimchi was in the right, who says,
it is the Name of some unclean Bird not known to us. But this is enough, that it
was some Solitary Creature of the feathered Order that kept in remote Places,
because it is said to be an Inhabitant of the Desert; and so it is used here to
set forth the present Solitude and mournful Condition of the Psalmist.
Chasidah, which we translate a Stork, Psalm. 104. 17. and Ier. 8. 7. is,
according to St. Ierom, a Kite: but the same Word in Job 39. 13, is rendered by
us an Ostrich; and so it is in the Vulgar Latin; which shows the Ambiguity of
the Word. Tachmas, Lev. 11. 16. is translated by us a Night-hawk; by the
Targum, the Seventy, St. Ierom, and Arias Montanus, an Owl; by the Arabic and
Avenarius, a Swallow; by Bochart, an Ostrich. The like Disagreement is there in
rendering the word Tinshemeth, Lev. 11. 18. which we english, a Swan; but
according to Arias Montanus, it is Porphyrio; according to R. Solomon, a Bat;
according to Bochart, a Chameleon: Some say it is a Bittern; others an Owl;
others a Daw. And to let you see the Uncertainty of the Word, in the very same
Chapter it is reckoned among the Creeping things, ver. 30. and is rendre^ a
Mole. To add one more, viz. Anaphah, which we render a Heron, Lev. 11. 19. but
according to the Seventy it is (...); according to the Vulgar Latin Charadrios,
i. e. a Sea-bird, called by some Icterus. It is a Kite, say the Talmudists and
Targum. It is a Ring-dove, a Pie, a Lapwing, a lesser sort of Owl, say others.
It is a Bird called (...), Anopaea, (which perhaps comes from Anapha) says
Bochant. It is probable that this and several others of those Fowls (as well as
other Animals) mentioned in Lev. 11. and Deuteronomy. 14. are not exactly rendered; but
we cannot tell when they are, or when they are not. And I do not see there can
be any help for this in the World, unless you can suppose that some Critics
are infallible. This only we can do; after a diligent and impartial Search into
the different Opinions concerning the Words, we may acquiesce in that which we
think to be most reasonable.

Here I will insert something concerning that Passage in 2 Kings 6. 25. The
fourth part of a Cab of Doves Dung was sold for five pieces of Silver; which
refers to a known sort of Fowls, but has been much controverted by Critical
Expositors. What is the true Import here of Kirjonim (which we translate Doves
Dung) is not easy to determine; for some derive the former part of the Word
from Charar, siccitas, calor, exustio: and others from Chur, which has various
Significations, as Whiteness, a Hole, or hollow Place, a Paunch, Dung. And the
Talmudists read it Dibjonim, because forsooth it is a modester Word. Some think
it to be Dung, properly so called, the Execrement of Pigeons; but then they
much differ about the Use of it. Rabbi Jonas, one of the chiefest of the Jewish
Doctors, has this Concelt, that in the time of the Siege they used Doves Dung
dried to kindle their Fires: this served the People of Samaria instead of
Sticks, which now were not to be had. But this seems to be an extravagant
Fancy, because (besides that it is questionable whether this could be made
serviceable for Fuel) the Text speaks of Scarcity and want of Food, not of
Firing. The Famine was so great, that not only an Ass's Head, but this Kirjonim
(which was some Edible) was sold at an excessive rate. Others say they used
Doves Dung, in the time of the Siege, instead of Salt. But this is as
groundless as the former Opinion, for (not to dispute whether the thing be
practicable or no) Persons are not solicitous in a raging Famine for Salt, but
for Meat. Another tells us, that it was to dung their Fields within the City,
that they might have a Harvest at home the ensuing Year, if the Siege should
last; and they were not permitted to go abroad. But this is no ways credible,
for either they had much Ground within the City for that purpose, or they had
but little. The former is wholly improbable, for in frequented Cities (such as
Samaria was) their Habitations take up the greatest part of the Place; so that
there is but little left for Arable. And if there was but little, it was not
worth their Time and Pains to bestow Compost upon it. Moreover, it is reasonable
to think that those distressed fami^h'd Creatures were eager about relieving
their present Wants, but were not concerned to provide against the ensuing
Year. Another of the Jewish Rabbis understands this Kirjonim, of that which
was contained in the Crop or Maw of Pigeons, the Corn they had picked up in the
Fields; this (says he) was taken out when they returned back, and was eaten
for want of better Food. But this Rabbi forgot that when the Famine was so
grievous and pressing, it is likely the Pigeons were seized on in their Houses,
and not suffered to fly abroad. Or supposing this latter, yet we are to
remember that the Fields about Samaria were stripped of their Corn at that
time, and therefore those Animals could not return home with that Prey. Others
think the Guts and Entrails of Pigeons are meant here by this Word; but why
they rather than the Garbage of Other Fowls should be mentioned, is not
accountable. Monsieur Bochart, the Great Goliah-Critick, tells us, it signifies
none of these, but he gives us an Invention of his own, viz. that this Kirjonim
is a sort of Cicer, a Coarse kind of Food, but such as the Jews sometimes did
eat. it is the same, he says, with Kali, in 2 Samuel 17. 28. and this is the
Name that the Arabians give it. But this Learned Author may receive a
Confutation from that Text it self; for if this Kali had been any Coarse
contemptible Food, it is not at all probable that the Persons there mentioned
would have made a Present of it to King David. Questionless they brought of the
best Provision to him, and this sufficiently appears from the other Gifts which
are in the same Place enumerated. This Kali is rendered by the Vulgar Latin
Polenta, and by our Translators parched Corn; perhaps parched and dried after
it had been soaked in Water, and was a kind of an early Essay of Malt. But
whatever it was, it is evident that it was some Choice Present, and therefore
this last Interpretation is not to be allowed. But what is, is very hard to
tell. I subscribe to this Learned Writer in this, that Grain or Corn is here
meant. But it was not any one particular sort of them, nor could it be that
Kali beforementioned. Wherefore, if I may have leave to give in my Conjecture,
(after all that has been said) it is this, that this Kirjonim was the Offals
or Refuse of all sorts of Corn and Grain, which was wont to be given to Pigeons
at such time of the Year, when they had nothing abroad to feed on. For the Jews
tell us, that they anciently kept Pigeons in certain Houses and Places built on
purpose for them, (as it is with us at this Day) and there relieved them with
Food when there was occasion. This Refuse-Grain, this TailCorn, these Sweepings
of the Floor, these vile Remains, are here called Dung, by way of Contempt.
This comports with the Style of Scripture, which uses the word 2 Kings 9. 37.
Psalm. 83. 10. Jer. 8. 2.
Dung to denote the Baseness and Vileness of a thing: and here it is joined
with an Ass's Head, which was the Vilest sort of Food; and therefore both
together do fully express the Extremity of the Famine at that time. And also
this Vile Dross and Siftings of all kind of Grain might be called Dung by them,
because these being very gross, yielded abundant Matter for Excrements. This
seems to me to be a very plain and obvious Interpretation of the Hebrew Word,
but let the Reader be Judge. It is certain it cannot be meant of Pigeons Dung,
strictly so called, for neither humane Excrements, nor any others, are capable
of being Food. If we meet with any thing to the contrary, as in Isa. 36. 12. 2
Kings 18. 27. it is spoken in an Hyperbolical Strain. But no more of this
ungrateful Subject. Perhaps we have lost the true Meaning of Kirjonim. Such
Words and Names of things as these, which are of no frequent Use, by reason of
their great Antiquity, are forgot, and not known by us. And this is not
peculiar to the Hebrew Tongue alone; the very same happens in other Languages,
which are not so Ancient, as it were easy to demonstrate.

Then as to insects, the Word which we render a Spider, Prove. 30. 28. is
Stellio in the Old Latin Version: and the Inquisitive Bochart labors to make
it probable, that that is the Creature there meant, viz. an Ewet, a little
Spotted Animal like a Lizard. I will mention here the Locusts, Lev. 11. 22.
(ranked with the Beetle and Grasshopper) which the Jews were allowed to eat: and
I will take occasion thence to speak of the (...), the Locusts, which John
Baptist fed upon in the Wilderness, Mat. 3. 4. Mark 1. 6. they being the very
same sort of Food which are mentioned here in Leviticus among the Species of
Creeping Fowls. I know there are other Opinions concerning them. The Ebionites
of old, as Contr. Haeref. l. 1.
Epiphanius relates, held that (...) was a Mistake for (...), which Word is
used Exodus 16. 31. and Numb. 11. 9. But this wild Interpretation has no Bottom
at all, and therefore has been universally rejected. Some have thought, as
Druthmarus in loc.
One tells us, that these (...) were Seafish, either Crabs or Lobsters: and
why not Shrimps? But guess how likely 'twas that St. John should meet with
Seafish in the Wilderness; besides that these were a dainty sort of Food, and
not so befitting this mortified Hermit. Others take these (...) not to be
Sensitive Creatures, but Vegetables, which was the Sentiment of some of the
Fathers. In Matthew. cap. 3.
Theophylact thought them to be a certain kind of Herb, some particular
distinct Species of Plants. But Clemens Alex. Chrysostom. Nicephorus, Hist. l.
1. c. 14. Isidor. l. 1. Epist. 5.
others of the Ancient Christian Writers took them to be Tops of Shrubs and
Trees; and among the Moderns this is held by Theophrastus and Paracelsus.
Hieron. Montius de Tutela salubritatis.
One Author is very particular in giving his Judgment of this Word, for he
says it signifies, 1. Little Shoots and Tendrels of Trees. 2. Young Sprouts of
Plants. 3. Asparagus. Baronius and Erasmus understand the Word of the uppermost
Parts or Toppings of young Trees, which they think St. John cropp'd: and our
Dr. Hammond favors this Opinion; but Annotat. in. Matthew. 3. 4.
Sir. N. Knatchbull very heartily defends it. But I see no Foundation at all
for it, for the Words (...) and (...) have no such Signification in any Author
whatsoever. It is true, (...), and the Plural (...) (used by Homer) signify the
Tops of Mountains: but what is this to the purpose, unless they think the
Baptist had such a Miraculous Stomach as first to remove the Tops of Mountains,
and then to eat them? I cannot imagine any other occasion of this Opinion than
this, that (...) is summum, extremum, whence some fancied that the Word
signified the Tops or Extremities of Plants. And besides, the Ancient Writers
(from whom the later received the Notion) thought not of the Locusts, which
were the ordinary Food of the Eastern People, (as is evident from the foresaid
Place in Leviticus) and were much bigger in those Countries than in others.
These are the (...) mentioned by St. Matthew and St. Mark; these are the
Locusts which the Holy Baptist made his Repast whilst he lived in the Desert:
for that those of meaner Rank, and such especially in the Eastern Countries as
conversed in the Fields and Deserts, fed on this sort of Meat, is sufficiently
testified by Aristotle, Ae^ian, Solinus, Pliny, and other Natural Historians,
who speak of this kind of Insects: also by Strabo and Lib. 4. c. 3.
Diodorus Siculus, who report that some People were called (...), because they
fed generally on this Food; and by the Learned Father Advers. Jovinian.
St. Ierom. But the most satisfactory Author on this Subject is Ludolphus, in
his Ethiopick or Abyssine History, who proves that Locusts are an agreeable
Food to the People of Africa and the Southern Parts of Asia; and that they are
of very great Bulk, and not like those in Europe: and in short, that they were
the usual Sustenance of some People in the East. What then can be plainer than
this, that St. John fed on these Animals in the Wilderness, it being a sort of
Food that the Hebrew People were no Strangers to, and consequently that this is
the true Interpretation of Mat. 3. 4.? But it must be acknowledged, that Other
Texts are not so easily understood: there is a great Ambiguity in those words
whereby Animals are expressed* and it is somewhat difficult to reach the true
meaning of them, as may sufficiently appear from what Monsieur Bochart has
said of those Animals that are spoken of in Scripture: though truly I am of
opinion, that that Great Man has sometimes (if not often) raised Doubts about
them when there was little or no Ground for it, as it is the fault of almost all
Great Critics to render Words and Things dubious when there is no occasion for
it.

In the next place, I will observe that the Names of Flowers, Plants and Herbs
among the Hebrews are scarcely known to us. Otherwise certainly the Hebrew word
which in our English Bibles is rendered a Rose, Cant. 2. 1. Isa. 35. 1. would
not have been translated a Flower in the former place, and a Lilly in the
latter by the Vulgar Interpreter. And Lexic. Hebraic.
Buxtorf was so sensible of the ambiguous Sense of this word, that he tells us,
it is either a Rose or a Lilly. The Jon. 4. 6.
Plant which God prepared for Jonas, to be a Shade to him, is rendered by some a
kind of Vine, by others a Cucumber, by the Seventy Coloquintida, or the Bitter
Gourd, (...), (called by the Botanists the Apple of Coloquintida, and the Gall
of the Earth, and the Death of Plants) by the Vulgar Latin an Ivy, by others
(as Mercer and Montanus) that Plant which we call Palma Christi, and by our
English Translators (according to the Arabic) a Gourd. So discrepant are the
Judgments of Interpreters about this Matter. And the Geneva, Helvetian and
Danish Bibles retain the Hebrew word Kikaion, because they knew not what to
make of it. Nor are Authors less divided about the Gopher-wood, Genesis 6. 14. of
which the Ark was made, for no less than Seven or Eight sorts of Trees are
mentioned by them on this occasion. Some say it is Square-Timber, because it is
rendered by the Greek Interpreters (...): others think it to be Smooth-Timber,
because in the Vulgar Latin it is Ligna levigata. According to the Chaldee
Paraphrasts, and most of the Rabins, it is Cedar: according to Munster and the
Geneva Translation, it is a Pine Tree. Iunius thinks it is a middle sort
between this and a Fir. Bochart and Fuller vote it to be a Cypress: and the
Miscell. l. 4. c. 5.
latter has this fanciful notion concerning it, that among the Gentiles the
Cypress was always held to be a Fatal Tree, and was used at Funerals, because
the Ark at the Flood, in which Noah was shut up as in a Sepulcher, was made of
this Wood. Some take it for a Fir, and others for a Turpentine-Tree. And
Pererius (that he might say something singular, and different from all the
rest) fancies it was not the Wood of one sort of Tree, but that it was made of
diverse Kinds. But the Translators of the English Bible retain the Hebrew word
it self, because they were not satisfied with any of these Significations.
Eolah and allah and allon, Ezekiel. 6. 13. Josh. 24. 26. Isa. 6. 13. according to
different Interpreters are rendered not only an Oak, but an Elm, an Alder-Tree,
a Turpentine, a Lime, or Teil-Tree, a Pine, a Chestnut. What kind of Trees
Algummim or Almuggim, 1 Kings 10. 11. 2 Chronicles. 2. 8. Chap. 9. 10, 11. were, is
not easy to tell: yea, the Hebrew Doctors think Coral (which we cannot properly
call a Tree) is meant by them. But Annotat. in Exodus 3. 23.
Grotius has warned us not to trust to the Rabins, especially the latter ones,
in their Interpretations which they give of Herbs and Trees. What particular
kind of Wood that is which is called Shittim, (of which you read so often in
Exodu^) and is rendered (...), incorruptible Wood by the LXX, is not agreed
among the Learned; some thinking it to be Cedar, others the Pitch-Tree, others
Box: but Ierom and Theodotion take it to be the White-Thorn, or a Tree very
like it. The truth is, we are certain of nothing but this, that it was some
very excellent and choice Wood which they found to be very Useful in Building.
It is probable that it was denominated from the Place where it grew, and whence
it was fetched, (for of Shittim we read in Numb. 25. 1. Josh. 2. 1. and in
other places) but what kind of Tree it was, is uncertain: for which reason both
the Vulgar Latin and English Translators thought fit to retain the Hebrew word
it self. For we are in the dark as to these things: and how can it be
otherwise, seeing it is not to be doubted that they had Trees and Plants in the
Eastern Countries which are not in these places? and therefore we know them
not. So for Animals, of which we spoke before, there were some proper to those
Regions: and because these Western Parts of the World have them not, we are
ignorant of them. Wherefore it is no wonder that several Names of Sensitive and
Vegetative Creatures mentioned in the Old Testament are unintelligible.

Whether the Hebrew Bedolach, Bdellium, Genesis 2. 12. be a Tree or a Stone, or a
Gum, or a Pearl, is disputed. Pliny and Diascorides mention Bdellium as Wood or
a Tree, and Iunius (upon the place) is of the same Mind. Others, and
particularly Antiqu. l. 3. c. 1.
Josephus, understand it to be an Aromatic Gum, or the Juice of some
Odoriferous Tree. The Jews generally hold it to be a Precious Stone; but some
of them think it is a Crystal, others a Jasper, and others of them a Carbuncle,
it being (...).
so rendered by the Septuagint. Bochart and some other Moderns tell us that
Bedolach is not Bdellium or any other Precious Stone, but a Margarite, a Pearl
of the Sea, which is usually fetched up in that Maritime Part of Arabia which
is called Havilah in the forementioned Text. And to corroborate this Opinion,
he further adds, that Manna is said to be ( Numb. 11. 7.) of the color of
Bdellium, i. e. white, which is the singular Ornament and Beauty of a Pearl. It
might be observed here, that the words for Minerals and Precious Stones are
very ambiguous. I will mention only one, viz. Nophek, the first Precious Stone
in the second Order of those in the High Priest's Breast Plate: this is rendered
by St. Ierom a Carbuncle, by Onkelos an Emerald, by some Interpreters a Topaz,
and by others a Ruby. And there is almost the like difference in interpreting
some of the other Words whereby other Stones are signified. For indeed, it is
the Confession of the Hebrew Doctors, as Buxtorf and others tell us, that the
Names of Precious Stones in Scripture are unknown to us. There is such a
discrepancy, says a Paul. Fagius in Exodus 28. 20.
Learned Hebrician, about these among all Interpreters, whether Christians or
Jews, that no Man is able to determine any thing certain.

The same may be said of Musical Instruments mentioned in Scripture: which have
employed many Critics and Grammarians, but with little Satisfaction. But I
have said enough for my present purpose, viz. to show you that the Hebrew Names
of diverse things are not well understood, which sometimes begets a
misunderstanding concerning the things themselves. There are indeed among the
Greeks and Latins a great number of words of Different Senses, but the number
is far greater in Hebrew, by reason of the paucity of words in this Tongue; for
there being many Things, but few Words to express them, it will follow that
sundry of them must be of various Significations, and consequently that it is
no easy matter to distinguish between them. This may be the reason why the
Septuagint have inserted several Hebrew words into their Version, namely,
because they could not tell how to express them in Greek, their Signification
being so Doubtful. Hence also some Proper Names are translated by these
Interpreters as Appellatives; which is done also sometimes by the Vulgar Latin,
because those Names are seemingly and as to their Sound no other than
Appellatives: however, the Dubious meaning of them prompted the Translators to
take them as such. Nor are we to think that this Ambiguity is any Blemish or
Disparagement to the Bible, and that for this reason, because we find it no
where but in those Matters which are Indifferent, and the Knowledge of which is
not indispensably required of us. Nay, on the contrary, this Difficulty which
we meet with in many Words and Passages in these Holy Writings, is so far from
disparaging them, that it is an undeniable Proof of the Unparalleled Antiquity
of them. We are assured hence, that they have the Priority of all other Books;
we may rationally gather that a great part of this Volume at least was composed
and written before any other Writings were extant. If this Sacred Book were of
a later Date, we should have had few or none of those Difficult Terms that it
abounds with now. We could not then have a more Convincing Argument of its
being Exceeding Ancient, than its being Dark in some places. And therefore
instead of complaining of the Obscurity of these Writings, let us reverence and
admire its Matchless Antiquity, and congratulate our own Happiness, that the
Divine Providence has entrusted us with the First and Oldest Records of Truth
in the World.

I will go on then still with my present Undertaking, and show in other
particulars the Dubious Import of some words in these Sacred Writings, and
attempt* to clear some of them. I will here speak of the Measures, Weights, and
Coins mentioned in Scripture, which are another Instance of the Difficulty
which arises from our being ignorant of the exact Significations of some Words
in the Sacred Volume. The Hebrew Measures are either of Application or of
Capacity, i. e. such Measures as are applied and laid unto things, or such as
hold and contain things. To the former sort belongs chiefly the Gubit, the
famous Standing Measure of the Hebrews. But this is twofold, either Common or
Sacred: the former is the length of the Arm from the Elbow to the end of the
middle Finger, according to the Dimensions of Men of the greatest Stature; and
it is generally agreed that this is a Foot and a half, or (which is the same)
half a Yard. This was the Measure for ordinary things, as Ogg's Bedstead, which
was Deuteronomy. 3. 11.
in length nine Cubits, i. e. thirteen Foot and a half, or four Yards and a
half, and in breadth four Cubits, i. e. six Foot, or two Yards: by which it
appears, that he was such another Giant as Goliath was, 1 Samuel 17. 4.
whose height was six Cubits and a Span, i. e. nine Foot and nine Inches, or
three Yards and almost a Foot: for we must suppose that his Bedstead was a
fourth part or thereabouts longer than his Body. But besides this ordinary
Cubit, called the Cubit of a Man, Deuteronomy. 3. 11. i. e. of a Man's Proportion,
from the Elbow to the Fingers end, the Common Cubit, there was the Sacred one,
which is as much again, viz. a Yard. By this were measured those things which
were Extraordinary and Unusual, or which were Holy and Religious. Some think
the length, breadth and height of the Ark is measured by this Cubit, Genesis 6.
15. otherwise they cannot make room for all the Creatures of every Kind that
were to be lodged in it. Yea, two of the Ancient Origin. Hom. 2. in Genesis
Augustine. de Civ. Del, l. 15. c. 27.
Fathers think that the Cubit by which the Ark was built, was the Geometrick
one, which is six times longer than the Ordinary Cubit, i. e. it contains nine
Foot: for they thought that the Ark otherwise could not hold all the Beasts.
But the contrary is stiffly maintained by But^o de Arc^ Noc. Kircher Arc. No^.
Others, who reject the Geometrick Cubit, because there is no mention of it in
Scripture, and because the Fabric of the Ark would have been of two vast a
proportion if it had been measured by this. These Men with the Ordinary Cubit
make that Vessel large enough to hold all the different Animals that were
ordered to be preserved in it. Buteo more especially has undertaken this, and
performed it as well as the thing would bear. He insists that Moses speaks of
the Cubit that was most in use in his time, which by consent of Writers
contained a Foot and a half in length: and accordingly he endeavors to make
the whole Business of the Fabric and Capacity of the Ark for receiving the
several Creatures, to be accountable on this Hypothesis of the Common Cubit.
When the Mosaic History relates that the Longitude of the Ark was three
hundred Cubits, we must understand it, he says, of four hundred fifty Foot in
length: when it describes its Latitude to be fifty Cubits, there are meant
seventy five Foot: and when the Altitude is said to be thirty Cubits, we must
reckon forty five Foot. This was the Proportion of that Ancient Fabric, of
that great Swimming Coffin, for its Figure agrees most with that Shape. But
whereas we read that it consisted of three Stories, ver. 16. this Author
assigns four, telling us, that the first (which he adds) is not mentioned,
because it was a Sink or Sewer to receive all the Filth that came from the
Stalls of the Animals: the next to this, was the place where the Terrestrial
Animals were lodged: The Third was the Storehouse for Provision let down to the
Creatures below through Racks: In the Fourth were the Men and Birds. And these
Rooms and Apartments, with their Accommodations, are reduced by him to that
number of Cubits which Noah assigns. So that the Cavils of Celsus, and of the
Gnostics before him, against the incapacity of the Ark for so many Beasts, are
silenced by the Undertaking of this Ingenious Writer, who has proved that this
Structure was able to hold very well all Speoies of Animals, i. e. of Creeping
things, which according to Gesner and Aldrovandus, are not above thirty, and of
Four-footed Beasts, which are a hundred and thirty, (for Antilopes begot
between a Heart and a Goat, Mules the Product of an Horse and an Ass, Iackals of
whom a Wolf is the Sire, a Fox the Dam, and some other such Mungrel Creatures
are not to be reckoned in the Number) and of Fowls of the Air about a hundred
and fifty.

As to the Tabernacle and Temple, it is granted that the Dimensions of them are
taken by the Holy Cubit, which is as long again as the Common one. But then,
whether the Vtensils and Vessels, and other things belonging to the Temple are
to be measured by the Common or the Sacred Cubit, is often disputed among those
who have treated of this Matter. And it must needs be so, because the word
Ammah, cubitus, is ambiguous; for though it never signifies in Scripture the
Geometrical Cubit, which is three Yards, yet it is left uncertain in many
places whether the Common or Sacred Cubit be meant.

Measures of Capacity among the Hebrews are either of things that are Dry, or
of those that are Liquid. Of the first sort are, 1. The Cab, 2 Kings 6. 25. the
Least of Dry Measures used by the Jews, about a quarter of a Peck of our
English Measure. 2. The Ephah, Lev. 5. 11. of the same Quantity with the Bath,
(of which afterward) only the one is for dry things, the other for wet. It may
be called the Hebrew Bushel, because it is much about that Quantity; though
some will have it to be much more, and others a considerable deal less, viz.
half a Bushel and a Pottle. Some say it contains about seven Gallons, others
nine. So that we cannot tell the precise Quantity of this Measure; which
neither the Greek Interpreters knew, it is likely, though they were Jews, for
they render the word Ephah differently, sometimes (...), sometimes (...), and
at other times (...) and (...), and (...). 3. An Homer, (...), Chomer, Ezekiel.
45. 14. which is ten Baths or Ephahs, i. e. ten Bushels, say some: but others
set it higher, making it fourteen Bushels; and others bring it lower, reducing
it to about eight Bushels. Perhaps the English word Coumb or Coume, which now
signifies but half as much, denoted a greater Quantity heretofore, and was
originally taken from the Hebrew Chomer, but is since corrupted in the
Pronunciation. Note that this is the Greatest (however the just and exact
Quantity be disputed) of all Dry Measures. 4. An Omer, (...), Gnomer, Vulgar
Latin Gomor. It is true, some Writers (and of no mean Note) have confounded
these two, Homer and Omer, and the Seventy Interpreters did so long before,
calling both of them (...), but they are two Distinct Measures. For we are
assured that an Omer is the tenth part of an Ephah, Exodus 16. 36. i. e. the
tenth part of a Bushel, or thereabouts; and therefore is called by the Jews
Gnisharon, decima, a tenth-deal, Numb. 15. 4. whereas the Homer contained ten
Ephahs or Baths, i. e. ten Bushels. But yet this is an Equivocal Word, as
appears from Lev. 23. 10. Ye shall bring a Sheaf of the first Fruits of your
Harvest unto the Priest. It is the word Omer which is here translated a Sheaf,
(a far different thing from a Measure) and by the (...)
Septuagint and Vulgar Manipuli spicarum.
Latin Version a Maniple or handful, which indeed is a sort of Measure, but
greatly disagreeing with the usual Signification of Omer. But in all other
places the Hebrew Name it self is retained in the Greek and Latin Versions as
well as in Ours; and I have told you what it is generally thought to signify.
5. The Cor, 1 Kings 4. 22. which is made by some a distinct Measure from those
before-named: but you will find, that according to the Vulgar Latin, a Cor and
an Homer are the same, Ezekiel. 45. 13, 14.

The Measures for Liquids among the Hebrews were a Log, Lev. 14. 10. which
contained about half a Pint: however, this is sure that it was the least of
Liquid Measures. Next, a Hin, Numb. 15. 4. which was somewhat bigger than a
Log: some say it held ten Logs, a Great Gallon I may call it. A Bath, Ezekiel. 45.
11. was yet bigger, and contained six Hins, i. e. about six Gallons: others
say, four Gallons and an half. And yet it is said to be of the same Capacity
with the Ephah, i. e. a Bushel, and consequently should hold eight Gallons. The
Homer was also a Measure for Liquor, as well as for Grain, and it contained ten
Baths, as is evident from Ezekiel. 45. 14. Ten Baths are an Homer. But because a
Bath is more or less, according to the different Determinations of Writers, we
cannot assign the exact Quantity of an Homer. A Cor (which I before mentioned
as the same with the Chomer, and the greatest of Dry Measures) is also a
Measure for Liquids, 1 Kings 5. 11. Ezekiel. 45. 14. But it is no wonder that we
have not an exact Knowledge of these Jewish Measures, for even those that are
mentioned in Greek and Latin Authors, and very much fall short of the Antiquity
of these, are but little known by us.

Next, if we proceed to the Words whereby the Hebrew Weights are expressed in
Scripture, which are the Shekel and the Talent, we shall find them something
dubious and uncertain. The Shekel, (...) (like the Cubit) is said to be either
Common or Sacred, the Profane Shekel, or that of the Sanctuary. And here there
is Dissension among Writers; but according to the most moderate Accounts, the
former is said to be in Weight a quarter of an Ounce, the latter half an Ounce
Troy. Others affirm, that there was no Profane Shekel, different from the
Sacred one; but that the occasion of the Opinion was the Scripture's mentioning
the Shekel of the Sanctuary, Lev. 27. 25. and Numb. 3. 47. which is so called,
because the Weights which were laid up in the Sanctuary were the Standard of
all Weights. The other Weights in use among the People were tried by These, and
if they were found lighter, they were condemned. As for the contrary Opinion,
it is looked upon by some (but I cannot subscribe to it) as an Invention of the
Rabbis. The other Weight is (...), Exodus 25. 39. 1. Kings. 20. 39. rendered by
the Greek and Latin Version (as well as Ours) a Talent; which is either Common
or Sacred; the first, according to some of the Rabins, is fifty Pounds; others
say, sixty; others, sixty two in weight. The second, according to some, is an
hundred; according to others, an hundred and twenty; and in others Estimation,
an hundred twenty five Pounds Weight, i. e. about as much again as the Common
Talent. But it is difficult to tell in which particular Places of Scripture the
Common Talent is meant, and in which the Sacred one. Only this we know, that a
Talent was the greatest Weight among the Hebrews. And this we may rest in, as
very probable, that there was a Difference of the same Weights among the Jews,
as among us there is Troy Weight used by Gold Goldsiniths and Apothecaries, and
(...) by those who deal in grosser things.

Then as to the Coins, these generally followed the Weights, because they
weighed their Money for the most part: Hence the Shekel and the Talent were not
only Weights but Coins among the Hebrews. The Shekel of the Sanctuary was in
strict Value two Shillings four Pence of our Money, but is generally reckoned
two Shillings six Pence, our Half-Crown: but the Ordinary S^ekel was but half
as much, i. e. as to the most strict Value fourteen Pence, but more generally
esteemed to be fifteen. This is to be understood of the Shekel of Silver; but
then we must know there was another of Gold, which was of a much higher Value,
fifteen Shillings at least. Now because the word Shekel is often mentioned
without any Addition in Scripture, we may be mistaken as to the right Value of
it, because we are uncertain which of the Shekels is to be understood, that of
Silver or that of Gold. And sometimes it happens by reason of the Shekels being
both a Weight and a Co^n, that the one is mistook for the other. As probably in
2 Samuel 14. 26. where it is said that Absalom at every Year's end polled his
Head, because the Hair was heavy on him, and he weighed the Hair at two hundred
Shekels; which is generally understood as if the Hair of his Head, being cut
off every Year, weighed two hundred Shekels, i. e. fifty Ounces, which is four
Pounds and two Ounces, if you reckon by the L^sser Shekel* but if you make your
Computation by the Greater one, which was double in weight, his Hair weighed
eight Pounds and four Ounces. But this cannot be, for though his Hair was
heavy, (as the Text testifies) yet it is no ways credible that it was of this
vast Weight. Two hundred Shekels of the lesser Weight are more ponderous than
the Fleeces of two ordinary Sheep. You may imagine then what the Weight doubled
will be, i. e. if you understand the Place of the Greater Shekels. Wherefore by
Shekels here is meant Coin, and not Weight: the Meaning is this, that Absalom's
Hair growing excessively, and being very heavy, he yearly cut it off; and when
it was weighed, it was found to be worth two hundred Shekels, that is,
according to the Common Shekel, twelve Pounds ten Shillings in our English
Money, but much more according to the rate of the Greater Shekel. The Price or
Value of his Hair, not the Weight of it, is here spoken of. So much Money he
could have had for the yearly Loppings of his Hair, and so much and more they
made of it to whom he gave it, viz. his Servants, who parted with it at a dear
rate to the Ladies of Jerusalem, who were ambitious of adorning their Heads
with the Hair of the Beautiful Absalom, with the Locks of the King's Son;
especially if what a Dr. Lightfoot Hor. Hebraic.
Learned Man from the Iervsalem-Talmudists suggests has any Truth in it, viz,
that he was a Temporary Nazarite, (as some among the Jews were; yea, it is my
Opinion that they were all at their Liberty) and let his Hair grow from Year to
Year, because of his Vow: for then some of the better disposed Females might in
a Religious way buy up these Relics of Nazaritism, and look upon them as
Sacred. If this Interpretation of the Place be not admitted, then one of these
two things must be granted, either that his Hair was of that Prodigious and
Incredible Weight which we mentioned, (which will hardly be received) or else
that we are mistaken in the true Value of a Shekel in this Place; and if so, we
may be mistaken in others.

We might likewise consider the Value of a Talent, which is either the Great or
the Lesser: the Value of the former is two hundred thirty three Pounds
Sterling; and of the latter one hundred seventy five Pounds Sterling, according
to some good Authors. But others will have four hundred Pound Sterling to be
the true Estimate of the Greater Talent, and they value the Lesser at half as
much. Again, the Scripture speaks of a Talent of Silver, and a Talent of Gold,
and these also are differently understood; for some value the former at one
hundred eighty seven Pounds ten Shillings; others at three hundred seventy five
Pounds: the latter is esteemed to be two thousand two hundred and fifty, by
some; and four thousand five hundred by others. In short, (as De Ass.
Budaeus has observed) Talents are according to the Use and Value of several
Countries, Babylonian, Syrian, Egyptian; yea, the Greeks, who first used this
Value of Money, did vary themselves in their Talents, having some greater, and
others lesser, some worth two hundred Pounds, others only one hundred Pounds
Sterling with us. From Lib. 9. c. 1^.
Julius Pollux we briefly learn what a great Difference there was in Talents;
The Attick Talent, says he, made six thousand Attick Drams; the Babylonian
Talent seven thousand; the Aeginaean ten thousand; the Syrian a thousand and
five hundred. What we read in 2 Samuel 12. 30. concerning the King of the
Ammonites Crown, that the Weight thereof was a Talent of Gold, is to be
understood of a Talent, as it signifies Coin, not a Weight, for we cannot
imagine that that King, or David, (on whose Head it was afterward set, as you
read there) could wear a Crown that weighed a Talent. It is spoken therefore of
the Value of the Crown: when it is said it weighed so much, the meaning is, that
it was worth so much in Money, for they weighed their Money in those Days.

If you look into the Roman and Greek Coins mentioned in the New Testament, you
will find great Uncertainty there. The least piece of Money is a Mite, (...),
Mark 12. 42. the seventh part of a piece of Brass Money among the Romans, say
some; much less than the Greeks (...), or the Hebrews Gerah, Exodus 30. 13. Lev.
7. 25. (which might have been mentioned before.) It is vulgarly reckoned the
eighth part of an English Penny, or half a Farthing, because it is said, two
Mites make a Farthing, Mark 12. 42. But (...), quadrans, is the word which we
here render a Farthing, which is not one of our Farthings, but is the fourth
part of an As, a small piece of Brass Coin among the Romans, a fourteenth part
of a Denarius; others hold it to be the Denarius, a denis aeris.
tenth part of it. But still we are not certain what it is, because we are not
sure what the Denarius or Roman Penny is, which is the next Coin. This we read
was the Days-wages for the Laborers in the Vineyard, Matthew. 20. 9. They
received every Man a Penny. The Aromatic Ointment of Spikenard might have been
sold for more than three hundred of these Pence, Mark 14. 5. This was the Penny
which was showed to Christ, as part of the TributeMoney, Matthew. 22. 19. But it
is not easy to tell the exact Value of it, though we translate it a Penny; for
the Roman D^narius was greater and less^^; the first was one Shilling Sterling,
the second was six Pence or seven Pence, or seven Pence half Penny in our Coin.
Others distinguish thus, there was either the Old Denarius, which was twelve
Pence, or the Latter one, which was of the same Value with the Dram, (of
which next) or another between these, valued at eight Pence. Thus we are partly
at a loss what a Mite, (that nummorum ^amulus among the Romans) or what a
Farthing, or what a Penny was, that is, what we translate so really was.

Nor is there greater Certainty in the Greek Coins, as (...), Luke 15. 8. the
piece of Silver (for so it is translated) which the Woman lost, and afterward
found. This is said by most Writers to be seven, or seven Pence half Penny of
our Money, being the same with a quarter of a Shekel, or with the Roman
Denarius. But the true Value of these being doubtful, (as has been said) this
must needs be so too. And consequently the (...), Matthew. 17. 24. rendered by our
Translators the Tribute-Money, (because they knew not how else to render it)
cannot very well be defined; for if the just Value of a Single Dram be not
known, how can we tell what a Double one is? But the generally received and
most approved Account is, that a Dram is seven Pence half Penny, and
consequently a Didrachm (which is the Word here) is fifteen Pence, i. e. a
Common Shekel. This, says the Learned Lightfoot, was a yearly Tax paid by the
Jews toward repairing the Temple; but after the Jews became subject to the
Romans, they paid it to the Emperor. And as for (...), Matthew. 26. 15. Acts 19.
19. which we translate Pieces of Silver, it is uncertain whether they are an
Hebrew or Greek Coin. Some are of opinion, that when they are put absolutely,
and without Addition, (either in the Old or New Testament) they signify
Shekels, as in the former Place, They covenanted with him for thirty pieces of
Silver, i. e. thirty Shekels, which after the rate of the Great Shekel is three
Pounds fifteen Shillings in our Money. But the latter Place which speaks of the
Value of those Books of curious Arts, which were brought forth and burnt, and
says, the Price of them was found to be fifty thousand pieces of Silver,
cannot be understood of this Shekel, it being improbable that they amounted to
so great a Sum as six thousand two hundred and fifty Pounds Sterling in our
Money; for so much is contained in fifty thousand great Shekels or Half-Crowns.
But it is more likely that this Place speaks of some Greek Coin of a lower
Value, as the Dram before mentioned. But as for the (...), Matthew. 17. 27.
which we translate a piece of Money, (the same which was found in the Fish's
Mouth) it was of the same Value with the Hebrew Great Shekel, and contained
four Drachms, i. e. two Shillings six Pence in our Money. Wherefore you may
observe that the Stater in the forenamed Place served to pay the Double Tax,
for our Savior and St. Peter: Take it, says Christ, and give it to them (i.
e. the Collectors) for me and thee; fifteen Pence for me, and fifteen Pence for
thee. But then it must be remembered, that there was not only a Silver Stater,
but a Golden one, the Value of which was thirteen, some say fifteen, others
sixteen Shillings, others eighteen; for of this as well as of other Coins there
were different sorts. Or if we could tell which of these kinds is here meant,
yet it will be a hard Task to adjust it to the Value of our English Money. The
same may be said of Other Coins, and also of Weights and Measures in use
heretofore among the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, some whereof are mentioned in
the Holy Writings: There is no little Difference among the Georgius Agricola,
Budaeus, Alciat, Por^ius, Glareanus, Fuschius, Waserus, Brerewood, Dr.
Cumberland.
Learned Authors, who have purposely treated of them, especially when they
endeavor to reduce them to the Modern Coins, Weights and Measures in use among
us. In expressing things of this Nature (not in the Great and Weighty Matters
of Religion) the very Words which are used in Scripture are uncertain and
doubtful; which is one reason why some Places are not interpreted with the same
Facility that others are.

CHAP. IX.
Two or three Different Names are given to the same Person in different places
of Scripture, which may occasion Difficulty sometimes. Exempli^ied in several
Texts, but more especially in Mat. 23. 35. Zacharias Son of Barachias. The Old
Testament sometimes gives one Name to a Person, and Profane Writers another.
Sometimes there is not properly Another Name attributed to the same Person in
the Old Testament, but only a Name a little changed. In the New Testament also,
the same Persons have Different Names, or somewhat Altered. Again, both in the
Old and New Testament different Persons have sometimes the same Name. Further,
sometimes the same Name is given to Persons of both Sexes. Moreover, one Name
served for all the successive Kings of a Country, or at least for several of
them. Lastly, the same Places which we read of in Scripture have different
Appellations, which sometimes causes Obscurity. Or some Names of the same Place
differ but a little, i. e. as to a Letter or two.

IN the Prosecution of the foregoing Head, viz. the Different acception of
words used in Scripture, I might here take notice that two or three Different
Names are given to the same Person in different places of Scripture, which has
occasioned no little difficulty in understanding some Texts. But yet when we
consider that this is a very usual thing in the Sacred Writings, the Difficulty
must needs vanish. By comparing 2 Samuel 14. 27. with 1 Kings 15. 2. we find that
the same Daughter of Absalom was named Tamar and Maacha. The Person who is
called Iozachar in 2 Kings 12. 21. is named Zabad in 2 Chronicles. 24. 26. Azariah
and Vzziah are the Names of the same King of Judah, 2 Kings 15. 1. Isa. 1. 1. 2
Kings 14. 21. compared with 2 Chronicles. 26. 1. The same King was called Zedekiah
and Mattaniah, 2 Kings 24. 17. 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. Thus Iehoiakim and Iechoniah are
the Names of the same King: which occasions that difficulty in Mat. 1. 11.
Josias begat Iechonias; it appearing from 1 Chronicles. 3. 16. that Josias begat
Iehoiakim. But if it were usual for the Kings and others among the Jews to have
a double Name, then it is likely that Iehoiakim had so too, and thus the
Difficulty is salved: Iehoiakim was called Iechoniah. It is true, there is
another way to reconcile this, by observing that in Christ's Genealogy (Of
which we shall speak afterward) sometimes a Person is said to beget another
who is not properly his Son, but one at a distance from him, his Grandchild,
or some of his Lineage farther off; and so the words in St. Matthew may refer
to a Iechonias that was afterward, 1 Chronicles. 3. 16. But from the places before
mentioned, and several others which I shall produce afterward, it is evident
that some of the Jewish Kings and Other Persons besides them had two Names.

Which may give a Solution of that controverted place, Mat. 23. 35. That upon
you may come all the righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, from the Blood of
righteous Abel unto the Blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar. Our Savior without doubt here refers to the
Old Testament, but we find no express mention there of Zacharias the Son of
Barachias 's being slain between the Temple and the Altar. Therefore some are
of the opinion that the word Zacharias is crept into the Text, but should not
be there. But this is an ill way of solving the Difficulty, because after this
rate we may expunge what word we please out of the Bible, to make good our own
Interpretation of the Place. Others think this Zacharias was the last but one
of the Twelve Prophets, who is expressly said to be the Son of Barachias, Zech.
1. 1. But, 1. We read not in Scripture or any other History that this Prophet
was slain by the Jews, and therefore there is no ground to believe that it was
He who is spoken of here. 2. He could not be slain between the Temple and the
Altar, for at that time, viz. the Return of the Jews from Babylon, neither the
Temple nor Altar were erected. Or 3. Suppose they were, yet the Jews, so soon
after their Captivity, were not arrived to that height of Wickedness to put
their Prophets to Death. Again, Baronius endeavors to prove out of some of the
Ancients, that this was John the Baptist's Father, whose Name we know was
Zacharias, Luke 1. 59. and that he was slain by Herod because he refused to
deliver up his Son the Baptist into his hands to be put to Death by him. But
first, though this be mentioned by some Writers of old, yet we find them not
forward in attesting and confirming this Narrative; because, without doubt,
there was no Evidence of it. Besides, as I suggested before, our Savior seems
to refer to something recorded in the Old Testament. Moreover, if Zacharias had
been put to Death by Herod, it is highly probable that the Evangelical History
would have taken particular notice of it, and have related the Death of the
Father, as well as of the Son. Lastly, There is not the least hint that this
Zacharias was the Son of Barachias. Next, It is said by Dr. Hammond and others,
that Christ speaks here of Zacharias the Son of Baruch, mentioned by De bell.
Jud. l. 4. c. 18.
Josephus, who was killed a little before the final Overthrow of Jerusalem: For
the Words of Christ relate not to any one who had been slain already, but they
are a Prophecy concerning the last of all the Martyrs of the Jews, who should
be put to Death before the Destruction of the last Temple, and the Dissolution
of that Nation. Such a Zachary, the Son of Baruch, was killed in the middle of
the Temple, as the Jewish Historian assures us. But first it is plain that
Christ speaks of something that had already happened, not of something that was
to come. It is not (...), but (...), not a future but an aorist, and so denotes
what has been done before, not what shall be done afterward. Therefore
Christ's words are to be understood of one that had been in time past killed by
the Jews. Secondly, It is unquestionable that Christ speaks of some very Holy
Man, whose violent Death is recorded in the Old Testament; for you find this
Zacharias joined with Abel, of whom you read in Genesis 4. 8. and for that reason
we may infer that this Baruch is not meant here. Thirdly, It is doubtful
whether the Blood of this Person whom Josephus speaks of, may be called
righteous Blood, as this is here: for it was upon a Civil Account that that Son
of Baruch was put to Death, viz. because he was thought to take part with the
Romans, and so he cannot be well paralleled with Abel.

You see how improbable the foresaid Opinions are: therefore I choose to
embrace that of St. Ierom and some Grotius, Dr. Lightfoot.
Learned Men of late, who conceive that this Zacharias is he who is mentioned
in 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the Son of
Jehoiada the Priest, who stood above the People, and said unto them, Thus says
the Lord, Why, etc. And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones
at the Commandment of the King, in the Court of the House of the Lord. Thus
Joash the King remembered not the Kindness which Jehoiada his Father had done to
him, but slew his Son. This is the Person whom our Savior speaks of, and the
shedding of whose righteous Blood he imputes to the Jews of that Age. Him ye
slew, says he; for though it is said, the King slew him, because he commanded
him to be slain, yet it is said likewise, the People slew him, because they not
only conspired against him (as you read) but actually stoned him. And this they
did in the Court of the House of the Lord, which is the same with what our
Savior says, between the Temple and the Altar. And his Blood may justly
deserve the Epithet of Righteous, and he may justly be reckoned with Righteous
Abel, because he lost his Life in a Righteous Cause, because with great
Boldness and Zeal he reproved the People for their Sins, but especially for
their Idolatry, and foretold them what Misery these would certainly bring upon
them. For this zealous Freedom of his they took away his Life. This was a very
Eminent Man among the Jews: There are in their Writings remarkable Stories
concerning him, not only relating to his Life, but his Death. They killed him
being both a Priest and a Prophet, and before the Temple, and on the day of
Expiation; and from several other Circumstances his Murder is aggravated in the
Talmud. This was Zach^ria^ the Son of Iehoiada, but called here the Son of
Barachias, because it was common to have two Names among the Jews. His Father's
Name being both Iehoiada and Barachias, he is called in the Chronicles the Son
of Jehoiada, and by our Savior, the Son of Barachias. But in this it is likely
Christ had reference to the words of Isaiah, Chap. 8. 2. [Zachariah the Son of
Jereberechiah] or Barachiah, as the Septuagint and Vulgar Latin give it us. It
appears hence, that Barachiah as well as Iehoiad^ was his Father's Name, as our
Christian Rabbi makes it clear. Thus our Savior's words are reconciled with
those in the Chronicles, by attending to what I before observed, viz. That it
is usual in Scripture to affix two Names to the same Person: one is given him
in one place, and another in the other.

So that in Mark 2. 25, 26. may be understood, Have ye never read what David
did when he had need, and was an hungered? how he went into the House of God in
the days of Abiathar the High Priest, and did eat the Shewbread? If you look
into 1 Samuel 21. you will see that it was in the days of Ahimelech the
High Priest: which Ahimelech, it seems, was called also Abiathar, otherwise our
Savior would not have used that Name. Which I will yet further confirm to you
by some other Instances. Ierubbaal and Gideon are the same Man, Judge. 6. 32.
Chapter 7. 1. Achish and Abimelech are one Person, 1 Samuel 21. 11. and the Title of
the 34th Psalm. So are Araunah and Ornan, 2 Samuel 24. 1 Chronicles. 21. Caleb and
Carmi are the same, 1 Chronicles. 2. 18. Chapter 4. 1. So are Ioah and Etham, 1 Chronicles.
6. 21, 41. Amminadab and Izhar, 1 Chronicles. 6. 2, 22. Joel and Vashni, 1 Samuel 8.
2. 1 Chronicles. 6. 28. The same is to be said of Daniel and Chileab, 1 Chronicles. 3. 1.
2. Sam. 3. 3. Of Ammiel and (...) 2 Samuel 11. 3. 1. Chron. 3. 5. Thus Ie^oiakim
and Eliakim, 2 Kings 23. 34. 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. Ahaziah and Azariah are Names of
the same Kings, 1 Chronicles, 3. 11. and 2 Chronicles. 22. 6. (...) and Ishboshet^ are
the same Son of Saul, 2 Samuel 2. 8. 1 Chronicles, 8. 33. Mephibosheth and Merib-baal,
are the same Son of Jonathan, 2. Sam. 4. 4. 1 Chronicles. 8. 34. Zimri and Zabdi are
one Man, 1 Chronicles. 2. 6. Jos. 7. 1. Esar-haddon and Asnappar are the same, Ezr.
4. 2, 10. So are Salmanassar and Shalman, 2 Kings 18. 34. Hos. 10. 14.
Zerubbabel and Shesh-bazzar are the same Person, Ezra 1. 8. compared with Ezra
5. 14. Iehoahaz and Shallum are the Names of the same King, as appears from
comparing 2 Kings 23. 30. with Ier. 22. 11. The King of Assyria who is called
Sennacherib, 2 Kings 18. 13. is called Sargon, Isa. 20. 1. Yea, we find three
or four Names given to one, as Moses's Father-in-Law is called Iethro, Exodus 3.
1. Chapter 4. 18. Iothor by the Septuagint, Exodus 3. 1. Raguel by the same
Interpreters, Exodus 2. 18. Revel in the same place, according to the Original:
Hobab, Numb. 10. 29. And I remember Antiqu. l. 2. c. 5.
Josephus says, his Name was Iethlege. Of Solomon the same is observable;
besides that Name, he has three others given him; for we find that he is
called Iedidiah, 2 Samuel 12. 25. Lemuel, Prove. 31. 1. Coheleth, Eccl. 1. 1.
which last is rendered Ecclesiastes and Preacher; and a great deal of dispute
there is why Solomon is called so, especially in the Feminine Gender: but if we
take it to be his Proper Name, then all Questions of that nature are at an end;
for neither the Derivation of the word, nor the Termination of it are to be
insisted upon. Nay, some think Agur is a fourth Name given him, Prove. 30. 1.
from the Participle agur, collectus, receptus; because he recovered himself
after his Follies, and was received into God's Favor. And some have thought he
is called in the same place the Son of Jakeh, i. e. of the Obedient, to express
further his Repentance and Reformation.

Here it might be observed, that the Old Testament gives one Name to Persons,
and Profane Writers another. He that is called Nimrod in the former, is named
Belus in the latter, it is likely. He that is Assure in Scripture, is Ninus in
Gentile History; for Genesis 10. 11,
he built Nineve, which bears his Name. This was the Chief Seat of the Assyrian
Empire, called so from this Assure, Son of Shem. That Assyrian King that is
called Belochus in Profane Story, is Pull in the Sacred one, 2 Kings 15. 19. And
in other Instances it might be showed that it is common to have two Names, one
in the Bible, the other in Heathen Writers. Artaxerxes is the same with
Ahasuerus, Esth. 1. 1. according to the LXX's Version, and Josephus: but
whether this be true or no, it is certain that other Kings had different Names
among Jews and Pagans. In Pagan Authors there is no mention of Salmanassar,
Tiglath-Pileser, Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar: The Greek and Latin Historians
have not the Names of these Assyrian Kings, who are celebrated in Scripture:
but it may be they are represented under other Names in those Writers; for the
Names of Kings vary according to the Language of different Countries: which
occasions some disagreement between Profane and Sacred History.

Further, I add that sometimes in the Old Testament there is not properly
another Name given to the same Person, but only a Name a little Changed, by the
Alteration or Addition of some one Letter or more; as that Great Captain who
conducted the Israelites into Canaan is called Joshua, Iehosua, Numb. 13. 16.
Oshea, or Hoshea, Deuteronomy. 32. 44. (besides that in the New Testament he is called
Jesus, Acts 7. 45. Heb. 4. 9.) Ahimelech, 2 Samuel 8. 17. (who is the same, as I
said, with Abiathar) is called Abimelech, 1 Chronicles. 18. 10. Iehosaphat, 1 Kings
15. 24. is Iosaphat, Matthew. 1. 8. Iehoram, 1 Kings 22. 50. is Ioram, Matthew. 1.
8. Rehoboam, 1 Chronicles. 3. 10. is Roboam, Matthew. 1. 7. So we read of Achar and
Achan, Josh. 7. 18. 1 Chronicles. 2. 7. Ram and Aram, 1 Chronicles. 2. 10. Matthew. 1. 3.
Hamor and Emmor, Genesis 33. 19. Acts 7. 16. Caleb and Chelubai, 1 Chronicles. 2. 9,
18. Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. is Abishalom, 1 Kings 15. 1. Vzziah (who, as you have
heard, was the same with Azariah) is called Vzzah, 2 Kings 21. 26. and Ozias,
Matthew. 1. 8. Iehoiachim, 2 Kings 23. 24. is (with the altering of one Letter
only) Iehoiachin, 2 Kings 24. 8. Iechoniah in contempt is named Coniah, Jer.
22. 24. He that is called Berodach in 2 Kings 20. 12. is the same with Merodach
in Isa. 39. 1. So Nebuchadrezzar (with the like literal Alteration) is written
Nebuchadnezzar.

If you look into the New Testament also, you will see that the same Persons have
Different Names: as he who was nominated for the Apostleship is called Joseph,
Barsabas, and Iustus, Acts 1. 23. And Ioses and Barnabas are Names of the same
Apostle, Acts 4. 36. Yea, all the rest of the Apostles, except John, had more
Names than one: But sometimes the Name is only somewhat altered, but cannot be
said to be another Name, as Simon and Simeon, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Acts 15. 14. Annas
the High Priest is called Ananias, Acts 23. 5. and is called so by Josephus the
Jewish Historian. Silvanus and Silas are the same Name, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. Acts 15.
22. chapter 16. 19. chapter 17. 4, 15. So are Prisca and Priscilla, Acts 18. 2. Tib. 4.
19. and Epaphras is the same with Epaphroditus, Col. 1. 7. chapter 4. 12. Phil. 2.
25. chapter 4. 18. Shall I take notice likewise that sometimes the Names of the
same Persons mentioned in the Old Testament and the New, differ only as to the
Greek or some other Termination which is given them in the latter? As Hannah,
Elkana^'s Wife, and Anna a Prophetess, Luke 2. 36. Miriam, Aaron's Sister; and
Marie, or (...), Matthew. 1. 20. chapter 1^. (...). Luke 1. 27. and sev^ral other
times in the same Evangelist.
Mariam a frequent Name in the New Testament. Elisheba, Aaron's Wife, Exodus 6.
23. and Elizabeth the Wife of Zacharias, and St. John the Baptist's Mother.
Iohanan, 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. and John. These four are New Testament as well as
Old-Testament-Names, but with a small Alteration. And to these may be added
Jacob and James, which are the same in the Greek. A varying as to some Letter
in the beginning or ending of Names is observable also in Kish, 1 Samuel 9. 1.
and Cis, Acts 13. 21. Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14. and Emanuel, Matthew. 1. 23. Hosea
and Osee* Romans 9. 25. Noah and Noe, Luke 17. 26. Korah and Core, Jude 11.
Elijah and Elias, Matthew. 16. 14. Elisha and Elizeus, Luke 4. 27. Jonah and
Jonas, Matthew. 1^. 39.

But as we have before observed that the same Men have different Names, so it
is not altogether unworthy the remarking that different Persons have the same
Name in Scripture: for by taking notice of this we shall be invited to attend
to their Particular Characters, and the Different Relations which they have to
the Texts where they are mentioned, whereby we shall avoid confounding one with
the other, when we peruse the Holy Writings. Iehoram was the Name of two Kings
of Israel and Judah that reigned at the same time, 2 Kings 1. 17. Iehu was a
noted King, and Iehu is a Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 20. 34. There were two Nehemiahs,
he that was Chief of the Jews after the Captivity, Neh. 1. 1. and another, Neh.
3. 16. chapter 7. 5, 7. Mephibosheth is the Name not only of Ionathan's but Readiness
Son, 2 Samuel 4. 4. 2 Samuel 21. 8. There is not only Daniel the Prophet, but
David's Son by Abigail, 1 Chronicles. 3. 1. There is Abimelech King of Gerar, Genesis
20. 2. and one of the Israelites Judges, Judge. 8. 31. and also a High Priest, 1 Chronicles. 18. 6. There is in the New Testament mention of three Herod's; 1. He that
was surnamed the Great, and was the Son of Antipater the Idumaean; he was
called the Ascalonite, from the particular Country where he was born. He was
made King of the Jews in the tenth Year of Augustus's Empire, and reigned
thirty seven Years. In his time our Blessed Savior was born, Matthew. 2. 1. and
this was he that barbarously massacred the Infants of Bethlehem, Matthew. 2. 16.
2. Herod surnamed Antipas, and called the Tetrarch, Matthew. 4. 3. he murdered
John Baptist, Matthew. 14. 10. he set at naught and mocked our Savior when he
was brought before him to be judged, Luke 23. 11. and he scornfully sent him
back to Pilate. 3. Herod Agrippa the Son of Aristobulus, and the Nephew of
Herod the Great; he killed St. James, and imprisoned St. Peter, Acts 12. 2, 3.
and was at last devoured by Worms, ver. 23. There was also another Agrippa, who
was the Nephew of this Herod, and it is probable was called Herod, whose
Incestuous Wife (for she was his Sister) is mentioned Acts 25. 13, 23. There
was an Ananias who was struck dead, Acts 5. 5. There was another of that Name
who was a Disciple at Damascus, and was sent to Saul, Acts 9. 10. There was a
third that was High Priest, Acts 23. 2. Besides Simeon the Patriarch in the Old
Testament, there is in the New one of that Name who was a devout Man of
Jerusalem, and prophesied of Christ, Luke 2. 25. There is Simeon called Niger,
a Teacher of the Christian Church at Antioch, Acts 13. 1. and Peter also is
called by that Name, Acts 15. 14. There are six or seven Joseph's; he that was
one of the Patriarchs; one of those that had married strange Wives, Ezr. 10.
42. a Priest that went up with Zorobabel, Neh. 12. 14. the reputed Husband of
Mary, the Virgin Mary: also a Wise Counselor of Arimathaea, Matthew. 27. 57.
Joseph called Barsabas, Acts 1. 23. besides two others that were obscure
Persons, Numb. 13. 7. 1 Chronicles. 25. 2. Simon is a Name of yet a larger Extent,
but is found only in the New Testament, where by this Name is called the
Apostle Peter, Matthew. 16. 17. Luke. 4. 38. and in many other Places: another
Apostle called the Canaanite, Mat. 10. 4. and Zelotes, Luke 6. 15. also one
that was a Leper, Matthew. 26. 6. called a Pharisee in Luke 7. 36. likewise the
Father of Judas Iscariot, John 12. 4. chapter 13. 2. moreover, a Man of Cyrene, the
same who bore Christ's Cross, Matthew. 27. 32. and is called the Father of
Alexander and Rufus, Mark 15. 21. Further, the Sorcerer of Samaria, Acts 8. 9.
and lastly, a Tanner of Ioppa, in whose House St. Peter lodged a considerable
time, Acts 9. 43. There are four or five Iudases or Iudes mentioned in the New
Testament. 1. He that was the Good Apostle, the Brother of Simon Peter. 2. The
Traitor called Iscariot. 3. One surnamed Barsabas, a Companion of Silas, Acts
15. 27. though some think this to be the Apostle. 4. The Mutineer, Judas of
Galilee, Acts 5. 37. 5. One in whose House St. Paul was, Acts 9. 11. There were
three Gaius's, one of Derbe, Acts 20. 4. the other of Macedonia, Acts 19. 29.
the other of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 14.

Of Women the same may be observed, viz. what different Persons of that Sex
have the same Name, as that of Deborah is common to Rebecca's Nurse, Genesis 35.
8. and to the famous Prophetess and She-Judg, Judge. 4. 4. Abigail is the Name
of Nabal's Wife, 1 Samuel 25. 3. and David's Sister, 1 Chronicles. 2. 16. so that
David had a Wife (for Abigail was married to him after the Death of Nabal) and
a Sister of the same Name. By the Name of Tamar is called the Wife of Er,
Judah's incestuous Daughter, Genesis 38. 6. Ruth 4. 12. and inserted into our
Savior's Genealogy, Matthew. 1. 3. so is named Absalom's fair Sister, ravished
by Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 1. likewise Absalom's fair and only Daughter, 2 Samuel 14.
27. There are more Mary's than one in the New Testament, and to distinguish
them aright is of very great Use. Besides Mary the Mother of John, whose
Surname was Mark, Acts 12. 12. and another Mary, whom St. Paul greets, Romans 16.
6. there are thought by some to be five more of that Name, viz. the Blessed
Virgin, the Mother of our Lord: Mary the Sister of Martha and Lazarus, Luk 10.
39. Joh. 11. 1. Mary Magdalene, Mar. 15. 40. Mary the Mother of James and
Ioses, Matthew. 27. 56. Mar. 15. 40. Mary the Wife (or Daughter) of Cleophas,
Ioh. 19. 25. But others reduce these to three, for Cardinal Baronius and our
Learned Rabbi Dr. Lightfoot, hold that Mary Magdalene was the same with Mary
the Sister of Lazarus. And the most profound Dr. P^arson avers, that Mary the
Mother of James and Ioses, and Mary the Wife of Cleophas, are the same: She had
the former Denomination from her Sons, and the latter from her Husband John or
Cleophas. These three Mary's are particularly mentioned in John 19. 25. There
stood by the Cross of Jesus his Mother, and his Mother's Sister Mary the Wife
of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. In the rest of the Matthew. 27. 56. Mark 15. 40.
Evangelists we find at the same place Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of
James and Joses: And again at the Sepulcher, Matthew. 27. 61.
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary. Wherefore, says this Learned Writer, this
other Mary, by the Conjunction of these Testimonies, appears to be Mary the
Wife of Cleophas, and the Mother of James and Ioses: and thence he infers that
James and Ioses who are said to be Christ's Brethren, were not the Sons of Mary
his Mother, but of the other Mary, and are called his Brethren, according to
the Language of the Jews, because the other Mary was the Sister of Christ's
Mother, she was our Blessed Lord's Aunt on the Mother's side. And so the right
understanding of these Places where the Mary's are mentioned, may lead us to a
true Notion of Christ's Brethren spoken of in the Evangelists, whereby we may
know whether they were the Children of Mary the Blessed Virgin by Joseph, or of
the Virgin's Sister, or of some other Mother akin to her, and therefore called
the Brethren of Christ, because they were his Kindred.

Again, I could observe that sometimes the same Names in Scripture are given to
Persons of both Sexes, as among us Francis and Philip, and some other Names are
common to both Men and Women. Not to mention Genesis 5. 2. he called their Name
Adam, whence it is evident that Adam was the Name of both our first Parents at
the beginning, though afterward the Woman had another Name given her by her
Husband, and he took the Name Adam as proper to himself, Genesis 3. 20. There are
other plainer Instances in Genesis 36. 2, 41. and in the same Chapter, ver. 12,
40. and 1 Chronicles. 1. 36. where you will see that Aholibamah was the Name both of
a Man and of a Woman, and so was Timna. I find that Noah is the Name of a
Woman, the Daughter of Zelophehad, Numb. 36. 11. but I confess the words differ
in the Hebrew, one is Noach, the other Nognah. John and Ioanna, especially the
Greek (...) and (...), ( Luke 3. 27.) are in a manner the same Name, but
belonging to different Sexes. And further, to let you see how differently the
same Names are bestowed, I could observe that Michael is the Name both of a
Man, 1 Chronicles. 7. 3. and of an Angel, Dan. 12. 1.

Moreover, under this Head it might be more material to observe that One Name
served for all the Successive Kings of a Country, or at least for several of
them. All Historians agree in the Catalogue of the Kings of Persia, viz. Cyrus
the First, Cambyses the Second, Darius Hystaspis the Third, Xerxes the Fourth,
Artaxerxes Longimanus the Fifth, etc. Yet in the Book of Ezra we read, that
These five were successively, viz. Cyrus, Ahasuerus, Artaxerxes, Darius,
Artaxerxes. How is this to be reconciled? Both by saying that the same Persian
Kings had different Names, and also that several of them had one Name, which
are both very true. One of them was called Cambyses and Ahasuerus, another had
the Name Darius and Artaxerxes, a third was called Xerxes and Darius. And
besides this, they were all called by one General Name; that is, Artaxerxes was
a common Name of the whole Race of the Persian Kings. Many of the (...)
Solomon, Aben Ezra, etc.
Learned Jews were of this Opinion, and it is the more probable, because this
has been usual in other Kingdoms and Countries, as we learn from the Sacred
Records. There we find that there was one Common Name for all the Kings of
Philistia or Palestine, and that was Abimelech, as is clear from Genesis 20. 2.
Chapter 26. 1, 4. Chapter 34. 1. 1 Samuel 21. 11. and also from the Title of the 34th
Psalm it appears that this was the Universal Name of the Kings of the
Philistines. So Agag was the Common Title of all the Kings of the Amalekites,
as may be inferred from Numb. 24. 7. 1 Samuel 15. 8. It is probable that Hiram
was the Catholic Name of the Kings of Tire: but that Pharaoh was so of all the
Egyptian Kings of old is undeniably clear from Genesis 12. 15. which speaks of a
Pharaoh in Abraham's time: from Genesis 39. 1, etc. where we read of another of
that Name in Ioseph's days. And in Exodus there is frequent mention of that
Pharaoh that enslaved the Israelites and ordered all their Male-Children to be
drowned, and of another whose Heart was hardened, and who was drowned in the Red
Sea. There was a Pharaoh in Solomon's time, 1 Kings 3. 1. and in Iosias's, 2
Kings 23. 29. In Isaiah we read of a King of Egypt of this Name, Chapter 19. 11.
Chapter 30. 2, 3. So in Jeremiah, Chapter 25. 19. Chapter 44. 30. Chapter 46. 17. and in
Ezekiel very often. That this was the constant Title of the Egyptian Kings is
attested by Suidas, Eusebius, and Josephus: yea, if we may believe this Antiqu.
l. 8. c. 6.
last, Pharaoh in the Egyptian Tongue signifies a King. Which seems truly to be
confirmed from that passage in Genesis 41. 44. I am Pharaoh, which is as much as
to say, I am King, I am Supreme Ruler, I will not part with this Name, i. e. I
will not lose my Royal Dignity and Power. And accordingly he retained this Name
himself, and gave Joseph another, as you read in the next Verse. It might well
then be the General Name of their Kings, it signifying Royal Authority and
Rule. But after the time of Alexander the Great, the Kings of Egypt were
generally called Ptolomees: and after the renouncing of the Greek Emperor they
were a long time called Caliphs: for the General of the Saracens, whom the
Egyptians took for their King, was named Caliph: whence the succeeding Kings
were denominated after his Name. To proceed in this Subject, Attalus was a
Standing Title to all the Kings of Pergamus, though it is true some of them had
a particular peculiar Name besides; whence that King of Pergamus, who was
thought to be the Inventer of Parchment to write upon, is called Attalus by
Aelian and St. Ierom, but Eumenes by others. Antiochus was generally the Name
of the Syrian Kings, and Mithridates of those of Pontus. All the Kings or
Dynasts of Edessa in Syria had the Name of Abgarus. Herod was the Name common
to all the Successors of Herod the first; as we learn from the Gospels and the
Acts. Communi nomine Candacae appellatae sunt. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 29.
Candace gave the Denomination to all the Queens of Ethiopia, or of one part at
least of that Country: Arsaces to all the Kings of Parthia, Sylvius to those of
the Albans, i. e. the Latin Kings of the Trojan Race. Chagan was anciently the
common word to express all the the Kings of the Hunns. Caesar was the Title for
all the Roman Emperors after Julius Caesar. Cos^oe or Kosroes was the
Appellation of the Kings of Persia heretofore, (after that of Artaxerxes) as
Sophi of late: and Sultan is the distinguishing Title of the Turkish Empire:
and Miramolin or Miramomolin of all the Princes of Mauritania. Thus briefly I
have showed, that it was usual for all the Kings of a Country to have the same
Name, for a very considerable time at least. The observing of which may be of
some use to us in reading the Sacred History, when it refers to any of those
Kings whom I first named, and in reading Profane Authors who mention any of the
others.

Lastly, I could observe concerning Places in Scripture, the same that I have
concerning Persons, viz. that sometimes they have different Names, which we
ought carefully to heed in reading this Holy Book. One eminent Mountain in
Palestine and the adjacent Parts, has several Denominations; it is called
Zion, Psalm. 2. 6. and frequently in other Books of the Old Testament. It is
also named Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. the same Mount where Moses saw the Burning
Bush not consumed, and where Isaac was offered, and where the Temple afterward
was built. This Name was so celebrated, that from this the Land of Canaan is
called the Land of Moriah, Genesis 22. 2. The same Mountain is named Hermon, as is
evident from those express words, Deuteronomy. 4. 48. Mount Sion, which is Hermon. It
is also called Sirion, Deuteronomy. 3. 9. which Name was given it by the Sidonians.
And in the same place it has the Name of Shenir, which was given it by the
Amorites. This Multiplicity of Names may, I conceive, be grounded on this, that
Sion or Hermon (or call it by any of the other Names) is, properly speaking, a
long Ledg of several Hills that go through Palestine and a great part of
Arabia. Some add Gilead and Seir, and Lebanon (the famous Alps of the Holy
Land, upon the North and East part of it, noted for its snowy tops, its lofty
Cedars and other Trees, and its fragrant Herbs and Plants.) Some, I say, add
these to the foregoing ones, and rightly determine that they were but one
continued Mountain with diverse Names: as Mount Taurus (though far greater) is a
ridg of Hills that has several Names according to the different Parts of it.
Hence Psalm. 133. 3. and some other places of Scripture mention some of those
Names before spoken of, as if they belonged to different Mountains: and the
reason is, because though they are the same Mountain, yet those Names refer to
the different parts of the same great ridg of Hills, and so are accounted as it
were different Hills: and accordingly the great Mass of Dew which was in part
distilled on Mount Hermon (one division of that great Mountain) did partly also
fall on Mount Zion (a neighboring part of the same Mountain:) which I take to
be the true and genuine meaning of those words of the Psalmist, which have
exercised the Brains of so many Interpreters, As the Dew of Hermon that
descended (as it is according to the Hebrew; or as we translate it, As the Dew
of Hermon, and as the Dew that descended) upon the Mountains of Zion: both
which Translations are reconciled by this Exposition, and the Sense is rendered
entire and perfect. The Dew which descended on both these places was the same,
for some of it fell on this part of the whole Mountain, and some on that; so
that successively Hermon and Zion were partakers of this Blessing. Part of that
Fructifying Moisture which came down upon the one, soon after came down upon
the other.

In the Deserts of Arabia, the Mountain whence God gave the Law to Moses is
called Sinai, Exodus 19. 18. and in other places: yet in Deuteronomy. 4. 10. and
elsewhere, frequently Horeb is the Name of the same Mountain. Though St. Ierom
is of a contrary Opinion, and thinks they are two distinct Mountains, or at
least two ridges of one Mountain. The like may be said of Mount Nebo, the
Arabian Parnassus, which had two Tops, Pisgah and Hor: and by these Names as
well as by the other it was called, Numb. 20. 23, 25. Chapter 27. 12. Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
and it was named also Mount Abarim, Deuteronomy. 32. 49. Numb. 27. 12. It may not be
improbable that Aaron and Moses died on the same Mount, though they are
represented under different Names. But it is most apparent that a double or
treble Name is given to several other places: thus the Salt-Sea, Genesis 14. 3.
Numb. 34. 3. the Sea of the Desert, Deuteronomy. 3. 19. and the Sea of the Plain,
Deuteronomy. 4. 49. signify one and the same place, viz. the Sea of Sodom, which is
called by others the Dead Sea, the Lake Asphaltites, which was caused by the
Destruction of Sodom. The Sea or Lake of Chinnereth, Numb. 34. 11. of
Genesareth, Luke 5. 1. of Tiberias, John 21. 1. of Galilee, John 6. 1. are but
one Lake. Who doubts that Assyria, Chaldea, and Babylon are sometimes
promiscuously used for the same Region, and that Mesopotamia; Charan,
Padan-Aram are one Country? So Galilee and Decapolis are the same: so are
Sichem and Sychar, Genesis 33. 18. John 4. 5. And the like is to be said of Egypt
and Sihor, Isa. 23. 3. Thus Places have more Names than one in the Holy
Writings: which we ought carefully to attend to, lest we run into Mistakes, as
some have done by this Diversity of Names given to the same Place. And this
Difference of Names might be observed in other Instances, which are frequent in
Gentile Writers, as Sparta and Lacedaemon, Troy and Ilium, Thra^ia and Romania,
etc.

And this likewise is to be noted, that some Names of the same Place differ but
a little, i. e. as to a Letter or two, and no more, as Haran, Genesis 12. 5. and
Charran, Acts 7. 2. are the same: so are Sechem, Shechem, and Sychem, Genesis 33.
18. Josh. 20. 7. Acts 7. 16. The same is to be said of Shiloah, Isa. 8. 6.
Siloah, Neh. 3. 15. Siloam, John 9. 7. Luke 13. 4. all three the same: as
Kidron, 2 Samuel 15. 23. and Cedron, John 18. 1. are the same Brook. So
Zarephath, 1 Kings 17. 9. and Sarepta, Luke 4. 26. are the same Town: Megiddo,
2 Kings 9. 27. and Megiddon, Zech. 12. 11. the same Valley: Zin, Numb. 13. 21.
Deuteronomy. 32. 51. and Sin, Exodus 16. 1. Numb. 33. 12. the same Wilderness: (though
some have thought these two latter words denote different places.) Concerning
some things mentioned in Scripture we should distinguish between them, though
they differ not much in Writing and Pronunciation, especially when they are of
the same Species, as Sardine, Rev. 4. 3. Sardius, the same precious Stone, Rev.
21. 20. but Sardonix is a Stone different from that, Rev. 21. 20. Though some
Names differ a little, yet they signify the same thing, as Sycamine, Luke 17.
6. and Sycamore, Chapter 19. 4. But these are small things, and in which there is
no great danger if there should be any mistake, and therefore I will not
entertain you any longer with these, but hasten to more important Matter. But
having spoken so largely of this First Head, I will be brief in that which
follows.

CHAP. X.
There are Words in the Hebrew Text which have not only Different but Contrary
Significations: which is another cause of some Difficulty in Scripture. This
exemplified in several Hebrew Nouns, more especially Tsagnir, Mic. 5. 2. which
signifies both little and great, and accordingly this place is reconciled with
Matthew. 2. 6. Likewise Hebrew Verbs bear a Contrary Sense, of which sundry
Instances are given. More particularly, the true import of the Verb Barak, Job
2. 9. is narrowly searched into, and the Author's particular Sense concerning
that Text is propounded and defended. Some Greek words in the New Testament
signify Contrary things. And the like Discrepancy is observed in some words in
other Greek Authors, and in some among the Latins.

I Proceed in the second place to observe, That there are words in the Hebrew
Text which have not only Different but Contrary Significations, which cannot
but render some parts of the Scripture difficult. That is, they will be so till
we have thoroughly examined the words, and found out the peculiar Signification
which they have in the Texts that are before us. Thus Shethum is rendered open,
as in Numb. 24. 3. [ the Man whose Eyes are open:] and yet this Hebrew word
signifies in all other places of Scripture (where it is) shutting of the Eyes.
Chesed denotes Beneficence, Goodness, Piety, and the height of them, and also
Cruelty, Malice, and all Excess of Evil, and whatever is Reproachful and
Ignominious in the Life of Man: thence R. Levi, Mercerus, Cocceius.
some render those words Vechesed leummim chattah, Prove. 14. 34. The Piety of
Nations is Sin, because whilst they worship Idols they think they serve God;
and others understand the place according to our Translation, Sin is the
Reproach of any People: which is much to be preferred before the other Version,
because it exactly answers to the former Clause. The word Cherem is both that
which is consecrated to God, and that which is Accursed and devoted to the
Devil, as I have showed in another place. An impure Catamite, a Sodomite is
called Kadesh, from Kadash, ^acer fuit: and Kedeshah, which is no other than
Sanctificata, is taken for a Common Prostitute. The word Tsagnir is both little
and great, and accordingly Mich. 5. 2. may be rendered either Thou Bethlehem
Ephratah, thou art little, or art great among the thousands of Judah. The not
attending to this, has occasioned no small trouble among Expositors, whilst
they labor to reconcile this Text with Mat. 2. 6. where it is quoted by the
Jewish Doctors and Priests, and Bethlehem is said to be not the least. But the
Learned Dr. Pocock* on the place says, that he had it from a very
Understanding Jew, that the Hebrew word Tsagnir signifies both little and
great, and others that have good Skill in that Tongue assert the same. It is to
be understood in this place in the latter Sense, and so the words ought to be
rendered thus, Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, thou art great among the Thousands (or
among the Princes) of Judah; for the Principalities were divided into Chiliads
or Thousands, Judge. 6. 15. 1 Samuel 10. 19. Thus the Prophet Micah and the
Evangelist Matthew agree, for great and not the least are here the same. And
certainly it is a far better way of reconciling them, than that which a Sir
Norton Knatchbull 's Annotations on St. Matthew.
Late Writer propounds, viz. That whereas we read it Tsagnir, it should be read
(...) progredere, go forth: for (besides that this somewhat marr's the Sense of
the place) if we go this way to work, we may alter a great many places in the
Old Testament, and in the New too, and substitute one word for another when we
please, and so we shall lose a great part of the Bible in a short time: this
therefore is not to be allowed of by any means. There are other Nouns of a
Contrary Signification, as Terugnah, which is both a Joyful Shout, Psalm. 33. 3.
and a Mournful Cry, Jer. 20. 16. Chesel is not only Inconstancy or Levity, but
Constancy or Stedfastness and Confidence. And there is a very great
Discrepancy, if not Contrariety in the rendrings of the word Deshen, which is
sometimes Ashes and sometimes Fatness. But if we be mindful of the Subject
Matter spoken of, we cannot miss of the true Sense.

But the Verbs which bear a Contrary Sense, are most remarkable: thus Sakal is
lapidare, lapidibus obruere, commonly: also elapidare, lapides amovere, Isa.
62. 10. Chasar is consecrari, Psalm. 18. 26. and execrari, Prove. 25. 10. Salah
is aestimare, Job 28. 16, 19. and spernere, conculcare, Psalm. 119. 118. Shub is
reducere, convertere; and avertere, rebellare: both Senses are common in
Scripture. Iaphang is to be bright and shining: yet it may seem to be taken in
a contrary Signification, in Job 10. 22. according to Pagnin's Translation,
tenebrescit sicut caligo, and the Vulgar Latin favors it. Tamam or tam, has a
contrary Sense, for it signifies to perfect or finish, as in Dan. 9. 24. to
finish the Vision: and also to consume, as in Ezekiel. 22. 15. I will consume thy
Filthiness out of thee. Kadash, in the usual Import of it, is to sanctify, but
it is used in a quite opposite Sense in Deuteronomy. 22. 9. lest the Fruit of thy
Vineyard be defiled. So for other Verbs, it is common to find them in Contrary
Meanings; as Iarash, to possess or inherit, commonly in Scripture; and to
dispossess or disinherit, to expel, reject and impoverish, Genesis 45. 11. and in
other Places; both which contrary Senses occur together in Josh. 23. 5. He
shall expel them from before you, and ye shall possess their Land. Expelling
and Possessing are the same Hebrew Verb; though in different Conjugations. So
Chata in Kal is to sin, but in Piel to expiate or take away Sin. There is no
other way to know the proper Rendrings of these and other Words
beforementioned, but by a diligent attending to the Scope and Design of the
Texts where they are. And thus we shall perceive which of the Senses is
designed, though sometimes this is done with some Difficulty. I will make
choice of a Text to enlarge upon to this purpose. The Instances are very usual
in Scripture.

Barak signifies both to bless and to curse, and in some Places it may seem not
very easy to tell which of these is intended, as in those Words of Job's Wife,
Job 2. 9. (...), which the Vulgar Latin renders benedic Deo, bless God. Arias
Montanus and Munster follow this Version, and so does the Learned and Pious Mr.
Perkins, and accordingly he renders the Verse thus, Do thou still retain
thine Integrity? bless God, and die; and makes this to be the Sense of it, Thou
being now sorely afflicted by God, and brought even to Death's Door, begin now
at length to cast away thy Conceitedness of thy own Righteousness, acknowledge
God's Hand upon thee for thy Sins, confess those Sins before him, pray for the
Pardon of them, and so end thy Days. This was good Counsel, (says this Worthy
Person) although the applying of it was mixed with Mistake and Folly; and
therefore Job told his Wife, that she spoke like one of the foolish Women. But
the Septuagint seem to take the Words in Another and Contrary Sense, and render
[ Barek Elohim] by (...), speak some Word, or say something against the Lord,
(for the Praeposition (...) may signify so) which approaches toward Our
Translation, Curse God: As if Job's Wife had said to her Husband, Thou have no
reason to speak well of God, thou have been undeservedly tormented by him; thou
have been an upright and righteous Man, and yet none has met with such
Calamities and Plagues as thou have done; therefore my Advice to thee is, that
thou would even curse and blaspheme God himself, and then make an end of thy
miserable Life, by laying violent Hands on thy self. In this Sense the word
Barak is thought generally to be taken in 1 Kings 21. 13. Naboth did blaspheme
God, though even there the Greek Interpreters render it, he blessed God; unless
by (...) (which is the Word used by them) be meant (...) which very (...).
Suidas. (...). Hesych.
Good Authors tell us is the Sense of the Word sometimes by an Antiphrasis.
Thus as the Jam. 3. 9.
Apostle says, with the same Tongue, with the same Mouth, so with the same
Word we both bless and curse: for the same Word both in Hebrew and Greek is
used sometimes for both. But it is my Opinion that the Word in the former Place
need not be rendered either bless or curse, but that there is a middle
Signification of it there. That we may apprehend this the better, we must know
what the first and original Sense of the Verb Barak is, which I perceive few
have enquired into. It appears from the best Hebrew Grammarians and
Lexicographers that I have met with, that this Word primitively signifies to
salute, or greet; in which abstract Sense it is used twice in 2 Kings 4. 29. If
thou meet any Man, salute him not: and if any salute thee, answer him not
again. The Hebrew Word which we translate salute, is Barak. So in Genesis 47. 7.
10. this Word is used to express Jacob's solemn Saluting of Pharaoh at his
coming before him, and at his going out of his Presence: Jacob saluted (we
render it blessed) Pharaoh. But because Kneeling was a Posture of Salutation,
Barak signifies also to kneel, or to salute one with bowing the Knee. And
thence Berek a Knee, and thence some have imagined the word Abrek comes, which
we read was proclaimed before Joseph when he rid forth in State, signifying (as
they think) that the People ought to salute him most humbly, and even to bow
the Knee to him. This is certain that Significat vel genu vel sermonem flectere
ad aliquem. alloqui cum geniculatione. Forster. Heb. Dict.
Barak is a general Word for Saluting (whether at meeting or parting) either by
Word or Gesture, and is equivalent with the Greek word (...). And because at
such times they generally used to bow the Knee, it has that particular
Signification; as in 2 Chronicles. 16. 13. (...), according to the LXX. So in Dan.
6. 10. (...). And in Genesis 24. 11. the Kneeling down of Camels to take up their
Burden is expressed by it. Yea, the word Barak is sometimes transferred from
its signification of Civil Respect and Kneeling, and applied unto Religious
Worship, as in 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. Solomon (when he prayed) kneeled upon his Knees,
etc. And in Psalm. 95. 6. Let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. The Word is
here made use of to denote bending the Knee in Divine Worship, and prostrating
themselves before God. So that this word Barak in the Original Denotation of it
answers to the word Nashak, which signifies to salute in a lowly and humble
manner, to submit and do Obeisance: and more particularly Kissing is expressed
by it, which was a Token of Homage and Subjection of old, 1 Samuel 10. 1. But
from this first and simple Import of the Word another arises, which is this,
viz. to take leave of one, because Salutations and Greetings at last end in
this. Men part and go their way after a short saluting and accosting one
another. Thus the Word is taken in 2 Samuel 14. 22. Joab ^ell to the Ground on
his Face, and bowed himself, and thanked the King: Hebr. Jeberek, he took his
leave of him; he made that Salutation which was becoming at his going out of
his Presence. In which Notion it likewise answers to Nashak, which (besides its
former Sense) signifies to take leave of, to bid adieu to one, as in Genesis 31.
28. therefore that Valedictory Salutation of Kissing was called Neshikah
Parashah, osculum separationis, the Kiss at parting or taking their leave of
one another. And then there is another derivative Sense of the Word, which
flows both from this and the former meaning of it, and that is twofold; for
Persons are wont at Saluting and taking Leave, to wish well or ill to one
another, and to express these by good or evil Words; whence it is that Barak is
either been or male precari, it imports either to bless or to curse. This, as I
take it, is the true and exact Account of the Word: and so you see what is the
primary and more restrained Acception of it, and what is the secondary and more
general Sense of it. Now that which I offer is this, that the Word in that
Place of Job is to be understood chiefly in the first and most proper
Denotations of it, i. e. as it signifies humbly to salute, to bow down and do
Obeisance: or, as it signifies, to take one's leave. According to the former
Acception of the Word Job's Wife speaks thus to him, Do not continue to retain
thine Integrity, or to hold fast thy Perfection, (as it is in the Original) Do
not justify thy self before God, as if thou were void of all Guilt, but with
humble Reverence bow thy self before the Lord, adore and worship the most High,
and submit thy self to him, and acknowledge thy Meanness and Sinfulness: Do
thus, and then thou may die with Peace and Comfort. In this only she might
incur the Imputation of speaking foolishly, because she (like Job's Friends
afterward) had wrong Apprehensions of this Good Man, and imagined that he
justified himself, and was in his own Thoughts a Sinless Person. Or else this
was the Worser Language of that Woman, Take now thy leave of God, and die, i.
e. seeing thou art in this miserable Condition, smote with fore Boils from the
Sole of thy Foot to the Crown of thy Head, (ver. 7.) think not of living, but
rather desire to quit this World, and to be gone: Bid God adieu, take your
Farewell of him, and only beg this of him, that you may die as soon as may be.
Or, you may suppose this Woman's Language, or Meaning rather, to be much worser
yet, even after this sort, Take your last Val^ of Heaven, utterly renounce God,
(as well as your Integrity) shake him off, and have nothing to do with him,
since he deals so severely with you; abandon him for ever, and hasten out of
the World. Though this be not so harsh as downright Cursing of God, yet this
was indeed speaking like one of the foolish sottish Women, as he roundly told
her, v. 10. The Style was something too rough to say, Curse God. She would not
speak after that rate to her Pious Confort; but she impiously counsels him to
take his Leave of God and Religion, and to bid an eternal Farewell to both. In
three other Places in this Book the Word is taken in this latter Sense, (for it
is most probable that in this particular Book the Word is always used in the
same Meaning) as in chapter 1. 5. It may be my Sons have as 'twere taken their
leave of (i. e. tacitly renounced) God in their Hearts, in the midst of their
Pleasures and Entertainments: it may be they have had an Aversion to God, they
have in some measure departed from him: for it is not likely that Job's
Children openly blasphemed, or (strictly speaking) cursed God. So that part of
the 11th Verse of this Chapter, and of the 5th of the next, which we translate,
he will curse thee to thy Face, seems to be too harsh a Representation (even
from the Mouth of the Devil) of that Holy Man's Carriage; for though he cursed
the Day of his Birth, he never cursed and blasphemed the Almighty, and that to
his Face, i. e. openly and audaciously: but he might be said in some Degree to
have forsaken and abandoned God, and to have turned himself from him, by
indulging too much to Impatience and Murmuring. And not only these Places in
Job, but that in 1 Kings beforementioned, which we translate thus, Naboth
blasphemed or cursed God and the King, may be understood in this Sense. He by
certain Actions discovered (as was pretended) that he had forsaken God, and
revolted from his Duty to the King. But I submit this to the Judgment of the
Learned. Thus you see that Words of Different, much more of Contrary
Significations, occasion some Difficulty in interpreting the Texts where they
are found. There are many See in the End of the Book.
Other Hebrew Words in Scripture which signify Contrary things; the Sense
sometimes as well as the Letters, must be read backwards.

Nor is the Greek wholly destitute of such Words, as in Tit. 1. 12. (...) may
be rendered either slow or quick Bellies, for (...) is both piger and celer. The
Cretians, of whom this is spoken, might be said to be Slow Bellies, because
they were given to Idleness and Gluttony; or they might be called Quick
Bellies, because they were Greedy and Fierce Eaters. Other Greek Words (some of
which occur in the New Testament) might be taken notice of, which have both a
good and a bad Sense, and so come under this Head: as (...) (a remarkable Word,
beginning with three Alpha's) is valdenoxius and innoxius: (...) is Inflammatio
and Pituita, a cold Humor: (...) bears a good Sense in its Primitive
Acception, and is no more than any Likeness or Image: but it also (and that
most frequently) signifies such an Image or Representation to which is given
Religious Worship. (...) and (...), were at first used to signify only
Curiosity, but afterwads they were taken in a worse Sense by some Authors, and
particularly by St. Luke, Acts 19. 19. (...) signifies to have more than
another; but withal, to have more than one ought to have, to defraud and
circumvent: yea, to defraud and injure by Adultery, as St. Chrysostom and Dr.
Hammond observe on 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. So (...), which is an honest Word, was
applied heretofore to a bad sort of Women, little better than Concubines; yea,
Harlots, as we read in In Epist. ad Philem. v. 2.
Theodoret and Haeres. 78.
Epiphanius. And so (...) was abused, as St. Epist. 22. ad Eustoch.
Ierom complains. The same is commonly said of (...), which was a good Word at
first, and signified a King, but afterward a Tyrant. (...) was a Professor of
Wisdom, and one that excelled in any useful Science; but at last it signified a
mere Pretender to Art. So (...) is a wholesome Medicine, and a deadly Poison.
(...) though it is well known it has an ill Sense, yet John 2. 10.
sometimes (like the Hebrew Genesis 43. 34.
(...)) is no more than ubertim expleri. So among the Latins, the same Word
sometimes has a Contrary Meaning: thus Expers is one that has not Experience
or Skill, and one that has. Religio is taken for downright Superstition and
Bigotry, as well as the Due Worship of God. Sacer, by an usual Antiphrasis, is
made to signify that Person or Thing which is so far from being Holy, that it
is most Profane and Desecrate, most Cursed and Detestable, most Pernicious and
Destructive. So ignis sacer is reckoned among the most Dangerous sorts of
Ulcers by Lib. 5.
Celsus: it is also the Name of the Erysipelas, called by Lib. 26. c. 11.
Pliny Zoster, and was thought to be extremely pernicious and fatal when it
encompassed the Part. And the sacer ignis in the Close of Virgil's third Book
of Georgicks is interpreted to be the same by some Commentators; by others the
(...), and called sacer, because of its Great Malignity. Villanus was once an
honest Rustic, (as Budaeus observes) but now is a Name of Infamy. So Missa,
the Mass, was an innocent Word at first, and signified no other than the
Service of the Church, but afterward it degenerated into a very bad one, and
is appropriated to the Idolatrous Worship of the Church of Rome. But enough of
this.

CHAP. XI.
Some Difficulties in Scripture arise from the Matter or Manner of things
delivered, wherein prejudiced Minds fancy some Repugnancy or Contradiction. The
Cavils against Genesis 4. 14. largely and fully answered. Numb. 14. 30. reconciled
with Josh. 14. 1. chapter 22. 13. The seeming Repugnancy of 1 Samuel 16. 22, 23, to
chap. 17. ver. 55. removed. The Geometrical Scruple about the brazen Laver, 2 Chronicles. 4. 2. dispelled. Another Objection concerning it founded on 1 Kings 7.
26. compared with 1 Chronicles. 4. 5. answered. The Contradiction which some fancy
in 2 Chronicles. 14. 5. compared with 1 Kings 15. 14. taken away. A satisfactory
Reply to the Cavil against Matthew. 27. 9. The double Repugnancy conceived by
some to be in Acts 7. 15. plainly solved. John 5. 31. considered with chapter 8.
ver. 14. showed to be void of Contradiction. The same proved concerning our
Savior's Words in Matthew. 10. 34. Heb. 9. 4. is not contrary to 1 Kings 8. 9.

IN the third Place I will show, that not only from the Different and Contrary
Significations of Words, but from Other Causes, viz. relating to the Matter it
self, or the Manner of what is spoken of, or the Reference of one Text to
another, or the Duration of Time, or some other Circumstances, the Style of
Scripture becomes Dark and Perplexed. Here I will produce some particular
Scripture-Difficulties which arise on these Accounts; and I will endeavor to
resolve them. First, There seem to be in the very Matter and Manner of things
delivered in Scripture (for I will promiscuously speak of them both) very great
Absurdities, Repugnances, and Contradictions. There seem, I say, i. e. to
prejudiced and vitiated Minds there appear to be such; but no Man of deliberate
Thoughts and an honest Heart will look upon them as so. I will not regard them
so much as to insist long upon them, but a few I will mention, that they and
the rest may not be thought Insuperable Difficulties. I will begin with Genesis 4.
14. which I find alleged by some as a great Blemish in Scripture, It shall
come to pass that every one that finds me shall slay me. I begin, I say, with
this Passage of Holy Writ, not because it is really Difficult, but because it
is represented such by some ill-minded Men, who thereby think to invalidate the
Truth of the Sacred History. Mr. Hobbes, and others of the same temper, have
taken notice of such Passages as these in the Bible, and endeavor by the
exposing of them to diminish the Authority of the Scriptures, and at the same
time to shake the Credit of the whole Body of the Inspired Writings. For thus
they vent their Cavils against that place, How could Cain say, that Every one
who found him would slay him when there was nobody at that time in the World
but his Father and Mother, and his Wife? Had the World been peopled, then
indeed the guilty Man (if we may call him so) might have had occasion to fear
that some body would seek to revenge the Death of Abel. But there could be no
ground of Fear when the World was so empty as we read it was: wherefore these
words of Cain contradict the plain History of Moses. When he says, Every one
that finds me, etc. it is implied that there were a great many at that time in
the World, which disagrees with what the same History delivers, viz. That there
were no more than Adam and his Wife, and their Son Cain and his Wife then
extant. To which I answer,

1. It is with too much Confidence averred by these Objectors, that there were
but four Persons at that time in being. For this is a thing which they can
never prove: and the reason is, because Adam might have more Children than Cain
and his Wife, though they are not mentioned; and these Children might have Sons
and daughters: So that it is not improbable that Mankind was then consider^bly
increased. He knows nothing of the Style of Scripture who knows not this, that
some things are supposed, others are touched upon only, and there are others
that are fully set down, and sometimes repeated. I am now speaking of the first
sort of things: we must necessarily suppose them to be done, though there be no
mention of them at all. A great many things (and those very consid^rable) as
the Creation of Angels, the Covenant entered into between God and our First
Parents, the celebrating of the Seventh Day, the instituting of Sacrifices, and
such like are omitted in the Book of Genesis. And when you observe that Moses
in the six first Chapters of this Book (and those but brief ones) compriseth
the History of the World from the Creation to the Flood, i. e. the Transactions
of Sixteen hundred Years and upward, you cannot but acknowledge that a vast
num^er of Passages which happened in that time are wholly left out. This in
part we may gather from the Writings of the New Testament, where some
particular things are mentioned that refer to the Affairs of the Old Testament,
but we find them not named there. As Enoch's Prophecy concerning the Last
Judgment is spoken of by St. Jude, ver. 14. but there is not a word of it in
that place of Genesis which speaks of him. The particular Persons that
withstood Moses, viz. Iannes and Iambres, are mentioned in 2 Timothy 3. 8. but
their Names are not set down in Exodus, which was the proper place for them.
The famous Contrast of the Good and Evil Angels about the Body of Moses, i. e.
the burying of it, is recorded by St. Jude, ver. 9. but there is not a word of
it in Deuteronomy. 34. where there is particular mention of his burying, ver. 6.
Whence it appears, that many things were done in those times concerning which
Moses wrote (or Whosoever it was that made a Supplement to his Writings) which
are not recorded. Nor are we to find fault with the Sacred History for this,
for if it be part of the Work of an Historian (as one who was such acquaints
us) Dionys. Halicarn.
to know what things are to be committed to History, and what things are to be
past in silence, to know from whence to take his beginning, and how far he is
to go, certainly Moses, who was skilled in all other Learning as well as that
of the Egyptians, and who moreover was an Inspired Person, knew what belonged
to this part of an Historian, inserted into the Pentateuch those things only
which the Holy Spirit thought fit to be committed to writing, and the rest
(which were exceeding numerous) were passed by* But though they were so, yet we
have no reason wholly to disbelieve them, but where they are fairly intimated
or supposed in the Sacred History, we ought to credit them as if they were
particularly and expressly mentioned. Thus, in the present case, though it is not
expressly recorded in the Fourth Chapter of Genesis, that there were any more
Persons at that time on the Earth than those four, yet it is reasonable to
think that there was a greater number, because we know that the History of
Moses is very short and contracted, and is wont to leave out several
considerable things, which we of our selves may gather and infer from what is
in express terms set down. There might then be, and it is most probable that
there were more People in the world at that time than those whose Names we meet
with. Moses gives us but two Genealogies, one of Cain, the other of Seth, but
it is likely there were some other Descents, whereby Adam's Race was increased
and multiplied. Wherefore notwithstanding the samll number of Persons named by
this Writer, it is rational to believe that there were many more living on the
Earth. We read presently after, ver. 17. that Cain built a City, which would
employ a considerable number of Men; yea, though we suppose it to consist of
some rude and slight Structures, and walled perhaps with Mud. This makes it
probable that the number of Persons was greater than the Objectors imagine.
Besides, Cain and his Wife there might be many other Sons and Daughters of
Adam; and there might be many Sons of Abel, who this Murderer might justly fear
would avenge their Father's Blood. Wherefore Cain had reason to say, Every one
that finds me shall slay me.

But, S^condly, Not granting but only supposing that there were th^n no more
Persons in the World than Adam and Eve, and their ungracious Son Cain and his
Wife, yet it is not to be wondered that he cried out, Every one that finds m^,
etc. for this is to be thought of, that his Guilty Conscience was able to make
more Men in the World than there were. This Vile Murderer might be afraid of
his Life, although w^ should grant that there were none in the World to take it
away. The inward Fears and Horror^ of his own Mind could present those things
to his Imagination which really were not, and then it is not strange if he
fancied every where Assassines and Murderers, as the just Recompe^sers of that
i^nocent and righteous Blood which he had most b^rbarously spilt. It is weakly
said by some in behalf of Cain, that he did not intend to kill his ^^other,
although he purposed to do him some har^, because (a^ Dr. Brown's Vulgar Errors.
One represents their Opinion) he did not know whether there was any such thing
as Killing or no: he was ignorant of Mortality, having never seen an Example of
it. But though he had not seen such an Example, yet it does not follow thence
that he understood not what Death or Killing was: for then it may as well be
said that Adam know not the meaning of God's Words, when he said to him, Thou
shall die (...) Death, b^caus^ at that time he had no Example of it before his
Eyes. Besides, it is not to be questioned that ^h^re were Examples of it,
though not in his own kind; for it is likely he daily beheld his Father Adam
slaying of Sheep or other Animals, in order to the sacrificing of them, (for
Sacrificing was the first Worship in the World) and he saw his Brother Abel do
the like, as is expressly recorded in this Chapter, where it is said, that he
offered the Firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat thereof, ver. 4. which he
could not do without killing them f^rst. So that Cain had an Example of Killing
and Death just before he practiced the same on his Brother. yea, perhaps ^he
one suggested to him the other, and being enraged with Anger against his
Brother, he resolved that he should fall a Sacrifice to his Fury. And this
Bloody Fact of his can admit of no Excuse, because it was the product of
perfect Malice, as appears from that account which an Inspired Writer has
given of it, telling us, that Cain was of that wicked one, viz. Satan, and
therefore slew his Brother, because his own Works were Evil, and his Brother's
Righteous, 1 John 3. 12. The grand Aggravations of his Murder were, that he
killed his Own Brother, and that he killed him because he was Good and
Righteous. Now, we may reasonably think that this Guilty Wretch, when he came
to entertain serious Thoughts, and to reflect on his Execrable Paricide, grew
very Black and Melancholic. Though God reprieved this Malefactor as to his
Life, yet he severely animadverted upon him by that Terror and distraction of
Mind, by that Horror of Conscience which he inflicted on him. He had Pashur's
Doom of Magor Missabib, i. e. Fear round about, Jer. 20. 3. but especially (as
it follows there) he was a Terror to himself. That this has been the Fate of
Murderers is evident from such Instances as these: Herod, who commanded John
Baptist to be beheaded, was afterward miserably tormented with the thoughts of
it, and fancied that Holy Man was risen from the Dead, and was alive again,
Mark 6. 16. Tacitus tells us of the Emperor Tiberius, who was a Man of Blood,
and under whom our Blessed Lord was crucified, that he was so troubled and
haunted, Tiberium non fortunae, non solitudines protegebant quin pectoris
tormenta suasque ipse poenas fateretur. Annal. c. ^*
that neither his great Fortunes, nor the Retirement which he sometimes made
trial of, could silence those Tortures which he felt in his Breast. Nero, that
Bloody Villain, after he had put to Death his Cousin German, his Mother, his
Wife, his Tutour, knew not what to do with himself; Sueton. in Nerone, cap. 34.
he was affrighted with Specters, beaten by Furies, and burning Torches were
flung at him, especially he was molested and plagued with the Apparition of his
Mother's Ghost, whom he had inhumanely and unnaturally murdered. Theodorick the
King of Goths, was constantly haunted after the Murder of Symmachus and
Boethius, and so ended his days in that torment of Mind. Charles the Ninth of
France (as a Thuanu^.
faithful Historian acquaints us) after the Parisian Massacre was a continual
Terror to himself, though he used all Arts to divert his Thoughts, and when he
awakned in the Nights, labored to chase away his Affrightments by Music,
which he constantly called for. These are some of the Transcripts which History
affords us of that First Murderer's inward Terrors and Disquietudes. Mine
Iniquity, says he, is greater than can be forgiven, ver. 13. (for so the words
may be rendered:) the Guilt of that Horrid Crime which I have committed is
unpardonable, I utterly despair of the Divine Mercy. And this Despair was not
only his Sin but his Punishment: (wherefore some read it, My Punishment is
greater than I can bear.) So that he anticipated the Miseries of the Damned,
(of whom he was the first of Humane Kind) and was in Hell while he was here on
Earth. Now it was that Dreadful Mormo's and Phantoms possessed his restless
Brain, and he increased his Terrors by Imagination. He was afraid of his own
Father and Mother, and of his Female-self; and his disordered Fancy represented
many more Persons to him: for a Troubled Conscience fears where no Fear is, it
fears Men where there are none in being. Whence such Language as this is very
accountable, Every one that finds me shall slay me. This is a satisfactory
Answer, upon Supposal (for I proceed only on that here) that there were no more
Men in the World at that time than are expressly mentioned in Genesis. A
Disturbed Mind has a Creating Power, and can make more Inhabitants on the
Earth than God has made.

Thirdly, Supposing still that the Number of Men was not greater than it is
represented in the Sacred Records, yet this Speech of Cain is very accountable,
for we may understand it of People that were not yet born, but to come
afterward. Observe therefore that it is spoken in the Future Tense, It shall
come to pass, that every on^ that finds me shall slay me. Cain being
reprieved, and suffered to wander up and down, and consequently to live some
Years afterward, it may be rational to think that he refers in these words to
what should be in those days. When Mankind shall be propagated, and the World
be peopled, th^n I shall go in fear of my Life, then every one that finds me
will slay me. And unto this the nex^ words may have relation, Whosoever slays
C^in, Vengeance shall be taken of him sevenfold: And moreover, The Lord set a
mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him, ver. 15. Lest in
aftertimes any one hearing of this bloody and cursed Fact of his should be
excited to revenge it on his own Head, there was a Mark set upon this Vile
Wanderer, to distinguish him from the rest of Mankind: but what it was we know
not, though the Jews have many idle and foolish Conjectures about it. And a
Penalty was threatened to be inflicted on the Person who should dare to kill
him: he was to be punished sevenfold, ver. 15. or in the seventh Generation,
as Munster and some others interpret it: which implies, that Cain was to be a
Long-liver, to continue seven, i. e. many Generations. So that we may look on
these Words as having reference to the Times that were to come, and not to the
present Season wherein they were spoke. It shall come to pass, says he, that
in future time, when the World is increased, every one who finds me shall be
greedy to take away my Life, because I most inhumanely bereaved my Brother of
his. Thus there is no Contradiction or Inconsistency in the words, when it is
said, Every one that finds me, etc.

But in the fourth and last place, it might be answered, (if what I have said
already be not satisfactory) that this word Kol, every one, has not reference
to Men but to Beasts. Every one is every Wild Beast. He was afraid, says
Antiqu. l. 1. c. 3.
Josephus, lest while he wandered up and down in the Earth, (which was part of
his Punishment) he should fall among some Beasts, and be slain by them. God
bids him not fear any such thing, for he would set such a Mark on him, that the
very Irrational Animals should be capable of knowing and discerning it. Every
one is not necessarily to be understood of Men or Women, but may be meant of
the Brutes which were then upon Earth, and might be Executioners of the Divine
Vengeance on him who was so savage and brutish. It will be very hard for any
Man to disprove this, and therefore it is sufficient to take off and null the
Cavil of the Objectors. But, I confess, I rather think it is spoken not of this
sort of Creatures, but of those Inhabitants of the Earth that were Intelligent.
Thus you see there is no Absurdity or Inconsistency in those words which Cain
uttered, and which are set down by the Sacred Historian, whether you understand
them of the then instant time, or of that which was afterward. Some Men of
Profane and Atheistical Spirits, and who have studied to impair the Truth and
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and particularly of Moses's Writings, have
exposed this Place as disagreeing with the rest of the Sacred Story concerning
the first Rise and Propagation of the World. But this is a very shallow and
vain Attempt, and grounded chiefly on Prejudice and Ill Will against the
Inspired Volume of Scripture. I have made it clear, that there is no Absurdity,
or any thing that looks like it, in the words abovementioned: and I defy that
Man who pretends to give any Satisfactory Answer to the Particulars which I
have offered in defense of them.

Again, it is said, That none save Caleb and Joshua should come into the Land of
Canaan, Numb. 14. 30. and yet we read that Eleazar and others entered into that
Land, Ios. 14. 1. Chap. 22. 13. This is objected by some as a Passage in
Scripture derogatory to the Truth of it. But if we will read the Holy Book with
the same Candor and Ingenuity wherewith we read other Authors, we shall not be
offended at this, or the like Passages. For nothing is more common in the most
serious and considerate Writers, than to speak things by way of Restriction and
Limitation, (as those words are spoken) and yet to leave them to be understood
with some Latitude, which shall afterward be expressed and explained when they
speak of the same Matter. So here we read that none but Caleb and Joshua entered
into the Land of Promise, this being spoken of the Chief Leaders that had that
Privilege and Honor; but then, if we consult other places where this thing is
more particularly related, we shall find that a Larger meaning was not
excluded. We cannot think that the Tribe of Levi were denied entrance into that
blessed Land, because it is evident from the History, that they murmured not,
and it is as evident that 'twas threatened to the Murmurers only, that they
should not see the Land which God swore unto their Fathers, Numb. 14. 22, 23.
therefore Eleazar and Phineas being Priests, are excepted. Again, it cannot be
meant of those that at that time were gone to spy the Land of Canaan, for they
were none of the Murmurers, and therefore that Threatening before cited does not
reach them, and consequently those words are consistent with what we read in
other places relating to this matter.

But That in 1 Samuel 16. 22, 23. is cried out against as an unanswerable
Repugnancy to Chap. 17. 55. for in the former we are told, that David came to
Court, and stood before King Saul, i. e. waited continually upon him, and
played upon the Heart before him* and was greatly beloved of him, and became his
Aymour-bearer: and yet in the latter we read that Saul did not know David* but
asked who he was, Whose Son is this Youth? These seem to be very repugnant to
one another, but there is really no such thing: all is clear and obvious* for
in Chap. 17. 15. it is said, David went, and returned from Saul, to feed his
Father's Sheep at Bethlehem. He stayed not long at Court, either because he
liked not that manner of Life, or because Saul was weary of him. David then
having been absent from Saul a considerable time, and following a Country-Life,
and now appearing perhaps in his Shepherd's Weeds, it is no wonder that Saul
did not well know him. This, I think is sufficient of it self, and clears the
Text of all Contradiction: though I know there are other Solutions used by the
Learned, as that of our English Rabbi, Saul (says he) asked whose Son David
was, not that he was ignorant who he was; but he only enquired who that was
that had such a Son. The question is not of David's Person, but Parentage. So
Lightfoot.

Others are more Curious in their Objections, as thus, Whereas the Diameter in
respect of the Circumference, is as seven to two and twenty, this is not
observed in 2 Chronicles. 4. 2. speaking of the brazen Laver, and by consequence the
Geometry of Scripture is faulty. In answer to these men who are such
Well-willers to the Mathematics, I say first, That the Proportion of a
Diameter to its Circle is not exactly as seven to two and twenty: therefore
these Gentlemen are not exact themselves. Secondly, I say this, that the
Scripture oftentimes speaks after the Vulgar manner, (as I have showed
elsewhere) and it is likely it does so here, and then we must not expect
Accuracy of Words or Things. The Bible was not calculated for them only that
can square a Circle, or that understand all the Mysteries of Algebra. Thirdly,
If this does not satisfy, I answer, that the Circumference of the brazen Sea
was not exactly Round, but it may be toward an Oval Figure, which makes some
alteration as to the Proportion of the Diameter. It was ten Cubits from brim to
brim, and a Line of thirty Cubits did compass it round about, says the Text:
but if it had been quite orbicular, the Circumference must have been one and
thirty Cubits. Or, perhaps in this place (as in several others) a round Number
is expressed, and the remainder being so small and inconsiderable is omitted.

But further it is Objected, that this Molten Sea or Laver is said to contain
2000 Baths, 1 Kings 7. 26. but in 1 Chronicles. 4. 5. we read that it received and
held 3000 Baths; therefore some infer, that one of these places is faulty, and
ought to be corrected. I answer, there is no need of it; because both these are
consistent. The Laver was of that vast dimension, that it could hold 3000 Baths
of Water, but it generally and usually contained but 2000. In a Synagogue of
the Jews at Amsterdam, there is one of these Lavers, and thence we may solve
the seeming difficulty: they fill it up to the Neck, but not higher: but if
they would fill it higher, it would contain much more. The Neck is large and of
another figure, and is capable of receiving a third part more.

Another Place which they alledg, cannot, they will tell you, be answered any
of these ways, for it plainly Contradicts another place of Scripture It is said
of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 5. he took away the high Places; but in 1 Kings 15. 14. it
is expressly recorded that the high Places were not removed by him. I answer
first, there were two sorts of high Places, namely some where they worshipped
Idols and False Gods, others where they worshipped the True God. The former were
taken away, as is intimated to us when it is said, he took away the high Places
and Images, i. e. the high Places where those Images were adored: but the
latter were not taken away, the Reformation which he had set on foot had not
gone so far. Besides, it is observable that he took away the high Places out of
all the Cities of Judah; which signifies to us that he removed them out of all
the Chief Places of his Kingdom, though he had not time to effect it in some
other less considerable places; and so the meaning of those words [ the high
Places were not removed] may have reference only to these latter, and show that
he had not expelled Idolatry out of every part of the Kingdom. The short is,
this Good King took away very many, he removed most of the high Places, but not
all. Where now is the Contradiction?

But in the New Testament perhaps they will b^ more successful. They are
pleased to make or find there a great number of contrarieties, as in Mat. 27.
9. this Evangelist quotes Jeremiah the Prophet, yet it was not Jeremiah but
Zechary that spoke the words which are there quoted. Some have answered this by
saying, here is a Mistake of the Transcribers, they have writ Jeremiah instead
of Zechariah. But this is not to be allowed, seeing there is no need of flying
to such a sorry Refuge as this. A Learned Sir Norton K^atchbull on Mat. 27. 9.
Critic of our own, tells us, that it is an oversight in the Evangelist, it is
a slip of his Memory; but this is much worse than the former: and if we should
once admit any such thing, the Truth and Authority of the Bible (as I have
showed in a Former Discourse) are endangered. But one of these three Answers
may remove the difficulty. 1. Grotius on the place salves it thus; many of the
Old Prophets Sayings were not written down, but preserved in Memory, and
delivered down to those that came afterward, of which he gives some Instances:
so that it is probable Zechary makes use of one of these Sayings and Oracles of
Ier^my: but when our Savior quotes this Passage, he mentions the first Author
of it, viz. the Prophet Jeremy. The short is, though the words are in Zechary,
yet he had them from Jeremy, that is, there was a Tradition, it is likely, that
they were his. Which is consirmed by that Saying of the Jews, that the Spirit
of the Prophet Jeremy rested on Zechary. For this reason, those words of
Zechary may be said to be spoken by Jeremy the Prophet. 2. Those words are
jointly to be found in Jeremy ad Zechary: but the former speaks only of buying
the Field, Ier. 32. 9. the latter makes mention of the Price, Zech. 11. 12. But
neither are these the very words which are in Zechary's Prophecy, but are
recited with some considerable alteration (as is not unusual in Scripture, as
you shall hear afterward.) If then the Substance of the words be taken out of
both the Prophets, the Evangelist might quote one of them only without any
Error and Mistake, and particularly Jeremy might be named as the more known and
eminent Prophet. 3. Dr. Lightfoot reconciles it another way, asserting, that
there is no Mistake of Transcribers here, but that Jeremy was the Name first
used in this place by St. Matthew, and yet Zecharias is not excluded, but
intended. This he makes good from the ordering and ranging of the Books of
Scripture in use among the Jews, in which this Learned Author was well skilled.
Ieremia^ had the first Place among the Prophets, and he is mentioned above all
the rest, because he stood first in the Volume of the Prophets: Therefore when
St. Matthew produced a Text of Zechary under the name of Jeremy, he cites the
Words out of the Volume of the Prophets under his Name, who stood first in that
Volume, that is the Prophet Jeremiah. Any of these Answers may satisfy a Man
whose Mind is not tainted with Prejudice against the Sacred Writings.

Those Words of St. Stephen, Acts 7. 15. Jacob went down into Egypt, and died,
he and our Fathers, and were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the
Sepulcher that Abraham bought for a Sum of Money of the Sons of Emmor the
Father of Sichem, seem to have a double Repugnancy in them to what is recorded
in the History of Moses; for first we read there, that not Jacob but Joseph was
carried to Sichem: And secondly that Abraham bought the Sepulcher not of the
sons of Emmor, but of Ephron the Hittite, Genesis 23. 17. chapter 49. 30. This latter
is the greater Difficulty, and seems to be most inextricable, because it is so
positively expressed, that Abraham purchased the Field of Ephron the Son of
Zoar, and that Jacob bought the Field of the Children of Emmor, Genesis 32. 19.
Josh. 24. 32. How therefore can it be said in the Acts, that Abraham bought the
Field for a Sepulcher of the Children of Emmor? Grotius takes away this
Repugnancy, by bidding us write Ephron for Emmor: but this way of answering the
Scripture-Difficulties is not to be tolerated, as I have suggested already on
the like occasion. Besides, this Alteration will not be sufficient to take away
the Difficulty, because Ephron was not the Father of Sichem, which is here
added. A late Sagacious Critic tells us, that those of whom St. Stephen here
speaks, viz. the Patriarchs, were part of them buried in Sichem, and part of
them in the Field that was Ephron's. They were carried over into Sichem, i. e.
says he, our Fathers, not Jacob, were carried thither. And the Sense of the
next Words he thinks he salves by a Parenthesis thus, [ and laid in the
Sepulcher (which Abraham had bought for a Sum of Money) of the Sons of Emmor
the Father of Sichem.] So that this Place does not say, the Fathers were laid
in the Sepulcher which was bought by Abraham of the Sons of Emmor; no, for that
contradicts the Sacred History, which assures us, that he bought it of Ephron
the Hittite, but only they were laid in the Sepulcher of the Sons of Emmor. So
Sir Norton Knatchbull. This does in part satisfy the Scruple, but in my
Judgment the best and shortest Solution of it is that which I have before
suggested, and abundantly proved, that it is usual for Persons in Scripture to
have two Names. So here, Abraham bought a Field for a Burial-place of Ephron
the Son of Zohar, Genesis 23. 8, 9. and yet he bought it of the Son (...) Sons of
Emmor; for this Zohar and Emmor were the same Man, only with two different
Names which he was called by, as was very common among the Hebrews. This is a
plain and easy resolving of the Doubt. And if there seems to be any Repugnancy
as to the Places of Burial, Sichem and Hebron, I offer this, that the Bodies of
the Patriarchs might be translated from the first Place, where they were
deposited, to another, i. e. they might be entombed at Sichem the Sepulcher of
the Sons of Emmor, and afterward be carried to Hebron, and laid in a Sepulcher
there. If we admit of this, then Moses's History concerning their Burial might
refer to one Place, and St. Stephen's to another.

Those Places also may seem to be Contradictory, If I bear witness of my self,
my witness is not true, John 5. 31. and though I bear Record of my self, yet my
Record is true, chapter 8. 14. But the Resolution is easy, Christ's Testimony
concerning himself was not true, i. e. valid in the Opinion of the Cavilling
Jews to whom he spoke, because their Law required two Witnesses: but his
Testimony concerning himself was true, was authentic and valid, because he was
an Extraordinary Person, even God Himself, and because likewise his Testimony
concurred with that of his Father, and so there was a Double Witness. Thus he
explains himself in John 8. 16. My Judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I
and the Father that sent me. And again, ver. 18. I am one that bear witness of
my self: and the Father that sent me bears witness of me. Therefore it is
plain that Christ does not absolutely exclude his own Testimony concerning
himself, and consequently the Texts above alleged do not oppose one another.
This also may be referred to what we observed in the beginning of this
Discourse, viz. a Negative is often put for a Comparative.

And that of our Savior, Think not that I am come to send Peace upon Earth, I
came not to send Peace, but a Sword, Matthew. 10. 34. may seem to be repugnant to
other Texts of Scripture which represent Christ as a Man of Peace. But this
arises from our misunderstanding his Words: his Meaning is, not that he
directly intended, or primarily designed a Sword or Fire, (as Luke 12. 49.
another Evangelist expresses it) i. e. Persecution and Division. But his Words
are to be understood as those in John 9. 39. I came into this World for
Judgment, i. e, Occasionally and by Accident his Coming would prove to be for
Condemnation. But this was not his Design, as he says, God sent not ^is Son
into the World to condemn the World, John 3. 17. And again, I came not to judge
the World, John 12. 47. You hear what our Savior says, he came for Judgment,
and he came not for Judgment. In such a different Sense he came to send a
Sword, and ^e came not to send a Sword: that is, it is Accidental, and not by
Design that Slaughter and Contentions happen by Christ's Coming. These are not
the natural Effect and Consequence of his Doctrine, and of Christianity it
self, but they proceed from the corrupt Nature and evil Dispositions of Men,
who will not entertain so harmless and innocent an Institution, but are resov'd
to oppose it. The Sword which Christ is here said to send, is managed and
wielded by the Hands of Irreligious and Profane Men: the Fire is blown up and
kindled by the Breath of Anger and Passion, the Fuel of it is our own wicked
Nature, inordinate Lusts, and corrupt Manners. In a word, the Doctrine of
Christ meeting with the Vices of Men, becomes an occasion of Quarrels,
Divisions, Bloodshed and Persecution.

When Christ sent forth his Apostles, he forbad them to provide Staves, Matthew.
10. 10. yet in Mark 6. 8. he permits them to take these for their Journey. But
this seeming Inconsistency is removed by remembering that there is a Necessary
Staff, a Staff to support them in their Travels, and there is an Offensive
Staff to encounter the Enemy with. The latter was not allowed them, because
they were not to use any Violence, especially at this time, when he sent them
forth. So in the foresaid Place of St. Mat^^ew, Christ forbids them the wearing
of Shoes, yet in that of St. Mark he permits them Sandals. Some sort of Fence
to their Feet they were not denied, but they must not be ^areful for the better
sort of it; nay, they must not be solicitous about any, it becomes them not to
be thoug^tful for any kind of Provision; that is the plain Meaning of our
Savior's Words. But when he beds them buy Swords, Luke 22. 36. which may seem
to be contrary to Ma^t^. 26. 52. it is (as I have showed) an Ironical way of
Speaking, and so there is no Repugnancy.

That of the Apostle, He^. 9. 4. is reckoned by some as a gross Mistake; for
speaking of the A^k of the Convenant, he tells us, that there were in it the
Golden Pot that ^ad Manna, and Aaron 's Rod that budded, and the Tables of the
Covenant: and yet we read that there was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables
of Ston^, I Kings 8. 9. To which Theophylact, upon the Place, answers, that
though there was at first nothing in the Ark but the two Tables, yet it may be
afterward the Pot of Manna and Aaron's Rod were put into it; and this perhaps
the Apostle had by Tradition from the Jews, says he. But Grotius tells us,
that it was the Opinion of the Old Rabins, (in which he also acquiesces) that
the Manna and the Rod were in the Ark in Moses's Days; but afterward, lest
they should be moldy and putrify, they were taken out, and deposited in some
subterraneous Vaults. But first thi^ disagrees with the former Solution, and
yet the Jewish Doctors are quoted for both. Again, I ask, were the Rabins sure
that these Holy Relics were kept from moulding in those low Cells or
Receptacles of the Earth? otherwise 'twas in vain to take them out of their old
Place, and lodge them here. Therefore I look upon this as a mere Invention of
the Rabinick Tribe, as it is well known they abound with such. Besides, we learn
from the forecited Text in the Kings, that these Sacred things were not in the
Ark, even in Solomon's time; and if they were not there then at all, it is not
likely the Apostle would have said, Wherein (i. e. in the Ark) was the Golden
Pot of Manna, and Aaron 's Rod; for who can think that he refers to some
after-Practice of the Jews, and not to what is so plainly recorded to have been
at that time? therefore I look upon these Answers as groundless. Another is
wont to be given, and it is this, that (...) refers to (...), and not to (...);
which does fully assoil the Difficulty, if you can be persuaded that (...) has
reference to a Word so far off, when there is another nearer to it, to which it
may well agree. The Consideration of this made Commentar. in Pentat^uch.
Drusius, who once rested in the foresaid Solution, to quit it afterward, and
to find out another, viz. that ^ which is rendered by in, signifies here ad,
prope or juxta: so the meaning is, that near the Ark stood the Pot of Manna:
But he checks himself for this afterward, apprehending it to be forced and
strained. Wherefore, to avoid all these Inconveniences, I reconcile that Place
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, with the former one in the Kings, thus, The Ark
is taken strictly in that former Place, but largely in the latter one. In the
first Sense, that is, as it signifies the Principal Part or Division of the
Ark, it had nothing in it but the Tables, for the Chief Apartment was designed
for these, and therefore it is observable that the Ark has its Name from them,
and is called the Ark of the Covenant; by which which is meant the Two Tables,
as you will see in 1 Kings 8 21. But as the Ark is taken largely, that is, as it
signifies the Whole Body of the Ark, and all its Receptacles and Boxes, it
contained in it other things besides the Tables, viz. the Pot of Manna, and
Aaron's Rod. This I propound as a plain and easy Solution of the two forecited
Texts. The Manna and the Rod were in the Ark, and they were not in it, viz. in
different Respects: they were in it, if you understand by it the Whole Sacred
Chest; but they were not in it, if you mean by it the Chief and Eminent Part of
it, which oftentimes gave a Denomination to the Whole.

CHAP. XII.
Answers to Objections against the Arithmetic of Scripture, as Genesis 46. 27.
All the Souls of the House of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and
ten, compared with Acts 7. 14. where they are said to be threescore and fifteen
Souls. Numb. 25. 9. says, that those that died of the Plague were twenty and
four thousand: but we read in 1 Cor. 10. 8. that there fell in one Day three
and twenty thousand. David is his Father's eighth Son, 1 Samuel 16. 10. yet he is
reckoned the seventh Son, 1 Chronicles. 2. 15. Other Numerical Difficulties in 2 Samuel 24. 9. 1 Chronicles. 21. 15. and in 1 Kings 4. 26. 2 Chronicles. 9. 25. cleared. A
Resolution of several Geographical Scruples, as about the Place of Abraham's
Nativity, Genesis 11. 28. chapter 24. 10. Joseph was sold to the Ismaelites, Genesis 37.
28. yet in the same Verse, and afterward (ver. 36.) it is said, he was sold to
the Midianites. Moses's Wife is called an Ethiopian, Numb. 12. 1. though she
was of the Land of Midian, Exodus 2. 15, 16. She that is called a Woman of
Candan, Matthew. 15. 22. is said to be a Syrophoenician, Mark 7. 26. The
Chorography of the Scripture is sometimes different (i. e. it seems to be so)
from that in Profane Authors, because several Places mentioned in Holy Writ
have not the same Names which they are known by in other Writers. Whether the
Queen of Sheba came from Arabia or Ethiopia is uncertain. Ophir is unknown to
us: So is Ararat: But Tarshish is so named from Tarsus, a Noted Town on the
Mediterranean. How East and West in Ezekiel are to be understood. Different
Meanings in Scripture arise from the Relation which certain Words have in Texts
to the adjoining Chapters and Verses. Some Instances of this largely prosecuted.

BUT a great Cry there is that the Scripture is defective, or in plain Terms
false in its Arithmetic: and here many Places are mustered up, as That in Genesis
46. 27. All the Souls of the House of Jacob which came into Egypt, were
threescore and ten. And again, Deuteronomy. 10. 22. they are said to be threescore and
ten Persons: so many they were, reckoning Jacob and Joseph into the Number. But
how does this agree with St. Stephen's Account in Acts 7. 14. Joseph s^nt and
called his Father Jacob to him, and all his Kindred, threescore and fifteen
Souls? Here is an Addition of five to the former Number. But the Agreement of
these Texts is not difficult, because we may say that Moses only reckons
Jacob's Children and Grandchildren, and not his Daughters in Law, the Wives of
Jacob's Sons, which in all are seventy five. Or it may be said that St. Stephen
reckons up how great the Number of Jacob's Family was before he came into
Egypt, and so takes in Jacob's Wives and Iudab's Sons, although then dead: Or
thus, that he reckons some into the Number who were begot before they came into
Egypt, but born after their coming thither. There might be such a Tradition as
this among the Jews, and Stephen here makes use of it. Any of these Answers is
satisfactory in a Matter of this nature. But by no means must we approve of
Grotius's shift, viz. that it was the Fault of the Transcriber; he inserted
five more than he should have done.

Again, some ask what Agreement there is between those two Places, viz. Numb.
25. 9. Those that died in the Plague were twenty and four thousand; and 1 Cor.
10. 8. (which speaks of the same thing) There fell in one Day three and twenty
thousand. Here is a Thousand short of the former Account: But if you look into
the Context, you will soon reconcile these two different Numbers, by taking notice
that there were two different Judgments or Plagues upon the People at that
time. The Apostle numbers those only that were killed with the Plague from
Heaven, but Moses reckons those also who were killed with the Sword, and hung
up by the Levites, ver. 4, 5. Or, I conceive, the Difference between the
Numbers may lie in this, that St. Paul speaks only of what was done in one Day:
the Emphasis may be in those Words; and so here is not excluded the other
thousand which fell at another time. Some are dissatisfied because they read in
1 Samuel 16. 10. that David was his Father's eighth Son: and again in 1 Samuel 17.
14. they find that he is called the youngest Son of eight: and yet in 1 Chronicles.
2. 15. he is reckoned the seventh Son. But the Answer is short and plain,
namely, that in this latter Place, where there is a particular Enumeration of
I^sse's Sons, one of them is omitted, and it concerns us not to know why. Only
we know that such Omissions are not unusual in Scripture.

Another Numerical Difficulty is in 2 Samuel 24. 9. where the Sum of the Number
of the People which Ioa^ gave up, is said to be ^ight h^^dred thousand, viz. in
Israel, and five ^undred thousand in (...), in all thirteen hundred thousand
fighting Men: but look into the Account in 1 Chronicles. 21. 5. and you will find a
vast Difference between it and the former. But why should this seem strange,
^^^ing there might be ^everal Reasons why these Sums vary? I will mention one.
Ioab had not finished his numbering of Israel, but left off, because the Anger
of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and so brought David the Number only
which is mentioned in Samuel. A^tiqu. l. 7. c. 10.
Josephus is more particular, and says, that Ioab left out the Tribe of
Benjamin, and the Tribe of Levi, which two he had not at that time reckoned:
for David in the mean time (when this Number was taking) repented of what he
did, and called back Ioab before he had finished the Sum: But the Captains who
were ^et about this Work in the remoter Parts, numbered thre^ hundred thousand
besides, which being put to the eight hundred thousand in Israel, make up
exactly the Number in the Chronicles: and the same may b^ said of Iudab. That
Place likewise is objected, Solomon had four thousand Stalls for Horses, 2 Chronicles* 9. 25. whereas we are told that he had forty thousand, 1 Kings 4. 26. If
we distinguish between Stalls and Stables, the Difficulty cease; and w^ have
reason to do so, because there is a Diffe^enc^ in the Ur^^^h: Urajoth.
Hebrew Words used in these Places. latter signifies distinct Stalls for
Horses, where they stood asunder by themselves, one single Horse in a Stall.
But the former signifies Stables or Stalls, wherein ten Horses were placed:
therefore there is a Iod, which is a Note of the number ten, inserted into this
Word, to distinguish it from the other. There were half a score Horses in every
one of these Stables, and so they amount to forty thousand. Abarbanel and some
other Hebrew Doctors determine thus, that there were forty thousand Horses in
four thousand Stables. Or if it were the very same Word in the Hebrew, yet it
might be differently taken, and signify Stalls in one Place, and Stables in
another, and so the Controversy is ended, i. e. every Stable or greater Place
for Horses contained in it ten thousand distinct Stalls. We may say there were
four thousand Great Stables which contained forty thousand Lesser ones. Thus
far in answer to those that charge the Scripture with want of Truth as to
Numbers.

Others complain that it is erroneous and false in its Geography, that is, as
to the Places and Countries that are mentioned in it. Thus we find that Ur of
the Chaldees is called the Land of Haran, and consequently of Abraham's
Nativity, Genesis 11. 28. And in Genesis 15. 7. God reminded him that he brought him
out of Ur of the Chaldees: therefore that was the Country which he first dwelt
in. But if we consult Genesis 24. 10. we shall see that Mesopotamia was Abraham's
native Country: and in Ios. 24. 2, 3. we read that he dwelt on the other side
of the Flood, i. e. of Euphrates, (which is frequently called the Flood, by way
of Eminency, in Scripture) and this parted Canaan, where Abraham afterward
dwelt, from Mesopotamia in Syria. This is the River which Abraham passed over,
Genesis 31. 21. when he came into Canaan out of his own Country, and from which
passing over he had his Name, as is thought by many of the Learned. So that
when it is said he dwelt on the other side of the Flood, it appears thence that
he came out of Mesopotamia, which was divided from Canaan by that Flood. But
how are these two consistent, viz. that he was a Chaldean and a Mesopotamian,
i. e. a Syrian, when these have reference to two distinct Countries, Chaldea
and Syria? This has puzzled Jews and Christians: But the Answer which most of
them acquiesce in is this, that Mesopotamia (Aram Naharaim, (as it is called in
the forementioned Place in Genesis, and in Judge. 3. 8.) Syria fluviorum,
because situated between two Rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, and called by the
Ancient Latins Mediamna, which answers exactly to the Greek Word) is taken in
Genesis and other Places in a large Sense, and comprehends Chaldea. So the
Arabian Geographers also refer C^alde^ to Mesopotamia, says Not. in Act.
Ludovicus de Dieu. And they might very well do so, for Mesopotamia tota
Assyriorum f^it, etc. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 6.
Pliny comprehends all Assyria under Mesopotamia: and in another Place tells
us, that the Reliqua pars Mesopotamiae Assyriaeque ^^bylonia appellata est.
whole Country of Mesopotamia belonged to the Assyrians, and in general
speaking was part of Babylon. And truly this is no unusual thing to take the
Names of Places sometimes in a stricter, sometimes i^ a more lax Sense.
Wherefore Mesopotamia in the general and large way of speaking (and it is likely
in the Estimation of the Hebrews) took in some other Places which were not
within the Rivers of Euphrates and Tigris. This is a true Answer, and a very
good one: But I rather think this to be the plainest Solution of the
Difficulty, viz. that Mesopotamia, as distinct from Chaldea, was Abraham's
native Soil, and that Vr was a City or Town in that Country, (thus Lib. 25.
Ammianus reckons it there, and not in Chaldea) and that this very City was the
Birthplace of Abraham: and yet this Vr is said to be of the Chaldees, because
it was possessed by the Chaldeans at that time. Persons have thought it was a
part of Chaldea, and properly belonged to it, because they read it to be of the
Chaldees: but this is a Mistake, for the true Import of this Addition to the
Word is only this, that this part of Mesopotamia, as well as the rest of it,
was under the Jurisdiction and Power of the Chaldeans, and was inhabited by
them: as Hebron is called the Land of the Hebrews, Genesis 40. 15. because the
Hebrews dwelt there. Besides, I might add, that this Place was defiled with the
Idolatry of the Chaldeans, and therefore for that reason also is called Vr of
the Chaldees. And from what has ^een said, we may have a right understanding
of those Words in Acts 7. 2, etc. The God of Glory appeared unto our Father
Abraham* when he was in Mesopotami^, and said unto him, Get thee out of thy
Country: -- then came he out of the Land of the Chaldeans. It is plain that
Mesopotamia and the Land of the Chaldeans (in a large Sense) are the same,
which is according to what we find in the Old Testament, and particularly in
the Places beforementioned: Yet Mesopotamia and Chaldea (strictly speaking)
were not the same: but the former was under the Power of the Chaldean Kings,
and for that reason was rightly called the Land of the Chaldeans. So that
Grotius needed not to have go^^ about to reconcile this Text, by telling us,
that St. Luke's Memory failed him as to the ^xact De^ignation of the Place:
which is as much a^ ^o say, that this Inspired Writer was mist^ken, and in ^
palpable Error; and that is as much as to say, (...) was not Inspired; and so
he contradicts himself, as well as defames the Holy Writings.

Another Geographical Scruple arises from G^n. 37. 28. where we read that
Joseph was sold to the Ismaelites; and in the very same Verse, and afterward,
( ver. 36.) we are told that he was sold to the Midianites. How co^ld he be
sold to both? Very well; for these are Names of the same people of Arabia,
either the Desert or Stony, or both, for there is a Dispute about this. Or if
there were some Difference between the Ismaelites and Midianites, (as it is not
unlikely) yet they were near Neighbors, and so passed for the same People*
thence the Kings of the Ismaelites are called Kings of Midian, Judge. 8. 24, 26.
Thus in the Gospel the Gadarens, Luke 8. 37. and the Gergasens, Mat. 8. 28. are
represented as the same People, because Gadara and Gergesa were neighboring
Towns, their Fields lay close together. Every one grants that the Inhabitants
of Arabia had several Names according to the Places and Regions they were
seated in: they are called Kenites, Numb. 24. 21. and frequently in other
places Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Hagarens, (as in Psalm. 83. 6.) from Hagar
Sarah's Maidservant, the Mother of Ismael* (which Name they have long since
^hang'd into that of Saracens, choosing to be called rather by the Name of the
Mistress than of the Maid.) And here they are styled Ismaelites and Midianites,
(...) former inhabiting in one part of that Country, and the latt^r in another.
Joseph then may be truly said to be sold both to the Ismaelites and Midianites,
because the Company of Merchants who bought him* consisted of both, it is
probable: they were joint-Traders, and did traffic in common. Thus we see here
is nothing inconsistent.

Some object against the Geography of Scripture, because Zippora, Moses's Wife,
is called an Ethiopian, N^mb. 12. 1. although she was of another Country,
namely, the Land of Midian as appears from Exodus* 2. 15, 16. In answer to which
Ios^ph^s would persuade us that Moses had two Wives, one an Ethiopian, the
other a Midianitess or Arabian: But there is no Foundation at all for this, and
therefore some other Answer is to be given. Some are of opinion that Cushith,
which is the Word used in the Book of Numbers, should not be translated an
Ethiopian, but an Arabian Woman; for Arabia was called Cush, because the Seat
of Cush, the eldest Son of Ham, was there, says Sir W. Raleigh. Whence he
concludes that Moses's Wife was not an Ethiopian, though a Woman of Cush, but
an Arabian. And Bochart asserts the same, and on the same Ground, viz. because
Cush was seated in Arabia, not in Et^iopia. But this Opinion has found but
little Reception among those who have further enquired into this Matter, and
have found that sometimes the word Cush in the Old Testament must necessarily
be understood of Et^iopia. Therefore it is more reasonable to adhere to those
Authors who affirm that Cush is an ambiguous Word, and that not only Arabia but
Ethiopia is expressed by that Name. Or rather, there is a double Et^iopia; one
in Africa, beyond Egypt, under the Torrid Zone; the other in Asia, and
particularly in some part of Arabia. And that there are both these Ethiopia's,
is testified by Philostratus, Herodotus, and Pausanias. This latter, viz. the
Asiatick Ethiopia, is meant in the forenamed Place, where it is said, Moses
married a Cushite, an Ethiopian Woman: She was not of the African but the Asian
Cush or Ethiopia; and so it well agrees with the other Text, where we are told
she was a Midianite. Nor is this to be wondered at, that Cush is thus
differently taken; for it might be proved from several Examples, that one and
the same Name is given to two or three Countries. Thus there is Caesarea in
Palestine and in the Lesser Asia: There is Antioch in Syria, in Pisidia, and in
Caria: There is Babylon in Chaldea and Egypt: There is Thebes in Baeotia, in
Egypt, and in Cilicia: There is Heliopolis in Egypt, in Coelosyria, and
Cilicia: There is Albania in Greece and Armenia: And so in our neighboring
Countries there is Zeland in Denmark and in the Netherlands. And not only in
France, but England, several Places have the same Name. But although this be
very satisfactory, yet I am inclined to offer another Resolution of the Place,
viz. that Midian was divided from Ethiopia only by the Red Sea, a short
Passage, and by reason of this Nearness Midian is called in Soripture the Land
of Cush or Ethiopia; and thence Zippora is called a Cushite; (...) according to
the Seventy Interpreters, an Ethiopian. She is called so, I say, because the
Midianites dwelt near to the African Ethiopians, and thence sometimes had their
Name communicated to them. Midian being a neighboring Country, was called
Ethiopia; and those other Parts of Asi^ and Africa that lay about the Red Sea
had the like D^nomination; as at this Day, among Cosmographers, some Places
that border on other Countries are sometimes said to belong to them, and to be
Parts of them, and are called by their Name. Thus Tire and Sidon, of old were
reckoned both in Syria and Palestine. And in our modern Geography ^ome Places
in the Netherlands and G^rmany are sometimes ranked among those of France. Some
Geographers place Lorain in Germany, others in France. The Alps are divided
among the Germans, Italians, French, and so are said to belong to all of them.
Piedmont is reckoned both in France and Italy. So it is in the present Case;
the Vic^nity of the Place to some other, causes the Name to be communicated to
both. The Midianites and other People, because they bordered on Ethiopia, were
called Ethiopians: hence Cushan or Ethiopia, and the Land of Midian are joined
together, Hab. 3. 7. Lastly, it is probable that Cush, the eldest Son of Cham,
was seated not only in Ethiopia, but in those Parts of Arabia which were
bordering upon it: and thence it comes to pass that a Cushite or a Woman of
Cush is an Arabian as well as an Ethiopian properly so called.

She that is called a Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 22. is called a Syrophoenician,
Mark 7. 26. which some imagin^ are inconsistent, and therefore they think the
former Word should be Cana, which was a Town in Phoeni^ia, and was known by the
Name of the Greater Cana, for there was a Lesser in the lower Galilee, where
John 2. 1.
Christ turned Water into Wine. But there is no Necessity of ^hanging the Word,
because Canaan and Phoenicia are but different Names for the same Region. Thus
in Genesis 16. 35. the Land of Canaan is called (...) by the LXX. and in Exodus 6.
15. a Canaani^^^ Woman is (...). We must know then that the whole Country of
Palestine is a part o^ Syria, and Phoenicia is a part of Palestine; and
Syro-Phoenicia as well as Phoenicia is the North Part of Canaan. But especially
the People of this Country that lived on the Seacoasts were called
Phoenicians, and that in a peculiar manner, as is evident from Stra^o, pliny
and others. Yea, and those were properly and strictly of old c^ll'd Canaanites
that dwelt at Tire and Sidon, and inhabited near the Sea. The Canaanites dwell
by the Sea, Numb. 13. 29. and some quote Isa. 23. 8. where the Tyrians are
called Canaanim* So this Woman who came out of the Coasts of Tire and Sidon (as
is expressly said ver. 21.) is rightly styled both a Canaanite by St. Matthew,
and a Phoenician or Syro-Phoenician by St. Mark; for the word Syrian is added
(as Grotius well notes) only to distinguish the Asian Phoenicians from those of
some Colonies in Africa. Thus there is no Reason to find fault with the
Chorography of the Bible.

Here, for the better clearing some Passages in the Holy Writings, and the
removing some Cavils which ill-disposed Men are wont to raise, I will further
remark that the Chorography of the Scriptures is sometimes different from that
in Profane Authors. Several Places mentioned in Holy Writ have not the same
Names which they are known by in other Writers, (of which the Learned De D^s
Sir. Proleg. c. 1.
Mr. Seldom has taken notice) which may sometimes occasion Dispute about
certain Places in Scripture. Bahylon is called Shinar, Genesis 11. 2. Egypt has
the Name of Ham, Psalm. 78. 51. and 105. 23. and Ra^ab, Psalm. 87. 4. and 89. 10.
Of old On and Bethshemesh were the Names of that Place in Egypt, which since is
called Heliopolis; Genesis 41. 45, 50. Ier. 43. 13. Some gather from Genesis 2. 13.
that Nile was at first called Gibon. Memphis had the Title of Noph, Isa. 19.
13. Jer. 46. 14. The City of Alexandria (called so from Alexander the Great,
who built it after it had been laid waste by the Chaldeans, and gave it that
Name) was at first called No, Jer. 46. 25. Ezekiel. 30. 15. Nahum 3. 8. The
ancient Name of Mesopotamia was Padan Aram, Genesis 25. 20. chapter 28. 6. Before
Cyrus's time the Country which is now called Persia was known by no other
Titles than Cuth and Elam, Ifa. 11. 11. oh. 22. 6. but afterward it had that
new Denomination from Paras a Horse, because the Persians were great Riders on
Horseback. Canaan and the Holy Land are Terms in Scripture for that known
Country which is styled Syria and Judea by the Greek and Roman Writers.
Jerusalem was first called Salem, then Iebus, then by putting both together
Joseph. Antiqu. 1. 1.
Iebusalem; and afterward, for better sound sake Jerusalem. I might proceed,
and observe this Change of Names in other Regions of the World, yea in our own:
Thus Albion was the ancient Name of this Isle, then Britain, then England. This
I mention to remind us that there is a great Alteration of Names as to several
Places and Countries. Either by Conquest or otherwise it has come to pass that
the former ones by which they were known are worn off, and new ones are come in
their room. Whence it happens sometimes that we have no Help from Profane
Historians to understand many Places mentioned in the Bible; and we are not
able to know to what Countries and Nations some of those Names refer which we
meet with in these Ancient Records.

This I will more largely insist upon in some few particular Instances: And
first that in 1 Kings 10. 1. does partly belong to this Place; there is mention
of the Queen of Sheba, who is called the Queen of the South by our Savior,
Mat. 12. 42. but whether she came from Arabia or Ethiopia, both which Countries
are South of Judea, is as much controverted, as whether Moses's Wife was an
Arabian or an Ethiopian. Monsieur Bochart and some others say she was the
former, for there was a Saba or Seba (as Lib. 16.
Strabo informs us) in that Country. Some tell us it is the Metropolis of
Arabia Felix, now called Zibet, whence the Zivet-Cat has its Name. The
Inhabitants of this Place were anciently called Virgil. Georg. 1, and 2.
Sabaei by the Latins. But for my part I cannot think that this was the Country
whence this Royal Visitant came, and that for this one good Reason, because our
Savior himself has informed us that (...), Mat. 12. 42.
She came from the utmost Parts of the Earth, which cannot be said of her if
she came from Arabia, for that was near to Judea. Antiqu. 1. 2. c. 5.
Josephus says, he found the ancient Name of Meroe in Africa to be Saba, and
thence he affirms that she was an African, viz. the Queen of Egypt and
Ethiopia: and others more particularly vouch her to belong to the upper
Ethiopia, i. e. the Kingdom of the Abyssines* and it is certain (as a late
Inquisitive Ludolph. Hist. Ethiop.
Writer has informed us) that the Abassyne People challenge her for theirs.
But now if we come to examine things, and to make some^ Proof of this latter
Opinion, viz. that the Queen who took a long Journey to visit King Solomon, and
behold his Glory, was an Ethiopian, we are not able to effect any thing, for we
cannot trust to the Jewish Historian, who had little Skill in foreign Matters;
and we cannot rely upon Pliny's Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 29.
Saba Aethiopica, or gather any thing certainly thence. And a more Authentic
Writer tells us, that there was not only a Psalm. 72. 10.
Sheba but a Seba: so that that Saba might refer to this latter rather than to
the former. We have then no ^ure footing, but all that we are able to say is
this, that there was a Nation of this Name in some very distant part of the
World in a Southerly Position from Judea: but we have no Geographer to acquaint
us what particular Region it was, and what the Name of it is at this Day; and
consequently we cannot determine the Place whence that Brave Woman came. What
the aforesaid Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6.
Jewish Historian observed has great Truth in it, that the Names of Nations
have been changed by new Comers, who with new Manners brought a Language of a
resembling Quality, and altered the former Names of Places.

This we find true in another Instance, viz. Ophir, the Place that King
Solomon's Navy went to, and form whence they furnished him with Plenty of Gold,
1 Kings 9. 26, etc. chapter 10. 11. But in what part of the Earth this Ophir was is
hotly disputed. Some say it was in that Region of it which we now call America.
They think that the Phoenicians or Tyrians, (for it is said that Hiram, the King
of Tire, sent in the Navy his Servants, Shipmen, that had Knowledge of the Sea,
with the Servants of Solomon, 1 Kings 9. 27.) they think, I say, that these
Tyrians (who were famous for their Skill in Navigation) failed to those remote
Parts in Solomon's time, passing through the Mediterranean to this Ophir: which
some imagine to have been in the P^^ei^ick Sea in the Southern Part of America,
for there is an Island in that Sea* which the Spaniards called the Isle of
Solomon, because they thought that was the Place which Solomon's Ships were
sent to for Gold. In Phaleg.
Arias Montanus, and some others, are persuaded that Ophir is the same with
Peru: and indeed there are the same Radical Letters in both, only with a
Metathe^is. And from Peru is the dual Pa^vajim, 2 Cliron. 3. 6. as the foresaid
Author thinks; which is a very Ingenious and Learned Conjecture, but is
entertained but by few, because it is thought that Columbus was the first that
found out the Western World. But whether that be true or no, it is not probable
that they had Skill enough in Solomon's Days to conduct a Navy to the
West Indies. Navigation was not so perfect at that time, that they could find a
safe Passage thither. Hercules's Pillars (which are now the Cape of Good Hope)
were said to be the Limits of their Maritime Travels. Before the Use of the
Compass it was impossible to havigate cross the Ocean; and consequently
Solomon's Mariners could not find Peru, which is in America. Besides, some
think that the Quality of some of the Commodities, viz. Wood and Ivory, which
were brought home in the Ships, argues that they came not from that Western
Quarter of the World. Again, it is added by some, that if Solomon had sent for
Gold to the West Indies, he would have set out his Fleet for that Voyage from
some Port of the Mediterranean, and not of the Red Sea, as we read he did, 1
Kings 9. 26. Others therefore say it was a Country in the East Indies: Ophir
was so called from Ophir the Son of (...) Genesis 10. 29. who, as Antiqu. l. 8. c.
2.
Ios^phus says, inhabited in the East. Wherefore it is likely (says this
Jewish Aritiquary) that Solomon's Fleet sailed to these Parts, and particularly
to the Golden Cherson^se, and other Golden Regions there. It is an Island in
the East Indies, says In Phaleg.
Bochart, which is named Zeilan. But others of late are inclined to believe
that it is that Island or Islands in this Eastern Part of the World, which are
called the Molu^^d's; but the Reasons which they alledg have no Cogency in
them. China illustrata.
Kircher is more general, and avers, that Ophir was India; for this is not, he
says, an Hebrew (as has been thought) but an Egyptick or Coptick Word, and
among the Egyptians of old was the Name for India: But we have only his Word
for this, and no more. Others hold it to be neither in the East nor
West Indies, but in Africa, which seems to me to be the most probable
Persuasion. Ortelius and Purchase are of this Opinion, and they say it is an
Island in the Ethiopi^k Sea, and is at this day called Sophala: But they might
as well have assigned any other Place and Name in this Country, if they had
pleased, for here is no firm Ground to go upon; we have no Chard to direct us.
Ophir is a Name not known to any Geographers: no Pagan Writers make mention of
it. This happens because several Places have changed their Names, they are not
the same now that they were heretofore. And how is it possible then that we
should arrive to a certain Knowledge of them? And what though we do not? There
is no reason why we should be troubled at it, much less that we should be
displeased with the Bible., Yea, rather we may make use of this to commend the
Holy Writings, for this is an undeniable Argument of the unparalleled
Antiquity of them, (as has been suggested before) and of their Transcendent
Worth and Excellency, in that they record those Names of Places as well as
Things which other Writers say nothing at all of.

To these Instances I will add one more, the Mountains of Ararat, Genesis 8. 4. on
which the Ark rested. They are not mentioned under this Name by any Heathen
Authors; and thence it is difficult to give an Account of them, i. e. to know
where they were, and consequently where the Ark landed. The Hills of Armenia
the Greater, called the Gordiaean Hills, are meant, say Josephus, St. Ierom,
Bochart, Grotius: and before these Berosus held the same. But there is another
Opinion maintained by Goropius Becanus, Sir W. Raleigh, and Dr. Heylin, viz.
that the Ark rested on Mount Taurus, but especially on the Top of Mount
Caucasus (which is a Part of it) in the Confines of Tartaria, Persia, and
India; which they think they prove from Genesis 11. 2. where we read that they who
entered into the Valley of Shinar came from the East, i. e. from those Parts of
Asia, on the South of Caucasus, which lie East from Shinar. And this is thought
to be a sufficient Confutation of the former Opinion, for it is impossible they
should come from the Mountains of Armenia, the Gordiaean Mountains, because
those lie not only full North of Shinar, but many Degrees unto the West. This
Caucasus was part of the Mountain Taurus, the biggest Mountain in the World; or
rather (as has been said in another Place before) a continual Ridg of
Mountains crossing all Asia from East to West, and dividing it as the Equator
does the Globe, into North and South. So that in short, Ararat, which according
to these Authors is the Scripture-word for Taurus, is no more One Mountain than
any one Hill among those that divide Italy from France is called the Alps, or
any one of those that part France from Spain is the Pyren^^n* But as these,
being Continuations of many Hills, keep one Name in diverse Countries, so all
that long Ledg of Mountains (which Pliny calls by one Name Taurus) are of one
general Name, and are called the Mountains of Ararat. These are the two
different Opinions of the Learned about this Matter; but it is my Persuasion
that a Man may easily compromise them: For, according to that Description which
Sir. W. Raleigh gives us of this great Multiplicity of Hills, the Gordiaean
ones may be taken in among those that make up Taurus, for this Learned Knight
himself acknowledges that these Mountains (which go through so many diverse
Countries and Kingdoms) seem to take their Rise from Arm^nia, or thereabouts.
So that it is probable the Gor^iaean Hills, and those of Taurus, are to be
reckoned together. Thus we may moderate between these Dissenting Writers: but
when all is done, it is impossible to define exactly what Mountains are meant
by those of Ararat. This only is unquestionable that they were in the East; but
as to their particular Situation, and whether they answer to the Gordi^ean
Hills, or to Caucasus, we are wholly ignorant. And there is no Remedy for it,
because Ararat is not a Name that we can find in any other Authors; and we are
not certain that any other Denominations in Pagan Writers refer to it. Thus it
must needs be, seeing the old Names of several Places are extinct, and others
are introduced: so that on that Account we cannot expect to know some of those
Places that are mentioned in Scripture. Nor is it necessary that we should, for
it is a Matter of small Moment, and not worth the contending about.

Some dream of a great Geographical Difficulty in the word Tarshish, so often
used in the Old Testament; but there is no reason for it, because it plainly
refers to a known Place, and such as is expressly mentioned by Lucan and other
Writers, besides those of the Bible, and that is Tarsus in Cilicia. The Sea
which washed the Shores of this Cilicia, had its Name from this Metropolis of
it, viz. Tarsus, and was usually called Tarshish. This is the first and more
restrained Acception of the Word in the Old Testament, where we read that
Solomon had a Navy of Tarshish, 1 Kings 10. 22. i. e. a Navy that frequented
the Mediterranean or African Sea, especially that part of it which was near
Cilicia, and was so noted for its Merchandising, Thus when it is said that
Solomon's Ships went to Tarshish, 2 Chronicles. 9. 21. (...) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 2.
Josephus interprets it that they went to the Mediter^anean Sea, where they
traffick'd, and for the Goods they exported brought Gold and Silver, etc. But
we are to observe that it is said there, the King's Ships went to Tarshish with
the Servants of Hiram, i. e. as I conceive, they went to those Ports which the
Tyrian Navy (with whom they were to go to Ophir) resorted to, and those were in
the Mediterranean. And that the Ships of T^rshish belong properly to Tyro, i^
manifest from Isa. 23. 1. otherwise [ Howl, (...) Ships of Tarshish] could not
be part of the Burden or Doom of that Place, as we find it is So (...) the
Kings of Tarshish, Psalm. 72. 10. are those Kings properly that were seated upon
the Mediterranean, especially that Part which was over against Tarsus, or
Cilicia, which it washed. Secondly, the word is taken more largely for the Sea
in general: for the African or Mediterranean Sea being the only Noted Sea to
the Hebrews. they called all other Seas, and the Ocean it self, Tarsis, as the
Latins call any Sea Pontus* though that word be proper only to one particular
Sea. Thus Tarshish is used in Psalm. 48. 7. thou breakest the Ships of Tarshish,
( i. e. of the Sea) with an East Win^: and in Isa. 2. 12, 16. The, Day of the
Lord of Hosts shall be upon all the Ships of Tarshish. (...), according to the
Seventy, And in several other Places it has this large Signification; but not
in Ion. 1. 3. (as is said by many Interpreters) for Tarshish here is the City
called Tarsus, a noted Place in Cilicia. Though Tarshish be a common Word in
Scripture to signify the Sea, (as has been said) yet here we must take it in
the most restrained Sense of all, we must understand by it the Town of that
Name; and from whence the Sea, but more particularly the Phoenician and Tyrian
Sea, had the Denomination of Tarshish. The Reason which I give of this
Interpretation is this, because in that Place of Jonah, Tarshish and the Sea
are expressly distinguished, and that not once. but often* as you may satisfy
your selves by perusing ver. 3. and the rest that follow in that Chapter, where
you will see that Hajam the Sea, is mentioned nine or ten times in distinction
from Tarshish: whence I gather that this latter Word is, not to be translated
the Sea, but that it denotes. that known City Tarsus of Cilicia. To this Place
the Timorous Prophet had a mind to flee, because it was sufficiently remote,
and also because there was a safe Harbor to put into. There need not then be
any Dispute about the word Tarshish, for wherever it is used in Scripture
(except in this Place last mentioned) it signifies either the Sea in general,
or more especially the Phoenician or African Sea, which the Tyrian Merchants
were most used to: but it has its Name from Tarsus or Tarsis, near to which
was the most famous Port of all the East Country, from whence they took Ship
for Africa and India, and the most remote Parts of the World.

To close up all the Geographical Scruples, I will only adjoin this concerning
the mentioning of East and West in the Old Testament, that these are generally
to be understood according to the Situation of Judea, more especially
Jerusalem, and as the Places spoken of had respect to these; but in the
Prophecy of Ezekiel it is for the most part otherwise, because Ezekiel writ in
Babylon; and thence it is that East and West are contrary here to what they are
in other Prophets. This I thought fit to add to prevent Cavils against the
Sacred Writ.

I might in the next place take notice of the different Meanings which arise
from the Relation which certain Words in some Texts have to the neighboring
Verses. Thus it is said, the Poor shall never cease out of the Land, Deuteronomy. 15.
11. yet it is implied, if not expressed, ver. 4. that there shall be no Poor
among them. But the Answer is, that this 4th Verse refers to the releasing and
forgiving their Debtors, ver. 2, 3. They must not by their exacting make their
Neighbors poor; yea, they must do what lies in their power, that there may be
no Poor: but as to the Event, there will be Poor, and always shall be.

Their Strength is to sit still, says the Prophet, Isa. 30. 7. which [ their]
if you refer to the Egyptians who are named in that Verse, then the Sense is,
Their Strength, their Aid, their Assistance is to no purpose; they had as good
sit still as help the Jews. But if you refer their to the Jews, then the
Interpretation is this, The Jews had best to sit still in their own Land, and
not to require Aid from Egypt, for it shall not prosper. This is the true Sense
of the Words, because their Proper Reference is to the Jewish People; which we
are sure of, because these are the subject Matter of this Part of the Chapter.
The right fixing of the Relation of the Words, especially of the Pronoun their,
leads us to the true meaning of the Place. And this is put out of all
Controversy by ver. 15. In R^^urning and Rest ye shall be saved; in Quietness
and Confidence shall be your Strength: which is a plain Comment on the former
Words, and shows that we have pitched upon the true Reference.

I interpret those Words in Heb. 12. 24. The Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks
better things than that of Abel, by observing what they particularly refer to,
viz. ver. 4. of the foregoing Chapter, By it he being dead yet speaks. I
conceive that this Speaking is referred to by the Apostle in the other Place;
and so by searching into the true Meaning of (...), he speaks, we shall be able
to arrive to the true Sense of the other. This Word has been variously
interpreted; for Grotius seems to think it is meant, that he (i. e. Abel)
speaks in the Book of Genesis, which speaks of him. But this is very dilute,
because the Apostle mentions not here what Book speaks of Abel, but by what he
himself speaks, viz. his Faith. Others say his Faith and Righteousness speak,
i. e. call to us to imitate and practice them: but this might have been said of
any of the other Worthies mentioned in this Chapter, and therefore is not
peculiar to Abel alone. Others take the word in a Passive Sense, and expound
it, he is yet spoken of, his eminent Faith and Innocence are to this Day (as in
several Generations before) spoken of, celebrated, praised, remembered with
Honor. But this (as well as the former) is common to all the other Holy
Patriarchs and Worthy Saints named in this Chapter, and therefore this does not
reach that particular and proper Meaning of the Place. Much less does that odd
Exposition of Sir N. Knatchbull, who reads it thus, For it (i. e. his Faith) he
is yet said to be dead; for he will have (...) to be inserted after (...), and
then the meaning is, As Abel suffered at first for his Faith, so he is still to
this Day said to have died for his Faith. But besides the needless inserting of
(...), and thereby making very bald Greek, he joins in Construction (...) with
(...), whereas according to the usual way of Trajection (which he so often
takes notice of in other Places, though he overlooks it here) it belongs to
(...), and so the Words are to run thus, By it he, though he be dead, yet
speaks; that is, because of his Faith and Holiness he yet speaks aloud, or
cries unto God for Vengeance against his Brother Cain, who inhumanly murdered
him; for he barbarously and maliciously took away his Life, because he was a
faithful and righteous Person. Thus I interpret the Words, because I discern
that the Apostle alludes to Genesis 4. 10. The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries
unto me from the Ground. Wherefore when he says, Abel yet speaks, it is as
much as if he had said, his Blood speaks or cries. It spoke long ago, and it
yet speaks, like the Souls under the Altar, Rev. 6. 10. How long, O Lord, holy
and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood? Now by this Text I expound
that other in Heb. 12. 24. The Blood of Sprinkling that speaks better things
than Abel, for so it is in the Greek. The Apostle having said before, [Abel yet
speaks] i. e. the Voice of his Blood speaks or cries to Heaven for
Vengeance; he here with particular reference to that Passage assures us, that
Christ's Blood speaks better things than Abel, or than the Blood of Abel, which
was shed by his Brother: for whereas that spoke and cried for Punishment, this
pleads for Mercy and Pardon. Christ's Oblation of himself on the Cross, by the
Effusion of his Blood, speaks better things, does more atone and appease the
Wrath of God than the Blood of Abel (who was spitefully murdered) did incense
and provoke it. Thus this is a good way of interpreting Scripture sometimes, by
comparing one Text with another, and observing their mutual Relation. Many
obscure and less intelligible Passages are cleared by this Means.

I will content my self with mentioning one Place more, viz. Mat. 24. 34. This
Generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled: Which remarkable
Words of our Savior may seem to have been mistaken by those Interpreters that
I have met with, and merely because they have not minded the Reference of the
Words. Some have taken this Generation for the Generation then in being in our
Savior's time; and so they apprehend him to speak of something that was soon
after to be accomplished, not unlike some of St. John's Visions which Rev. 1. 1.
were to come to pass in a short time; and consequently that those Signs of his
Coming, which he had foretold in that Chapter, were to be every Day expected;
and if they were meant of his General and Final Coming, then that the Overthrow
of Jerusalem, and of the World, should be about the same time. And that some of
the Signs mentioned by Christ are to be understood properly and peculiarly of
the Jewish Nation, soems to be clear from that one Passage in ver. 20. Pray
that your Flight be not on the Sabbath Day; which intimates that the Jewish
People were particularly concerned, who solemnly observed that Day. By this
Generation then they understand the present Generation of the Jews which was at
that time: and to confirm this, they observe that this Generation is applied by
Christ to the Jews of that Age, Mark 8. 12. The Meaning then of [ this
Generation shall not pass, etc.] according to this Acception of the Word, is
this, that whilst the Jews then living were upon the Earth, those things which
our Savior had foretold in that Chapter, yea all those things should be
fulfilled. This were a very good Interpretation of the Words, if the thing it
self could be proved, that is, that within so short a time all those
Predictions of Christ were accomplished. But the contrary is very evident, for
the Chapter speaks of the Day of Judgment as well as of the Devastation of
Jerusalem: wherefore all the things that our Lord spoke of were not fulfilled
within the Compass of that Generation, and consequently that Period of Time
could not be meant when it is said, This Generation shall, etc. Secondly,
therefore others who are sensible of the Invalidity of this Interpretation,
understand this Generation in a wider and larger Sense, and think that by it is
meant the Evangelical Dispensation, the whole Series of Time from our Savior's
Days to the End of the World, the final Upshot of all things. And this is a
good Exposition of the Text, and salves the Sense very well; only there is no
Proof that (...) signifies the last Age of the World. This Period of Time is
called by 1 John 2. 18.
St. John, the last time; by 1 Pet. 4. 7.
St. Peter, the End of all things; and by 1 Cor. 10. 11.
St. Paul, the Ends of the World; but I do not find that it is any where styled
this Generation; therefore I do not see any good Ground to apply it here in
that manner, as some Expositors have done: Wherefore I will offer another
Interpretation, which I hope will not be unacceptable to the Learned; though I
confess I do not expect it should be presently received, because it is wholly
new and unheard of. But let Impartial Minds judge of it, who will not suffer the
mere Novelty of an Exposition to hinder their embracing of it. (...) is as much
as (...), the Generation of the Heaven and Earth, the Whole Creation of the
World, this vast Mundane Fabric: So St. James uses the word (...), chapter 3. 6.
making it the same with (...) in Romans 8. 19, 22. And even among Profane Authors
(...) has sometimes the like Acception, and is rendered Seculum, the World.
This shall not pass, i. e. be destroyed, till all these things be fulfilled: as
if our Savior had said, The World shall continue as it has hitherto done,
till all these things which I have foretold, but especially these concerning my
Last Coming, be accomplished; but immediately after the fulfilling of them,
this Generation of the Heavens and Earth, this Frame of the World shall be set
on Fire, shall be consumed. And that, (...) has this Signification here, i. e.
that it imports this System of Heaven and Earth, I gather from the Reference of
this Verse to the immediately ensuing one, Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but my Words shall not pass away: where you see (...) is explained by (...);
This Generation of Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words (my
Predictions concerning future things, which you have just now heard from my
Mouth) shall not pass away. Which is as much as if he had said, This great
Structure of the World shall perish at last, Heaven and Earth shall be
destroyed by a general Conflagration; but new Heavens and a new Earth shall
arise in their room, which shall be a Building not made with Hands, not of
perishing Materials, but such as shall last eternally. And of this Nature is my
Word and Promise, such are all my Predictions, and particularly this of the
Signs of my Coming, it shall never be nulled and abolished. The applying of the
words shall pass to the Heavens and Earth immediately after, shows that Christ
means by this Generation the whole World, expressed by Heaven and Earth. You
see then how sitly it is said here, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, it
referring to this Generation's passing away, viz. at the End of the World, the
final Close of all things, when there shall be new Heavens and a new Earth, as
2 Epist. chapter 3. v. 13.
St. Peter informs us. Our Savior here signifies the Time when the things he
spoke of last ( ver. 24, 25.) shall be accomplished. When this Generation, this
present Creation of things shall be dissolved, then and not before all these
things shall be fulfilled: Then shall be verified all those things which were
said concerning the Dissolution of the World; yea, all the things mentioned in
this Chapter: For we must know, that even the Predictions concerning the
Destruction of Jerusalem, shall be most signally fulfilled in the final
Dissolution of Heaven and Earth, because that was designed to be a Type and
Representation of this. And as for the word this, which is joined with
Generation, if any cavil at it, I can prove out of Mat. 26. 13. this Gospel:
Acts 5. 20. this Life: and other Places. So that, Mat. 7. 22. 1 John 3. 12. and
these, 1 Cor. 12. 2. 2. Tim. 1. 12. are prefixed, where there is no reference
to any thing going before.
abundance of Texts, that it is sometimes of the same Import with the: and so
you might read it the Generation, viz. of the Heavens and Earth. But here, as I
conceive, it is an Emphatical Word, and refers to the things spoken of before,
viz. the Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth and Sea, ver. 29. of this Chapter: and Luke
21. 26. which further confirms the Acception of this Word which I propound,
viz. that it is meant of the Works of the Creation. Or perhaps our Savior did
cast his Eyes about, and intentively beheld the Heavens and the Earth, and then
pronounced these Words, This Generation, this Fabric of the World which I now
behold, and all the Works in it, shall not be dissolved till that very time,
when these my Predictions shall be verified. The fulfilling of my Words, and
the Period of all things, shall happen at the same time. And lastly, I will not
conceal my Conjecture that these Words of Christ refer to what he had said in
his Excellent Sermon on the Mount; and if so, then this Interpretation which I
have offered, will be thereby exceedingly confirmed. His Words there are these,
Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall
in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 18. And his Words
here run thus, Verily I say unto you, this Generation shall not pass till all
these things be fulfilled: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall
not pass away. By comparing which Texts it plainly appears, that there is the
same Air and Aspect in them, the same Style and Mode of Expression are used, so
that we are hereby invited to expound one by the other. First, they begin with
the same solemn Preface, Verily I say unto you. Secondly, the Verb (...) is
used in both Places in the very same Signification, (for as Grotius observes on
Mat. 5. 18. (...) is as much as interire, perire; and so it is here, it
signifies to be destroyed, to perish, to be anul^d). Thirdly, that considerable
Passage, (...), till all be fulfilled, is in both Places, and refers to the
very ^ame things, viz. the Law, or Words, or Predictions of our Savior, what
he had said, or what had been said of him. And, Fourthly, the Works of the
Creation, the Fabric and System of the World, are spoken of in both Places,
though under different Expressions; for in the former they are styled Heaven
and Earth, in the latter the Generation. But that they are of the same Import,
and express to us the same thing, is clear from this, that (...) is exactly
applied to both: for though we make some little Difference in our English
Translation, rendering the Greek Word by passing in one Verse, and passing away
in the other, yet the Verb it self is the same in the Original, and accordingly
should (if we would be accurate) be rendered alike in both Verses. Whence it
appears that the Generations passing, and the Heavens and Earth passing, are
Synonymous, which is the thing I aimed at, and which puts a Key into our Hand
to open these Words, viz. that this Generation in ver. 34. is the same with
Heaven and Earth in ver. 35. and that their passing is the very same. If it be
said that this Generation, in some other Place, is applied to that present Age
and People of the Jews, and therefore it must be so understood here; the
Consequence must be denied, and that with very good Reason, for (besides what
has been said already) in several Places we find that the same Words and
Expressions are not used and applied after the same manner, and to the same
purpose. He is a Stranger to the Bible, and particularly the New Testament, who
knows not this. And therefore from the Identity of Words we cannot necessarily
infer that the same thing is intended. But we are to examine the Ambiguity of
Expressions, and to apply them as we see occasion. This we must do here, and if
we have Respect to the Context, (as we ought to have) we shall apply this
Generation after the aforesaid manner. And indeed the Connection of these two
Verses was that which led me first to this Interpretation, for the mention of
Heaven and Earth passing, in this latter Verse, suggested to my Thoughts, that
it had some Cognation with the like Expressions in the foregoing Verse; which,
upon farther Examination, I found to be so indeed. Christ proceeds in ver. 35.
to speak of Heaven and Earth passing, because he had in ver. 34. been speaking
of the same thing; which gives us Assurance of what I propounded, that this
Generation's passing, and Heaven and Earth's passing, are exegetical of each
other. This is the Exposition which I give of this Place, and I submit it to
the Censure of the Considerate and Judicious. This I only say, that as it is a
fair Construction, and contains nothing inconsistent in it, so I deem it to be
the best Solution whereby we can cleverly avoid the Quarrels of Expositors
about the Words, especially about the Meaning of (...), which (as several other
Places of Scripture) is misunderstood, because the due Reference of the Words
is not attended to.

CHAP. XIII.
Chronological Difficulties fully reconciled, as Genesis 15. 13. Thy Seed shall be
a Stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall
afflict them four hundred Years. Nay, thirty Years are added to this reckoning
in Exodus 12. 40. whereas it is confessed by all, that the Israelites Bondage in
Egypt did not last above two hundred and fifteen Years. It is said, Acts 13.
20. After that he gave them Judges about the Space of four hundred and fifty
Years, until Samuel the Prophet: Yet, according to the usual Computation, there
were but three hundred and thirty nine Years from the first Judge till Samuel.
God gave unto them Saul by the Space of forty Years, Acts 13. 21. yet no Man
thinks that he reigned so long. This salves many Chronological Difficulties,
that the Kings of Israel often made their Sons Kings, in their own Reign. Other
Doubts in Chronology are cleared by Interregnums, by omitting the Years of Bad
Kings, and of the Years of Oppression, Captivity, and Anarchy. The Difficulties
in our Savior's Genealogy in Mat. 1. and Luke 3. resolved, viz. how it can be
said, Ozias begat Joatham. A Scruple about the three Tesseradecads. Another
about Jechonias's begetting Salathiel. How Cainan came to be inserted* How
either of the Genealogies in St. Mark or St. Luke can be said to be Christ's,
when they both give an Account of Joseph's Pedigree. How one may be said to be
Joseph's, and the other Mary's Genealogy. How Joseph can be the Son of Jacob
and of Heli. Several Occasions (besides what have been mentioned before) of the
Difficulties in Scripture, viz. it was writ by Different Persons: It refers to
Ancient Practices now almost unknown or forgot, (where the Author's Conjecture
about the (...) in 2 Timothy 4. 13. is propounded). The Hebrew Text especially
has some things proper to it self, which render it obscure in some Places. It
is the way of the Hebrews to express things briefly, concisely, abruptly. Their
peculiar Idiom admits not of an exact Translation. Order and Time are not
always observed. The Abstrusity of Scripture in some Places is an Argument of
its Worth and Excellency.

I Will now, according to my propounded Method, speak of those Difficulties
which arise from the Duration of Time wherein such and such things were done,
or came to pass. The first Chronological Doubt which I shall mention is that in
Genesis 15. 13. Thy Seed shall be a Stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and
shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred Years. So long the
Israelites were to serve the Egyptians, and be afflicted by them: Which is
confirmed in ver. 16. In the fourth Generation they shall come hither again,
that is, after four hundred Years (mentioned before) the Israelites shall be
delivered from their Slavery in Egypt, and shall return to Canaan. But it is
well known and confessed by all Men, that the Israelites were not in Egypt so
long a time, and consequently did not serve them, nor were afflicted by them so
many years. It is generally acknowledged that their Bondage in Egypt did not
last above two hundred and 15 Years at most: And so the Antiqu. I. 2. c. 6.
Jewish Historian himself computes it. Here then seems to be a great Mistake as
to Time: But really there is none, but those rather who think the forementioned
Words are spoken wholly of the Time of the Israelites Servitude in Egypt are
mistaken, which we shall the better apprehend if we take notice of the Text as
it is quoted by St. Stephen in Acts. 7. 6. God spoke in this wise that his Seed
should sojourn in a strange Land, and that they should bring them into Bondage,
and entreat them evilly four hundred Years. The four hundred Years, as you may
observe, refer not only to the latter but the former part of the Verse, viz. to
the sojourning in a strange Land, which may be applied to Canaan as well as
Egypt: so that this Term of four hundred Years includes all the Time from
Abraham's leaving his own Country till the Departure out of Egypt. In all this
space of Time Abraham's Seed were Sojourners and Pilgrims, were evilly
entreated, and suffered Bondage and Persecution. But the Difficulty is renewed
by what we meet with in Exodus 12. 40. The sojourning of the Children of Israel,
who dwelt in Egypt (the last eminent Place of their sojourning) was four
hundred and thirty Years. Here are thirty Years added to the former Reckoning:
how shall we reconcile this? Very well, for this latter Account is precise and
exact, but the former was not, which is no unusual thing in Holy Scripture, as
well as in other Good Writers. The Years are not always precisely set down, the
odd and lesser Numbers are omitted, and the great round Number only is
mentioned. Thus in the forenamed Places the round Number of four hundred is put
for four hundred and thirty, which latter is the whole time of the sojourning
both of Abraham and his Seed in Canaan, and afterward of their Posterity in
Egypt. This Exact Number is mentioned by the Apostle, whose Words will give us
farther Light into this Computation; The Covenant, says he, that was confirmed
before of God in Christ, the Law (which was four hundred and thirty Years
after) cannot disanul. It is certain that the Covenant he here speaks of, is
that Covenant which God made with Abraham, (as the preceding Verses show) and
the Law is that Body of Moral Precepts and Prohibitions which was given on
Mount Sinai, in the very Year of the Israelites coming out of Egypt. Hence we
plainly discover the beginning and ending of the four hundred and thirty Years:
they began when Abraham left his own Country, (for then God entered into
Covenant with him) and they ended when the Israelites left Egypt, and thereupon
received the Law from Moses on the Mount. Though it be true then that the
Israelites Servitude in Egypt was not above two hundred and odd Years, yet the
full time of their whole Peregrination was four hundred and thirty, which is to
be reckoned from the Calling of Abraham, and his coming out of Vr, until the
Israelites leaving of Egypt under the Conduct of Moses. This is the full and
exact Account, and the other beforementioned fell short of it, because the odd
Numbers were omitted, as is frequent among the best Writers. And indeed a great
many Difficulties in Chronology are answered by this, that a Great or Round
Number is oftentimes used in Scripture for an Odd or Imperfect one, though it
be more Exact. Thus it is threatened and foretold in Numb, 14. 33. that the
Murmuring Israelites should wander in the Wilderness forty Years: yet if you
compare Numb, 33. 3. with Josh. 4. 19. you will see that some Days, if not
Weeks, were wanting to make up the Number: But because forty Years was a round
and complete Number; and because in so many Years a few Days were
inconsiderable, therefore Moses delivers it in this manner. The like you may
observe in Judge. 11. 26. where you read that the Israelites dwelt in the Land
of the Amorites three hundred Years; whereas from the first time that the
Israelites began to enter upon the Land of Canaan (when Joshua was made their
Leader) to Iephthah's Reign, there were not above two hundred threescore and
seven Years. But becaue the other was a Round Number, and because was nearer to
three hundred than to two hundred, it is thus expressed. And other Instances of
this sort might be produced, (which I now wave) wherein the lesser and more
imperfect Numbers are omitted; especially in very Great Sums the small Number
is neglected, and comes not under any Account.

There is another difficult Passage in Chronology, and that respects the time
of the Judges, Acts 13. 20. After that he gave them Judges about the space of
four hundred and fifty Years, until Samuel the Prophet: yet, according to the
usual Computation, it is generally said, that there were but three hundred and
thirty nine Years from Othniel the first Judge, till the beginning of Samuel's
Government, who was the last: So that hence it appears there are above a
hundred Years too much in that Account. Beza and some others lay the Fault on
the Amanuensis, telling us, that (...) is written instead of (...), four
hundred for three hundred. But this Expedient for taking away the Difficulty is
not to be approved of, and I have given the Reason of it before. Some think to
help it by insisting on the Particle (...) in the Words, which signifies about,
or as it were, and so implies a Latitude in the Chronology. It is true, this
shows that the time is not punctually determined here: but then any Man may see
that the vast Difference between four hundred and fifty, and three hundred
thirty nine Years, is not decided by this. Grotius on this Place tells us, that
the four hundred and fifty Years began from the going out of Egypt, and ended
at the time when David expelled the Jebusites out of Sion; for so long it was
before the Jews were settled in that Seat which God designed for them. But this
does not in the least clear the Doubt, for St. Stephen's Words are, After that,
i. e. after the seven Nations were destroyed, and the Land was divided by Lot
to the Israelites, as you read in the foregoing Verse. (...), after these
things he gave them Judges about the space of, etc. Therefore the Calculation
cannot commence from the going out of Egypt. Usher, Knatchbull.
Others, though of very great Learning, are yet more extravagant, for they
refer these Words to those in ver. 17. of this Chapter, The God of this People
of Israel chose our Fathers; which was about the Birth of Isaac, in whose
Family the Covenant was to rest. And they proceed to compute thus; from Isaac's
Birth to that of Jacob sixty Years; from thence to their going into Egypt one
hundred and thirty Years; from thence to their coming out two hundred and ten;
from thence to their Entrance into the Land of Canaan forty; and from thence to
the Division of the Land, and settling the Government by Judges, seven Years:
in all four hundred and forty seven. But besides that this falls short three
Years of the intended Number, viz. four hundred and fifty, this also is to be
said, that it is nothing to the purpose, for the Text we are treating of speaks
of the Time of the Judges; but these Interpreters run back as far as Isaac's
Birth, which was above four hundred Years before there were any Judges.

In the next Place therefore, This and only this can reconcile the Difference,
viz. that the Apostle follows the Ordinary and Vulgar Account in use among the
Jewish People, who made the Number of Years from the coming out of Egypt till
the building of the Temple to be about an hundred and twelve more than is
expressed in 1 Kings 6. 1. as appears from Josephus, who makes the Distance
between the one and the other to be five hundred and ninety two Years; the
which Enlarging of the Account arose from their computing the Years of the
Oppressions of Israel between the times of the Judges, as distinct from the
Years which are allowed to each particular Judge. The Apostle, who intended not
Accuracy in Chronology, but spoke as the Vulgar, follows this Computation; and
by putting the Sum of both these together, viz. the Years under the Judges and
under the Oppressors, he makes up the just Number of four hundred and fifty
Years; particularly thus, he joins with the three hundred and thirty nine Years
of the thirteen Judges, one hundred and eleven Years in which the Israelites
were in Trouble and Servitude under several Enemies; which Years are numbered in
the History by themselves, Judge. 3. 8. and 3. 14. and 4. 3. and 6. 1. and 10.
8. and 13. 1. Now these being added to, or included in three hundred and thirty
nine Years of the Judges, make up exactly four hundred and fifty Years.

As to the forty Years Reign of Saul, which is mentioned by the Apostle in the
next Verse, Acts 13. 21. God gave unto them Saul by the space of forty years,
it may seem very hard to reconcile it with 1 Samuel 13. 1. where Readiness Reign
seems to be terminated within three Years; some think within two Years. I
answer, that Place is misunderstood, Saul reigned one Year, and when he had
reigned two Years over Israel, he chose him three thousand Men, etc. Here is
not assigned the full Term of Years in which Saul reigned; but all that is
meant is this, that at that time when the Thunder in Harvest happened, (of
which you read in the preceding Chapter, v. 18. and to which the beginning of
this Chapter, refers) Saul had been King one Year, namely, since his first
anointing by Samuel, to his second anointing; and that when he had reigned
another Year, or two Years more, he chose him those three thousand Men to be
his Guard. This is all that can be gathered from those Words, and therefore
none can infer thence that Saul reigned but three Years in all. But still the
greatest part of the Difficulty remains; for though Saul reigned more than
three Years, yet it is impossible he should have reigned forty, which is the
Space of time that the Apostle here assigns him: for if he was King so long,
it would certainly follow that there were almost five hundred Years from the
Departure out of Egypt to the building of Solomon's Temple: neither could Saul
be a young Man when he was elected King (as we read he was:) nay, it would
follow that David was not born at that time when he is said to have vanquished
Goliath: and other such Consequences might be drawn thence. How then did Saul
reign forty Years? I answer, this may truly be said, because with Readiness
Government Samuel's also is computed in this Place of the Apostle. How this
forty Years is to be divided betwixt them is not agreed. Antiq. Jud. l. 6. c.
15.
Josephus comes pretty near to the space of Time mentioned here, asserting that
Saul reigned eighteen Years with Samuel, and twenry Years afterward. An Mr.
Abraham Cowley in his Davideis.
Ingenious Man of late has so adjusted the time, that he concludes Saul to
have reigned ten Years of this forty, and he allows the remaining thirty for
the Government of Samuel. Others make up the forty Years between them in
another manner. But all is Conjecture, and we know nothing certainly here. This
only we may rest in as a very great Probability, that the times both of Samuel
and Readiness Government are joined together in these forty years. Samuel was Judge
of Israel, and being set over them by God, was their rightful Governor. They
had no Authority to depose him, and to choose a King in his room, and therefore
Samuel might be looked upon as their True and Lawful Governor as long as he
lived. Yet this time of his Rule is made here a part of Readiness Reign, because
he was forced at last to anoint him King, and because he suffered his own
Government to be swallowed of his. Hence it is that the forty Years assigned to
him by St. Paul do include Samuel's Judicature, that is, Samuel and Saul
reigned forty Years together.

This also will salve many Chronological Differences, that the Kings of Israel
did often make their Sons Kings in their own Reign, to settle them in the
Kingdom before their Death; and so the time of the Reign is sometimes set down
as it respects the Father only, sometimes as it respects the Son, and sometimes
as it includes both. Iehoram is said to have reigned eight years in Jerusalem,
2 Kings 8. 17. but by Collection out of the Text it is clear that either seven
of those eight Years, or at least four, are to be reckoned in the Life of his
Father Iehosaphat; for Iehoram reigned as Viceroy in his Father's time, or he
reigned with his Father, and so his Father's Years and his are reckoned too.
But when, upon the Death of his Father, he came to reign alone, then it is said,
Jehoram his Son reigned in his stead, 2 Chronicles. 21. 1. So Iotham reigned Sixteen
Years, 2 Kings 15. 33. yet mention was made before of his twentieth year, ver.
30. which we reconcile thus, Iotham reigned alone sixteen Years only, but with
his Father Vzziah (who was a Leper, and therefore unfit for the sole
Government) four Years before, which makes twenty. Thus we take away that
seeming Repugnancy between 2 Kings 24. 8. Jehoiachin was eighteen Years old
when he began to reign, and 2 Chronicles. 36. 9. He was eight Years old when he
began to reign: that is, he was eight Years old when he began to reign with his
Father, but he was eighteen when he began to reign by himself. It was common
both with the Kings of Judah and Israel to take their Sons into Partnership
with them in the Throne. This is the way of resolving other Places of the like
Nature in the Books of Kings and Chronicles. Sometimes the Sons are made Kings
with their Fathers, and the Years of their Joint Reign are put together: At
other times they are spoken of as ruling separately; and hence it comes to pass
that the Years vary. We are concerned then to take notice that in the foresaid
Books the Reigns of some Kings are mentioned twice; first as they were
Contemporary and Sharers with some others; and then as they ruled alone.

We may sometimes solve the Doubts about the different Account which is given
us of the Duration of some Kings Reigns by Interregnums or Vacancy of Kingly
Government for few or more Years, which was not unusual. Thus of King Ahaziah,
who succeeded Iehoram in the Throne, it is recorded (2 Kings 8. 26.) that he
was two and twenty Years old when he began to reign: but in 2 Chronicles. 22. 2. it
is said, he was forty and two Years old when he began to reign. If this latter
Account be true, then besides that it is a contradicting of the former, it will
follow hence that the Son was two Years older than the Father; for of Iehoram,
who was his Father, it is said in 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. Thirty and two Years old was
he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight Years: whence it
appears that he was forty Years old when he died: but of his Son who succeeded
him in the Throne it is said, He was two and forty Years old when he began to
reign, 2 Chronicles. 22. 1. This is thought to be so great a Difficulty, that
Malvenda and others cry out, it is not to be solved. But why, I pray? Because,
say they, according to this Relation the Father died at forty; and the Son, who
immediately succeeded him, was above forty: so then Iehoram begat his Son two
Years before himself was born; which to assert, is as ridiculous as the thing
is impossible. But those who talk after this manner make Difficulties, and then
complain there is no possibility of answering them. They affirm that Ahaziah
immediately succeeded Iehoram; whereas they find not this asserted in the
History. There might be an Interruption of the Royal Government, Ahaziah might
be kept from the actual Possession of the Throne a long time. So then it is
truly said, He was two and twenty Years old when he began to reign, if you
reckon from his Father's Death, for then a King's Heir is said to begin his
Reign. But if you compute from the time when he was peaceably settled in the
Kingdom, he was two and forty Years old when he began to reign: for by that
time he got securely to the Throne, twenty Years were expired: and after this
he reigned but one Year, as we read in the same Place. Thus (besides that it
might have been said, that Ahaziah reigned with his Father twenty two Years)
the Difficulty is answered by supposing an Interregnum for several Years, which
was very frequent in those Days: and there is Reason Sometimes to grant this
Vacancy to have been, although it be not expressly mentioned in the Place; for
many things of this kind are omitted in the Sacred History, and are left to be
inferred from the Reasonableness of the thing it self, and from the
Circumstances which attend it.

Again, there are those who avoid some Scruples in Chronology, by holding that
the Years of Bad Kings are sometimes omitted, as if they had not reigned at
all. So some have interpreted that Place, 1 Samuel 13. 1. which speaks of the two
Years Reign of Saul; not but that he reigned many more, which are not there
reckoned, because of his evil Government. Thus Solomon, they say, reigned many
more Years than are set down, for the time of his sinful and idolatrous Reign
is suppressed. Lastly, it has been observed (in order to the taking away those
Doubts which arise about the different Assignation of Time in the Old
Testament) that the Scripture gives us the Computation of the Times of the
Jewish Republic or Kingdom, but altogether omits the Spaces of Servitude,
Oppression, Captivity, and Anarchy, excepting only the time of the Egyptian
Bondage, which is reckoned by Moses. The Author of Seder Olam, and Other Jewish
Writers, and the Learned Broughton, Concent of Scripture.
, from them give an Account of some Chronological Disputes by adhering to this
Expedient. With whom agrees The C^ronicle of the Times of the Old Testament.
Dr. Lightfoot, who has admirably performed this Task, adding several things
of his own Observation, whereby the Differences in Chronology are fully
reconciled. The Result then of what we have said is this, that if in some
Places of Scripture the Years seem not to be rightly set down, we may recur to
the foregoing Resolutions, and satisfy our selves with them, but not condemn
the Text as corrupted and falsified; nay, as if it had had Mistakes and Errors
in it at the first. This latter is Mr. Hobbs's way, but we may plainly see that
he makes it his Business to expose the Scripture, and to represent it as a Book
fraught with many Inconsistencies and Falsities. If he had dealt thus with
Virgil or some other Writer of that strain, if he had impeached that Poet's
Chronology in making Aeneas and Dido contemporary, it had been tolerable, yea
laudable, for some are of Opinion that Dido was not in being till above a
hundred and fifty Years after Aeneas's Death. It was high Poetical Fiction to
make that Queen fall in love with the fugitive Trojan so long a time after he
was dead. But in the Sacred Writings there is nothing that looks like such
Defect in Synchronism: both Time and Place are truly assigned, though sometimes
by reason of the things before mentioned we cannot presently discover the Truth
of it, and make it appear how it is.

Lastly, I conclude all with those Genealogical Difficulties in Mat. 1. and
Luke 3. I begin with our Savior's Genealogy, as it is drawn up in the first
Chapter of St. Matthew. Here some Heretic Christians of old, (as the Ebionites
and Manichees) here some of the Notablest Pagans (as Celsus, Julian, and
Porphyrius) found Matter of Cavil; and some of late have thought that here are
such Knots as are impossible to be dissolved. As first, the Genealogy runs thus
in ver. 9. Ozias begat Ioatham; whereas it is clear from 1 Chronicles. 3. 11, 12.
that Ioash, Amaziah, and Azariah, were between Ozias and Ioatham. The Answer
is, that this Genealogist reckons sometimes per saltum: when he says such a
Person begat another, it is not always meant of Father and Son properly, but he
is said to beget another from whom that Person or others proceed at a distance.
An immediate Generation (such as the Father's is in respect of his Son) is not
to be understood in this Place, nor indeed in some others in this Genealogy,
where you cannot but observe that sundry Persons are wholly omitted. It is
evident therefore that the Design of St. Matthew was not to be strict and
accurate in this Pedigree, and to give us a complete Enumeration of Persons,
but only to present us with a general and loose Draught of Christ's Descent.
And this should teach us not to be overcurious in scanning the Parts of this
Genealogy; for if the Evangelist was not Critical and Exact in composing it,
why should we show our selves so in examining it?

Again, it is objected that the Genealogy is said to be divided into three
Fourteens, and yet in one of them there are only thirteen Persons to be found.
This is solved by some Manuscripts, which insert Iachim into ver. 11. thus,
Josias begat Jachim, and Jachim begat Jechoniah: and others interpose Abner in
ver. 13. as thus, Eliakim begat Abner, and Abner begat Azor. But there is no
need of flying to Other Copies in this case; for the plain Resolution of the
Difficulty is this, that in ver. 11, 12. under one Name, viz. Iechonias, two
Persons, viz. the Father and the Son are understood: for that Iechonias,
mentioned in ver. 11. had two Names, and was called Iehoiakim (as you read in 1 Chronicles. 3. 15, 16.) who was the Father of that Iechonias mentioned in ver. 12.
The first Iechonias was the Son of Josias, the second was the Father of
Salathiel, and the Son of the former Iechonias. Now if the former Iechonias,
the Father of the latter, be numbered in the second Tesseradecad; and if the
latter Iechonias, the Father of Salathiel, be inserted into the third
Tesseradecad; or, which is the same thing, if the Father be meant in ver. 11.
and the Son in ver. 12. the Difficulty vanishes; for here are thrice fourteen
Generations, according to this way which I have propounded. And the way is
obvious and easy, and cannot seem strange to any Person who observes the manner
of the Lineages in this Genealogy, which are not set down with Accuracy, but
something is left to be supplied by us in the several Branches of it, and
particularly in this which I last mentioned. But it is further Objected, how
could Iechonias beget Salathiel, (v. 12.) when it is said concerning him, Write
ye this Man childless, Jer. 22. 30? If Iechonias was childless, Salathiel could
not be his Son. But I answer, 1 st. [Childless] may import no other than this,
that he should be bare, Solitary, desolate, distressed, as the Greek renders
it, and as the next Words may be thought to explain it [ a Man that shall not
prosper in his Days]. Or, 2dly. the meaning is, that Iechonias's Children
should be cut off, and not one of them succeed him in the Throne, as is said
likewife in the following Words, [ No Man of his Seed shall prosper, sitting
upon the Throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. This is here to be
childless: and so though Iechoniah had a Son, viz. Salathiel, yet this Son was
not his Successor in the Kingdom.

Then, as to the Genealogy of Christ from Joseph upwards, which we have in Luke
3. it is Objected, that Cainan is inserted between Arphaxad and Sala, ver. 36.
but is not so in Genesis 11. 12. where these Generations are first recorded. I
answer, Cainan is omitted by Moses for Brevity sake, and Arphaxad is said to
beget Salah, that is, not immediately, but Cainan intervening. But what was
left out in the Hebrew Text the Septuagint supplied, who in their Greek Version
expressly mention Cainan: and St. Luke following this Version put Cainan into
the Genealogy. And it was better to do so than to alter it according to the
Hebrew Original, because the LXX's Version was in great Repute: and if he had
altered it, it would have given Offense to the Weak. Besides, this might be by
Tradition among the Jews, (as St. Paul's Iannes and Iambres, 2 Timothy 3. 8.) and
that gave farther Occasion to him of inserting it, though it was not in the
Hebrew.

But how can either of these Genealogies (in St. Matthew and St. Luke) be said
to be Christ's, when they both give an Account only of the Lineage of Joseph?
To satisfy this Scruple we must know that the Virgin Mary's Genealogy is
included in that of Joseph, and consequently Christ's Descent is here set down
because he sprang from the Virgin Mary. Joseph being a Good Man, and an
Observer of the Law, would not marry one that was not of his Tribe or Family;
so that Mary's Genealogy is in a manner his, because she was of the same Family
and Stock with him: which is partly intimated in the Close of that Genealogy
which is in St. Matthew, ver. 16. Jacob begat Joseph the Husband of Mary;
giving us to understand that Mary and Joseph were of the same Family and
Descent, viz. of the Stock and Lineage of David; for according to the Mosaic
Law and Custom one Tribe and Generation did not mix with another, but they were
to match together: wherefore in giving the Pedigree of one, that of the other
also is given at the same time. Hence Christ is called the Son of David, Mat.
1. 1. and in other Places; not that he was so in respect of an Earthly Father,
for he had none, but by reason of his Mother, who was of the House of David. So
then the Genealogy of Joseph and Mary is to be reckoned as the same, and that
is the reason why one of them only, viz. Joseph, is distinctly mentioned.

And yet you may observe a very Great Difference in the Genealogies of St.
Matthew and St. Luke; and one may be said to be Ioseph's and the other Mary's
Genealogy; that is, those Persons from whom more immediately Joseph descended,
are mentioned by the former Evangelist, and those from whom more directly Mary
descended, are mentioned by the latter. St. Matthew's Genealogy gives Ioseph's
Pedigree from the House of Solomon, and St. Luke's gives the Blessed Virgin
Mary's from the House of Nathan. The one, says St. Comment. in S. Matthew.
Hilary, sets down the Royal Stock of Christ by Solomon; the other shows his
Priestly Lineage by Nathan. Grotius speaks more consistently, telling us, that
St. Matthew takes notice of the Right Succession in his Genealogy, but St. Luke
has regard to the Right of Consanguinity. The short is, we have Christ's
Genealogy, not only as it respects his Reputed Father, but his Own Mother.
Matthew being a Jew, does, according to the Legal way, deduce the Line of
Joseph, the supposed Father of Jesus. Luke being a Gentile, follows the Law of
Nature, and writes Mary's Descent, from whom (being his Mother) Christ really
came. And yet after all this, and much more which has plausibly and probably
been said by Writers on this Subject, we are certain of this, that both St.
Matthew and St. Luke's Genealogy derive Christ's Line from Joseph. We find that
both of them terminate expressly in Him. Jacob begat Joseph, says St. Matthew,
ver. 16. and so ends the Descent. St. Luke, who reckons another way, yet makes
the lineal Descent of Christ from Joseph, Jesus being (as was supposed) the Son
of Joseph, Luke 3. 23. This we must assert, and we cannot do otherwise, because
the thing is so plain before us, that he that runs may read it in express
terms. Moreover, this was according to the constant Custom of the Jews, who
always deduced the Pedigree from the Father: and we know that Joseph was our
Savior's reputed Father. But then you will say, if both the Genealogies belong
to Joseph, what is the reason that they differ so much? Whence is it that the
same Names and Persons are not mentioned in one that are in the other, if they
be the same Genealogy? This Query has been warmly pursued, and diverse Answers
have been returned to it. But the true one is this, that where there were so
many Names and Persons, the Evangelists might pitch on whom they pleased. It
being their Design only to draw up a Pedigree in a desultory way, and not to
mention all from whom our Savior descended, it was in their choice to take who
they thought fit, either Persons nearer or further off; they might insist on
this or the other Stock as they saw convenient. It is no wonder then that the
Names and Number of the Persons in the two Genealogies vary, for St. Matthew
and St. Luke proceed in a different way, and derive the Pedigree from distinct
Stocks. This is the true reason why there is so great a Difference in the two
Genealogies; why the Persons whence the Lineage is drawn, are not the same in
both the Evangelists. Yet it evidently appears from both ways of framing the
lineal Descent, that our Lord sprang from the House of David, which was the
main thing designed and aimed at in these Genealogies. Now, this is effectually
done by propounding of Ioseph's Descent: for seeing no Genealogies were
reckoned among the Jews by the Woman's side; and seeing the Pedigrees of Women
were not wont to be recorded among them, (no more than their Age; whence the
only Woman whose Years of her whole Life are recorded in Scripture is Sarah,
Gen 23. 1.) it is manifest that when Ioseph's Lineage is set down, that also of
his Wife, and consequently of her Son, is set down also: Which is grounded on
what I said before viz. that the Jews generally married within their Tribes,
that the Inheritances might be preserved in the same Tribe they were in, and
not be translated to another. The Injunction was plain and positive, Numb. 36.
6. To the Family of the Tribe of their Father shall they marry: and though
afterward a Special Reason is given, viz. because the Inheritance should not
be alienated, yet the Injunction was General, and concerned both Rich and Poor;
and though there be some Examples of a contrary Practice in the Sacred History,
yet we cannot thence argue that the Law was not General. Yea, the Jewish
Masters tell us, that the Woman, after the Contract of Marriage, though she was
before by her Family of another Tribe and Lineage, different from her Husband,
yet by virtue of that Contract she was adopted into the same Tribe with him to
whom she was espoused, and so was ever after legally reckoned to be of that
Tribe: and the Progeny which afterward was born of this Woman, was accounted
to be of the same Tribe. Thus it is plain that when Ioseph's Lineage is
described by the Evangelists, that also of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of our
Lord himself is determined. We have reason then to assert this Proposition,
that the Pedigrees mentioned by St. Matthew and St. Luke, are both of them
properly the Genealogies of Joseph: Which I find most Writers on this Theme are
loath to acknowledge; yea, they tell us positively, that one is Ioseph's, and the
other is the Virgin's Genealogy. But if we will make use of our Eyes, and
behold and read the Pedigrees themselves as they are delivered by the
Evangelists, we must be forced to confess that Joseph is in the beginning of
the Genealogy in St. Luke, and in the end of that other in St. Matthew; only in
this the one differs from the other, that the former reckons Ioseph's Lineage
upward, and the latter downward. But this is common to them both, that in the
Line of Progenitors which they set down, they skip over many Persons; and when
this or the other Person was the Son of such an one, it is sometimes meant, that
at a great Distance he was his Son, or rather his Kinsman, as the Hebrews use
the word Son. If we take but this one thing along with us in our perusing of
these Pedigrees, it will help us to go through most of the Difficulties we meet
with in them: and this you will find made use of to this purpose by those that
have traveled with great Industry in this Point, and have undertaken to solve
the hard Passages in either of the Genealogies.

If it be Objected in the last Place, How can Joseph be the Son of Jacob in one
Genealogy, Mat. 1. 16. and the Son of Heli in the other, Luke 3. 23. it is
answered by some, that because Joseph married Mary, Heli's Daughter, therefore
he is called his Son, i. e. his Son by Marriage of his Daughter. Others say,
Heli and Jacob were Brethren, and the former dying without Children, the latter
married his Widow, as the Law in that case required: So that Jacob was the
Natural Father of Joseph, and Heli was his Father-in-law. This is the Sentiment
of several of the Jul. African. Greg. Nazianz. Auguslin, Jerome, Eusebius,
Ambrose.
Ancients and Baronius, Jansenius, etc.
Moderns, and we have no Argument to confute it. This was a Tradition among the
Jews themselves, as you may see in Grotius on Luke 3. Or if this be not
satisfactory, we may quash the Difficulty by what I have formerly propounded,
viz. that it is usual among the Jews to have two Names. It may be Jacob and Heli
are Names of the same Person; and St. Matthew makes use of one, and St. Luke of
the other. To conclude, though we were not able to reconcile some Passages in
the foresaid Genealogies, yet we have no reason to take occasion thence to
question the Truth and Consistency of them, for it is ridiculous to think that
St. Matthew would expose this Genealogy, and in the very Entrance of his
Gospel, unless he knew it was true, and as to the main unexceptionable. And the
very same we may say of St. Luke, who without doubt would not have offered to
public View a Pedigree wherein the Chiefest of that Nation were concerned, if
he had not been assured that it was impossible to confute it. And suppose we
are not able to give an Account of some part of it, yet let that of Grotius be
thought of, viz. that the Jews had a way of drawing up Genealogies, which is as
to some things unknown to us: they reckoned the Generations in a manner that
was different from what is now in use.

So much touching the Difficulties of the Style of Holy Scripture, and the
Occasions of them. No intelligent Person could expect but that it should
contain in it some things hard to be understood, if he ever we^ghed the
Particulars before specified in this Discourse, and if he consider moreover,
that,

1. The Scriptures are a Collection of Different Writers, some of which leave
out those Passages which others put in, and upon that account there seems
sometimes to be a Discrepancy among them, and one is thought to assert that
which another seems to deny.

2. We are ignorant of many Particulars relating to the Names of things, to
Rites, Opinions, Customs, Proverbs and peculiar Circumstances of those Times of
which the Holy Writings speak: and this is another Reason why several things in
them are obscure and unintelligible. We read of the Synagogue of the
Libertines, Acts 6. 9. but whether it was so called because 'twas built by Jews
that were made free of Rome, or from a Man or Men of that Name, or from a
Country and People of that Denomination, or whether Libertine be corruptly for
Labratheni, (because as Academ. cap. 2.
Fr. Iunius observes, Labratha was the old Word for a Synagogue or School) no
Man can tell: For we must needs be ignorant of the true occasion of Words and
Things, if there be no particular Record concerning them. How were it possible
to understand the Psalmist's Complaint, Psalm. 119. 83. I am become like a
Bottle in the Smoke, if we had not read that Anciently the Eastern People used
to hang up the Skins, of which Bottles were made, in the Smoke, to dry and
harden them? Besides, if they were long hung up in the Fire or Smoke, they were
subject to be parched and shriveled. I am dried up and withered like such a
Bottle, says he. We could not reach the Sense of those other Words of his, The
Rod of the Wicked shall not rest on the Lot of the Righteous, Psalm. 125. 3.
which is an Allusion to the dividing of the Lands among the Jews, if we did not
know that the Rod or Staff was used in Sortition, the assigning of Land or
Ground by Lot. Again, let not the Reader be surprised when I add, that it may
be when St. Paul orders the (...), to be brought to him from Troas, 2 Timothy 4.
13. he means the Skins which he was to make use of in his Trade of Tent-making:
For he was brought up to a Trade, (as was usual in those Days, and in those
Eastern Countries) and particularly to this, as we read in Acts. 18. 3. And
therefore when at other times he acquaints us that he labored with his Hands,
it is not to be questioned that he means his working in this Calling in which
he was skilled, and was bred up to. And this questionless was a considerable
Employment, and sufficiently gainful, because there was great use of Tents and
Booths in those open and hot Countries: and they were much bought up by those
whose Employment was in the Fields, especially they were useful for Soldiers.
Now the great Materials which were used in this Occupation, were Skins or Hides
of Beasts dressed. Accordingly we read that the Covering of the Tabernacle of
Testimony was made of Skins, Exodus 35. 23. Yea, Skins are simply and absolutely
put for Tents or Tabernacles in these following Places and others, 2 Samuel 7. 2.
1 Chronicles. 17. 1. Cant. 1. 5. Hab. 3. 7. Ier. 10. 20. Ierignah is constantly
rendered Pellis by the Latin Interpreter, because the Tents were made of Skins.
And that Tents and Pavilions were made of these, we may sufficiently inform our
selves from Pagan History. This we learn from Q. Curtius, who tells us, that
Soepe pellibus tabernaculi allevatis, ut conspiceres hostium ignes. Hist. lib.
7.
such kind of Membranous Tents were used in Alexander the Great's Camp. And
Tentoria militum erant ex pellibus, etc. De gest. Alex. M. l. 1.
Arrianus is very positive in this Matter. These Tents of Skins or Hides were
not only among the Greeks but Romans, and both Decad. 1. lib. 5.
Livy and Lib. 1. cap 12.
Florus pretend to assign the Date of them. De Bello Gall. l. 3. c. 4.
Caesar mentions this sort of Tents, and Lib. 8. cap. 2.
Valerius Maximus tells us, that those Soldiers who behaved themselves amiss,
had this as part of their Punishment, ne tentorium ex pellibus haberent, they
were not suffered to lie in these Tents in the Field. Hence in Tully we shall
find, that 4 Acad.
sub pellibus esse, is to be safely entrenched, and lie secure in their Tents.
It is probable that St. Paul sent to Timothy to bring or convey to him these
Skins wherewith he made his Tents, and at that time especially when he was in
Bonds at Rome, (the time of his writing this Epistle) and had no other way to
gain a Livelihood, than by exercising himself in his Calling. Wherefore he
writes to his beloved Timothy, to send him not only his Cloak and his Books,
but (...), chiefly, especially his (...), his Skins for Tent-making, which he
most of all wanted at that time: for he was unwilling to be burdensome, and to
rely wholly on the Charity of the Christian Brethren. These were some choice
Skins which he had left behind him at Troas, when he wrought in this his Trade
there. And if it be objected that Troas was a great way off, the Answer is,
that they might as easily be brought to him as the Books he writ for, if these
were of any considerable Number and Bigness. And this Notion is yet more
probable, if you consider that St. Paul was in way of Contempt called by the
Pagans (...) and Coriarius, because he cut out Hides and Skins in order to the
making of Tents. Yea, some of the Christian Writers give him the foresaid
Titles, thereby to magnify the Grace of God toward him. He is often styled
(...) by Therapeut.
Theodoret; and so he is by Hom. 5. ^n 2 Timothy
Chrysostom. Coriarius Cilix is the Epithet given by Comment. in Epist. ^d
Eplies.
Ierom. This makes it not improbable that the forementioned Text has
reference to the Practice of those times, the making of Tents, or the covering
of Booths and Pavilions with Skins. These, it is likely, are the (...) St. Paul
speaks of. As he sends for his Cloak to defend himself from the Cold, so he
sends for the Skins (which he left behind him) to make Tents to shelter and
keep others warm. For though it is granted that one Signification of Membrana
is Parchment, of which I had occasion to speak before; yet it also signifies
the Uppermost Skin or Hide of any Creature, as appears from that of Lib. 4.
Lucretius; Membranas mittunt vituli de corpore summo. And it has its
Denomination from Membrum, says Voss. Etymolog.
Priscian, because it covers the Limbs and other external Parts. Nay, you must
note that this is the first and most proper Signification of the word Membrana
in Tully, Pliny, and other Authors: whereas afterward in a secondary Sense it
came to signify Parchment. These things may render my Interpretation of this
Place not improbable. However, I presumed to offer the Criticism on the Word,
and let the Learned entertain it as they please. But this is not to be
questioned, that the not attending to the Usages and Practices of old in the
Countries to which some things spoken of in Scripture belong, is one Reason why
we miss of the right Sense of some Places.

3. The Hebrew Text (which is the greater part of the Bible) has some things
proper to it self, which render it perplexed and obscure in some Places, for in
Hebrew there are no Moods in the Verbs but the Indicative and Insinitive: no
Tenses but the Past and Future, Participles being made use of to express the
Present Time, which oftentimes renders the Meaning obscure and intricate.
Instead of an Interrogative Point the Hebrews make use of their Interrogative
He; otherwise there are no Notes or Marks of Interrogation, which is another
Cause (as might be showed) of misunderstanding the Text sometimes. There are
frequent Parentheses in the Hebrew Bible, and if they be not diligently
observed, they mar the Sense, as to instance but in one Place at present, Isa.
9. 3, etc. The 3d, 4th and 5th Verses are a Parenthesis; you must join the 6th
Verse to the 2d, and then you will see how the word for in the 6th Verse comes
in, not otherwise. But there are no Marks or Characters whereby we may know
when there is such a Parenthesis, which cannot but trouble the Sense very much,
and confound the Meaning of the Place, unless it be with extraordinary Care
taken notice of. And I might add, that the Pauses and Periods in the Hebrew
Copies are not so distinct as might be wished. The greater ought our Care and
Diligence to be in perusing and studying this Holy Book.

4. It is the way of the Hebrews (and indeed of all the Eastern Writers) to
express things in a brief and concise manner, which renders the Place sometimes
dark and confused. In the second Psalm several Persons are introduced speaking,
but it is not in the least intimated that there is this Change of Persons, but
all is expressed in a short and promiscuous way. The whole Psalm is a Dialogue,
wherein the Church speaks, ver. 1, 2. then the Enemies of the Church, v. 3. the
Church again, V. 4, 5. then God, ver. 6. then Christ the Son of God, ver. 7, 8,
9. And lastly the Psalmist ends with his own Exhortation. All which Parts, if
we do not take notice of, (though they are not distinguished for Brevity sake)
the true Import and Scope of the Psalm are lost. It is common to recite Words
which are said by Persons, and yet to bring them in abruptly, and not to
signify that they are said or spoken by them. As in Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted in
the Lord, i. e. they said so: but this is not here expressed. Thus in Isa. 33.
14. Who among us, etc. i. e. the Sinners in Zion, mentioned in that Verse, said
those Words. In v. 18. where is the Scribe? etc. to make the Sense perfect you
must insert, thou shall say. So in Isa. 49. 24. these Words [ say the Enemies]
must be inserted. In Ier. 6. 4. these or such like Words are left out [ the
Enemy shall say]. The like is observable in Ier. 22. 28. chapter 31. 20. In Hos. 5.
15. the word [ saying] is necessarily implied, for the first Verse of the next
Chapter contains the Words which were to be said. Sometimes this is supplied by
the Translation, though it be not in the Hebrew, as in 2 Samuel 2. Isa. 64. 11.
But in Obadiah, ver. 1. before Arise ye the word saying is to be supposed. In 1
Cor 15. 45. but is left out: otherwise you cannot understand the Apostle. And
many other Words are omitted in the Old and New Testament, and ought to be
supplied by the diligent Reader, who on that account is obliged to be very
Attentive when he reads these Sacred Writigs, for their short and contracted
way of speaking makes them the less intelligible; whereas when Matters are
amplified by Words, they become more clear and plain.

5. There is in the Hebrew Language a certain Peculiar Idiom or Force of
Signification, which when it comes to be translated into another Tongue, is
wholly lost; at least a great part of its Vigor and Elegancy is taken away;
and at the same time it is not so well understood, because it is a Strange
Idiom, and no ways agreeable to our manner of expressing our selves.

6. Order and Time are not always observed in these Holy Writings, which too
often begets Mistakes. Upon these several Accounts, and others, there must
needs be some Obscurity and Difficulty in the Style of Holy Writ. But you may
observe that this happens, through the All-wise Providence of God, in those
Places where the Great and Momentous things of Religion are not concerned,
where the Grand Truths of the Law and the Gospel are not in the least
endangered. And when in other Parts of the Bible we meet with Hard and Dark
Passages, we ought to be so far from blaming and disparaging this Divine Book,
because of these, that we should rather reckon them an Ornament to it. The
Dubiousness of Scripture in some things is part of its Excellency. It is a
great Commendation of this Sacred Volume, that it is not destitute of
Abs^rusities and Difficulties; that we are not wholly tied up and confined in
our Interpretation of it; that there is a Freedom of Disquisition allowed us;
that in several Places every Man is at his Liberty to embrace what Sense he
pleases of the Words, so it be according to the Analogy of Faith, and the
Tenor of the other Parts of this Inspired Book. This gives us an opportunity
of exciting our Care, of exerting our Industry, of improving our Knowledge, of
enlarging our Faculties by continual Researches and Examinations. Thus the
Obscurity of some Parts of Scripture is of great and excellent Use. But then
wherever the Indispensible and Necessary Points of Faith and Manners are
treated of in these Writings, their Style is sufficiently clear and plain, and
the Matter which is expressed by it is easy to be understood. In brief, the
Scripture is plain where it should be so. But if in some other Places there be
Controversy and Perplexity, if some Texts seem to oppose and clash with one
another, let us remember this, that the Scriptures were inspired by the Holy
Ghost, and therefore there can be no real Oppositions or Repugnancies in them,
because Truth cannot contradict it self. By impartial Study and Enquiry let us
dive into the Meaning of these Ancient Writings, and by the Helps which I have
tendered in the foregoing Discourse, endeavor to reconcile those Places which
seem to differ: but let us never be so daring as to accuse the Scriptures,
which were endited by God himself, of Contradiction.

FINIS.
FINIS.
ADDENDA
Refer this to Page 267. Line 19..
HEBREW Verbs of different Significations: 1. Those of two Significations; Anah
in Kal, to grieve or mourn, Isa. 3. 26. chapter 19. 8. in Piel to deliver up, Exodus
21. 13. Dabar in Kal to speak, in Piel to reduce into order. Chalatz in Piel to
save, in Hiphil to arm. Iaal in Hiphil to will or desire, in Niphal to be
foolish or mad. Pala in Niphal to be admired, in Piel to separate. Alam in
Niphal to be silent, in Piel to gather. Mashal in Kal to rule, in Niphal to be
compared with or likened to any thing or Person. Sabar in Kal to consider, in
Piel to expect, to hope for. Rakah in Kal to spit, in Hiphil to attenuate.
Tanah in Kal and Niphil to hire, in Piel to discourse with. Gaal in Kal to
redeem, in Piel to pollute. Bara in Kal to create, in Hiph. to make fat. Cacash
in Kal to be lean, in Piel to tell a Lie. Lamad in Kal to learn, in Piel to
teach. Cabad in Kal to be heavy, in Piel and Niph. to be honored. Puk to
stumble, to produce. Gnarak to ordain, to esteem. Saphak to suffice, to clap
Hands. Shabar to break, to buy. Kut to loath or abominate, to contend. Katar to
offer Incense, to bind. Kam or Kum to stand or rise, to be dim-sighted. Ragang
to quiet, to break or cut asunder. Ramah to dart, to deceive. Shaal to request,
to borrow. Panah to behold, to remove. Naka^ to bore or make a Hole, to curse.
Sama^h to rejoice, to shine. Pharash to separate, to interpret. Lutz to laugh,
to argu^ or dispute. Zachah to be innocent, to overcome. Lacham to eat, to
fight. Gnatsam to strengthen, to shut. Gnatsab to disturb, to fashion or form.
Gnaraph to cut the Throat, to distill. Gnathak to wax old, to be removed. 2.
Those of three Significations, Rab or Rahab, (and so the Verb Rabah) to be many
or much, to shoot Arrows, to educate. Ragal to search, to calumniate, to walk,
or make to walk or go. Halal to praise, to shine, to be mad. Shalam to be
peaceable, to be perfect, to recompense. Gnabar to pass, to be with Child, to
be angry. Nasha^ to forget, to let out Money upon Interest, to put out of
joint. Gnur, to be watchful, to make blind, to make naked. Alaph to learn, to
teach, to make or produce a thousand. Ruang to do Evil, to break or bruise, to
make a great Noise. Charash to plough, to think, to be silent. Gnara^ to be
emptied or poured out, to make naked, to adhere. Mahar to make haste, to be
liberal, to be foolish or inconsiderate. Gur to travel abroad, to gather
together, to fear. Damah to be quiet, to be like to one, to consent. Pharang to
be open or naked, to be free, to vindicate. Aphah to boil, to bake, to fry. Zur
to abhor, to sneeze, to compress. Gnana^ to answer, to humble, to commit
Adultery. Shar to sing, to walk, to observe. Shalah to be quiet, to be
fortunate, to err or be faulty. Kutz to rise or awake betimes, to be weary of,
or nauseate, to summer, or spend the Summertime. Kara to call, to read, to
meet one. 3. Verbs of four or more Significations; Natzah to bud forth, to fly,
to fight, to overcome. Salad to strengthen, to warm or heat, to harden, to
desire or beg. Kalal to be light or vile, to curse, to destroy, to polish.
Shagnah to behold, to be astonished, to abstain or desist, to shut. Pathach to
open, to engrave, to plough, to expose, to loose. Carah to open, to pierce, to
dig, to prepare, to entertain one with a Feast, to traffic or merchandise.
Chalal to begin, to profane, to bring forth Young, to wound, to mourn or
grieve, to cut or bore, to leap. Lastly, no Verb in the Holy Tongue has so
many different Significations as Gnarab, the Import of which is to mingle, to
negotiate, to be sweet or pleasant, to undertake for, or be Surety, to be
dusky, as in the Evening, etc.

Refer this to Page 274. Line 1.
Hebrew Nouns of two Significations; Ed a Vapor, Calamity. Siach a Shrub,
Speech. Tagnar a Whetstone, a Sheath. Goel a Redeemer, a Kinsman. Sheber Corn
or any Food, interpreting or unriddling. Racham the Womb, a Girl, (so, Mother
has this double Signification with us). Lahat a Flame, the Edg of a Sword.
Kesil a Fool, a certain Constellation. Aven Iniquity, Vanity. Nagnal a Shoe, a
Glove. Nouns of three Significations; Nachal an Inheritance, a Flood or
Torrent, a Valley. Alluph a Teacher, a Prince, a Bull or Ox. Keren a Horn,
Strength, Splendour. Gevah Pride, Excellency, a Body. Nouns of four or more
Significations; Chebel Corruption, Grief, a Rope or Cable, a Crowd or
Multitude, besides other collateral ones, as an Inheritance, etc. Shebet a Rod,
a Staff, a Scepter, a Tribe, a Stroke or Plague, a Quill, a Writing-Pen.
Charutz cut off, industrious, Gold, precious, a Ditch, a Flail, a Rake.

Refer this to Page 343. Line 7.
Hebrew Words that have Contrary Significations; Nacar to be known, to be
unknown. Kalas in Piel to slight or disesteem, in Hithpael to praise or extol.
Ragang to move and roll up and down, to rest or be quiet. Sharash to take root,
to eradicate or extirpate. Taab to desire in Kal, to abominate in Piel. Gnuph
to shine, to be obscure. Natzar to save, to destroy. Gnazab to desert, to help.
Batzar to rob or prey, to defend one's self from ^obbers. Bara to make or
create, also to remove or destroy. Salah to tread under foot, to esteem. Garaph
to gather, to disperse. Asaph to gather or preserve, also to remove or destroy.
Nacham to grieve or repent, to abandon Grief, or to be comforted. Chissed to
consecrate, to desecrate.

There are Instances of all or most of these ( viz. the same Hebrew Verbs and
Nouns, which have not only Different but Contrary Senses) in the Writings of
the Old Testament, which the Reader may consider at his leisure, and thereby be
helped to a distinct understanding of the Words in those Texts where they occur.

BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. JOHN EDWARDS.
AN Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament, which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a Probable Resolution of them: In two
Volumes, 8o.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, Vol. I. with a continued Illustration of several
Difficult Texts throughout the whole Work, 8o.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, Vol. II. wherein the Author's former Undertaking is
further prosecuted, viz. An Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts which contain
some Difficulty in them, 8o. All sold by Jonathan Robinson, John Evering^am,
and John Wyat.

Imprimatur,

Ian. 10. 1694/5. CAROLUS ALSTON, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris.

DISCOURSE Concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfection OF THE BOOKS OF THE
Old and New Testament.

Vol. III.

Treating of the Excellency and Perfection of the Holy Scriptures.

Wherein are also several Remarkable Texts interpreted according to the
Author's Particular Judgment.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. sometime Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, John Tailor
at the Ship, and John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's ChurchYard. MDCXCV.

October. 13. 1694.
I judge the Reverend Author shall do well to print the following Discourse,
wherein he has Learnedly demonstrated the Excellency and Perfection of the
Books of the Old and New Testament:

Io. Beaumont, D. D. The King's Professor of Divinity in Cambridge.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, His Grace THOMAS Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England; and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Grace;
I Embrace this welcome Opportunity of congratulating Your late Access to the
Highest Station in our Church, which all Wise and Good Men look upon as an
Happy Omen of the future Felicity of these Realms. For in Your Grace conspire
all those things which can render us, by the Divine Blessing, a Prosperous
People, viz. Your unstained Faithfulness and Loyalty to his Majesty, Your most
Ardent Love to Your Country, Your Great Ability for Public Counsels and
Affairs, Your perfect Abhorrence of all Immorality and Debauchery, Your Zealous
Concern for the Church of England, and in that for the whole Protestant
Religion. Of this last You have afforded the World such an Illustrious Proof as
will give an immortal Reputation to Your Name. For you have not only with Your
Learned Pen encountered the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and therein
vindicated the Reformed Cause, but in all Your Actions You have demonstrated
Your singular Care for this latter, and Your Detestation of the former.
Especially, when in the late Reign this Idol began to be set up again, and too
many fell down to it, You with the utmost Zeal, Vigor and Courage,
remonstrated against this Practice. You bore the Insolences and Insults of the
Enemy with an unimitable Bravery; You withstood their Boldness with a
Confidence becoming the Goodness of Your Cause: You obviated their Folly and
Madness with a profound Wisdom and Prudence: You defeated their Diligence by a
more unwearied Industry: And, in brief, You were the Successful Maul and
Scourge of the Hectoring Jesuits that lifted up their Heads in that Day. For
this You were hated and defamed, and are so at this Hour, by all the sworn
Friends to the Pontifician Interest, who look upon You (and that justly) as
their most Dreadful Enemy. But this very thing deservedly makes Your Grace to
be loved, admired and honored by all Sincere Protestants and True English -men.

I am one that glory in being of that Number, and accordingly I now attempt to
express my infinite Regards and Veneration of Your Grace's Transcendent
Undertakings in behalf of our Religion and our Church, and of the Whole Nation.
And, as a Testimony of my Resentments and Duty, I here offer to Your Grace a
Discourse of the Perfection of the Holy Scriptures, which was designed to be
presented to Your Lordship before you were advanced to this Supreme See, to
which Your Merits have called You. Wherefore I having then consecrated it to
Your Name, I hold it unlawful now to alienate it; especially it being the
Choicest and Noblest Subject that I have yet treated of, and therefore I hope
not unworthy of Your Grace's Patronage. I submit the Work wholly to Your
Grace's Judgment, and beg leave to have the Honor of professing my self to be

Your Grace's most Humble and Obedient Son and Servant, JOHN EDWARDS.

The PREFACE.
I Now present the Reader with that Part of my Discourses concerning the Holy
Scriptures, wherein I have attempted to display the matchless Worth and
Perfection of those Divine Records. Besides the Great and Important Remarks
which I have offered, I could have mentioned other things barely Critical; and
which, though they be of an inferior Nature in comparison of those which I
have insisted upon, are deemed to be Excellencies and Embelishments in other
Authors of good Rank. Thus some Critics have observed concerning that of
Virgil, Aen. 8. Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula (campum; That in the
very Sound of the Words the swist Career of the Horses beating and shaking the
Ground with their Hoofs seems to s^rike the Ear. The Poetic Feet are so formed
that they express those of the Steeds. And so in the same Writer, Aen. 5. --
Procumbit humi bos, is thought to be a great Elegancy and Pulchritude, as if it
represented in a lively manner the Dull and Heavy F^ll of that Creature. Both
in this and the former Instance the very Noise of the Words, the very Composure
of the Syllables, are justly applauded by the Admirers of that Poet. The like I
could have observed in the Inspired Writings, especially those that are
Poetical, among which I reckon the Book of Isaiah to be one; for tho it be not
in Verse, yet a Poetic Genius and Strain may be observed in most Parts of it.
Those Words, chapter 21. v. 5. Prepare the Table, watch in the Watchtower, eat,
drink, arise ye Princes, anoint the Shield, express the Speediness of the
Preparations made for Babylon's Fall. They are so ordered that the Quickness of
the Dispatch is signified by them. There are six Parts or Divisions in this
Verse without a Copulative, merely to signify the Celerity of the Undertaking.
And the Vision wherein this Speedy Ruin of that Nation is foretold is thus
represented, v. 7. He saw a Chariot, a couple of Horsemen, a Chariot of Asses,
a Chariot of Camels. There is Expedition in the very Words, there is no
Conjunctive Particle to retard them. You may in the very Frame of the Words
perceive the Chariots running speedily. But if we look into those Parts of the
Bible which are strictly and properly Poetical, that is, which consist of
certain Measures and Numbers, we shall find Examples of this sort very
frequently. The Egyptians furious Pursuit after the Israelites is thus
expressed in Moses's Song, Exodus 15. 9. I will pursue, I will overtake, etc.
Where there are ^ix Verbs denoting Action and Expedition, and not one
Conjunction between them. In the Conciseness and Roundness of the Words,
especially if we consult the Original, which is more Emphatick, we may discern
the Speediness of the thing it self spoken of. The like might be taken notice
of in the Song of Deborah, Judge. 5. and in several Places of the Psalms, and
the Lamentations. Thus, if we would be very Curious, we might parallel the
Inspired Poetry with that of the best Masters in that Art among the Gentiles.

But because these things are but mean in respect of those Weightier ones
wherein the Bible's Excellency does appear, I have not inserted them, or any
other Observations of the like Nature, into the ensuing Discourse; and the
rather, because it was my Design to mention only those Particulars which are of
Universal Use, and which may without Exception be acceptable to all Persons who
have a due Esteem either of True Learning or Piety. Those who value the former,
and are well acquainted with it, will most readily give their Suffrage here,
and proclaim to the World that Scripture-Learning outvies all others, that the
Original of most Arts and Sciences is to be fetched hence, that a Library
without the Bible is an imperfect thing. Those who have a Sense of the latter
will be as forward to assert the Pre-eminence of this Sacred Volume, for here
is the Source of all Religion; and no Man can be Devout and Pious who is a
Stranger to this. Wherefore when, with a becoming Regret, I saw that the Sense
of Religion and Piety is generally lost among us at this Day, I apprehended
that the best way to retrieve it, is to read and peruse the Scriptures: And
that this may be done with Success I thought it requisite to set forth the
Excellency and Perfection of this Holy Book, that thence Persons might be
effectually invited to acquaint themselves with it. And I hope, how meanly
soever I have performed this Task, some who light upon these Papers will from
them be inspired with a hearty Regard and Reverence, an entire Love and
Veneration of the Holy Writ, and be reminded from what is here suggested, to
converse more intimately with it themselves, and to encourage others to follow
their Example. This would in a short time make a great Change in the World, and
the Bible it self would be read in the Lives and Behavior of Mankind.
Wherefore with great Seriousness and Importunity I request the Reader that he
would entertain such Thoughts and Persuasions as these, that Bible-Learning is
the Highest Accomplishment, that this Book is the most Valuable of any upon
Earth, that here is a Library in on single Volume, that this alone is
sufficient for us, tho all the Libraries and Books in the World were destroyed.
And this is the Grand Truth which I have labored to demonstrate in the
following Papers.

A CATALOGUE of most of the Texts of Scripture which are interpreted in the
following Discourse, according to the Author's Particular Judgment.
GENESIS.
THE whole first Chapter. Page 3*^ Chap. 3. v. 7. They made themselves Aprons.
What the word C^agoroth signifies. p. 235* Ver. 21. Unto them the Lord God made
Coats of Skins. Why so called. p. 237 Chapter 4. v. 20. Jabal was the Father of
such as dwell in Tents. p. 112 Chapter 18. v. 7. He took the Calf which he had
dressed, and set it before them. p. 117 Chapter 24. v. 22. The Man took* a Golden
Ear-ring. What is meant by Nezem zahab. p. 242 Chapter 50. v. 2. Joseph commanded
the Physicians [Rophim] to embalm his Father. The large Extent of that Word is
fully showed. p. 187
EXODUS.
Chapter 21. v. 7. His Master shall bore his Ear through with an Awl, and he shall
serve him for ever. p. 247
NUMBERS.
Chapter 21. v. 14. -- The Book of the Wars of the Lord. Besides several other
Texts from which some endeavor to infer that some part of the Writings
belonging to the Bible is lost. p. 453
JOSHUA.
Chapter 2. v. 4. The Woman took the two Men, and hid them. p. 153 Chapter 7. v. 26.
They raised over him a great Heap of Stones. p. 280 Chapter 23. v. 2. Joshua called
for their Elders, and for their Heads, and for their Judges, and their
Officers. p. 85
JUDGES.
Chapter 20. v. 16. There were seven hundred chosen Men left handed, or shut of
their right Hands. p. 212
SAMUEL, Book I.
Chapter 17. v. 6. He had a Target [ Cidon] of Brass between his Shoulders. p. 204
SAMUEL, Book II.
Chapter 1. v. 21. There the Shield of the Mighty is vilely cast away: the Shield
of Saul, as though he [rather, it] had not been anointed with Oil. p. 206, 207
Chapter 3. v. 35. All the People came to cause David to eat Bread.
KINGS, Book I.
Chapter 9. v. 28. And they came to Ophir. In what Part of the World this is. p.
194
CHRONICLES, Book II.
Chapter 21. v. 19. His People made no Burning for him, like the Burning of his
Fathers. p. 273
JOB.
Chapter 1. v. 21. Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return
thither. p. 264
PROVERBS.
Chapter 1. v. 17. Surely in vain is the Net spread in the Sight of any Bird. p.
385
JEREMIAH.
Chapter 34. v. 5. He died with the Burnings of his Fathers. p. 272
EZEKIEL.
Chapter 24. v. 17. Bind the Tire of thy Head upon thee. p. 275
AMOS.
Chapter 2. v. 8. They lay themselves down upon Clothes. p. 134
St. LUKE.
Chapter 10. v. 42. Mary has chosen the good Part. p. 141
ACTS.
Chapter 7. v. 22. He was mighty in Words and in Deeds. p. 312, etc.
CORINTHIANS, 1 Epist.
Chapter 5. v. 9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle. p. 467 Chapter 7. v. 6. I speak this
of Permission, and not of Command. p. 472 Ver. 12. To the rest speak I, not the
Lord. ibid.
CORINTHIANS, 2 Epist.
Chapter 3. v. 17. Now the Lord is that Spirit. p. 434 Chapter 8. v. 8. I speak not by
Commandment. p. 472 Chapter 11. v. 6. Though I be rude in Speech. p. 437 Ver. 17. I
speak not after the Lord. p. 472
St. JAMES.
Chapter 4. v. 5, 6. Do you think that the Scripture says in vain, The Spirit that
dwells in us lusts to Envy? But he gives more Grace. p. 463
St. PETER, 2 Epist.
Chapter 3. v. 5. This they are willingly ignorant of, that by the Word of God the
Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, and in the Water.
p. 62
St. JOHN, 2 Epist.
Ver. 12. I will not write with Paper, (...), p. 167
Besides sundry Texts mentioned in that Part of the Discourse where the
Emendation of the present English Version of the New Testament is attempted.

ERRATA.
PAge 30. line 1O. r. able fully to. P. 79. l. 29. r. who were. P. 104. l. 33.
r. as. P. 11O. l. 5. r. Found^rs. P. 117. l. 28. r. Greeks. P. 121. l. 33. r.
(...). P. 139. l. 25. r. a^. P. 140. ^. 33. r. from its. P. 146. l. 27. r.
require either of. P. 159. l. 15. r. recorded that the Letters of their
Alphabet were. P. 188. l. 14 after Times dele (,). l. 15. after these dele (,).
P. 196. in the Margin r. (...). P. 206. l. 20. r. this. P. 216. l. 1. r. which
we read of in. P. 230. l. 15. r. Places. P. 244. l. 27. r. which we, and
include the following words (which is rendered (...), i. e. rotulae, by the LXX)
in a Parenthesis. P. 322. l. 33, 34. r. the former, and f. were r. was. P. 336.
l. 30. r. might. P. 340. l. 3. r. the deadly. P. 361. l. ult. r. Lives. P. 432.
l. 1. after thus insert (:). P. 433. l. 3. before but leave out (,). P. 491. l.
13. r. that. P. 493. l. 4. r. in the. P. 504. l. antepenult. r. (...) P. 554.
l. 32. del^ all. P. 558. l. 9. r. they did. P. 562. l. 5. r. for one. P. 563.
l. 30. r. mist. P. 565. l. 15. r. are. The Faults in the Hebrew are le^t to be
corrected by the Learned.

The CONTENTS of the Several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.
THE different Esteem and Sentiment of Persons concerning the Authors they make
choice of to read. No Writings can equal the Bible. It has been highly valued
in all Ages by Men of the greatest Learning, Wit and Judgment. A Scheme of the
following Discourse briefly propounded. The Holy Scriptures are the perfect
Rule of Faith. They are the best Conduct of our Lives and Actions. They are the
only Ground of solid Consolation, Joy and Happiness. This Perfection of
Scripture is opposed by many of the Rabbis. An Account of their Cabala and
Oral Law. The Papists by preferring their Traditions before the Scriptures, and
by endeavoring to keep these latter in an unknown Tongue, deny the Perfection
of them. So do Familists, Quakers, and all Enthusiasts. page 1*
CHAP. II.
The Bible is furnished with all sorts of Humane (as well as Divine) Learning.
Hebrew, wherein the Old Testament was written, is the Primitive Language of the
World. The True Origin of the World is plainly recorded in no other Writings
but these. The first Chapter of Genesis is a real History, and records Matter
of fact. It is largely proved that the Mosaic History gives us a particular
Account of the first Rise of the several Nations and People of the Earth, and
of the Places of their Habitation. Also the true Knowledge of the Original of
Civil Government, and the Increases of it, and the different Changes it
underwent, is derived from these Writings. The Courts of Judicature, and the
sever^l kinds of Punishment among the Jews distinctly treated of. The
Government among the Heathen Nations. The four Celebrated Monarchies or Empires
of the World. p. 45
CHAP. III.
In these Sacred Writings we have the first and earliest Account of all useful
Employments and Callings, viz. Gardening, Husbandry, feeding of Sheep,
preparing of Food. The ancient manner of Threshing, Grinding of Corn, and
making Bread is enquired into. What was the Primitive Drink. The Posture which
they used at eating and drinking. Sitting preceded Discubation. The particular
manner of placing themselves on their Beds. Eating in common not always used.
Discalceation and Washing the Feet were the Attendants of Eating and Feasting.
So was Anointing. They had a Master or Governor of their Feasts. Who were the
first Inventers of Mechanic Arts. The first Examples of Architecture. Houses
were built flat at top, and why. p. 111
CHAP. IV.
The first Original of Letters and Writing is recorded here. The several kinds
of Materials they wrote upon of old. The Instruments with which they formed
their Letters or Characters. The Antientest (as well as the most Excellent)
History is in the Bible. So is the Antientest and most Admired Poetry. The
first Invention and Practice of Music, and on what Occasions it was wont to be
made use of. The Rise of Natural Philosophy, and who were the first Founders of
it. The Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures necessary in order to the due Study of
Natural Philosophy. The first Instances of Anatomy, Medicks, Surgery,
Embalming, and the Apothecaries Employment, are in the Old Testament. Here are
the first Examples of Shipping and Navigation. An Enquiry into the Place
whither Solomon's Navy went every three Years: A Conjecture concerning Ophir.
Astronomy and Judiciary Astrology mentioned in Scripture. Of War and Skill in
Arms. The Nature of those Military Weapons which are spoken of in Scripture,
particularly and distinctly inquired into. The Antiquity of Martial Ensigns and
Standards. The vast Numbers which the Armies of old consisted of. The Scripture
is not silent concerning Sportive Diversions and Exercises: some of which, but
especially Dancing, are considered. p. 157
CHAP. V.
We are furnished in the Bible with the Knowledge of the first Vsages relating
to Matrimony. Of Nuptial Feasts; and other Ancient Feasts. We have here the
first Notices of Buying and Selling, and the Ancient use of Money. We learn
hence what was the first Apparel, and what Additions there were afterward. The
chief Ornaments of Men and Women, viz. Crowns, Mitres, Frontal Jewels,
Earrings, (the occasion of wearing these at first, and among what Persons and
Nations, together with the Abuse of them) Chains, Bracelets, FingerRings and
Signets. Changes of Garments. The Ancient Use of White Apparel. Fullers Earth.
Looking-Glasses. Rending of the Garments. P. 225
CHAP. VI.
Here we are informed concerning the Primitive Institution of Burying. Graves
and Sepulchers were generally in the Fields, and without the Walls of Cities.
They usually embalmed the dead Bodies. Why they sometimes burnt them. Burning
also signifies Embalming. There was a Difference between the Funeral Burning of
the Jews and of the Heathens. The Manner and Time of Mourning for the Dead.
Both Vocal and Instrumental Music used at Funerals. The Antiquity of Funeral
Monuments. The old way of erecting great Heaps of Stones over the Dead.
Stone-heng is a Sepulchral Monument, and in imitation of it. Anah's Invention
of Mules. Writers borrow from one another. The Bible only is the Book that is
beholden to no other. Here is the Antientest Learning in the World: and that of
all Kinds. It Is common with Authors to contradict themselves, and one another:
they are uncertain, lubricous, and fabu^ous. But the Divine Writers alone are
certain and infallible. How strange and improbable soever some of the Contents
of this Holy Book may seem to be, they justly command our firm Assent to them.
p. 263
CHAP. VII.
A particular Distribution of the several Books of the Old Testament. Genesis
(the first of them, together with the four following ones) being written by
Moses, his ample Character or Panegyric is attempted, wherein there is a full
Account of his Birth, Education, Flight from Court, retired Life, his Return to
Egypt, his conducting of the Israelites thence, his immediate Converse with God
in the Mount, his delivering the Law, his Divine Eloquence, his Humility and
Meekness, his Sufferings, his Miracles, and his particular Fitness to write
these Books. A Summary of the several Heads contained in Genesis: to which is
added a brief but distinct View of the Six Days Works, wherein is explained the
Mosaic Draught of the Origin of all things, and at the same time the bold
Hypotheses of a late Writer (designed to confront the First Chapter of the
Bible) are exposed and refuted. The Contents of the Book of Exodus: to which is
adjoined a short Comment on the Ten Plagues of Egypt. A Rehearsal of the
remarkable Particulars treated of in Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. That
Moses was the Penman and Author of the Pentateuch, notwithstanding what some
have lately objected against it. p. 305
CHAP. VIII.
A short Survey of the Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, (which is a Supplement to
the History of the Judges) Samuel, the Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, (which is a
Continuation of the Chronicles) Nehemiah, Esther. The Author, Style, Composure,
Matter of the Book of Job discussed. An Enquiry into the Penmen, Subjects,
Kinds, Titles, Poetic Meter and Rhythm of the Psalms. p. 350
CHAP. IX.
The Book of Proverbs, why so called. The transcendent Excellency of these
Divine and Inspired Aphorisms. Some Instances of the Different Application of
the Similitudes used by this Author. The Book of Ecclesiastes, why so
entitled. The Admirable Subject of it succinctly displayed. The particular
Nature of the Canticle or Mystical Song of Solomon briefly set forth. It is
evinced from very cogent Arguments, that Solomon died in the Favor of God, and
was saved. The Books of the Four Great Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, with his
Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, are described. So are those of the Twelve Lesser
Prophets, Hosea, etc. p. 379
CHAP. X.
An Account of the Writings of the Four Evangelists* the peculiar Time, Order,
Style, Design of their Gospels. The Acts of the Apostles showed to be an
Incomparable History of the Primitive Church. The Epistles of St. Paul
particularly delineated. He is proved to be the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. An Enquiry into the Nature of this Apostle's Style and manner of
Writing. The excellent Matter and Design of the Epistles of St. James, St.
Peter, St. John, St. Jude. An Historical Series or Order is not observed in the
Book of the Revelation. p. 415
CHAP. XI.
None of the Books of the Holy Scripture are lost: Not the Book of the
Covenant: Nor the Book of the Wars of the Lord: Nor the Book of Iasher: Nor the
Acts of Vzziah. An Account of the Book of Samuel the Seer, the Book of Nathan
the Prophet, the Book of Gad the Seer, the Book of Iddo, the Books of Shemaiah,
Iehu, etc. What is to be thought concerning the Books of Solomon, mentioned 1
Kings 4. 32, 33. Objections drawn from Jam. 4. 5. from Luke 11. 49. from Acts
20. 35. from Jude v. 14. from 1 Cor. 5. 9. from Col. 4. 16. fully satisfied.
Other Objections from 1 Cor. 7. 6, 12, 25. 2 Cor. 8. 8. and 11. 17.
particularly answered. p. 451
CHAP. XII.
A short View of the Eastern Translations of the Old Testament, especially of
the Targums. The several Greek Translations, more especially that of the LXX
Jewish Elders. The impartial History of them, and their Version. Some
immoderately extol it; others as excessively inveigh against it. The true
Grounds of the Difference between the Hebrew Text and the Greek Translation of
the Septuagint assigned, viz. One Hebrew Vowel is put for another: One
Consonant for another, Sometimes both Vowels and Consonants are mistaken: The
Difference of the Signification of some Hebrew Words is another Cause:
sometimes the Sense rather than the Word it self is attended to: Some Faults
are to be attributed to the Transcribers: Some, because the LXX are Paraphrasts
rather than Translators; they take the liberty to insert Words and Passages of
their own. The Greek Version has been designedly corrupted in several Places.
Why the Apostles in their Sermons and Writings made use of this Version, though
it was faulty. Sometimes the Sacred Writers keep close to the Hebrew Text, and
take no notice of the Seventy's Translation of the Words. At other times in
their Quotations they confine themselves to neither, but use a Latitude. The
Greek Version is to be read with Candor and Caution: and must always give way
to the Hebrew Original. The chief Latin Translations of the Bible, especially
the Vulgar, examined. Modern Latin Translations, and lastly our own English
one, considered. p. 477
CHAP. XIII.
Our English Translation showed to be faulty and defective in some Places of
the Old Testament. But more largely and fully this is performed in the several
Books of the New Testament, where abundant Instances are produced of this
Defect: and particular Emendations are all along offered, in order to the
rendering our Translation more exact and complete. The Date of the Division of
the Bible into Chapters and Verses. p. 532
CHAP. XIV.
The Reader is invited to the Study of the Bible, as he values the Repute of a
Scholar and a Learned Man. That he may successfully study this Holy Book, he
must be furnished with Tongues, Arts, History, etc. It is necessary that he be
very Inquisitive and Diligent in searching into the Mind and Design of the
Sacred Writers: In examining the Coherence of the Words: In Comparing Places
together: In observing and discovering the peculiar Grace and Elegancy, and
sometimes the Verbal Allusions and Cadences of the Holy Scripture, of which
several Instances are given. He must also be Morally qualified to read this
Book, i. e. he ought to banish all Prejudice: He must be Modest and Humble: He
must endeavor to free himself from the Love of all Vice: He must with great
Earnestness implore the Assistance of the Holy Spirit. p. 532
OF THE EXCELLENCY and PERFECTION OF THE Holy Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
The different Esteem and Sentiment of Persons concerning the Authors they make
choice of to read. No Writings can equal the Bible. It has been highly valu^d
in all Ages by Men of the greatest Learning, Wit and Judgment. A Scheme of the
following Discourse briefly propounded. The Holy Scriptures are the perfect
Rule of Faith. They are the best Conduct of our Lives and Actions. They are the
only Ground of solid Consolation, Joy and Happiness. This Perfection of
Scripture is opposed by many of the Rabbis. An Account of their Cabala and
Oral Law. The Papists by preferring their Traditions before the Scriptures, and
by endeavoring to keep these latter in an unknown Tongue, deny the Perfection
of them. So do Familists, Quakers, and all Enthusiasts.

IT may be observed that the Minds of Men have been differently disposed as to
the choice of the Authors they would read; and their Esteem and Value of them
have been as various. It has been usual for Persons to express a particular
Kindness for one Writer above another. Thus Homer of old was excessively
magnified by those famous Warriors Agesilaus and Alexander the Great: The
former read him continually at home and in the Camp, and whenever he had any
time to spare for Reading: The latter could not sleep without his Iliads under
his Pillow. Scipio, ^irnamed the African, had a great Opinion of Xenophon's
Institution of Cyrus, and was always consulting it, and valued it at a high
rate. So among Christians, St. Cyprian was a great Admirer of Tertullian; and
when he had a mind to read him, his usual Saying was, Give me my Master.
Charles the Great was hugely taken with St. Augustine de Civitate Dei, and had
it constantly read to him, yea even at Supper. King Alphonsus in all his
Expeditions, and at all other times, carried Julius Caesar's Commentaries,
others say Livy's History, with him. Theodore Gaza gave his Vote for Plutarch's
Works, and was so pleased with them, that he protested if he could have but one
Man's Writings, he would certainly choose His before all others. Thomas Aquinas
was no less in love with St. Chrysostom on St. Matthew, and expressed his high
Esteem of him by saying, he preferred him before the goodly City of Paris.
Charles the V th gave a greater Deference to Comines than to any other Writer,
and perpetually conversed with him. Scaliger would rather be the Author of the
ninth Ode of Horace than be Emperor of Germany. And to come down yet lower,
Grotius gives Cujacius the Pref^rence to all the other Comm^ntators on the
Imperial Laws. Salmasius admired no Divine so much as Calvin, and particularly
preferred his Institutions. And the Reverend Mr. B. Oley tells us, if he were
to be con^ined to one Author, he would choose Dr. Iackson's Works. Thus have
Men's Sentiments and Esteems been various about Books, ^ome preferring one
Writer, and some another, according as their Genius or Studies led them.

^ut when we mention the Bible, i. e. the Book of Books, we are certain there
is no Comparison between This and any others whatsoever. This Sacred Volume is
emphatically, and by way of Eminence, called (...), as if other Books in
respect of This deserved not the Name. For in what other Writings can we de^cry
those Excellencies which we find in This? None of them can equal it in
Antiquity, for the first Penman of the Sacred Scripture (who relates the
Origin of the World, and whose Writings contain the Acts and Monuments of the
Patriarchs) has the start of all Philosophers, Poets and Historians, and is
ab^olutely the Antientest Writer extant in the World. No Writings are equal to
these of the Bible, if we mention only the stock of Humane Learning contained
in them. Here Linguists and Philologists may find that which is to be found no
where else. Here R^etoricians and Orators may be entertained with a more lo^ty
Eloquence, with a choicer Composure of Words, and with greater Variety of Style
than any other Writers can afford them. Here is a Book where more is understood
than expressed, where Words are few, but the Sense is full and redundant. No
Books equal This in Authority, because (...) is the Word of God himself, and
dictated by an unerring Spirit. It exc^ls all other Writings in the Excellency
of its Matter, which is the Highest, Noblest, and Worthiest, and of the
Greatest Concern to Mankind. Lastly, (to name no more at present, that I may
not anticipate what is intended in the following Discourse) the Scriptures
transcend all other Writings in their Power and Efficacy. This Psalm. 19. 8.
Word of God is pure, enlightening the Eyes, irradiating Men's Minds with
Supernatural Truth, affecting their Hearts and Consciences, subduing the
Refracotriness of their Wills, transforming their Lives, and changing them into
other Persons. Thence it is that all Men of well-disposed Souls find a plain
Differene between their reading This and other Books. When they read those, it
is true they are something affected and pleased, the Style or the Matter give
them some Satisfaction; but if they read them often, and confine themselves to
them, their former Pleasure and Satisfaction abate, and the Authors seem not to
be so entertaining and acceptable as they were before, and at length they
become burdensome and nauseous; and hence it is that some Writers grow out of
fashion, and other New ones are called for. But it is far otherwise with this
Holy Book: the Affection and Pleasure which you feel in the reading it are
lasting and durable, because this Blessed Word sinks down into the Center of
the Soul, and is always present with it. Though you lay this Book aside, and
afterward take it up, and do so again and again, yea never so often, you will
not ^ind it grow worse, but much better, i. e. it will yield you greater
Delight and Satisfaction; and the oftener you converse with it, the more you
will discern the Worth of it, yea the more pleasing will the very Words and
Syllables of these Divine Writings be to you. For what the Great Critic
observes of Homer's Poem* that there is a certain kind of Peculiar Easiness and
Sliding in his Verse, which are not to be found in any other Poets, is
eminently true of the Holy Scriptures, if compared with other Authors: there is
a peculiar Sweetness, a matchless Softness and Pleasantness in the Style of
these Holy Books; the Words as well as the Matter are Winning and Ravishing,
and all pure and sanctified Minds have a clear Perception of this, yea the
clearer, because they so frequently converse with these Inspired Writers. We
may then on this Account, as well as on others, challenge the World to show us
where there is any Book like this, where there is any Author comparable to it.
In all Humane Writers there is something wanting, something imperfect; but in
this Sacred Volume there are all things, and every thing here is complete. To
the Holy Scriptures therefore all other Writings must vail, to this Best of
Books they must all submit, and acknowledge their Meanness and Inferiority.

Hence it was that the Wisest and Best Men (as we may observe) did always extol
the Scriptures. Lib. advers. Hermogenem.
I adore the Plenitude of the Scripture, said Tertullian; and to him have
ecchoed the rest of the Ancient Fathers, especially St. Cyprian, Ierom,
Augustine, Chrysostom, who have highly magnified the Writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, and have been very Rhetorical in their Panegyricks upon them.
These and some other Brave Men in the first Ages of the Church signalized
themselves by their Reverence and Esteem of the Scriptures; and Juvencus,
Nazianzen, (...), Sedulius, Prudentius, A^a^or, Rusticus Elpidius.
some of them consecrated their Wit and Poetry to this Noble Cause. Nor have
thse latter Ages been destitute of Persons of the most Celebrated Parts and
Learning that have adored the Fullness and Perfection of the Scripture, and have
used their Wit and Eloquence in setting forth its Prai^^s (...) ^icinus, that
Great Philosophic Soul, and the Noble Pi^us Mirandula, who was the best
Linguist and Scholar of his age, two as Learned Italians as that Nation ever
bred,(and who may more than compound for those two other Italians mentioned in
my former Discourse, who so impiously vilified the Sacred Writings) after they
had read all good Authors, rested in the Bible as the only Book; and
particularly it was pronounced by the latter of them, that now he had found the
(...) Eloque^^e and Wisdom. Yea, these last Times have produced Men of the
Choicest Brains, of the Briskest Parts, of the Greate^t Humane Learning, who
have employ^d these excellent Talents in embelishing the Sacr^d Scriptures;
witness Ca^^^llio, who has turned the Whole Bible into Pur^, Terse, Elegant
Latin, able to tempt us to read this Book: And ^rotius has incompa^ably
asserted the Propriety and Elegancy of the Sacred Style; and many Other
exc^ll^^t Persons who have defended this Holy Book against the Insults and
Cavils of profane Men. We could name D^-Bartas, B^chanan, Bishop Hall, Sir
George Sandys, Dr. Done, Mr. (...), Mr. H^rb^r^, Dr. Beau^o^^, Mr. C^wley, Mr.
Milton, Dr. More, Mr. Norris* Mr. W^o^ford, Dr. Patrick* Vida, Wes^^y.
Others of the most Sparkling Wit and Fancy, who have exercised their Poetic
Genius in descanting either on the Sacred Hi^tory of the Bible, or on those
Divine Matters which are contained in it, and have thought their Pens, yea
Poetry it self, ^nobled by such a Subject. We could mention others of the most
Serious Thoughts and of the most Impartial Judgment, not only among those that
are Pr^^essed Divines, and that have adorned the Sacred Scripture by their
Learned Expositions, Comments, Annotations, Paraphrases, Lectures, Sermons,
Discourses, but also among Persons of another Rank and Capacity, who have given
the Bible the Pre-eminence of all Writings. I will at present mention only Mr.
Seldom and Judge Have: the former was one of the greatest Scholars and
Antiquaries of this Age and made a vast Amassment of Books and Manuscripts from
all Parts of the World, a Library perhaps not to be equaled, o^ all Accounts,
in the Universe: This Man of Books and Learning holding some serious Conference
with Archbishop Usher a little before he died, professed to him, that In his
Li^e.
notwithstanding he had po^^essed himself of that vast Treasure of Books and
Manuscripts in all ancient Subjects, yet he could rest his Soul on none but the
Scriptures. And hear what the other Gentleman of the same Studies and
Profession declares, Judge Hale, in his Letter to one of his So^s.
I have been acquainted somewhat with Men and Books, and have had long
Experience in Learning and in the World. There is no Book like the Bible for
excellent Learning, Wisdom and Use: and it is want of Understanding in them
that think or speak otherwise. This is sufficient to show that the most Noble
and Refined Wits, the most Knowing and the most Judicious Heads, bear the
greatest Regard and Esteem for the Holy Scriptures, and prefer them before all
other Writings in the World. It may pass for a Certain Maxim, that the more
learned any Man is, the more he prizeth the Bible, the greater Regard he has
for these Sacred Records. It was said of old, that Cic^ronem ama^^e, pro^ecisse
est. Q^intil.
it was a Sign of a great Proficiency in Good Letters to love Tully's Writings.
It is much more a Sign of our Improvement in true Learning that we delight in
the Holy Scriptures, and love them above all Writings whatsoever. We show our
Proficiency by reverently esteeming the Bible, and preferring it before all
other Authors. We discover that we have a Sense of True and Useful Knowledge,
when we value this Book wherein it is contained, when we admire this Volume
where all Excellencies meet together.

To evince this, I will undertake these following things.

I. To show the matchless Usefulness of the Bible in respect of Spiritual,
Divine and Supernatural Matters. II. To demonstrate its Transcendent Excellency
in regard of things Temporal and Secular, such as are for the Improvement of
all kinds of Humane Learning, and for the Use of Life. III. To give a Proof of
this Excellency and Perfection, by a particular displaying of the several Books
contained in this Holy Volume. IV. To let you see that this Perfection is not
impaired by what is objected and alleged. 1. Concerning the Loss of some Books
which had formerly been a part of the Old and New Testament. 2. Concerning the
great Difference between the Hebrew of the Old Testament and the Greek
Translation of the Seventy. Where I will endeavor to discover the true Grounds
and Foundations of those Mistakes that are in the LXX's Version, and show
whence it arises that there is such a Discrepancy between that and the Original
Verity. V. I will attempt an Emendation of the present English Version, which
in several Places seems to me to be defective; that I may hereby restore the
New Testament (for of that I shall chiefly speak) to its native Perfection and
Luster. Lastly, I will invite and solicit the Reader to the Study of the Bible,
and direct him in so laudable and worthy an Employment.
First, I will demonstratively prove the Transcendent Excellency of these
Writings in respect of the things which are Divine, and have an immediate
relation to Religion. Thus they are the only Canon of our Faith, the exact
Standard of our Lives, and they mark us out the Way to solid Comfort, peace and
Happiness. These are the three things I will insist upon.

1. This Holy Book is the Absolute and Perfect Rule of our Faith. This
comprises in it every thing that is the Object of our Belief, the Ma^^^r of our
Assent. Here we are taught to believe^ a God, an Immortal, Independent,
All-sufficient, Self-subsisting Spirit; who is infinitely Wife, powerful, Just
and Merciful: who though he was ineffably happy in the fruition of his own
immense and transcendent Perfections; yet, that he might communicate his
Goodness to others, was pleased to frame the World, with all the excellent
Furniture which we behold in it. By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made,
and all the Host of them by the Breath of his Mouth, Psalm. 33. 6. He laid the
Foundations of the Earth, and gave to the Sea his Decree, and set a Compass on
the Face of the Deep, Psalm. 104. 5. Prove. 8. 27, 29. We are assured from these
Writings, that God's Providence governs the World, and all things in it,
whether great or small, Psalm. 147. 8, etc. Matthew. 10. 29, 30, etc. And that he
does whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 115. 3. But more
especially the Divine Oracles acquaint us, that this Divine and Benign Author,
gave existence unto Man, the Choicest of all the Creatures of this lower World,
whom he created in his own Image, after his Likeness, Genesis 1. 26, 27. that is,
in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. And we
are told in these Sacred Writings, how Man lost this Image, and miferably
defaced and corrupted his Nature, viz. by listening to the Temptation of Satan,
and by wilful disobeying the Divine Command. Here also we are informed, that
all Flesh is desiled and polluted by this Transgression of our First Parents in
Paradise, and that their Sin is become the Sin of All Mankind, Romans 5. 12.
Hence we learn moreover, that the Merciful Creator, out of his infinite and
boundless Philanthropy, vouchsafed to promise, that the seed of the Woman, the
Blessed Jesus, who was to be born of a Virgin, should bruise Satan's Head, Genesis
3. 15. and save and redeem lost Mankind, and restore them to their former State
of Happiness. Here is taught the Rise of Religion and the Church, which began
with our Pe^tent First Parents, and their Children; of whom Abol was the Chief.
Their first and early way of expressing their Devotion and Religion, was by
Offerings and Sacrifices unto God, Genesis 4. 4. To which end, without doubt, they
erected Altars, though these are not mentioned till after the Flood, Genesis 8.
20. We are told at what time there was established an Open and more Solemn
worshipping of God, viz. in Seth's days; then it was that Men began to call
upon the Name of the Lord, and to form a Visible Church, Genesis 4. 26. i. e. an
Orderly and Solemn Society of Men, gathered and chosen out as a peculiar People
to serve God. For as Men increased, they began to embody themselves into
Communions, and to worship God more signally and openly, and with a joint
Consent. Here (and no where else) we have an Account of the Church's Progress
and Increase, under the good Patriarchs, Noah, Abraham, etc. Here we are
informed what were the several Defections and Restorations of Religion in the
first Ages. Here we have an Account of the Erection of the Levitical or Mosaic
Service; the whole System of Religious Rites and Ceremonies, unto which the
Jewish Church was obliged. This yields abundant Matter of Contemplation and
Enquiry to the Studious, who will find that these Observances were instituted
after the Israelites had been a while in the Wilderness, and had showed
themselves inclinable to commit Idolatry. Then it was that God by Moses gave
them these Laws, and prescribed them these Usages, which he knew would be the
best Antidote against the Idolatrous Practices of the Nations that were round
about them. And withal, if we look into these Ceremonies with a discerning Eye,
we shall see that they had a farther End, and were Presignifications of the
great and wonderful Transactions of the Evangelical Dispensation, that they
obscurely pointed unto the Messiah, and his Blessed Undertakings for the
Redemption of Mankind. They were Forerunners and Harbingers of the Blessed
Child Jesus, that Child that was to be born, that Son who was to be given, and
on whose shoulders the Government was to be settled, Isa. 9. 6. And we are
ascertained that in the fullness of time, God actually sent forth this his Son,
made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. that He so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life, John 3. 16. All ^e like Sheep have gon^ astr^y, we have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of
us all, Isa. 53. 6. He bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pe^. 2. 4.
He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was ^ruised for our Iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed,
Isa. 53. 5. The True Nature, the Admirable Method, and the Inestimable Worth of
this Healing and Saving us, are the main Subject of these Inspired Writings:
where we are taught likewise, that this Salvation is Free and Undeserved, and
founded on the Mere Grace and Bounty of God, and is not the Acquist of any
Merit and Worth in us. We are justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God ^ath set forth to be a
Propitiation for Sin, through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3. 24. And in the
Evangelical History, we are told, that this Blessed Redeemer, who laid down his
Life for us, took it up again, rising from the Grave by the irresistible Power
of his Godhead, and after a few Days Ascended gloriously into Heaven; from
whence He shall come at the last Day to call the whole World to an Account: for
He has appointed a Day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness. Then
all the Dead shall hasten out of their Dormitories, and stand before that Great
Tribunal, and receive Sentence according to their past Behavior.

These are some of the Grand Principles of our Faith, these are the Fundamental
Verities of our Religion: and they are originally fetched from this Sacred
Volume, and are established and confirmed there, by unanswerable Arguments and
Demonstrations. Behold here the Eminency of Scripture-Notions, see the
Transcendency of these Excellent Truths, which are contained in the Bible! Here
are things of a higher Nature than any Moral Writings afford us. These say
nothing of the Gracious Economy of the Gospel, of the Incarnation of the Son
of God, of Satisfaction made for Sins through the Blood of Christ, of
Justification by his Righteousness, and other the like unparalleled
Discoveries, which are to be learned out of Scripture only. In short, the Bible
is the Standard of all Notions, Propositions and Articles in Religion: it is
the Rule and Square of all our Opinions, Discourses and Arguments relating to
Christianity; and all our Conceptions, though they seem never so sine and
plausible, are of little worth and nse, unless they be regulated according to
This. If there arise any Disputes and Controversies concerning Matters of
Christian Faith, This is the Judge that we must have recourse to, or rather This
is the Rule by which we are to judge: for every Man is to judge and choose, and
the Rule whereby he is to guide his Judgment and Choice is the Scripture. It is
true, Reason or Conscience is our Immediate Guide or Rule: but then we must
have a Mediate Rule; that is, a Guide or Rule for our Reasons and Consciences,
and That in all Sacred and Religious things is the Word of God, and That is the
only Rule. By This, and This alone, all Controversies of Faith which are
necessary to be decided, may, and ought to be decided. And it is the Excellency
and Perfection of this Rule, that it is Infallible. This is that more sure Word
of Prophecy, which St. Peter prefers before Eyewitnesses and Voices from
Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 16, etc. Yea, though an Angel from Heaven should preach any
other Doctrine than what the Apostles preached, and afterward committed to
Writing, St. Paul pronounces him accursed, Gal. 1. 8. These Infallible
Records, these undoubted Oracles of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, are the
standing Rule of Belief to all christians, even to the End of the World. On
this they may rely with Confidence, as on an Unerring Guide; for it is not like
other Books which are made by Men, and therefore are not void of Errors and
Mistakes; but the Author of it is God, who is Truth it self, and can neither
deceive, nor be deceived. Thus the Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, are the Complete and Absolute Rule of our Belief, and of all
Supernatural Truth.

2. They are the Perfect Rule of Life and Manners: they contain all things to
be Done as well as to be Believed. Here is the Decalogue, the Sum of all our
Duty toward God and Man; and the Necessary Precepts of Life, comprised in it,
are often repeated, enlarged upon, and explained, through the whole Sacred
Book. To these are added the Evangelical Duties of Self-denial, Mortification,
Poverty of Spirit, Purity of Heart, Brotherly Love, Heavenly-Mindedness,
Circumspect Walking, Redeeming the Time, Abstaining from all appearance of
Evil, Giving no Offense to any, and many others of the like Nature. The
Writings of the Gospel forbid us to be Carnal, Sensual and Earthly, and call
upon us to converse with Spiritual and Celestial Objects, to to set our
Affections on things Above, and to work our Minds to such a Temper that we may
desire to depart out of this Body, and to be with Christ, which is far better
than grovelling here below. And Christianity promotes this Heavenly-mindedness
by giving us a Power over Our selves, by restoring us to a Government of our
Bodily Appetites and Passions, so that the Soul thereby becomes Pure and
Defecate, purged from all mundane Dross and Filth, fitted for Heavenly Joys,
and therefore most earnestly breathes and longs after them. Here we learn, that
Christianity is repugnant in all things to Satan's Kingdom, and designedly
promotes the Kingdom of God; it bids us not seek our selves, and aim chiefly at
worldly Respects, but it enjoineth us to Humble and Debase our selves, and to
Glorify God in all, to advance his Honor in the World, and next to that, to
look after the Salvation of our own and others immortal Souls These are the
Noble and Worthy Designs of Christianity, and the Laws of it: their Business is
to take us off from those low and mean Projects which Men of the World carry
on, and to set the Soul of Man in a right Posture, and to fix it on right Ends.
The Christian Precepts reach to the Hearts of Men, they restrain the secret
Thoughts and inward Motions of the Mind, they curb the inordinate Desires and
Wishes, they temper the Affections and Passions, especially they forbid
Revenge, Malice, Hatred; and they direct us to love God, and to bear Love to
all Men for his Sake. The Christian Laws give Rules for our Words and Speeches,
and will not allow them to be Idle and Vain, much less Profane and Impious;
but they command our Discourse to be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, to
favor of Goodness and Piety, and to be for the Edifying of those we converse
with. The Commandments of the Gospel do also govern the Outward Actions of our
Lives, and bid us be Holy in all manner of Conversation: They enjoin Chastity
and Continence, Temperance and Sobriety; they forbid Lust and Luxury, Pride and
Sensuality: They teach Courtesy, Affability, Meekness, Candor, Gentleness
toward our Brethren: They bid us be Kind and Charitable to all, and even to
love our Enemies. Christianity is a Religion that is exactly Just, and gives
the strictest Rules of dealing Honestly and Uprightly with our Neighbors. Even
Morality, which is the very Foundation and Groundwork of All Religions, is
most Illustrious here. Christianity has the Impress of Reason, Civility, and
all Acceptable Qualities. It forbids nothing that is Fitting and Decorous, it
countenances all that is Manly and Generous, it is agreeable to the Law of
Nature and the Reason of Mankind. In these Sacred Writings the Duty of
Christians is set down not only as they are Single, but as they stand in
relation to others, and as they are Members of the Community. There are
Peculiar Lessons for Persons in every Condition, for Husbands and Wives, for
Masters and Servants, for Parents and Children, for Superiors, Equals and
Inferiors. They are all provided here with Instructions and Directions proper
to that State they are in. They are very Remarkable Words which a Dr. Iackson,
Vol. 1. Book ^.
Reverend Divine of our Church uttered; Would Men apply their Minds (says he)
to study Scripture, and observe their own and others Course of Life, Experience
would teach them that there is no Estate on Earth, nor humane Business in
Christendom this Day on foot, but have a Ruled Cafe in Scripture for their
Issue and Success. This is a Great Truth, and is no mean Demonstration of the
Excellency of these Holy Writings which I am speaking of.

Here are also the most Notable Instances of all those Virtues and Graces which
adorn the Life of Man. Here is the Example of Abel's sincere and acceptable
Devotion; of Enoch's walking with God; of Noah's untainted Faithfulness amidst
the Temptations of the corrupt World; of Abraham's Faith and Self-denial, when
he offered his only Son on the Altar; of Ioseph's Resolved Chastity, when he
once and again resisted the lustful Solicitations of his Mistress. Here is the
Example of Moses's Public Spirit, who desired his Name might be blotted out of
the Book of Life rather than that Nation should perish. Here you read of
Aaron's submissive Silence; of Reuben's fraternal Commiseration; of Rohab's
Seasonable Wisdom, which was the Effect of her Faith, in concealing the Spies
that were searched for. Here we may observe Phineas's Active Zeal; Eli's Entire
Submission to the Divine Pleasure; Job's Invincible Patience; Iosiah's Early
Piety; his and Iehosaphat's Care to reform the Church; Ionathan's entire
Friendship; Manasses and Peter's Repentance; John Baptist's Austerity; the
Centurion's Faith; Stephen's Charity to his Enemies at his Death. Briefly, here
is commemorated the Religious and Holy Demeanor of all Ranks and Degrees of
Persons, whether in Prosperity or Adversity; whether in Youth, Manhood, or Old
Age, or in whatsoever Condition of Life they were placed. Where can we find
such glorious Achievements as the Sacred History recounts unto us? Where are
there such Perfect Paterns of Virtue? Where do you meet with such Noble Acts as
some of the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles are celebrated for? The
Great Heroes spoken of in the Writings of the Pagans are generally but Ideas of
Virtue, and a kind of Harmless Romances to preach Goodness to Men. Virgil's
Aeneas, Xenophon's Cyrus, Curtius's Alexander, Plinty's Trajan, are rather
Ingenious Portraictures and Images of Worthy Princes than Real Characters of
them. They represent rather what they should be than what they are. They
imitate some Limners who study not to draw the Face exactly like that of the
Person they are to pourtray; so they make it Fair, they think it is enough. But
the Sacred Writers have not done so, they have no ways flattered or
misrepresented the Originals they drew. They have set them before us in their
proper Features, native Lineaments, and genuine Colors. What we read of the
Worthies mentioned in the Bible, is Certainly True, and Real Matter of Fact.
Such was their Incomparable Spirit, that they did braver and greater Actions
than Others ever thought of, witness the matchless Valor, Fortitude and
Conduct of Joshua, Iephthah, Gideon, yea of those Masculine Women Deborah and
Iael; witness all the Other Eminent Instances of Heroic Undertakings in the
Sacred Records; witness those Exact Paterns, those Accurate Examples of the
rest of the Virtues which we read of these. And to illustrate and set off
these, there are added very Signal and Memorable Examples of all sorts of
Vices, as of Cain's Persidious Murdering his Brother, Laban's Fraud and
Ingratitude, Esau's unruly Appetite, Reuben and Judah's Incest, Pharaoh's
impious Obstinacy, Abimelech's unnatural Cruelty to his Brethren, Dinah's
wanton gadding, Amnon's Rape, Achitophel's evil Policy, Shimei's Railing,
Haman's revengeful Pride, Rabshakeh's Blasphemy, Belshazzar's sacrilegious
Debauchery. Potiphar's Wife is an Example of the Impudence and Outragiousness
of Lust when it is repulsed; Eli is an Instance of Fond Indulgence to his
Children; Absalom, Achitophel, Sheba and Zimri, of Treason and Rebellion;
Samson and Solomon of an Undue Love of Women: And in the New Testament the
Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, the Treachery of Judas, the Timorous Compliance of
Pilate, the Malice of the Jews against our Savior, the Apostasy of Demas, the
Ambition of Diotrephes, are notorious. And innumerable other Examples there are
of all manner of Immorality and Wickedness.

And with these are mixed the most Signal Instances of the Punishment of Vice,
and the Reward of Virtue. Here are abundant Proofs of God's Extreme Severity
and Vengeance against profligate Offenders; and here are as frequent Tokens and
Assurances of the Divine Love and Kindness toward those that lead a holy and
religious Life. Here are set before us the most Conspicuous Acts of God's
Providence in reference both to Bad Men and Good, that by the former we may be
discouraged, yea deterred from continuing in the ways of Vice, and that by the
latter we may be encouraged, yea as 'twere bribed to be Virtuous and Good. Here
we may observe and admire God's Wonderful Care of his Servants in all Ages of
the World; and here we may take notice of the Variety of those Evils and
Miseries which he inflicteth on those who wilfully decline his Service, and
give themselves up to their Lusts. There are no where such Eminent Examples of
this Nature to be found as these which we meet with in the Sacred Volume of the
Bible. No other Writings can produce such Remarkable Discoveries of God's Will
toward Men, and of his Dealings with them: Wherefore These must needs be the
Best Conduct of our Lives and Actions, the Best Reformers of our Ways and
Manners: Which is the Meaning of the Psalmist in Psa^. 1 19. 9. Wherewith shall
a young Man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto, according to thy Word, i.
e. by making the Holy Scripture his Rule, and by adjusting all his Actions to
it. If the Youthful and Passionate Sinner may be reclaimed and reformed by
attending to God's Word, and that only the Pentateuch or the Laws of Moses (for
this was all the Inspired Scripture extant at that time, which we certainly
know of) then we cannot despair of the Success and happy Influence of the whole
Body of the Scriptures upon Others. It will thoroughly change and amend their
Lives by making a full Discovery to them of all their Lusts and evil
Affections, by representing Sin to them in its own native Desormity, and by
setting before them the Beauties and Excellencies of a Religious Life, by being
a Faithful Monitor and Guide to them whenever they undertake any thing, by
showing them the true Boundaries of Good and Evil, and by directing them how to
accomplish the one, and to avoid the other. The Sum of all is, that these
Inspired Writings acquaint us with the Whole Will of God, whether it refers to
our Belief or to our Practice, and consequently that not only our Faith, but
our Manners are to be regulated by this Holy Book. Especially by the Principles
and Laws of the New Testament they will more conspicuously be exalted, and all
Righteousness and Godliness more visibly promoted in our Lives. For here is the
most Perfect and Consummate Exemplar of Holiness; in the Evangelical Writings
the Blessed Jesus still speaks and lives: In these you may hear what he said,
and see what he did, and know how you are to conform your Lives according to
His. Whence you have Reason to infer, that as these Writings are the Complete
Canon of our Faith, so they are the Adequate Rule of our Actions.

Nay, although we should suppose some Mistakes in them by the Fault of
Transcribers,(which yet no Man can certainly prove, nay it is not by any means
to be allowed, and therefore it is the most culpable thing in Sir N.
Knatchbull, that he is several times finding Faults in the Transcribers of the
New Testament, which if we once grant, we bid farewell to the Certainty of
Scripture: But if we should, I say, suppose some Slips in the Copying out of
the Books, yet) still they retain the same Character, because those supposed
Mistakes are not of Moment, and belong not to Faith or Manners. Neither do the
Obscurity or Difficulty of Scripture hinder it from being our Rule, because all
the Matters in it which relate to our Salvation, are clear and easy. For when I
say it is an Adequate Rule of Faith and Manners, the Meaning is, that it is so
as to such Matters of Faith and Manners as are Necessary to be believed and
practiced by us. Now nothing is Necessary but what is absolutely requisite to
our Salvation. This then is the thing which we maintain, that the Scriptures
contain in them either in express Terms, or by just Consequence, all things to
be asserted and done by us in order to our being Saved. The Reason of which is
evident, namely, because the End for which the Scriptures were written was
this, to direct us how to be Saved. This is the grand Design of it, and
therefore there must be in it all things that are requisite to this great End
and Design. Which is expressed thus in the Words of Our Church, Article the
6th, viz. of the Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And this is a sufficient and
solid Proof of a thing's not being Necessary to Salvation, that it is not
contained in Scripture. This then we assert, that these Writings are Plain and
Perfect as to all Matters that are Necessary, and accordingly are able to put
an End to all Controversies which relate to Salvation: And if Men will not end
them with This Rule, they will never do it with any. This is the Chief
Perfection of Scripture, that in it the whole Will of God, as to those things
that have a necessary Tendency to our Happiness, and consequently are the only
Necessary Things to be known and done by us, is plainly revealed. The New
Testament particularly is the last Revelation of God's Will and Counsel, and
nothing is to be added to it or taken from it, which makes it a Perfect
Standard of Belief, and a Complete Rule of our Lives, in which there is nothing
short and defective, nothing superfluous and redundant. Here are all the
Principles of True Religion, and all the Measures of Holy Living: so that
whilst we proceed according to this Perfect Canon, we are infallibly certain of
the Truth of what we believe, and of the Rectitude and Lawfulness of what we
act. On this sole Account the Holy Writ excels all Writings in the World
besides.

3. We are to adjoin this, that as it is a Light to our Understandings, and a
Rule of our Lives, so it is the grand Procurer of our Comfort, Joy and
Tranquillity. Alas, they are Cold Topics of Consolation which the Writings of
the Best Moralists afford us. When our outward Distresses and Miseries, much
more when our inward and spiritual Maladies increase upon us, Epictetus and
Seneca, with all their Spangled Sayings, are too mean Physicians to take us in
Hand. The Great Cicero, when in the Close of his Life he was reduced to
marvelous Difficulties, declared that his Learning and his Books, afforded him
not any Considerable Arguments of Comfort; that the Disease of his Mind, which
he lay under was Imbecillior est Medicina quam Morbus, Epist, 16. ad Attic.
Lib. 10.
too great, and too strong to be cured by those Ordinary Medicines which
Philosophy administered to him. There must be some greater Traumatick, some more
powerful Application to these Wounds to work a perfect Cure. And this Divine
Book is able to furnish us with it. This alone can remove our Pains and
Languors, and restore us to an entire Health. Psalm. 119. 50.
This, faith the Psalmist, is my Comfort in my Affliction, Thy Word has
quickened me: And again, v. 92.
Unless thy Law had been my Delight, I should then have perished in my
Affliction. It was this which upheld and cheered him in his greatest Straits,
and yielded him Light and Joy, when all things about him looked black and
dismal. If but a small part of the Bible had this blessed Effect, how powerful
and successful will All of it prove, if we duly consult it, seriously meditate
upon it, and give it admittance into our Hearts? If the Apostle could say, Romans
15. 4.
Whatsoever things were written asore time in this Book, were written for our
Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the scriptures might have
Hope, how much greater Hope must needs be administered to us, in all Conditions
of Life, but more especially in the Day of Trouble and Calamity, when we have
the Scriptures, not only of the Old but New Testament to repair unto? This
latter especially will be a never-falling Spring of Contentment and Joy to us.
In these Books we have a true and perfect Landscape and View of the World: Here
is unmasked and laid open the Vanity of it. Here we are assured that many of
the Gay things which it presents us with, and which fond Minds so dote upon,
are but empty Bubbles, deceitful Phantoms and Apparitions, mere Conceits and
Castles in the Air. Here we are informed that a Prosperous State is not really
Good, that an Overplus of Riches and Worldly Abundance does frequently prove a
Clog to virtuous Minds, and that Excess of Pleasures is too fulsom and
luscious, and takes away that purer Relish of spiritual and heavenly Delights;
yea, that Men generally find a worse Effect of them: for when they are gorged
and clogged with them, they revolt from God; when they are waxen fat, they kick
against Heaven. So their Worldly Plenty is turned into the worst of
Punishments, and this Plethory is their Disease On the other side, we are
taught in these Writings, that Crosses and Afflictions are not evil in
themselves, yea, that they are Good and Medicinal, and advance our spiritual
Health; that they are so far from being a hindrance to our Happiness, that they
are a part of it, for otherwise the Afflicted would not be so often pronounced
Job. 5. 17. Psalm. 94. 12. Prove. 3. 11. Matthew. 5. 10. 11. Acts 14. 22. R^m. 5.
3. and 8. 17. Jam. 1. 2, 12.
Blessed: That God's Afflicting a Man is Job 7. 17.
Magnifying of him, and setting his Heart upon him. It shows, that God is
greatly concerned for his Good, and that the Almighty has more care of him
than he has of himself. Here we are instructed that we have ground to suspect
our Condition, if we be wholly exempted from the Distresses of this Life; and
that not to be Chastised is a Mark of Bastardy. Here we learn the true use and
end of all those Adverse Dispensations which we meet with, viz. that they were
designed to try us, to make us know our selves, and to inform us how evil and
bitter a thing it is to offend the Divine Majesty; to awaken us out of our
Sloth and Security; to hold us in Action, to keep us in Breath and Exercise, as
Carthage was useful to rouse Rome's Valor; to abate our Pride and Haughtiness,
and make us humble and submissive Creatures; to check our immoderate Passions
and Pursuits after earthly things; to disintangle us from these Snares, to free
us from these Charms, to keep us from being sucked in, and swallowed up in the
powerful Circle and Eddy of this World; as who knows not that it is True
Philosophy that the World is made up of Vortices? to cause us to look after
Better Things when these are taken from us, to reclaim us from our evil
Courses, and to reduce us unto Virtue and Goodness; to excite us to a
Renunciation of all Trust and Confidence in our selves, and the transitory
Enjoyments of this World, and to depend upon God alone. It is this Book whence
we are acquainted that our Sufferings make us conformable to Christ our Master,
and therefore are Honorable Badges of Christianity: That the Curse which
usually attends outward Crosses, is taken away by our Savior's Death: That the
Calamities of the Faithful are Chastisements, rather than Punishments: That no
Adverse Accidents can do us any hurt, if we believe in Jesus, and abandon our
Sins: That the Pressures of this Life are serviceable to make us pity those
that are in Misery, to know and relish the Love of Christ in suffering for us,
to inhanse the Comforts of a Good Conscience, to commend the Favor of God to
us, to prepare us for Heaven, and to increase the Happiness of it. Thus the
Scriptures reconcile our Minds to those Disappointments, Dangers and
Calamities, which are our Allotment in this World; thus they allay the evil
Spirit of Discontent, they effectually cast out and vanquish those Legions of
Impatient and Tumultuous Thoughts, which are the frequent Attendants of
Adversity: They assure us that these Afflictive Dealings of Heaven toward us,
are intended for our real Advantage; that they are the greatest Kindness and
Favor that can be showed us; that they are undeniable Tokens of Divine Love;
and in brief, that Good Men are happier in their worst Circumstances, than
others are, or can be, in their greatest worldly Felicities. Upon these
rational Grounds, the Holy Scriptures become the most effectual Anodynes to
take away, or at least to mitigate all our Pains and Sorrows. They successfully
remove all those Murmurings and Discontents which russle and imbroil the Soul,
they quash and defeat all those troublesome Passions which embarass and plague
the Mind. By the help of these Divine Instructions which the Holy Writ affords
us, we are enabled to encounter the greatest Evils, with courage and bravery to
receive the Shock, to weather the Storm, to bear all the Insolences and
Insults of our Enemies, to break through all Difficulties, to have Peace within
though we find none without, to keep a Sabbath in our own Breasts, to entertain
our selves with the Serenades of a Good Conscience. This is the Patience and
Comfort of the Scriptures, and no Writings in the World can bless us with them
but these.

And indeed this necessarily follows from those foregoing Assertions, viz, that
Scripture is a Perfect Rule of Faith, and also of Manners. As it is the former,
it is a sure Basis for us to rest upon: we know whom we have believed, and so
we are fixed and determined; which does effectually contribute toward our
Peace and Solace. As it is the latter also, we cannot but receive Comfort from
it, because being a Certain and Unerring Guide in all our Actions, it must
needs administer great Satisfaction and Joy to us through our whole Lives, when
we consider that we have a Stable Rule to walk by, and that we cannot do amiss
if we follow that; but especially, when we reflect on our Manners, and see that
they are adjusted to this Canon, and that 2 Cor. 1. 12.
we have in Simplicity and godly Sincerity had our Conversation in the World.
This will be our Rejoicing and Exultation. Again, the Scripture yields an
inconceivable Joy, by prescribing the Best Means for attaining Peace and Unity,
which are Comfortable Blessings of this Life; by allowing us all Innocent and
Harmless Delights, such as will neither destroy the Peace of our Souls, nor
impair the Health of our Bodies; by thoroughly convincing us that Christianity
in it self is most Satisfactory to our Minds, and is made to convey Joy and
Peace into our Hearts; by teaching us Contentedness in all Conditions; by
assuring us that Christianity provides for our greatest and most Important
Wants, and supplies our most Urgent Necessities, and therefore we ought to
acquiesce in it, and solace our selves with it. Thus it administers the most
Chearing Cordials: and so it does by directing us to the Worthiest Ends, by
setting before us the Strongest Motives, the most Powerful Perswasives to our
Duty, whereby we are enabled not only to undertake it, but to discharge it with
Cheerfulness and Delight; by propounding and presenting to us the Best Rewards,
viz. Forgiveness of our Sins, Assurance of God's Love, and Eternal Life and
Blessedness: For as a Great Man says, Judge Hale, in his Discourse of the
Knowledge of God and of our Selves.
No Book in the World but this shows a Man the Adequate End of his Being, his
Supreme Good, his Happiness, nor directs the Means of acquiring it. The Bible
is the Great Instrument (as it was emphatically called by the Fathers) of our
Salvation and Happiness. By these Writings we hold our Everlasting Inheritance:
And these are the Great Deeds and Evidences whereby we prove our Title to it.
In a word, as these sustain and support us in all Conditions of our Life, and
give us a happy Prospect of a better State, so they render Death welcome and
joyful to us, they enable us by virtue of those Sacred Truths contained in
them, to expire our last Breath with Peace and Tranquillity. On all which
Accounts we must acknowledge them to be the greatest Support and Relief of our
Souls, yea the Only Source of Comfort and Content. Thus if you consider the
Holy Scriptures as they dictate the Best Principles, as they beget in us the
greatest Holiness and Purity, and as they are the Solace of our Lives, we must
be forced to acknowledge their Incomparable Excellency.

These three Particulars, wherein I have endeavored to display the Perfection
of Scripture, are to be found together in Psalm. 19. 7, 8. where These
Properties are ascribed to the Law of God, namely, that it enlightens the Eyes,
and so is a Director of our Faith; that it converts the Soul, and so is a
Reformer of the Manners; and that it rejoiceth the Heart, and so is the
Fountain of True Comfort. You find all these in conjunction in that other
remarkable Place, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture (whereby we may understand not
only the Old Testament, but part of the New, viz. St. Matthew's Gospel, which
was extant when Timothy, to whom the Apostle here speaks, was a child, V. 15.)
is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. It is not to be doubted that
Doctrine refers to the Understanding and Belief, and Reproof and Instruction in
Righteousness to the Will and Manners: and then (...), Rectifying, restoring,
setting all straight again,(as the World imports) includes in it that
Comforting and Chearing which I spoke of. These are the Main Contents of the
Holy Scripture. First, it is a Body and System of the Best and most Consistent
Notions: it regulates the Apprehensions, and presents us with True Conceptions
of things. Here is nothing delivered that thwarts our rectified Understandings,
or is a Contradiction to the most refined Faculties of our Minds. Moreover, it
most successfully conducts us into the Ways of Piety and a Holy Life. The
Design of it is to perfect humane Nature, to exalt Men to the highest Pitch
their Condition is capable of, both by Moral and Revealed Truth,(the latter of
which none but the Blessed Redeemer was able to communicate) to bring them to
the Noblest improvement and Exaltation of Virtue which they can possibly arrive
to on this side of Heaven: In brief, to make us act not only as Rational but as
Divine Creatures, yea even to render us like God Himself. And lastly, it not
only inspires us with Excellent Principles, and promotes the Practice of
Holiness, but administers the greatest Matter of Joy imaginable. This raises
our Spirits, and fills our Souls with Delight and Pleasure; this Strengthens
and supports us under our heaviest Crosses, and makes our Life Happy, whatever
befalls us. All which are undeniable Arguments of the Perfection of Scripture,
whence we are enabled to Believe aright, to Live well, and to Rejoice. Thus
these Holy Writings were endited, that 2. Tim. 3. 17.
we might be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. And thus
Scripture must needs be Perfect, because its Design is to make us so. But I am
sensible that several Devout and Practical Writers have enlarged on this
Subject, and therefore I will say no more of it, because my present Discourse
is designed to be chiefly Critical. Let it suffice that I have briefly asserted
the Perfection of the Holy Scriptures as to the three forementioned
Particulars, and that I have showed that this Perfection is not communicable to
any Other Writings under Heaven. Such is the Peculiar Excellency of the Bible.

Wherefore it behooves us to take notice and beware of those Men who oppose, or
rather deny this Excellency and Perfection. First, the Circumcised Doctors show
themselves great Oppugners of it, whilst they excessively magnify their
Traditions, and even prefer them before the Sacred Text. We must know then that
the Jews talk much of their a kibbel accepit, quia a Majoribus accepta est.
Cabala, or (as that Word signifies) the Received Doctrine among them, which
was propagated by Oral Tradition and Continual Succession. This their Cabala is
twofold; First, that which deals in Mysterious Criticisms and Curiosities about
Words and Letters, to which belongs the Masoreth, which (as I have showed in
another Discourse) is serviceable for the Preservation of the Bible. Secondly,
that which by them is called the Oral Law, or the Law delivered from one to
another, as an Exposition on the Written Law. It may not be impertinent to give
the Reader a short Account of this Oral Law which they so much boast of. This
was either before Moses, and was the Doctrine of the Patriarchs, propagated by
Word of Mouth before the Law was committed to Writing; it consisted of the
Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah; of the Apothegms, Sentences and Paradoxes
of the Wise Men in the first Ages; or it was in and after Moses's time, who is
reckoned the Great Author of the Cabala, because he delivered it viva voce to
the Jews, say the Rabbis, at the same time that he gave them the Decalogue and
the Other Written Laws. This Torah gnal peh,(as they style it) this Oral Law is
the Exposition of those Written Laws, and is meant, they say, in Deuteronomy. 4. 14.
The Lord commanded me at that time to teach you Statutes and Judgments. And for
this they alledg Deuteronomy. 12. 21. which they tell us refers to some Special
Command of God about Killing; and seeing we read no such Special Command about
it in the Written Law, it is reasonable to conclude that it is to be understood
of the Oral one: that must be the Sense of those Words there, As I have
commanded thee. That Moses received this Law on Mount Sinai, In Deuteron. cap.
34.
Rabbi Bechai proves by the same Token that he knew by this Law how long time
he was upon that Mount; for when God taught him the Written Law, then he knew
it was Day, (because he could not write in the Dark) but when God gave him the
Oral Law, he knew then that it was Night. A most profound Answer to the
Difficulty, how Moses could tell that he was 40 Days and Nights on the Mount.
Well, God (they say) delivered this Law to Moses, Moses delivered it to Joshua,
Joshua to the Seventy Elders, they to Ezra, who (some say) committed it to
writing, for he was the Chiefest Cabalist next to Moses; but the Books which he
composed of this Matter were lost, and so it went on after the old way again,
viz. by Tradition, and came to the Prophets, of whom Zechary and Malachi were
the last, and from them the Great Sanhedrim had it; and at last it was made
into a Book, that it might not be lost by reason of the Dispersion of the Jews.
He that compiled this Volume or Book was Rabbi Judah, who for the singular
Holiness of his Life was called Hakkadosh the Saint: He flourished in the Days
of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, about a hundred and twenty Years after our
Savior's Passion. The Title which he gave to it was Mishnah, i. e. the
Repetition of the Divine Law, or a Larger Explication of it given immediately
to Moses by God, and by Tradition derived to the Jews. This (...), this
Iterated or Second Law is divided by him into six general Sedarim, i. e. so
many Heads or Subjects of which it treats: and every Sedar is divided into
Books, every Book into Chapters or Pirka's. About a hundred Years after this
famous Rabbi had reduced the Traditions of the Jews into one Volume, the
Learned Doctors began to comment upon it; and first the Jerusalem Talmud(called
so because 'twas made for the Jews that lived in Judea, especially in
Jerusalem) was finished by R. Iochanan about A. D. 240. The Comment which he
and the other Rabbis made on the Mishnah is called the Gemara, the
Supplemental Exposition of that Volume of Jewish Traditions. Next, the
Babylonick Talmud was put forth by the Learned Jews at Babylon, who gathered
their Traditions into a more Complete and Exact Body (as they thought) for the
Benefit of their Countrymen in those Parts of the World. It was compiled by
Rabbi Ase and his Companions about A. D. 500. and consists (as the former
Talmud) of the Mishnaioth and the Gemara: the one is the Text, the other is the
Comment, or the Decisions of the Doctors on the Book of the Mishnah. So then
the Oral Law, which the Jews so much boast of, and set so high a Value upon, is
contained in the Two Talmuds, which are made up of the Mishnah and the Gemara:
The Mishnah is that which R. Judah compiled; the Gemara's are the Work of R.
Iochanan and Ase, and other Rabbis; and both are a Complete Body of the Civil
and Canon Law of the Jews. Whosoever names the Talmuds names all Judaism, says
Lightfoot: These (as he adds) are the Jews Council of Trent, they are the last
and fullest Determinations which they have about all their Religious Opinions,
Rites and Usages. Thus I have exhibited a brief Account of the whole Talmudick
System, wherein the Oral Law is comprised, explained, and descanted upon. And
it is not to be denied that there may be a very excellent Use made of this
Collection of Jewish Traditions, it may be serviceable in sundry Instances to
expound the Mosaic Law, to acquaint us with the Jewish Antiquities, to
illustrate several Places in the Old Testament, yea to interpret many Passages
in the New, which have reference to the received Practices and Usages of the
Jews.

But the Jews(who are the Persons whom I am now blaming) make very ill Use of
it, because they immoderately extol these Traditions, calling them Torah
shebegnal Peh, their Infallible Oracle, and esteeming the Authority of them
equal with that of the Bible. For as the Canonical Scriptures were dictated by
Divine Inspiration, so these Laws they hold were from God Himself, and are of
the same Authority with those Scriptures. They make no difference between the
Inspired Writings of the Old Testament and the Books of Mishnaioth or the
Talmuds, which are in truth an Amassment only of the Traditions of the Jews,
and of the Diverse Decisions of the Schools of Hillel and Shammai, of the
Different Determinations of R. Akiba and R. Eliezer, of R. Simeon and R.
Joshua, etc. bandying against one another: or rather, if we speak plainer, they
are a Rhapsody of Idle Dreams, Groundless Fables, Cursed Errors, Superstitious
Rites and Practices, yea (if we should instance in the Babylonick Talmud) of
Horrid Blasphemies against Christ, of Obloquies against the Mosaic Law it
self, and of Contradictions even to the Law of Nature. These are part of the
Books so highly prized by the Jewish Masters, these go along with their Oral
Law, which was first given by God himself, and consequently is of the same
Original with the Canon of Scripture. But they go yet higher; for they do not
only equalize these Traditions with Scripture, but they prefer them before it.
They do not only say in a Proverbial Manner, that Impossible est stare super
Fundamento Legis scriptae nisi bene^icio Legis ore traditae.
they cannot stand upon the Foundation of the Written Law without the Help of
the Unwritten one, i. e. the Oral Law which they talk of; and that Verba Legis
in loco proprio egena funt, in alieno vero locupletissima.
the Words of the Law as they are found in the Text are poor and wanting, but
as they are expounded by the Doctors have great Riches and abundance in them:
And again, that Magni montes dependent a pilo.
very Great and Weighty Matters depend upon these Little Traditions which they
contend for: but they are so bold and presumptuous as to proceed further, and
give a far Greater Deference to these Traditions and Doctrines of their Wise
Men (as they call them) than to the Holy Scriptures themselves. For they tell
us, that Sapientes suis ipsorum verbis robur secerunt majus quam ipsis Legis
verbis.
their Doctors have done more good (viz. as to strengthening and confirming of
Religion) by their own Sayings than by the Words of this Holy Book it self. And
accordingly their Advice is, Fili mi, attend magis ad verba Scribarum quam ad
verba Legis.
My Son, attend more to what the Scribes say than to what is said by the Law,
(though I know this may admit of another Sense, viz. that we ought to look more
to the Sense of the Law than the bare Letter of it). But that in the Talmud is
plain, and can have no other Meaning, Lib. dict. Bava Meziah, cap. 11.
To read the Holy Scripture, and to be studious in searching out the Sense of
it is good, and not good, (i. e. it is not of any considerable Advantage) but
to turn over the Mishnah Night and Day is a Virtue which will have a great
Reward hereafter; and to learn the Gemara is an incomparable Virtue. Yea, the
Jews blasphemously say that God himself studies in the Talmud every Day. Here
you see they prefer their Delivered Law before the Written one: they make the
Infallible Scriptures truckle to the Fabulous Traditions of the Mishnah. To
this purpose it is a Noted Saying of the Hebrew Rabbis, that the Text of the
Bible is like Water, the Mishnah like Wine, and the Six Books of the Talmud are
like the Sweetest Honey'd Wine, Thus, to magnify the Traditions of their
Fathers, they vilify the Scriptures. They are not content with the Rites and
Injunctions written in the Law, which in way of Contempt they call (...)
the Precepts of the Law, but they admire those most which are taken from their
Wise Men, which they call the Precepts of the Rabbis, and which are summarily
contained in the Talmud: these they hold to be of greater Value than the other.
The Persons that are skilled in these are sliled by them Tannaim, Profound
Masters and Doctors: but they that study the Scriptures only are but Karaim,
Poor Readers, and Men of the Letter. All this shows how these Men depretiate
the Written Word of God, and exalt above it their Oral Law, which is a mere
Fiction and Forgery, (as to the pretense of its being given to Moses by God)
and therefore is not owned by the Karaint among them, who stick close to the
Text, nor by some of their Perushim, their sobrest sort of Expositors, who
think those Traditions are derogatory to the Holy Scriptures.

Secondly, Papists as well as Ie^s disparage the Holy Scriptures, and deny its
Perfection.(Nor, by the way, is this the only thing wherein they agree with the
Jews, a great Part of their Religion being no other than Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies.) These Modern Talmudists will not own the Sufficiency of the Sacred
Writings, they have their Cabala, the Doctrine Received from their Ancestors:
they are for their Oral Law delivered from one to another, they supply the
defect of Scripture (so they are wont to speak) with their Traditions. They are
of the same Mind with the Jews, that (...) sacite sepem Legi. Prove. Jud.
there must be a Fence made about the Law, that it must be hedged in with
Traditions. The Scripture is not a Perfect Rule of Faith and Manners, say they:
but the things which are necessary to Salvation, are partly contained in the
Scripture, and partly in unwritten Traditions. A very absurd and wild Doctrine!
because they have no way to prove any thing to be necessary to Salvation, but
by proving it to be found in the Scripture. Whatever was or is necessary for
the Universal Church is revealed in these Writings; and no New Doctrine
necessary to Salvation, is delivered since to the Church or any particular
Person. But notwithstanding the Absurdity of this Tenent, they hold it fast,
and make it a Great Article of their Belief. For they are taught by an
Ecumenical Council (as they repute it) that Unwritten Traditions are of equal
Authority with the Scriptures, that they are to be received Pari pi^tatis
a^^ectu and reverentia. Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
with the same pious Affection and Reverence(those are the words) wherewith the
Infallible Writings of the Prophets and Apostles are to be entertained, and
consequently they are to be made a Rule of Faith equal with the Scriptures. But
they rest not here; they not only equal Humane and Ecclesiastical Traditions
with the Written Word of God, but following the Steps of the Old Talmudists,
they proceed yet further, preferring Traditions before Scripture. Thus a
Renowned Divine in their Church tells us plainly, that Est Tradi^io imprimis ad
salutem Ecclesia necessaria, atque adeo magis quam ipsa Scriptura. Salmeron in
Epist. St. Pauli, Disput. 8.
Traditions are exceeding necessary for the welfare of the Church, yea, that
they are more requisite than the Scripture it self; and this he endeavors to
make good. With him concur several others of their Writers, whom we find
extolling Traditions, but at the same time speaking very meanly and slightly of
the Holy Writ. Hence they blasphemously call it a Nose of Wax, and a Leaden
Rule; and many such vilifying Terms are used by Pighius and Melchior Canus, and
Tapperus, H^ntlaeus, Petrus a So^o, Bellarminu^, Cos^erus* etc.
other Great Doctors of that Church. We deny not the Usefulness, nay even the
Necessity, nay the Perpetuity of Tradition, viz. That Tradition whereby the
Doctrines which were entrusted in the Church's Hands by the Prophets and
Apostles, shall by her be delivered over to her Children to the World's End,
which way of Transmission is the great Prop of our Religion. Besides, the
Apostle enjoins the 2 Epist. Chapter 2. v. 15.
Thessalonians to hold fast the Traditions which they had been taught, whether
by Word or his Epistle: for he had used two ways of delivering the Truth to
them; namely, Preaching and Writing: and other Apostles committed the chief and
necessary Heads of their Doctrine to Writing. So that the Traditions meant
here, are the Revealed Truths of the Gospel delivered by the Apostles and
Evangelists, and are no other than what Christ delivered to them, according to
that of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
I delivered to you that which also I received: whence they have the Name of
Traditions, i. e. they are Evangelical Doctrines delivered to us from those
that were taught them by Christ. And whether they were imparted by Word or by
Epistle, by Preaching or Writing, they are the same, the same as to substance,
the otherwise there may be some difference. But that which we condemn (and that
most justly) the Papists for, is this, that they magnify and rely upon
Traditions which have no affinity with the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles,
yea, which contradict it in many things; and yet they equalize these with the
Word of God, and sometimes prefer them and the Authority of the Church, before
that of the Sacred Writings of the Old and New Testament. Thus One says,
Ecclesia visa est aliquando facere contra Scripturas, aliquando praeter
Scripturas: ergo ipsa est Regula eorum quae traduntur in Scripturis, ergo
credimus Ecclesiae contra formam Scripturarum. Caranza.
The Church sometimes does things contrary to the Scriptures, sometimes besides
them: therefore the Church is the Rule and Standard of the things that are
delivered in the Scriptures, and therefore we believe the Church, though she
acts counter to the formal Decisions of the Scriptures. And an Stapleton
Relect, Controvers. 4. qu. 1.
other Famous Doctor gives it for good Divinity, that the Decrees and
Determinations of a Council are binding, though they be not confirmed by any
probable Testimony of Scripture, nay though they be beyond and above the
Determination of Scripture. Thus the Holy Writings of the Bible are most
impiously disparaged and vilisied by the Pontificians. Whereas there is nothing
defective or redundant, nothing wanting or superfluous in these Writings: they
assert in the open face of the World that they are short and imperfect, and
therefore have need of being supplied by Traditions, which in some things are
of greater Value and Authority than they.

Again, that the Church of Rome oppugneth or rather denies the Perfection of
the Scriptures, might be evinced from their constant care and endeavor to keep
them in an Unknown Tongue. It is true they have translated them. But, 1. There
was a kind of necessity of doing it, the Protestants having turned them into so
many Tongues. By this means they were compelled as it were to let some of their
people see what the Bible was in their own Language. But, 2. It is so corruptly
translated that it is made to patronize several of their Superstitious Follies
and Errors. And yet, 3. They dare not commit these Translations to common View.
Although in all Countries where People were converted to Christianity, in elder
times the Scripture was turned into their Language, and every one was
permitted, yea exhorted to read it, (as is proved by many Writers, The Council
of Trent examined, page 46, 47.
the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet particularly) yet the Church of Rome denies the
common People the Use of it, as a thing hurtful and pernicious. The Bible, as
some Bad Book, is tolerated to be read with great Caution and Restriction, in
some Countries only, and by some Persons. It is, like the Sibyls Prophecies of
old among the Romans, not to be looked into without the permission and
Authority of the Senate; none can read it without a License from their
Superiors: so dangerous a thing is the Bible. From this Practice the People
generally imbibe a strong Prejudice against the Scriptures, and believe they
cannot be good for them, because the Pope and their Pastors tell them they are
not. Wherefore, as W. H. M. Dr. in a Letter lately written by him.
one who was once of the Communion of the Church of ^ome, has well observed,
As soon as ever any Man embraces Popery, he presently throws the Bible out of
his Hands as altogether useless (to say no worse). Which unreasonable and
wicked Behavior of theirs was one great Reason or Motive (as he professes) of
his returning to the Church of England again. For what Considerate Man can
think That to be a True Church which teaches its Members to slight and reject
the Word of God, which is the Source of all Divine Truth, and without which we
can neither believe nor practice aright, we can neither have Comfort here, nor
arrive to Happiness hereafter? This indeed is not only to null ^^e Perfection
of Scripture, but to abolish the whole Body of Scripture it self.

A third sort of Persons that are Opposers of the Perfection of Scripture are
Enthusiasts, and such who act out of a truly Fanatic Principle. Such were the
Familists heretofore, whose Pretenses to the Spirit were so high that they
excluded and renounced the Letter of Scripture, which according to their Style
Se^ast. Franc. Paradox.
was a dark Lanthorn, a liveless Carcass, a Book shut up and sealed with seven
Seals, the Scabbard (not the Sword) of the Spirit: or, if it be a Sword, it is
the Sword of Antichrist, wherewith he kills Christ. This was the impious Jargon
of these High-flown Men, who made no other Use of the Bible than to Allegorize
it, and to turn it all into Mystery. These have been followed by Others of a
like Fanatic Spirit, who have made it a great part of their Religion to
despise and reproach the Sacred Writ. A In ^is Tracta^. Th^ologico-Poll^icus.
late Enthusiast, or rather one that pretends to be such, but designs the
Overthrow of all Religion, tells the World that the Bible is founded in
Imagination, that God's Revelations in Scripture are ever according to the
Fancy of the Prophets or other Persons he spoke to, and that all the Phrases
and Speeches, all the Discoveries and Manifestations, yea all the Historical
Passages in the Old and New Testament are adapted to these. The Quaker comes
next, and refuses to own the Scripture to be the Word of God, and the Perfect
Rule by which we are to direct our Lives. It is a great Error and Falsity,
(says George Keith of Immedi^te R^^^lation.
one of the most considerable Persons of that Persuasion) that the Scriptures
are a filled up Canon, and the only Rule of Faith and Obedience in all things,
and that no more Scriptures are to be writ or given forth from the Spirit of
the Lord. With whom agrees Barclay in his Apology, p. 59, 60.
another of as great Repute among that Tribe; I see no Necessity (says he) of
believing that the Canon of Scripture is filled up. And again, The Scriptures
(says he) are not to be esteemed the Principal Ground of all Truth and
Knowledge, nor yet the Adequate Primary Rule of Faith and Manners, but they are
only a Secondary Rule subordinate to the Spirit. And accordingly he adds, That
the inward Inspirations and Revelations which Men have, are not to be subjected
to the Examination of the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, but are above
them. Thus these bold Men, out of a pretense of Inspiration, vilify the Sacred
Volume of the Bible. Thus absurdly and irreligiously these deluded Persons, out
of an Enthusiastic Heat, prefer their own private Spirit before the Holy
Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures. The Men hold themselves to be
Perfect, but the Scripture must by no means be so: it is weak and imperfect,
and ought to give way to the Inward Impressions in their Minds, which,
according to them, are that more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto they think
they do well to give heed as unto a Light shining in a dark Place: But we see
that they are thereby led into gross Error and Darkness. And as to this
particular Persuasion concerning the Meanness of the Scriptures, they therein
(as in several other things) symbolize with the Church of Rome, whence they had
their Original: They confound Natural Light or Reason with Revelation, they
hold that Pagans are in as good a Condition as Christians; they make their
private Dictates as Authentic as the Bible; yea they must needs hold that
there is no Infallible Rule of Truth or Practice but their own Notions and
Sentiments, which some of their Writers call Canonical.

I might observe to you that besides Jews, Papists and Enthusiasts, there are
Others that deny the Excellency and Perfection of the Holy Scriptures, as
Atheists and mere Politicians, who endeavor to persuade the World that all
Religion is a Cheat, and that This Book is so too: Likewise the Generality of
Heretics, Seducers and Impostors, who (it is no wonder) debase that which they
design to pervert. But the bare mentioning of these Persons is sufficient to
beget a Dislike of them with all that are Wise and Sober, and who are convinced
of the Scriptures perfection from those Topics which I have propounded. It may
be said of most Books as Martial said of his, Sun^ bona, sunt quaedam
mediocria, su^t mala mul^a.
There are some good, and some bad things in them, and some of a middle Nature.
But in this Divine Book there are no such Allays; all is pure and incorrupt,
entire and unmixed: there are no Defects, no Mistakes in this Infallible Volume
given us from Heaven. Shall the Turks then when they find a Leaf or any part of
the Alcoran on the Ground, take it up and kiss it, and deposite it in some safe
place, affirming it to be a great Sin to suffer that wherein the Name of God
and Mahomet's Laws are written, to be trodden under Feet? And shall not we
Christians highly value and reverence the Sacred Volume of the Bible, the
Writings of the Old and New Testament, which contain the Words of God Himself,
and the Laws of the Blessed Jesus, which enrich us with that Sublime and
Supernatural Learning which is the Rule of our Faith, the Conduct of our
Manners, and the Comfort of our Lives?

CHAP. II.
The Bible is furnished with all sorts ofHumane (as well as Divine) Learning.
Hebrew, wherein the Old Testament was written, is the Primitive Language of the
World. The True Origin of the World is plainly recorded in no other Writings
but these. The first Chapter of Genesis is a real History, and records Matter
of ^act. It is largely proved that the Mosa^ck History gives us a particular
Account of the first Rise of the several Nations and People of the Earth, and
of the Places of their Habitation. Also the true Knowledge of the Original of
Civil Government, and the Increases of it, and the diff^rent Changes it
underwent is derived from these Writings. The Courts of Judicature, and the
several kinds of Punishment among the Jews distinctly treated of. The
Government among the Heathen Nations. The four Celebrated Monarchies or Empires
of the World.

I Proceed now to the Second General Head of my Discourse, viz. the Universal
Usefulness of the Bible as to things that are Temporal and Secula^. Not only
all Religious, Divine and Saving Knowledge is to be fetched hence, but that
likewise which is Natural and Humane, and b^longs to the World and Arts. Many
believe the former, but cannot be induced to credit the latter; for they think
the Bible was writ only for the saving of Men's Souls, but that all other
Knowledge and Discoveries are to be derived wholly from other Writers. I have
sometimes observed that Persons who have had a good Desire to Learning, and
were greedy Devourers of all other Authors, yet have no regard to the
Scriptures, and fondly imagine there is no Improvement of Men's Notions, no
enlarging of their Understandings, no Grounds of Excellent Literature from the
Sacred Writ. They persuade themselves that the Bible may serve well enough for
the Use of those that study Divinity, or make Sermons, but that the Writings of
Profane Authors must be wholly consulted for other things. But this is a gross
Surmise, and possesses the unthinking Heads of those only that consider not the
Matchless Antiquity of the Bible, or that on a worse Account refuse to acquaint
themselves with these Writings, and care not for that Book which speaks so much
of God and Religion, and checks the Disorders of Men's Lives. All honest,
industrious and impartial Enquirers into Learning know that the Scriptures are
the Greatest Monument of Antiquity that is Extant in the whole World, and
particularly that the First and Earliest Inventions of things are to be known
only from the Old Testament, especially the five first Books of it. In vain do
you look for these in the Writings of other Men; for though some of them relate
very Ancient Occurrences, yet they are not so old as these: and as for those
Writers who pretend to some Greater Antiquity, and have been so impudent as to
think that they could impose upon the World, they have been exploded by all
Persons of Sobriety and serious Thoughts. In Pagan Writers we have some wild
Guesses at the Origin of things, and the First Inventors of Arts; but he that
is desirous to have Certain and Infallible Information concerning these, must
consult the Writings of Moses and other Books of the Old Testament. From these
alone we learn what were the Antientest Usages in the World, and what was the
first Rise and Original of them. Wherefore I may safely pronounce that no Man
can have the just Repute of a Scholar unless he has read and studied the
Bible: for in this one Book there is more Humane Learning than in all the Books
of the World besides. And therefore here by the way I cannot but look upon it
as a very Scandalous Mistake, that the knowledge and Study of the Holy
Scriptures are for Divines only, as if these were not to be skilled in any
Humane Learning. They that talk after this rate, understand not what the Study
of Divinity and True Scholarship are: for there is no Complete Divine that is
not well versed in Humane Literature, and there is no Complete Scholar that is
not skilled in the Bible. Wherefore this is that which I intend very
particularly and largely to insist upon, viz. that the Scriptures are the
Antientest Storehouse of Good Letters and Learning, and that here are All the
Sorts of them, which I conceive will be a full Eviction of what I have
undertaken, viz. to demonstrate the Pre-eminence of the Inspired Writings
before all others whatsoever.

First; I begin with the Language in which the greatest part of the Bible, that
is, the Old Testament, was written, which is Hebrew, and was the First and
Original Tongue of the World. This certainly inhanses the Worth of the Hebrew
Text, and renders the Bible preferable to all other Books. It is true there are
other Languages that pretend to Priority; but when we come to examine their
claim, we discover it to be a mere Pretense indeed. We are told by ^ib. ^.
Herodotus, that Psamm^ticus King of Egypt had a mind to make an Experiment
about this, and accordingly caused two Children to be nourished and bred up by
two she-goats, and suffered none to speak a Word to them. At last they were
heard to utter the word bec, which it seems signifies Bread in the Phrygian
Dialect; whence it was concluded that that was the First Language. But upon
Enquiry it was found that this Experiment was fruitless, for bec was an
insignificant Pronuntiation which the Children learnt of their Goat-Nurses, to
whom (and all other Animals of that Species) that Sound it seems was natural.
Quaest. ^9. in (...)
Theodoret thought Syr^ack was the First Tongue. Philo the Jew was of Opinion
that Chaldee was the Primitive Language, and that what we call Hebrew is truly
the Tongue which the Chaldean Abraham brought out of Chaldea. And Capellus in
his Sacred Chronology seems to espouse this Assertion. But there is little
Ground for it, if we consider that the Chaldee is borrowed from the Hebrew, and
is a different Dialect of it. The Scythian is the Primitive Tongue, says
Boxhorn. Goropius Becanus fetches all Words from the Teutonick or High Dutch,
and would persuade us that this is the Mother Tongue of the World: but he has
given so slender Proof of it, that he has gained but few Proselytes to his
Opinion. The Learned Bochart derives all Words from the Phaenician Tongue; but
any impartial Judge may discern that he is too extravagant in his Derivations*
witness that of Phaenicia or Phaenix from ben Anak the Son of Anak,(making the
Old Phaenicians his Posterity) or by Contraction Beanak, then Pheanak, and so
Phaenix, and hundreds more of the like Nature; which straining to maintain his
Opinion is unacceptable to wise Men. A late Author has published an Historical
Essay (as he is pleased to call it) of the Probability of the Language of China
being the Primitive one, and among other Offers toward it he has this, that
the first Expression we make of Life at the instant Minute of our Birth is by
uttering the Chinois Word Ya or Yah But by the same Reasoning I can prove that
the first Tongue was Hebrew, because Yah (for so most Hebricians pronounce it)
is one of the Hebrew Names of God: and how proper is it for Infants to mention
and acknowledge their Maker as soon as they come into the World? I allow the
Author to be very Ingenious, yet I believe he is so wise himself as not to
think he has brought any solid Proof for what he undertook. Such another
Attempt is his, who commends the British or Welsh Tongue to us as the
Antientest of all. This Glory is due only to the Hebrew, which certainly was
the Language that Adam spoke, and was that peculiar Form of Speech which was
given to him by God, and which he taught his Children, and which lasted
incorrupt (there being no other Tongue to be its Rival) till the Confusion of
Tongues at Babel, and the Dispersion which was the Consequent of that. Of this
those Words are meant, Genesis 11. 1. The whole Earth was of one language, and of
one Speech, Viz. Hebrew: which without doubt was no small Benefit to Mankind;
this ^dentity of Speech having such an Influence on So^iety, and contributing
to the Increase of their Friendship and Familiarity, whereas now we must ^e a
long time learning to make those of other Countries understand what we say, we
must go to ^chool to be Friendly, and we cannot be sociable without a
Dictionary. But this Primitive Blessing was not of very great Duration, for the
Infallible Records inform us that a notable Confusion of Languages happened to
the World when it was yet in its Minority and Childhood, and had not long
learnt to speak, if we may reckon the Age of it from the Deluge. By the Fault
of Man, and the Judgment of God, the One way of Speaking was changed into
diverse. But we are not to think that this Change introduced into every Colony
or Plantation a Different Language, but only a particular and peculiar Dialect:
For the Difference of the Idiom was sufficient to beget a not-understanding of
one another, as we see at this day the Germans, Danes, Swedes, Norwegians,
Dutch, English, understand not one another when they speak, though they have
not properly a Different Language, but only Several Dialects, for they all
speak Teutonick. The Confusion of Tongues then was not New Tongues, but a
considerable Variation from the Primitive one, viz. Hebrew. Hereupon the
Babel-Builders (who before spoke and understood this Language, it being their
native one, as it was of all the rest of Manking) were so confounded, that they
were forced to lay aside their Tools, and leave off working. And that this
Confusion was not an Introduction of really Distinct Tongues* (as some have
thought) is evident hence, that there is a Great Affinity between Tongues,
especially the Eastern ones (for as for others, they have had their Rise since,
and we are not to imagine that at the Babylonick Confusion they spoke Italian,
Spanish or French, or that afterward there were any of the Plantations that
understood English, Dutch or Irish). I speak then concerning the Eastern
Languages, and assert them to be Different Dialects or Modes of the Hebrew
Tongue: which is sufficiently proved from the Harmony and Cognation between
them. I remit the Reader to Skickard, Hottinger and others, for the particular
Eviction of this. He will from them be persuaded that Tongues were not
Multiplied at Babel, but Divided; and that that One Language which had been in
use ever since the beginning of the World, received there an Alteration and new
Modification: the Diversity of which was the Cause, that Persons could not
understand one another.

Now that the First Tongue which Adam and Eve spoke, and was used before the
Division of Languages, and was the Original from whence all the other Languages
are but Variations, was Hebrew, is apparent from that foresaid Cognation
between the Hebrew and other Oriental Tongues. We find that this One Language
has spread it self more or less into all others. We may discern in them some
Words either purely Hebrew, or of near alliance with it. It is well known that
the Chaldeans and Syrians have abundance of Hebrew words in their Tongue, only
there is some difference in the inflection of them. The Arabic likewise has
great affinity with the Hebrew, and so have the Punick and Ethiopick, as the
Learned Bochart has demonstrated. And this you may observe (which confirms the
thing I am establishing) that the nearer any People were to the Hebrews and
their Country, the greater Number of Hebrew Words and Idioms they retained in
their Languages: and on the contrary, the more remote any Nation was from them,
the fewer Hebrew Words have they, and the greater Strangers are they to their
manner and way of Speaking. But there are some Relics of that Primitive
Tongue every where: all Languages have borrowed from this, as Lingua Hebraica
omnium linguarum matrix. Commentar* in Sophon. C^p 3.
St. Ierom long since observed; and Mercer and other Learned Moderns take
notice, that Sac and some other Hebrew Words are to be found in all Languages,
and thence argue that Hebrew is the Mother Tongue of all. Again, where should
we look for the Original Language, and where should we hope to find it, yea,
where is it possible to find it but among the First People of the World, and
the immediately succeeding Generations of Men before the Flood and Confusion of
Tongues? Accordingly we discover that Hebrew was that Language which was in use
with them. The Book of Genesis abundantly testifies this, where are the Names
Adam, Ishah (Woman) Chavah or Eve, Cain, Abel, Seth, Noah, and a Multitude of
other Words of Hebrew Extraction, which are Arguments that Hebrew was the
Language of those first People, and therefore the Primitive One. The Etymology
and Derivation of these Words do irrefragably prove this, for there is no other
Tongue that has these Words from whence these Names are taken but the Hebrew;
therefore this was the First Tongue. And this was it which Noah carried into
the Ark with him: and if he did so, no Man questions that he brought it out
with him, and that it was universally used till the Babel-Conspiracy. Otherwise
it could not be said (as we have heard) that the whole Earth before that
Confusion was of one Lip (or Language) and one Speech. This Text is peremptory,
and therefore it is to be wondered that a J. Cleric. Disl. ^ de Ling. Hebr.
Learned Man contents himself with saying, [There seems to have been One Tongue
before the Flood till the building of Babel.] And in Commentar. in Genesis 11. 1.
another place he understands one Lip and one Speech, of their mutual Concord
and Agreement: which Interpretation of his is refuted from what follows, Let us
go down and confound their Lips, that they may not understand one another Lip,
v. 7. Where we see the Confusion of Lips is opposed to one Lip and one Speech
before mentioned. It is evident then from this Text that there was only One
Language in use at first: and that could be no other than Hebrew; for I have
showed before that this Language was spoken, and therefore if there was but One
Language on the whole Earth, This must be it: for there was no Alteration as to
Language till the building of Babel: whence we infallibly gather that the
Language which was used before the Flood and the Erecting of Babel, was Hebrew,
and consequently, that the forementioned Writer who holds Prolegom. ad
Commentar. in Ge^.
that the Hebrew Tongue is no more Primitive than any other Oriental Tongue, is
under a Mistake; and that his Learned Countryman who asserts Huet. Demon^^rat.
Evangel. C. 13. Prop. 4.
that the Hebrew was one of the Tongues that arose out of the Confusion of
Tongues at Babel, is grossly overseen. For it is a flat Contradicting of that
plain Text above named, which acquaints us that there was One Universal
Language in the World at that time, and no more; which from what I have
suggested appears to be Hebrew. And as this was the Common Tongue of the World
above seventeen hundred Years, ( viz. from the Creation to the building the
Tower of Babel) so we are to observe further, that the Curse of the Confusion
of Tongues fell only or chiefly on those People that were at Rabel, and
concerned in that Wicked Exploit, Viz. the Inhabitants of Shinar and the
neighboring Places, those impious Troops of Men that were the greatest
Admirers and Flatterers of Nimrod and his Government. The Sons of God, the holy
Posterity of Noah assisted not in the building of the Tower, and therefore
among them and their Posterity, and those that learned it of them, was the
Primitive Tongue preserved. Which some think had its denomination of Hebrew
from Heber, who was none of the Babel-Builders, and therefore the Original
Tongue was preserved entire in his Family. This is the general Opinion of the
Jewish Writers, and it has been received by many Christians. More especially
the Geograph. Sac. Pars 2.
Learned Bochart is of this Opinion, but is contradicted by some other Learned
Pens, who tell us that the Hebrew Tongue was called so from Gneber Transiit, i.
e. from Abraham the Traveller or Passenger, Genesis 14. 13. But Mr. Seldom, whose
Learning was equal to any of these, Affensum tamen retinemus* nam non lique^.
De D^s Sir. Proleg. Cap. 2.
suspends his Judgment in this Controversy, though at the same time he declares
that he is more prone to the Opinion of those who deduce it from Eber Transitus.

This is a short Account of the A^tiquity of the Hebrew Tongue, and we may
rationally conclude from it, that it was the Primitive and Original Speech, and
that from the corruption of this was the Generation and Production of other
Tongues. And that Worthy Critic himself, who makes the Phaenician the First
Tongue, agrees to what I here assert, though he seems to oppose it: for if we
scan what he says, we shall see that even according to him the Phaenician and
Hebrew are the same, which appears from this, that he holds the Canaanites and
Phaenicians to be the same People. Geogr. Sac. Canaan.
He proves that the Phaenicians or Punicks, or Syrians, or Sidonians, (for they
were Known by all these Names) were formerly the Inhabitants of Cana^n, but
being expelled thence by Joshua when he subdued that Land, they carried
Colonies into most parts of the World, and their Language is found in all
Languages of other People, as he endeavors to show. This is the Hebrew Tongue
he confesses, abating the Difference of Dialect; and therefore Hebrew (he
says) is called the Language of Canaan, Isa. 19. 18. If then the Punick was in
its first Purity Hebrew (as some others besides Bochart grant) it follows that
in proving the former to be the Original Tongue, he does in effect prove that
the latter is so, because they are the same. And truly it is no hard task to
evince the Language of the Canaanites to have been Hebrew, for all the Proper
Names of Men and Places reckoned up in Scripture in those Nations are purely
Hebrew, as Salem, Jerusalem, Hebron, etc. To which a Weems.
Learned Scots-man gives his Suffrage, expressly vouching that the Canaanites
spoke Hebrew, and that the Hebrew Tongue is called the Language of Canaan,
because 'twas the native Language of those that possessed that Land: to prove
which he produces the Names of Persons and Places among them, as Melchisedek,
Abimelek, Kirjath-sepher, Jericho, etc. and thence infers that Hebrew was the
native Tongue of the Canaanites or Philistines. And if this be true, then the
Great Seldom, and with him many others are mistaken, who affirm, that De Dis
Sir. Prolegom. C. 2.
the Hebrew Tongue remained pure in the Family and Posterity of Abraham only,
and that Abraham brought that Tongue first into Canaan. The contrary appears,
viz. that this Tongue was preserved even in Canaan. But Monsieur Bochart goes
too far when he adds, that Hebrew was not retained in the Families of Heber and
Abraham, but that this latter learned this Tongue of the Canaanites when he
lived with them in Canaan. I do not see this cleared by him, and therefore I am
inclined to believe that the Hebrew Tongue was both in Abraham's Family, and
among the Canaanites. Though Abraham was a Chaldean, and Chaldee was the
Language of the Country, yet by the singular Providence of God, the Hebrew
might be kept up and spoken by him. Nor did this hinder his converse with the
Chaldeans, because the Chaldee is a Dialect of the Hebrew. If it be objected
that Canaan, and consequently the Canaanites were from Cham, who was a
^abel-Builder, and how then was the Primitive Hebrew among them? It may be hard
to resolve this, and perhaps it is the only considerable Objection against
Bochart's Opinion. I am not now obliged to show why it was so, but I am only
concerned to attend to the Matter of Fact, Viz. that the Canaanites spoke
Hebrew, and consequently kept their Tongue notwithstanding the Confusion at
Babel. And (that I may not wholly dismiss it without giving a Reason of it)
this might very well be, because the Canaanite speaking Hebrew was as much a
Barbarian, and as little understood by another Family or Plantation, as if God
had infused a new Language or Idiom. So that we need not wonder that Hebrew was
the Language of the ungodly Canaanites. Though truly, if I may speak freely, I
do not see that this is firmly built on that Text in Isaiah before cited; for
it is manifest, that that is a Prophecy concerning the Conversion of the
Gentiles, and particularly the Egyptians, to the True Religion and Worship,
viz. that of the Jews which was then in Being; and consequently This (and not
the Ancient Speech and Dialect of Canaan) is here meant by the Language of
Canaan. Or supposing the very Speech of that Country to be meant, yet we cannot
thence absolutely infer that the Canaanites spoke Hebrew, but only that Hebrew
is called the Language of Canaan: which might be for this reason, because the
Israelites who spoke Hebrew had possessed the Land of Canaan about eight
hundred Years when this was said by Isaiah. But this does not prove the
Language of the Jews and the Old Canaanites to be the same. Yet,
notwithstanding this, from what has been before alleged, we have good reason
to conclude (as several Scaliger, Capellus, Erpenius, Vossius, Grotius, Bochart.
Learned Writers have done) that the Hebrew Tongue was the same with the
Language of Canaan, i. e. the Language which the Canaanites spoke.

From all which, laid together and compared with what has been said, we are
confirmed in this Assertion, that Hebrew was the only Language that was in use
before the Confusion of Babel, and so was the First Tongue, and the Mother of
all other Eastern Tongues. This is so evident that it has been the universal
belief of the Jews, who are very positive here; and it has been held and
defended by the Learnedest Mercer, Junius, Pererius, Bertram, Pagnin.
Christians who have treated on this Subject. This is the Language which God
himself spoke, as is manifest from abundant Instances, some of which have been
referred to; and there are many others, as God's changing of the Names of
Abram, Sarai, Jacob, etc. and several Names and Memorials in the forty Years
abode of the Israelites in the Wilderness, testify this. This is the Ancient
and Holy Tongue that was used by our First Parents; and without doubt it was
immediately taught them by God: for he that bestowed upon them other excellent
Benefits, denied them not Speech. Therefore this was a special Gift of the
Creator: this was one of the first Donatives conferred on Adam and Eve. And it
was enjoyed by them, and by all the Antediluvians, yea all Noah's Posterity,
till the Confusion at Babel. In this first and antientest Language was the
Pentateuch, and even all the Old Testament written, and that in those very
Hebrew Letters which we have at this day, for the Samaritan ones (which by some
are cried up for the Antientest) are but a corrupt Imitation of these. In this
Holy Language and Characters (both of his own Institution) God would have the
Sacred Mysteries of his Religion expressed and recorded. In this Book alone are
the first Names of Men and Beasts in that Tongue, denoting their particular
Natures and Qualities: which I might have mentioned before, to show the
Antiquity of this Tongue. Nay, we are to remember this, that this first way of
speaking among Mankind, is no where preserved but in these Writings: for after
the Babylonian Captivity (which was about three thousand and four hundred years
after the Creation) this Original Speech was no longer the Language of any
particular Nation; for the Captive Jews lost this Tongue at Babylon, (a Place
fatal to Hebrew, at first in the Confusion of Tongues, and afterward in this
Peoples forgetting their Language there) insomuch that at their Return home
they could not understand the Book of their own Laws but by an Interpreter,
Neh. 8. 7, 8. for they had changed their Hebrew into a Mixed Language
(compounded partly of Hebrew and partly of Chaldee) which was afterward called
Syriack. But in the Old Testament the pure Hebrew is kept entire and
uncorrupted, and is extant at this day in no Writings but these. If any
Grammarians and Critics could say the like concerning the Greek or Latin
Tongue, that there is One Book wherein either of these in its first Purity is
wholly contained, they would be very lavish in their Encomiums of that Volume,
and the Prelation of it to all others should not want setting forth. Behold
here the Whole Hebrew Tongue, and that in its native Luster, comprised in the
Old Testament! In no one Book upon Earth besides this is there lodged a Whole
Language; which should invite all Admirers and Lovers of Ancient Literature to
prize it, and the Books written in it. Certainly this is a high Commendation of
these Sacred Writings, and gives them the Preference to all others whatsoever.

Secondly; They rightly claim this, because they acquaint us with the true
Origin of the World, which we find recorded in no other Writings. For tho the
Beginning of all things, and some Circumstances which appertain to it, are
obscurely intimated in some Pagan Historians and Poets, and thereby (as I have
lately showed on another occasion) Testimony is given to the Authority of the
Sacred Writings, yet none of them give us a plain and particular Account of
this Beginning and Original of the Mundane Fabric. Yea, the very Philosophic
Men among the Gentiles in a most wild and rambling manner talk of the Rise of
all things, and at the same time ba^^le themselves. Thus the Epicureans tell us
a senseless Story of the Eternal frisking of Atoms; which yet, if they were
Eternal, had no Beginning or Ri^e at all. Pythagoras and his Disciples, and
Plato and some of the Peripateticks held that Men were always, and that there
was an Eternal Succession of them, and consequently no Original of them. Others
who believed they had a Beginning, had strange and monstrous Fancies concerning
it, as that Men were formed out of Fishes, which was Anaximander's Conceit:
Others imagined they shooted out of Trees; some out of Eggs; others out of
Wombs affixed to the Earth, as Epicurus and Lucretius: Others (as the fabulous
Poets) conceited they were produced out of Stones: and De Legib. I. 1.
Cicero relates concerning some of the Philosophers, that they thought the
Original of Mankind was from Seed falling from the Stars, and impregnating the
Earth. This stumbling at the Threshold, these extravagant and groundless
Notions conce^ning the very first Original of things, were too ominous a
Presage that these Philosophers would grossly mistake about other Matters, and
give us but a sorry Account of the other Works of Nature. But Moses confutes
all these fond Surmises about the Nativity of the World, and of Mankind; he
quashes all those wild Conjectures, by assuring us that Man had his Origin
from the Earth, by God's peculiar framing him out of it; and that the World it
self had its Being by Creation, i. e. by being made out of Nothing by the
Infinite Power and Wisdom of God. Wherefore it was rightly said by an
Understanding Person, Neiremberg, de orig. Script. I. 2. c. 7.
I am persuaded (says he) that in the first Chapter of Genesis Moses taught
more than all the pagan philosophers and Interpreters of Nature. And that this
first Chapter of the Bible is an Historical or Physical Account of the Creation
of the World, and is no Allegory, is not to be questioned by any Man of a sober
Mind and consistent Reasoning. For thus I argue, It is highly fitting that the
Doctrine of the first Rise of the Universe, the Production of all things,
should not be le^t doubtful, but be conveyed unto us in such a way as may best
preserve the Memory of so weighty and considerable a Matter. For this is of
such Concern that our Belief of Providence and the true Nature of God is
comprised in it. Now a Thing of this Quality ought not to be so delivered that
it may be liable to Imposture, or suspected of Falsehood or Uncertainty. As for
private and personal Revelations (which some may here suppose) these can only
satisfy the individual Persons to whom they are communicated: and as for Oral
Tradition, it is not so certain but that it may leave some Scruples in Men's
Minds. Hence it is reasonable that the History of the World should be digested
into such Records which may assure us of what is to be believed, and therefore
it is sit that they should be Plain and Simple, and properly to be taken and
understood, so that they may be reckoned as an Indubitable Account of the
World's Production; therefore such is this Relation which Moses has lest us,
which is a Perfect Diary of th^^ First Work of the Almighty.

But I will attempt yet further to prove that thi^ History deserves that Name,
i. e. that it relates what was really done. If this be acknowledged by some
Sacred and Inspired Author, I conceive that will be a fair Conviction to those
who believe that Author to be inspired, and to deliver things that are really
true. That St. Peter then in the third Chapter of his second Epistle (where he
briefly describes the Make and Frame of this World, as it was formed at the
first Creation) refers to this Mosaic History, and also fully confirms it,
will appear in the Perusal of that his Description, where you will find those
very Terms which Moses in the first of Genesis makes use of. This they are
willingly ignorant of, says the Apostle, that the Heavens were of old, i. e.
from the Beginning, which in the Verse before is called (...), the Beginning of
the Creation, which agrees exactly with the first Words of Genesis. And these
Heavens were by the Word of God, which is a reference to God said, which Moses
expressly mentions, chap. 1. 6, 14. Next to the Heavens he makes mention of the
Earth, (as Moses does) telling us, that it Stood or consisted out of the Water
and in the Water, which is the same Account of it which we have in Genesis,
viz. that it was partly above Water and partly under, i. e. it was above the
Seas, Fountains, Rivers, etc. but under the w^tyr Mass of Clouds. So that any
Man of unprejudiced Thoughts cannot but see that those Words [the Earth
standing out of the Water, and in the Water] plainly relate to the Mosaical
History, where we are told that the Globe of Earth included in it a heap of
Waters called the Deep, or the Abys^, which was afterward gathered into one
Receptacle or Channel. This is called the Water under the Firmament, i. e.
under the Expansion of the Air, as the Water above the Earth, viz. the Clouds
are called the Water above the Expansion, Genesis 1. 7. Thus you see all this is
alleged and acknowledged by St. Peter as True History, and accordingly is made
use of by him: Wherefore we are ascertained from his infallible Pen, that the
Mosaic Account of the Creation is no Fiction, no strain of Poetic Fancy, but
is perfectly Historical, and to be taken in a real, proper and literal Sense,
which was the thing to be cleared. Wherefore Origin, and the rest of the
Allegorists who despise the Letter of this Chapter, and rely chiefly on some
Mystic and Symbolical Meanings, are confuted. And so likewise are they that
adhere to the foolish Dreams of Philosophers concerning the Eternity of the
World, or its being made by Chance, or the Existence of More Worlds. All these
are inconsistent with Moses's Account of the Creation, besides that they
affront other Principles established by the Holy Scriptures, and bid desiance
to Reason and the greatest Evidence of things. So that it is to be wondered that
any Person who pretends to own the Divine Authority of the Bible, should
publicly disown Moses's Relation of the First Original of the World, and look
upon this first Chapter of Genesis (as well as he does on the third) as not
True, i. e. not giving an Account of Matter of Fact. But there was a kind of
Necessity upon him to form such Thoughts as these concerning this Entrance of
Moses's Book, because he had in his Theory of the Earth run counter to that
Relation of it which Moses gives. This is the bold Man that asse^ts the
Primitive Earth to have been without Sea, and without Mountains, and the Airy
Expansion to be without Clouds, which are a plain contradicting of Moses, who
says, the Waters were gathered together, and were called Seas, ver. 10. and
informs us that there were other Waters above the Firmament or Air, ver. 7. and
in another Place lets us know that all the high Hills and Mountains were
covered by the Waters of the Deluge, Genesis 7. 19, 20. Thus it must needs be ill
philosophizing in defiance of Moses, the first of the Philosophic Order. This
is Confutation enough of his Hypothesis; and herein I am satisfied that the
Excepter against his Book is in the right. Now to support his own Opinion, and
to run down Moses, he tells us, that instead of a History we are here presented
with a Parable, with an Ethical Discourse in an obscure way. This Philosophic
Romancer turns the Holy Scriptures into Aesop's Fables, and seems with his
Friend Spinosa to hint that the Writings of the Prophets are only high Flights
of Imagination. God forbid that I should fasten any such thing upon him, (or
any the like Imputation on any other Man of Learning) or so much as suspect it
unless there were some ground for it. I appeal therefore to all persons of
correct Thoughts, whether his asserting that Moses the Prime and Leading
Prophet is so fanciful that he presents us with mere Allegories and Parables,
even when he seems to speak of the Creation of the World, and the Fall of our
First Parents, whether (I say) this does not argue that the rest of the
Prophetic Writers (who could not do amiss in imitating so Great a Guide) are
led wholly by Imagination, and dictate not things as they really are, but as
they fancied them to be. Nay, he not only overthrows the Truth and Reality of
Moses's Writings, but he blasts the Integrity of the Penman himself, telling
us, that he was a Crafty Politician and Dissembler, one that did all to comply
with the People, one that cheated the ignorant Jews with a thing like an
History, merely to please them, wh^lst in the mean time it is nothing but a
piece of Morality in an Allegorized way, and is to be understood so by us.
Certainly Moses needed not to have been Inspired by the Holy Ghost (as I
suppose most grant him to be) to have merited this Character. But I have
animadverted on him with some Freedom in a former Discourse, and therrfore I
will not say any more here. Nor should I have said any thing then, or now, if I
had not been verily persuaded that the Credit of Moses, and of the Scriptures
themselves, and consequently of our whole Religion, lay at stake: for if this
1st Chapter of Genesis, together with the rest which follow, which have all the
Marks of History upon them, be not Literal and Historical, we know not what
Judgment to make of any other Places of Scripture which recite Matter of Fact,
we cannot tell whether any Text bears a Literal Sense or no, and so we throw up
the whole Bible into the Hands of Scepticks and Atheists.

After all that I have said under this Head, I would not be thought to mean any
such thing as this, that the Scripture was designed for Philosophy: No, there
are Nobler things that it aims at. Yet this is most certain, that here is the
Best Philosophy, both Moral and Natural. It is the latter I am now speaking of,
viz. the Knowledge of the Works of Nature, God's creating of the World, which is
the f^rst ^tep to all Natural Philosophy. This is to be learnt in the Beginning
of this Holy Book, whose Excellency and Perfection I am treating of. Here the
Birth and Original of all things are distinctly set down, which is a Subject
that all the Philosophers are defective in. I grant wha^ Cyril, speaking of
Moses, says, (...), etc. cont. Julian.
that he designed not to play the Philosopher in a subtle and curious manner,
and to be accurate in his Discourse of the First Principles of things: but
notwithstanding this, it is an undeniable Truth that no Book in the World
teaches us the True Origin and Age of the World, the Epoche of the Universe,
the Particular Order and Method of the Creation, and more especially the manner
of the Production of Mankind, but This. By this alone we are fixed and
determined in these Points, and we have no longer any Reason to doubt and
waver. We may plainly discern from these Sacred Writings the Invalidity of
those Notions which some Philosophic Heads have entertained, viz. the Eternity
of the World, the Production of it by Chance, or the Mechanical Rise of it by
virtue of mere Matter and Motion. All these fond Conceits are silenced by this
Sacred Author; an Happiness which we could not have had if this most Ancient
and Authentic Book were not extant.

Thirdly; We have no Account of the first Rise of Nations and People in the
World, but from the Mosaic History. Here, and only here, we have an Exact
Narrative of the dividing of the Earth among the Sons of Noah and their
Posterity. It is in the Tenth Chapter of Genesis that we have the History of
the First Plantations. A Choice Monument of Antiquity, and to be prized by all
Lovers of Ancient Learning, those that delight to enquire into the First
Originals of things. Here we are informed that Iapheth, the eldest Son of Noah,
and his seven Sons, were the first that peopled that part of the World which is
called Europe, with a part of Asia the Less. His Sons are reckoned up in this
manner; 1. Gomer, whose Progeny seated themselves in the North-East part of
that Le^^er Asia, which contains Phrygia, Pontus, Bithynia, and a great part of
Galatia. These were the (...), says Josephus, called by the Latins Galatae;
among whom is the City Comara, according to Pliny: and Lib. 1.
Mela speaks of the Comari. The People that dwelt in this Tract were (as
Herodotus and other Ancient Historians testify) called Cimmerii, and had their
Name from Gomer, if we may give Credit to some of the Learnedest Critics, such
who are not wont to rest in fanciful Derivations. They tell us that Gomeri,
Comeri, Cumeri, Cimbri, Cimmerii, are the same. The Old Germans are thought by
them to have been a Colony of these Cimmerians or Gomerians, for German is but
a Corruption of Gomerman. The Old Galls were another Colony of the Gomerians,
(who by the Grecians were called (...) or (...), and contractedly (...),
Celtae) for it appears that the Cimbri or Cimmerii were the ancient Inhabitants
of Old Gallia. And our Ancestors the Britains were of the same stock; for that
they descended from the Galls or Celtae, who were the Gomeri or Cimbri of old,
our own Learned Antiquary Mr. Cambden attempts to prove from their Religion,
Manners, Language, etc. The Inhabitants of Cumberland (as he thinks) retain the
Name still: they were the true Britains, i. e. Cimbri or Cumbri, or (as
afterward they were called) Cambri. But this latter Denomination was more
especially applied to those of them that fled into the British Ci^^^ri^ or
Cambria, now called Wales, in the time that the Saxons raged in the Southern
Parts of this Isle* I will here particularly mention Gomer's three Sons, and
take notice what Places are assigned to them To Ashkenaz belonged Troas, or
P^rygia the Lesser where is the River Ascanius, and a Country called Ascania,
which it is probable took their Name from him: and hence are the Ascanian Port,
and the Ascanian Isles, in Pliny. And the Name Ascanius (as is observed) was
much used in those Parts Riphath (the second Son) was seated in Pontus and
Bithynia, especially in Paphlagonia, whence (as the Jewish Historian remarks)
the Paphlagones were called Riphathae, and afterward by Contraction Riphaci:
and in Lib. 1.
Mela there is mention of Riphaces, To Togarmah (another of Gomer's Sons) was
allotted Phrygia the Greater, and part of Galatia. Thence the Phrygians were
known by the Name of Tygrammines, says Josephus.

But I proceed to speak of the Plantations of the other Sons of Iapheth. The
second of them was Magog, from whom were the Scythians that dwelt on the East
and North-East of the Euxine Sea; for Scythopolis and Hierapolis, which those
Scythians took when they conquered Syria, were ever after called Caelosyria
urbem habet Bambycen, quae alio nomine Hierapolis vocatur, Syris ver^ Magog.
Not. Host. i. ^ c. 23.
Magog, says Pliny. And Ptolomee grants that the proper Name of that Place was
Magog* Antiq. Jud. ^. 1. c. 7.
Josephus confirms this, when he says the Scythians were called Magogae by the
Grecians, and thence infers that the Scythians had their Original from Magog
the Son of Iapheth. The third Son was Madai, from whom were descended the
Medes; for Madai is the Hebrew Word for Media, as is evident from Isa. 21. 2.
and other Places. And another Seat of his Offspring was Macedonia, anciently
called Aemathia or Aemadia, which is the same with Madia; for it is usual in the
changing of a Name out of one Language into another, to Prefix a Vowel or
Dipthong. And a People of this Place are called (...) or (...). The fourth Son
was Iavan, who it is likely came first into Greece, upon the Division of the
Earth among Noah's Children, and then afterward into the more Western Parts of
Europe. From this Iavan ('(...) according to the LXX) the Jones or Iaones (as
Homer and Strabo call them) the first and original Grecians were derived.
Antiq. ^. 1. c. 7.
Josephus is peremptory, (...), from Iavan came Ionia and all the Greeks. And
Greece is expressly called Iavan, Dan. 10. 20. and 11. 2. So that there is no
Reason to doubt that this Son of Iapheth was the Father of the Grecians. Moses
goes on, and mentions the four Sons of Iavan: 1. Elisa, whose Portion was
Achaia, and part of Peloponnesus, as some of great Learning have inferred from
this, that in this Country they meet with Ellas, and the Elysian Fields, and
the City Eleusis, and Elis a City of Peloponnesus, who took their Names from
Elisa. Some also make him the Parent of the Aeoles in Greece. 2. Tarshish, from
whom the Country that he inhabited is called Tarsis, on the Coast of which is
the Great Sea or Mediterranean, whence Tarshish is the Word to signify the Sea.
It is reasonable to think that the Place where this second Son of Iavan was
seated is Cilicia, the chief City whereof was Tarsus, called so by his Name And
it appears that the Cilicians of old were known by the Appellation of the
People of Tarsus, 3. Kittim or Chittim, whose Dwelling is thought to have been
Lycia and part of Pamphylia; for the Country Cetis and the People Cetii, the
first mentioned by Ptolomy, the second by Homer, show that the Sons of Cittim
or the Citteans inhabited there. That Chittim is meant of some parts of Greece
is clear from Numb. 24. 24. Ships shall come from the Coasts of Chittim: By
which are understood the Greeks and Seleucidae that crossed the Hellespont, and
came against the Hebrews and Assyians. And in 1 Mac. 8. 5. the King of Macedon
is called the King of Chittim. And because there were several Colonies of them
sent into Cilicia, this bears the Name of the Land of Chittim, Isa. 23. 1. and
Chittim, ver. 12. for thence Alexander the Great came to destroy Tire, which is
the Subject of that Chapter. Lib. 5.
Ptolomee tells us, that Cetis is a Region in Cilicia. Cyteum is in Crete,
says Lib. 4. c. 12.
Pliny. There is a Cittium in Cyprus, according to Lib. 14.
Strabo. And Antiq. ^. 1. c. 7.
Iosep^us relates that Cetios was the Greek Name of Cyprus it self: and thence
he says all the Greek ^sles were called Chittim from thence. Italy also was
peopled by the Chittians, and therefore is sometimes understood by that term.
The Ierusalem-Targum interprets the Word so in Genesis 10. 4. And when it is said,
The Ships of Chittim Shall come against thee, i. e. against Antiochus, Dan. 11.
30. the Meaning is thought by some Learned Writers to be, that the Romans by
Sea should disturb him. But I conceive that this may be true, and yet Chittim
may in this Place (as before) signify Cilicia, for the Ships of the Romans
commonly harbored in the Ports of Cilicia, to command the Mediterranean. The
short is, from consulting and comparing the several Texts where Chittim is
mentioned, I find Reason to determine, that some People both of Greece and
Italy are comprehended in it: and accordingly there is Reason to believe that
there were different Colonies of the Posterity of Chittim. (the Grandchild of
Iaphet) planted in these Places. This puts an End to the Disputes and Quarrels
of the Learned on both sides; some of whom contend that Greece, others that
Rome is meant by Chittim. 4. Dodanim, whose Seat was Epirus and part of
Peloponnesus. The Name is kept up in the City called Dodona, (which is in
Epirus) near to which was Jupiter's Oracle, whence he was styled Dodonaeus.
This Jupiter was this Dodanim, the fourth Son of Iavan, who was the Grecian
Saturn, for there were Jupiters many, and Saturns many.

Iaphet's fifth Son was Tubal or Thubal, who took up his Habitation at first,
it is probable, about the South-East of the Euxine Sea, where dwelt the Albani,
Chalybes, Iberi, who were anciently called Thobeli, says the Jewish Antiquary,
from this Thubal: and Ptolomy speaks of a City here named Thubilaca. From those
Parts some of the Iberi were translated to Spain, which was thence called
Iberia, and so the Spaniards are reckoned as the Posterity of Tubal. Meshech
was Iapheth's Sixth Son, to whom fell Cappadocia, the Inhabitants whereof were
the Meschini and Moschi, says the foresaid Antiquary, who are also mentioned
by Strabo, Mela, and Pliny. Some of his Posterity were placed in Scythia and
the Regions adjacent, whence we find that Meshech and Tubal (which are
constantly joined together in Scripture) are Words to express Scythia, Ezekiel.
32. 26. and Magog is joined with them, Ezekiel. 38. 2, 3. where Gog in the Land of
Magog is said to be chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal. And it is moreover
probable that the Muscovites are of the Race of Meshech or Moshech, (for the
Word was pronounced differently, as Melech and Moloch) it being generally
granted by the Learned that the Muscovites were originally from Scythia. To
confirm which Opinion I will offer this Observation to the Reader, that the
Seventy Interpreters render Meshech in Ezekiel. 38. 2. (...), where Rhos gives the
Denomination to the Russians, which is another Name of the Muscovites. The last
Son of Iapheth is Tiras, who is univrsally agreed to be the Progenitor of the
Thracians, Thrax having a near Cognation with Thiras. It is yet further
remarkable in this Account which is given us of the First Plantations, that by
these foresaid Sons of Iapheth the Isles of the Genciles were divided in their
Lands, Genesis 10. 5. The Hebrews by (...) understand not only those Regions which
are encircled with the Sea, and are more properly and strictly called Islands,
but all Countries divided from them by the Sea, or such as they could not come
to but by the Sea. This is proved from several Texts of Scripture where the
word (...) is used: and the Grecians (...) is taken in this large Sense
sometimes. Accordingly there being no part of the World called by the Name of
Christendom but what was divided from the Jews by Sea, we may gather how large
and wide the Allotment of Iapheth and his Posterity was. The Isbes of the
Gentiles include not only all Europe, with all the I^bes adjoining and
appertaining to it, but whatever Regions lie North and West of Judea. Or, take
it in Discourse the 47th.
Mr. Mede's Words, The Isles of the Gentiles are all Countries that lie above
the Mediterranean, from the Mountain Amanus and the Hircane Sea Westward. So
much concerning the Offspring of Iaphet, which was not unknown by Name to the
Pagans, witness Horace's Iapeti Genus, and Lucian's (...), which he Provrbially
applies to that which is very Ancient.

The middle Son of Noah was Shem, whose Portion in the Division of the Earth
was Palestine, and all the Eastern (which was the greatest) Part of Asia. His
five Sons were these: 1. Elam, the Parent of the Elamites, i. e. the Persians,
for that was the Primitive Name of those People, as we learn from Isa. 21. 2.
and 22. 6. Dan. 8. 2. And because some Part of Media was a near Neighbor, Elam
is the Word for the Land of the Medes, Ezekiel. 32. 24. 2. Ashur, from whom was
peopled and named Assyria. He was Nimrod's immediate Successor, and is called
Ninus by Profane Writers. 3. Arphaxad, whose Posterity was seated in Chaldea
and Mesopotamia, and of whose Race Abra^am was. 4. Lud, whence the Lydians in
Asia the Less. And by the Ludim are meant sometimes the Ethiopians, as Phaleg.
L. 4. C. 26.
Bochart has abundantly evinced. 5. Aram, whose abode was Aramea or Syria, for
so it is called by the Greeks. Whence Lib. 1, 14, 16.
Strab^ tells us that Aram was the old Word for Syria; and those that are now
called Syrians, were heretofore known by the Name of Aramaeans. And I doubt not
but Armenia had its Denomination from Aram, there being so great probability
that his Race were Inhabitants of Syria and Armenia the Great, which is as much
as Aramenia. Vz, Aram's Son, had the Land of Vz. There is mentioned also Heber,
Arphaxad's Son, from whom some think the Hebrews had their Name, but that is
disputable. Some Writers tell us that among the Divisions of the several
Regions of the World, America or the West Indies fell to the share of some of
the Stock of Shem. This Part of the Earth was possessed and peopled, say Arias
Montanus and Vatablus, by Iobab and Ophir, two of the Sons of Ioctan. To
confirm which Brerewood and others aver, that America is joined to the
Continent of Asia, and so the Passage was easy, and Men and Beasts might go
thither. Not only these Writers, but Genebrard and others declare it to be
their Opinion, that Ophir, from whence Solomon fetched his Gold, had its
Denomination from the latter of those Sons of Ioctan, and that this place was
that which is now called Peru; which they think they partly prove from 2 Chronicles.
3. 6. Where the Gold which came from Ophir, is called Zahab Peruajim, which
latter Word is the dual Number, they say, of Peru. If you enquire after the
more particular Place, Vatablus will tell you that it is Hispaniola in the
Western Ocean, lately found out by Columbus. But others tell us it was the
Eastern India, that which was possessed by Shem's Posterity, viz. Ophir and
Havilah the Sons of Ioctan. So say Rabanus Maurus and Lyranus, so Pererius,
Massaeus, Tzeta, Lipcnius, but all in a different Manner, and placing it in
different Regions of this part of the World. To these Indies, says Antiq. L.
8. C. 2.
Josephus, Solomon's Navy made a Voyage, to a Region called heretofore Sophyra,
now the Golden Land. With him agrees De Ophyra Regione.
Varrerius, and adds that this Golden Chersonesse is the same with the Place
that is at this Day called Malaca, and is in the Kingdom of Pegu, and borders
on Somatra. But Mercator holds the Place to be Iapan. Acosta would persuade us
it is Pegu, Siam, Sumatra. Here Is a wide Difference (you will say) among
Authors: the East and West Indies are concerned in the Controversy: and it may
be, after all, Ophir was in neither of them. It is Sophala in the Ethiopick
Sea, and consequently belongs to Africa, say Volaterranus and Ortelius: but I
rather think that Africa it self, or the African Shore is meant by it. Which
seems to be confirmed from 2 Chronicles. 9. 21. and 20. 36. (compared with 1 Kings
9. 28. and 10. 22. and 22. 48.) where Ophir is called Tarshish. For though this
Name belongs properly to the Cilician Port, which is on the other Side of
Africa, yet (as I have showed in another Place) in a large Acception it
comprehended all the Mediterranean Sea, and that Part especially which washed
the African Shores: and hither it is probable Solomon's Fleet sailed, and the
Merchants went up into the Country in pursuit of the Golden Mines: of which
afterward.

Cham or Ham (the youngest Son of Iapheth) and the Families that descended from
him, were first seated in this Country of Africa, though some of them made
Excursions also into Syria and Arabia. That he was seated in Egypt (the most
considerable part of Africa) is undeniable, since it is so often called Psalm.
105, 23, 27.
the Land of Ham: and In Osiride.
Plutarch has left it on record, that Chemia or Chamia was the ancient Name of
that Place, which without doubt it had from Ham, or Cham, Iaphet's Son. That he
or his Posterity lanch'd out into some parts of Arabia, which bordered on
Africa, is rendered very Probable by Monsieur Bocbart. But that Chush, the
eldest Son of Cham, was the Father of the Ethiopans, cannot be denied by any
Man that well observes what the use of the Name Cushi or Cushim is in the
Sacred Writings. Havilah, one of Cush's Sons, gave Name to Havilah, which
Strabo places in the Confines of Arabia and Mesopotamia. Whether the Arabian or
Ethiopian Saba or Saba be denominated from Sheba the Son of Cush, or another of
that Name who was his Grandson, or from a Third Sheba, the Son of Ioctan, (whom
also we find in this 10th Chapter of Genesis) it is to little purpose here to
dispute. Mesraim, the second Son of Cham, was questionless the Founder of
Egypt, for that is the known Name that it has in the Hebrew of the Old
Testament. From Antiqu. L. 1. C. 6.
Josephus we learn that the Metropolis of this Province (by some called
Memphis) had the Name of Mezzara given it by the Jews in his Time. And to this
day Egypt is called Mizraim by the Jews and Arabians. Phut, a third Son, is
believed by most Writers to have peopled Mauritania, Numidia, Lytia, Thence
Not. Hist. L. ^. C. 1.
Pliny makes mention of a River in Mauvitania called Phut: of which also St.
Ierom speaks, telling us that there was in his time a Phur, and juxta cum regio
Phutensis usque in praesens dicitur. Trad, Hebr. in Genesis
Region in Africa that had its Name from it. I doubt not but some part of
Africa (if not the whole Country) is meant by Phut in Nah. 3. 9. And it cannot
be looked upon as an Extravagant Conjecture if I guess that Phetz or Fez, a
Kingdom of Mauritania, is a Corruption of that Word. The fourth and last Son of
Cham was Canaan, from whom sprang the Canaanites. His Sons were Sidon, Emori,
Iebuss, etc. from whom were the Sidonians (including the Tyrians) Amorites,
Jebusites, etc. often spoken of in the Old Testament. All this Country of
Palestine was (as I said before) part of Shem's Portion, but Canaan invaded it,
and thence it bore his Name. The Learned Bocbart thinks this was the ancient
and Primitive Phoenicia, it being called (...) by the LXX. Exodus 16. 35. and
she whom St. Matthew calls a Woman of Canaan, is said by St. Mark to be a
Syro-Phoenician. It is this Great Critick's persuasion that the Phoenicians
were originally Canaanites, and that they fled out of Canaan, when Joshua came
and took Possession of their Country: then they went and seated themselves on
the Seacoast of Palestine, called by them afterward Phoenicia, as the
Britains upon the coming of the Saxons betook themselves to that part of the
Country which is now known by the Name of Wales. This Excellent Person has
with great and manifold Arguments attempted the Establishment of this
Assertion, and has abundantly Bochart in Phaleg.
showed that there are several plain Footsteps of those first Planters in the
Names in Geography. I might confirm this from a very remarkable Passage in St.
Augustine, who assures us Exposit, in Epist. ad Romans
that in his time the Peasants of Hippo, who were known to be of the Race of
the Phaenicians, when they were asked who they were? used to answer they were
Canaans: which plainly shows that Canaan and Phoenicia were the same.

But this I would add here, that Phoenicia is a larger and more extensive Term
than Canaan, because I conceive the former takes in all those Countries that
bordered on the Red Sea: for I am persuaded that Phoenicia had its Denomination
from (...) the Name of Esau or Edom turned into Greek. I had occasion
heretofore to show that this Noted Person was called Erythras or Erythroeus by
the Pagan Historians: which Name I am now to observe is of the like
Signification with (...), i. e. Rufus. So that Esau, Edom, Erythraeus, Phoenix
are the same, and consequently the Phaenicians properly speaking, were all
those People that lived near the Red Sea, (which is called so from Edom (the
Hebrew of (...)) i. e. Red) and were under the Dominion of that Great Lord and
Potentate Esau.

This is the Division of the World among the Sons of Noah; thus Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
the most High divided to the Nations their Inheritance, he separated the Sons
of Adam, he set Bounds to the People. Iapheth's Possession was the Northern and
Western Parts of the Earth: Shem had the East: and Cham had his lot between
both. Moses reckons up in this Chapter fourteen Persons of the Posterity of
Iapheth, six and twenty of the Race of Shem, and nine and twenty of that of
Cham: who all with Iapheth, Shem and Cham themselves amount to seventy two: and
just so many Languages (or rather Dialects) some think there were, and the very
same number of Nations occasioned by the rise of those Languages. It is a most
difficult Task to assign exactly the several Particular Regions and People
derived from the Posterity of Noah, and their proper Seats and Habitations.
Arias Montanus, Bochart, Raleigh, Heylin (besides others before them, who have
writ of this Subject) seem to differ not a little, and yet they all agree in
the main. Nay, where you see different Places and Regions assigned by them,
they may all be true: for one may set down the first Seats of Noah's Offspring;
another may mention the Colonies they sent forth, which lie it may be a great
way off of the first Seats; and another may take notice of their Encroachments
and Invasions. But whatever it is that is said by any Authentic Writer
concerning this peopling of the several Parts of the Earth, it is all founded
on the Mosaic History. Here we are told that the Parts of the World were
divided by the Sons of Noah, every one after his Tongue, after their Families
in their Nations, Genesis 10. 5. The Confusion of Tongues was that which divided
Families: and yet by the Affinity of the Tongues there was an Union made, for
those that agreed in the same Idiom joined together, and went and seated
themselves together. And who these First Planters were, the Sacred History
particularly acquaints us. As we have no Book but this that lets us know who
were the first People in the World, who were before the Flood; so none but this
tells us who the most Considerable Persons after it, and by whom the Several
Nations of the World were first erected, and Colonies were sent forth into all
the Parts of the Earth.

Fourthly; The true Knowledge of the Original of Civil Government, and the
Increases of it, and the Different Changes it underwent, is to be drawn from
these Sacred Fountains. We may inform form our selves here (and no where else)
that the Primitive Government was Paternal, i. e. it was seated in Fathers of
Families; as first in Adam and other Heads of Families, who then lived a very
long Time. It is true, we are told by Aristotle, that (...). Politic. L. 2, C.
8.
the Power of Parents over their Children was a Regal and Sovereign Dominion:
the one ( i. e. Parents) were the first Kings, the other ( i. e. Children) were
the first Subjects. But this the Philosopher could learn from no other Book but
the Bible, or from those Traditions which were founded on these Ancient
Records, because no other Writings give an Account of the Government which was
first of all settled among the Sons of Men. Here, and only here, we are told
that Adam and the other first Partriarchs were Supreme Governors in their
respective Tribes and Houses; that the Father of every Family was at the first
the King of it, and reigned over his Children and Household as Sovereign; and
that upon the Decease of the Father, the Eldest Son by a natural Right and
Title was Successor, and inherited the Paternal Power and Dominion. Thus with
the Paternal Rule went Primogeniture; i. e. the Firstborn Sons of Fathers of
Families were Rulers, and there were many of these every where. And thus the
Authority quietly and peaceably ran in this Channel, and it is not likely was
interrupted till some years before the Flood, when there was a general
Corruption of Mankind, and some affected extraordinary Dominion and Sway, and
perverted the Primitive way of Government. After the Flood we find that the
Authority was continued in the Heads and Firstborn of Families: and now by a
more especial Commission the Magistrate's Authority is confirmed, Genesis 9. 5.
whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. The Ruler is
authorized to punish Murder with Death, to require Blood for Blood. This is the
first Formal Appointment of the Power of the Sword that we read of, this is the
first Erection of a Tribunal of Life and Death. From some Genesis 8. 20. and 12.
2. and 35. 3.
Instances in the Records of this Time we may gather, that the Sacerdotal
Dignity was joined to the Secular Power: they that were Magistrates were
Priests. And so far as we are able to discover, these Offices were exerted by
those who had the Paternal Right, or that of Priority of Birth. Thus it was in
the first Patriarchal Economy; this was the Government which lasted till after
the Deluge in the Race of Shem. For as yet there was no one Person who usurped
Authority over all the rest, (though those of Cham's Offspring had a Monarchy
in the mean time, Nimrod being their King, of whom I shall speak afterward)
but the Patriarchs kept up the first and original Laws of Paternity and
Primogeniture all the time they lived at Liberty: there was no failure of this
Government till they were brought under the Egyptian Yoke. And then afterward,
when the Jewish People were in the Deserts of Arabia, the Primogeniture more
signally ceased in Moses, who was appointed by God himself to be Ruler over
them. And so we are come to give an Account of the Civil Government of the
Jews, which we can learn from no other Writings under Heaven but These. Moses,
I say, was their Ruler, and was the First of that kind that they had. He was
not only their Captain and Leader, but their Civil Magistrate; yea he may be
said to be their King, for even that Title is given to him, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. Moses
was King in Jeshurun, i. e. in Israel. He was an Absolute King, say Devit.
Mosis,
Philo, and the Jewish Doctors, and De Synedr. l. 2.
Mr. Seldom, and some others. Joshua was their next Ruler, Captain and King;
who was succeeded by the Judges, who were, like the Roman Dictators, set up
upon emergent Occasions to desend, protect and deliver the People. But all this
time the Jews were under a Theocracy, i. e. they were governed in a more signal
manner by God. They received their Laws from Him, and he appointed the
Punishments for the Breach of those Laws: They went to War by His Advice and
Direction, and they did nothing in Civil or Ecclesiastical Affairs without
consulting him. Thus God was their King; it was a Divine Government; and the
Judges were but God's Vicegerents, and held a Power under Him. That God himself
exercised this Regal Power over the Jews, was expressly acknowledged by Gideon,
Judge. 8. 23. I will not rule over you, (says he to that People) neither shall
my Son rule over you, the Lord shall rule over you. So Samuel told the People,
that the Lord their God was their King, 1 Samuel 12. 12. And this is implied in
what God said to Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected
me, that I should not Reign over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7. This Kingdom of God among
the Jews began when he renewed the Covenant with them, Exodus 19. 5, 6. Then
they took God for their King and Governor; and accordingly the Jewish
Government is styled a Theocracy, not only by Contr, Appion. l. 2.
Josephus, but many of the Christian Writers. But this wanton People desired
another King besides God; they would by no means be Singular, they would be
Ruled as other Nations were; a King they must have, as Egypt, Babylon, Syria,
Persia, and the rest of the Pagan World had. And a King they had according to
their earnest Desire; for they chose Saul to be their King in desiance of God's
Sovereignty over them: and now the Theocratical Dispensation ceased. Their
Kingly Government lasted till the Captivity, when Zedekiah was their last King.
After their Return from Assyria they were governed by the Chief Heads of their
Tribes: Thus the Sacred Writings acquaint us that Zerobabel, a Prince of the
Tribe of Judah, was their Supreme Ruler. But the Canonical Scripture goes not
on to tell us the great Variety of Governors over the Jews after the
Captivity: Only in the New Testament we read of Herod, who was the first
Stranger that was King of the Jews, but the last of all their Kings; for their
that famous Prophecy of the Scepter departing from Judah was accomplished, and
Shiloh, the Blessed Savior, the Prince of Peace, came into the World.

Having given you a short Survey of the Government among the Jews, I will in
the next Place speak of the Particular Exertments of it in their Courts of
Judicature. There was the Iudicatory of three Men; two of which were chosen by
the Parties that were at Controversy, and those two chose a third. This sort of
Courts was called the (...)
Judicature of Moneys, because it was conversant about Pecuniary Causes, i. e.
wherein Life was not concerned, but only a Sum of Money to be paid for the
Fault, viz. Thest, Trespasses, Defamation, Hurt and Damage, and all Private
Injuries. In short, all Lesser Causes and Petty Actions were tried by these
Triumviri. I must add, that though this was usually called the Judicature of
Three, yet this Number was sometimes increased to five or seven. And this must
be noted, that these three, five, or seven Judges, or rather Justices of the
Peace, were settled in every City and considerable Town, and they tried the
Causes, and decided the Controversies of the Inhabitants of their proper City
and Town. Again, there was the Iudicatory of Three and Twenty Men, and
sometimes it consisted of Four and twenty: This Court was styled the (...)
Iudicatory of Souls, because Great and Capital Causes, such as concerned the
Life of Men, were brought and tried here. This Court was also called the
Sanedrim Katon.
Little Sanedrim, or Lesser Consistory: and whereas the former Judicature of
Three was in every City, this Court was in every Tribe in Israel. All the
Hebrew Writers of any Note, who designedly treat of the Jewish Government,
speak of these two Courts, and therefore it is not to be questioned that they
were in use among that People. But it is also unquestionable that they were not
made use of at first, i. e. either in Moses's time, or three or four Ages
afterward; otherwise we should have had them particularly mentioned in the Old
Testament, which for my part I could never observe, though some pretend to do
so. It being therefore our present Business to speak only of those things
relating to the Jewish Polity which are expressly mentioned in Scripture, I will
proceed to recount those particular Models of Judicatures which are expressly
taken notice of in these Sacred Writings, and they are these. First, there was
in every Town a sufficient Number of Overseers of the People, who upon occasion
met together to do them Right: for the Tribes were divided into Thousands,
Hundreds, Fifties, Tens, i. e. into so many Families; and over each Division
there presided Rulers of Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and
Rulers of Tens, to judge the People at all Seasons, Exodus 18. 21, 25. And the
same are called Captains over Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties, Tens, Numb. 31. 14.
Deuteronomy. 1. 15. 1 Samuel 8. 5. and their Business was to decide lesser Causes in
these their respective Thousands, Hundreds, etc. Besides these Ministers of
Justice in every particular Town, there were others of a larger Jurisdiction,
who are called Princes and Heads of the Tribes, Numb. 13. 2. and 34. 18. Chief
of the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 1. 15. Officers among the Tribes (in the same Place), and
Judges and Officers throughout the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 16. 18. There were Twelve of
these, every Tribe having its distinct Head and President over it; and these
determined in Causes of a greater and higher Nature than the others. Moreover,
there was a Senate of Seventy, chosen out of the two former Ranks of Persons;
and they were designed at first to be Coadjutors to Moses Numb. 11. 16. You
will find that these are mentioned together with the other two in Ios. 23. 2.
and 24. 1. for by the Elders in both these Places are meant, I conceive, the
Seventy Seniors, and by the Heads of Israel we are to understand the
Representatives and Governors of the Tribes; and by Officers and Judges the
Ordinary and Inferior Justices, viz. Captains of Thousands, etc.

It was the first of these, namely, the Judicature of Seventy Men, which was
most considerable, and therefore I will add a few Words concerning it: Because
Moses was President over it, the Jews called it the Judicature of Seventy one;
and others, adding Aaron to that Number, say, it consisted of Seventy two. This
famous Council, which was at first appointed by Moses in the Wilderness, was
afterward a Settled Council for governing the People in the Land of Canaan,
and was called the Sanedrim, (which is a (...).
Greek Word originally, but crept into the Hebrew, as other Greek Words have
done) but to distinguish it from the Lesser one, it is called the Sanedrim
Gedolah.
Great Sanedrim. The other Courts sat in every City and Tribe, but This was at
Jerusalem only, and could sit no where else. This Great Consistory judged of
All Matters, whereas the Others took Cognizance only of Lesser ones. This was
not only a Court of Common Pleas or Nisi Prius, where only Civil Causes were
tried, but sometimes it determined both them and Criminal Actions. It was also
a Chancery, or Court of Equity. But the more special and peculiar Work of this
Court was to try the most Weighty Causes: these most commonly were brought
before these Seventy Seniors: Matters of the Highest Nature, the most Important
Affairs of the Kingdom, and such as belonged to the Safety of the Public, were
tried here. This Great Senate was chosen out of all the Tribes, and consisted
of Laymen, Priests and Levites. The King, or Chief Civil Magistrate, was the
Head of it, as Moses was at first. This Assembly of the Seventy Senators was
looked upon as the Chiefest and Highest Court of the Jews. The Supreme Power
was thought to be seated here: accordingly all other Courts appealed to This,
but from This was no Appeal. But some are of another Opinion, and add a Fourth
Court of Justice, viz. the Public Council and Congregation of all the People.
This some make to be the Highest Court, as in the Case of the Levitc's Wife
that was cut into twelve Pieces. The Captains of Thousands, etc. the Seventy
Seniors, and All the Chief of the People met together, made this Great
Assembly, this Mikel Gemot, this Parliament. This is that (they say) which is
called Kehal Jehovah, De^t. 23. 3.
the Congregation of the Lord, and Col Gnedeth lisra^l, Exodus 1. 3.
the Whole Assembly of Israel, and Ezra 10. 14.
the Whole Congregation, and Kahalah Gedolah, Neh. 5. 7.
the Great Congregation or Assembly. These were the several Courts of Judgment
amongst the Jews. Whilst Moses lived, he judged and decided Controversies alone
when he thought fit; or when any of These Councils met, he was the Prince and
Head of them. So that the Jewish Government (so far as it respected These
Courts) was partly Regal and Monarchical, as under Moses; and it was partly
Aristocratical, as under the Captains of Thousands; and partly Democratical or
Popular, under the Kahal of the People. We are beholden to the Sacred Records
of the Old Testament for these excellent Discoveries relating to Government,
which the most Civilized Nations in the World have taken for their Authentic
Precedents.

Having spoken of their Methods of Government, and Courts of Judicature, which
are so justly admired and imitated by all Wise Governors, I will next of all
show from these Ancient Writings how the Jewish Governors chastised and
corrected those that offended against their Laws. Their Lesser Punishments were
such as these: 1. Retaliation; Exodus 21. 24. Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand
for Hand, Foot for Foot. The plain Meaning of which was, that whoever bereft
another Person of his Eye, Tooth, Hand or Foot, should be punished with the
Loss of an Eye, a Tooth, etc. and sometimes this literal and rigorous Sense of
the Law was put in practice. But generally it was not understood in the strict
Sense, but he that put out another Man's Eye was to give him Satisfaction, i.
e. as much as an Eye was thought to be worth. So the Targum of Jonathan
interprets Deuteronomy. 19. 21. which is a Repetition of the foresaid Law of Talion:
the Offender was to make a sufficient Recompense. And thus the (...) among the
Grecians, and the Lex Talionis among the Romans was understood, viz. not of an
Identical, but an Analogical Compensation. An Equivalent was accepted, the
Value of an Eye, a Tooth, etc. for the Eye or Tooth it self. 2. Restitution,
the diverse kinds of which are particularly set down in the beginning of Exodus
22. as first, when the same. thing that was taken away is returned to the
Owner, ver. 12. or when the like thing is restored, v. 5. or when more is
returned than was taken away, ver. 1, 4. viz. in the Case of Thest, where
twofold, sometimes four or five-fold, (according as the Circumstances of the
Fault were) Yea sevenfold sometimes was to be restored, Prove. 6. 31. or, when
the Thief had nothing to make Satisfaction with, he was to be sold, and
Restitution was to be made to the Owner with that Money, Exodus 22. 3. 3.
Imprisonment, keeping the Body of the Man in Custody for his Fault. And thence
this Place of Consinement is called the House of Custody, 2 Samuel 20. 3. and by
the Chaldee Paraphrast the House of Detention, Isa. 24. 22. Thus King Asa
clapped the Prophet Hanani into Prison for reproving him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. King
Ahab commanded Micaiah to be sent to the like Place, because he prophesied
against him, 1 Kings 22. 27. Jeremiah was put into the Court of the Prison by
King Zedekiah for the same Offense, Ier. 37. 21. John the Baptist was
imprisoned by Herod, Mat. 4. 12. and so was St. Peter by another of that Name,
Acts 12. 4. This also was anciently the Place to receive those that were in
Debt, Mat. 18. 30. and such as had committed Murder, Luke 23. 19. We read of
(...) a Common Prison, a Public Jail, Acts 5. 18. a Place of Durance and
Consinement for the worst sort of Offenders. In their Prisons there was usually
a Dungeon, Jer. 38. 6. or a Pit, as the Hebrew Word Bor is rendered in other
Places when it has reference to a Prison, as in Isa. 24. 22. Zech. 9. 11. And
from this Word we gather what was the Nature of the Dungeon, viz. that it was a
Place dug deep in the Ground so as to let in Water, (for that is imported by
Bor, Puteus, Fovea) whereby the Place became miry; and accordingly we read that
Jeremiah, who was cast into this worst and lowest part of the Prison, sunk in
the Mire, Jer. 38. 6. It is no wonder therefore that the Hebrew Word is
translated by the LXX (...), (whence lacus) a Ditch, a Pit, a Lake. Among the
Egyptians there was in their Prisons this kind of Tullianum or Dungeon, Genesis
41. 14. for Bor is the Name of that lowest Place in the Prison into which
Joseph was cast. And this is afterward called the House of the Pit or Well,
(for so it is in the Hebrew) Exodus 12. 29. It might be observed out of those
Authors who have given an Account of these Subterraneous Dungeons, that they
were deep; and thence (...) was the Name of a deep noisome Durance in Cyzicum in
the Propontis, as Beda relates out of Theodorus of Tarsus, into which perhaps
St. Paul was cast when he passed from Troas to that City, as Annotat. on 2 Cor.
11. 25.
Dr. Hammond conjectures; which may be the meaning of his being a Night and a
Day in the Deep, (...), 2 Cor. 11. 25. It is not improbable that this (...) is
synonymous with (...) Fovea, a Pit, a Well, which is the frequent Word in the
Old Testament for a Dungeon. And in conformity to this Style, as well as to the
Nature of the thing it self, Puteus is the Word used by In Aulul. Act. 2. So. ^.
Plautus for the muddy dirty Vault or Dungeon into which the vilest Offenders
were detruded.

To Imprisonment belong the Stocks, not only because they are (...)
a kind of a Prison, (as the Scholiast on Aristophanes speaks) yea a real
Prison for the Feet, but because they generally were made use of in Prisons;
which I collect from two or three Places in the Old and New Testament. In Ier.
29. 26. putting in Prison and in the Stocks are joined. The Word (...) has much
troubled Interpreters: Among these the Learned Buxtorf derives it from ^si
navis and janak sugere, and thinks it originally and properly denotes that kind
of Punishment mentioned by Plutarch in Artaxerxes's Life, viz. that a Man was
immured between two Boats, and had Milk and Honey given to him, and whether he
would or no poured down his Throat to keep him alive, etc. The Hebrews, as this
Critic imagines, from the manner of Torture and Feeding, express the
Punishment by the Ship of the Sucker; and by this they use to signify any Close
Prison, and even that more particular Consinement of the Hands or Feet in
Prison: Accordingly an Eminent Rabbin thinks it imports Hand-shackles; another,
that it signifies Fetters for the Feet. That there was such an Ancient
Punishment as the Stocks, is evident from Job 13. 27. and 33. 11. where the
Hebrew Word is (...), rendered in the former Place (...), and in the latter
(...). The other Place which I alledg is in the New Testament, Acts 16. 24. He
thrust them into the inner Prison, and made their Feet fast in the Stocks.
Where observe there was (...), to distinguish this Place from the other Parts
of the Prison: and this it is likely was the Dungeon, the Pit spoken of before;
and here was placed (...), (for that is the Word here used) the Wooden Stocks;
lignea custodia, as Plautus calls it; which was both to secure Offenders, and
to put them to pain. I confess this Text speaks of the Prison at Philippi, but
I suppose as to this there was little difference between the Jewish and Grecian
Jails, especially if you take notice of what the other Text before mentioned
acquaints us with. There is another Word, viz. (...), which we render the
Stocks, Jer. 20. 2, 3. and seems to me to be some Uneasy Place in the Prison
into which Jeremiah was cast, and so it confirms the former Notion I offered.
We read of the Correction of the Stocks, Prove. 7. 22. but what the Hebrew Word
gnekes properly signifies is difficult to determine, only we know that it was
some Exemplary Punishment to teach a Fool Wisdom: these (...) (as the Seventy
render it) were to bind him to his good Behavior. 4. Scourging was another
Penal Infliction, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. where we find that the Offender fender was to
receive forty Stripes according to the Rigor of the Law, but thirty nine was
the usual Tale, as all the Jewish Writers affirm, and as we may gather from 2
Cor. 11. 24. This Flagellation is called Bikkoreth, Lev. 19. 20. from bakar
bos, it being done with Scourges made of Bulls Hides or Ox-leather; which we
also find confirmed by several Classick Authors. Our Blessed Savior underwent
this severe Penalty, Mat. 27. 26. and foretold his Disciples that it should be
their Lot, Mat. 10. 17. and 23. 34. which was fulfilled, Acts 5. 40. and 22.
10. The most grievous sort of Scourging was with Scorpions, 1 Kings 12. 11. i.
e. with Whips, to which were fastened Pricks and sharp Thorns, to rend and tear
the Body: and sometimes there were Plummets of Lead at the End of them, to
bruise and batter the Flesh. Scourging was also a Roman Punishment, as is
evident from Acts 22. 24. besides that the best Pagan Histories attest this:
yet there was some Difference between this Penalty as it was inflicted by them
and by the Jews; for the former used both Rods and Whips, but the latter
chastised Offenders with Whips only, which were much more painful and grievous.
St. Paul (who, as he confesses himself, used to beat in every Synagogue those
that believed on Jesus, Acts 22. 19.) felt the Severity of both; Of the Jews
(says he) received I forty Stripes save one, 2 Cor. 11. 24. Thrice was I
beaten with Rods, ver. 25. which refers to this Punishment which was inflicted
on him by the Gentiles, Acts 16. 23.

These were the Lesser Punishments among the Jews: we are moreover informed
from the Sacred Writ what the Capital ones were. These, as to the particular
manner of executing them, and as to the Usages and Customs that attended them,
are particularly spoken of in the Talmud, and are treated of by Maimonides, and
by our Learned Dr. Godwin: but I am to consider them as they are mentioned in
Scripture, for that is my Business at present. And though the Talmudists
distinguish between (...) Lesser Deaths, and (...) those that are more
Grievous; yet because I find that the Jewish Writers do not fully agree what
particular Capital Punishments are to be referred to these two Heads, I will
lay this Distinction aside, and proceed in this order. First, (...), Killing
with the Sword, or Beheading, was in use among them; and though I do not find
it among their Judicial Laws, yet there are some Examples of this sort of Death
recorded. Ishbosheth was the first that was slain so, 2 Samuel 4. 7. though it is
true this Execution was without Law, yet it shows what way of Death was used
Lev. 20. 2, 27. and 24. 14. Dent. 13. 10. and 17. 5. and 21. 21. and 22. 21, 24.
among them in those days. We may observe that it is said, They smote him, and
slew him, and then beheaded him: The severing the Head from the Body was a
Consequent of some foregoing Violence, whereby his Life was taken away. Indeed,
that it was usual to cut off the Head after the Person was slain, and to bring
it in a way of Trophy, may be proved from many Instances, as that of Sisera,
Judge. 5. 26. Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 57. Saul, 1 Samuel 31. 9. Sheba, 2 Samuel 20. 22.
And perhaps in those Days and afterward the beheading of Persons alive was not
the Practice among the Jews; but they rather took off their Heads (either by
cutting them off with a Sword, or chopping them off on a Block with an Ax)
after they had dispatched them by some other Means. For, as I apprehend, the
Decollation was only for Pomp, and to expose the Malefactors. Nor in the
Account that is given of the beheading John the Baptist, Mark 6. 24. (which is
another Instance of this Punishment in the Holy Book) do I meet with any thing
to disprove that his Life was first taken away by the Executioner whom Herod
sent, and then his Head was cut off, to be brought in a Charger, to be shown in
a way of Triumph. It is probable that when it is said St. James was killed with
the Sword, Acts 12. 2. it is meant of that Killing which preceded Beheading,
which, as some Ecclesiastical Writers tell us, was inflicted on that Apostle. I
will only add, that the Hebrew Masters inform us, that this was the Deadly
Penalty of Men-slayers, Murderers, such as apostatized to Idolatry, or that
enticed others to it.

Another Mortal Punishment was (...) Stoning, which was wont to be performed
first by one of the Witnesses against the Malefactor, and then all the People
followed him. This Lapidation was used 'towards Blasphemers, Idolaters,
Incestuous Persons, Witches, Wizards, Prophaners of the Sabbath; those that
inveigled others to Idolatry; Children that cursed their Parents, or rebelled
against them. In the Old Testament the Examples of this Punishment are Achan,
Josh. 7. 25. Adoram, Kings 12. 18. Naboth, I Kings 21. 10. Zechariah, 2 Chronicles.
24. 1. In the New Testament we read that they attempted to stone our Savior,
John 10. 31. and that they effectually did so to St. Stephen, Acts 7. 58. and
that they exercised this Severity on St. Paul, but by the singular Providence
of God he escaped with his Life, Acts 14. 19. This was the most General
Punishment that was denounced in the Law against notorious Criminals; yea by
those indesinite Terms of putting to Death, is sometimes meant this sort of
Exemplary Animadversion, as in Lev. 20. 10. (compared with John 8. 5.) and
other Places.

Another severe Punishment was (...) Burning, which was by the Mosaic Law
executed on some sort of Incestuous Persons, viz. Lev. 20. 14.
those that vitiated their own Daughters, and Lev. 21. 19.
on the Priest's Daughter that committed Whoredom, and on Offenders of a far
different Nature, as appears from Achan's Example. Some think they were burnt
alive, as some Criminals amongst us are: Others say, that before they were
burnt they were strangled, and then melted Lead was poured down their Throats,
and afterward their whole Bodies were consumed in the Fire. This is certain,
that Burning was a secondary Penalty, that is, it followed upon some other
going before, as we may infer from what we read concerning this Punitive way of
dealing with Achan and his Family; All Israel stoned him with Stones, and
burned them with Fire after they had stoned them with Stones, Josh. 7. 25. I
might observe further that this Penal Course was taken with Harlots and
Prostitutes before the Judicial Law: Thus the Doom which Judah pronounced
against Tamar for her Whoredom was, Let her be burnt, Genesis 38. 24. And I
propound it, whether it be not reasonable to think, that [ She shall be utterly
burnt with Fire] Rev. 18. 8. is an Allusion to this Ancient and Legal
Punishment of Whoredom, seeing we find that Babylon (who is meant in those
Words) is signally styled a Whore, and her Fornication is twice mentioned in
the third Verse of that Chapter.

Again, (...) Hanging was in use among the Jews, Numb. 25. 4. Deuteronomy. 21. 22. but
it was of a different Nature from that which is among us. For First, they were
hanged up by the Hands, not by the Head or Neck. Secondly, this Suspension was
not while they were alive, but after they were dead. Thirdly, it was seldom or
never used alone, but in conjunction with one or other of those Punishments
before (or after to be) mentioned. Some hold that it was used only after
Stoning, and was the Recompense of Blasphemy and Idolatry. Others say, it was
generally the Consequent of Strangling. This is not to be doubted that it was a
Secondary Punishment, as well as that which I before mentioned. First they were
dispatched, and then they were hung up upon a Tree, Gibbet, or Stake, to be
seen and taken notice of, to be made Exemplary, and to be a Warning and Terror
to others. Therefore when the Sun went down, i. e. when they could no longer be
a Public Spectacle, they were taken down from the Place where they hung, Deuteronomy.
21. 23. And from Josh. 10. 26. it appears that this was a Subsequent
Punishment, for it is said, Joshua hanged five Kings on five Trees, but he first
smote them and slew them. In the same manner it is likely he dealt with the King
of Ai, Josh. 8. 29. whom he hanged. And the same may be thought of Readiness seven
Sons, 2 Samuel 21. 9. This is particularly expressed in Numb. 25. 4, 5. where
both hanging up and slaying are mentioned as the Punishment of some scandalous
Sinners in the Wilderness: where by the way observe, that this was the Penalty
of Whoredom as well as Blasphemy and Idolatry.

I know Suffocation or Strangling (which is by the Jews called (...)) is
reckoned as a Capital Punishment among the Jews, but I do not find it expressly
named, unless Machanak, which Job says, his Soul chose, chapter 7. 15. be a
Reference to this sort of Death. But we are to remember that Job was no Jew,
and therefore it is improbable he speaks of a Jewish Punishment. But if we may
credit R. Solomon and other Hebrew Doctors, this is often mentioned in the
Mosaic Law; for they say this is meant in those Places of Leviticus, and other
Parts of the Pentateuch, where it is commanded that the Criminal shall die, or
be put to Death. So in Lev. 20. 10. The Adulterer and Adulteress shall surely
be put to Death: the Targum of Jonathan interprets it of Suffocation. And so it
does in Exodus 21. 15. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. This absolute way of speaking signifies
this particular Species of putting Persons to Death, they say. But from what
has been suggested before, we may infer that this is not always true: however,
it may be so generally and for the most part; and accordingly from the
respective Texts we may gather, that the Offenders that were strangled were
those that carnally knew the Priest's Daughter, or another Man's Wife, and
those that struck their Father or Mother; and all Lying Prophets, or that
prophesied in the Name of a false God. The way, they tell us, of Strangling was
with a Towel, Napkin, or any Linen Cloth put about the Malefactor's Neck, and
drawn by two Men with Force contrary ways.

Another Punitive Infliction, though not specified in the Judicial Law, nor
reckoned up by the Rabbinick Masters among the Jewish Punishments, was the
Wheel, as we are acquainted from what Solomon faith, and without doubt
concerning himself, A wise King brings the Wheel over the Wicked, Prove. 20.
26. This was used of old not only in Rackings of Persons to make them confess,
but to take away their Lives. They were tied unto it, or extended upon it, and
so drawn and broken. That this was used by Antiochus toward the Jews,
particularly the Macchabean Brethren, is attested in the Apochryphal Writings;
and that the Pagan Emperors made use of it upon the Christian Martyrs, we
learn from Ecclosiaitical History.

Furthermore, Tebigna^, Submersion, of which we read in Mat. 18. 6. Mark 9. 42.
is reckoned by St. Ierom on the former Place among the Punishments of the
Jewish Nation: and so it is by Casaubon in his Notes. And Chald. Lexic.
Buxiorf hints that some were condemned to this Punishment among the Jews, and
were signally said to be Men adjudged to be drowned. But whether it was really
so, or was a Punishment proper to the Gentiles I will not here dispute, but
proceed to speak of Another which undoubtedly was Jewish, and is oftener
mentioned in the Old Testament, especially in Moses's Writings, where the
Jewish Penalties are fixed, than any of those before named. It is being cut off
from Israel, or the Soul's being cut off from among the People: concerning
which there are as many various Opinions, as about any one thing that I know of
this Nature. This Chereth or Cutting off is thought by the Jewish Doctors to be
peculiar to the Jewish Occonomy: but in this first Essay of their Sentiments
about it they are mistaken, for this Penalty is expressly taken notice of before
the Judicial Law, in Abraham's time, Genesis 17. 14. God says of the
uncircumcised Manchild, that that Soul shall be cut off from his People:
therefore it is plain that this Infliction, whatever it was, was not peculiar to
the Mosaic Dispensation. The Hebrew Expositors all agree in this, that by this
Excision is meant a Divine Punishment, i. e. some Judgment immediately sent by
God: but they agree not as to the particular kind of it. It signifies Sudden
Death, says R. Saadias, who expounds it by those Words, Psalm. 55. 23. They
shall not live out half their Days. Another of the Rabbis, Sol. Iarchi,
understands it of Barreness or want of Children. When Persons are threatened to
be cut off, their Seed, their Posterity is meant, he says. Again, some of the
Jews think that Eternal Torments in another World are here intended. Others
think it is meant of the Excision of both Body and Soul: the former is cut off
here by untimely Death, the latter by being separated from God and Happiness in
the Life to come, says Abarbanel. The famous Maimonides goes higher, and says
it signifies not only the shortning of Life here, but the utter Extinction and
Annihilation of the Soul hereafter, so that a Man perishes like a Beast.
Christians also (as well as Jews) have different Opinions concerning this, for
some of them understand it of some Capital Punishment to be inflicted by the
Civil Magistrate, such as Stoning, Burning, etc. according to the Nature and
Demerit of the Offense. Others believe an Ecclesiastical Punishment is designed
here, viz. Excommunication: This is the general persuasion of the Divines of
Geneva. Some interpret it of Sudden and Immature Death, as L' Empereur and
Grotius. Others think Eternal Damnation is meant. Iunius will have it to be
both Excommunication and Damnation. Upon a View of the Whole, and weighing the
several Places where this Chereth is mentioned, I doubt not but I may most
rationally determine that according to the Subject Matter of the Texts, this
Punishment is to be differently under derstood. That is, where this Excision is
threatened for such an Offense as was not punishable by the Jewish Laws, it is
meant of some Divine Penalty, some Plague immediately to be inflicted by God
himself. But where this Cutting off is denounced for a Sin which the Law of the
Jews and their Courts of Justice took notice of and punished, it is likely it
is then to be understood of such a kind of Punishment as the Law inflicted, as
some kind of Bodily Death, or Excommunication. In this latter acception the
Chereth was used, when for some great Offense a Man was excluded from
Ecclesiastical Communion, debarred the Congregation, cut off from being a
Member of the Church. Thus the Chereth is the same with Cherem, which was the
middle sort of Excommunication among the Jews, between Nidui which was a
Separation from Company and Converse, and Shammata which was a Devoting to
Satan and utter Destruction. Thus you see what Course they took in those early
Times to animadvert on those that were Faulty: and it is the more considerable
because it was of God's own Appointment. Hence we conclude these Inflictions
were appointed and executed with great Reason and Equity, with singular Wisdom
and Prudence, and such as became the Divine Author of them, and the All-Wise
Governor of that People.

It cannot be expected I should insist on the Particular Laws and Constitutions
of their Civil Government, they being so Many and Various. These may be
consulted in the Old Testament it self, which presents us with the most
Complete Rules of Civil Polity, and such as to a great Part of them are sitted
to the Governments of all Nations in the World. The Greeks were famous for
their Laws, and so were the Old Romans, who borrowed a considerable Part of
their Laws from them, and particularly caused those of the Twelve Tables (the
first beginning of their Laws) to be fetched thence by their Decemviri: and we
see they contain Excellent Things in them. And the Encomiums of the Learnedest
Men are large on the Laws of the Empire: the Pandects are fraught with the
Decisions and Responses of Wise and Experienced Lawyers, and the Code is famed
for the Decrees and Constitutions of Emperors. Yea, how large and elaborate
have the Fortescue de Laudibus Leg. Angl. Coke every where.
Great Sages of our Nation been in Commendation of the English Laws, telling us
that they are Lex e^t summa ratio.
the Highest Reason, and nothing else but Reason; that they are so Reasonable
that Nullum iniquum in jure praesumendum.
nothing that is Unjust can be so much as supposed to be in them, and therefore
that Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus.
no Man must presume to be wiser than these Laws. If these be the Elogiums of
mere Humane Constitutions, of what transcendent Worth and Excellency must we
needs allow Those Laws to be, which though calculated for Civil and Humane
Government, were originally Divine and Heavenly, and framed by Insinite Wisdom
it self? Such were the Laws of the Jews which in this Sacred Volume are
transmitted to us, and consequently they far surpass, they infinitely surmount
all others under Heaven. And no Laws whatsoever were prior to these, as
Josephus against Appion very clearly demonstrates. Moses was the Antientest
Lawgiver: and Lycurgus, Draco, Solon, and other Publishers of Laws, whom the
Greeks boast of, were but Upstarts in respect of him. You do not so much as
meet with the word Law in Homer, or Orpheus, or Mus^us, the Antientost Greek
Authors, as De Repub. 1. 6. c. 6.
Bodinus observes. Indeed the Nations had no Written Laws at first. Tully,
Livy, Justin and other Historians acquaint us, that the Verbal Commands of
Kings and Princes were their Laws. But afterward when they had Laws committed
to writing, (such as could be read, whence they had the Name of Leges) they
derived them from the Hebrews: more especially it might be proved, that the
Antientest Attick and Roman Laws were borrowed from Moses, and that other Wise
Law givers and Rulers have taken some of their best Constitutions hence.

Then in the next place, if we look abroad, and enquire into the Government of
the Heathen Nations, we shall there also be assisted by the Anitent Records of
the Bible: and as to many things that concern their Kings and Government, we
cannot inform our selves otherwise than from this Sacred History. Here we read
of four Eastern Kings, (such as they were, for Melech is a large Word, and
signifies any Ruler) the King of Shinar, the King of Ellasar, the King of Elam,
the King of Nations; Genesis 14. 1, 2. Which were the first peepings out of the
Kingdoms of Babylon, Assyria, Persia and Greece: for Shinar is Babylon (as all
agree) Ellasar is Assyria, (some Region near to Euphrates, as may be gathered
from Isa. 37. 12.) Elam is the usual Name of Persia, and by Nations is meant
Greece, especially the Grecian Isles where there was a great Conflux of several
Nations. But these Names are not to be taken in this Extent here, for we cannot
suppose that Five Great Kings (and some of them of very distant Countries)
would come to sight the King of Sodom a Petty Prince. Therefore the Places here
named, must not be thought to be those Wide Regions which afterward were known
by those Names: and the Persons who are here called Kings must not be conceived
to be any other than Governors or Magistrates of Cities, for so the Title of
King is to be understood in some Texts of the Old Testament, and particularly
in this History, where the five Kings of Canaan are mentioned. We read that
Abimelech (which afterward became the Name of the Kings of Palestine) was one
of the first Kings of this Country, and that the particular Seat of his
Government was Gerar, Genesis 20. 2. We are informed that about this time (which
was about 400 Years after the Flood) there were Kings of Egypt, and that
Pharaob was the Royal Name even then, Genesis 12. 15. No Book that we can trust to
make mention of these Early Kingdoms, and Royal Thrones (such as they were) but
Moses's History. Yea, here is a considerable Account of the Four Grand
Monarchies or Empires of the World, as they are usually styled. We are told
here that Nimrod was a Mighty One in the Earth, Genesis 10. 8. and a Mighty Hunter
before the Lord, v. 9. by which Character, and what we may infer from it, it
appears that he was the First that exercised an Imperial and Kingly Power in
the World, though he has not here the Title of King. The Word [Gibbor] which
we render [Mighty] is in the Version of the Seventy a Giant, which expresses
not only the Greatness of his Stature, but the Exorbitancy of his Power which he
exerted over others with an Unlimited Sway and Arbitrariness. And when it is
said he was a Mighty Hunter, I grant it may set forth what Warlike Exercise he
was given to, as Livy remarks of Romulus and Remus, that they were addicted to
this Manly Recreation, and that it was a Sign of the Vigor of their Minds, and
the Strength and Agility of their Bodies: and so Xenophon in the Life of Cyrus
observes, that it is a Military Exercise, and becoming a Great Man. But I
conceive there is something more intimated to us in his being represented as a
Hunter and a Mighty Hunter, and before the Lord; for this may signify to us his
Fierce Pursuit of Men as well as Beasts, his Tyrannizing and usurping Dominion
over the People, and that in desiance of God, before whom he was not ashamed to
act thus wickedly. He was of the Race of Chush the Son of Cham, and was the
Head and Ringleader of those Miscreants that built Babel or Babylon: which
baffles the common Account of Pagan Historians, who tell us that Semiramis,
Ninus's Queen, was the first Founder of that City, unless we understand by it
that she finished the Work. He it was that with the Remains of the Babylonian
Crew set up here the First Empire: which began soon after the Flood, viz. about
130 Years. This is the Date of the First Monarchy in the World, and Babel was
the Place where it commenced. It is expressly said, The beginning of his Kingdom
was Babel, Genesis 10. 10. This was the first Step to the Universal Empire of the
Chaldeans or Assyrians, which afterward spread it self to vast and almost
unlimited Dimensions. This is he that by the Pagan Writers is called Belus, and
said to be the Father of Ninus, as Eusebius, Ierom, and other of the Learnedest
among the Ancients agree: for this is observable (and I have proved from
several Instances in another Place) that oftentimes the same Persons have not
the same Names in Profane History that are given them in the Sacred one. Some
read Genesis 10. 11. thus, He went out of the Land into Assyria, and thence
gather, that though Nimrod was first seated at Babylon, and reigned in Chaldea,
yet from thence he pierced into Assyria, where he built Nineveh, the Head City
of the Assyrian Monarchy. But this is unquestionable that the Empire was
translated into Assyria, and thence there is a Distinction between the Land of
Assyria and the Land of Nimrod, Mic. 5. 6. The Sacred Writings also acquaint
us, that as this Monarchy began at Babylon and Chaldea, and was translated into
Assyria, so at last it returned to Babylon again, the Assyrian Dynasties being
swallowed up of those of Chaldea. So the Assyrians laid the Foundation for the
Chaldeans, they set up the Towers thereof, they raised up the Palaces thereof,
Isa. 23. 13. And this Relapse or Reduction of the Assyrian Government to the
Babylonians is again foretold in Ezekiel. 31. 11, 12, etc. I have delivered him
into the Hand of the mighty One of the Heathens, he shall surely deal with him.
King Nebuchadnezzar is that El gojim, that God of the Nations (for so it is in
the Hebrew) who made them all bow down to him and worshi him, and he more
especially made the Assyrians truckle to his Greatness and Sovereignty. This is
very carefully to be heeded, because it gives Light to the whole History both
Sacred and Profane, which relates the Affairs of those Kingdoms. The want of
attending to this is the reason why several that have writ of these things have
egregiously blundred, confounding one part of the Empire with another, making
no difference between Babylonians and Assyrians, and thereby rendering all a
mere Babel, a Confusion. But we are directed by what the Sacred History
suggests, to distinguish between the two neighboring Dynasties of Assyria and
Chaldea, which alternately made up the First Monarchy. Sometimes the Babylonian
Princes bore sway, and were Heads of the Empire; at other times those of the
Assyrian Race climbed to this Honor. Babylon and Nineveh were the two Royal
Seats belonging to each: when the Chaldean Kings prevailed, then the former was
their Place of residence; when the Assyrian Monarchs bare Rule, the latter was
the Place where they kept their Court. The brief Scheme of the Successions is
this: At first all Assyria was subject to Babylon or Chaldea: next the
Babylonian Power gave way to the Assyrian: after this the Assyrians lost the
Monarchy, it coming again to the Chaldeans, yet so that the Empire was then
divided, for the Medes had a Part, though the greatest Share went to the
Babylonians.

Where by the way we may observe, that that which is called and reputed the
First Monarchy may as well be said to be the Third: it may be counted Two at
least. And thence it will follow that that which is vulgarly called the 2d
Monarchy was the 3d or 4th; for before the Persian Monarchy there was the
Babylonian, Assyrian and Median. Here, if the Reader would pardon the
Digression, it might be further proved, that the common Division of the
Monarchies into four, and no more, is imperfect and groundless: for there were
several other Entire Dynasties or Kingdoms in the time of the Assyrian
Monarchs; there were the Kingdoms of the Old Germans, Egyptians, Argives,
Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Tyrians, Romans, Jews. So the Greek Monarchy (which
is reckoned the Third) was divided into four Kingdoms. Likewise, with the Roman
Emperors were contemporary the Greek Emperors in the East. Besides, if we
should come down lower, it would appear that Mabomet's Dove has been as
wonderful in the World as the Roman Eagle: the Turkish Monarchy has grasped
more than the Roman, and might challenge to be numbered among the most
Celebrated Monarchies. For these reasons I am apt to be of Method. Hist. Cap. 1.
Bodinus's Mind, that we ought to reckon more Monarchies than Four. But I will
not now contend, especially because it is likely the Interpretation of those
Dreams and Visions in Daniel concerning the Four Beasts and the Four Metals,
gave the first Occasion to this number of Four Monarchies, and no more. To
return then to our former Matter, viz. The Difference which the Old Testament
directs us to take notice of between the Assyrian and Chaldean Empires, which
some have so shuffled together that they cannot distinctly be discerned. These
Inspired Writings let us know that the First Captivity of the Jews was under
the former, the Second under the latter; that the Kings of Assyria were those
properly who reigned in Nineve, and that strictly speaking the Kings of Babylon
were those that resided at Babylon: though it is true by reason of the
Vicissitude of the Government of the Assyrians and Chaldeans, these are
sometimes called the Kings of Assyria; and the King of Babylon and of Assyria
is the same. It is from the Scripture-Records that we are informed that Kings
24. 12. Jer. 39. 12.
Nebuchadnezzar in the eighth Year of his Reign, transported Iehoiakin the
King, and other of the Jews to Babylon, and that in his eighteenth Year he
utterly destroyed Jerusalem, and carried away Captive Zedekiah and the greatest
Part of the Jews, from which time are to be numbered the Seventy Years of the
Babylonian Captivity. This was Nebuchadnezzar the Great, he who brought that
Monarchy to its highest Pitch, insomuch that some have reckoned him the First
Absolute Monarch. Many other remarkable Passages relating to the whole Series
of this Government, and those that presided in it from first to last, are set
down in the Holy Writ. Several of the very individual Persons who were the
Chief Monarchs of this first and antientest Empire, are here particularly
mentioned, with the considerable Actions and Events appertaining to them: as
Pull, 2 Kings 15. 19. Tiglath-Pileser, 1 Chronicles. 5. 26. Salmanassar, 2 Kings 17.
3. Hos. 10. 14. Senacherib, 2 Kings 18. 3. Esarhaddon, 2 Kings 19. 37.
Merodach-Baladan, 2 Kings 20. 20. Isa. 39. 1. Nebuchadnezzar mentioned in the
Books of the Kings, Chronicles, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel: and lastly
Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 22. in whom this Monarchy had its Period. And so these
Sacred Writings acquaint us not only with the Rise but the Progress, Duration
and End of this Empire; hence we learn that it lasted from Nimrod to the close
of Belshazzar's Reign, i. e. from the year of the World 1717. to the Year 3419.
which is in all 1702 Years; a much longer time than any of the other Monarchies
endured.

Again, in these Writings is recorded the Original of the Next, viz. the
Persian (usually known by the Name of the Second) Monarchy. Here we read that
Belshazzar, the last Chaldean Monarch, he that impiously carouzed in the Holy
Vessels belonging to the Temple, was slain by Darius the Mcde, Dan. 5. 30, 31.
who joined with Cyrus the Persian in the Expedition against Belshazzar; and
they both had Right to the Babylonian Monarchy on that Account, and accordingly
jointly ruled: so it was a Medo-Persian Monarchy. Darius is spoken of in the
6th and 9th Chapters of Daniel; but being aged before he came to the Throne, he
lived but about two Years after; whereupon Cyrus reigned alone, and is
generally reputed the First Founder of the Persian Monarchy. This famous Cyrus,
surnamed the Great, was prophesied of long before he appeared in the World,
Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1. This is he that was the Happy Restorer of the Jews to
their own Country, and was a great Favourer of the Pious of that Nation, Ezr.
1. And in the following Chapters, and in the Book of Nehemiah, is infallibly
related what Persian Kings hindered the Building of the Temple, and who they
were that promoted it. Besides, the Book of Esther, and a great part of Daniel,
are a Narrative of what was done under the Kings of Persia. Next, it might be
added, that Alexander the Great the First Founder of the Grecian Monarchy, is
spoken of in these Sacred Writings, as in Dan. 2. 32, 39. and 7. 6. and 8. 5,
6, 7, 8. and 10. 20. and 11. 3, 4. whence Joseph, Antiq. Jud. 1. 11. c. 8.
Iaddus the High Priest showed the Prophecy of Daniel to that Great Monarch,
and particularly turned to that Place where his Conquering of the Persians, and
the Translation of the Empire to him, are foretold. Here also the Division of
the Empire among his Captains is predicted, Dan. 2. 33. and 7. 7, 19. and 8.
22. and 11. 5, 6, etc. Lastly, the History of the New Testament mentions the
Author and Erecter of the Roman (which generally passes for the Fourth)
Monarchy, and some of his Actions and Decrees. This was Augustus, for if we
speak properly, this Empire began not ^ Julius C^sar, but in him when he
vanquished ^ Anthony and Cleopatra in the Battle of Actium, an^ all Egypt
became a Roman Province. Thus Ni^ rod, Cyrus, Alexander, Augustus, the Founder
^ those four renowned Monarchies, and many of the most eminent and remarkable
Passages in some of them, are recorded in the Sacred Scriptures; whereby the
Truth of those things is confirmed, and some obscure Places in Pagan Writers
are enlightened, and some Mistakes may be corrected. Indeed it is impossible to
understand the Gentile History aright in sundry Matters relating to the First
Kingdoms and Governments, unless we are acquainted with the Bible.

CHAP. III
In these Sacred Writings we have the first and earliest Account of all useful
Employments and Callings, viz. Gardening, Husbandry, feeding of sheep,
preparing of Food. The ancient manner of Threshing, Grinding of Corn, and
making Bread is enquired into. What was the Primitive Drink. The Posture which
they used at eating and drinking. Sitting preceded Discubation. The particular
manner of placing themselves on their Beds. Eating in common not always used.
Discalceation and Washing the Feet were the Att^ndan^s of Eating and Feasting.
So was Anointing. They had a Master or Governor of their Feasts. Who were the
first Inventers of Mechanic Arts. The first Examples of Architecture. Houses
were built flat at top, and why.

In the fifth Place, here and only here is to be learned the Original of all
Employments, Callings, Oecupations, Professions, Mysteries, Trades, and of all
Arts and Inventions whatsoever. First, here is the earliest Mention of
Gardening, Husbandry Plougbing, keeping of Sheep, which are of ordinary Use,
and for the necessary Support of Man's Life. God placing Adam in Paradise, a
Garden of Delight, instructed him how to dress and keep it, Genesis 2. 15. (...)
to work and belabour the Ground, (for so it is according to the LXX.) to dig
and delve with great Care and Art, to open the Earth to let in the Influences
of Heaven, to prune the Trees and cherish the Plants, to preserve the Fruits
from the Beasts and Fowls, which had Admittance into that Place, (as we read in
Genesis 2. 19, 20.) and to keep all things in good order as a skilful Gardener and
Husbandman; for both these made up the First Employment and Trade in the World.
And when Man was ejected out of Paradise, he was still set about the same Work,
Genesis 3. 23. for the Hebrew Word that is used here is the same with that in ver.
15. and is translated there to dress: but it is certain that gnamad (which is
the Verb in both Places) is of a large Import, and signifies all Husbandly
managing and improving of Ground. And truly there was more need of exercising
that Art now than before, the Earth being not a little endamaged by the Curse
which God denounced against it, and executed upon it; which was one Reason why
Adam brought up his Son Cain to Husbandry and Tilling the Ground, Genesis 4. 2.
for now it wanted Manuring and Cultivating. And as this his eldest Son was
brought up to take care of the Fruits of the Earth, so his next was bred up to
feeding of Sheep, which is the Second Employment or Calling that we read of in
the World. Afterward Iabal advanced higher, and became the First Grasier; for
so I understand those Words, Genesis 4. 20. He was the Father of such as have
Cattle, i. e. that have other Cattle besides Sheep; for these, and the keeping
or feeding of them, had been mentioned before. He lived upon Pasturage, and for
that purpose was the Father of such as dwell in Tents, as it is said in the
same Place: The Meaning of which is, that whereas others generally lived in one
fixed Place and Habitation, he and others of his Calling went from one place to
another feeding: They traveled as their Cattle did, and for this Reason it was
requisite to have Tents. Accordingly that they might look after their Flocks
and Herds the better, he invented these, that they might lie out in the Fields
all Night under this Shelter. Thus you see what was the Primitive State of
things; Adain and his firstborn Son were Husbandmen, and his second Son a
Shepherd; and others of his Race were busied in feeding of Cattle. Such was the
Employment of those that were the First Heirs of the World.

And so for a long time after, in the first and most uncorrupted Ages, this was
the Entertainment of the Greatest Persons. In those more innocent Times of the
World the Wealthiest Men embraced this kind of Life (as mean as it is accounted
now). Some of the Old Patriarchs were plain honest Grasiers, and the richest of
them (as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) were busied in looking to their Grounds and
their Flocks. Moses the Great Lawgiver was a Shepherd. Nabal and Absdlom were
Sheep-masters. Elisah, when he was busy at the Psough with twelve Yoke of Oxen
was called thence to the Prophetic Dignity and office: and Amos of a Herdsman
became a Divine Messenger and Preacher. Shamgar was taken from the Herd to be a
Judge in Israet, and with the same Goad that he drove his Oxen slew six hundred
Men. Gideon's Seat of State and Justice was a Threshingfloor, and he had no
other Mace than a Flail, Judge. 6. 14. The renowned Iair and Iephthah kept
Sheep, and were fetched from that Employment to be Judges. David the Son of
Iesse, a Worthy Parent in Israel, was took from the Sheep-folds, from following
the Ewes great with young, to feed Jacob, to rule Israel, Psalm. 78. 71. Thus
the Pastoral Art has been a Pre^^d^^ to Empire and Government: the taking care
of these tame Creatures has made way for the presiding over the stubborn Flock
of Mankind. We read that Crowned Heads have not disdained this Art. King Vzziah
(or as he is called elsewhere Azariah, for I have showed in another Place that
it was common with the Jews to have two Names) was a Lover of Husbandry, 2 Chronicles. 26. 10. And one of the Greatest Kings that ever swayed a Scepter,
acknowledges that as the Profit of the Earth (i. e. of Agriculture) (...) for
all, is of universal Advantage, so more especially the King himself is a
Servant to the Field, Eccles. 5. 9. for so it is according to the Hebrew. It is
worthy of his Royal Care and Study to support Tillage and Husbandry, which were
heretofore the Employment of those of the highest Rank.

And thus it was also among the Profane Nations of old. Knowledge and Skill in
Rustic Affairs ushered in Rule and Command. The Gordian Knot was but
Plough-tackling hampered in a Knot, and he that untied it was to be Monarch of
the World. Araunah King of Iebus condescended to be a Thresher, 2 Samuel 24. 18.
1 Chronicles. 21. 20. and (which is a^ unparalleled Exaltation of this Primitive
Husbandry) his Threshing-floor was the Spot of Ground which King David made
choice of to build an Altar to God upon, 2 Samuel 24. 25. and this was the very
Place where Solomon's Temple was afterward erected, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. Mesha King
of Moab was a Sheep-master, 2 Kings 3. 4. Noked is the Hebrew Word, and it is
simply and barely used for a Shepherd, Amos 1. 1. Spartacus, the dreaded Enemy
of the Romans, was of the same Calling Aurel, Vict
Dioclesian the Emperor left his Throne, and turned Gardener: After he had laid
down the Empire he took up Husbandry. Justin, 1. 6
Attalus abdicated his Kingly Government, and applied himself wholly to the
same Employment. The Great Scipio left his Commands to exercise and enjoy the
Pleasures of Agriculture. In the Old Roman History we read that the Chief Men
among them studied and practiced this, by the same Token that several of them
were fetched from their Tillage to Arms, from their Country Carts to Triumph,
from Harvest-work to the Senate, from the Field to the Camp, from the Plough to
bear the high Offices of Consuls and Dictators. They that were sent from the
Roman Senate to desire Attilius to take upon him the Government, Val. Max. 1.
4. Tit. de Panpertate.
found him sowing in his Grounds. They tell us that Romulus the Founder of the
Roman Empire, was bred up first to the Sheep-hook: and we know that the Riches
of the Ancient Romans was Plenty of Cattle. From the Country-Exercise of
feeding of Beasts came the Sirnames of the Families of the Vituli, Porcii,
Tauri, Caprae, and others. (And here, by the by, let me insert, that it may be
Eglon the Name of a Man, and so Rachel and Dorcas the Names of Women in
Scripture, which sighnify a Calf, a Sheep, a Deer, were given at first on the
like Account, Women as well as Men being employed of old in looking after
Cattle.) From their sowing of Beans, Pease, etc. arose the Names of the Fabii,
Pisones, ^^cerones, Lentuli, etc. And it is not to be denied that the Exercises
of Husbandry have been treated of and applauded by the Wisest Men, as Cato,
Varro, Cicero, Pliny, Columella, Virgil. And when among the Pagans their very
-- Habitarunt Di quoque sylvas. Virgil, Eclog^^
Deities are represented as Lovers of a Country-Life, when Pan was said to be
the God of Shepherds, and Mercury and Apol^^ fed Sheep, and the last of these
was cried up for the Chief Patron of this Calling, they intended to signify to
us that this and the like Country-Employments are Princely and Divine. Which
very thing we are assured of from the Word of Truth, the Infallible Records of
the Bible, which tell us that these were the Early Business and Practice of the
Greatest and the Best Men. The Greatest Princes heretofore were esteemed
according to the Numbers of their Cattle.

Among the First and Necessary Employments and Advantages of humane Life may be
justly reckoned the Preparing of Food; and the Scriptures alone can furnish us
with the certain Knowledge of this. It is undeniable from those plain and
express Words in Genesis 1. 29. that there was no Food allowed at first to Mankind
but Plants and Herbs, Corn and all other Fruits of the Earth. I have wondered
sometimes that any who believe the Sacred Text can question this, for the Words
are positive and downright, utterly excluding all other kind of Sustenance but
this. Yea, unless you can prove that Milk is no part of any Living Creature,
but is a Fruit of the Earth, you have reason to think that they were debarred
of this also. But after the Flood, which had much impaired the Virtue of the
Earth, and exhausted somewhat of its Seminal Power, there was a License to eat
Flesh; Every moving thing that lives shall be Meat for you, Genesis 9. 3. in
which is included the Product of Flesh; Milk; which was denied to the
Antediluvians. But now all are at liberty to feed on it; and that was not all,
they were so skilful as to make it afford them Cheese and Butter; neither of
which we read of before the Deluge. And questionless they that fed not on Milk
knew not the Use of these; but among the Post-diluvians Charitze hachalab, 1 Samuel 17. 18. Cheeses of Milk were a common Food: which are, without doubt,
meant by Shephoth bakar, 2 Samuel 17. 29. Coagulationes bovis, as Pagnine renders
it, Cheeses of the Milk of Cows, according to the Targum: and they are called
by the Hebrews, in their peculiar way of speaking, the Sons of Milk. And in Job
10. 10. gebinah is the Word for Cheese. The other Product of their Milk, as
well as of their Housewifery, was Chemeah, Butter, Genesis 18. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
Judge. 5. 25. which was not known to some other Nations a long time. Among the
Greeks there was no such thing, and no Word for it. Homer and the Ancient
Writers mention Milk and Cheese, but of this nothing is said. Neither does
Aristotle in his History of Animals so much as name it, though he mentions
those two forts of Food, and would certainly have made mention of this if there
had been any such thing among them. Nor was it made use of among the Romans, as
we understand from Pliny's Words Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 9.
, e lacte fit butyrum, barbararum gentium laudatissimus cibus. The Barbarous
are not Greek or Latins, but the Oriental People; and accordingly the ancient
Use of this among the Easterns we learn only from Moses and such Inspired
Writers. As to the ancient feeding on the Flesh of Animals, Abraham's
entertaining his Guests with a Calf, Genesis 18. 7. ( i. e. part of a Calf, a
Joint of Veal; for it is not likely that he set a whole boiled or roasted, or
otherwise dressed Calf before three Men, for Sarah was in her Tent, and Abraham
sat not down with these Guests, neither did eat, as may be gathered from those
Words, He stood by them, and they did eat) and many other Instances of making
Repasts on other sorts of Creatures, as Kids, Sheep, Oxen, might be produced
out of this Sacred History.

But it appears that there was but little Art and Cookery used at first in
dressing of Meat. There was no great Distinction in preparing it, as we may
gather from the Hebrew Word Aphab, which signifies to boil, to bake, to fry;
and so Bashal indisserently denotes Rosting and Boiling: But the particular
Denotation of these Words in the Texts where they occur, is known only from the
particular Matter spoken of there. Concerning the Paschal Lamb there is a
strict Injunction not to boil, but roast it, Exodus 12. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 7. which
has a secret and my sterious Meaning in it, it is likely; but concerning
Common Eatings and Repasts, I do not find a Difference observed: yet this
latter way of dressing has had the Preference generally to the other.
Accordingly it may be observed, that the Poots for the most part present their
Heroes feeding on roast, and not on boiled Meat. All Homer's Dinners for his
Great Captains and Worthies are of the former sort. And In Virgil. Aen. l. 1.
Servius (who was no mean Critic) tells us, that in the Times of the Heroes
they were not fed with Boiled but Roast. We cannot but take notice that though
at first the Preparing of Diet was simple and artless, yet at length it became
a kind of Science, and much Time, Study and Cost, were bestowed upon it. Thence
we have many Examples of Extravagant Feastings in this Sacred History, on which
several Critical Remarks might be made, to show what Customs were prevalent at
eating in those Days. Cookery was grown to a great Height, and as great an
Esteem: there was Sar Hatabbachim, Genesis 39. 1. i. e. according to the Version
of the Seventy (...), the Prince of the Cooks: and there were Tabbachoth, Royal
She-Cooks, 1 Samuel 8. 13. Much more might be said on these Particulars, but I
designed only a Taste of them, to invite the Curious to study the Bible, for
here is the Antientest Learning in the World, and that of all Sorts.

But the most Useful and Strengthening, as well as the most Common Food, was
Bread made of Corn: concerning which it may be acceptable to the Inquisitive to
know how in those first Ages it was beaten out of the Ear, how it was ground
into Meal, and how it was made into Bread: which can be learnt from these
Ancient Books of Scripture only. And this I must needs say, if Varro and some
other Authors before named be consulted, and prized by Lovers of Antiquity for
what they have delivered concerning Country-Affairs and Husbandry, surely then
much more are these Holy Writings to be esteemed seeing they far excel them in
Antiquity: for Varro, Cato, Columella, or any others that have written de re
Rustica, are Modern Authors in respect of the Sacred Penmen. First then, as to
Threshing or beating the Grains of Corn out of the Ears, it was performed
diverse ways; as, 1. By drawing a loaded Cart with Weels over the Corn backwards
and forwards, so that the Wheels running over it did forcibly shake out the
Grain. Of this is express mention in Isa. 28. 27. where we read that Opban
gnagalah the Cart-whell was trun'd about upon some sort of Corn. And this in
the next Verse is called Gilgal gnagelah, which is the same, and therefore by
the Vulgar Latin is rendered both here and in the former Place Rota Plaustri. To
this bruising of their Corn with Loaded Carts, perhaps that Place, Amos 2. 13.
refers, (although otherwise applied by Expositors generally) which may be
rendered thus, I am pressed under you as a full Cart presses the Sheaves, or
Sheaf (for it is in the singular Number.) It sets forth the Manner of Threshing
in those Days, which was by pressing the Ears of Corn with a Heavy Cart, and
forcing out the Grain by bringing the Wheels often over it. 2. Another ancient
way of Threshing was with a Wooden Slead or Dray without Wheels, full of Iron
Nails or Teeth on the Side toward the Ground, and loaded with massy Iron, or
some other heavy Weights at top to make it heavy: and this was drawn by Oxen
over the Corn till the Ears were so pressed that the Grain flew out. This
Instrument was commonly known (as the Hebr. Masters and Talmudists report) by
the Name of Morag, and also of Charutz: and accordingly it has these Names
given it, in 2 Samuel 24. 22. and Isa. 28. 27. and both of them together we meet
with in Isa. 41. 15. where it is translated by us a sharp Threshing-Instrument.
And in the same Place it is said to have Teeth, which plainly refers to the
foresaid make of it, viz. that this great wooden Plank was set at the Bottom
with Iron Teeth or Pikes to cut the Sheaves, and make way for the Grain to come
out. And to these Iron Nails or Teeth refers Amos 1. 4. where this sorst of
Country Tackling is called Threshing-Insturments of Iron. Upon the whole, it
appears that the Instrument wherewith Husbandmen at this Day break the Clods of
Earth was used heretofore (when they had not attained to any great Skill in
these Affairs) in Threshing the Corn; for by the Description that is given of
it, it was a kind of Harrow. 3. They thresh'd with Oxen, who with their Hoofs
(which for that purpose were generally shod with Iron or Brass) were wont to
beat and tread out the Corn: and sometimes they brought in a whole Herd of Oxen
to trample upon it. This way of Threshing is referred to, when they were forbid
to muzzle the Ox when he treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. And this is
plainly alluded to in Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim is a Heifer that is taught, and
loves to tread out the Corn: and in Mic. 4. 12, 13. He shall gather them as
Sheaves into the Floor (viz. to be thresh'd): Arise and thresh -- I will make
thy Hoofs brass, and thou shall beat in pieces, etc. 4. Another ancient way of
Threshing was that which is in use with us, viz. with Flails. Some sort of
Grain and Seeds were beaten out with these Flagella, (for this is the Word
whence that English one comes) as is clear from Isa. 28. 27. The Fitches are
beaten out with a Staff, and the cummin with a Rod. And generally Bread-Corn
was thus thresh'd, as we may gather from the 28th ver. Of this Nature was
Gideon and Araunah's threshing of Wheat, Judge. 6. 11. 1 Chronicles. 21. 20. for it is
represented as their Personal Action, and those general Terms Chabat and Dash
(the Words in those Places) favor this Sense: and in the former Text Threshing
is rendered by (...), in the Septuagint's Version, which signifies beating with
Staves, Sticks or Rods.

After they had thus thresh'd their Corn, when they had ^ Mind to makd use of
it, they laid it open to the Sun to dry it, or they dried it by a Fire, or in a
Furnace, to get off the Husk: and this dried or parched Corn it self (without
any farther Preparation) was a great Food in those Eastern Countries, as we
gather from Lev. 23. 14. Ruth 2. 14. 1 Samuel 17. 17. and 25. 18. And this From
Kalah, torruit.
Kal^ (for that is the Word for it) was, if we may credit the Rabbis and
Jewish Expositors, first soked in Water, and then dried as Barley is maulted
among us at this Day: (where by the way observe the Antiquity of Maulting) But
generally the Drying and Parching of the Corn were to make it more capable of
being ground.

The ancient Manner of their Grinding it (which is the next thing I am to
consider) was twofold, either in Mortars or Mills. That both these were made
use of, we may satisfy our Selves from Number. 11. 8. where you read both of
Rechaim Mills, and Medocah a Mortar. In this latter they were wont pinserc (for
from the Jews this Practice descended to the Romans) to pound or bray their
Corn: whence Bakers, who did this in order to making their Bread, had their
Name Pistores. That they used of old to beat and bruise their Wheat in a Mortar
with a heavy Pestle, may be collected from Prove. 27. 22. where this hollow
Vessel is called Mactesh. But Mills were chiefly made use of for this purpose
in those early Times: and they were of such use and necessity, that Men were
strictly forbid to take the nether or the upper Millstone to pledge, because (as
it is added) this is taking a Man's Life (Hebr. his Soul) to pledge, Deuteronomy. 24. 6.
as much as to say, hereby his Neighbor's Life would be endangered, this is the
way to starve him. The grinding at mills was counted an inferior sort of Work,
and therefore Prisoners and Captives were generally set to it: whence to take
the Milstones, and grind Meal, is part of the Description of a Slave, Isa. 47.
2. And to this refers Samson's grinding in the Prisonhouse, Judge. 16. 21. For
of old Time there were Mills in their Prisons, (whence Pistrinum is used both
for a Mill and a Prison) and the Prisoners were wont by Grinding to earn their
Living, and procure themselves Food. However, this was counted a very Laborious
and Slavish Employment. And this was in use not only among the Jews and
Philistines but the Egyptians also, and thence there is mention of the
Maidservant behind the Mill, i. e. thrusting it forward with her Arm, Exodus
11. 5. So among the Chaldeans the Young Men (viz. the Captives of Judea) were
taken by them to grind, Lam. 5. 13. But for the most part the Women-Servants
were employed in this Drudgery, as is deducible from Mat. 24. 41. Women are
said to be grinding at the Mill, whiles the Men are in the Field, i. e. at work
abroad, as we read in the preceding Verse. Therefore Lex. Chald. p. 586.
Buxtorf observes that the Word for Grinders is Resoshoth, of the Feminine
Gender, to note that Grinding was usually Women's Work. These Mills which they
used in those Days were Querns or Hand-mills, and therefore before the
Invention of others that go with greater Force, they first dried the Corn (as I
mentioned before) that they might grind with more Ease.

The Corn being thus prepared and reduced to Meal or Flour, they moistened it,
and made it into Dough or Paste (Batzek, Exodus 12. 34. 39. Gnavisah, Numb. 15.
20.) and then baked it, and made Bread of it. This was either Cakes, or Loaves:
the lighter kind of Bread was composed into Cakes, Gnuggoth, Genesis 18. 6. Exodus
12. 39. Numb. 11. 8. Ezekiel. 4. 12. Sometimes Magnog is the Word, 1 Kings 17. 12.
at other Times Challah, Lev. 2. 4. and 24. 5. 2 Samuel 6. 19. The greater and
heavier sort of Bread was Loaves: thence you read of Cicear Lechem, a Loaf of
Bread, Exodus 29. 23. 1 Chronicles. 16. 3. (tho in some other Places we render it a
Piece of Bread, Prove. 6. 26. Ier. 37. 21. which shows that the word Ciccar is
uncertain.) But this we may depend upon, that Lechem Breads (in the Plural, for
it is taken plurally in 1 Samuel 21. 3. 2 Samuel 16. 1. and in other Places) always
signifies Loaves of Bread, in contradistinction to Cakes or lesser Portions of
Bread. Then as to the ancient Manner of Baking, it was, 1. Upon the Hearth,
under the hot Embers, and thence Gnuggoth are denominated. The first Instance
in the World of this way of Baking, is that in Genesis 18. 6. where Gnuggoth are
by all acknowledged to be Panes sutcineritii, and accordingly we render them
Cakes upon the Hearth, i. e. such as were baked upon the hot Hearth, and
covered over with Ashes. This was the ancient way of Baking among all the
Eastern People: and it is in use among them at this Day. A late Thevenot. Lib.
2. C. 32.
Traveller assures us, that this sort of Bread is ordinarily used among the
present Arabians: and he particularly and distinctly describes their making and
ordering of these Cakes. 2. Upon burning Coals, something ('it is likely) like a
Grate being laid between, 1 Kings 19. 6. Isa. 44. 19. These were the two ways
of Baking their Cakes, i. e. their lesser and siner Bread, which after they
were sufficiently baked on one side were turned on the other: whence is that
Comparison of a Cake not turned, Hos. 7. 3. They had Ovens, which were first
used for Baking the Holy Bread, Lev. 2. 4. and 26. 26. but afterward for that
which is Common, viz. the greater and larger Bread. But (to conclude) we are
not to think that Loaves of Bread, such as we have of a considerable Thickness
and Height, which must needs be cut with a Knife, were in use among the Jews or
other Eastern People: but they made Broad Cakes, and these they broke with
their Hands, whence we so often read of breaking Bread. If they were somewhat
thick, they were generally called (...) Loaves of Bread, 1 Samuel 10. 3. but if
they were very thin, or if they were of a siner sort of Flour, they had the
Name of (...) Cakes, Lev. 7. 12, 13.

From these Sacred Records we may also learn what was the Primitive Drink. Foo
though it is not expressly said any where that they drank Water before the Flood,
yet we may rationally gather so much, because this simple Element was most
suitable to their simple and plain sort of Feeding, which is in direct Terms
expressed. And that this was the general Beverage after the Flood also, we are
assured from positive Texts, Genesis 21. 19. and 24. 14. Job 22. 7. 1 Kings 13.
22. Prove. 25. 21. Likewise from these Authentic Writings we know that another
Liquor (which was denied to the world before) was now granted them, viz. Milk,
Genesis 18. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 14. Judge. 4. 19. Cant. 5. 1. Yea, Wine the choicest of
all Liquors became the usual Drink of those Eastern Countries, which was
occasioned thus, (the Knowledge of which can be known only from Scripture
originally) God having granted an Indulgence to eat Flesh, Noah took it for a
sufficient Intimation that they might change their Drink sometimes: wherefore
he being a Man of Observation and Prudence, gathering from the goodness of
Grdpes the virtue and benefit of Wine, (for even before the Flood they did eat
Grapes, as all other Fruits of the Earth, but drank no Wine: unless we grant
that the bold and luxurious Sinners of Cain's Offspring sometime before the
Deluge knew this Liquor, and abused themselves with it, for it is said they
drank, Luke 17. 27. i. e. they excessively gave themselves to some Strong and
Intoxicating Liquor) Noah I say, understanding the benefit of Wine, and
apprehending how seasonable and comfortable it would be at that time when the
Flood had so chilled the Earth and Air, and made every thing look bleak and
dismal, he began to be an Husbandman, ^^h Haadamah, a Man of the Earth, Genesis 9.
20. and among other Instances of his Husbandry, he planted a Vineyard, he set
Vines in that warm Country where he was seated, viz. Armenia: He chose this as
a proper Soil for them; for Armenid is noted for an excellent Ground for Vines,
and the Vines of that Place are celebrated by Historians. Others planted Vines
before him, mixing them with other Trees, but Noah planted a Place of Vines
only: this is properly Kerem, Vine^. Others had planted Vines in their Grounds,
that they might eat the Grapes that grew on them, and perhaps some (as was
hinted before) had preserved the Juico of them, and made themseves drunk with
it: but Noah's Plantation of Vines, was purposely in order to make Wine of the
Fruit of them. Thus he was the First that planted a Vineyard: the skilful
ordering of that generous Fruit to this particular End, was first found out by
him. And now when the Good Old Man had taken this Pains, and we may suppose was
very weary and thirsty, he began to taste the Fruit of his Labors, which
happened to be with ill Success: for he had chosen so excellent a Spot of
Ground, and had so richly cultivated it, that the Product of it proved too
pot^nt; the Liquor of that noble Plant, which he too rashly made an Experiment
of, and with some Greediness took down, was too strong for his Brain. But as he
sinned once in this kind, so he never did the like again. Yea, as he found out
Wine, so it is not improbable that he admonished Men from his Failing to use it
soberly. What the Pagan^^ Writings say of the first Inventer of Wine is little
to be heeded, unless you refer it to this Noah, who is represented by their
Bacchus and Ianus. They all agree, that (...). Diodor. Sic. lib. 5.
the former of these first planted Vines, and found out the Art of managing
them, and made Wine of the Fruit of them; wherefore they confound him with the
latter, viz. Ianus, who had his Name from Iajin, Vinum. This was no other than
Noah, the happy Author of this Boon to Mankind. And his Sons propagated this
Art, he especially that went to inhabit in Africa: whence (as was observed by
an St. Augustine. de Civ. Dci, l. 18. c. 13.
Ancient Writer) the Poets feigned that Dionysius, in the Days of Deu^alion,
discovered this Art of making Wine to the Person that entertained him in Africa.

They had anciently other Strong Liquors besides Wine, the general Word for
which wa^ From shacar, ebrius suit.
(...), Lev. 10. 9. Numb. 6. 3. Judge. 1 3. 4, 7. and 29. 9. Isa. 5. 11. and 28.
7. Prove. 20. 1. rendered always (...) by the Seventy, except in two Places^ (
Psalm. 69. 12. Prove. 31. 4.) where it is translated (...). The Greek Word is once
mentioned in the New Testament, viz. Luke 1. 15. and is rendred^ by our
Translators (as the word Shacar in the Old Testament) strong Drink. It is all
Inebriating Drink* says Hom. 7. in Lev.
Origin: So says (...).
another Greek Writer* with whom agrees a Learned Latin Omne quod inebriare
potes^ apud Hebraeos sic^ra dicitur. Hieronym. lib. d^ Nom. Hebr.
Father. But others that have criticized on the Word, especially the Hebrew
Doctors, tell us, that it is all Strong Drink except Wine. But ^ soba,
inebriatus ^uit.
(...), Isa. 1. 22. Ho^* 4. 18. is a Word that signifies Wine properly so
called, i. e. the Juice of the Grape, and also al^ factitious Wines, i. e.
strong Liquors made of Mulberries, Palms, Pine-nuts, Apples, Pears, and other
Fruits. So that what we call Sider, Perry* etc. is that Drink which was by the
Hebrews called Soba. And the Rabbis comprehend under this Term Ale, and tell
us, there was such a sort of^ Liquor of old in use among the Medes and
Persians, the same which was anciently used in Egypt, and found out by Osiris
one of the Kings of that Place: for Lib. 1. c. 2.
Diodorus the Sicilian relates that i^ the Countries where there were no Vines,
this King caused them to make a Drink of Water and Barley; which Lib. 2. c. 77.
Herodotus had before taken notice of, calling it (...). And this (...),
Barley-wine, is mentioned by Athenaeus. I will only add here under this Head,
that they used of old to dash and mingle their Wine with Water: whence a Cup of
Mixture, Psalm. 75. 8. is a Cup of Wine, and Wine is expressed by Mixture
(according to the Hebrew) Prove. 23. 30.

And since I have gone thus far, and have enquired into the First Eating and
Drinking of the People of the World, I will proceed further on this Subject,
and from the same unquestionable Records give some Account of the Posture which
they used in Eating and Drinking. We may here inform our selves that at first
they sat at Meat, i. e. they either spread something on the Ground, and sat
upon it, or they sat at a Table. Whatever some Critics have suggested
concerning the Antiquity of another Position of Body, it is certain that this
was the Antientest of all: for in the Old Testament there are Examples of this,
long before any of those that are alleged out of Profane Authors. The Old
Hebrew Patriarchs sat at Meat, as is plain from Jacob's Words to his Father,
Sit and eat of my Venison, Genesis 27. 19. There are no Writers in the World that
go so far back as this. And the next to this is Genesis 37. 25. They sat down to
eat Bread. On which Words Drusius observes that the Old Hebrews sat at Meat.
That this was the oldest Posture among the Jews, these Texts sufficiently
testify; The People sat down to eat and drink, Exodus 32. 6. and the Apostle,
according to the LXX, renders it so, 1 Cor. 10. 7. (...). They sat down, and
did eat and drink both of them together, Judge. 19. 6. I should not fail to sit
down with the King at Meat, said David to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 5. And in ver.
24. it is expressly said, The King sat him down to Meat. And here by the way we
may observe, that there was a certain Order and Precedence observed in their
sitting in those times. They were seated every one according to their proper
Rank and Quality: Thus Abner sat by Saul' s side, ver. 25. And David had his
peculiar Situation allotted him, which is signally styled his Seat, ver. 18.
and his Place, ver. 25. That Sitting was the Eating Posture is further evident
from 1 Kings 13. 20. It came to pass as they sat at Table. When tho^ sit to
eat with a Ruler, says Solomon, Prove. 23. 1. And many other Quotations to this
purpose might be produced, where (...) (which is always rendered (...) or (...)
by the LXX) is the Word used. It is true, the first Paschal Lamb was eaten by
the Jews standing; but that was an Extraordinary thing, because that particular
^esture was fittest for that occasion, it signifying their sudden Passage and
Departure out of Egypt. Wherefore those who make use of this Instance to prove
that Sitting at Meals was not the Primitive Posture, do it very impertinently,
because there is no arguing from an Unusual Case to what is Common. They might
as well argue that it was the Custom to eat with Staves in their Hands, because
they did so at this solemn Occasion: whereas the true Account of this
particular Circumstance wa^ this, that the Passover was to be eaten in a
Pilgrim's Guise, in remembrance of their traveling out of Egypt. This, as well
as eating with their L^ins girt, and with Shoes on their Feet, was a Temporary
Precept, and accordingly yo^ will not find it mentioned among the Directions
given about the Anniversary Passover afterward. Others as vainly infer from
the strict Command laid upon the Israelites to have Exodus 12. 11.
their Shoes on their Feet at the eating of the Passover, that they used to
have them off at other times when they were eating, and consequently that
Discubation was first used by the Jews; for it is alleged that they were
barefooted, that they might not with their Shoes soil their Beds that they lay
upon. This is a very palpable Mistake, for the true reason why they were
commanded to eat the Paschal Supper with Sho^s on their Feet (as well as with
their Loins girded) was, because they were to eat it in haste: they are the
very Words in Exodus 12. 11. And therefore we cannot conclude from their eating
the Passover with their Shoes on, that either they were barefooted at other
times when they dined or supped, or that they lay down upon Beds. Besides, at
other times generally within Doors, and therefore at their Meals, they used to
wear Sandals or Slippers, a ^light and thin sort of covering for their Feet: in
opposition to which they are now upon this solemn Occasion enjoined to have
Shoes on, as much as to say, to be ready and prepared for their Journey. Or
lastly, if I should say that it was the custom to put off their Shoes at Meals
even when the Custom of Sitting prevailed, it were no hard Matter to prove it;
for they washed their Feet even at that time, as appears from the Relation
concerning Abraham's entertaining the Angels, so that they must put off their
Shoes for that, and it is probable they put them not on again till they went
out. Wherefore from their putting off their Shoes it does not follow that
Discumbiture was the Posture in those Days among the Jews, as some would
persuade us.

Then, as for Other Nations, the same Records assure us that they sat at
Eating: thus according to the use of the Egyptians, Ioseph's Brethren were
ordered to sit according to their Age, Genesis 43. 33. Whence (...). De Vita
Politica.
Philo observes, that the Custom of Discumbiture was not yet received in those
Days. And that this was the Posture of eating not only among the Jews and
Egyptians, but the Assyrians and Chaldeans, may be proved from that one single
Text, Ezekiel. 23. 41. where the Prophet speaking of that adulterous and luxurious
Conversation which the Jews had with those Foreign Nations; describes it by
sitting upon a stately Bed, and a Table prepared before it. Only here we may
observe, that they began to decline from their first simple Usage, and to turn
their ordinary Seats or Stools into Beds or Pallets. Conformably to these
Eastern People, the Grecians behaved themselves, who (as Deipnosoph. l. 8, etc.
Athenaeus attests in several Places) sat at their Feasts. He takes notice that
Lying along or Leaning is not once mentioned in Homer, but that he makes all
his Guests sit at Table. And they were seated according to their Worth and
Eminency; whence it is, that the Grecians showed their respect to Diomedes,
(...), by seating him first at the Ta^le, by placing him according to his
Dignity, as well as by entertaining him with choice Meats and full Cups. So it
was with the Old Romans, they feasted sitting. Virgil. Aen. 8.
Perpetuis soliti patres considere mensis. And that this was their Posture at
first on their Tricliniary Beds, Servius remarks on Aeneid the 7th. From
abundant Instances it is concluded by Athenaeus, that (...). Deipn. l. 1.
the Antientest Heroes used Session, not Discumbiture, at their festival
Entertainments. This without doubt was the first, and most received situation
of their Bodies at such times. In the most Heroic Ages of the World they sat
upright when they were at Meals.

But afterward this Posture was changed, for when Men gave themselves to ease
and delicacy, and grew soft and effeminate, they lay down upon Beds at their
Dinners and Suppers, and thence the Eating-Bed was called Plin. Not. Hist. l.
33. c. 11.
Discubitorius Lectus. Lying upon their left Sides, they upheld and rested the
upper Part of their Bodies with their left Elbows (under which was wont to be a
Cushion.) It is supposed they might sometimes (perhaps when they drank more
freely) sit up a little, but for the most part they were in this leaning
lolling Posture. This became a general Custom among the Greeks and Romans, as
Authors relate: but the first Rise of it was from the Eastern People, and this
we have first discovered to us from the Holy Scripture, which mentions
Ahasuerus's Supper, and the Rich and Gaudy Beds used on that Occasion, Esther
1. 6. That the Persians lay on Beds at their Banquets, may be gathered from
Esth. 7. 8. Haman was fallen on the Bed where Esther was. From these and other
Oriental People, this wanton and effeminate Usage came to the Jews. Those among
them that were Luxurious Feeders lay along, with their Bodies stretched out at
their Feasts. This seems to be intended in Amos 2. 8. they lay themselves down
upon Clothes, belonging to Bedding at Feasts. But more expressly it is said of
them, Chapter 6. v. 8. they lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches. The next Words which particularly make mention of their Eating
and Drinking, and the usual Attendants of them at high Festivals, viz. Vocal
and Instrumental Music, and Odoriferous Ointments, show that it is meant of
their lying on Beds at their Feasts. Wherefore I can by no means approve of
what our Dr. Hammond' s Annot. on March. 8. 11.
Learned English Annotator says, that the Custom of (...), accubitus, lying
along at Meat, is not mentioned in the Old Testament. And afterward these
Dining Beds began to be a general Custom among the Jews, and the best and
holiest Persons complied with this Practice, insomuch that leaning or lying
upon them was the Posture used by our Bles^ed Savior and his Apostles at the
Passover, as well as at other times. The words (...) and Matthew. 14. 19. Joh.
13. 23.
(...), but especially Matthew. 9. 10. Mark. 16. 14. Luke 22. 27. John. 6. 11.
(...), are used in the New Testament to express this particular disposing of
their Bodies, although our Translators render it by sitting down to Meat, or
sitting at Meat.

And if we would know what was the Particular Manner of placing themselves in
those Days at their Mensal Beds, this may be learned from several Passages in
Scripture, as well (though not so largely) as from the Greek and Roman Writers:
nay, here are Antienter Instances of that way of disposing their Guests than in
any other Authors whatsoever. A Room was generally spread with Three Beds,
(therefore by the Romans called Triclinium) one of which was situated at one
end of the Table, the other two at both Sides: and as for the other part or the
end of the Table, it was left clear for the Waiters to serve up the Dishes.
Generally three or four lay upon a Bed together: but this is to be understood
of Men only, not of both Sexes. For it was not usual for the Women and Men to
eat promiscuously at one Table on one Bed, because the Posture was not fit and
decent for the former. These therefore usually had a Triclinium by themselves,
and feasted apart: thus Ahasuerus feasted the Men, and Vashti the Women, Esther
1. 3, 9. So the Daughter of Herodias went to her Mother in another Room,
feasting at the same time at another Table, Matthew. 14. 2, 8. for she stepped
thither to take her Mother's Instructions, and then came in straightway unto
the King, Mark 6. 25. So it was with the Greeks generally, the Women did not
dine and sup together with the Men. But it was otherwise with the Romans: yet
this distinction at first was observed by them, that Foeminae cum viris
cubantibus sedentes coenitabant. Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1.
the Men lay along at Meals, the Women sat: but afterward in the degeneracy of
Times, the same Posture was used by both Sexes.

Again, we find that this Discumbiture (as well as the other Posture before
spoken of) was not in a disorderly manner, but every one had his Place
according to his Dignity. When thou art bidden of any Man to a Wedding,( i. e.
to a Wedding-Feast) lie not, or lean not (for so it should be rendered according
to (...).
the Greek) in the highest Room, in the chief Place of Decumbiture, Luke 14. 8.
for the Word is (...), to which is opposed (...), the last or lowest Place,
ver. 10. The Invited did not take what Place they pleased, but the Worthiest
were placed first; therefore the Pharisees, who thought themselves Persons of
the greatest Worth, ambitiously sought after the highest Places, they loved the
uppermost Rooms at Feasts, Mat. 23. 6 The (...), (for it is in the singular
Number, though we render it as if it were plural) the dining Bed, which they
knew was usually preferred before the rest, and the chief and most honorable
Situation in that Bed, they also affected. The Order of placing was this; the
Chief Guest did lie at the Head of the First Bed, with his Feet behind the back
of him that lay next to him: so the second Man's Head rested in the first's
Bosom, and his Feet were behind the Back of the third. To this Ancient Way of
lying along at Eating, those Words in Cant. 2. 6. His left Hand is under my
Head, and his right Hand does embrace me, seem to refer (for this is supposed
at a Feast, a Country-Banquet in a Garden or Orchard, ver. 4. 5. which was the
ancient Usage; and thence we Cic. Offic. l. 3.
read that Canius a Roman Knight bought a Garden of Pythias, in order to invite
his Friends, and feast them there). The Person, according to the Situation
before named, might, if he pleased, lay his left Hand under the Head of him
that lay next to him, and was in his Bosom; and he lay also conveniently to
embrace him with his other Hand or Arm. Thus it is said, the Disciple whom Jesus
loved leaned on his Bosom, John 13. 23. And again, ver. 25. He lay on Iesus's
Breast, which is a plain Proof of this Order of lying at their Suppers at that
time. Our Savior had the first and chiefest Place, John who was dearest to him
lay next to him, and leaned his Head in Christ's Bosom. For this was the Custom
of those times, their Favorites and Friends, and such as they loved most, were
placed just below them, so that they could rest their Heads on their Breasts.
That this was a Sign of Familiarity, Love and Respect, is evident from that of
Pliny the Younger, Epist. ad Sophr. lib. 4.
Coenabat Imperator cum paucis Veiento proximus, atque etiam in sinu
recumbebat. The Bride's proper Place at Supper was the Bridegroom's Bosom,
according to that of the Juven. Sat. 11.
Poet; -- Gremio jacuit nova nupta mariti. And those of either Sex that were
intimate and dear to them had this Privilege, as we learn out of In Verr. 1.
Tully and (...). Zonaras de Heliogabalo.
others. Here then we may guess at the Manner of our Savior's lying at Supper
with his Apostles, who with him were thirteen in all. Three Beds being placed
about the three Sides of the Table, there were four Persons in one, four in
another, and five in a third; or else two Beds held five apiece, and one of
them only three, who it is likely were our Savior, St. John, and St. Peter;
for as next to John he intimates that he should ask of Christ who was to be the
Traitor. This Bed whereon our Blessed Master and these two Apostles lay was the
Middle Bed, viz. that which was set at the End of the Table; but in respect of
the Beds which were placed on the two Sides was the Middle one; for this was
reckoned as the uppermost and most honorable. Christ lay at the Head or upper
End of this Bed, for this was the (...), the Chief Place of Recumbency, and was
always reserved for the Worthiest Persons; though I confess there was some
Variation as to this among the Romans, (and so might be among the Jews their
Imitators) among whom the other End of the Middle Bed was sometimes the
uppermost and most valued. Moreover, we may gather from Mat. 26. 23. that the
Table about which the Beds were placed was square and short, so that all of
them could eat out of the same Dish. He that dippeth his Hand with me in the
Dish, the same shall betray me, Mat. 26. 23. In which Words our Savior points
not at one particular Person, for all dipped their Hands in the Dish, they did
eat all in common; for their Beds were close to the Table, and the Table was
not broad, so that they could all conveniently reach to the Vessels in which
the Meat was. They could all put (that is the Meaning of Dipping) their Hands
into the same Dish; and among these that did so at this time, there was one
that designed to betray our Blessed Lord.

But though this was the Usage then, yet I must adjoin this, that at the
Entertainment of some Special Guests, and to show a more than ordinary Kindness
to them, there was another Custom anciently in use, that is, every one had his
Portion apart at the Table. Homer makes all his Heroes eat after this fashion;
particularly he tells us, that Ajax's Allotment (who it is likely was as good at
eating as fighting) was -- (...). -- Hom.
a Chine of Beef; for the more worthy and honorable the Guest was, the greater
was his Allowance. But the Sacred History gives us the earliest Examples of
this kind, as indeed it does of all other sorts of Usages. Here we read that
Joseph, when he entertained his Brethren, took and sent Messes ((...) according
to the LXX, particular Portions) unto them from before him, Genesis 43. 34. If it
be said that the Egyptians ^ight not eat Bread with the Hebrews, for that was
an Abomination to the Egyptians, ver. 32. and that was the Reason why they had
particular Parts or Messes allotted them, and therefore it does not follow
thence that this was a Custom either among the Hebrews or Egyptians when they
feasted asunder; I answer, the true Reason why the Hebrews and Egyptians did
not sit and eat together at the same Table, was because the one eat Flesh, and
the other did not, and on that Account their Different Customs were abominable
to one another. But the dividing of the Meat, and distributing a Particular
Portion to every one, had no reference at all to this, but was a General Custom
in those times, and was (I conceive) partly founded upon this, that hereby they
had no Opportunity of showing their particular Respects to the Guests according
to their different Quality; for the greatest and choicest Portion of Viands was
allotted to those whose Place and Dignity required more than ordinary
Deference, or for whom they had the greatest Kindness and Love. Thus in the
Relation here given us, Benjamin's Mess was five times so much as any of his
Brethren. This was a Mark of singular Favor and Affection, for Joseph was more
nearly related to Benjamin than to any of the rest, who indeed were but his
half-Brethren; but Benjamin was his Brother both by the Father's and the
Mother's side. Hence it may be gathered that this Practice was not grounded on
the Difference of Meats on which the Hebrews and Egyptians fed. And indeed from
other Instances in this Divine Book it appears, that though Persons sat at the
same Table, and differed not about the sort of Food, yet they had particular
Messes or Portions distributed to them. So when Elkanah and his Family and
Friends feasted together on a solemn Occasion, to show his more especial Love
and Regard to Hannah, he gave to her a worthy Portion, 1 Samuel 1. 5. Manah
aphajim (where aphajim is the same with panim, as is usual in the Holy Style) a
Distribution of Faces, such a liberal share of Meat as showed a favorable
Countenance, a particular Respect and Love; such a Portion as was usually given
to the best and most beloved sort of Guests. Another Remarkable Example of this
we have in 1 Samuel 9. 23, 24. where we read that Samuel invited Saul to a Feast,
and made him sit in the chiefest Place among them that were bidden, (for there
was a Precedence in those times according to the Rank of the Persons that were
invited) and he said unto the Cook, (whom he had spoken to before to prepare
this Entertainment) Bring the Portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto
thee, Set it by thee: (which I ordered thee to have in Readiness against the
time that I called for it) And the Cook took up the Shoulder,(for that was the
peculiar Joint of Meat which was designed for his Portion; and indeed it
appears from being the Priest's particular Portion, Lev. 7. 32. that it was
accounted the choicest part) and that which was upon it, (it may be some lesser
and daintier Morsels which were served up in the same Dish) and set it before
Saul. Whence it is evident that in old times they had a certain Measure and
Quantity of Meat appointed them at Feasts by the Governor and Master of it.
This is the appointed Portion, rendered by our Translators necessary Food, Job
23. 12. and this is the Food of Allowance or Appointment, Prove. 30. 8. which we
render Food convenient, attending to the Sense rather than the Original Word.
The set Portions of Meat were called by the Greeks (...); and the Name of the
Servants or Waiters that distributed them to the Guests, according to the Order
which they received from the Master of the Feast, was (...), as we may satisfy
our selves in Lucian and other Good Writers. And in this very Sense (...) is
taken in Mat. 20. 28. Mark 10. 45. Luke 12. 37. We read of the Ruler of the
Household, whose Office was to give them their Portion of Meat, (...), Luke 12.
12. where (...), of which that Word is compounded, is a general Term for all
Food, and so the Word signifies a certain Demensum, a Set Portion or Dividend
of Meat that was allotted to every one at Meals. And I am mistaken if our
Savior's Words concerning Mary, she has chosen, (...), the good Part or
Portion, Luke 10. 42. do not refer to this Distributing of the Food, and
particularly Martha's being cumbred about much serving, (...), the way of
providing for the Guests by allotting every one his Distinct Part. And it is
not improbable, seeing the Dispensers of the Gospel are compared to 1 Cor. 4.
1. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
Stewards and Mat. 24. 45. Luke 12. 42. Ephesians. 2. 19.
Governors of Families, that the rightly dividing the Word of Truth, 2 Timothy^
15. Haec Metaphora ^ convivii apparatoribus and dapu^^ instructooribus ducta
est. Gerhard. Harm. Evang.
has special Reference to this Custom of dispensing to every one his proper
share at the Table; though (as I have suggested) this was not a perpetual
U^age, and particularly at the Paschal Fea^ our Savior and his Apostles supped
together (...) common, and eat out of the same Dish.

Furthermore, from what we read in the Evangelical History, Luke 7. 38. viz.
that Mary Magdalen stood at Christ's Feet behind him, we may collect the Truth
of what has been suggested concerning their Posture at their Eatings in those
Days. Then Feet lay out behind the Backs of those that lay next to them, and so
those that waited at the Table were properly said to stand at their Feet
behind. Thence this is the Periphrasis of a Servi^or (...) Waiter, according to
De Benefic. l. 3.
Seneca, qui coenanti ad pe^^steterat. Likewise here we are acquainted that
Putting off the Shoes, and Washing the Feet, were an usual Attendant at Eating
and Feasting; and the one was in order to the other. I grant that the Ancients
wore not Shoes at all times, yea their Captives and Slaves went always
barefoot, as ^ evident from Isa. 20. 4. Nay, some of the better sort of People
among the Gentiles were put upon this Hardship by their severe Governors and
Lawgivers: so Lycurgus enjoined the Spartans to go without Shoes. But among
the Jews I find no such thing; even in the Wilderness (where they underwent the
greatest Difficulties) their Feet were clad with Shoes, by the same token that
they wa^ed not old, Deuteronomy. 20. 5. i. e. by a particular Providence they were
preserved from any considerable Decay a long time. And from Exodus 3. 5. Josh.
5. 15. Deuteronomy. 25. 9. and several other Places, it may be proved that their Feet
were armed with this Defense; yea, it was an Ornament as well as a Defense and
is reckoned as such in Ezekiel. 16. 10. where we find that Shoes of the best and
most fashionable sort were made of Badgers Skins, viz. dressed and made into
Leather. Now, when they came into a House as Guests to be entertained, they
stripped themselves of this lower Apparel, and had their Feet washed and
cleans'd; and this was the usual Introduction to their sitting or lying down to
eat. A very ancient Instance of this you have in Judge. 19. 21. They washed
their Feet, and did eat and drink. And that this was afterward a Jewish Custom
is clear from our Savior's upbraiding of Simon in those Words, I entered into
thy House, but thou gave me no Water for my Feet, Luke 7. 44. which he would
not have said if the Washing the Feet had not been a common Testimony of
Civility and Friendly Entertainment. From Lib. 14.
Athenaeus we learn that the Greeks used this Custom at their Feasts; and many
Authors attest the same concerning the Romans. And as to the Discalceation in
order to it, Deposui soleas, etc. Epigr. lib. 5.
Martial and Accurrunt servi, soleas detrahunt, etc. Heautontim.
Terence, and several other Writers speak of it.

Besides, the Sacred Writings inform us, that Anointing was of old an usual
Entertainment at their Feasts. Thus the Penitent Magdalen bestowed a Box of
Spikenard on Christ's Luke 7. 38. John 12. 3.
Feet while he was at Supper: and indeed, according to the Account before given
of his Situation at that time, she had the Advantage to do it, his Feet being
toward her, and bare; for (as was just now said) they put off their Shoes and
lay barefoot on their Eating-Beds. At another time this Religious Woman
refreshed and perfumed his Head with precious Ointment when he was at the
Table, Mat. 26. 7. Mark 14. 3. And it is particularly recorded that this
fragrant Ointment was in an Alabaster-Box: which is according to what
Herodotus, Athenaeus, Plutarch and other ancient Authors relate, (whom you may
see alleged in Dr. Hammond's Annotations on Mat. 26. 7.) that those particular
Vessels, viz. Alabaster-Boxes, were commonly made use of for that purpose. It
is said in the forementioned Place in St. Mark that she brake the Box of
Spikenard, but (...) signifies to shake or knock, rather than to break; so that
the meaning is this, she shook the Box, or knocked it against the Ground to
make the Ointment come forth the better. This pouring of Odoriferous Oils on
the Heads of their Guests at Feasts, is taken notice of in Psalm. 23. 5. where
with preparing a Table is joined anointing the Head with Oil. And in Eccl. 9.
8, 9. Eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart; and let
thy Head lack no Ointment. And because it was used at these times of Mirth and
Rejoicing, it is called the Oil of Joy, Isa. 61. 3. Of this it is probable, the
Parable in Luke 16. speaks, where among the Steward's Expenses a hundred
Measures of Oil are reckoned, which were used at Festivals. With the Holy
Scriptures accord the Pagan Writers, who frequently make mention of this
fragrant Unction. That it was used among the Greeks is manifest from the
Example of Telemachus, who according to Odyss.^.
Homer was not only washed but anointed before he supped. Martial bears witness
concerning the Romans, Epigr. Lib. 3.
Vnguentum fat^or bonum dedisti
Convivis, here.
But of this Anointing the Head with perfumed Liquors at Festivals, Dr. Hammond
has produced several Instances in his Annotations on Mat. 26. 7. and therefore
I remit the Reader thither.

Lastly, here is mentioned another remarkable Attendant of those Feasts, viz.
the Master or Governor of them. (...) is the Name given him, John 2. 8. and it
was a known Name among the Grecians: from whom the Latins borrowed their
Architriclinus. He was set over the Triclinium as an useful Officer, his Place
being to order the Guests at the Feast, and to give Laws concerning the eating
and drinking. And generally this Symposiarch, this Overseer and Controller of
the Feast, was a Friend and Associate of the Person that made the Feast, and
was acquainted with the Guests. Thus I have briefly from this Sacred Fountain
of all Good Letters, showed the Manner and Order of the Discumbiture among the
Ancients.

Next, we are here acquainted who were the Inventers of Mechanic Arts. We find
that Tubal-Cain was the first Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron,
Genesis 4. 22. Where by the way we may observe, that the late T. Burne^ Theory of
the Earth.
Philosopher is mistaken when he confidently asserts, that there were no Metals
or Minerals in the Antediluvian Earth. If he can prove that Tubal-Cain was not
before the Flood, (which will be one of the hardest Tasks he ever undertook)
then he may effect something toward his Hypothesis; but to say that the
Primitive Earth was without these Metals, and yet to acknowledge this Tubal-Cain
to be an Antediluvian, is perfect Contradiction, for he could not deal i^
Metals if there had been none at that time. Him then I take to be the First
Smith and Brasier that ever was in the World. Theory of the Earth.
Yea, perhaps these Terms of Brass and Iron may be more large and
comprehensive, and then here may be signified to us the general Skill of
Improving all Metals for the Needs of Mankind. It is not improbable that the
Art of Refining was found out by this Tubal-Cain* and that he taught Men the
separation of Metal^ from their Dross. However that this Separating and
Purifying them, to render them more useful were very Ancient, is plain from
Psalm. 12. 6. which mentions Silver tried in a Furnace of Earth, purified seven
times: And we read, Mal. 3. 2. of a Refiner Fire. But this we are certainly
informed of from the forenamed Text in Genesis, that Tubal-Cain was more
especially skilled in the use of those Metals there mentioned, viz. Brass and
Iron: he knew the particular and proper Use of them in all Trades and
Employments that require them, as in that of a Carpenter, a Mason, etc. and
most of the Laborious and Handicraft Trades.

With Mechanics and Manual Arts we may join Architecture, which cannot be
managed without Tools of either of these Metals. Where again we may observe the
rash and groundless Assertion of the foresaid Writer, viz. that there were not
of old any Instruments belonging to Building. This is confuted from what has
been said concerning Metals, for of these they could make Instruments that were
serviceable in Building. Therefore when the Egyptians held that Vulcan was the
Inventer of Architecture, it is probable they had reference to Tubal-Cain, (the
first Founder of Metals which were so useful in Building) who was the Heathen
Vulcan, as all Mythologists acknowledge. It is true, This, as all other Arts,
was mean and low at first, for it began with making and fixing up of Tents
(which I spoke of before.) The Father, i. e. the Inventer of which was Iabal,
who it is probable made them of Skins or Hides of Beasts; for our First
Parents, and without doubt all others in imitation of them, were clothed with
Skins (of which afterward) which they found kept out Rain and Cold; and
accordingly they learned to clothe their Tabernacles with the same Materials,
and for the same End and Purpose: and to confirm this, we read in several
Places afterward that the Tents ^r Booths were made of Skins; in tacking and
fastening of which it is likely they at length made use of some of Tubal's Hard
Ware. This was the first Essay of Building, these were the first Houses. And
from thence a Tabernacle and a House are convertible: thus Job mentions his
Tabernacle, Chapter 31. v. 31. not that he had not a House properly so called, he
being the Greatest Man in the East: and that he had so, appears further from
Chapter 21. v. 28. And his Children had such Houses, else the fall of the House,
Chap. 1. v. 19. could not have killed them. But sometimes they retained the old
Name of Tabernacles, which were first in use: therefore Job calls his House or
Palace a Tabernacle in the Place above cited. So in Judge. 12. 8. his Tent is
explained by adding his House: for as a Drusius.
Learned Critic says well upon the Place, Because they of old dwelt in Tents,
they afterward called any House a Tent. And it is further observable that their
Houses (for so it is in the Hebrew, though we translate it Households) and their
Tents, Deuteronomy. 11. 6. is as much as their Houses, namely their Tents: for in the
Desert they had only Tents or Booths, which were instead of Houses. And let me
observe further, that Ohel a Tabernacle is rendered (...) by the Seventy, in
Genesis 9. 21. and 24. 67. Number. 19. 18. Deuteronomy. 16. 7. Ios. 22. 4. Job. 29. 4. and
in several other Places. Yea, sometimes Ohel is rendered by the Seventy (...)
Pellis, as in Exodus 3^. 15. which confirms what I said before concerning the
Materials of Houses. Booths and these were alike, and thence perhaps arose the
literal Cognation between Beth and Booth, the latter being an easy Corruption
of the former. This is certain that the first Dwellings were Tabernacles* the
Old Patriarchs lived in these Moveable Pavilions, especially those of them that
kept Cattle and some of those were the most Considerable (...) in the World.
Some a long time after, as the Jer. 35. 7.
Rechabites, a sort of Votaries among the Jews (but not of the Stock of
Abraham, but originally Kenites or Midianites) chose this ancient and simple
way of living all their Days. But Architecture soon found an improvement, and
the old Tent-dwelling was turned into another sort of Habitation. Of this Art
of Building Cain is mentioned as the first Author: this Vagabond after all his
Travels at last ^at down in a certain Place, and there built Joseph. Antiqu. l.
1. c. 3.
Nod, Genesis 4. 16. and afterward he built a City, a walled City, and called it
Enoch, after the Name of his Son, v. 17.(whence in succeeding times it was
usual to give the Names of Men unto Cities and Countries, of which there are
Places named of old from Persons; as Adam, Ios. 3. 16. Abel, 2 Samuel 20. 18.
Cain, Ios. 15. 57. Sihon. Numb. 21. 34. So Haran, Jabesh, Salmon, ^ahab,
Jezreel, Ephraim, etc.
many Instances in Scripture.) This first Murderer was the first Builder, for
being haunted and tormented with a guilty Conscience, to divert it he fell a
building: and perhaps he did it to environ himself with Walls, to keep himself
safe. A City was made a Sanctuary, a Place of Refuge. And as Cain is recorded
to be the First Builder before the Flood, so Nimrod was the first after it; for
the City and the Tower which he and his Partisans built, are expressly mentioned
Genesis 11. 5. And if you would know the chief Materials that these bold
Architects made use of in this Work, the 3d Verse will acquaint you, they had
Brick for Stone, and Slime had they for Mortar. Which intimates, that they
would have made use of Stone to build the Tower, (for Stone was ever of
greatest Esteem for that purpose, and the Great Men's Houses were built of
these, 1 Kings 7. 9, 11. Isa. 9. 10. Am. 5. 11.) and would have cemented the
building with Mortar, if the Place had afforded either. But it seems it did
not, and therefore they used Brick instead of Stone, and a Bituminous Substance
which that Soil furnished them with instead of Lime and Sand. Accordingly we
are told by several Ovid, Lucan, Juvenal.
Pagan Writers that the Walls of Babylon were built of Brick: and Pliny and
other Authors commend the Bitumen or Asphalt of that Country, a kind of Pitch
which was serviceable in making of Cement.

But besides Examples of Common and Prophan^ Architecture, there are in these
Ancient Writings others of a different Nature, which are worthy of the Study of
all Curious Enquirers into Ancient Arts. Here is described the Famous Thebah,
Genesis 6. 15. etc. the Ark which Noah and his Sons and their Assistants built by
the particular Direction and Guidance of God himself. There were in this
Habitation upon the Waters, this Floating House, three Principal Stories and
Floors of an equal Length from one end of the Fabric to the other; in which
were peculiar Kinnim, Nests, for that is the Metaphorical Word that is used by
the Holy Ghost to express the sundry Mansions, the various Cells, Apartments
and Divisions for the convenient lodging of Noah's Family and all sorts of
Animals, and their different Foods. This Structure was six times longer than it
was broad, and ten times longer than it was high, and so was exactly
proportioned to the particular Symmetry of Man's Body at its full Extent: and
as to several other things, the Admirable and Singular Contrivance of this
Edifice, worthy of its Divine Author, has been demonstrated by the Arias
Montanus, Buteo, Hostus, Jacobus Capellus, Kir^cher, etc.
Learned. So that we have no cause to wonder at Clemens of Alexandria, when he
propounds the Ark(as also the Mosaic Tabernacle, which I will mention next) as
(...). Strom. 1.
an Eminent Exemplar of Geometrick Art. Another famous Specimen of Ancient
Architecture was the Tabernacle, that Portable Habitation of God, that Vehicle
of the Divinity, that Ambulatory House of the Almighty, that Traveling Temple,
that Appointed Place of Public Worship for the Israelites, that Visible Pledge
of the Divine Presence among them. All the Materials of which, as Gold, Silver,
Brass, dyed Wool, fine Linen, Goats Hair, Rams and Badgers Skins, Shittim Wood,
with all the sacred Utensils belonging to it, and the individual Shape and
Formation of every one of them, were by the particular Order, Appointment and
Designation of God himself, who extraordinarily inspired Bezaleel and Aholiah
with Skill and Art about that Noble Work. Here likewise we have an Account of
that most Celebrated Piece of Architecture, Solomon's Temple, wherein every
thing is Great, August and Divine, and suitable to its Author. The whole
Contrivance is so various, so artificial, that it has been reckoned by some of
the Wisest and most Judicious Men, as the Basis of the whole Art of Building.
Villalpandus (who was a Good Judge in the Case) declares that (...) Ezekiel*
Tom. 2. Par* ^. Lib.^.
the whole Architectonick Art, which the Grecians communicated to the Romans,
and which Vitruvius's Books present us with, was first derived from the Hebrew
Proportions in this Sacred Building, and the Apartments that belong to it. But
more especially it is the Idea and Pattern of all Great and Stately Structure
whatsoever.

As to the more ordinary way of Building, it is certain that the general
Draught or Scheme of Erecting of Houses, as they are represented in the^^
Sacred Writings, has been taken for the Model of these Dwellings in all
Countries ever since. And here I will choose out only one thing to speak of,
because it may give Light to several Passages in Scripture. It was the Custom
in Palestine to build their Houses flat at top; and they made a^ much use of
this as of any part of their Habitation. Here they walked, as may be partly
gathered from Deuteronomy. 22. 8 but it is in express Terms said in 2. Sam. 11. 2 that
David walked here in the Evening, the time when he saw the fair Bathsheba. Here
they prayed, as is evident from Acts 10. 9. Peter went up upon the
Housetop,((...), which is the Word in the New Testament, that answers to Gag
in the Old) to pray about the sixth Hour. For here the Jews had the Convenience
of looking toward Jerusalem, which they were commanded to do whenever they
prayed in a Place distant from it, I Kings 8. 48. and this was St. Peter's Case
here, wherefore he went up hither to offer his Prayers. Here they sacrificed
sometimes: whence you read of burning Incense on the Roofs of Houses, Jer. 19.
13. and 32. 29. and worshipping the Host of Heaven upon the House-tops, Zeph.
1. 5. This was also the place of Public Mourning and Lamenting, as is clearly
deducible from Ier. 48. 38. And in Isa. 22. 1 to go up to the House-tops, is to
make an open Condolance and Lamentation. From these high and eminent Places
they were wont to discover any Danger at a Distance; thence you read of the
Watchman going up to the Roof, 2 Samuel 18. 24. They used to speak to the People
from these Places as fittest for that purpose; whence that Proverbial kind of
speaking used by our Savior, Mat. 10. 27. to preach on the House-tops, is to
make a thing known to all, to proclaim it to the World. Here they did eat, and
drink, and sleep, especially in the Summer-Evenings; thus David rose from off
his Bed, 2 Samuel 11. 2. (the Bed where he had supped, and it is probable had
taken a short Nap afterward) and from hence had his unfortunate Prospect.
Again, this was usually among the Jews and other Eastern People, a Place of
Employment and Business, of one kind or other: and therefore, by him which is
on the Housetop, Mat, 24. 17. is meant, the Man that is about his Business or
Work at Home, in contradistinction to the Man employed in the Field, v. 18.
Lastly, from what has been suggested, and from the very Nature of the Place,
it must needs be gathered that it was open and exposed to the Sight of the
World, and therefore Absalom purposely made choice of this to defile his
Father's Concubines in, that it might be in the Sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.
22.

But then why were the Spies that were sent by Joshua into the Land of Canaan
lodged here by Rahab? ^os. 2. 4, 6. She brought them up hither to hide them:
therefore it seems there was upon this Roof some Place that was private;
otherwise she would not have disposed of them here. It might be answered, and
that from the Context, that though it was an open Place, yet she knew that the
green Stalks of Flax which lay there a drying would sufficiently cover those
Persons, and keep them from being seen, especially in the Night-season. But I
rather think that the Cunning of this good Woman lay in this, that she carried
them up to a Place that was known to be open and frequented, and therefore it
could not be imagined that she would, or that she could hide them in the
openest Place of her House. Here was the Subtlety of this Female; she knew that
(...) Body would look for them in that Place, for ther^ could not be the least
suspicion of their being there: however, she had taken a Course to prevent
their being discovered, if the busy Searchers should have had the groundless
Curiosity of looking into that Place.

Further, I might observe, that because Flat-roofed Houses were the way of
Building in thos^ Countries (and generally in all Asia) there was care taken to
fence this Part about, that it might not be dangerous. Among the Jews this was
by the particular Injunction of the Divine Architect, Deuteronomy. 22. 8. Thou shall
make a Battlement for thy Roof. And the reason of this (...) Muru^ per
circuitum(as the Vulgar Latin renders it) is ad^ded, That thou bring not Blood
upon thy House, if any Man fall from thence. The flat Roofs of their Houses
were railed in, that none might slip off of them, and hazard their Lives. And
here by the by, I may add, that this was the very Structure of the Temple; it
was flat at top, and accordingly was encompassed round with a Peribolus, a ^ett
of Rails or Battlements: and this we are to un^erstand by the Pinnacle of the
Temple, Mat. 4. 5. i. e. some Part, Side or Wing(as the Word (...) imports) of
the Battlements wherewith the Temple was surrounded at top, lest any should
fall down thence. And to confirm this Interpretation, I willl produce that
Passage of Hege^ippus (quoted by Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
Eusebius) who relates that some of the Pharisees, and others of the
unbelieving Jews, came and requested James the Just, the Brother of our Lord,
and Bishop of Jerusalem, to preach at the Passover, when the People came from
all Parts to Jerusalem: and that he might be both seen and heard of all, they
de^ired him to stand (...), on the Battlement of the Temple: and he further
tells that he did so. It was a Place then that they might safely stand upon,
otherwise St. James would not have consented to their request. Dr. Hamm^nd
thinks this was the Top of the Battlement, and adds that it was broad enough to
stand upon: but supposing it was, yet it was unsafe to trust their Feet there,
lest they should slip, Therefore I rather think that (...) in St. Matthew, must
not be taken as it is in the forementioned Story: in the one it signifies the
Top of the Rails or Battlement, a dangerous Place to stand upon, and for that
reason the Devil set our Savior there: but in the other we are to understand
by (...) the Place within the Battlements, for the whole Space encompassed with
these had that Denomination. However we are hence informed that (...) is not a
Pinnacle or Spire, (for the Jewish Temple had no such thing, though some of our
Churches have) but the exterior Circuit, which compassed the Top of the Temple,
and was made to be an Ornament to it, as well as to prevent the Danger of
falling down. This is the proper Notion of it among Grammarians (as Annot. on
Man. 4. 5.
Dr. Hammond has rightly noted:) and not only the Temple but every House had
this (...), this Battlement about it. This is the short Account which I thought
fit to insert here of the (...), or as the Latins call them Solaria, (because
they lay open to the Sun and Air) the Flat Roofs with which the Houses
heretofore (especially in the Asiatick Regions) were built. And this is certain
that there is not so Early an Account in any Writers whatsoever of the
Structure of the Ancient Houses as this of the Sacred Penmen is.

CHAP. IV.
The first original of Letters and Writing is recorded here. The several kinds
of Materials they wrote upon of Old. The Instruments with which they formed
their Letters or Characters. The Antientest (as well as the most Excellent)
History is in the Bible. So is the Antientest and most Admired Poetry. The
first Invention and Practice of Music, and on what Occasions it was wont to be
made use of. The Rise of Natural Philosophy, and who were the first Founders of
it. The Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures necessary in order to the due Study of
Natural Philosophy. The first Instances of Anatomy, Medicks, Surgery,
Embalming and the Apothecaries Employment, are in the Old Testament. Here are
the first Examples of Shipping and Navigation. An Enquiry into the Place
whither Solomon's Navy went every three Years: A Conjecture concerning Ophir.
Astronomy and Judiciary Astrology mentioned in Scripture Of War and Skill in
Arms. The Nature of those Military Weapons which are spoken of in Scripture,
particularly and distinctly inquired into. The Antiquity of Martial Ensigns and
Standards. The vast Numbers which the Armies of old consisted of. The Scripture
is not silent concerning Sportive Diversions and Exercises: some of which, but
especially Dancing, are considered.

FROM Mechanical I proceed to Ingenious Arts and Sciences, or such as are
approaching to them; and I am to show that the Sacred History relates the first
Rise and Original of these. And what Liberal Art should I begin with but
Grammar? what should this part of my Discourse commence with but Letters and
Writing? Many have been very inquisitive about the First Author of these: and
truly it is worth the Enquiry, it being the Foundation of all Learning in the
World. The Pirk. Avoth. c. 9.
Rabbis held that (...) Writing, and consequently Letters, were created among
other things at the close of the sixth Day's Work of the Creation: but few that
are sober will give Credit to this. They were found out before the Flood by
Seth, ^aith the Jewish Antiquary; for according to Antiq. I. 1. c. 3.
him there were two Pillars, one of Stone, another of Brick, erected by that
Godly Patriarch, on which he caused his Astrological Notions to be written.
Afterward (for we may suppose this Invention lost by the Flood, though the
Pillars and Characters on them remained) Abraham retrieved the Art of Writing,
yea in manner invented it anew, says Philo. But there is no Proof at all of
what he or Josephus says concerning this Matter, and therefore we may justly
question the Truth of both. But supposing that Seth began this Art, and that
Abraham improved it, we are certain of this, that Moses came and perfected it,
having that most Complete Copy before him to instruct and direct him, the
Tables written with the Finger of God, Exodus 31. 18. We read of no Writing in
Scripture till this writing or engraving the Law on the Two Tables, which is
called in another Place the Writing of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 16. There is no mention,
I say, of any such thing before: wherefore it is likely God was the First
Inventer of Letters or Writing, and that Moses learnt it of him, and
communicated it to the Jews, from whom other Eastern People received it, and so
Letters were imparted to the rest of the World. Eupolemus and Artapanus, two
very Ancient Historians quoted by Strom. I. 1.
Clement of Alexandria, were of this Opinion, and asserted, that Letters had
their original from Moses. This is favored by Clement himself, by De Praepar.
Evang. l. 9.
Eusebius, by Lib. 7. cont. Julian.
Cyril of Alexandria: and De Civ. Dei, l. 18.
St. Augustine inclines to it.

And this is confirmed from that general report of the Pagans, that from the
Phoenicians all Letters were derived. Particularly concerning the Greeks,
Herodotus and Plutarch testify, that they recorded the Letters of their
Alphabet from the Phoenicians, and that therefore they were called (...),
Plutarch. Sympos. l* 9. quaest. 3*
the Phoenician Letters. Yea, the Word (...) absolutely and by it self is,
according to Hesychius, as much as (...) among the Lydians and Ionians. Lib. 3.
Lucan makes the Phoenicians the first Inventers of Letters, Phoenices primi,
famae si creditur, ausi
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
Now, when these are said to have first found out Letters, and when these
Letters are signally styled Phoenician, it is as much as if they had called
them Hebrew Letters, (so named from that Famous* Hebrew Moses, and the People
of that Denomination) for it is acknowledged by all the Learned, that
Phoenicians and Hebrews are ^^e same in several Authors. The old Distinction
was this, Dionys. P^ri^g.
(...)*
(...).
That is, those of Syria that inhabited the Contine^^ had the name of Syrians,
but those that bordered (...) the Maritime Coasts, were called Phoenicians, w^^
were the same with the Canaanites. When w^ find Pliny professing, Not. Hist. I.
7. c. 56.
Literas semper arbitror Assyri^^ fuisse, we cannot but know that by Assyrian
the Country of the Patriar^hs, and even the Jewish N^^tion are pointed at. When
therefore he says he is of Opinion, and always was, that Lette^^ were first of
all Assyrian, it is certain that he co^^firms what I am now suggesting. And
when the Gentile Historians tell us that the Invention (...) Letters was from
Cadmus, it is to our present Purpose, to observe who this Cadmus was. He (...)
said to be a Tyrian or Phoenician, whence h^ has the Title of (...), a
Syrophoeni^cian Traffiker, given him in Lucian's Council of the Gods. This was
he that brought the use of Letters to the Greeks: which shows that the
Origininal of them was from Canaan, from the Hebrews who were styled
Phoenicians. Besides, that the Greek Alphabet was taken from the Hebrew, not
only the Names but the Order and Figure of most of the Letters do plainly show.
And when it is said by Plato, Diodorus Siculus, Tully and others, that
Mercurius and Thoth (who were the same Person) were the Inventers of Letters
and Erudition, Moses is meant, for he is the true Mercurius, as I have had
occasion to prove by very convincing Arguments in another Place. This seems to
be referred to in the word (...), the Muses, who are the celebrated Authors of
Learning and all Ingenious Arts; for In Cratylo.
Plato (who was the greatest Searcher into Antiquity of all the Philosophers)
acknowledges that this Word is borrowed from the Barbarians: and it is well
known who are the Barbarians with the Greeks, viz. the Hebrews; which makes me
think that (...) is a Corruption of Moses, and that what is said of the Muses
is to be understood of him, and consequently that he was the First Inventer of
Letters and of Learning. Hence it is that the same Divine Philosopher in
another Place expressly testifies, that (...).
the Greeks received their Names and Letters from the Barbarians, who were
elder than they. Lastly, I will mention that Notable Passage in De Isid. and
Osir.
Plutarch, who speaking of the Egyptians says, (...), they think that Hermes
was the Inventor of Grammar: where by Grammar is meant all Good Letters, and by
Hermes we are to understand Moses, who (as has been said already) is
universally owned to be the Ancient Hermes. To this Excellent Man it pleased
God to reveal the Art of Writing, setting him an Illustrious Copy upon the two
Tables with his own Hand; so that next unto God himself he was the first
Inventer of Letters, or Written Characters: He who, when an Infant, was wrapped
up in the Egyptian Papyrus, (as you shall hear afterward) was most congruously
the Principal Author of Writing on it, and adorning that and other Materials
with Letters. The first Penman and Writer of the Bible had the Glory of this
Discovery, viz. to be the first Author of Writing.

These Sacred Records acquaint us also what were the First Ways of Writing or
making Letters. They let us know what Materials they of old wrote upon, and
what Instruments they wrote with. Here we learn that the first way of Writing
was Sculpture or Carving, i. e. they cut their Letters in Sto^^ or Wood, or
some other hard and solid Matter. We read that Moses, or rather God himself,
(...) graved his Laws on Stone, Exodus 34. 1. Deuteronomy. (...) and the People were
commanded afterward to write these very Laws after the same manner, Deuteronomy. 27.
3, 8. This is the First and Antient^^ Way of Writing that we read of. Stones
were their Books of old. On these they engraved the Characters which they had
learned. The Egypti^^^ did thus, says De Mist. Egypt. I. 1. c. 2.
Iamblichus, before their Invent^^^ of Paper. The Babylonians writ their Laws
(...) stony sort of Substance, says Not. Hist. l. 7. c. ^6.
Pliny. Of such (...) of Writing speaks (...) ^rania.
Herodotus. And all the (...) Marble Monuments which Rome affords, and ar^^^
this Day to be seen, witness the Antiquity of (...) Engraving. On Wood and
Trees it was usual to carve their Letters of old: Thus they writ the Names of
the Tribes on twelve Rods, Numb. 17. ^. and Ezekiel was bid to write upon
Sticks, sma^^ Pieces of Wood, Ezekiel. 37. 16. Writing on a T^ble, (...) according
to the LXX, super bu^^^ according to the Vulgar Latin, Isa. 30. 8. may refer to
this, I suppose. This Writing in Wood was not unusual among some of the
Gentiles: So Shepherds and Lovers used to cut their Names on the Barks of Trees
of old. This is called Virgil. Eclog. I0.
-- Teeneris incidere amores
Arboribus --
Some of the old Roman Laws were written in Dionys. Halicar. 1. 3.
Tables of Oak: and from sufficient Testimonies in Authors it might be proved
that they cut Letters in Wooden Tables, i. e. thin Slices of Wood, which were
called Codices. But afterward it was the Custom to cover these Tables with
Wax, and so to cut their Characters on it: of which sort it is probable was the
(...), the Writing-Table that Zacharias called for, Luke 1. 63. These Waxen
Boards were in use in the time of the Trojan War, as appears from Homer, Il. 6.
And that they were frequent among the Romans and others, is attested by Epist.
l. 7, 27.
Pliny, Instit. l. 10. c. 3.
Quintilian, In Curcul.
Plautus, Martial, and most of the Latin Writers. Of engraving Letters in Gold
there is an early Instance in Exodus 39. 30. where we are told that Holiness to
the Lord was written on a Golden Plate, and worn on the High Priest's Head. So
Lib. 44.
Dio relates that they anciently made Letters in Gold, and wrote in Silver. The
drawing of legible Characters on Lead, i. e. thin Leaves of that Metal, is
recorded in Job 19. 24. of which there were afterward Examples in Pagan
Writers, as in In ^^otic.
Pausanias, who tell us, that Hesiod's Poems were thus written. And Public
Records and Decrees, says Plumbeis voluminibus monumenta publica fieri c^^pta
sunt. N. Hist. ^. 13. c. 11.
the other Pliny, were wont to be transcribed into these Sheets of Lead,
because they were accounted Lasting and Durable For the same Reason the Twelve
Tables of the Ol^ Roman Laws that were fixed up in public were written on
Plates of Brass, as a great Number of good Latin Authors testify. And ^ome, to
preserve what they writ, imprinted Characters on Slices of Iv^ry, thence called
Libri Elephantini in Tacitus and Flavius Vopiscus. Thus Sculpture was one
ancient way of Writing among Men, of whi^^ the First Instances are to be found
in the Holy Scripture. And I doubt not but A^oliab, who w^^ the Chief Master of
Exodus 38. 23.
Engraving (and that by the particular Inspiration of Heaven) was the fi^^^
Improver of this sort of Letters. This was (...) Primitive Writing of Mankind:
the First Lett^^^ were cut and engraven, which indeed may be fou^^ in the very
Word; for to grave is the same with (...), and is thence derived without doubt.

As hither to we have seen by Help of the Sacr^^ Records that Sculpture or
E^^r^tion was the an^^ entest sort of Characters, so These likewise in^o^ us
that Painting was the next, i. e. that Lett^^^ were generally drawn and
pou^trayed in some bla^^ or ^able kind of ^olouring. And to this end, i^^stead
of those Hard Materials which were mad^ use of in writing before, there were
others a^terwards found out of a more tractable Nature. The Scripture does not
mention those that were (...) seldom and little used, as Leav^s of Trees,
espe^^^ally In palmarum foliis primum scriptita^^^ Plin. l. 13. c. 11.
Palms, which was the way ^f the Virgil. Aen. 3. Juvenal. Sat. ^.
Si^^^ transmitting some of their Verses. And that of old they wrote sometimes
on Leaves not only of Trees but Flowers, is more than once witnessed by Virgil
and Ovid. Still to this Day we seem to retain the Memory of this ancient way of
Writing when we say a Leaf of Paper, and Books in Folio. Nor are the thin Coats
or Rinds which were between the Bark and Body of Trees, and were used in
Writing of old, (as Cic. 2. ad Quint. fratr. Plin. I. 13. c. 11. Alexander ab
Alexand. Genesis dier. I. 2. c. 30.
several relate) and from whence came the Name of Liber at first, mentioned by
the Holy Writers, because their Use continued but a little time, and they were
of little Service. Much less is there any thing said of writing in Linen,
(which yet Lib. 4. dec. 1.
Livy, Lib. 18. c. 11.
Pliny, In Antonino.
Vopiscus, and others, take notice of) because this was used among the Indians
and such remote People as the Sacred History had no occasion to speak of. But
those Materials for writing which were of constant Use, and that among most
Nations, as Papyr and Parchment, are either expressly mentioned or tacitly
referred to. The former was made of broad Rushes and Flags, which grew in great
abundance in Egypt: of which the Prophet Isaiah foretelling the Confusion of
that Country speaks, chapter 19. v. 6, 7. The Reeds and Flags shall wither: the
PaperReeds by the Brooks shall wither, be driven away, and be no more. The
Gnaroth, the Materials for Writing, which were so celebrated all the World
over, and which were the peculiar Commodity of Egypt, and which brought in so
great Revenues to that Nation, these, even these shall decay, the Traffic of
them shall cease. Yea, when it is said that Moses was laid in an Ark of
Bull-rushes, Exodus 2. 3. a Grotius in loc.
Great Critic tells us, that the Papyrus is meant here; and for this he quotes
Lib. 4.
Lucan, Conseritur bibula Memphitis cymba papyro. And before him St. Ierom (the
most Critical of all the Fathers) thought the Egyptian Rushes, of which the
first Paper was made, are to be understood in this Place, and therefore Gome
(which is the Word here used) is rendered by him Papyr^^. And he it is likely
had this from Antiq. l. 2. c. 5.
Iosep^us, who acquaints us that the Ark in which Moses was secured, was made
of this great Flag growing on the Banks of Nile, of which they made Leaves to
write on, and whence our Paper at this Day has its Name. It was divided into
thin Flakes, which were pressed and dried in the Sun, and so were made
serviceable to write upon in some tolerable manner. Of this Papyrus est planta
nasce^^ in palustribus Aegypti, aut quiesc^ntibus Nili aquis. Lib. 23. c. 11.
Pliny and several other Writers speak; and thence Nile is called Papyriferus
by Metamorph. l. 15.
Ovid.

Parchment, which was made of Sheep Skins, or the thinner Skins of other
Animals dressed, was another thing they writ upon. The best of this sort was
made at Pergamus, and thence had its Name Pergamena but it was invented before
Attalus King of Peragamus his time, (though the contrary has been believed by
some Men) and was in use at the same time that the Egyptian Papyrus was; only
this was used for common Purposes, and the other for more choice Writing, and
such as they designed should last a long time. Therefore it is most probable
that the Books of the Mosaic Law, and the rest of the Old Testament, were
transcribed into this. Moses writ the Words of the Law, gnal sepher, upon a
Book, Deuteronomy. 31. 24. i. e. on Parchment, says Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast
on the place; for so he and other Learned Jews understood the Text. This is
meant by Megillah a Roll, Ezra 6. 2. and Megillah sepher a Roll of a Book, Jer.
36. 2. and Gillaion a Roll, Isa. 8. 1. and a Scroll rolled together, Isa. 34.
4. for it was Parchment (which is of some Consistency) not thin and weak Paper,
that was capable of being thus rolled up. To this In Terpsichore.
Herodotus refers when he says that writing on Skins was used by the
Barbarians, meaning the Eastern People, especially the Jews. And Antiq. l. 12.
C. 2.
Iosep^us avoucheth that the Books of the Old Testament were written in Sheets
of Parchment exactly joined and fastened together, of which Testimony of his I
have spoken in another Place. It is the general Opinion of Interpreters, that
by (...) are meant Writing- Parchments, 2 Timothy 4. 13. but I have heretofore
proposed another Sense of that Word, and therefore I make no use of this Place
here. It is likely that (...), a Scroll rolled together, Rev. 6. 14. refers to
this. And though I will not aver that by (...), (which our Translators render
Paper) 2 Ioh. v. 12. is to be understood Parchment, yet it is not wholly
improbable, for this was the usual Word to signify any thing that they writ
upon, whether Egyptian Reeds, or Leaves of Lead, or Gold, or Stone, or Wood, or
any of the other writing Materials before specified. The Matter, whatever it
was, was called (...) and Charta, from (...), (and this from the Hebrew Charath
seulpsit, exaravit) for this was a general Term, and signified any thing that
had Characters engraven or written upon it.

But the Scripture has not only taken notice of the Materials on which they
wrote of old, but of the Instruments with which they formed their Letters on
them. I mean here such as were of common Use, and therefore we must not expect
that it should say any thing of the Rubrica, (mentioned by Sa^. 5.
Persius and others) which served sometimes instead of Pen and Ink. With this
they writ o^ rather marked their Titles of Books; whence that of Sa^. 14.
Iuvenal, -- P^rlege rubras
Majorum leges --.
At other times they made use of Chalk, and of Coal, both which are mentioned
by Sa^. 5.
Persius, Illa prius creta, mox b^^c carbone notasti. But these were used only
on special Occasions, and were not the ordinary manner of Writing, therefore
it is no wonder that the Bible is wholly silent a^ to this. But it mentions the
Writing Instruments that were of common Use; as first those which were peculiar
to the Harder Materials, those wherewith they made Incision into Stone, Wood,
etc. Accordingly it tells us, that they used an Iron Pen or Style, and
therewith cut what Characters they thought fit in them. Of this we have mention
in Job 19. 24. where that holy Man wis^^th that his Complaints were written
down and recorded, that future Ages might take notice of them; which Moses, or
some other Inspired Person who digested and compiled this Book, thus
expresset^, O that my Words were engraven with an Iron Pen and Lead, with a
(...) ((...) according to the Seventy) made of Iron, and with Lead, plumbi
lamina, (as the Vulgar Latin) a thin Sheet or Plate of Lead, on which they
engraved Letters with this Iron Pen. And in the next Clause of this Verse he
wishes yet further, that his Words might be written in the Rock, (...), (as
the LXX render it) ut sculpantur in silice, the Vulgar Latin following the
Septuagint, as it generally does every where; which refers to the ancient
manner of writing in those Days, which was by Engraving of Letters not only on
Leaden Tables, but on Stone and Flint, with Iron Pens or Bodkins. These were
the first Instruments used in writing in the World. And when Jeremiah says,
Jer. 17. 1.
The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, and graven upon the Table of
their Hearts, it is an Allusion to this Practice: though here another Word is
used, viz. Cheret (from Charath, sculpsit, whence (...)) which is a graving
Tool, and so is rendered, Exodus 32. 4. With this they made the Letters on Wood
and Stone, and such like hard Substance, and in Wax-Tables.

Next, the Scripture takes notice of the ancient Instrument which was proper to
the other way of writing, viz. upon the softer Materials, as the Papyrus and
Parchment. This is called Shebet (which Word in other Places is rendered a
Scepter): We read that the Tribe of Zebulon afforded some that handled the Pen
of the Writer, Judge. 5. I4. such as were dexterous at this Instrument, such as
knew how to wield this Shebet, this Writing-Scepter, with Art and Skill. In
other Places it has the same Names that were given to the Engraving Pen: thus
it is styled Cheret, ((...) according to the Septuagint) Isa. 8. 1. the Pen of
a Man, i. e. such a Pen as Men usually writ with in those Days when they wrote
upon any soft and yielding Matter, and that was a Reed: which is confirmed to
us by Ier. 8. 8. where Gnet, the Pen of the Scribes, is (...) in the Greek
Interpreters. And in Psalm. 45. 1. where it is again called Gnet, the Pen of a
ready Writer, the same Interpreters render it (...), and the Vulgar Latin
Calamus, which is the Word used by Martial and others for the Egyptian Reed,
Which was the Writing Pen in their time; M^rt. Epigr. 38. lib. 14.
Dat chartis habiles calamos Memphitica tellus. And Aquila, a Learned Jew, who
knew the genuine Meaning of the Hebrew Word in this Place, renders it (...), i.
e. juncus, arundo aquatica, wherewith they anciently writ. It appears then that
Egypt afforded both Paper and Pens; the former was of that Rushy Plant before
described, the latter were of a Reed growing in the same Place, viz. about the
River Nile and the fenny Parts of Egypt, which being dried and hardened, and
conveniently shaped, was the usual Instrument of writing before the Invention
of Quills, It was so made, that it would contain and convey in it a black sort
of Liquor, (which answers to our Ink which we use at this Day) into which they
used to dip it. To this ancient writing with Ink or such like dark Substance
some have thought Ezekiel. 9. 2. has reference, where we read of the Writers
Inkhorn; but though the Hebrew Word be rendered Atramentarium by the Vulgar
Latin, yet in its Original Signification it has no reference to that
particular thing, but may be translated a Pen-case, or a Writing-Table, as well
as an Inkhorn. From the bare Sound of the English Word we cannot infer the
thing it self. We may as well affirm the Art of Printing was found out and
practiced in Job's Days, because he wishes that his Words were printed in a
Book, Job 19. 23. But there is a Place to our purpose, and that is Ier. 36. 18.
I wrote them (i. e. the Words which Jeremy spoke) with Ink in a Book. The
Ancient way of writing appears from what Baruch here says, that he wrote
Ieremiah's Prophecy (...) atramento, which was the black and inky Matter
(whatever it was) that was laid on by his Pen in writing. This is the (...)
mentioned 2 Cor. 3. 3 2 Ep. John v. 12. and again 3 Epist. v. 13. where it is
joined with (...), Which shows what was at that time the way of writing, viz.
with Reed-Pens dipped in Ink, which (as we are told by Pliny and Persius) was
variously prepared. The Greeks and Romans made it of Soot, says the Not. Hist.
I. 35. c. 5.
former of these Writers: and from him and Sat. 3.
Persius we learn that the Africans used the dark Excrementitious Humor which
the Sepia afforded them: and other black Juices served for Ink in other
Countries. Thus the most Ancient as well as the most Authentic Memoirs
concerning Letters and the Manner of Writing are in the Books of the Holy
Penmen. Thus the Foundation of all Grammar, and the Root of all Learning is
laid here.

Next unto Grammar I might mention History, the first Father of which was
Moses, whose Writings begin the Bible. All that I will say of him under this
present Character is this, that we are solely indebted to him for our Knowledge
of the Transactions of the First Ages of the World. As he wrote before all
other Historians, so he gives us an Account of those things which none besides
does; wherefore his Books are the Key of all History. To him are added Others,
who are not only of admired Antiquity, but ought to be prized as much for the
Admirable and Various Matter they communicate. Here are Excellent Historical
Passages of all sorts, Religious and Civil, Sacred and Profane, Foreign and
Domestic, relating to Politics and Oeconomicks, to Public and Private
Affairs. Yea, the Arcana Historiae.
Title of Procopius's History belongs only and properly to these Sacred
Chronicles, for here the Secrets and Depths of all Ancient Occurrences are
contained, and here are those Choice Materials which no other Histories furnish
us with. But I should be endless if I should enlarge here by particularizing;
therefore I will not launch out, but only commend to the Reader the Learned
Endeavors of Strigelius in his Commentaries on the Books of Samuel, Kings,
Chronicles, where he will be amply convinced of the unparalleled Diversity,
Multiplicity, and Peculiar Excellency of the Historical Examples in Scripture.

The Antientest Poetry is in the Old Testament: for as Moses was the first
Historian, so he is the first Poet that is ^xtant. A Proof of this we have in
that Eucharistick Song which he composed upon his passing the Red Sea, and is
recorded in Exodus 15. An Admirable Hymn it is, and in Hexameter Verse, if
Antiq. l. 2. c. 14.
Josephus may be Judge in this Matter, and if a Christian Father may be
credited, who had more Hebrew than most of the Writers of the Church in his
time, yea more than all of them except Origin. But whether this be true or no,
this is without Controversy, that there is no Piece of Poetry in the World that
has the Priority of this of Moses: for Orpheus, who is reckoned by the Pagans
as the First Poet, was, according to the most favorable Computation of some of
their Historians, three hundred Years after Moses, and Homer was toward six
hundred. Besides this Divine Hymn, there are other Ancient ones of the like
nature recorded in the same Authentic Writings, viz. Deborah's Song, Judge. 5.
which has many Noble Flights of Poetry; and that of Hannah; the Mother of
Samuel, 1 Samuel 2. 1, etc. which has Excellent Poetic Raptures. And here by
the way I will offer this Conjecture, that perhaps from Miriam's bearing her
part in Moses's Song, ( Exodus 15^ 20, 21.) and from these other Women's Poetic
Inspiration, which came to be celebrated among the neighboring Nations, the
Poets (who, as I have largely showed elsewhere, have frequent References to the
Old Testament) took occasion to report that Poetry was of Female Extraction,
and that Calliope, one of that Sex, was the Author of their Faculty. Other
famous Instances there are here of this Sacred Art, as David's Incomparable
Elegy on the Death of Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 16, etc. that Gratulatory
Hymn in the 12th Chapter of Isaiah; Hezekiah's Song of Praise in the 38th of
the same Prophet; Habakkuk's Lofty Description of the Divine Majesty and
Greatness in Poetic Numbers, chap. 3. the Style of which is far more sublime
and majestic than any of Orpheus or Pindar's Odes. I appeal to any Man of
Skill, and that has a right Poetic Genius, whether this be not true. And as
there are these single Hymns and Songs, so there are Just Poems, for of the
Books of the Old Testament there are six that are composed and writ in Verse,
viz. the Books of Job, the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles,
Lamentations. As to the Nature of the Hebrew Poesy, and the Kinds of Verses
which are in the Bible, the Learned Quaest. in cap. 4. Genesis v. 21.
Mersennus and others have given us some Account of them, but it is very short
and mean, and much of it is mere Surmise, and therefore I will not trouble the
Reader with it. A late Writer has attempted to prove that the Hebrew Verse or
Poetry of the Old Testament is in Rhythm; which I believe is true in many
Places: and if the Pronuntiation and Sound were the very same now that they
were when these Poetic Books were composed, we should observe the Cadence in
them more frequently. But he goes too far in asserting that all the Hebrew
Poesy in Scripture is Rhythmed, for they were not so exact at first: though the
Verses end with the same Sound sometimes, yet generally they took a Liberty.
Upon Examination we may find this to be true, and I may have occasion to say
something further of it when I come to speak particularly of the Psalms. But
the other Assertion, viz. that the Psalms and other Pieces of Hebrew Poetry are
always Rhythmical, necessarily infers a great many Faults and Mistakes in the
Scripture, it supposes several Places to be corrupted and mangled, (for we do
not find all the Poetry of the Bible to be such at this day) and consequently
subverts the Truth and Authority of the Bible, which is by no means to be
allowed of. All that I will add under this Head is, that even among the
Gentiles, the first and antientest Writers, were Poets. Geogr. l. 1*
Strabo undertakes to show that Poetry was before Prose, and that this is but
an Imitation of that. It cannot be denied that the First Philosophers writ in
Verse, as Orpheus, parmenides, Empedocles, Theognis, Phocylides, etc. and
thence (as Bishop Stillingfleet Origin. Sacr.
One of the Learnedest Men of our Age observes) the Moral Precepts of the
Philosophers were called of old (...) and Carmina. The Grecian Oracles were
delivered in Verse. Concerning the Agathyrsi we are told by Aristotle, that
their Laws were all in Meter. Concerning the Old Germans, Tacitus relates that
their very Records and Annals were in Verse. And all this, it is probable, was
in Emulation of the First Sacred Writers, the Penmen of the Old Testament, in
whose Writings there are several things dictated in Measure, and some entire
Books are altogether Metrical; for it was the Design of the Holy Ghost to
delight as well as profit.

With Poetry let us join Music, it being of so near Affinity with it: and the
First Inventer of this also is to be known only from the Scripture; which
informs us, that Iubal, the Son of Lamech the sixth from Adam, was the Father
of such as handle the Harp and Organ, Genesis 4. 21. From whose Name some have
thought the Iubilee was called, because it was proclaimed with Music. The
poets tell us, that Apollo and Mercury were the first Authors of it, by whom it
is not improbable they meant Moses, who first gives an Account of the Original
of this Art, and might well be represented by Apollo because of his Singular
Wisdom, and by Mercury because he was the First Interpreter of the Divine Will
in his Writings, and on other Accounts merited that Name, as I have evidenced
in another Place. Perhaps the Story of Pythagoras's finding our Musical Notes
from the Strokes of the Hammers upon the Smith's Anvil, was suggested from
this, that the first Musical Instrume^^^ were made of Iron and Brass, the
Metals of the Smith and Brasier. Or, if I should guess^ it a downright Mistake
of Tu^al for Iubal, (Sons of the same Father) a Smith for a Musician, or that
it was suggested from the Music of their Name^ ( Tu^al and Iubal having some
affinity in the Sound) it would be hard to disprove it. But that which is
certain is this, that as the First Inventers o^ other things are recorded in
Scripture, so particularly is he that found out Music; and by the Harp and the
Organ all other Musical In^trument^ are meant, whether Pulsative or Pneumatick.
And it is not improbable that the same Person was the Author of Vocal Music,
it being so natural and usual to join this with the other.

These Inspired Writings are the first that te^^ us on what Occasions these
several forts of Mu^^^ were used of old: as namely, first in a Religious Way.
Harmony both Vocal and Instrumental was primitively consecrated to God, as we
learn from Exodus 15. where it is said that they not only sang unto the Lord, v.
1. and that Alternately, (for Miriam ans^ored them, viz. the Persons that ^ung
before: she repeated their Song, ^. 21. which s^ews the Antiquity of that
Alternate way of Singing) but they made use of Timbrels, v. 20. And afterward
in David's Reign it more solemnly became a Religious Exercise, he so often
making use of it in his own personal and private Devotions. For he was not only
an Excellent Poet, and composed psalms and Hymns, (which by the by shows that
Poetry is an Accomplishment worthy of a Prince, yea of a Saint) but he played
with great Skill on Musical Instruments. Hence he mentions his Harp and other
Instruments often in his Book of Psalms. And it appears from what we read in 1 Samuel 16. 19. that he was initiated into this Art betimes, and was very Eminent
in it when he was a Young Man, otherwise he would not have been sent for to
Court. But he not only made and played his Psalms, but he sung them, and was so
famous for it, that he is by way of Eminency, styled a Sam. 23. 1.
the Sweet Psalmist, or Singer of Israel. Nor was Music his own Entertainment
only, but it was by him constituted a part of the Public Worship. He being
Poetical and Musical, endited Hymns, and his skilful Musicians 1 Chronicles. 25.
set them to grave and serious Tunes, and then they were devoted to the Church,
and do still remain Patterns of Devotion, and so shall to all Ages. To the
Religious Use of Music both of Voice and Instrument, those words in Psalm. 68.
25. refer; The Singers (Sharim, the Princes or Chief Masters of Singing) ^ent
before, the Nogenim, the players on Instruments followed after: amongst them
(or in the middle of them, according to the Hebrew, viz. between the
Singing-men and Players) were the Damsels playing with Timbrels. So that both
Sexes were wont to join in consort at the joyful bringing forth and procession
of the Ark, which are here meant, and called the goings of God in the
Sanctuary, v. 24. To this belongs Chron. 5. 12, 13.
Sam. 6. 5. David and all the House of Israel played before the Lord on all
manner of Instruments, viz. at the removal of the Ark. And those Musical
Instruments are particularly and distinctly mentioned in the next Words, Harps,
Psalteries, Timbrels, Cornets, Cymbals. Afterward, in Solomon's time when the
Temple was erected, and Singing-men and diverse Orders and Degrees of Musicians
were appointed, some being Masters, others Scholars and Candidates, (as we may
inform our selves from 1 Chronicles. 15. 22. and 25. 7. Ne^. 12. 46.) Music was a
considerable Part of Divine Service. And there was not only Singing of Psalms,
but playing upon Instruments, of which some were Psalm. 4. 1.
Neginoth, such as yielded a Sound by touch or stroke, others were Psalm. 5. 1.
Nechiloth Wind-Instruments. This was the pompous Service of the Jewish Church,
this was the Temple-Musick, which began not (as Dr. Lightfoot thinks) till the
pouring out of the Drink Offering, when the Cup of Salvation (as the Psalmist
calls it) went about. And here also it might be observed, that the Religious
and Prophetic Raptures of holy Men were attended with, and promoted by Music:
thus a company of Prophets came down from the high Place (where they had been
worshipping) with a psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and Harp before them, 1 Samuel 10. 5. praising God with Songs which the Holy Spirit dictated to them.
Thus the famous Prophet Elisha called for a Minstrel, and when the Minstrel
played, the Hand of the Lord came upon him, 2 Kings 3. 15. i. e. he was stirred
up thereby to undertake and accomplish great things for the Glory of God, of
which you read in the ensuing Verses. It is no wonder therefore that Music was
thought to be Divine, that it was (as Plato faith of it) the Invention De Leg.
Lib. 2^
(...) And though he spoke this of the Egyptian Music, yet all the Learned
know that the Pagan Writers commonly call that Egyptian which is Hebrew, for
they were wont to take the Jews for Natives of Egypt: and then it is not to be
doubted that the Sacred Use and Improvement of Music among the Jews was
referred to by this Philosopher. Thus Music was first dedicated to Religion
and Divine Worship.

But we read that upon other Occasions also it was made use of, viz. at all
solemn times of Rejoicing. Hence Laban complimented Jacob after this Manner,
that if he had known of his Intentions of going away from him, he would have
sent him away with Mirth and with Songs, with Tabret and with Harp, Genesis 31.
27. It seems this was the Ancient Entertainment at their Farewels. And the same
was used at all great Festivals, the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe (as
well as Wine) are in their Feasts, Isa. 5. 12. They chaunt to the sound of the
Viol, Am. 6. 5. And therefore to express the Cessation of these Feasts, it is
said, the Mirth of Tabrets cease, the Joy of the Harp cease, Isa. 24. 8.
Yea, at the most Innocent Festivals this was not thought unlawful, as may be
gathered from Luke 15. 25. where at the solemn Eating and Drinking which were
occasioned by the prodigal Son's return, there was (...), a Consort of many
Voices and Instruments, as the Word properly imports. This (as multitudes of
Authors acquaint us) was the general Usage among the old Greeks and Romans. And
what if I should ^ay that this is meant by Odyss* r.
Homer's (...)? (Whence perhaps the Word Anthems) for Music was on^ of the
constant Attendants at their Feasts. This likewise was the manner of expressing
their Mirth at Tidings of Victory, and the Triumphal Return of Generals and
Captains: thus Iephthah's Daughter came out to meet him with Timbrels, Judge.
11. 34. When David and Saul returned from the Slaughter of the Philistines, the
Women came out of all Cities of Israel singing and dancing, to meet them, with
Tabrets, with Joy, and with Instruments of Music^, 1 Samuel 18. 6. And it is added
in the next Verse, The Women answered one another as they played: which is
another Instance of Alternate Singing. This was the Custom at the Coronation of
Kings, 2 Chronicles. 23. 13. All the People of the Land rejoiced, and ^ounded with
Trumpets, also the Singers with Instruments of Music. And at all other Seasons
of Mirth this was the wonted Diversion and Entertainment. Yea, it was used on
special Occasions to expel Melancholy, and to free Men of their Distempers both
of Body and Mind: otherwise they would not have sought out a Man that was a
cunning Player on a Harp, to allay the evil Spirit with which King Saul was
troubled, 1 Samuel 16. 16. And we read how effectual this proved, ver. 23. It
came to pass when the evil Spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took a
Harp, and played with his Hand: so Saul was refreshed and was well, and the evil
Spirit departed from him. So powerful and charming are the Cheerful Airs of
Music. Conformably to which we find in Pagan Story that Discases and Madness
have been cured by these: so that Apollo was deservedly made by the Ancient
Sages the God of Medicks as well as Music. By which Fiction they acquaint us
that this Art is Medicinal and Healing. This reminds me of what our Chronicles
attest, that St. Bartholomew's Hospital was founded by a Minstrel. How
congruously do the Musi^al and Sanative Art meet together? Who has not heard
of the strange and wonderful Virtue of Harmony? Timotheus did what he would
with Alexander the Great by playing on his Harp: he had such a Command over him
by those powerful Strokes, that he could make him Fight or Drink, hasten to War
or Banquets as he pleased. And not only Men, but Brutes have been capable of
this Charm: several wild Beasts are caught, and Birds are enticed to the Net
with Music. Nay we are told by the Poetic Tribe, that Senseless and Inanimate
Creatures have felt the Force of it: which indeed is Romantic if you take it
literally, but the intended Design of this Flourish was to express to us the
Wonderful and Astonishing Virtue of this Delightful Art. Hence it is that the
Noblest Minds have not disdained to be acquainted with it, the most serious
Brains have been entertained and ravished with its agreeable Pleasures: so
Plutarch reports of Plato; and concerning Socrates we are informed by another
that even Socrates jam senex institui lyra non erubescebat. Quintil.
in his declining Years he was a Student and Practitioner in this Art. Lastly,
Music was made use of of old at Funerals, of which afterward.

Again, The Rise of Philosophy (Which is so useful to Mankind) and the best
Grounds of it are learnt from this Divine Volume. Here we are told that Natural
Philosophy was founded by Adam; for no less is comprehended in those words,
Genesis 2. 19, 20. The Lord God brought every Beast of the Field, and every Fo^l
of the Air unto Adam, to see what he ^ould call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living Creature, that was the Name thereof. And Adam gave Names to
all Cattle, and to the Fowl of the Air, and to every Beast of the Field. And
it is reasonable to believe that he also gave Names to Plants, Trees, Herbs, and
all Celestial and Terrestrial Creatures. Now, it is not to be questioned that
their Names were bestowed upon them according to their particular Nature; for
this Great Nomenclator was created perfect by God, and endued with the Knowledge
of all natural and divine Things, and therefore in fixing certain Names on
them, he thereby signified their peculiar natural Qualities. And that he really
did so, is manifest from his giving a Name to his Female Companion; as soon as
God brought her to him, he presently knew her by virtue of that excellent
Instinct and Knowledge wherewith he was created, and said, This is now Bone of
my Bones, and Flesh of my Flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was
taken out of Man, Genesis 2. 23. We see here that the Name Ishah or Woman was
imposed according to the nature and condition of the Person: and can any Man of
deliberate Thoughts imagine that the same was not done in the naming of the
Inferior Creatures? No certainly; especially if we take notice of the like
manner of expressing this and the other Imposition of Names: for as it is said
here, God brought the Woman to the Man, v. 22. whereupon he gave her her
Denomination, so in the foregoing place it is said, God brought the Creatures
unto Adam, viz. in order to their receiving their Names from him. Nay, this
very thing is particularly expressed in that forecited Text, which speaks of
this Action of Adam, (tho Expositors are not pleased to take notice of it) God
brought them to Adam, to see what he would call them. Where to see refers not
to God (as generally Interpreters think) but to Adam. The Creatures were
brought on purpose that he might see, i. e. that he might know by looking on
them what their Nature was, and that accordingly he might know how to give
Names to them. For it is not reasonable to think that this is spoken of God, as
if he himself would see or know, etc. for this would argue imperfection in him,
and would imply that he knew not at that time what they were to be called, or
at least what Adam would call them. Therefore this Interpretation which I give
of the Words is rather to be embraced than the other. We are acquainted here
with the End and Purpose for which all Living Things were summoned to appear
before Adam, viz. that he might give them Names which denoted their Nature.
Accordingly some of them that we meet with in Scripture give an Account of the
Qualities they are endued with. And though it is true that some of them signify
only their Outward and Visible Qualities, yet we are to remember that it was
not easy to discover even These at the first View of the Creatures, and
therefore Man's Sagacity was tried by it. And besides, the Primitive
Significations of many Names (as all the Learned acknowledge) are lost, and by
length of time are forgot; so that though some of these Words whereby Animals
are expressed, seem not to set forth their Internal Nature and Disposition, yet
we cannot thence peremptorily infer that they did not so at first, yea that
they do not so now, though we do not comprehend it by reason of our being
unacquainted with the Original Derivations of Words. I conclude then, that the
Creatures were brought to Adam to give him an early Opportunity of exerting his
Knowledge and Wisdom in fitly distinguishing the several sorts of Creatures by
their particular Names: and accordingly, whatever he ^all'd them, that was
their Name. Thus it is clear that this Nomenclatorship of Adam is a certain
Argument of the Insight which he had into the Natures of these Animals: and all
the Jewish Rabbis and Commentators on the Place acknowledge as much. And thence
is that Observation of In Cratylo.
Plato, that there is something extraordinary and Divine in the Ancient Names
of things: they arose from a more than humane Power, he says. It is not to be
doubted then that Adam was the First Philosopher, and laid the Foundation of
all Philosophic Notions. Next to him I will mention Moses, who (as I have
partly showed already, and shall more fully afterward, when I present the
Reader with a Particular Comment on the first Chapter of Genesis) was well
skilled in the true Principles of Nature, and perfectly understood the Right
System of the World. It is said of this Great Man that he was learned in all
the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. which comprehends not only
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, all Parts of Mathematics, Physics, of all
which there are several remarkable Strictures in the Pentateuch, but Moral
Philosophy, with which his Books are everywhere fraught. Solomon also was a
most profound Philosopher, as those Words in 1 Kings 4. 29, etc, amply testify,
God gave Solomon Wisdom and Understanding exceeding much. His Wisdom excelled
the Wisdom of all the Children of the East-Country, and all the Wisdom of
Egypt. He spoke of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even to the
Hyssop that springs out of the Wall: he spoke also of B^asts, and of Fowl,
and of creeping things, and of Fishes. And, as Antiq. ^. 8.
Josephus adds, after the same manner he discoursed of All Terestrial Things:
for he was ignorant of no natural Things, he passed by none of them unexamin'd,
but philosophized concerning every one of them, and fully discussed the
Properties and Nature of them. Thus he was certainly the Greatest Natural
Historian that ever was: and his Book of Proverbs, and that which is entitled
Ecclesiastes, abundantly inform us what skill he had in Ethics, Oeconomicks,
Politics: so that we may justly style him an Universal Philosopher. Job's
skill in the choicest Parts of Physics is evident from his excellent
Discourses and Disquisitions concerning Thunder, the Clouds, the Sea, Chap. 26.
concerning Minerals and other Fossiles, and Fountains, Chap. 28. concerning
Rain, Vapors, Snow, Hail, and other Meteors, Chap. 37. and 38. And several
sorts of Animals, both wild and tame, with their chiefest Properties and
Qualities, are discoursed of in Chapters 39, 40, 41.

And here I must insert this, that the Knowledge and Study of the Bible are
absolutely necessary in order to the Study of Natural Philosophy. It is a very
good Thought of an Ingenious Man, Mr. Lock concerning Education.
The Doctrine of the Scriptures, says he, is to be well imbi^ed before young
Men be entered into Natural Philosophy; because Matter being a thing that all
our Senses are constantly conversant with, it is so apt to possess the Mind,
and exclude all other Beings but it self, that Prejudice grounded on such
Principles often leaves no room for the admittance of Spirits, or the allowing
any such things as immaterial Beings in the nature of things. Which shows the
neces^ity of our conversing with the Inspired Writings, when we have abundant
Proofs of the Existence and Operation of those Invisible Agents. No Book ^ so
fully and demonstratively convince us of their Being and Power as the Holy
Scriptures. And the grand Reason, in my Opinion, why so many reject the Notion
of Spirits, and run into wild and extravagant Notions, which are the Consequent
of it* is, because they are unacquainted with, and (which is more) dislike this
Book, which is the Basis of a^^ Natural Philosophy, in that we have here an
irrefragable Demonstration of those Incorporeal Beings. Whence it follows that
no Man can be a Good Naturalist, if he be a Stranger to the Hol^ Writings, much
more if he slights and vilifi^^ them. We shall perpetually fluctuate without an
Adherence to these Infallible Records. The Cartesian, and indeed the whole
Corpuscularian Philosophy depraves Men's Minds, unless it be tempered by these.
Nay, I may say, the Study of Nature, abstract from them, will lead us into
Skepticism and Atheism: for many Substantial Notions as well as Phenomenon are
utterly unaccountable without Help from this Book. But this rectifies our
Apprehensions, and gives us a true Account of the State of Things, and of the
Government of the World, which is managed chiefly by Spiritual and Immaterial
Substances. This salves the most surprising Difficulties, by acquainting us
with the Spring of the Generality of those Motions and Transactions which are
observable in Natural Bodies. In short, this will season and qualify our
Speculations concerning Nature and all its Operations: for when the Operations
and Results of Matter are defective, here we are taught to have Recourse to a
Higher Principle. Thus the Bible lays a Foundation for our Study of Philosophy,
and is it self the Best Body of Philosophy, I mean on the foresaid Account,
because it assures us of the Existence of Spirits, by whose Influence so many
Works of Nature (and those of the greatest Importance in the World) are
effected. This was known of old by the Name of the Barbarick Philosophy; and
it is frequently called so by Stromat. l. 1, and 2.
Clement of Alexandria; and both he and Demonst. Evang.
Eusebius, and some Steuch. Eugub, de Perenni Philos. Theoph, Gale.
Modern Writers, have showed that the Grecian Philosophy was derived from this:
Which indeed was the Confession of some Considerable Men among the Pagans;
whence Diogenes Laertius tells us this was their Saying, In Pro^emio.
Philosophy had its Original from the Barbarians, i. e. the Hebrews; which is
as much as to say, that all the true Notions about God and Providence, and the
Souls of Men, and other great Doctrines in Philosophy, are taken from the
Jewish Writings, the Sacred and Inspired Scriptures.

In the next Place, the Antiquity of Medicks, Surgery, Anatomy, Embalming,
is likewise discovered here: For Joseph commanded the physicians to embalm his
Father, and the physicians embalmed Israel, Genesis 50. 2. The Word here repeated
is Rophim, and it is the proper Hebrew Word for Men skilled in Medicks, and
there is no other. Wherefore Vatablus and some others are mistaken, who fancy
this Place is not meant of Physicians properly so called, because this Term is
translated (...) by the Septuagint, and because they are bid to embalm Jacob.
Whence they infer that they were not Physicians in the Sense that we use the
Word in at this day, viz. for such as take care of sick and diseased Persons,
and endeavor by their Skill and Art to restore them to Health, but that they
were only Embalmers, that is, that their sole Office and Employment was to take
care of the dead Bodies, and to preserve them from putrefying. But this
Misapprehension had its Rise from this, that they judged of Physicians and
their Employments according to what they see now, according to the Practice of
these Days, which no Man of due Consideration and unprejudiced Judgment ought
to do. For of old the Physician was both Surgeon and Embalmer; yea, even in
Hippocrates's time the Work of the Physician and Surgeon was not different,
but the very same. In Antienter times, much more these, Professions were
united, and were the Employment of the same Person. It is no wonder therefore
that Embalming was annexed to it, and constantly went along with it, for the
Surgeon or Physician (call him which you will, or both) was the Man that had
Skill to dissect Bodies in order to their Pollincture. He knew what Parts to
take out, and how, being acquainted with the Situation of the Vessels: for
Anatomy was first of all practiced among the Egyptians, as we may gather from
Not. Hist. l. 19. c. 5.
Pliny and others, who attest that the Egyptian Kings used it to find out the
Cause and Cure of Diseases. By the Egyptian Kings using it, is meant
undoubtedly* their appointing and encouraging their Physicians to do it. These
then knew how to handle the Anatomick Knife: And moreover, these Persons were
skilful in Drugs, Balsams, Ointments, Aromaticks, and the Materials that were
sit for that Business of Embalming: wherefore this was their proper Work.
As living Bodies were their Care, so were the dead ones; and what they could
not cure, they dressed up for the Tomb: those whom they could not keep alive,
they artificially preserved when dead. Thus it was heretofore, and thus
particularly it was with the Physicians of Egypt, of whom this Text speaks, and
who are the first of the Faculty that are mentioned in Sacred History. And with
this agree the Records of the Antientest Historians among the Pagans. Diodorus
of Sicily relates that the first Invention of Medicines was from the Egyptians,
and particularly that some of them said that Mercurius, others that Apis a King
of Egypt was the first Inventer of Physic. Herodotus observes that the
Egyptians had more Experiments in Natural Philosophy, and chiefly in Medicks,
than any other Nation whatsoever. Strabo testifies that they were hugely
addicted to this Art, and reckoned it among their Sacred Mysteries: Which is
confirmed by what Lib. 29. C. 1.
Pliny faith, that they used to deposite and keep their choice Experiments of
Physic in their Temples. To be brief, Anatomy, Surgery and Embalming, met
together in these Ancient Artists. This was the triple Office and Work of the
Rophim, the Physicians, besides the more general Work of Curing the Diseased.
From what Job faith concerning those that pretended to comfort him, we may
collect that there were some of this Prosession among the Old Arabians; for
otherwise he would not have compared them to Persons of this Character, Ye are
all Physicians, faith he, of no Value, Job 13. 4. Ye deal with me just as
unskilful Men in that Faculty do with their Patients, just as sorry Quacks and
Empiricks do with the Diseased: they understand not their Malady, and so make
false Applications; their Medicines are good perhaps, (as your Counsel and
Advice to me are in themselves) but they administer them in a wrong manner, and
without any regard to the Constitution present Temper and Circumstances of
those they have to do with. Thus you deal with me, and therefore are so far
from curing my Distemper, that you enrage it, and make it much worse. Thi^
Language is founded upon a Supposal of the Profession of Medicks in that
Country.

That there were such among the Jews, may be gathered from Exodus 12. 19. He
that smites and wounds a Man shall cause him to be thoroughly healed viz. by one
who professedly took care of the Wounded, for so the Chaldee Paraphrast renders
that Place, He shall pay the Physician. But that there was such an Order of Men
among the Jews, we are in more express and positive Words assured from 2 Chronicles.
16. 12. King Asa in his Disease sough not to the Lord, but to the Physicians.
And it may be some of his Ancestors had been Medically dispose^* and were
Students in this Art, whence they had their Name, for Asa is the Chaldee Word
for Medicus; and perhaps for this Reason this King had the greater Esteem of
those who were skilled in Medicinal Arts, and therefore put Confidence in them
so as to neglect to apply himself to God the Sovereign Author and Giver of
Health. And from those Words in Ier. 8. 22. Is there no Balm in Gilead? is
there no Physician there? it is manifest that there were Medicaments and Proper
Persons to apply them, for else the Prophet could not by this Language set
forth the incurable and deplorable State of the Jews at that time. This way of
speaking implies that they had in that Country, in Gilead especially, such
healing Balsams as they were wont to close up Wounds with, and that there were
Physicians or Chirurgions, (for the Word signifies both, and in this Place is
to be taken in the latter Meaning) Artists that knew how to apply the Balsam
with Skill. This also is implied and supposed in Lam. 2. 13. Who can heal thee?
or according to the Chaldee, Who is the Physician [Asa] that can cure thee? And
when we read of the Art of the Apothecary, and his Confections and Ointments,
Exodus 30. 25, 35. we are to conceive of these as having some Reference to
Medicks. The Holy Anointing Oil for the Use of the Tabernacle is appointed to
be made according to Magnasheh rocheach, (...), (so the LXX, and the Vulgar
Latin renders it opus unguentarii) the professed Art and Skill of the Maker of
Odoriferous Ointments. Now this is the Man we are speaking of, viz. the
Physician or Apothecary, (which is the same, for they made up all their
Medicaments themselves heretofore) whose Business it was to make Arti^icial
Unguents, Sweet Oils and Perfumes, for Health no less than Delight. This is
Rocheach, (...), Vnguentarius, Aromatarius, and by our English Translators not
unfitly rendered Apo^^ecary, not only here but in Eccles. 10. 1. where from the
mentioning of Shemen Rocheach, Vnguen^um Pharmacopolae, (as the Tigurine
Version has it ^ightly) we are certified concerning the ancient Use of
Aromatic Compositions and Confections, which were made use of for the
promoting of the bodily Welfare. They were thought by Persons of those early
times to be both Sanative and Cosmetick. On both which Considerations they
belong to the Physicians, whose Task it is to take care ^ot only of the Health,
but the Beauty, Cleanliness and Comely Plight of the Body; in order (...) the
latter of which Smegmaticks, Mundifiers* Cleansers, Adorners, are useful. Thus
you see ho^ large the Physician's Province was in those fir^^ times: he was not
only all that was said before but he was moreover an Anointer, a Perfumer, ^
Beautifier; the Knowledge of all which we deriv^ from the Sacred Fountains.

Something, though not much, we have deriv^^ to us from the Scriptures
concerning the early Beginnings of Navigation and Shipping. God him^^^^
instructed Noah to make the Ark, the first Ve^^^^ we read of that swam on the
Waters, Genesis 7. (...) and it is not to be doubted but that God direct^^ him to
steer it aright, and that He from that Knowledge and Practice which he had in
managing it (...) long a time, whilst the whole World was Se^ was able to
instruct others in the Mari^^^^ Art. It is true we read that Noah was Genesis 7.
16.
shut up in the Ark as in a Prison, but it is probable that this was not all
the time the Ark was riding on the Waters. When these began to decrease, the
happ^ Prisoner looked abroad, and was taught how to direct his Course, and to
bring his Vessel to Land, even to the particular Place where it rested: and no
Man is able to prove that he was not furnished with Sails, or Oars, or Rudder
to that purpose, and that he did not make use of them as soon as the Window of
the Ark was opened, Genesis 8. 6. and the Covering of it removed, ver. 13. Hence
arose the first Knowledge of Navigation, which is of so great Use in the Life of
Man, and so necessary for Commerce and Traffic. Before this time there was no
Use of Boats or Ships; otherwise the Men of that Age would have been sensible
of Noab's Design when they saw him build the Ark, and would have suspected
their own Danger, and they would have attempted to build one for their own
Preservation: but our Savior tells us, that they knew not until the Flood
came, and took them all away, Mat. 24. 39. which shows that Shipping had not
been practiced before. Yea, even among the Egyptians many hundred Years
afterward, they were content to sail on the Red Sea and the River Nile in
Vessels of B^^^ushes, Isa. 18. 2. To which Profane Writers b^^r Testimony, as
Herodotus, who expressly affirms that Lib. 2.
the Egyptians made their Ships of Reeds and Flags. And Lib. 17.
Strabo, Lib. 5. c. 9. I. 6. c. 22. I. 13. c. 11.
Pliny, Lib. 4. c. 9.
Theophrast, certify ^s that these Rush-Boats or Paper-Vessels were used
^equently by them and their Neighbors of Ethio^ia. And from that forecited
Verse in Lucan, it appears that the Egyptian Boats were composed of the
Papyrus. Afterward they and others advanced ^ little higher, and made their
Marine Vessels of Barks of Trees: which very Name is still retained among us
and the French, who call a little Ship or Hoy a Bark or Barque. But to proceed;
Next to Noah, Zebulon, i. e. some of that Tribe, may be accounted the first
Founders of Shipping and ^^ilers, who are mentioned to that purpose in the
^^^riarch Jacob's Benedictions, Genesis 49. 13. about (...) hundred Years after
the Flood; the Maritime Si^^ation of this Tribe (which was seated near the Sea
of Galilee, and reached even to the Great Sea, the Mediterranean, which was
noted for Ports and Havens; besides, that it was near to Tire and Si^^, famed
for Shipping) promoting this very thing. So Dan was seated on the Western Part
of Palestine near the Mediterranean, and so traffick'd by Ships, Judge. 5. 17.
Afterward the Naval Art increased, and arrived to a great Height in King
Solomon's Days, who made a Navy of Ships, 1 Kings 9. 26. and was therein much
helped by Hiram King of Tire, who sent him Shipmen that had Knowledge of the
Sea, ver. 27. that were expert Navigators. And indeed among the Pagan
Historians and Poets the Tyrians are said to be Eminent in Sea-Affairs* yea the
first that ventured to Sea. Albertus Magnus thinks that the Use of the
Lodestone in sailing was known to these Tyrians of old; and a Nic. Fuller.
Misc. 1. 4. c. 19.
Learned Writer of our own is of the same Persuasion. But it may be deservedly
questioned whether they had in Solomon's time attained to this Knowledge. I have
met with no Certain Proof of this Magnetic^ Invention in those Days: therefore
I am forward to believe that when it is said King Solomon's Navy made a Voyage
to Ophir, 1 Kings 9. 28. neither of the Indies are meant, but (as was suggested
before) some Place in A^rick that was at a considerable Distance from
Ezion-geber, the Port (on the Shore of the Red Sea next to Palestine) whence
that Navy s^t out, and therefore they made a Long Voyage of it in those Days
(though it was not a three Years Voyage, as is generally thought, but was every
three Years, for so once in three Years, 1 Kings 20. 22. ought to be
interpreted) when their Naval Skill was but mean, and they generally coasted
along the Shore. Hither they might make a shift to reach without the Help of
the Compass* but it is unreasonable and extravagant to think that they sailed
to the East or West Indies if they were wholly destitute of that Skill. But as
for the Mediterranean, they tolerably knew it, and I question whether they knew
any other Sea properly so styled, for this is called the Sea emphatically,
Psalm. 80. 11. and the Great Sea, Numb. 34. 6. Josh. 1. 4. Nay, it is observable
that it is called the Utmost Sea, Deuteronomy. 11. 24. and 34. 2. which we may
understand of its being not only the farthest Boundary of the Land of Canaan on
the West, but also of its being the farthest Sea that they had any notice of:
Whereas if they had been acquainted with the Wide Ocean, the Main Sea through
which they must necessarily pass to those remoter Parts of the World, the
Midland Sea would not have been by way of Eminence called the Sea, yea the
Great Sea, much less the Utmost Sea. But though it was but a small River in
comparison of the Vast Ocean, it was a Great Sea in respect of the Dead Sea,
the Sea of Galilee or Genesareth, and other such like Lakes which they were
acquainted with, and which they improperly called Seas. Again, Africa seems to
be the Place rather than any other to which Solomon's Navy was sent for Gold,
there being several Regions here (as is confessed by all) that abound with that
Choice Metal. These Reasons (besides those offered in a former part of this
Discourse, where I treated of the First Plantations) prevail with me to believe
that the Royal Fleet before mentioned sailed no further than the Coasts of
Africa.

And I crave leave here to propose this Conjecture, viz. that Africa is meant
by Ophir, to which that Fleet went. I offer it to the Learned to be considered
whether there be not an exceeding great Affinity between (...) Ophir and Apher,
(for so this latter was anciently written, and it is known that f and ph are
frequently convertible) or between (...) and Aphrica; for the former, yo^ see,
is written with an Aleph, and so was perhaps anciently read Aphira: And that
the Letter c is i^serted into the Latin Word is not to be wondered at, for
nothing is more ordinary than the Insertion of a Letter or two, especially when
Words are transferred out of one Language into another, as I could show in
abundant Instances. Besides, this Derivation of the Word is the more to be
attended to, because the Common Etymologies that are given of Africa are very
sorry and groundless. Wherefore though I have formerly asserted that Ophir is
not mentioned by Geographers, (which is very true, if we speak of the Place
under that formal Name) yet upon Search I verily believe it to be the same
which has been since called Afric^, from Auphir, which is the Arabic
Pronuntiation of Ophir. Before I quit this Particular, I desire it may be
observed that it stands upon Record in 1 Kings 9. 26. that King Solomon's Ships
(the first Navy that we read of) were built on the Shore of the Red Sea in the
Land of Edom, and thence launched and sent forth on their Voyage: whereon I
guess is founded that of an Ancient Writer, that (...),
(...).
Dionys. Alexandr.
the Erythraei (who are the same with the Inhabitants of the Land of Edom; for
Edom or Esau, and Eryt'oraeus, are the same; and the Red Sea, which is known by
the Name of Erythraeum, is denominated from him) were the first that invented
Shipping. And I appeal to any judicious Man, whether this might not give
occasion to that confused Passage in Pliny, viz. that Navem primus ex Egypto in
Graeciam Danaus invexit: ante ratibus navigabatur, inventis in mari rubro,
inter insulas, ^ rege Erythr^. Lib. 7. c. 56.
the ancient Shipping was first brought out of Egypt, and that formerly slight
Ships or Boats were made use of, which were invented in the Red Sea, among the
Isles, by King Erythras. It is plain that Egypt and the Red Sea, and Erythras,
have relation here to the Infallible Records, which tell us, that the Place of
the first setting forth of any Considerable Ships was on the Coast of Egypt, in
the Red Sea or Arabian Gulf, and in that Part of it that belonged to Edom or
Erythras. Lastly, I offer it to be examined, whether the Report among the
Heathens, that the Stat. Achill. 1. Sil. Ital. Punic. l. 11. Manil. Astronom.
l. 1.
first Ship that ever was, went to a Country in the Euxine Sea, to fetch thence
the Golden Fleece, be not grounded on this part of the Sacred History, viz.
that the first Shipping of any Note was this of Solomon, which went through the
Mediterranean, of which the Euxine Sea is a Part of Arm, (and might be mistaken
for the whole) to bring Gold from Ophir: And the Ship might justly be called
Argos, because it sailed so slowly. This is not unlikely, if we remember how
the Poets are wont to corrupt and mangle True History, and to affix New Names
to Persons and Things: Besides, there is no very great Difference as to the
Chronology of both these Expeditions.

It is probable that Astronomy also was the Invention of those first Ages, (and
was useful in both those which I last mentioned, Physic and Navigation) the
Patriarchs and other worthy Enquirers (of whom the Scriptures speak) living in
those Eastern Countries where the Sky was Serene, and where upon high Mountains
they had a peculiar Advantage of acquainting themselves with the Stars, and
studying their Motions, Aspects and Influences. Accordingly Ant ^ Jud. l. 1. c.
3.
Josephus relates that Seth, an Antediluvian Patriarch, was skilled in this
Celestial Art, and that his Pillars r^corded the Doctrine of the Stars and
Rules of Astronomy. And Abraham was well skilled in this Science, says that
Cap. 8. 9.
same Writer, and was Public Professor of it. The Kings of the East and West
came to learn this Art of him, says Ra^^i Solomon. And the Talmudists quoted
by Lex. Chald. p. 156.
Buxto^f would persuade us that he had extraordinary Sill in the Stars. Which
is intimated perhaps in what God said to Abraham, Genesis 15. 5. Look now toward
Heaven, and tell the Stars, etc. and in what he assured him of in other Places,
viz. that he would multiply his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 22. 17. and
26. 4. Which manner of Speech and Repeating it were, it may be, occasioned by
this Holy Man's frequent Contemplating those Heavenly Bodies, and enquiring
into their Nature and Operations. But because there is no clear ground for
this, I dismiss it. Only this may be said, that Astronomy, like the Sun the
chief Subject of it, had its Rise in the East: all Authors agree that it was
first known and practiced in Chaldea, whence a Chaldean and an Astrologer were
Terms convertible: and it is certain that the Patriarch Abraham was of that
Country, and was eminently styled by the Greeks (...), and was known and
distinguished by that Name. But that Job (a famous Arabian, and who lived, as
it is thought by some, not long after Abraham's time) was Astronomically
disposed, is very clear from his universal Skill inall Points of Natural
Philosophy, which his Book is full of, and particularly from his mentioning of
Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the Chambers of the South, Chap. 9. v. 9. and
from other Passages in 26 and 28 Chapters relating to the Sun and Stars, to the
Heavens and their wonderful Operations and Influences. Judiciary Astrology, i.
e. foretelling Futurities by insight into the Heavenly Bodies, was pretended to
of old, as appears from the frequent Caveats against it, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. Ier.
10. 2. and 27. 9. Mich. 5. 12. The Chaldean. Professors of this Art are
particularly mentioned in Isa. 47. 13. where they are styled Choberim
Hashamajim, Viewers of the Heavens, Chozim Bachocabim, Star-gazers. To this
belong the Teraphim, Genesis 31. 19. and in other Places, i. e. Images and
Consignations made according to the certain Position of such and such
Constellations, whereby they divined concerning future Events. Thus we see the
beginning of False and Counterfeit Arts as well as True Ones, may be learnt
from this Holy Book.

I will not enlarge here upon Picture or Pourtraicture, strictly so called, i.
e. the representing and drawing of things with Exactness and Life in diverse
Colors, of which there are notable Instances in Ier. 22. 14. Ezekiel. 8. 10. and
23. 14. nor will I speak of Embroidery, Exodus 26. 1. and 28. 4. Ezekiel. 16. 10.
and 27. 7. nor of all manner of Cunning Work so often mentioned in Exodus, for
which Aholiab and Bezaleel were so famous, and on which several Critical
Remarks might be made. But I will proceed to some other things.

Among the First Arts and Inventions, we may reckon Skill in Arms and Warlike
Feats: the first Instances whereof are registered in sacred Story. Josephus
thinks that Tubal, who was an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron,
was the first Inventer of Arms and Military Weapons, they being made of those
Metals. A late Dr. Burnet Theor. Tellur.
Writer was forgetful of this when he said, There were not of old any
Instruments that belonged to War. And how could there be indeed, when he
asserts that there were no Metals in the Earth before the Flood? Which is
precariously said, and has no Foundation at all to support it; yea, it is
quite contrary to the express Testimony of Scripture, which assures us that
there were Brass and Iron in those Days. It is not then wholly improbable that
Weapons of Wa^ were framed of these, and that the People of those times went
forth to Battle, though in the whole History from Adam to Noah there is no
mention of their Wars. Neither is there of some other things, which yet we
cannot but suppose to have been, notwithstanding Moses is silent concerning
them. If we consider what are the great Incentives to War, viz. Lust and
Passion, we have no reason to disbelieve that there were Wars from the
beginning, tho they are not mentioned. It is likely they were but rare then,
partly because they had not found out such expedite ways of managing their
Feuds as have been since, and partly because the Numbers of Men were not so
great as afterward: the Earth could better hold them at that time than now,
and consequently they had not occasion to quarrel about their Territories, and
to strive how they should enlarge their Dominions. However, Hatred, Malice and
desire of Revenge might push them on to fall out one with another, and to
proceed to Acts of Hostility, and to bring Forces on either side into the Field
to decide the Quarrel in Battle. But I grant there is no certainty of this,
there is nothing expressly delivered concerning any Warlike Enterprises before
the Deluge. The first that we read of after it, is the Battle of four Kings
against five, four of Assyria and the adjoining Parts, against five of Sodom
and the neighboring Parts of Palestine, Genesis 14. 1, 2. etc. And presently
after this was the Military Expedition of Abraham and his armed trained
Servants, v. 14. whom he had instructed in Martial Affairs. This is the first
War or Battle that we read of in the Sacred History, and is thought to have
been about A. M. 2030. It is certainly the first that is to be read of in the
World; for the Theban War, the most ancient that either Historians or Poets
among the Gentiles write of, was about six hundred Years after this: and the
Trojan War, that famous Expedition which Profane Writers talk so much of, and
is one of the antientest Subjects of Humane History, was not till A. M. 2760.
or thereabouts. Afterward we read in the Sacred Writings of the Wars of the
Jews before and after their coming into Canaan; which were as remarkable as
those of the Old Romans, and much more just and lawful: they were indeed
generally Holy Wars, and Battles of the Lord of Hosts. In Leviticus and Numbers
we read of their Laws of Arms, and Councils of War, and in Jos. 8. 4. Judge. 7.
16. and 20. 38. 2 Samuel 5. 24.
other places of their Military Stratagems: and all along we are told what were
the Martial Preparations not only of that Nation, but those they fought with.

From this Ancient Register we are particularly informed what were the Warlike
Weapons of old, both the (...) and (...), as the Greeks distinguished them,
Alia ad tegendum, alia ad nccendum. Cic. pro Caecin.
those that were to defend the Persons that wore them, and those that were to
incommode and hurt the Enemy. Of the former sort were first a Helmet [Cobang]
(...) (as the Seventy render it.)
to cover and defend the Head. This was part of the Military Provision which
that warlike King V^ziah prepared for his vast Army, 2 Chronicles. 26. 14. And we
read before this, that part of Readiness Armor was an Helmet of Brass, 1 Samuel 17.
38. It was used by the Philistines, as appears from 1 Samuel 17. 5. Goliath had a
Helmet of Brass upon his Hea^. And this Martial Cap for the Head was worn by
the Persians and Ethiopians when they fought, Ezekiel. 38. 5. Another Defensive
Piece of Armor used in those early times, was a Breast Plate or Corslet, Heb.
Shirjon, by the LXX rendered (...), and by the Vulgar Latin Lorica. Goliath was
accoutred with this warlike Defense, 1 Samuel 17. ^. which we translate here a
Coat of Mail. This is mentioned among the Jewish Armoury, 2 Chronicles. 26. 14. and
is englished an Habergeon. This was part of King Readiness warlike Furniture, 1 Samuel 17. 38. and is translated, as before in that Chapter, a Coat of Mail.
Between the Joints of this Harness (for so we english it, 1 Kings 22. 34.) King
A^ab was casually struck with a Dart. To this Species of Armor the Prophet
alludes, Isa. 59. 17. where the same Hebrew Word is used that is in the
forementioned Texts, but is here rendered a Breast Plate. And in Ier. 46. 4. a
Brigandine is our English Word for it. So that according to what may be
gathered from this various rendering of it, it seems to me to answer to the
Cuirasse or Corslet-Armour both for Back and Breast. It is likely that it was
chiefly designed to defend this Latter, and thence had its Denomination. But
some had it made so long as to come over all their other Clothes: which is the
reason why in some Places (as you see) it is otherwise translated.

Again, a Shield, to defend the whole Body in time of Battle, and to keep off
the Enemies Insults, which was either Tsinna^ the great Shield or Buckler, or
Magen the lesser kind of this Weapon, was of great Service of Old. It was used
by the Babylonians, Chaldeans and Assyrians, Ezekiel. 23. 24. and by the
Egyptians, Jer. 46. 3. in both which Places the two Hebrew Words aforesaid are
made use of. It was frequent among the Jews in their Wars, as is manifest from
2 Samuel 1. 21. and many other Places which are well known. Hence David, a Great
Warrior, so often mentions Shield and Buckler in his Divine Poems, to set
forth that Defense and Protection of Heaven which he expected, which he
experienced, and which he wholly trusted in. And when he says, God will with
Favor compass the Righteous as with a Shield, Psalm. 5. 12. he seems to allude
to the Use of the Great Shield, Tsinnah, (which is the Word he uses) wherewith
they were wont to cover and defend their whole Bodies. King Solomon caused
those two different Sorts of Shields (the Tsinnah which answers to Cly^^us
among the Latins, such a Large Shield as the Infantry wore, and the Maginnim,
s^uta, used by the Horsemen, which were of far less Size) to be made, 2 Chronicles.
9. 15, 16. The former of these are here translated Targets, and are double in
weight to the other. The Philistines came into the Field with this Defensive
We^pon: so we find their Formidable Champion was appointed, 1 Samuel 17. 7. One
bearing a Shield went before him, one whose proper Office it was to carry this
and some other Weapons, wherewith he was to furnish his Master upon Occasion.
It seems this was an Office among the Jews as well as Philistines; for we read
that David, when he was first called to Court, was made King Readiness
Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 1^. 21. And there is mention made of the young Man that
bore Jon^than 's Armor, 1 Samuel 14. 1. By the Grecia^ this Officer was called
(...) and (...); and by the Latins (as In Casiua.
Plautus and Aeneid. 9.
(...) testify) Armiger. The very same with (...) ferens arma, in the Places
above ^i^ed. But the bearing of the Shield was the most considerable Piece of
Service, and was reputed most Honorable. The Longobards called this Military
Attendant (as our Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor.
Great Antiquary acquaints us) Schilpor, i. e. a Shield-bearer: and Scutifer,
Esc^ier, Esquire, became a fixed Title of Honor; and Escuage a particular
Tenure or Service. The Original of it we see in the Example before us, the
Great Philistian Warrior was waited upon into the Field by his Military
Squire, one bearing a Shield. And besides this Tsinnah, this Great Massy
Shield, he was furnished with a lesser One, which is not expressed by one of
the forementioned Words, but is called Cidon, which we render a Target, v. 6.
and a Shield, v. 45. and was of a different Nature from the common Shields, and
(as I conceive) was not only to hold in his Hand when he had occasion to use
it, but could also conveniently at other times be hung about his Neck, and
turned behind: wherefore it is added that it was between his Shoulders, v. 6. So
I understand those Words, and truly I think it is a more genuine and unforced
Interpretation of them, than what is usually given by the Jewish Writers, and
some others. And this Target (as well as his Helmet, and some other Pieces of
his Armor, of which anon) was of Brass, which was the usual Metal of which
their Arms were made in those Days, and in the Times following, as Homer and
Virgil testify, who mention Helmets, Shields, Swords, Spears of Brass. This is
evident from Hesiod, and Alcaeus an old Poet quoted by Athenaeus. The like we
learn from Statius in several Places. The Arms of the Massageta^, says Lib. 1.
Herodotus, were of this Composure. Lucretius, speaking of the first Weapons
that were used in War, tells us that they were of Brass, and afterward of
Iron, Et prior aeris erat quam ferri cognitus usus.

Lastly, the Greek and Roman Warriors, and all Nations used this serviceable
Weapon, to fence off the Blows of their Adversaries, and particularly to
repulse their Arrows. The Grecians especially affected a very large sort of
Shields, which we may gather from the Description of them in the Poets, and
from what the Lacedemonian Women, when they sent their Sons into the Wars, used
to say to them at parting, (...), either return back with this Piece of Armor,
or be carried to the Grave upon it. It seems by this that they were so broad
and capacious, that they might serve them for Biers, or Open Coffins. It was
^^^^nitely opprobrious among these Greek Warriour^ to lose this Weapon in
Fight, insomuch that Pl^tarch relates that the Lacedaemonians banished
Archicolus his Country, because he had said and written that it was better for
a Man to throw away his Shield than himself, i. e. to perish in Battle. And
from what the same Author says of Epimanondas, that he asked when he was dying
whether his Shield was safe, we may infer that nothing was so dear to them as
this one Piece of Armor. And I can prove that it was thus among the Eastern,
and particularly the Jewish Warriors: the loss of this Weapon was excessively
resented, as well as condoled by them. If you ask me on what I ground this, I
answer, on 2 Samuel 1. 21. where it is a signal Ingredient of the Public
Mourning, that the Shield of the Mighty was viley cast away. I apprehend this
to be the meaning of the Words; David a Man of Arms, who composed his
Funeral-Song, was sensible how disgraceful a Thing it was for Soldiers to quit
their Shields in the Field: yet this was the sad and deplorable Case of the
Jewish Soldiery in that unhappy Engagement with the Philistines, they fled
away (1 Samuel 31. 7.) and left their Shields behind them: this vil^ and
dishonorable c^sting away of that principal Armor is the deserved Subject of
this Losty Po^t's Lamentation. I propound this Interpretation (or Conjecture,
if you will call it so) as preferable to any that I have met with.

And further, it may be useful to observe that their Shields were wont to be
oiled, scoured and polished, as indeed it was the Custom to use the like Care
toward their other Armor, as may be gathered from furbishing the Spears, Jer.
46. 4. and making bright the Arrows, Jer. 51. 11. But more especially their
Shields (which were Weapons that they so highly valued and took a kind of Pride
in, and on which they generally engraved their Names and Warlike Deeds, if they
had achieved any; whereas those that had none of these, were called Blank
Shields, and were thought to be disgraceful, according to that of Virgil, --
Parmaque inglorius (...)) these Weapons, I say, were carefully polished with
Oil, and made exceeding Bright. Whence two Places of Scripture may receive some
Light: the former occurs in the Chapter before cited, where it is said, the
Shield of the Mighty is vilely cast away, the Shield of Saul, as if it had not
been anoin^ed with Oil: for so I render that latter Clause, referring it to the
Shield, and not to Saul; and the Hebrew Text bears this Version best. The
meaning then is, the Shields were cast away and trod under Foot as if they had
not been made bright with Oil, as if there had not been that care taken about
them. And that other Passage, Isa. 21. 5. Anoint the Shield, is a plain
Reference to this ancient Custom of polishing their Shields with Oil: and
therefore the Import of these Words is this, Furbish and make ready that
Weapon, and prepare for Battle. I could also observe that as they anointed
their Shields to give them a Brightness and Luster, (for Glittering Arms were
in great esteem among Warriors) so they covered them with a Case when they
used them not, to preserve them from being rusty and soiled: thence you read of
uncovering the Shield, Isa. 22. 6. which signisies preparing for War, and
having that Weapon especially in readiness.

Another Defensive Provision in War was the Military Girdle; which was for a
double End, first in order to the wearing the Sword, for this hung (as it does
at this Day) at the Soldier's Girdle or Belt. Secondly, it was requisite to
gird their Clothes and Armor together: thus David girded his Sword upon his
Armor, 1 Samuel 17. 39. This the Sacred Writings take some notice of, as a^
Ancient Accoutrement of Military Men: for this is meant, it is probable, in
Exodus 13. 18. Ios. ^* 14. Judge. 7. 11. where according to the Hebre^ Idiom,
Soldiers and Armed Men are called C^^ mushim, accincti, girded. These (...),
as the Sevnty render it, are Armati according to the Vulg^^ Latin Interpreter,
and harnessed, armed according to our English Translators: for the Soldier's
G^dle was a principal Part of his Arms. So it was among the Old Latins, Cincti
and Accincti, were as much as Armati, and among the Greeks (as S^^das lets us
know) (...) is the same with (...), because Soldiers unless they were girt
could not wear a Sword. But to con^ine o^^ selves to the Scripture, here to
Gird and to Arm are synonymous, 1 Kings 20. 11. Isa. 8. 9. And in 2 Kings 3.
21. those that were able to put on Armor, are, according to the Hebrew and
Septuagint, girt with a Girdle. Hence girding to the Battle, 2 Samuel 22. 40. ^
Psalm. 18. 39. And there is express mention of this Warlike Girdle in 1 Samuel 18.
4. where it is recorded that Jonathan, to assure David of his entire Love and
Friendship by some visible Pledges, stripped himself not only of his usual
Garments, but of his Military Habiliments, viz. his Sword, Bow and Girdle, and
gave them to David. From the joining of these together, it is plain that Chagor
here is the Sword-Girdle or Military Belt, wherewith they not only girt on
their Swords, but made their Clothes and Armor sit close and fast about them.

Boots were part of their Defensive Harness of Old, because it was the Custom
to cast certain Obstacles, (...), Impediments (so called because they did hurt
and entangle the Feet) afterward known by the Name of Gall-traps (which since
in Heraldry are corruptly styled Caltrops) in the Way before the Enemy. The
(...) (as Geogr. l. 10.
Strabo calls it) the Military Boot or Shoe was therefore necessary to guard
the Legs and Feet from these Iron Stakes placed in the Way to gall and wound
them. This gives an Account of Goliah's Greaves of Brass upon his Legs, 1 Samuel
17. 6. which were his warlike Fence against any Mischief designed to those
Parts of his Body. These (...) (for so the LXX render them) were of the same
Nature with (...), etc. (...). ^.
those mentioned by the Prince of the Gentile Poets, and from which the Grecian
Soldiers had the Epithet of '(...). Yea their Boots, their Martial Gambadoes
were sometimes of Brass, as Goliah's were; whence (...) in the forementioned
Poet, whereby are signified not only those Grecian Soldiers that were clad in
Brass Boots, but Synecdochically those that had Brass Arms, which was the old
Grecian Fashion in War: but the first Tidings of this sort of Armor we have in
the Sacred Records of the Bible.

And not only Defensive but Offensive Weapons are mentioned here: and these are
either such as they made use of when they came to a close Engagement, or when
they were at a Distance. Of the former Sort were the Sword (Chereb) and
Battel-Ax (Mapheng.) The first of these is the antientest Piece of Armor that
we read of (except the Bow, of which afterward.) In Genesis 34. 25. we ^ind it
was treacherously handled by Jacob's Sons when they invaded the Sh^chemites: To
which refers Genesis 49. 5. and is rendered by some Learned Jews thus, Instruments
of Violence are their Swords, Mecheroth (for that is the Word here) the Plural
of Mecherah, Gladius, whence (...) and Mach^ra. And in Exodus 32. 27. we find it
was used by the Israelites in the Wilderness. If it be asked how they furnished
themselves with this and other Weapons in that Place, seeing (as it is generally
said) they left Egypt without taking any Arms with them, we need not answer (as
some do) that the great Winds and Tide upon the return of the Red Sea beat the
Egyptians Arms upon the Shore where the Isra^lites had pitched their Tents; for
this is more tha^ we can prove. And so indeed is their Supposal that the
Israelites came unarmed out of Egypt, for the contrary is plainly asserted in
Exodus 13. 18. The Children of Israel went up harnassed (Chamusim, girt, i. e.
armed, as I said before) out of the Land of Egypt. And then it is no wonder that
you read of their being Armed in the Wilderness. This may be meant when it is
said, they borrowed of the Egyptians Raiment, Exodus 12. 35. in which may be
included Military Habits. However, they are comprehended in what follows, The
Lord gave the People favor in the Sight of the Egyptians, so that they ^ent
unto them whatever they required: and they spoiled the Egyptians, v. 36. For
the Israelites left Egypt with leave of the Inhabitants, yea, with their
request to be gone, for the last Plague which slew all their Firstborn in one
Night put them upon hastening away the Israelites: and to be rid of them they
were willing to part with any thing, and accordingly they not only suffered
them to take with them their own Goods and Cattle, but gave them a great deal
of Gold and Silver, and all sorts of Rich Materials, Exodus 3. 22. with which
afterward they furnished the Tabernacle. And among other things they let them
carry away as many Warlike Weapons as they pleased, for they that lent them
Jewels, would not deny them Armor.

The Battel-Ax mentioned in Ier. 51. 20. was another Weapon which they
anciently fought with when they came to a close Engagement. We have no
particular Account of this Martial Club, but it is reasonable to believe that
it was a weighty Weapon or Hammer (as it is called Chap. 50. v. 23.) made use of
when there was occasion to break asu^^der any hard thing that stood in their
way, and to beat down the Enemies, and lay them prostrate, and to bruise and
batter their Armor. It is likely it was a sort of Poll-Ax, but proper to the
Cavalry, which I gather from the following Verse, which speaks of breaking in
pieces with it the Horse and his Rider, the Chariot and his Rider.

The Weapons Offensive to wound and hurt the Enemy at some distance, were, 1.
The Spear or Iavelin, for so the Words Chanith and Romach are diversely rendered
in Numb. 25. 7. 1 Samuel 13. 19. Ier. 46. 4. These Weapons were of different
Kinds according to their length and make. Some of them might be thrown or
darted, 1 Samuel 18. 11. others were a sort of Long Swords, Numb. 25. 8. And from
2 Samuel 2. 23. we may gather that some of them were piked or pointed at both
Ends. 2. A ^ling, Kelang, with which they slung Stones at the Enemy. This is
reckoned as a Part of Warlike Provision, in 2 Chronicles. 26. 14. and in other
Places. David made use of one of these to good Purpose When he came into the
Field against the Giant of Gath, 1 Samuel 17. 49, 50. The Bejaminites (for so we
should read the Word, and not call them Benjamites, as if they were derived not
from Benjamin but Benjam) were famous in Battle, because they had attained to a
great Skill and Accuracy in handling this Weapon, they could sling Stones a^ an
Hair's breadth, and not miss, Judge. 20. 16. And whereas it is said here that
they were Left Handed, it should be rather rendered Ambidexters, such as could
use both Hands, as will appear from comparing this Place with 1 ^hron. 12. 2.
which spea^^ of these Benjaminites, and tells us that they could (...) both the
right Hand and the left. When therefore it is said in the former Place, that
they were (...) of their right Hand, (for so it is in the Hebrew) the meaning is
that they did not constantly use their right Hand (as others did) when they
shot Arrows or slung Stones, but they were so expert in these Military
Exercises that they could perform them with their left Hand as well as with
their right. This is the true Sense of this Expression, and therefore the
S^ptu^gint render it (...), and the Vulgar Latin, ita sinistra ut dextra
praeliantes. Which is said to express how skilful and exact Slingers they were,
and of what great Use and Service this singular Way of managing this Weapon was
^o them. Fighting with the Sling was afterward used by the Baleares, as
Diodorus the Sicilian testifies, and by other Nations, as Aen. 9.
Virgil and Lib. 8. Dec. 4.
Livy relate: yea, it is generally known, says De re mili^ar^ Lib. 1.
Vegetius, that in all the Battles of the Ancients this was the way of
Fighting. 3. Bow and Arrows [ Kesheth and Chitzim] are of great Antiquity.
Indeed no Weapon is mentioned so soon: take thy Weapons, thy Quiver and thy
Bow, Genesis 27. 3. though it is true these are not spoken of here as used in War,
but Hunting. And so they are supposed and implied before this, viz. in Genesis 21.
20. where it is said of Ishmael that he became an Archer, he used Bow and Arrows
in shooting of wild Beasts. It is likely that the Military Art commenced from
Men's encount^ring with Brutes. They fought wiith wild Beasts, and for that
purpose invented Arms, which afterward they unhappily used against one
another. Particularly, shooting with the Bow was first used in Hunting and
Killing of Beasts, and then of Men. At last there was scarcely any Battle
fought but it was decided by the Bow. It was so useful a Weapon that care was
taken to train up the Hebrew Youth to it betimes. When David had in a solemn
Manner lamented the Death of K. Saul, he immediately gave order for teaching
the young Men the use of the Bow, 1 Samuel 1. 18. that they might be skilled in
the Primitive Artillery of the World, that they might be as expert as the
Philistines, by whose Bows and Arrows Saul and his Army were slain. So in 2 Chronicles. 26. 14. we read that these were part of the Military Ammunition: for in
those times Bows were instead of Guns, and Arrows supplied the Place of Powder
and Ball. From Job 20. 24. I gather that the Warlike Bow was generally made of
Steel, and consequently was very stiff, and hard to bend: wherefore they used
their Foot in bending their Bows; and thence to tread the Bow, Jer. 50. 14. is
to bend (...); and Bows trodden, Isa. 5. 28. and 21. 15. are Bows ^^nt, as our
Translators rightly render it: but the Hebrew Word which is used in these
Places is darak, calcavit. In short, this Weapon was so requisite in War, that
it is thence called Kesheth Mil chamah, the Bow of War, or Battel-Bow, Zech. 9.
10. and 10. 4.

Fourthly, You may observe that the Great Commanders and Chief Warriors not
only among the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 6, 7. Canaanites and Philistines, Josh. 17.
16. Judge. 1. 19. and 4. 3. 1 Samuel 13. 5. Syrians, 2 Samuel 10. 18. 1 Kings 20.
21. Babylonians, Ezekiel. 23. 24. but among the Jews; 2 Samuel 15. 1. 1 Kings 10.
26. fought in Open Chariots or War-Coaches. This was the ancient manner of
Fighting, and afterward was used by other Nations, as Diodorus of Sicily
reports. Hom^^ acquaints us that these Military Chariots were in use among the
Trojans. And that they were so among the Persians, Hist, lib. 4. c. 9.
Quintus Curtius lets us know when he describes Darius's Army. De Cyri
Institu^. l. 6.
Xenophon attributes the Invention of these (...) (as he calls them) these
Sithed Chariots to Cyrus. But from this (as many other things) we may discern
the Defect of these Historians, and their failure in the Point of Antiquity.
These great Iron Chariots for Battle were much older than that Monarch. We read
of them in the Sacred History about a thousand Years before his time; for
Pharaoh's Chariots without doubt were of this kind, which we may infer from the
great Number of them, which was six hundred, and from the appointing of
Captains over them, Exodus 14. 7. which shows they were no other than their
Fighting Chariots. And we read that about fifty Years afterward the Canaanites
had got this sort of Warlike Vehicle, and used them in that Champian Country,
which struck Terror into the Jews, and made them almost despair of conquering
that part of the Nation, Josh. 17. 16, 18. I might add that our Predecessors
the Old Britains (as both Caesar and Tacitus record) fought in these Chariots,
which (as they describe them to us) were fang'd at the Ends of the Axle-trees
with Iron Hooks or Sithes. With these fastened on both Sides, and standing out
about a Yard in length, they cut down their Enemies that came in their way. I
remember the Hebrew Word Ketzir is both Harvest and War, ( Exodus 23. 16. Isa.
9.) here we have too true an Account of it, for with these Sithe-Chariots they
mowed Men down as some Corn at Harvest is wont to be.

Fifthly, We learn from the Scriptures that when they were besieged of old,
they made use of Engines on their Towers and Bulwarks to shoot Arrows and great
Stones withal, 2 Chronicles. 26. 15. and when they sat down before a Place and
resolved to besiege it, they dug Trenches, 2 Samuel 17. 20. they drew a Line of
Circumvallation, Lam. 2. 8. they made Ramparts, they built Forts against it,
and cast a Mount against it, and set the Camp also against it, and set
battering Rams against it round about, Ezekiel. 4. 2. for though Carim in the last
Place here mentioned signi^ies both Arietes and Duces, and is taken in this
latter Sense in Ezekiel. 21. 22. yet in this Place it seems to be restrained to
the former denotation, viz. of Iron Engines wherewith they battered down the
Walls of a Town. Of this sort is Mechi, Ezekiel. 26. 9. (whence perhaps (...),
Machina) an Engine of War (as we render it) which they made use of to set
against the Walls (as you read there) to demolish them and lay them even with
the Ground. It may be this is that Military Instrument with which they shot
Stones into a City or besieged Place, which the^ forementioned Place in the
Chronicles, and is perhaps the same with Sollelah, Jer. 6. 6. an Engine of
Shot, as our Margin renders it. These were of a resembling Nature with the
Balistae and Catapultae among the Romans, which were used for throwing Stones
and Arrows, and were to them of old instead of Mortars and Carcases. Next I
might observe that to give notice of an approaching Enemy, and to bring the
despersed Inhabitants of the Country together to resist and repel him, they
used to set up Beacons on the Tops of Mountains as a ^it Alarm on that
Occasion, Isa. 30. 17. This perhaps is Maseth, Jer. 6. 1. which we translate a
Sign of Fire lifted up, that those that were afar off might be warned of the
Enemies coming. Nay, if I am not mistaken, this was of far greater Antiquity;
for that great Flame with Smoke rising up out of the City, which was appointed
as a Sign between the Men of Israel, and the Liers in wait, Judge. 20. 38, 40.
seems to be meant by this.

And now when I am enumerating the Kele Mil^hamah, the Instruments or Vtensils
of War, (as the Prophet calls them, Ier. 51. 20.) I might take notice that
Trumpets were anciently used on this Occasion (as they are at this Day) Numb.
10. 5, 6, 7. 2 Samuel 2. 28. and 18. 16. I^r. 4. 21. and 6. 1. Ier. 4. 2. 14.
Zeph. 1. 16. So were Ensigns, Banners, Standards, Exodus 17. 15, 16. Psalm. 74.
4. Cant. 6. 4. Isa. 13. 2. Ier. 4. 6. and 51. 12. But the most eminent Place
for this purpose (and which shows the Antiquity of this Military Usage, and
will give us an Account of the first and most early Marshalling of Armies) is
Numb. 2. 2. Every Man of the Children of Israel shall pitch by his own
Standard, with the Ensign of their Fathers House. For the explaining of which
we must know that when Moses had received the Law and finished the Tabernacle,
he mustered all the Tribes and Families of Israel, and disposed them for their
March through the Wilderness. This Great Army (as this Chapter informs us) was
divided into four Battalions or Squadrons, each of which contained three whole
Tribes. The first contained the three Tribes of Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon:
and every Tribe being distinguished by his particular Standard, this Squadron
marched under the Standard of Judah. And it was peculiar to this Tribe to
encamp always on the East Side of the Tabernacle, and to hold the first Place
and lead the Vanguard. The second Battalion consisted of the Tribes of Reuben,
Simeon and Gad: and Reuben's Standard was that which they were placed under.
These had the second Place in the Army, and encamped on the South Side of the
Tabernacle. The third Division marched under the Standard of Ephraim, to whom
were joined the Regiments of Manasse and Benjamin, and they were situated
always on the West Quarter. The fourth Squadron were ranked under the Standard
of Dan, to whom belonged the Tribes of Naphthali and Asher. These were placed
on the North Side of the Tabernacle, and always marched in the Rear. In every
Standard or Banner there was a particular Ensign or Badg by which those of that
Squadron were known. In that of Judah which marched in the Van there was
pourtrayed a Lion: in that of Reuben a Man: in that of Ephraim an Ox: and in
that of Dan an Eagle. Where by the way we may observe here the Invention of
Badges and Coats of Arms. The Tribes were distinguished by their different
Scutcheons, which were of diverse Figures, and ('it is not to be doubted) of
different Colors. Though truly this Invention seems to have been begun first
of all in Genesis 49. where the several Tribes have assigned them by Jacob their
particular Distinctive Ensigns and Armorial Cognizances, as Judah a Lion, Dan a
Serpent, Issachar an Ass, etc. which were certain Arms or Badges by which they
were known and distinguished. In these and the forenamed Instances, Heraldry
had its Original, hence it may fetch its Pedigree. Thus that Noble Camp was
disposed and situated, thus the several Tribes and Princes of them were
marshalled. Thus the Tabernacle was placed in the midst of the four Divisions
of the Army, which pitched round about it, as a Guard to Defend and Protect it.
But I should note withal, that the Tabernacle was more Immediately surrounded
by the Priests and Levites. Moses and Aaron, and Eleazar and his Brethren were
lodged on the East, at the Entrance of the Court of the Tabernacle: the
Families of Cohath were placed on the South, the Families of Merari on the
North, the Geshurites on the West: and all others that were dedicated to the
Service and Attendance on the Tabernacle, were quartered near it. This was the
Excellent Order that was observed, the Ecclesiastical Persons were placed next
to the Tabernacle because of their Employment and Office: and to guard both
them and the Tabernacle, the whole Host was drawn about them in a Circle. I
might further take notice that there was not a fixed Distance of Ground from
every part of the Camp to the Tabernacle, for it was necessary that some should
be further off than others: but this was enjoined them, that the Limits of
their traveling on the Sabbath Day should not be above two thousand Cubits,
Josh. 3. 4. But by reason of the different Acception of the Cubit, it is not
easy to determine exactly the Length of the Way which they were permitted to
travel. If it was two thousand Paces; it amounted to two Miles: but most of the
Buxtorf. Chald. Lex. p. 2583.
Rabbis agree that it was 2000 lesser Cubits, which make a large Mile. So far
the furthest Part of the Israelites Camp was distant from the Tabernacle,
according to the general Opinion of the Hebrew Doctors. This, whatever it is,
is called a Sabbath-Day's Journey, Acts 1. 12. i. e. as much space of Ground as
it was lawful for the Jews to go on a Sabbath Day. This shall suffice to be
said concerning the Ancient Situation of the Camp of Israel. A very Curious and
Excellent Prospect it is, and worthy of our Observation, it being the First
Platform of a Military Encamping.

To close this Head, I will take notice of the Vast Numbers which some of the
Armies mentioned in Scripture consisted of of old. That of the Jews in the
Wilderness (which I last spoke of) according to the Muster-Roll in Numb. 1.
contained no less than six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred
and fifty. There were enrolled about a thousand thousand fighting Men in
Israel, and about half as many in Judah when David numbered the People, 2 Samuel
24. 9. 1 Chronicles. 21. 5. King Vzziah had an Host of three hundred thousand and
seven thousand and five hundred, besides a choice Band of two thousand and six
hundred, 2 Chronicles. 26. 12, 13. King Asa's military Force consisted of about six
hundred thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14. 8. And against him came an Ethiopian Army of
above a thousand thousand Chariots, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. whence we must collect that
the whole Force was much more Numerous, for the Chariots generally had more
than one single Person in them. King Jeroboam brought eight hundred thousand
Men into the Field, of whom five hundred thousand were slain, 2 Chronicles. 13. 3,
17. And other vast Numbers we read of in the Books of Kings and Chronicles that
were brought into the Field in those Days. Which I the rather mention because
some have questioned the Truth of it, and have thought that it is by the Fault
of Transcribers that the Arithmetic mounts so high. And I am sorry to find a
Great Man, whom I will not name, enclining this way. I doubt not but if he had
lived to revise his Writings, he would have expunged what seems to favor this;
for so Great an Asserter of the Authentic Verity of the Scriptures (as well as
of the Christian Religion) could not have done otherwise. But this I desire may
be considered by those that think the Number of the Men in the forementioned
Armies is mistaken by those who copied out the Bible, they setting down (as
they imagine) one Arithmetical Figure instead of another; I desire (I say) this
may be considered, that the Numbers in these Sacred Writings are set down in
Words at length, and not in Figures, which these Objectors did not think of;
and therefore those who transcribed the Bible did not mistake the Numbers by
writing down one Figure for another, and consequently these Men's Conceit is
groundless. Again, we are to remember what is said in Numb. 1. 45. they numbered
from twenty Years old and upward all that were able to go forth to War: and so
afterward they trained up all that were able to bear Arms unto Martial
Exercises and Military Discipline: which if we consider, it will not seem
strange and incredible that the Number of those in their Armies was so great.
Moreover, the Cavil will vanish if we consult Pagan Authors, and thence learn
how numerous their Armies were of old. Ninus the third Assyrian Monarch, raised
an Army of seventeen hundred thousand Foot, and two hundred thousand Horse, and
ten thousand six hundred Chariots of War, and invaded Bactria with these
Forces, as Diodorus Siculus and other Good Authors relate. Z^roaster the King
of Bactria met him with four hundred thousand fighting Men, say the same
Historians. And the foresaid Diodorus tells us that Semiramis that celebrated
Queen of Assyria, Ninus's Relict, carried an Army that consisted of three
Millions of Men into India: and Staurobates the King of India encountered her
with more numerous Forces, and vanquished her. It is universally acknowledged
that Xerxes entered Greece with an Army of above a Million of fighting Men. Thus
Profane History may induce us to credit that which we meet with in the Sacred.
When we find such vast Numbers mentioned in the former, we have no reason to
wonder at the like in the latter. And though, it is true, there is a
Disproportion between Judea and those Countries which I have named, yet if it
be remembered how Populous the one was in respect of the others, and likewise
that in time of War every Man that could handle a Weapon turned Soldier, the
great inequality which some imagine between this and the others will soon
vanish. This is some Account of Martial Affairs which the Ancient Writings of
the Bible give us: and though we read since the like things in other Authors,
yet here we see the First and Earliest Instances of them.

I might pass form Military Affairs to some Sportive Diversions and Exercises
which the Scripture speaks of, and gives us the first notice of, as Hunting,
which was the mighty Nimrod's Sport, Genesis 10. 9. (though, as was said before,
under that Term likewise his Tyrannical and Arbitrary Rule is denoted to us) It
is likely that he killed and destroyed the wild savage Beasts that grew
numerous at that time, and became very troublesome and noxious: for upon that
signal Dispersion of Mankind they remained not together in so great a Body as
before, and thence the Beasts were more formidable; and therefore Hunting began
to be necessary to preserve themselves. But this Great Man might follow this
Employment also for Pleasure and Recreation. So the first Hunting was for
private Delight, and public Profit. Esau afterward is called a Cunning
Hunter, Genesis 25. 27. and his Game is particularly specified, Genesis 27. 3, 5. And
I have intimated before that this Robust Exercise was a Specimen of Warlike
Enterprises and Arms. Hunting and Fowling are joined together in Lev. 17. 13.
and in order to the catching both Beasts and Birds; there is mention of Prove.
1. 17. Psalm. 124. 7. Prove. 7. 23. Eccles* (...)* Job 18. 8, 9, 10* Job 40. 24.
Am. 3* 5.
Nets, Traps, Snares, Ginns. Washing or Bathing (as it was a Recreative
Exercise of the Female Sex) you will find mentioned Exodus 2. 5. where we read
that Pharaoh's Daughter washed her self in the River Nile. It may be Ruth 3. 3.
Wash thy self (after which immediately follows, anoint thee, which was the
usual Attendant of Bathing) refers to this. Ruth's. Mother thought this not an
improper Exercise before she went to engratiate her self with Boaz. Bathsheb^
was bathing her self in a Garden in the Evening when David espied her, 2 Samuel
11. 2. This made way for Artificial Baths aftewards among the Jews in their
Gardens and Orchards: which, if we may credit the Targum upon Ecclesiastes, are
meant by the Delights of the Sons of Men, Eccl. 2. 7. This was the known
Practice of the Persians, Greeks and Romans, and other Nations; but the
Antientest and most innocent Examples are in the Bible, viz. among the
Egyptians and Hebrews. Other Recreating and Pleasurable Entertainments I had
occasion to mention before, as Instrumental and Vocal Music, though I
considered them chiefly as they were used on serious Occasions. I will now add
Dancing, which also was sometimes on a Religious Account, as in Exodus 15. 20.
where Miriam and her Females with Dances (as well as Timbrels) sang, and
glorified God after the Deliverance from the Egyptians. This Miriam may pass
for the true Terpsichore whom the Poets make the Inventer of Dancing, she being
the first famous Instance of it. We read that David danced before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 16. But it is not the Sacred but Civil Use of this Exercise, which I am
now to take notice of. It is certain that a pleasant and decent moving, a
Graceful Agitation of the Body (helped by some innocent noise of Music) was
one of the first and most natural expressions of Joy when there was some great
occasion for it. This we learn, as from Reason, so from the sacred Monuments of
Antiquity in the Scriptures. Here we are informed that this was an old
Expression of Mirth at times of solemn Feasting, Judge. 21. 19, 21. There was
not only Music but Dancing at the Festival of the returning Prodigal, Luke 15.
25. This was usual also after Victory, and in Public Triumphs, Judge. 11. 34. 1 Samuel 18. 6. and 21. 11. and at all Seasons of Mirth and Rejoi^ing, Psalm. 30.
11. Jer. 31. 4, 13. And still, so far as Dancing imports a Graceful Motion and
Comely Deportment of the Body, I see no reason to declame against it. But we
read that this Usage oftentimes degenerated into inexcusable Extravagancy and
Vice. The Idolatrous Jews made it part of their mad Worship which they paid to
the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. 19. The Amalekites after their Victory used it to
advance their Luxury and Debauchery, 1 Samuel 30. 16. Job makes it part of the
Character of the Prosperous Wicked, such as forget God and Religion, that their
Children dance, Job 21. 11. And what was the bloody and execrable Fruit of this
sort of Lewd Frolic, the Evangelical History records, Mat. 14. 6, etc. where
H^rodias's Daughter's Heels made the Baptist's Head fly off his Shoulders. And
it cannot be denied that this is the frequent Companion of Luxury and Wantoness
in these Days, in which so great Numbers (yea and of the inferior and ordinary
Rank) immoderately affect and addict themselves to this Diversion. This Vanity
seems to be part of the Temper and rooted Inclination of the gay People of this
Age, as if the Punctum Saliens were yet in their Blood, and they were still
made up of those Capering Particles, the first Rudiment of their Conception and
Life. One would think the Scene changed from Naples to England, and that our
People were stung with the Tarantula, and were (as we might hope) dancing and
playing it away. But then, when we see that the Sting is rather increased than
cured, and the Venom of Lust and Debauchery is daily more and more instilled by
it, we have cause to lament the fashionable Folly and Levity of our Times.

CHAP. V.
We are furnished in the Bible with the Knowledge of the first Vsages relating
to Matrimony. Of Nuptial Feasts; and other Ancient Feasts. We have here the
first Notices of Buying and Selling, and the Ancient use of Money. We learn
hence what was the first Apparel, and what Additions there were afterward. The
chief Ornaments of Men and Women, viz. Crowns, Mitres, Frontal Jewels,
Earrings, (the occasion of wearing these at first, and among what Persons and
Nations, together with the Abuse of them) Chains, Bracelets, Finger-Rings and
Signets. Changes of Garments. The Ancient use of White Apparel. Fullers Earth.
Looking-Glasses. Rending of the Garments.

THAT the Scriptures contain the Knowledge of all the First and Antientest
Usages in the World, I will make good in the next Place by speaking of
Marriage, and several things that have reference to it. Concerning which we
have the best Notices from this Authentic Book. There we are told that Man was
no sooner made but God extracted a Woman out of him: and when he had divided
them, he presently joined them together, so that a Conjugal Life became the
first and blessed State of Paradise, Genesis 2. 21, etc. The first Person that
violated this primitive Law of Wedlock was Lamech, who took unto him two Wives,
Genesis 4. 19. and if we may believe Antiqu. lib. 1. c. 3.
Josephus, had 77 Children by them. The Example of this first Polygamist was
afterward drawn into practice by the Jews, and Polygamy became frequent, and
Divorcements were permitted in order to the marrying of other Wives. The first
that kept Concubines was Abraham, Genesis 25. 6. whose Practice was followed
afterward by other Patriarchs, not without some permission from God, but grew
at last to a most Scandalous Excess in Solomon and Rehoboam's Days. That there
were Prostitute Harl^ts betimes we may gather from Genesis 34. 31. and Chap. 38.
v. 14, 15. in which latter Place there are mentioned some Circumstances whereby
those Mercenary Women were known in those times, as their Vail, their sitting
in an open Place, etc. That they were veiled may be gathered from the Practice
of Tamar, but it was with a proper and peculiar sort of Covering, by which they
were known from others, for all the Sex generally in those Eastern Countries
went veiled. It was not worn because those first Prostitutes were modest in
respect of those since, (as some have thought) but because they were
Distinguished by this from other Women. I know that Bochart and some others
attempt to infer from Isa. 47. 3. and such like Places, that they were not
veiled; but this, as I apprehend, is upon mistake, for those Words have no
reference to Harlots, but to Slaves, and so the Learnedest Commentators agree.
Their placing themselves by the way side or in some open Place, may be gathered
from the foresaid Example of Tamar: and this was a long time afterward the
usage among Persons of that infamous Character, Prove. 7. 12. She is in the
Streets, and lies in wait at every Corner; where by the Corner are meant the
chief and most eminent Places in the Streets, open and to be seen. Wherefore we
find her Seat to be in the high Places of the City, Chap. 9. v. 14. To this
impudent Practice refer those Passages, In the ways have thou set for them,
Jer. 3. 2. Thou have made thee an high Place in every Street, -- at every head
of the way, Ezekiel. 16. 24, 25. So the Roman Strumpets were wont to sit in
triviis, in the high Way where there was the greatest Resort of People, as from
Catullus and others might be proved, if it were worth the while. But to return
to our main Subject, that of Matrimony, we see what kind of Treaty there was
about it, Genesis 34. 6, 12. what the Contract, Genesis 24. 50, 51, 57, 58. what the
Solemnizing of it, Genesis 24. 67. were in those early Days. We read not of any
Formality in joining of Man and Woman. Mutual Consent made Marriage. Will thou
go with this Man? And she said, I will go. Then when she was come to his House,
he took her, and she became his Wife* To this some have thought those Words of
the Prophet, Hos. 3. 3. refer, I bought her for an Homer of Barley, as if they
alluded to the ancient Custom of Marriage solemnized per Confarreationem, by a
Cake of Bread or some Corn put into the Bride's Hand (which here by the way I
might observe was perhaps the Original of the Bride-Cake which has been the
constant Attendant at Nuptials:) But though that be questionable, yet it is
certain that these Words have respect to the Ancient Buying of Wives. The
Bridal Purchase here spoken of by the Prophet, was partly with Corn and partly
with Money; for he says he bought her to him for fifteen Piece^ of Silver, as
well as for an Homer, etc. So that the Dower consisted in Money and Goods. But
we have a much earlier Example of this Dowry or Gift, as it is called Exodus 34.
12. where it appears that there was wont to be given a certain Sum of Money to
the Father of the Woman who was courted and designed for a Wife. And this may
be gathered from 1 Samuel 18. 25. for when it is said the King desires not any
Dowry, it is implied that although Saul in Craft seemed to refuse a Dowry for
his Daughter, yet it was usual in those Days to give it for a Wife. This is
that which is called (...) by the Great Father of Poets and of all Pagan
Antiquities: and there is reference to this Practice in several Places of his
Poems. Whence Aristotle speaking of the Usages of the Old Greeks, says (...).
Polit. l. 2. c. 8.
they bought their Wives. And this Conjugal Buying or Purchasing was
reciprocal, i. e. it was performed by both Parties generally, Husband and Wife.
It was the same Matrimonial Coemption or Mutual Purchasing which prevails at
this Day: the Woman purchases the Man with her Portion or Jointure, and he her
with his Estate, or part of it. The Simplicity of those first Ages was such
that there were then no such Ceremonial Rites in their Nuptials as have been
observed since. And indeed it became partly necessary to have a Public and
Solemn Celebration of Marriage after the World was grown more numerous, to fix
and a^certain the Legitimacy of Succession in Families, and to tie the
Matrimonial Knot the faster in these slippery times.

Yet this we may take notice of, that notwithstanding the Nuptial Bonds were
entered into without Ceremony and Formality, yet they were always attended with
a Feast. Which ever afterward became fashionable among all Nations, but
especially the Romans, of whom we have Examples in Ad Q. Fratrem, l. 2.
Tully, In Caligula, Cap. 25.
Suetonius, Satyr. 6.
Iuvenal and many others. We read of a Feast at Jacob and Rachel's, or rather
(as Latan ordered the Matter) Leah's Wedding, Genesis 29. 22. which lasted seven
Days, as may be gathered from v. 27. Fulfill her Week, i. e. stay till the seven
Days of the Wedding-Feast be over, for so you will find it explained in the
next Verse. So Samson's Nuptials were accompanied with a Festival which
continued a Week, Judge. 14. 12. And this it seems was the usual Term not only
of these but all other great and solemn Feasts, Esth. 1. 5, 10. And here I
might observe, that it is peculiarly recorded that at Samson's Marriage Feast
he put forth a Riddle, and required the Bridal Companions to declare and
expound it some time before the Days of that Solemnity were ended. This was one
way of diverting and entertaining themselves at those times of Mirth, as other
Writers testify. Herodotus and Plutarch mention these among the Ancients,
telling us that they were wont to propound certain Quaint Problems to be solved
by the Company, and thereupon arose Battles of Wit. And from Athenaeus we may
be informed that these Enigmatical Questions were used at their Compotations.
Another famous Instance of Feasting on this account was that at the Royal
Nuptials of Ahasuerus and Esther, Esth. 2. 18. signally styled Esther's Feast.
Where by the way observe that a Feast was called by the Hebrews (...) a
Drinking, for that is the Word here used; and the same you will find in Judge.
14. 12. Job 1. 4. Esther 5. 5, 6. in which Places the Seventy Interpreters
render it (...). Accordingly to drink, Esth. 3. 15. is to Feast, and so again,
Chap. 7. v. 1. Thence in the New Testament the Word (...), 1 Pet. 4. 3. is
rendered very rightly Banquetings. And the Feasts or Banquetings among the
Greeks were called (...), Compotations, drinkings together. Because the Wine
generally bore the greatest part in those Meetings, the Denomination was
thence. But to go back to what I was speaking of, the Mariage-Feasts are taken
notice of in several Places in the New Testament, Mat. 9. 10. and 22. 2. John
2. 1. which shows the frequent use of them in those Days. The Word to express
them is (...), which in those forecited Texts, yea three or four times together
in Mat. 22. is by our Translators rendered a Marriage; but that is not the
proper Translation of the Word in these Place, for (...) here is a
Marriage Feast, and so it is in Odyss. (...) (...).
Homer and other Authors, (as the Learned Dr. Hammond has observed) and you
may perceive from the Texts themselves that it must be so translated. Further,
it is observable that of old there were Proper Vests made use of when they went
to these Wedding-Feasts. They generally put on white Garments (which you shall
hear afterward were in great Request of old) upon this Occasion: however, it is
certain they changed their Apparel, and were clad in a Vestment fit for that
Solemnity. This is called (...), the Wedding Garment, Matthew. 22. 11. that
distinct bridal Attire which was usually worn at such a time.

And here I might take occasion to speak of Other Feasts, hesides the Nuptial
Ones, mentioned in these Sacred Monuments. To say nothing of the Religious
Feasts of the Jews, as the Passover, etc. which were particularly appointed by
God, we read that there were some of Royalty and State, Estb. 1. 5, 9. some at
the Weaning of Children, Genesis 21. 8. some at Sheep-shearing, 1 Samuel 25. 36. 2 Samuel 13. 23. others at making of Leagues and Treaties, 2 Samuel 3. 20. others at
finishing of them, and to render the Compact sure, Genesis 26. 30. some on
occasion of Great and Public Deliverances, Esth. 9. 17, 18. some at
celebrating of Birth-days, as that of P^araoh, Genesis 40. 20. (the first Instance
of this Nature that we can possibly produce) and that of Herod, which is called
(...), Mark 6. 21. which we render a convenient Day: but our Learned Annotator
translates it a Festival Day, it answering to the Hebrew Iom Tob, a good Day, a
merry Season: and such was the Anniversary of Herod's Birth, which was kept as
a Festival. And among Other Nations there were usually Feasts on this Account.
That there were so among the Persians and Grecians, Deipnosoph. l. 4. c. 6.
Athenaeus bears witness: and particularly concerning the Persian Kings In
Calliop^.
Herodotus does the like. From Suetonius and other Historians we learn that the
Birth-days of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Titus, Nerva, Antoninus, Gordian, were
celebrated in the same manner. Epist. 64.
Sen^^^ kept the Birth-days of Socrates, Plato, etc. for such he understands by
Great Men. Mecaenas and Virgil's Nativities were observed, as is evident from
Lib. 4. Ode 11.
Horace and Lib. 3. Epist. 7.
Pliny the younger. But enough of this.

I will next enquire what ancient Notices we have from the Scripture concerning
Buying and Selling. We do not read that there was any Pecuniary Traffic before
the Flood, but it is likely that Swapping or Bartering of one thing for another
was the Practice of those times (as it is still among the most Barbarous
Nations.) That the first way of trafficking was without Coin, was the Opinion
of the Prince of Philosophers, Aristor. Ethic. l. 5. cap. 8.
(...), Before the Invention of Money Exchanging (says he) was in use. And
even after the Flood this way of Commerce did not cease, as when there was a
Dissension between Abraham's and Abimelech's Servants about the Well that
Abraham dug, we read that he took Sheep and Oxen, and gave them to Abimelech,
which perhaps may denote his Bartering for the Well, Genesis 21. 27. no less than
furnishing him with Beasts for Sacrifice. Whence perhaps Kesitah, which
signifies a Lamb, signifies also a Piece of Money, Genesis 33. 19. and is so
translated: and the same Hebrew Word is used in Job 42. 11. and is rendered by
the Syriac and Chaldee, Greek and Vulgar Latin, a Lamb, because Cattle
heretofore (the chief Commodity they had) was instead of Money to them, and
these they frequently changed for other Commodities. Though I know Grotius and
some other Learned Interpreters think this Kesita was that Piece of Money which
was of the Value of a Lamb, and for that Reason had the Figure of that Creature
stamped on it. So Not. Hist. l. 33. c. 3.
Pliny tells us, that among the Romans Pecunia was so named, because the first
Money was marked with the Figure of a Sheep or Ox, or some other Cattle. De Re
Rust. l. 2.
Varro gives the same Reason of the Name: And In Poplicola.
Plutarch confirms this, telling us, that they engraved on the Ancient Coins
the Figure of a Cow, or a Sheep, or a Hog; though withal he acknowledges that
it was the Opinion of some, that the Reason why Pecunia had its Name from
Pecus, was ^ot because a Sheep or other Animal was engraven ^n their ancient
Money, but because their chief Substance consisted in Cattle heretofore, those
were their first Riches.

But to wave this, this we are certain of, that when in process of Time Men saw
that they had no need always of one another's Wares, and so could not change
one thing for another, they invented Money, which might be given at any time
instead of Commodities, and which was supposed to answer Exactly to the Value
and Price of the things which they bought: For, as Aristotle says, (...) Eth.
l. 5. c. 8.
there was a necessity of having all things valued and estimated by a certain
Price, that so by this Means there might be on all Occasions an equal and
proportioned way of Changing, i. e. Money for Goods, and Goods for Money.
Wherefore in the same Place he says, (...)
All things are measured and duly proportioned by the Invention of Money. And
the Dictate of Reason, and the Necessities they were generally under, prompted
them to make use of this way, because Goods and Wares could not so conveniently
be carried up and down. The antientest mention of Money or Coin is in Genesis 13.
2. Abraham was rich in Silver and Gold; for Keseph and Zabab are the Words used
in Genesis 20. 16. and 23. 16. and 29. 9. and 43. 22. Deuteronomy. 2. 28. 2 Samuel 18. 11.
Judge. 8. 26. 2 Kings 5. 5. 2 Chronicles. 9. 16.
other Places for Money of Silver and Gold: But generally Keseph (which is
properly Silver) is the Word that is rendered Money in the Holy Writings. That
Money was used in Abraham's Days is evident from Genesis 17. 13. which makes
mention of him (i. e. a Servant) that is bought with Money; him that is the
Acquisition (...) Silver (as the Hebrew has it). And concerni^^ this Patriarch
it is said, He bought a Burying-(...) with Money, as much Money as the Field was
(...) viz. four hundred Shekels of Silver, Genesis 23. 9, (...). And it is
observable, that this is called here curre^^ Money with the Merchant: the
Silver was (...) such as passed to the Merchant or Trader, such (...) he would
take as well as give. It was good (...) that would not be refused by
merchandising Men. This is a plain and undeniable Proof that Money, Silver
Coin, was in use betimes, even in those fi^^^ Ages of the Word. Yea, I gather
that the use of Coined Money was frequent in those Days, for that is implied in
its passing from one to another. And from this time we constantly read that
things were purchased with Keseph, Money, properly Silv^^, and therefore
rendered by the Seventy (...). This is the Word for a Shekel in all those Te^^^
where it is put absolutely, and alone by it self. It is generally translated a
piece of Silver, but in Is^* 7. 23. a Silverling.

Further, it might be observed that they weighed their Money in those Days, as
appears from the Instance before mentioned in Genesis 23. 16. where it is said,
that Abraham weighed unto Ephron four b^^dred She^els of Silver for the Field
he bought of him. So you read of weighing of Money or Silver, Exodus 22. 17. Job
28. 15. Ier. 32. 9. Zech. 11. 12. Yea, their common Coin, a Shekel, had its
Name from Shakal, to weigh. And this was in use among the Persians, for in
Esth. 3. 9. to weigh is to pay. The Reason of which was because generally their
Money was in Large Pieces, and very Heavy; and because in Moneys the Account
went by Shekels among the Jews, and the common Pound-weight was fifteen
Shekels, therefore some used Great Weights to weigh the Money which was paid to
them for what they sold: And thence you may understand the Meaning of Amos 8.
5. where those are complained of that made the Shekel great, viz. for their own
Advantage and Profit. It is not unlikely that the Old Romans had this Custom of
Poyzing the Money which they paid, or received in Payment; whence ^^^dere,
expendere, appendere, are both to weigh and to pay. Likewise hence (as I
suppose) what is very Valuable and Precious, what is Choice and Worthy, is said
to be Weighty not only in the Idiom of the Hebrews, but among the Greeks and
Latins: as on the contrary those things are said to be Light which are Vain,
Vile, Little and of no Value. This way of speaking (of which I have largely
treated in another Place) had its Rise from the weighing of ^oney of old:
Because their Coin went by Weight, therefore what is very Valuable (as Money is
always reckoned to be) is signified by Weight. But we cannot hence infer that
they did not tell their Money, (as some have thought) for the same Money that
was weighed might be told, that there might be no Cheat, especially if it were
a great Sum. We are not certain that the one did exclude the other: but the
telling of their Money, as well as the weighing it, might be in use at the same
time.

Moreover, the First and Antientest Apparel is to be known out of this Sacred
Volume. Here we are informed that after Adam and Eve had transgressed the
Divine Law, and thereby vitiated both Souls and Bodies, their Nakedness became
shameful to them, and therefore to cover it they sewed Fig-l^^ves together,
(which were broad and wide, and therefore fit for that purpose) and made
themselves Aprons, Genesis 3. 7. These were the first Clothing; for I do not see
any ground for the Interpretation of a J. Clerici Commentar. in Genesis 3. 7.
late Writer, who by Chagoroth (which we translate Aprons) understands some
Booths or T^bernacles, which they dressed up with Fig Leaves that were broad
and shadowy, to hide themselves. The Original Word has never any such Sense,
and therefore we cannot but look upon this Exposition as precarious. Besides,
he might have satisfied himself from very credible Authors, that among some
Nations, even at this Day, their Garments are made of Leaves of Trees: so that
there is no Cause to wonder, much less to deny that the (...) Apparel was of
this kind. We are to understand by Chagoroth ((...)) such Garments wherewith
they girded themselves about, and therefore in other Places the Word is rendered
Girdles; 1 Samuel 18. 4. Prove. 31. 24. Ezekiel. 23. 15. They had (...) Denomination
because they were tied or girt abo^^, and on that Account are not unfitly
translated Aprons; as also because they hung down before, it being the Design
of that Covering of Fig Leaves to hide those Parts of the Body which by the
Fall were become disgraceful and uncomely. And there is no need of supposing
such Instruments in order to an artificial sewing of them, as a Late Author
would suggest, and thereby would enervate the Truth and Reality of the Adamick
History; for we may reasonably conceive them to be tacked and fastened together
with sharp Stalks and small Twigs which the Garden of Eden afforded them. (As
afterward for a long time People sewed or pinned their Clothes together with
Thorns; whence a Pin, as a Dr. Skinner.
Great Onomatologist tells us, is from the French Pingle or Espingle, Acicula,
and that from Spina or Spinula.) Whence you see how frivolous and childish, how
frigid and dilute that Cavil is; Archaeolog. Philos. cap. 7.
Where had they Needles when the Art of working Iron was not found out? and
where had they Thread when the Thread-makers Trade was not invented? For indeed
there was no Necessity of Needles or Thread: nay, it is certain that Leaves
could better be fastened together with little Twigs, or something of that
nature, than with those other Materials. Besides, this Gentleman shows himself
as unacquainted with the Original Language as with the Ancient Usage and the
Nature of the thing it self; for the Hebrew Word Taphar, which is here used, is
of a large Signification, and denotes putting on, fitting together, or any kind
of applying, as in Job 16. 15. Ezekiel. 13. 18. So that he has no ground hence to
understand this Word of sewing in a strict and proper Sense. And the Verb
(...), which is here made use of by the Seventy Interpreters, is also of great
Latitude, and is rendered adapto, concinno, as well as suo. Thus our first
Parents made themselves Garments, but afterward God clothed them, Genesis 3. 21.
They had not sufficiently covered themselves with their Fig-leaf Aprons;
therefore unto them the Lord God made Coats of Skins, i. e. he taught them how
to make them. These Garments are called Coats, because they were a Raiment that
came over their Bodies, whereas the other covered a Part only, viz. from the
Waste and Belly downwards. It is not improbable that they wore the former ones
still, and so these latter may partly be called their Upper Garment. And they
are called Coats of Skins, because they were made of the Hides of Beasts,
which, it may be, were worn at first raw, and afterward dressed and made (...)
Leather, and so were a Substantial Apparel* wh^^^ as the Covering of Fig Leaves
was very ^light, a^^ deserved not the Name of Clothing. I will (...) stay here
to debate, as the Talmudists and (...) other Jewish Writers do, what Beasts
Skin (...) Skins they were that these Coats were made (...) Perhaps these Skins
wherewith they were arrayed were Sheepskins, with the Inside (which was cool)
toward them in Summertime, and with (...) warm Fle^ce next to them in Winter
(for they had their Summer and Winter in the Paradisi^^^ Earth, whatever this
Archaeologist says to the contrary). But I own this to be mere Conjecture,
though the thing it self is not unworthy of the Divine Wisdom and Providence.
But this is beyo^^ Conjecture, that Cothnoth gnor (which we rightly translate
Coats of Skin) does not signify Taber^^cles made of, or covered with Skins to
keep out the Heat, as the forecited Commentator on Genesis does imagine; for it
is said, God made them Coats of Skins, and clothed them, the latter being
purposely added to explain to us the former. And we are sure of this, that
Garments of the Skins of Animals were the antientest Apparel: so that there was
no Unlikelihood of the thing. Diodorus of S^cily expressly relates, that in the
times of old they (...) Lib. (...)
did use the Skins of wild Beasts to cover them: And that they lasted a long
time among the Ind^ans, Persians, Scythians, and the Old Romans, we may inform
our selves from Profane History; which will tell us likewise that these Skins
were the only Clothing that the Old Britains (the first Inha^itants of our
Country) were Masters of. This ^as all the Covering they and others had at
first. We see then what was the Primitive Clothing, and that it was made of.
Our first Progenitors (as gay and trim as we go now) were clad in plain
Leathern Coats; yea she of the softer Sex, and who was the Queen of the World,
had no other Gown to wear. This plain rude Habit, which was to hide their
Nakedness, and to defend them from the Injury and Inclemency of the Weather,
not to adorn them, was the only Dress a long time: but their Posterity by
degrees found out other Materials for Clothing, as Wool (taken off from the
Skin) and Flax, and made of them Woolen and Linen Garments, Lev. 13. 47. Prove.
31. 13. Ezekiel. 34. 3. The richer Sort, not content with this common Drapery,
sought out for something more artificial and gay, more fine and delicate. Hence
Joseph, when he was made Viceroy of Egypt, was arrayed in Vestures of fine
Linen, Genesis 41. 42. and afterward this and Silk, and Purple, and Scar^et, and
Crimson, i. e. Fine Linen or Silk dyed with those Colors, became the usual
clothing of all Persons of Quality, Judge. 8. 26. and 14. 12. 2 Samuel 1. 24.
Prove. 31. 21, 22. Ier. 4. 30.

Though their Garments of old were but few, yet their Ornaments were many. I
will not here trouble you with inquiring into Iezebel's (...) (whence the Greek
and Latin (...) and fucus) (...) (70) Stibium (Vulgar Latin) 2 Kings 9. 30. or
Esther's Tameruk, (...) (70) Esth. 2. 3, 9. which though they were Ornamental,
yet belong not to Apparel. Nor will I rifle all the fantastic Gaieties of the
^anton and proud Dames of Iewry, Isa. 3. 18, etc. but I will only take notice
of some of the Chief ^^d most Usual Ornaments of Men and Women, and those which
we most frequently find mention^^ in Scripture, that thereby we may understa^^
what we read, and that we may be confirmed in this Truth, (which I have so
often urged) that the first Rise of the most Ancient things whatsoever is to be
derived from the Writings of the Old Testament. The Head-Ornament known by the
Name of a Crown [ Gnatarah or Gnatereth] was not peculiar to Kings, but was
made use of by others, as is to be inferred from Ezekiel. 16. 12. and 23. 42.
where it is reckoned among the other usual Ornaments appertaining to Women. It
was worn by them at solemn and extraordinary times only, and most of all on the
Day of their Nuptials, as the Jewish Doctors inform us. The better sort of
these Attires were gilt, the common ones were made of Flowers. And that they
were a Piece of Gentile Pomp and Gaiety, might be proved from several Authors,
but I forbear. But there was a Crown which was proper to Kings, and is
frequently called not only Gnatere^^ but Nezer, (which latter Name is never, as
I remember, given to the other Crown) this was the peculiar Badg of Regal
Authority among the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 12. 30. and Persians, Esth. 1. 11. and 2.
17. and 6. 8. (where the Word is Cether, and it is called the Crown of the
Kingdom, or the Royal Crown, as we translate it) and among the Jews, 2 Samuel 1.
10. 2 Kings 11. 2. From Esth. 8. 15. Psalm. 21. 3. Zech. 9. 16. we may gather
that this Royal Crown was made of Gold, and set with Precious Stones and
Jewels. The Tsaniph, another Capital Ornament, rendered sometime (...) by the
LXX, and englished by our Translators a Mitre, and sometimes a Diadem, was worn
by Great and Honorable Persons, and was a Badg of Authority and Eminency, as
appears from Job 29. 14. Isa. 62. 3. Zech. 3. 5. The Persian Kings and Priests
were clad in this Cidaris, as Cidarim Persae capitis vocabant insigne. Hist
lib. 6.
Curtius and other Historians acquaint us: and it is not to be doubted that
they had it from the Jewish High Priests and Priests, the former of which wore
a Mitre, Mitsnepheth, Exodus 29. 6. and 39. 28. and the latter Bonnets,
Migbanoth, which were of of fine Linen, Exodus 29. 9. and 39. 28. (as well as
the Mitre) and are said to be bound upon their Heads, for that is the true
Import of the Hebrew Word in the forecited Place in Exodus and in Lev. 8. 13.
which plainly shows that these Mitres and Bonnets were of the Nature of
Turbants, and so were the same with the Tsaniph, which was a Covering rolled up
in Folds, and tied about the Head, from tsanaph, circumvolvere, circumligare.
And indeed Tsaniph, if we exactly enquire into it, will be found to be the same
Word with Mitsnepheth, only this latter is with a Mem Heemantick in the
beginning, and a Tau in the End of it. If I had time I could show that other
Ornaments were borrowed from the Jews, and that what God himself enjoined the
High Priests was afterward used by the Eastern Princes.

As to the ancient Head-Covering of Women, I had occasion given me to speak of
it when I discoursed on 1 Cor. 15. 29. therefore now I shall only speak of what
was mere Ornament: the most eminent of which sort was their Frontal Jewel,
which though it was fastened on their Foreheads, hung down lower, and thence is
called Nezem Haaph, a Nose-Iewel, Isa. 3. 21. Gemma in front pendens, as the
Vulgar Latin renders it: and St. Comment. in Ezekiel. 16.
Ierom tells us that the Women in his time had Rings or Jewels hung from their
Foreheads dangling over the Nose. Nor was this of old reputed an immodest and
unbecoming Ornament, for we find that Rebekah was presented in the Name of her
absent Lover with this Forehead-Pendant, as a Pledge of his Conjugal Faith and
Love, Genesis 24. 22. For it is a Vulgar Error, yea it is a Mistake which I find
has prevailed among some Learned Writers, that Part of the Love-Token which
was sent Rebekah was an Ear-Ring: there is no ground at all for it, for in
express Terms it is said that the Nezem Zahab, the Jewel of Gold (as it is
called in this v. 22. which our Translators render a Golden Ear-ring) was put
gnal Aphah, upon her Nose, v. 47. or, as our Translators themselves render it,
upon her Face; for the Word Aph is largely taken sometimes for the Face. But we
never find that it is taken for the Ear, and therefore this place cannot be
meant of an Ear-ring, yea our Translators themselves acknowledge as much when
gnal Aphah is rendered by them upon her Face: wherefore there was no reason to
render Nezem an Ear-ring at the same Time and in the same Place. Besides, the
Women wore that sort of Ornament by Couples, and consequently we may gather
thence that this Golden Nezem which was sent to Rebekah was no Ear-ring, but a
Pendulous Jewel upon her Face or Forehead. Isaac had more of Generosity and
Courtship in him than to make an offer to his Mistress of a Half-Present. The
truth then of the Matter is this, they had of old Forehead-Ornaments, as well
as those that they wore in their Ears. The plain and unquestionable Difference
between these is observable in Ezekiel. 16. 12. I put a Jewel on thy Forehead, and
Earrings in thine Ears. The Nezem gnal Aph, the Jewel on the Forehead, or on
the Nose or Face, (for it is the same with Genesis 24. 47.) is distinguished from
the Ear-Ornaments, the Rings and Pendants that hung at that part. Some have
thought (and St. Augustine was of that number) that the Nezem before mentioned,
Genesis 24. 22. and the Nose-Iewels mentioned Isa. 3. were Rings in their
Nostrils; for, as this Father observes, there was Mos Maurorum est ut inaures
etiam in nari^us hab^ant foe^^^^* etc. Quaest. in Genes.
such a Custom among some of the African Women: and others since that time tell
us the like of some of the Eastern People. Particularly a Thevenot, lib 3.
Modern Traveller informs us that at this Day not only in Persia, but other
Oriental Regions, it is usual with the Women to bore their Nostrils, and wear
Pendants there. But whatever may be the Custom at this Day, there is no Author
that makes mention of it as practiced of old by the People of the East, and
particularly of Syria and Judea. Therefore we may conclude that the Nezem Haaph
was a Jewel for the Forehead, but had its Denomination from its hanging above
or over the Nose. So much of this (...) (or Nose-Ornament) as Symmachus renders
it, and very properly: whereas the LXX most absurdly translate it (...), and
that too in the forenamed Place in Ezekiel, where it is plainly distinguished
from the Ear-Ornament. I thought therefore I was obliged to give you a true and
exact Account of the Original Word. And truly if we observe what large Searches
Eustathius and Servius make into a single Word in Homer and Virgil, and how
busily and concernedly other Critical Commentators on Profane Authors dive
into some dubious Expressions which occur in them, we cannot think this present
Criticizing or any other undertaken in this Discourse upon the Words in this
Holy Book, to be superfluous and impertinent, unless we can persuade our selves
that the Terms which the Holy Ghost makes use of in this Sacred Volume, are not
as well worth our enquiring into as those in other Authors.

Another Ornamental Furniture which I will name, and which (of all others) is
most frequently mentioned in the Books of the Old Testament, is that which is
appropriated to the Ears. Concerning which these useful Remarks may be made:
Fir^^ we may take notice of the Words whereby this Pendulous Ornament is
expressed. The Word Nezamim (the Plural of the former Word Nezem) is not only a
general Term for Jewels, but it is particularly used concerning those which are
wo^^ in the Ears, Genesis 35. 4. Exodus 32. 2. and accordingly are rendered (...)
by the Seventy Interpreters. Another Word is used in Isa. 3. 20. viz.
Lechashim, from lacash to whisper or mutter, also to charm; because these are
the Ornaments of that part (the Ear) which is most affected and wrought upon in
Charms, and by which the Enchantment is received. But the more particular and
restrained Word is Gnagil, Numb. 31. 50. Rotula, sphaerula, a round Ring, from
Gnagol Circulus; and the Plural Gnagilim we read in Ezekiel. 16. 12. which is
rendered (...), i. e. rotulae, by the LXX. Earrings had this Denomination
because of their circular Figure: and the Jewels and Pearls which hung at them
were known by this Name, because they hung at these Circles, these round Wires
of Gold put into the Ears. These then are the Ear-Ornaments properly so called,
being peculiar to this part alone, and no other. It seems they anciently chose
the lower part of the Ear as the fittest Place to have little Incisions made in
it, because it is spungy and flexible, and will safely admit of these soft
Penetrations: and indeed it seems as it were to be made to receive some
Ornament to hang there. Yea, it is it self a king of Pendant, in respect of the
other parts of the Ear. Besides, this is a Part in view, where Ornaments may be
seen, which was one design of wearing them. This might prompt them at first to
bore holes in this fleshy Part, and hang Jewels in them. Likewise, the Ear is
the Organ of Hearing, and the grand Medium of Instruction and Discipline; it is
on this account the most Honorable Part of the Body, and therefore in the
first and innocent Ages they endeavored to adorn and honor it with placing
Jewels there. This a Mr. Weems, of the Image of God.
Reverend and Learned Writer of a neighboring Nation gives as the reason why
they made these small Perforations in the Ear, and inserted Rings of Gold or
Silver into them. He conjectures it to be done as a Sign of Honor to that
noble Part, which is the Instrument of the chiefest and most useful Sense.

Again, from the Sacred Writings we may satisfy our selves what People and
Nations wore this ancient Ornament. Here we read that those of Abraham's Race,
particularly Jacob's Family, were decked with it, Genesis 35. 4. By this it
appears that they retained the innocent Fashion of the Country whence they
came, for it was customary with the Assyrians to make these Apertures in their
Ears, and let the Light through them as it were, according to that of the Poet,
Juvenal* Sat. 1.
Natus ad Euphraten, molles quod in aure fenestrae
Arguerint. --
And afterward it became among the Jews a way of adorning themselves, as is
deducible from that manner of God's expressing his Kindness and Bounty to the
Jewish People, I put Earrings in thin^ Ears, Ezekiel. 16. 12. And that this
ancient Bravery was not confined to one Sex only among them, is plain from
Exodus 32. 2. where we read of golden Earrings in the Ears of their Wives, of
their Sons and of their Daughters, yea of all the People, in the next Verse.
That boring of the Ears, and admitting of Gold into them, was also in use among
the ancient Arabs, we cannot but conclude from Job's accepting of an Ear-ring
as a Present from his Friends, Job 42. 11. and wearing it for their sake; for
Nezem is one of the Words (as you have heard) that is made use of to express
that particular Ornament: and besides, it could not be the (...) (which is
sometimes signified by that Word) because this was proper only to Women.
Further, this was the usual Ornament of that Country, as several Historians
since acquaint us. We have a Proof of this in Number. 31. 50. where it is
enumerated among those Ornaments of the Midianites, i. e. Arabians, which
became a Prey to the Jews when they slew all the Males, and took the Women
Captive. And there is another very notable Proof of this in Judge. 8. 24. where
it is recorded that the Ishmaelites (or Midianites, for they were the same) who
were a People of Arabia, had golden Earrings; and it is added that they had so
because they were Ishmaelites, because by this means they would take off the
Imputation of Slavery, of being of the Race of the Bondwoman, which some might
object to them. They all made Holes and Fissures in the tender Lobes of their
Ears, and therein wore these Ornaments to signify they were Free; for this
anciently was reckoned as a Token of Ingenious Breeding, and an Argument that
the Persons who were decked with them, were of some considerable Rank and
Station.

But how then came it to be a Sign of Servitude among the Jews, for we read
that they bored their Servants Ears? I answer, this was not a Mark of their
being Servants, but it was a Testimony of their Voluntary Subjection and
Obedience to their Masters, and a Mark whereby they might be known to be
Theirs. The Words of the Law are observable, If the Servant shall plainly say,
I love my Master, then his Master shall bring him unto the Judges, and he shall
bore his Ear through with an Awl, and he shall serve him for ever, Exodus 21. 6,
7. His great Love to his Master made him continue in his Service, and this
Loving Service (for it was such, and not a Constrained Servitude) was testified
by the boring of the Ear. The Perforation of this Part was significant, in that
the Ear (as has been said before) is the Organ of Hearing, and consequently of
Obedience. To hear and to obey are synonymous, to give ear and yield obedience
are Terms convertible: therefore the Ear was submitted to the Threshold, and
bored, to express the Person's submissive Obedience and Harkening to his
Master. And it is probable that when the boring of the Ear was done, they put
some Iron or Brass Ring into the Hole, for otherwise it would close up, and
there would be no Mark: whereas the Design was to mark the Person, that he
might be known to belong to such a one. So that piercing the Ear was in order
to something else, viz. to have something put into it by the Master, perhaps
sometimes a Ring of some value, if he had a great Esteem of him as a very
faithful Servant. This as a Visible Memento was to hang at that Place, and he
was distinguished by it from others of better Rank, because it was in one Ear
only. This, as I apprehend, is the true Notion of that Jewish Usage: and it is
the more likely and credible, because this Custom of boring the Ear was used
toward those Servants who were so pleased with their Master and the Family,
that they would not part from them, they would live with them continually, and
be always in their Service. The Master had a proportionable Kindness and Love
to such a Servant, and might reward him with an Ear-ring of Silver, or it may
be of Gold. This Ornament was ever esteemed by the Ancients as a Mark of some
Gentility, as a Badg of some Repute and Creditable Estate in the World. Whence
the Arabians, who had no mean Opinion of themselves and of their Descent and
Gallantry, were the most noted of all People heretofore for boring their Ears,
as we learn from Pertunde aures ut imitemur Arabas.
Petronius and others. Yea indeed, it was an universal Practice (as In Orient
quidem and viris aurum gestare e^ loci decus existimatur. Not. H^^t. l. 11. c.
37.
Pliny observes) among the Eastern People both Men and Women, to punch the Lap
of the Ear, and to hang some Ornament there. Concerning the Africans the same
has been observed by Authors, whence that Piece of Raillery in Plautus, In
Poenulo, Act. 5. (...). 2.
Digitos in manibus non habent: incedunt annulatis auribus. The Carthaginians,
says he, as if they had no Fingers, wear their Rings (which were wont to shine
there) in their Ears. And we may take notice that this is spoken of the
Servants of that Country: whence we gather that these as well as Freemen had
their Ears bored, and wore Rings in them. As to the Romans, some even of the
Men among them (but very few) had their Ears bored, and wore Jewels in them, or
in one of them at least, as appears from one of Tully's Jests which Saturnal.
I. 7. c. 3.
Macrobius relates. But a Multitude of Authors agree that 'twas the Mode of the
other Sex among them, the Wealthy Matrons especially, to adorn that Part with
Pearls and Precious Stones: and they purposely made their Incisions very large
and wide for the Reception of Rings and Jewels of a great Magnitude, according
to that of the Satyrist; Juvenal. Sat. 1.
Auribus extensis magnos commisit Elenchos. The Females underwent those
troublesome and uneasy Perfossions in the Lappets of their Ears, in assurance
of having them loaded with some Rich Pendants as a Recompense. Those tender
Women ventured to wound their Flesh, because these Wounds were to be filled up
with Gold. They became at last so extravagantly lavish as to this Ornature,
that (as Nec in alia part ^oeminis majus impendium, margaritis dependentibus.
Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 37.
Pliny observes either of these or some other Women) no part of them was so
expensive and costly as their Ears. It was Seneca's Complaint, that Muliebris
insania viros ita subjecit, ut bina ^ut terna Patrimonia auribus singulis
suspenderent. De Benefic. ^. 7.
whole Patrimonies and more dangled at the Tips of Ladies Ears. And some of the
Ancient Doctors of the Church were wont to lash this unsufferable Prodigality
among the Christian Women, telling them, that they were so shamefully profuse,
as to hang Graciles aurium cutes Kalendarium expendunt. Ter^ull* de hab.
mulierum.
a whole Year's Revenue at this Part.

Furthermore, I take occasion from Scripture to remark that this Ornament was
heretofore used to Idolatrous Ends; for else we cannot give any Account of the
Patriarch Jacob's Injunction to his Servants and Household to put away the
strange Gods that were in their Hand, and the Earrings that were in their
Ears, Genesis 35. 2, 4. These two would not have been thus joined together, unless
the latter had been made use of in a Superstitious and Idolatrous manner.
Enchanted Rings were usual of old, as we are informed from several Passages in
History besides that concerning Gyges. And this may be one Reason perhaps why
those Rings that were peculiar to the Ears were called Lechashim, (as we heard
before) viz. because they were wont to be made use of in Enchantments. Gold
Rings were a sort of Talismans, and were used (as Petronius testifies) by the
People of the Isle of Samothracia, in a Magical way, to drive away Diseases,
and to do strange Feats; and they learned this from the Egyptians, he says. An
S. Augustine. de Doctr. Christian. l. 2.
Ecclesiastical Writer upon the Place before alleged tells us, that among the
Gentiles their Earrings had in them the Effigies of their Deities, and that
they were made by them the Phylacteries of their Gods. That they were used in
way of Magic, is attested by the same Ancient Writer, who reproves and
condemns the Execranda superstitio ligaturarum, in quibus etiam inaures virorum
in summis ex un^ part auriculis suspensae deputantur, sed ad serviendum
daemonibus adhibetur. Augustine. Epist. 73.
Execrable Superstition of Ligatures in those Days, which was performed by
Earrings, which the Men wore in summis ex una part auriculis. Whence a late
Learned J. Clerk Comme^tar. in Genesis 35. 4.
Critic would infer, that the African Servants wore their Earrings (not as
others did, but) on the top of their Ears. But I conceive there is no ground
for this Inference from St. Augustine's Words; for if we consult the Place, we
shall find that he speaks in general, and consequently not of Servants any more
than others. And moreover, there may be another and more proper Construction of
summae auriculae, for summae may be as much as extremae, and then not the upper
part of the Ears, but the lowest, i. e. the Tips of them (where all Earrings
are hung) are meant here. And ex una part seems to me to signify their wearing
their Earrings on one Side only, not in both Ears. This I conceive is the true
and genuine Sense of that African Father's Words. But the main thing we observe
from them is, that this sort of Ornament was employed heretofore to wicked and
Diabolical Purposes; and thence were deservedly called by this Pious Writer, in
the same Epistle, the Mark of the Devil. And this, it is probable, was derived
from that more ancient Practice of some of Jacob's Household before cited. As
the Pagans used to conse^rate their Hair, their Clothes, and things of all
kinds to their Demons, so here some of Jacob's Family engraved the Image of
some Idol on their Earrings, and wore them in remembrance of the feigned
Deities: Or perhaps the Good Patriarch saw some ground to fear that they would
do thus, and therefore that these Ornaments might not be serviceable to
Idolatry, or (as Grotius says) left some Golden Calf should be made of their
Earrings, he bids them cast them away; and when they had done so, he took
them, and hid them under an Oak, ver. 4. buried them and their Gods together.

It is to be lamented that the Number of those who dedicate their Ornaments to
false Gods, and make them serviceable to some sort of Idolatry, is too great at
this day. Lamprid, in Severo.
Indeed the fond Bigotry of the Emperor Severus was reprovable, who, when a
pair of Pearls of inestimable Value was presented to his Lady, ordered them to
be hung at the Ears of Venus: but there are those who wear the richest Jewels
themselves, and at the same time devote them to this Goddess, i. e. they make
them wholly subservient to Lust and Lewdness, to Wantonness and Luxury, and
other vicious Purposes: and when it is thus, Jacob's Injunction should be put in
practice, the Choicest Ornaments are to be laid aside, it is time now to inter
these Pernicious Idols. But those who know how to use their Ornaments in a
right manner, that is, to substract them from all vicious Principles and Ends,
to suffer them not to administer to Levity and Vanity, to Softness and
Effeminacy, to lewd Desires and Inclinations, to Pride and Vainglory; these,
and only these, are the Persons to whom the using of them is lawful. And this
must more particularly be applied to that kind of Ornament which I have been
speaking of, which seems to be no effeminate one in it self, both because it
was used by Men, and likewise because it is accompanied with some Hardship, and
requires some Valor to endure the piercing of the Bodkin. They must bleed
first before they wear it: and afterward those little Wounds are continually
kept gaping. And it cannot be thought unlawful and vicious in its own Nature,
seeing the Israelites decked themselves with it, but are never reproved and
checked for it. They are not blamed for wearing Earrings, but for making an
Idol of them. The religious Rebekah, who wore the Frontal Jewel, did not boggle
at the Auricular one; for questionless this is comprehended in the Keli Zahab,
the Jewels of Gold which she was presented with, Genesis 24. 53. Yea, Holy Job,
whose Spirit had been unspeakably broken and mortified by his Afflictions, yet
refused not this Innocent Gift (which was of general Use in that Country) from
the Hands of his Friends. So much of this Ornament, which was the Antientest,
the most Universal, the Simplest, and the most Unaffected of any that we read
of in the Sacred Records: on which Accounts it has the Precedence of all
others. But this and other Adornings, in these licentious times, are abused by
their Commonness: whereby that Distinction which ought to be made between the
different Ranks of Persons is taken away; and that Money is lavished in a
needless and unbecoming Dress, which should be laid out in Bread.

Again, the Neck was not destitute of its proper Decking, viz. Chains. These in
great Persons were Ensigns of Authority and Dignity (as they are in several
Places at this Day): thus Pharaoh put a Gold Chain about Joseph' s Neck, Genesis
41. 42. and Belshazzar did the same to Daniel, Dan. 5. 29. This was a general
Ornament of the Midianites or Arabians, as appears from Numb. 31. 50. where it
is mentioned with a great many others that were in fashion among that People.
It was used by the Jews, as we may gather from Prove. 1. 9. It was more
especially the graceful Attire of the softer Sex, Cant. 1. 1O. Charuzim are
Pearls on a String orderly disposed, as Buxtorf explains the Word. And these
Necklaces of Pearl are, it is probable, meant by Gnanak, Cant. 4. 9. One Chain,
i. e. one of those Strings of Pearl. And that this was a piece of Woman's
Finery is plain from Ezekiel. 16. 11. where it is numbered among other Ornaments of
that Sex, and is styled R^bid. Another sort of Neck-Ornaments (we may call them
Counter-points) much antienter than these, is mentioned, Judge. 5. 30.
Needlework of diverse Colors, wrought on both Sides, for the Necks (ad ornanda
colla, as the Vulgar Latin has it) of those that take the Spoil.

The Arms or Wrists were wont of old to have their peculiar Adorning, viz. with
Bracelets: Of which we read first of all in Genesis 24. 30. these as well as the
Forehead-Pendants being presented to Rebekah by her Servant Isaac. We find it
in the Catalogue of the Female Ornaments used by the Jews, Ezekiel. 16. 11. And
this was worn not only by Women but Men, viz. such as were of some considerable
Figure in the World, as Judah, Genesis 38. 18. and King Saul, 2 Samuel 1. 10. And
from Exodus 35. 22. it may be concluded that both Sexes at first made use of
them. As to the Nature of them, I shall not here enquire into it: only I remark
this, that from the several Distinct Names given in Scripture to them, as
Tsemidim, Petilim, Chach, Atsgnadah, we may infer, that there were several
sorts and kinds of them. It is certain that the first mention of them is in the
Bible: and afterward we read of them in Profane Authors. These tell us, that
even Men, yea Martial Men* did not disdain this Finery; of which we have a
remarkable Instance in the Sabines, who inveigled Tarpeia to betray the Capitol
to them, by promising to give her what they wore on their left Arms, by which
she thought they meant their Br^celets; but they, both to keep their Word, and
to punish the Treason, threw in their Bucklers to boo^, wherewith the poor
faithless Maid was stifled and overwhelmed.

We read of another Ornament, which was for the Hands and Fingers, viz. a Ring,
Tabbagnath. This is reckoned among other Habiliments of the Midianites, Numb.
31. 50. and of the Jewish Women, Isa. 3. 21. And that it was an Innocent
Ornament among the Jews afterward, we may gather from the Parable, where the
kind Father put a Ring on the Hand of the returned Spendthrift, Luke I5. 22.
And St. James's (...), Chapter 2. v. 2. shows it was fashionable in those Days.
Sometimes their Rings were garnished with Precious Stones, for we read of Gold
Rings set with the Beryl, Cant. 5. 14. Some of them were anciently wont to be
cut and engraved, and so were made use of as Seals. The first mention of this
Chotham, this Sealing Ring, is in Gen,. 38. I8. Judah gave his Daughter (whom
he took to be another Female) a Signet, as a Pawn, to assure her of something
of another nature. Perhaps some began then to betroth Virgins with a Ring, and
so this Pledge was a Symbol of Judah's espousing Thamar. If this were so (which
I think cannot be disproved) the Wedding Ring is of greater Antiquity than is
imagined. The Seal-Ring was worn on their right Hands, as appears from Ier. 22.
24. It was of great Use, and much prized, and therefore carefully kept, as this
Place and others, Cant. 8. 6. Hag. 2. 23. import. And not only Jews but
Persians frequently used this sort of Ring, Esth. 3. 12. and 8. 8. and it was a
Badg of Authority among them, for Ahasuerus plucked off his Ring from his
Finger, and bestowed it on Haman, Esth. 3. 10. and afterward on Mordecai,
Esth. 8. 2. to signify the Power and Honor he in^^sted them with. And the like
Practice was long before among the Egyptians, Genesis 41. 42. Pharao^ took off his
Ring from his Hand, and put it on Joseph' s. Where by the way we may observe,
that Not. Hist. l. 33. c. 1.
Pliny is no good Antiquary when he says the Egyptians knew not the Use of
these Rings. And he further shows himself deficient in Antiquity, when he tells
us, that they were not used in the Time of the Trojan War (because forsooth
Homer does not make mention of them): for this Instance was at least five
hundred Years before that Trojan Expedition. And the other of Judah was
somewhat before this. So that it is clear that the first Discovery of things in
the World is made in the Writings of the Old Testament: and afterward Humane
Authors derive their Relations from these, or speak of things that were in
imitation of them, as Lib. 11.
Dionys. Halicarn. Hist. l. 3.
Livy, Na^. Hist. l. 33. c. 1.
Pliny, mention the Sabines and Romans wearing of Rings.

Before I quit this Part of my Discourse concerning the Attire made mention of
in Scripture, I will take notice that this was according to the Rank, Place and
Dignity of the Persons, or according to the Occasion of Business they were
employed about. Thus we read of Lebush Malkuth, Esth. 6. 8. The Royal Apparel
which the King used to wear. And the Queens had their Royal Vestment proper to
their Dignity, which is absolutely and barely styled Malkuth, Esth. 5. 1. She
put on the Kingdom; so the Hebrew. To this belong the (...), the soft Apparel,
fit for Kings Houses, i. e. their Courts, Mat. 11. 8. Others, though not of so
high a Rank, had their Caliphoth shemaloth, their Changes of Raiment, Genesis 45.
22. which are rendered by the Greek Interpreters (...), double Raiment; and in
the same Verse again (...), changeable Garments. Of these we read in Judge. 14.
12. 2 Kings 5. 5, 22. Zech. 3. 4. These were their Different Habits which they
put on, according to the Difference of Times, and the Employment they were
about. These were an usual Present of old (as appears from some of the Texts
which I have here alleged) that they customarily bestowed on their Friends as
Tokens of Hospitality and Love. That this was an ancient Practice may be
collected from Homer, by whom these Changes of Garments are called Odys. ^.
(...). And among other Gifts and Presents which Alcinous gave to Ulysses, --
Odys. ^.
(...), are reckoned. That the same Persons had Different Suits of Clothes
appears from Genesis 27. 15. which mentions Esau's goodly Raiment, which was very
rich and fashionable, and which had been laid up by his Mother among those
Aromatic Spices and Odours (as it is likely was the Custom then) which the
Fi^lds in those warm Countries supplied them with; whence we read of the Smell
of his Raiment, ver. 27. This Perfumed Suit was fetched out and worn by him at
solemn Seasons, as we may gather from the Occasion of Jacob's using it by his
Mother's Order. So in succeeding times they were clad on Festival Days, and
Times of Rejoicing, with a better sort of Apparel than they wore at other
times. These are styled Garments of Beauty, Isa. 51. 1. and Garments of Praise,
Isa. 61. 3. such as they put on at times of Rejoicing and praising God.

Especially White Garments were then much in fashion: to which refers that of
Ecclesiastes, chapter 9. ver. 7, 8. After he had said, Go thy way, eat th^^ Bread
with Joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart, he adds, Let thy Garments be
always (...) Of this particular sort of Garments used at Feasts among the Jews,
Philo speaks in his Discourse of a Theoretick Life. And perhaps such a Linen
Vesture or Ephod David wore at a solemn time of Rejoicing, 1 Chronicles. 15. 27.
This is certain, that the richer sort of People among the Jews were wont to
wear, especially in public, this White Clothing. Whence the Nobles and Great
Men were styled Chorim, 1 Kings 21. 11. Neh. 13. 17. Eccles. 10. 17. Isa. 34*
12. Ier. 27. 20. and 39. 6. i. e. Candidi, from the Color of their Garments.
This gives an Account of (...), the bright Apparel, Jam. 2. 2. Whence it was
that the Fullers were an ancient Trade, and are more than once mentioned in
Scripture, 2 Kings 18. 17. Mal. 3. 2. But by this Name are not meant those who
deal about combing or plucking the Wool, but those that washed and whitened
both Woolen and Linen, and took out their Spots and Filth, which were soon
contracted, and as easily seen in that White Raiment. It is probable that the
Fullers Field, Isa. 7. 3. was the Place where they dressed and dried their
Cloth: and it is likely that it was made choice of by those Tradesmen, because
it was so near the Pool (which they had occasion to use constantly) mentioned
in the same Verse. The Fullers Soap, Mal. 3. 2. was useful to this purpose: The
Hebrew Word Bori^^ is rendered (...), herba, by the Seventy, because they used
some certai^ Plant or Herb of an abstersiv^ and cleansing Nature, a kind of
Sope-wort. In the New Testament likewise this Employment is spoke^^ of; for the
Evangelist, speaking of our Saviou^^ Garments at his Trans^iguration, ^aith,
they beca^^ shining, exceeding white as Snow, such as no Fuller on Earth can
white them, Mark 9. 3. Where it is not improbable that (...), which we render
on Earth, should rather be englished with Earth, i. e. with Fullers-Earth;
which, with other things, was so useful in scouring and cleansing their
Garments, and reducing them to their former Whiteness: (...) in Theophrastus
(whom the Learned Hammond quotes) signifies much of this Fullers-Earth; whence
that Excellent Critic is inclined to think that that is the meaning of (...)
here. And it is certain that the Preposition (...) is sometimes used in that
manner which it is in this Place. The Use of White Garments was in great Esteem
not only among the Jews (of whom I have spoken already) but the Persians, as
may be seen in Esth. 8. 5. But especially the Romans hugely affected to wear
Clothes of this Color, and that chiefly at their Feasts and on High Days: Then
their bright Gowns were put on, which with their Eatings and Drinkings they
brought home soiled, and thence they had occasion for Fullers very much, to
cleanse their Gowns of Spots, and to make them white again. These Garments
which they put on when they went out upon solemn Invitations to Suppers, were
called vests accubitoriae, coenatoriae, cibarial;, togal; triclinares, and are
often mentioned by Pliny, Martial, and other Writers. Among the Greeks this
Habit was known by the Name of (...), and (as we learn from In vir. Adriani.
Xiphilin) (...). To these belongs the (...) spoken of before, and perhaps that
Linen Garment* (Mark 1 ^ 51.) which a young Man had cast about him. This young
Man (says St. Ambrose) was John the Evangelist, who went with Christ from the
Supper into the Garden, having on his Festival Garment still. I could observe
also that Garments of diverse Colors were in great Esteem of old: thus the
Beloved Joseph had his Phassim, ((...), LXX) Genesis 37. 3. And the Royal Ladies
were thus apparelled, 2 Samuel 13. 18. This is called Rikmah in Judge. 5. 30. and
Tsebagnim in the same Verse.

To see themselves, and how their Apparel sat, they had of old no
Looking-Glasses, properly so called, for we have no Word for Glass in the Old
Testament, though in the New we have (...) and (...), Rev. 4. 16. and 15. 2.
and 21. 18, 21. and it is probable that the Artificial making and ordering of
it was found out about that time, as we may gather from what Not. Hist. l. 36.
c. 26.
Pliny says of it. Their Speculums were not made of Glass, (as now) but of
polished Brass, otherwise the Jewish Dames could not have contributed them
toward the making of the Brazen Laver, Exodus 38. 8. These are the Miroth here
spoken of, which are also expressed by other Words, as Rei, Job 38. 8. and
Gilinim, Isa. 3. 23. all three from Hebrew Roots, which signify to see, to
reveal or discover, because Objects appear and are seen in these Speculums. Of
this sort of Mirrors, made of some bright Metal, and particularly of burnished
Brass, Not. Hist. l. 33. c. 9.
Pliny and De Architect. l. 7. c. 3.
Vitruvius speak. But before this Invention, yea and afterward, among all the
plainer sort of People, the Water, in Ponds and Rivers, when the Surface of
them was smooth and even, was instead of Looking-Glasses to them: and that
might be one Reason why they often of old went down to visit these Places, and
after they had well viewed themselves in them, made use of them for Bathing.
Men likewise at first used to look themselves in Fountains and Rivers: -- In
Bucolic.
Nuper me in littore vidi, says the Shepherd in Virgil. Thence Speculum udum
is the Periphrasis of a River in Apuleius. And from other Testimonies it might
be proved, that they anciently looked their Faces in Waters. So that when the
Burnished Looking-Glasses of the Hebrew Women were commuted into a Laver, they
were thereby seasonably put in mind of the first Watery Speculums.

Lastly, to put a Period to this Head of my Discourse, I will take notice of
the rending of the Garments, so often spoken of in the Divine Writings. This
they did either when some great Calamity befell them, or when some Enormous Fact
was committed, or when some Impious and Blasphemous Words were uttered; and
briefly it was a Sign of extraordinary Grief, Perturbation of Mind, Anger,
great Displeasure, Detestation. Frequent Examples we have of it among the
Hebrews, Genesis 37. 29. and 44. 23. Numb. 14. 6. Josh. 7. 6. Judge. 11. 35. 2 Samuel
1. 2. Mat. 26. 65. Acts 14. 14. And the Arabians expressed their doleful
Resentments by this Ceremony, Job 1. 20. and 2. 12. And so did the Persians, as
may be rationally supposed from Mordecai's running in this mourn^ul Posture
through the Streets, where he would have been thought to be mad, if that People
had not used the same way of testifying their Mourning, Esth. 4. 1. And indeed
we are assured from Lib. 3.
Herodotus, De Cyri Institut. l. 3.
Xenophon, and De reb. gest. Alex. M. l. 5.
Q. Curtius, that the Persians were wont to rend their Clothes when they had
any doleful Tidings brought them. In imitation of them the Musaeus in Erone.
Greeks did so, but very sparingly. And several Dio^ys. Halicarn. I. 3. c. 24.
Herodian. I. 1. Dio I. 40.
Historians ascertain us, that the Romans used this Custom when they would show
their excessive Sorrow and Trouble of Mind, especially at the Death and
Funerals of their Friends.

Which reminds me of the last Part of my Task, viz. to speak of the
Scripture-Antiquities which relate to Burial and Funerals.

CHAP. VI.
Here we are informed concerning the Primitive Institution of Burying. Graves
and Sepulchers were generally in the Fields, and without the Walls of Cities.
They usually embalmed the dead Bodies. Why they sometimes burnt them. Burning
also signifies Embalming. There was a Difference between the Funeral Burning of
the Jews and of the Heathens. The Manner and Time of Mourning for the Dead.
Both Vocal and Instrumental Music used at Funerals. The Antiquity of Funeral
Monuments. The old way of erecting great Heaps of Stones over the dead.
Stone-heng is a Sepulchral Monument, and in imitation of it. Anah's Invention
of Mules. Writers borrow from one another. The Bible only is the Book that is
beholden to no other. Here is the Antientest Learning in the World: and that of
all Kinds. It Is common with Authors to contradict themselves, and one another:
they are uncertain, lubricous, and fabulous. But the Divine Writers alone are
certain and infallible. How strange and improbable soever some of the Contents
of this Holy Book may seem to be, they justly command our firm Assent to them.

HERE, and only here, we ^ind the first Institution of Burying or Inhumation;
the Antiquity of which is greater than is commonly thought. Man's Original and
Interment are both joined together, Genesis 3. 19. for he is told by God himself,
that he must return unto the Ground, because out of it he was taken: and that
he may be assured of it, it is repeated in the same Place, Dust thou art, and
to Dust thou shall return. Man acts in a Circle, he goes back to his first
Principle, to the same Point again, the Earth of which he was compounded. Here
is the Primitive Law of Burial, i. e. of committing the Body to the Earth
(which is properly Interring): this was instituted by God, and this is the most
proper way of disposing of the dead Body. Of this the Pious Sufferer speaks,
saying, Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return thither,
Job 1. 21. Having in the former Clause mentioned his Mother's Womb* and the
Earth being as it were his Mother, he says, he shall return thither, as if he
had mentioned the Earth. Therefore, according to Chrysostom and some other
Expositors, his Mother's Womb is interpreted the Earth. But there is something
more than this, which has not been taken notice of by Interpreters: therefore
the better to show the Tenor of the Words, I desire it may be observed, that
it is in the immediately foregoing Verse said, Job fell down upon the Ground,
grovell'd upon the bar^ Earth, and then he took occasion to utter these Words,
Naked came I, etc. As if he had said, I am here laid low upon the Ground, which
reminds me of my original Extraction: out of this I and all Mankind were first
taken, as we were since out of our Mothers Wombs, and to the Ground we must
return again, which is the Mother of all. This, as I conceive, is the true
Meaning of the Words, which could not have been discovered without attending to
the foregoing Verse, to which these have a plain Reference. This Notion has
been entertained by Pagan Writers when the Earth is called by them (...) and
(...), but none of them mention (because they were ingnorant of) that first and
original Order of Burial, Unto Dust thou shall return, on which this is
founded. Man by these Words is appointed to be laid in the Ground, to be buried
in the Earth. In pursuance of which Order Men have been naturally inclined to
take care of decent Burial, and to bestow the Bodies of the Dead in the Earth.
Therefore the burying with the Burial of an Ass, which is properly no burying
at all, is abhorred by Mankind, and is threatened as a Judgment from Heaven,
Ier. 22. 19. for I suppose few will attend to what Antiqu. l. 1^. c. 10.
Josephus says, that Nebuchadnezzar took Iehoiakim (who is the Person to whom
this is threatened) and killed him, and ripping up an Asses Belly, buried him in
it, which this Writer says is the fulfilling of the Prophecy. It is rather to
be understood of his being not buried at all, but exposed to the Air and
Putrefaction above ground (as Beasts are) he being cast forth beyond the Gates
of Jerusalem, as it follows in the next Clause; and more expressly in Ier. 36.
30. his dead Body was cast out in the Day to the Heat, and in the Night to the
Frost.

Though Burial was used from the beginning, yet the first Instance we meet of
it is that in Genesis 23. 19. viz. of Abraham's burying Sarah, to which purpose he
bought a Field with a Cave in it, wherein he lodged his beloved Wife, Genesis 23.
17, 18, 19. and there afterward he was buried himself, Genesis 25. 8. and in the
same Sepulcher were deposited the Corpse of Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob and Leah,
Genesis 49. 31. This then we are certain of, that Fields were the first Places of
Burial, (I mean the first that we read of) and Caves the first particular
Repositories of the Dead. And thus generally it was afterward, so far as we
have any Discoveries from these Holy Records. The Burying-Places were in the
Fields, and not within Cities and walled Towns. Only here I must premise that
there were some few Exceptions, as that in 1 Samuel 25. 1. they buried Samuel in
his House at Ramah. There were at that time some Persons interred privately,
and then their Corpse were not carried abroad. This was the Case of Samuel, who
though he had been an eminent Person, yet chose an obscure Burial. Nay, it is
likely that all Persons at first of a mean Figure and private Capacity, were
lodged when they were dead, in the same Ground on which they dwelt when they
were alive. Which is Servius's Remark on a Passage in Virgil, Apud majores
omnes homines in suis domibus sepeliebantur. In (...). 6.
Of old, says he, all Men were buried in their Houses. And Prius autem in domo
sua quisque sepeliebatur. Orig. 15. c. 11.
Isidore agrees with him. Another Instance of this private Interment was Ioab,
who though he had been a Great Man, yet went off the Stage in very ill
Circumstances, and was buried in his own House in the Wilderness, 1 Kings 2.
34. And King Manasses who had been so exorbitant an Offender, voluntarily chose
a mean and humble Grave in the Garden of his own House, 2 Kings 21. 18. as
thinking himself unworthy of the Royal Sepulcher of his Fathers, which was in
the City of David. And here also is remarkable another Exception, viz. as to
the Burial of some of the Jewish Kings, who were not buried without the Walls,
but in the City it self, viz. Zion, (the upper Part of Jerusalem, where the
Temple and the King's Palace were seated) the City of David, as we expressly
read concerning the Burial of David, 1 Kings 2. 10. Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 43.
Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. and others. The rest had a Royal Burying-place
without the City, and King Vzziah being a Leper, was not interred with some of
the other Kings, but in the Field of the Burial which belonged to the Kings, 2 Chronicles. 26. 23. And in the Fields or Places separated from their Cities and
great Towns, they generally disposed of their Dead heretofore. Rachel was
buried in the way to Ephrath, i. e. Bethlehem, Genesis 35. 19. Not to speak of
Moses's Burial in a Valley, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. which was of God's own disposal, we
read that Aaron before him was buried on Mount Hor, Numb. 20. 28. Deuteronomy. 10. 6.
and Joshua after both these on Mount Ephraim on the Side of a Hill there, Josh.
24. 30. The Son of the Widow in Naim was carried to be buried without the Gates
of the City, Luck. 7. 12. Lazarus's Grave was without the Town of Bethany, John
11. 30, 32. Ioseph's Sepulcher, where our Savior was laid, was in a Garden
without Jerusalem, John 19. 41. in the Place where he was crucified there was a
Garden. And that the Graves of the Jews were without the Cities, is evident
also from Mat. 27. 52, 53. The Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints
which slept arose, and came out of the Graves, and went into the holy City.
Thence the Devils are said to abide among the Tombs, Mat. 8. 28. these being
Places of Solitude, remote from the City. Hence we read of the (...), Graves
that appear not: and the Men that walk over them (they being in the Fields and
Highways) are not aware of them, Luke 11. 44. To prevent which, they sometimes
washed them over with White Lime, that Passengers might the better discern and
discover them, and thereby avoid Desilement. These are the whited Sepulchers,
Mat. 23. 27. to which our Savior compares the Pharisees. These were situated
in the Common Ways and Fields, at least some were in the suburbs. This was the
Law and Practice of the Greeks, and from them the Romans borrowed this Custom,
who (as several Authors witness) buried none within the City, but without the
Gates in the Fields and Highway Sides: whence the Epitaphs were directed ad
Viatores. Thus it was among the Christians of old: We bury our dead without the
City, says Homil. 89. ^om. 6.
Chrysostom, therein letting us know what was the ancient Custom of the Eastern
Churches. But afterward People were loath to lie in the wide and open Fields,
and desired their dead Bodies might be taken into Cities, then into
Churchyards, and Constantine the Great was peculiarly favored to be interred
in the Church Porch. Afterward, when some presumed to bury their dead in
Churches, there were Bibliothec. Jur. Can. Collect. Constitut. Eccles.
Canons made against it. But by degrees it became lawful to do it in most
Countries where Christianity was received: and as to England, Bodies were first
brought to be buried in Churches here, by the Means and Procurement of Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 758. The Turks at this Day refuse to bury in
their Mosches or Temples, or within the Walls of their Cities, though (if you
will believe it) their Prophet had the Privilege to be exempted from the common
way of Burial, and was entombed at Mecca. I have this likewise to observe, that
as Persons of great Rank had particular Apartments and Places set apart for the
burying of themselves and their Family, (as is evident from what has already
been said, and may be confirmed from 2 Samuel 19. 37. I Kings 13. 22, 31, 32.
where these peculiar Repositories are called the Graves of their Fathers, and
of their Mothers, and the Sepulchers of their Fathers) so the poor and meaner
sort of Persons were buried in a common and promiscuous Place of Sepulture,
Ier. 7. 32. and 26. 23. the Graves of the Sons of the People.

To Burying appertains Embalming, of which we have the first Instance in Genesis
50. 2. And the next is in the 26th ver. for Joseph who had taken that care of
his Father, was embalmed himself, and then put in a Co^^in, a Chest, as the
word Aron signifies. No History, whatsoever goes so far back as this: though,
it is true, we have these particular Passages of Moses's History confirmed by
Pagan Historians, afterward; for In Euterpe.
Herodotus tells us this was the Practice of the Egyptians, and fully describes
the manner of it: yea he mentions the (...), the Coffins wherein the Corpse were
deposited after the Embalming was finished. Not. Hist. lib. 2. c. 27.
Pliny does the like, showing us how they opened the Bodies, disbowell'd them,
and filled them with Aromaticks. Moses records that forty Days were fulfilled
in Embalming, Genesis 50. 3. which agrees with what Herodotus and Diodore of
Sicily say of this Egyptian Performance, viz. that it was done with great
Curiosity and Art, and that Considerable Time was spent about it. And seeing
there was required Skill to know and choose out the best Herbs, Drugs,
Ointments and Spices, it is no wonder that this was (as you heard before) the
Physicians work. From the Egyptians this was derived to other Nations, and
particularly to the Jews, who constantly used it more or less toward the
Bodies of such as were of any Rank and Quality. Hence we read of the Embalming
of King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 4. of King Zedekiah, J^r. 34. 5. of which more anon.
And it was used to our Savior, as is particularly recorded, John 1^. 40. They
took the Body of Jesus, and wound it in li^e^ Clothes, (which was a Custom
generally observed by all other Nations, though the Plutarch. vita Ly^urg.
Lacedaemonians by a particular Order of Lycurgus buried all in Woollen, as we
do at this Day) with the Spices, viz, a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes about a
hundred Pound weight, (mentioned in the foregoing Verse) which Nicodemus
liberally bestowed on Christ's Body for this Purpose. This they did, designing
to preserve it entire and sound, and to keep it free from Putrefaction, not
knowing or being persuaded of his Resurrection. And it is added here, that this
Care of Embalming dead Bodies, was a Jewish Custom, As the Manner of the Jews
is to Embalm; for so we may truly read the Text, (...) being the Word here
used, which is the same that the Seventy Interpreters express Embalming by in
Genesis 50. 2. So (...), Mark 14. 8. may be rendered not to the burying, but to the
embalming: for it is said, the pious Female (...).
came aforehand in order to this; so that the now anticipated that Funeral
Work which she and others of her Sex afterward came to perform to their Dear
Master, by bringing sweet Spices to his Sepulcher, Mark 16. 1.

But though committing the Body to the Ground (in order to which Embalming was
used) was the generally received Custom of the Jews, yet sometimes, but very
rarely, another was practiced by them, and that was Burning the dead Bodies, or
some part of them at least. Thus they took the Bodies of Saul and of his Sons
from the Place where the Philistines had hung them up, and came to Jabesh, and
burnt them there, 1 Samuel 31. 12. They laid the dead Bodies on a Pile of Wood,
and consumed the Flesh of them to Ashes, but they buried their Bones (which
were not consumed by the Fire) under a Tree at Jabesh, v. 13. But this was an
extraordinary Case; for these Bodies had hung so long in the Air, that the
Flesh was putrified and rotted, and partly eaten with Worms, so that the
committing them to Fire was the best way of Funeration at that time. There is
another Instance of this Funeral Conflagration in Amos 6. 9, 10. If there
remain ten Men in one House, they shall die: and a Man's Uncle shall take him
up, and he that burns him, to bring out the Bones out of the House. But as we
may easily perceive from the Words themselves and the Context, this was in the
time of a great Pestilence, which raged so furiously, that there was scarcely a
sufficient Number of Men left to bury the Dead, and it was unsafe at such a
Time to go abroad, and carry the Corpse in solemn manner to the Grave, and
perform the Rites of Funeral. In such extremity Burning was a good Expedient,
because after the Carcass was reduced to Ashes, the Bones (which being hard and
solid remained unburnt) might easily be carried out of the infected House, and
laid in the Ground. Wherefore from this Place in Amos, and from the foregoing
one in Samuel, I think it is evident that they burnt the Corpse among the Jews
sometimes, though very seldom. There in another Burning at Funerals which we
cannot but take notice of: so concerning King Asa, it is said that they laid him
in the Bed (the Funeral Bed, 2 Samuel 3. 31.) which was filled with sweet Odours,
and diverse kinds of Spices, prepared by the Apothecary's (or Physician's) Art,
(for this King sought unto them, and is now come under their last Hands) and
they made a very great Burning for him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. which cannot be meant
of burning his Corpse, for it is expressly said before in the same Verse, they
buried him in his own Sepulcher: wherefore this was not a burning his Body in
the Fire, but only an usual Piece of State which was observed at the Funeral
Solemnities of Kings and Great Personages. It was, it seems, the Custom not
only to embalm the Bodies of such eminent Men, (for that is meant here by the
sweet Odours and diverse kinds of Spices prepared by the Apothecary's Art, Whose
Employment it partly was to dress Men for their Funerals) but to set up a great
Heap or Pile of this sort of Aromaticks, and make a Bon^ire of them, as
Triumphal Valediction to the departed. Some add that it was the Custom to burn
the Clothes, Chariots, Armor, and other things belonging to the Dead, and that
this was in Honor of their Memory. King Zedekiah, though he died a Captive,
was not denied this last Honor and Obsequy, Ier. 34. 5. He died with the
Burnings of his Fathers, the former Kings that were before him: so they burnt
Odours for him, and lamented him. On which place Maimonides notes, that the
Jews did not use to burn the dead Bodies, but that this is meant only of
burning their Clothes, and some other things appertaining to them, with
Frankincense and other Aromatic Drugs, in Honor of the deceased. But though
it was no Jewish Custom to burn the dead Bodies, yet it is probable that they
extracted the Entrails, (as was usual in Embalming, to which this and the
former Texts do partly refer) and consumed them in the Fire with those Perfumes
before spoken of. So that the Serephah, the Burning which you read of in the
forenamed Place was not (as is imagined by Interpreters generally) for Royal
State only, but it was in was of Pollincture.

And this Opinion was first suggested to me from 2. Chron. 21. 18, 19. where
the reason is assigned why the People of Israel refused to pay this Funeral
Duty to K. Iehoram, He was smote in the Bowels with an incurable Disease, and
his Bowels fell out by reason of his Sickness, of which he died: and his People
made no Burning for him, like the Burning of his Fathers. Observe it, his
Bowels being rotted, and by that means loosned, fell out, and were immediately
disposed of by reason of the Stench, and consequently these Parts could not be
pompously laid on the Fire with sweet Odours, as was the Custom, and (as the
Consequence of this) there could be no Funeral Burning for him. I know it is
generally said by Expositors, that this Ceremony was omitted merely because
this Iehoram was a wicked King: and Grotius goes along with them, and adds,
that they paid a greater or lesser Honor to their Kings when they were dead
according to the Merits of their Actions when they were alive, which he
applauds as a Good Custom. But though this might be true, yet it is not the
Reason that is here given (which we are now enquiring into) why there was no
Burning for Iehoram. The true Cause of this Omi^sion was (as this Text
acquaints us) the falling out of his ulcerated Bowels by reason of his
Sickness, whereby it became impossible to have the usual Burning of his
Fathers, whose Bowels were entire and sound, and so capable of being burnt in a
solemn Manner with all sorts of Spices and Odours. This was a Concomitant of
the Embalming, and so accordingly in the forenamed Instances of Asa and
Zedekiah it is probable their Entrails were taken out (according to the Custom
of Embalming) in order to have their dead Bodies replenished with odoriferous
Compositions: and the Burning for them spoken of in the respective Places, is
meant of the con^uming of their Intestines in the Fire with sweet smelling Gums
and precious Ointments. But Iehoram was wholly incapable, because of the
unusual Malady whereof he died, of this Fragrant Burning, which was the Funeral
Ceremony generally used at the Deaths of his Progenitors. This I take to be the
genuine meaning of the Place: but however, I submit this to the Judgment of
Learned and Impartial Critics, who (whether this Comment be true or
conjectural only) will not disdain this free offer of my Sentiments on this
Text. It appears from what has been said that the Funeral Burning of the Jews,
and of the Heathens, was not of the same kind. The former was only a committing
of the Bowels of the Dead to the Flames, the latter was a Burning of their
whole Bodies. Besides, among the Jews their Conflagration was used to their
Kings and Great Ones only, but among the Pagans to all. Rurying in the Ground,
as Not. Hist. I. 7. c. 54.
Pl^y acknowledeth, had the Priority among the Romans and others, of Burning
the dead Bodies; for this latter had its Rise, he says, from the barbarous and
inhumane digging up of the Carcases by Enemies: to prevent which they consumed
a great Part of them in their Funeral Pyres, and what what was remaining was
preserved in Sepulchral Urns and Pitchers, and deposited so deep in the Earth
that they were for the most part out of the Reach of the Adversary. This was
the Custom of the Old Germans, as Tacitus reports: and from other Authors it
appears that the Ancient Galls, Spaniards, and other Nations, were no Strangers
to it. Yea, some Old Britains took it up, and Polydore mentions particularly
the Flaming, the Blazing Obsequies of Belinus King of the Britains. This Pagan
Usage was first left off among the Romans in the Reigns of the Antonines. And
when Christianity got a firmer Footing in the World, it was quite laid aside
and extinct, and they returned to the old Primitive Institution of burying the
dead Bodies in the Earth, from whence they had their Original.

Of other things relating to Funeral Rites we have the antientest Account in
these Inspired Writings: as namely, that they used to mourn for the Dead in a
solemn manner, rending their Garments, and putting on Sackcloth, as may be
gathered from what Jacob did, thinking his Son Joseph was dead, Genesis 37. 34.
and as may be made appear from more positive Texts, which make mention of
exchanging their usual Habit for Hair-cloth, or some such coarse sort of
Covering (known by the Name of Sac, not only among the Hebrews, but all other
Nations) whereby they used to testify their Grief. This altering, the Habit and
Wearing of Mourning Apparel at Funerals was afterward practiced among the
Jews, 2 Samuel 14. 2. So was the Ceremony of covering the Face and Head, 2 Samuel
19. 4. for in that manner David expressed his Mourning for the Death of his
dear Absalom. Whence we may understand the Meaning of Lev. 10. 6. Uncover not
your Heads, i. e. put not off your usual Head-A^tire to put on the Covering of
Mourners: it is not God's Will that you should lament the Death of those wicked
Men, Nadab and Abihu, And from this you may know how to interpret Ezekiel. 24. 17.
Bind the Tire of thy Head upon thee, i. e. keep on thy ordinary Head-Apparel,
and do not change it for a Mourning one, such as is u^ed at Funerals. The
Prophet is here forbid upon the Death of his Wife to use any such Funeral
Ceremony. There was anciently a peculiar Space of Time allotted for lamenting
the Deceased, which they called the Days of Mourning, Genesis 27. 41. and 50. 4.
Thus the Egyptians, who reverenced the Patriarch Jacob as a Prince and a Great
Man, lamented his Death threescore and ten Days, Genesis 50. 3. which is confirmed
by what Lib. I.
Diodorus the Sicilian says, that the Egyptians mourned for their Kings, when
they died, seventy two Days: wherein he is either guilty of a small Mistake of
the Number, or those People afterward added two Days more to the Time of
Mourning. But it must needs be an Oversight in De Bell. Jud. I. 3. c. 15.
Josephus, when he says, the Time of Public Mourning among the Egyptians was
forty Days. Which Mistake perhaps was grounded on what is said in the preceding
Words of the forecited Place, forty Days were fulfilled for the embalming: so
that it is likely he mistook the time of Embalming or making Preparations in
order to the Funeral, for the time of Mourning, which was distinct from that,
and was seventy Days. The Hebrews Term of Condoleance was far short of this,
for Joseph mourned for his Father but seven Days, Genesis 50. 10. And generally
afterward the Funeral Mourning was confined within a Week both among the Jews,
1 Samuel 31. 13. and the Arabians, Job 2. 13. Thus the Time of Mourning was
Proportionable to that of Feasting, which (as I have observed) lasted seven
Days. Yet at some Times, and for extraordinary Reasons, it was lengthned out to
a much longer Season: thus they mourned for the Death of Aaron thirty days,
Numb. 20. 29. and so long a Time they lamented the Death of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 8.
And this particular Period of Funeral Lamentation is mentioned in Deuteronomy. 21. 13.

Mourning at Funerals was heretofore helped and advanced by Music, and that
both of Voice and Instrument. Thence it is said that King Iosias's Death was
lamented by all the singing Men and the singing Women, 2 Chronicles. 35. 25. And
thence you read of the Mourning Women, Jer. 9. 17. the same with those that
were afterward called (...) Bewailers, Lamenters, of whom Lexic. Talmud.
Buxtorf speaks. The same with the Praeficae among the Romans, and the (...)
among the Greeks, who were hired at Funerals soften, and melt the Relations of
the Deceased into Fits of dolorous Passion by their mournful Notes. Of this
sort are the Mourners that go about the Streets, Eccl. 12. 5. that attend the
Corpse to the Grave, the long Home, (as it is styled in that Verse) for the
Chaldee Paraphrast expounds Beth Gnolam by the House of the Sepulture. The
Forms used at these Funeral Lamentations and Outcries are mentioned in Ier. 22.
18. Ah my Brother, ah my Sister, etc. and in Chapter 34. v. 5. To the mournful
Music on such Occasions refer the Prophet's Words, Ier. 48. 36. my Heart shall
found like Pipes, i. e. with a Mourning-sound such as Minstrels made at
Funerals, as a Sr. N. Knatchbull, in Mat. 9. 23.
Modern Critic rightly guesses, tho An^otat. in Mat. 9. 23.
Dr. Hammond is positive that there is no mention of Instruments of Music at
Funerals in the Old Testament. In the New Testament we read of the (...), the
Players on the Pipe or Flute at the Houses of those who were deceased, Mat. 9.
23. For this Music was used before the Dead were carried forth to Burial, but
chiefly at the time of Interment. That this Custom was received among the
Gentiles is clear from that of Ovid, Fast. l. 6.
Cantabis moestis tibia funeribus.
And again, Trist. l. 5.
Tibia funeribus convenit is it a meis.
And these hired Pipers served indifferently at Funerals, and at Weddings, or
the like Occasions of rejoicing, as is deducible from Mat. 11. 17. Further, it
is observable that after the Burial of the Dead, a Supper was wont to be made:
a Feast of rejoicing succeeded the mournful Exequies. Thus after Abner's
Funerals were over, all the People followed, or came to David (who was the
Chief Mourner that Day, and it is probable had invited them to the Funeral
Banquet) to eat Meat with him, 2 Samuel 3. 35. Of this Feasting and Rejoicing
after the Burial of the dead, Jeremiah speaks Chapter 16. v. 7. calling it Cos
Tanchumim, the Cup of Consolation, which they drank for their Father or for
their Mother, i. e. which they took to comfort and refresh them when their
Relations were departed: and accordingly the Place where this Funeral Supper
was made is called the House of Feasting in the next Verse. And no Man can be
backward to think that this is intended by eating the Bread of Men, Ezekiel. 24.
17. if he seriously peruse the foregoing part of the Verse, which speaks wholly
of the Funeral Customs. This is the Bread of Mourners, Hos. 9. 4. Thus in
compliance with the Jewish Custom (as (...).
Josephus says) Archelaus mourned seven Days for his Father, and entertained
the People with a costly Funeral Banquet, which he calls (...). And from the
Hebrews these Sepulchral Feasts were derived to the Greeks and Romans,
especially the latter, among whom Lib. 40.
Dio and Orat. pro Murena.
Tully and others take notice of this Usual Entertainment.

Lastly, as for Funeral Monuments, we learn their great Antiquity from 1 Samuel
6. 18. where mention is made of the Great Stone of Abel, perhaps the Tombstone
of that Holy Man and First Martyr, (for it may be that Proper Name was written
sometimes with an Aleph, as well as with a He, in the beginning) who deservedly
had this Sepulchral Monument erected for him in Palestine near Bethshemesh.
This Eben Gedolah (for Eben is of the feminine as well as the masculine Gender,
and so is (...)) this Great-stone was mentioned before in v. 15. and here in
this it is called Abel Hagedolah, the word Stone being here understood; or else
the Stone is called Abel because it was his Memorial, as we call Statues and
Pictures by the Names of those who are represented by them. If then I should
assert that this is the Tombstone which Adam erected in Memory of his murdered
Son Abel, and so was the first Funeral Monument in the World, I am sure there
is none can disprove it. But because there is no certainty of this, and it may
be Abel in this Place is no more than Ebel, luctus, (as that Hebrew Word
signifies) and so relates to the remarkable Occasion of Mourning which we read
of v. 19. therefore I shall dismiss it, and propound that which is plain,
certain and undeniable. Such is Jacob's setting a Pillar on Rachel's Grave,
Genesis 35. 20. He that had set up a Stone for a Pillar as a Memorial of the
Covenant made between Laban and him, Genesis 31. 45, etc. and had at other times
done the same upon Religious and Devout Occasions, Genesis 28. 18, 22. and 31. 45.
erects here another Pillar as a Monument for his beloved Rachel, a visible
Remembrance of that Virtuous Woman, and also a Testimony of his own Kindness
and Love to her. This was known by the Name of Rachel's Sepulcher, and
continued till the latter End (and it is likely a long Time after) of Samuel's
Days, 1 Samuel 10. 2. that is, almost seven hundred Years from the first erection
of it. Among the first and Ancient Tombs, or Monumental Sepulchers, we must
reckon those that are said in Scripture to be composed of great Heaps of
Stones. Such is that in Josh. 7. 26. They raised over him (i. e. Achan) a great
heap of Stones, which remains unto this Day. And the like Monument had the King
of Ai, Josh. 8. 29. They took his Carease down from the Tree, and cast it at
the entering of the Gate of the City, (there interring it, a little without the
City) and raised thereon a great heap of Stones, that remains unto this Day.
And a Sepulchral Structure of the very same Sort was set over the Body of
Absalom, They took him and cast him into a great Pit in the Wood, and laid a
very great heap of Stones upon him, 1 Samuel 18. 17.

From which three Instances I observe, 1. That this sort of Monument was made
for those whose Deaths were untimely and violent. Whence we might be apt to
infer that these were Monuments of Infamy: and accordingly the Heap of Stones
laid over Achan and his Sons, is called by Josephus, (...). But, we are not
certain that this particular kind of Monuments was appropriated to this Rank of
Persons. It might have been erected for the Good and Virtuous as well as
others, tho the Scripture affords us no Examples of the former. 2. I observe
here the Nature of these Old Monuments, and that as to these two things; first,
this great Mass of Stones was not merely to cover the dead Bodies, (for from
the foregoing Instances we find that they were buried in the Earth before)
there was an Edi^ice erected over them, which was built of these Stones, to be
a lasting Remembrance to Posterity. This great heap of Stones was not
confusedly cast upon them, but laid in some kind of Order by and upon one
another: so that this was a Fabric, such as it was. This I gather from the
Hebrew Words (...) and (...), which we find used in the forenamed Texts, and
which signify to raise, set up, erect: wherefore these Stones were not cast or
thrown upon, or laid over the dead Bodies disorderly, but were a real Building.
But secondly, we may gather from their being called a great heap of Stones,
that they were not disposed with any Curiosity or Skill, they were set up
without hewing, shaping, polishing. This sort of Inartificial Building was
sometimes without any Cement at ali, at other times with a Careless Use of it,
but such as rendered the Pile firm, solid and durable; otherwise it could not
have lasted so long a Time as we have heard it did. This is the Notion that I
form of these first Rude Sepul: chers: and you see that the Terms in which they
are exprel^s'd are a Confirmation of it. These let us know that they were an
Edifice, but very Incondite and Artless: which could not be more ^itly
expressed to us than by raising a great heap of Stones. And indeed this was the
old Way of Entombing Great Men and Heroes among the Gentiles: they heaped up
great and massy Stones upon one another, and seemed as it were to frame a
Mountain rather than a Monument, according to that of the Poet, Lucan. Lib. 8.
Et regum cineres extructo monte quiescunt.

Such a Monstrous Pile I take Stone-heng on Salisbury Plains to be, which
without doubt is a very Ancient Piece. I look upon it as a Sepulchral Monument
of the primitive Order and Fashion, such as those I have been speaking of, viz.
an Indigested, Artless, Formless Tomb. This Apprehension I prefer before any of
the others which Writers have published concerning this Antique Structure. Some
think they give a true Account of it when they tell us that it was made of
Heaps of Sand and some Unctuous Matter that lay in that Part of the Plains, and
by means of these two incorporating together this Pile of Stones was made. Mr.
Cambden mentions this, and seems partly to approve of it, but the Examples
which he produces to confirm it are not of the like Nature, but far different.
And truly though we should suppose some such unwonted (though natural)
Coagmentation of Sand and Gravel, yet what sober Man can imagine such High
Heaps or Mountains of them in that Spot of Ground, and no where else? This
therefore looks a little too Romantic. Others would persuade us that it is a
Sea-Concretion, and to this Purpose they suppose that these Plains were once
part of the Sea; but this is as Chimerical a Notion as the other, because of
the great distance of this Place from the Sea, and because the shape of these
Stones seems not to be natural but factitious. Others think it was no Work of
Nature, but of Art: these affirm it to be a Temple either, 1. of the Tuscan
Order (as Inigo Jones in his Stone-heng Restored.
One not unskilled in Architecture suggests) and dedicated to Coelus, and
therefore is without a Roof. He thinks it was built by the Romans when they
were Masters of this Country. But supposing this was a Roman Temple without a
Roof, yet who can believe that it was without Walls and Foundation? But such we
must fancy this to be, for neither of these can be found here: wherefore there
is no reason to believe that it was a Building of that kind. Or 2. it was (as
See Spelman.
others think) a Temple of Herthus or Hertha, a God or Goddess of the Old
Germans, and consequently of the Saxons our Ancestors here in Britain, who
called this Deity Earth, the same with Vesta and Terra among the Romans. But
what I said before will serve to confute this groundless Conjecture. Only here
observe how far distant the Opinions of Writers are about it: some will have it
to be a Place dedicated to Heaven, and others to the Earth. Or 3. (as Dr.
Spencer de Leg. Hebr. l. 2. c. 6.
another surmises) this Structure was in imitation of those Temples of old
among the Pagans which were wont to be built of unpolished Stone, and without
Art, because these were thought to be most acceptable to the Gods. Of which he
says there were many Instances, but produces none; for instead of Temples he
mentions Altars and Statues made after this Fashion, as those sacred to Diana
and the Sun spoken of by Herodian, and the Statue of Mars in Arnobius. But it is
enough here to recur to my former Answer, which it is impossible to evade, viz.
that here are no Marks or Footsteps of such a Building as a Temple. Or, if you
should say that there were of old, but are now missing, it is spoken without
Proof, and therefore we need not attend to it: and besides, you must tell us
why all is not missing as well as some. These are the Absurdities wherewith
those Authors are pressed who hold Stone-heng to have been a Temple.

But those in my Judgment are in the right, and are clogged with no such
Inconveniences, who hold this Great Amassment of Stones to be a Funeral
Monument in remembrance of some eminent Persons laid there. The particular
Occasion is not well known, though the Common Opinion is that this Pile was
erected in Memory of the British Lords perfidiously murdered by the Saxons
here, upon an Interview in King Vortimer's Reign: for they tell us that
Aurelius Ambrosius, a Roman by Birth, but a great Lover of the Britains, came
over soon after this inhumane Slaughter to rescue them from the Insolency of
the Saxons, and then he erected this Monument in the Place where those
treacherous Villains slew the British Nobility, and interred them. Others say
it was erected in Memory of Ambrosius himself, who expired in this Plain, where
he so valiantly fought against the tyrannizing Saxons. But neither of these
Opinions have any sure Fonndation. The latter is rendered very improbable by the
Reasons which Jones has offered. Nor is the former (which prevails most)
attested by Authors of very good Credit, unless we reckon Geoffery Monmouth and
Polydore Virgil (the chiefest Writers that speak of this Structure) to be such.
Whereupon our Cambden, in Britannia.
Judicious Antiquary deplores this Unhappiness, that the Founders and Authors
of this Wonderful Structure are utterly forgotten. Perhaps it was set up in
Honor of Boadicia a famous British Queen, who was killed with fourscore
thousand in a Batttel against the Romans and Britains Romaniz'd, in Nero's
Reign. This is the Conjecture of the Author of the History called New Caesar.
But neither is this founded on any sure Basis: though it is true he quotes Dio
and Xiphilin who say she was bur^ed very Magnificently by the Britains. Dr.
Charlton (who has writ against Jones) says this Fabric was erected in the
Reign of King Alfred by the Danes, who at that time domineered in the West of
England: But I do not find that this Learned Man offers any convincing Proof of
this, I rather think that this Ragged Pile was of much antienter Date: and that
is the Reason why we have no certain notice of the particular Occasion of it.

But notwithstanding this Obscurity, we have good reason to assert that it is
an Old Funeral Monument made after the first and ancient Fashion, i. e. Rude,
Unpolished, Artles. Nay indeed, it seems to be a Triple Monument, for it is
composed of three divisions of Stones at some distance from one another, and
the Ditch or Pit in which they are situated, is the particular Place where the
dead Bodies (for whose Sake this Memorial was erected) were laid. Not but that
in other adjacent Places there were other Bodies deposited, and hence it is
that Men's Bones have been dug up here, as Mr. Cambden informs us: which is a
farther Proof that this part of the Plains was a Place of Burial, and that this
Great Stone-Pile has relation to that, i. e. that it is a Sepulcher, and not a
Temple. Nay, I could add that it is probable a great part of this spacious
Plain was on occasion of some famous Slaughter turned into a Burying-Place, and
not only Tombs of Stone were set up for the most Eminent Persons that lost
their Lives, but others of Clods were raised for those of an inferior Degree:
for there are many of these Turf-Monuments on Salisbury-Plain, which the
neighboring Inhabitants call Berries, Barrows, or Burrows, (whence perhaps the
Towns fenced heretofore with Walls of Turf or Clods of Earth were called
Burrows or Boroughs) which have their Denomination from the Saxon Byring or
Buriging or Boroging, which we now call Burying, because the way of Interring
dead Bodies among many of the Ancients (and among the Saxons themselves, with
whom Beorg, the Original of the foregoing Words, signified an heap of Earth)
was not in deep Graves, but under Clods or Turfs of Earth made into Hillocks.

As to the fastening and joining together these Stones which we are speaking of,
though this has perplexed some Men's Minds heretofore it seems, and occasioned
them to report that they were transported whole from Ireland by Merlin's
Enchantment, (as it is not unusual with the Vulgar, when they cannot give an
Account of a Thing, to ascribe it to the Devil, or some Magic Art) I am not
very solicitous to solve the manner of it: but this suffices me, that 1. It
was usual among the Old Romans (as all skilful and knowing Men in Architecture
confess) to lay great and vast Stones together by Tenons and Mortises without
Mortar. And so it may be here, (which may induce us to think it was a Roman
Structure) and therefore in vain do we endeavor to find where they are joined
and fastened together. 2. I am satisfied that they had of old ways of Cementing
Stones which are not known or practiced at this Day: and they had an Art of
making the Cement after that manner that it could not be distinguished from the
Stones themselves which it joined together. Pliny speaks of Cisterns at Rome
made of a sort of dug Sand and strong Lime, which could not be distinguished
from Stone. It is not unlikely then that there was here used a kind of Mortar
that hardened into Stone, and became of the same Consistency with it. Nor is it
improbable that this petrified Coagmentation turned into the same Color with
the Stones which it joined together; and then how can we expect to discern the
Difference between them? and then why should it be thought strange that they
seem to be all of a Piece? Which puts me in mind of the Name which this Stony
Fabric is commonly known by, an Account of which I will give somewhat
different from what is usually received. If I should propound this Etymology,
viz. that Stone-heng is so called from the Stones which Ambrosius is thought to
have erected here, and from Hengist the Leader of the Saxons, at whose giving
the Word they pulled out their Seaxes and killed the British Nobles, so that
Stone-heng is as much as Hengist-stone, (as this Country of Britain was by the
Saxons called Hengist-land, as some Writers tell us) this Derivation cannot be
looked upon as improper: Or if I should offer Mr. Cambden's Origination of the
Word, viz. from the Stones of this Fabric hanging as 'twere in the Air, whence
he calls it Pensile opus, this might be thought a fair Account of the Name. But
in my opinion, and according to what I have already hinted, the plainest,
simplest and most genuine Derivation of the Word is from the Stones hanging
(not in the Air, but) together, each heap of them seeming to be all of a Piece.
For this is the great wonder of th^^ Structure, as is confessed by all; this is
that which renders it a Fabric of a peculiar and unparalleled Nature. The
Stones are closely joined together by an invisible Cement, they hang together
as (...) they were but one Stone. For this reason therefore I quit the other
Derivations of the Word, an^ of^er this as the most obvious and proper.

But it is not the Name but the Thing that I am most concerned for, and I hope
I have given a satisfactory Account of that, in asserting it to be an Old
Sepulchral Pile, erected after the manner of those Funeral Monuments spoken of
in Joshua and Samuel, where we find that the Ancient Entombing was raising a
great heap of Stones over the dead Bodies. This is the best Solution I can give
of our Western Wonder. It is, as the First Monuments were, without any Shape or
Symmetry, (...) is like the Jewish Stone-henges (before mentioned) rough and
unwrought, and may (as they) be called a heap of Stones for that reason. Whence
by the way it may be worth the Observation of Critical Men that the Hebrew Word
(...) is both Acerv^^ and Sepulchrum, a Heap and a Tomb, Job 21. 32, and 30.
24. Also (...) is the known Hebrew Word for a Grave; but in Isa. 14. 19. the
Seventy render it (...) a Mountain, because Places of burial were elevated. The
Word (...) has the same double Sense, from Talal, instar tumuli aut cumuli
elevare, erigere. So Tumulus among the Latins is both an heap of Earth, and a
Sepulcher: whence it is plain that the Old Hebrews and Ancient Romans used to
erect heaps of Earth or Stone in memory of the Dead. To conclude, whosoever
they were that were buried in the foresaid Place in Wiltshire were entombed as
Achan, as the Kings of Ai, and as Absalom were. Here was the first Draught of
the Stony Tombs^ these were the first Patterns of those Sepulchral ^onuments
which were inartificial, shapeless and without Ornament. Afterward they took
more ^are in erecting their Houses of Sepulture. Stately and Lofty Tombs were
made by Great men with much Art and Cost, which is called hewing out to
themselves Sepulchers on high, Isa. 22. 16. Yea, their (...)* their (...) were
not only better built, but garnished and adorned, Mat. 23. 29.

But I will add no more of this Subject, nor insist any longer on this Second
General Head of my Discourse, wherein I have been evincing this Proposition,
that the Scripture gives us the True Original of things, and consequently the
Antientest learning is stored up in this Sacred Volume. I have largely showed
that here is the first commencing of Arts and all Ingenious discoveries: here
is the first Rise of Trades, Mysteries, Occupations, Professions, Customs,
Vsages, Manners, Yea, the Holy Scripture disdains not to record the First
In^entions of things though they be but mean and contemptible, to show that no
sort of Learning and Knowledge is useless. Thus it is said, This is that Anah
that found the Mules in the Wilderness, as ^e fed the Asses of his Father, Gen
3 6. 24. This ^s the Man (and let him be known to Posterity) that not by
chance; but purposely and designedly, found this new way of Procreation, and
thereby produced ^ new Species of Animals. Some Jewish Writers have thought
this Iemim was a Plant, but there is not the least ground for it. The Learned
Bochars makes Iemim to be the same with Emim; some Giant^y People; but this is
a perverting of the Original Text, and therefore must not be allowed of: and
the finding of them is, according to him, the Accidental meeting of them, but
this is very flat. I hold therefore to the plain Interpretation of the pure
Hebrew Text, which tells us that Anab found the Mules, etc. i. e. he caused the
first Engendring of Horses and She-Asses together, whence (...) that unnatural
breed of Creatures called Mules. And, if you will believe the Rabbis, he was
of a (...) and incestuous Stock himself. Here by the way the Learned may
enquire whether there be not some probability that Homer's Eneti, from whom
came the Race of wild Mules, 11. B.
(...) be not corruptly named from this Anah or (...) for so the Seventy
Interpreters express his Name. But this is the thing that I observe at present,
(...) the Sacred History takes notice even of small Occurrences, and thereby
lets us see that it is very full and particular in giving an Account of the
first Inventions of things. It is true, other Authors have attempted to
discover this, and to (...) us with the History of the Rise of Sciences, and
the Founders of them. Herodotus, Diodorus (...), Strabo, Plutarch, Porphyrius,
Tully, Varro, (...), give us some light into these things, but it is dark in
respect of the clear Discoveries in the Old Testament. Out of these foresaid
Writers Poly done Virgil has given us a pitiful short Account of the Inventers
of Arts, and other useful things among Men. Saturn, Ceres, Pallas, and other
Gods and Goddesses among the Pagans are assigned the first Founders of them.
All this is feigned Antiquity, unless so far as it has some reference to the
Holy Scriptures, and under those disguised Names points at the Persons who are
mentioned in this Inspired Book. Hence, and from no other Writings, the first
Original of things is to be had: and it must needs be so, because all the best
and antientest Authors have borrowed from the Old Testament. It is granted that
Arts and Professions received their Improvement and Perfection afterward, and
therefore we cannot expect that these should be found in Scripture; but the
first Rise of them was among the early Posterity of Adam and Noah, and
therefore the first mention of them is found here, and no where else. Some of
these are but little and mean things, I know, but yet it is certain they are as
great as the Greatest Critics take notice of sometimes, and spend much time
about in Other Authors. This moreover is to be said, that here we are Certain
of what we read, we are Sure the thing is so, which we are not in Other Writers.

But before I speak of that, let me insist a little upon This, that it is a
singular Commendation of the Authors and Penmen of the Old Testament, but
especially of Moses, that, being the First Writers, they borrow from none, but
Other Writers are beholden to them. It may be observed, that Writers in all
Faculties have showed themselves not backward in imitating others that writ
before them, or, in (...) terms, of Filching from them. This we may see in the
Poets, all the Greek ones take many things out of Homer, and he himself was a
Filcher no less than they, for you may descry Po^tick Theft in the very
Entrance of his Iliads: (...), was stolen from an Antienter Poet, Orpheus;
besides that he borrowed the main things in that Poem from Dares the Phrygian,
and Dic^ys the Cretian, who wrote before him of the Trojan War. Nay, Suidas
tells us, that he took a great part of his Poem form Corinnus a Trojan Poet,
Scholar of Palamedes. And as for Aristophanes, he borrows much from Euripides,
as an observant Eye cannot but take notice. As for the Latin Poets, they have
particular Authors in whose Steps they tread. Virgil in his Eclogues and
Bucolicks strives to resemble Theocritus, in his Goorgicks Hesiod and Aratus,
and in his Aeneids Homer. Horace writes in imitation of the Greek Lyricks, and
the he calls these Imitators servum pecus, yet he is pleased to follow
Anacreon, and especially Pindar: Plau^us and Tcrence are Emulators of
Epicharmus and Menander. In brief, AElian and others look upon all Poets after
Homer to be but his Apes. Amongst Orators the chiefest of them think fit to
borrow or steal from one another, as Tully from Demosthenes, and he from
Pericles, and this last from Pisistratus. In Philosophy it were easy to observe
the same, and Seneca frankly confesses it; Quicquid been dictum est ab ullo,
meum est. Epist. 16.
If any of the Mora^ists, says he, has an Excellent Saying, I make it mine.
Thus he speaks in excuse of himself for using several of Epicurus's Sentences,
and that very frequently. Before him Plato stole from Heraclitus, Pythagoras
and Socrates, says Hesychius. And if we may believe Deipnosoph. li^ 11.
Athenaeus, the greatest part of Plato's Dialogues was taken from Aristippus
and Antislhenes. Among the Historians there is the same Trade carried on:
Justin is a downright Plagiary, taking all from Trogus Pompeius. Apion
transcribes many entire Sentences and other considerable Passages out of
Polybius, Plutarch, and others, and takes no notice of their belonging to those
Persons, but sets them down as his own: for which Reason he is styled by
Scaliger, alienorum laborum fucus, a Drone that lived upon others Labors.
Solinus almost transcribes Pliny, his Polyhistor is but a Variation of the
other's Natural History: and Pliny himself acknowledges that he gathered his
Book out of a great Number of Authors Greek and Latin. So in Ecclesiastical
History, Eusebius took all or most of Julius Africanus (an Excellent Writer,
and the first Christian Chronologer) his Book de Temporibus into his Chronicon.
In Canon Law Balsamon all along transcribes Zonaras on the Councils. In Medicks
Avicenna borrows from Galen, and Galen from Hippocrates. So in Divinity, St.
Hilary's Commentaries are for the most part taken out of Origin. Theophylact is
a constant lmitator, or Transcriber rather, of Chrysostom; and O^cum^nius takes
from him very largely. If we should descend to Modern Writers (and those very
excellent ones too) we may espy the same thing practiced by them. Tasso is
beholden to Virgil for much of his Model and Characters. Galatinus stole all
from Porchetus, a Franciscan from a Carthusian Monk. Isidore Clarius
transcribes whole Pages out of Sebastian Munster; and we know of a Learned
English Paraphrast and Annotator who has often conferred Notes with a Belgic
one: You will find Monsieur Le Iay complaining that Bishop Walton stole from
him his Polyglotts. Thus the best Authors are beholden to one another: and
indeed there is very good Reason for it sometimes, and you cannot expect it
should be otherwise; for they find it requisite to borrow of those who have
treated of the same Argument, both because they have said those things which
cannot be omitted on the Subject, and also sometimes because they are naturally
inclined to embrace the very same Notions and Sentiment^ This then is an
Epidemick Fault, and who is there that is not in part guilty?

But we are speaking now of a Book and of Authors where nothing of this nature
can happen, for the Old Testament (which is the Writings we speak of) was, as
to a great part of it, extant before there were any Writers in the World, and
so it was utterly impossible to borrow from Others This is the Peculiar
Excellency of this Book, this is the Particular Commendation of these Writings
that they were the First of all, and could not be taken from any else. These
Holy Scriptures borrow from none, unless you will say they do so from
Themselves; as the 18th Psalm is taken out of 2 Samuel 22. or this out of that.
The Evangelists borrow from one another. The Virgin Mary's Magnificat refers in
several Places of it to Hannab's Song, 1 Samuel 2, and St. Paul takes some things
out of his Epistle to the Epbesians, and puts them into that which he wrote to
the Colossians; and so st. Jude may be said to borrow from St. Peter: but this
is not the Plagiarism which Other Writers are guilty of, and which is an
Argument of their Wants and Defects, whereas the Holy Spirit supplied the
Penmen of the Bible both with Matter and Words. In the Old Testament
especially, and more particularly in the Books of Moses, there is nothing at
second hand: all is fresh and new; the things there spoken of were never
delivered by any Writer before. But most of the Profane Historians began when
the Holy History was just ending. And Herodotus himself, the Father of History,
writ not till Ezra and Nehemiah's time. The Gree^ Historians go no further back
than the Persjan E^pi^e: and most of the Roman History takes not its Rise so
high. Indeed the Egyptians boasted that they had been ruled by Kings above ten
thousand Years, (as Herodotus relates) and thence perhaps it was that one of
their Pharaoh's (which was the common Name of all their Kings) bragged that he
was the Son of ancient Kings, Isa. 19. 11. The Chinoises pretend to give an
Account of Passages almost three thousand Years before Christ: and we are told
by Martinius (in his Atlas) that they preserve a continued History, compiled
from their Annual Exploits, of four thousand and five hundred Years: yea they
have (if we may credit the younger De Aetate Mundi.
Vossius) Writers antienter than Moses. But these high Flights are exploded by
all Considerate Men, and upon a View of whatever Pretenses are made by Others,
they conclude that Moses was the Antientest Writer, and that the earliest
Discovery of Transactions and Occurrences in the World is to be learnt from him
alone. Some of the Wisest Pagans had a hint of this, and traveled into the
Eastern Countries to acquaint themselves with these Records. And it was
observed long since by Plato, (as I took notice before) that the Oldest and
most Barbarous Tongues (meaning the Hebrew and Chaldee) were very requisite for
the finding out the first Beginnings of things: for the first Names of them,
which are now grown obsolete by length of time, are preserved in those
Languages, they being the antientest of all. In the Hebrew especially are to be
found the Primitive Origines of things: and most of the Pagan Histori^^s have
borrowed from these. And so have their Po^ts, Orators and Philosophers, as a
great Number of the Christian Fathers (whom I have particularly quoted in
another Place, to evince the Authority of the Scriptures) have largely proved.
In a word, all other Ancient Writings refer to these, or suppose them, this
Inspired Volume alone being the Fountain from whence either they or we can
derive any Truth and Certainty.

And as there is the Antientest Learning, so there is All Learning (I speak now
of that which is Humane, and is reckoned the Accomplishment of Rational
Persons) and all the kinds of it in this Book of Books. Here is not only Prose
but Verse: here are not only Poems but Histories, Annals, Chronicles. Here are
things Profound and Mystical, and here are others that at the first sight are
Intelligible and Clear: here are Prophecies, Visions, Revelations (for even in
the Narratives which are given of These there are some things serviceable to
promote the Study of Humanity): here are Proverbs, Adagies, Emblems, Parables,
Apologues, Paradoxes, Riddles: and here are also Plain Questions and Answers,
Propositions, Discourses, Sermons, Orations, Letters, Epistles, Colloquies,
Debates, Disputations. Here are Maxims of Law and Reason, Rules of Justice and
Equity, Examples of Keen Wit and Deep Politics, Matters of Church and State,
Public and Private Affairs, and all manner of Subjects either treated of or
referred unto. Thus the Bible is excellently sitted to entertain any Persons as
they are Students and Scholars: for here is a Treasury of all Good Letters,
here are laid up all things that conduce to Humane Knowledge. Porphyrius is said
to have writ a Book (...). Suid.
of Homer's Philosophy, wherein he attempts to prove that he was as much a
Philosopher as a Poet: and no less a Person than Dissert. 16.
Maximus Tyrius affirms him to be the Prince of Philosophers: and another
Plutarch. de Homero, lib. 2.
Grave Author undertakes to show that the Seeds of all Arts are to be found in
Homer's Works. This is said by his Admirers to inhanse his Credit and Repute;
but far greater things, and more justly, may be pronounced concerning these
Famous Records of Learning and Antiquity. With more Reason may we maintain that
the chiefest Arts and Inventions are originally in the Sacred Volume, and that
the Foundations of all Humane Learning and Science are laid here; for though
these are not the chief things designed in this Book, (it being writ to higher
Purposes) yet they are occasionally interspersed every where, and a Studious
Enquirer cannot miss of them. It is rationally and undeniably to be inferred
from the Particulars abovementioned, (though many more might have been added)
that the Bible is the most Complete Book, and has All Learning in it. This
truly deserves the (...).
Name which Diodore the Sicilian gives his History, that is, it is indeed a
Library, an Universal one, and contains All Books in it. As the Writers of it
were Persons of Several Conditions, Kings, Noblemen, Priests, Prophets, etc. so
the Matters of it are Various and Different, and by reading and studying these
Writings we may Commence in all Arts and Sciences, we may be accomplished
Grammarians, Critics, Chronologers, Historians, Poets, Orators, Disputants,
Lawyers, Statesmen, Preachers, Prophets. Many valuable Monuments of Learning
have been lost. The famous Library of Alexandria, which contained six or seven
hundred thousand Volumes, and that of Constantinople, which consisted of an
hundred and twenty thousand, perished by Fire. And the Works of Varro, the
Learneds^ Man of all the Romans, are extinct. And many others might be reckoned
up, besides those that Historians say nothing of. But having the Scri^ture,
Hacatub, (as the Jews rightly called it by way of Eminence) the most Excellent
Writings in the World, fraught with all manner of useful Literature, we may
afford to be without the other: for this is a certain Verity, that if we have
the Bible we want no Book.

And more particularly I have made it appear, that the Choicest Antiquities are
to be found here. A prying Antiquary may find more Work, and much more to his
Advantage, in the Writings of the Old Testament, especially of the Five Books
of Moses, than in all the Moldy Manuscripts and Records in the whole World
besides. Therefore you will find Mr. Seldom (as Great an Antiquary as this last
Age afforded) continually conversing with these Sacred Records, and presenting
the World with the Noblest and most Useful Pieces of Antiquity from thence.
Here we learn what they did in the Primitive Age of the World, how things went
before and immediately after the Flood. The Scriptures give the Oldest Account
and Discovery of things. All Curious Observations of the First Times, all
Ancient Notions and Inventions are to be met with here. So that if you look
upon the Bible but as an Ancient Book of Learning, we are invited to study it.
We are furnished here with some of the most desirable Antiquities of the
Babylonians, Persians, Egyptians, Arabians, Syrians, Canaanites, Phoenicians,
Jews, Greeks, Romans, and several other Nations. On which very Account alone
the Bible is the best Book that a true Lover of Learning can take into his
hand. Briefly, from the whole I make this Conclusion, that no Man can be a
Consummate Scholar without reading the Scriptures, which are the Source even of
all Humane Learning.

But as the Antiquity and the Universal Learning contained in this Book, so the
Certainty of it gives it the preference to all others. What we meet with here,
we are sure is true: whatever is related as said or done in so many Ages past,
we have reason to yield a full Assent to, because the Penmen of this Book were
divinely inspired, and therefore could not err in what they delivered. This we
cannot say of any other Writers, for we find them to be uncertain and
lubricous, and they too often take up Stories on trust, or invent them as they
please. As for the Writings of the Poets, the best of them are mere Fictions.
Yea, One that knew the Nature of an Heroic Poem very well, tells us that Fable
is the chief thing in it, it is the (...). Aristot.
very Soul and Life of it. Thus it is in Homer and Virgil's Poems: and
generally the other Poetic Writers (as Orpheus, Hesiod, etc.) are fabulous
Rhapsodists. Even the Father of Latin Poetry, whom I just now mentioned, brings
Eneas and Dido together, though he lived several Ages before her. And many such
Historical Incongruities and fabulous Inconsistencies the Poets put us off with
instead of true Relations. Yea, professed Historians are full of Uncertainties
and Contradictions every where. Xenophon avers that Cyrus the first Persian
Monarch died peaceably in his Bed: but Herodotus and Justin say he was
vanquished in Battle by Tomy^is Queen of Scyt^ia, who caused his Head to be cut
off and thrown into a Vessel full of Blood. Some tell us that Alexander the
Great died of Drunkenness, others that he was poisoned. Hannibal poisoned
himself, says Justin: he was killed by his Servants, says Plutarch: but this
Author also acknowledges that he drank Bulls Blood, and thereby procured his
Dissolution. The same Writer sets down the several Opinions concerning the
Deaths of Romulus and Scipio Africanus, and makes this Observation, that the
Deaths of Great Men are uncertainly reported. Athen^us says of Plato, that he
was eaten up of Lice by his frequent eating of Figs, which he so exceedingly
loved, that he was called (...), but this is contradicted by others. Some say
Aristotle drowned himself in Euripus, because he could not find out the Cause
of its ebbing and flowing: others would persuade us, that he poisoned himself:
but some affirm he died a natural Death. There is scarce any Philosopher but
dies twice or thrice in Laertius. Nor is there almost any Life in Plutarch
without two or three Deaths, as a Dr. Brown Relig. Med.
Learned Man has observed.

To pass to other Historians, from whom we might think to have better and
certainer Information, Antiochus in the Book of Maccabees died three several
Deaths; 1 st. In his Bed at Babylon, 1 Mac. 6. 8, 16. 2dly. He was stoned in
the Temple of Nanea, 2 Mac. 1. 15, 16. 3dly. He died on the Mountains by a Fall
out of his Chariot, 2 Mac. 9. 28. There were different Reports concerning
Iulian's Death, but the respective Historians are consident in them all: He was
killed by one of his own Soldiers, says Socrates; by a Demon, says
Callistus, who wrote in Verse of the War at that time with the Persians. It is
probable that he died by a Stroke which a Christian Soldier gave him,
according to Sozomen: but none knows whence that Stroke came, according to
Theodoret. Eusebius and Zosimus speak diversely concerning the Life and Death of
Constantine the Great. Procopius gives an Account of Justinian contrary to what
all other Historians do. And before this we find the Fathers differing about
the Character of Nicolas the Deacon: Clemens of Alexandria and Theodoret say he
lived a chaste Life, but that being reprimanded by the Apostles for his
Jealousy toward his Wife, he thereupon brought her out, and exposed her to any
one. But Tertullian and Epiphanius affirm, that he allowed of and practiced all
Obscenity and Lewdness, and the promiscuous Use of Women. The Person who goes
under the Name of St. George, was a Cappadocian Tribune, a great Hero, and at
last a Martyr, say some: he was an Heretic, an Arian Bishop of Alexandria, say
others: there was no such Man, say a third sort. If we should look into our own
British Concerns, there we shall find History very dark and uncertain, nothing
is tolerably related of this Country till Julius Caesar's time: and then and
afterward we are involved in great Uncertainties, and we can look no where but
things are diversely reported. Great Men die several Deaths, and the Lives and
Actions of Persons are variously represented. King Edward, surnamed Ironsides,
his Death is four or five ways related in our Chronicles, and so is King
John's. Some Writers tell us that King Richard the Second died of Famine by
Force; others, that he voluntarily famished himself. Some say he was killed
with the Blow of a Poll-Ax on his Head; others, that he escaped out of Prison,
and led a solitary Life in Scotland, and there expired. Concerning King Henry
the 5th, it is said by some, that he was po^soned; by others, that he died of a
Pleurisy; by others, that a Palsy and Cramp took away his Life; and there are
others that considently report his Death was by St. Anthony's Fire. Yea, our
Writers are often grossly mistaken about Matters of very late Occurrence, as
Baker, Heylin, Fu^^er, (professed Historians) tell us, that Richard Sutton, a
single Man, founded the Hospital at the Charterhouse, whereas his Christian
Name was Thomas, and (...) was a married Man. So Mr. Hooker died in holy
Celibacy, say Gauden and Fuller, but the contrary is known to be too true. But
I should be infinite if I should undertake to set before you the palpable
Mistakes and Misreports in History both domestie^ and foreign. All that are
conversant in this way of Study complain, and that justly, of the erroneous
Misrepresentations of Passages of all sorts among Historians, and of our
Darkness and Ignorance by reason of these.

But no such thing is to be feared, or so much as suspected in the Sacred
History, because God himself speaks there: and therefore we have the sur^^
ground for our Faith that we can desire. There is no Authority so firm as that
which is Divine: there is no Testimony so strong and valid as that which is
from the Holy Spirit. And such is that of the Holy Scriptures; and consequently
it most justly challenges, yea commands our Faith and Assent. This is the
singular Pre-eminence and Advantage which this Book has above all others, that
the Penmen of it were directed by the unerring Spirit of God. This alone is
sufficient to determine and six us, it being the most stable as well as the
most proper Basis of our Belief, even where things that are very Improbable are
propounded to us to be assented to. Besides, as to the seeming Improbability of
some things that are related in the Historical Part of the Bible, this ought
not to hinder us from giving Credit to them. Many Persons are wont to look upon
these Passages and Stories as Strange and almost Incredible, which they observe
are not suitable to the Manners, Customs, Arts, and Conversation of the World,
as it is at present, and thence they are inclined to think that there were no
such things heretofore. But these Men do not well consider, nor distinguish
between those times and these, which are exceedingly Different. And moreover,
if they suspend their Belief of some things which they read in the Old
Testament, because they see other things now, things of a Different Nature,
they may as well disbelieve all the Other Histories of the Ancients that are
extant, which yet we see they are very backward to do. And they have good
Reason on their Side, because the World is not now as it was then, and
therefore we must not expect that the things which we read of in those times,
should be fully conformable and agreeable to what occurs in these latter Days.
For this Reason a very Dr. Jackson, Vol. 1. Book 1. chap. 11.
Solid and Judicious Writer has defended the Ancient History of the Greeks and
Latins, (whereof whatever is strange is in Herodotus and Pliny) showing, that
(though some fabulous Narrations, and many gross Mistakes and Errors are
intermingled) the Strangeness of some Passages which we meet with in them,
proceeds from the Diversity of Times, the Posture of the World having much
changed since those things happened. Let us make use of the same Reasoning in
the present case, and when we find several Strange, Unusual and Surprising
Matters in the Writings of the Old Testament, impute this to the Antientness of
them, and the great Discrepancy between those Days and these we now live in. If
we do so, there will be no Impediment to our steady Belief of the Truth of
them. Nay, if we weigh things well, we shall see it is ridiculous to expect
that the Guises and Manners of the World should be the same now that they were
4 or 5000 Years ago: for there must needs be new things when the Numbers of
Persons are so vastly increased; when the Difference of Climes produces such
Diversity of Dispositions; when Casualty, Necessity, Industry, Wit, etc. are
the Occasions of so many new Occurrences. Let this be remembered and seriously
thought of, and it will dispel our vain Scruples and Disbelief. Or, if there be
any remaining, the former Consideration will thoroughly extirpate them, i. e. if
we call to mind the Undoubted Certainty and Infallibility of the Scripture,
which is its peculiar Prerogative and Excellency.

CHAP. VII.
A particular Distribution of the several Books of the Old Testament. Genesis
(the first of them, together with the four following ones) being written by
Moses, his ample Character or Panegyric is attompted, wherein there is a full
Account of his Birth, Education, Flight from Court, retired Life, his Return to
Egypt, his conducting of the Israelites thence, his immediate Converse with God
in the Mount, his delivering the Law, his Divine Eloquence, his Humility and
Meekness, his Sufferings, his Miracles, and his particular Fitness to write
these Books. A Summary of the several Heads contained in Genesis: to which is
added a brief but distinct View of the Six Days Works, wherein is explained the
Mosaic Draught of the Origin of all things, and at the same time the bold
Hypotheses of a late Writer (designed to confront the First Chapter of the
Bible) are exposed and refuted. The Contents of the Book of Exodus: to which is
adjoined a short Comment on the Ten Plagues of Egypt. A Rehearsal of the
remarkable Particulars treated of in Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. That
Moses was the Penman and Author of the Pentateuch, notwithstanding what some
have lately objected against it.

To demonstrate yet further the Excellency of these Holy Writings I will enter
upon the Third way of Proof which I proposed; that is, I will give you a
Particular Account of the several Books contained in the Old and New Testament,
and I will show all along the particular Usefulness and Excellency of them. I
begin first with the Old Testament, which is divided by the Jews into three
general Parts; first Torah the Law, which contains the five Books of Moses;
then Nebiim the Prophets, which comprehends the Books of Joshua, Judges, first
and second Book of Samuel, the first and second of the Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, the twelve Small Prophets; all which make the second Volume: then the
Chetubim the Holy Writers, in which are included the Psalms, Proverbs, Job,
Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Chronicles; and these made the third Volume. The Books of this last Rank were
written, say the Jewish Doctors, by the Inspiration of the Spirit, but the
Writers were not admitted into the Degree of Prophets, because they had no
Vision, but their Senses remained perfect and entire all the while: only the
Holy Spirit stirred them up, and dictated such and such things to them, which
they writ down. For you must know that the Old Jews thought nothing to be right
Prophecy but what was conveyed in Dreams or Visions. But though this be a
Rabbinical Conceit, and hereby they strike David and some others out of the
Number of the Prophets, who were the Chief of them; yet the Partition of the
Old Testament, as it may be rightly understood, is not altogether to be
rejected, nay it seems to be allowed of by our Savior himself, Luke 24. 44.
where he tells his Apostles, that all things must be fulfilled which were
written concerning him (in the whole Old Testament, viz.) in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, under these last comprising all the
other Parts of the Hagiographa: Or you may divide the Books, as they stand in
their order in the Septuagint and Latin Version, (and according to them in our
English Bibles) into these three sorts, Historical, Doctrinal, and Prophetical.
The Historical Books are Narratives of things done, and these are fifteen,
whereof Genesis is the first, and Job the last. Or if you reckon the two Parts
of the History of Samuel, and the Kings, and those likewise of the Chronicles
as distinct Books, then there are eighteen in all. The Doctrinal Books are such
as purposely and wholly instruct us in our Devotion and a Holy Life: these are
four, the Psalms, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Solomon's Song. The
Prophetic Books are those which consist chiefly in Predictions concerning the
Deliverance of the Church, the Punishment of its Enemies, and the Coming of
Christ in the Flesh. These were written either by the Greater Propbets, as
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ez^kiel, Daniel, to which also appertain the Lamentations of
Jeremiah; or by the Lesser, whereof the first is Hosea, and Malachi the last.
Having thus given you a Distribution of the Several Books, I come now to a
Particular Survey of them, the first whereof is

Genesis, which together with the other Parts of the Pentateuch was written by
Moses, who being the First Writer that we know of extant in the World, and
being every ways so Remarkable and Admirable a Person, I think my self obliged
(before I proceed any further) to present you with the Character of this
Excellent Man, that in what we shall deliver concerning this One Penman of
Scripture, you may guess how large we might be in commendation of the rest. But
because we cannot have leisure to do so in all the others that follow, I will
offer here a Specimen of it in this First Inspired Writer, whom we have
occasion to mention. He was born (about the Year of the World 2370) in Egypt,
of Hebrew Parents, who presently read in his Face Acts 7. 20.
extraordinary Marks of Divinity, and therefore were unwilling to discover his
Birth to the Egyptians, that he might not, according to Pharaoh's Order, be
hurried into Nile, and there drowned. However, in this River they resolve to
expose him in an Ark of Bull-rushes, and to commit both Him and the Care of
this Little Vessel in which he was embarked to the Great Pilot of the World:
And behold, it arrived at a safe Harbor, and no meaner a Person than the
King's Daughter received the little Passenger into her Embraces, and caused him
to be brought to Court, and bred up as her own Son. Here he became Ver. 22.
Learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, in all those Arts and Sciences
wherein they used to instruct their Youth, which they chiefly designed for the
Service of their Country, viz. in Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, Astronomy; for
these were Sciences that they thought were Natural to Men's Minds, and were the
first things taught not only by the Egyptians, but the rest of the Ancients in
their Schools. Hence it was written in great Letters over the Entry of Plato's
School, (...), None must be admitted into this Place but such as have been
initiated into Geometry, such as have had a taste of it at least. Therefore
this and the forenamed Arts were termed Mathematics, i. e. Learning or
Discipline, by way of Eminency. In all these was this young Courtier brought
up, and skilled in all Philosophical Accomplishments and the Knowledge of
Nature. Besides, he was more especially instructed in that Abstruse and
Recondite Knowledge which the Egyptians were peculiarly Masters of, namely their
Hieroglyphick Ciphers, their Mystical Symbols and Figures, whereby they
represented the choicest Truths to Men's Minds. This way of Symbolical Learning
furnished them with all kinds of Notions that were serviceable in the Life of
Man, they were taught hence the best Rules of Morality, the profoundest Maxims
in Politics, and the most useful Sentiments in Theology. This was the
Celebrated Wisdom of the Egyptians, in which Moses was educated, being sent by
Pharaoh's Daughter to the best Academies and Schools of Learning, and committed
to the best Tutors, and having moreover the Advantage of his own Excellent
Parts and Quick Ingeny; for he who was so Eminent as to his Bodily Features and
Proportions, had without doubt as Fair a Soul.

But it is time now for Moses to leave the Court, and to add to all his other
Accomplishments, that of Traveling. And truly he was neceslitated to this, for
the Court could not bear him any longer, because He could not bear it: he every
Day more and more disliked their Manners, contemned their Gay Follies, laughed
at their empty Titles, and Heb. 11. 24.
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. He was now resolved to
help and assist his oppressed Brethren, though by that Attempt he should lose
the Favor of the King, and his Royal Patroness, and with that all Possibility
of being Great, yea though he should incur the Danger of being Miserable above
the degree of his former Happiness: Ver. 25, 26.
He chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God (his Hebrew
Brethren) than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season (in Pharaoh's Court):
esteeming the Reproach of (or, for) Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in
Egypt. In pursuance of this Acts 7. 23.
he visited his Brethren the Children of Israel, who now groaned under their
extreme Bondage and Slavery in that Country, he boldly Ver. 24*
defended them when ^e saw them suffering wrong, and avenged the Cause of the
Oppressed, and smote the Egyptians. This made him taken notice of by the
Egyptian Lords and Taskmasters, who presently went and represented his Carriage
to the Court, and thereupon he was banished thence for his daring to take the
part of any of those Hebrew Bondslaves. Ver. 29.
Then fled Moses into the Land of Midian, and was a Shepherd there Ver. 23, and
30
forty Years, just as many as he had been a Courtier. This was the sudden
Change of his Condition, and he made it serviceable to the best Ends. He went
out of the World, as it were, to come into it with the greater Vigor; for his
Retired Life fitted him for Public Achievements afterward, his Contemplative
and Solitary way of living prepared him for Action, his Low and Mean Estate was
the Forerunner of his being called to an High one. God bestows not on a Man
Magnificence unless he first makes Trial of him in some Small thing, say the
Rabbis; and they instance in Moses and David, who kept Sheep. Kings were
anciently styled Shepherds, and sometimes were really such. God calls Cyrus his
Shepherd, Isa. 44. 28. (...) is the Epithet of a Prince in Homer: which 'Plato
explains by (...), a Feeder and Nourisher of the Flock of Mankind. The three
Hebrew Verbs nahag, nahal, ragnah, signify to lead or feed Sheep, and to
govern. So do the Greek Words (...) is both a Palace, Luke 11. 21. John 18. 15.
and a Sheepfold, John 10. 1. The Word Genesis 49. 10. Psalm. 23. 4.
Shebet is both a Scepter and a Pastoral Rod. The Shepherd's Employment, says
(...). De vita Mosis.
Philo, (speaking of this very Matter) is a Prelude to Empire and Government.
Yea he runs this too far, adding, that he is clearly of the Opinion (though he
may be laughed at for it) that (...).
he only can be a Perfect Complete King who is well skilled in the Shepherd's
Art, and by taking Care of lesser Animals has learnt how to preside over
greater ones. But though this be extravagant, and not becoming that Learned
Man, yet it is a Sober Truth that a Retired Contemplative Life (such as the
Pastoral was in those Days) is a good Preparative to Public Action and
Business.

Accordingly Moses, when he had been forty Years a Shepherd, was appointed by
God to feed Israel, and to spend the remaining forty Years in that Employment.
To which purpose he was sent back by God into Egypt to be a Deliverer to that
oppressed People, and to conduct them into the Promised Land. Being arrived
there he delivered his Message to Pharaoh, and earnestly solicited him to
attend to it, and to obey the Command of the King of Kings. Which when he
(after several Offers of Compliance) at last refused, Moses with the Israelites
Heb. 11. 27.
forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King, who they knew would soon
pursue them: and this their Valiant and Undaunted Captain by a Miraculous Hand
led them safe over the Red Sea, and placed them out of all Danger of the
Egyptians, whom presently after they saw lying dead upon the Shore. And this
was the Man who was their Constant Leader in the Wilderness; here he is their
only Guide, their Counselor, their Oracle in all their Difficulties. By his
Ardent Prayers he was wont to avert the Divine Vengeance when it was lighting
on them, and by the same Fervent Breathings and Cryings he procured them the
Greatest Blessings they desired and stood in need of. This was the Person that
was taken up by God into the Mount, and had the peculiar Favor and Honor of
conversing most Familiarly and Intimately with him; and in that had the
Prelieminence of all the Prophets that ever arose in Israel, for none of them
were admitted to that singular Dignity vouchsafed to him, namely, Deuteronomy. 34. 9.
to know God Face to Face. He was the Man employed by God to receive the Law
for the Jews, which he delivered to them with great Care and Faithfulness,
often Repeating and Explaining it, showing them the Reasonableness, Usefulness
and Excellency of those Constitutions and Statutes which were given them by
God, continually teaching them to understand these Laws aright, and encouraging
them to practice them; insomuch that he has gained among all Nations the Name
of a Lawgiver, far surpassing that of Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians, or of
Solon among the Athenians, or of Numa among the Romans.

Of this Admirable Person this short but comprehensive Character is given by
St. Stephen, that Acts 7. 2^.
he was Mighty in Words and in Deeds. He that was Exodus 4. 1^.
not eloquent, not a Man of Words, (as it is in the Hebrew) he that was slou of
Speech, and of a slow Tongue (for which Reason Aaron was his V. 16.
Mouth, i. e. his Spokesman to the People) was Mighty in Words. How can this
be? Very well. A Man may want Eloquence, and yet be a Great Orator. Demosthenes
had a natural Impediment in his Speech, and so had Tully, and neither of them
could quite conquer it by their Art and Industry. Their Oratory lay more in the
Matter, and their wise framing of it, than in the Words they spoke. So was it
with this Great Man, (if I may compare him with them) he was mighty in Words,
yet was no Graceful Speaker; he was Powerful in Speech, yet a Stammerer. This
shows that there is a Rhetoric, and that very Potent, which consists not in
Readiness of Language and Volubility of Words, but in speaking Great Reason and
Excellent Sense, and in saying that which is to the Purpose. Especially the the
Words are Mighty when they proceed from an Excellent Mind, and when Deeds
follow. So that Diodorus Siculus may be thought to be a good Commentator on St.
Stephen, for he gives this as part of Mose's Character, that (...). Lib. 2. c.
5.
he was of a Great Soul, and very able and powerful in his Life. He did what he
said, he acted according to what he spoke. The Israelites were directed to
their Duty more by his Practice, than his Words. He effectually taught them to
live well, chiefly by doing so Himself. He set them a Pattern of all Virtues
imaginable, and then commended them all by his Exemplary Condescension and
Humility. Though he was one of the most transcendent Excellencies, (the
Beauties of Body and Mind shining in him, as you have heard) yet he was the
Humblest and Number. 12. 3.
Meekest Man on the Face of the Earth. He gave an undeniable Proof of this when
Ibid.
he refused to contend with Miriam and Aaron about his Authority and Eminency,
which God himself had enstated him in, but which they denied to own. He
discovered this mild Spirit when he patiently bore all the unworthy Carriage of
the People toward him. They knew well enough that he left the Egyptian Court
and Honors for their Sake, that he might be their Leader and Deliverer: yet
they forgot this his singular Affection to them, and often murmured against
him, and slandered and reviled him, and would have none of his Conduct, yea and
Exodus 17. 4.
were ready to stone him after all his Pains and Care for them. But
notwithstanding all these Affronts, and Injuries, and offers of Violence,
(which were almost perpetual) he went on contentedly in the Discharge of his
Office, and forgot their ill Demeanor toward him, and studied nothing more
than to oblige them. Or, his being Mighty in Deeds, may refer to the
Astonishing Miracles which he wrought. He outdid all the Prophets in these, say
the Jewish Doctors; for (if you will believe their Manasse ben Israel Quaest. in
Deuteron.
Computation) there were but seventy four Miracles done by all of them from the
Beginning of the World, till the Destruction of the first Temple, but Moses
himself wrought seventy six Miracles: so that he did more than all the Prophets
together. But this we are certain of from the infallible Records of Scripture,
that he was Mighty in working of Miracles. The Sacred History, which he penned
by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, gives us a Particular of some of those
Wonderful Things which he effected in Egypt, and at the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness; and many others are not mentioned, (as is usual in these brief
Narratives of things) but all of them were the Operations of a Divine and
Supernatural Power.

Lastly, he was Mighty in Deeds relating to Government, and the Management of
Public Affairs which respect either Peace or War. It was Plato's Judgment of
old, and after him some Great Persons liked it so well that they made it theirs
too, that it would never be well with the World till Philosophers had the Reins
of Government put into their Hands, or till the Governors and Guides of People
were become True Philosophers. There were notable Examples of this in Athens,
where Aristides, Themistocles, Miltiades, Pericles, Phocion, Alcibiades, and
several others were as celebrated Philosphers as Commanders and Captains. They
were renowned for their Great Wit and Judgment, and for as Great Valor and
Conduct. As wife Men they knew how to regulate themselves and their own
Manners; as skilful Rulers and Governors, they knew how to rectify the
Behavior of others. We are sure that Moses wanted not this double Advantage,
being versed both in the Principles of the Best Philosophy, and the Wisest
Government, and being able to act according to both. His Learning and
Contemplation were reduced into Exercise: he by them not only understood but
practiced the Arts of War and well Governing. He knew how to give Laws to the
People, and knew how to lead them into the Field: like Caesar afterward, who
was both Scholar and Soldier, the Master of Eloquence and of Arms. The great
Variety of Life which he had gone through made him universally Knowing, and
sitted him for all sorts of Actions. David is a like Instance in Scripture, and
I know not another. He was, like Moses, a Shepherd, a Courtier, a King's
Favorite, and afterward out of Favor, a Fugitive, a Warrior, a Ruler, a
Prophet, a Writer. This Difference of Scenes rendered both of them Complete
Actors: this Diversity of States furnished them with Political Wisdom, which
being added to that which was Divine, enabled them to act so laudably in those
Public Stations to which they were advanced. And for this reason our Moses is
the more Acceptable Historian, because he was one of such vast Knowledge and
Wisdom, and had passed through so many and various Stages of Life, and
especially because he was personally engaged in most of the things he writes.

We count it a good Qualification in those that pen Histories, that they write
things done in their own time, and that they bore a Part in what they describe.
Thus Dictys Cretensis (if we may begin with him) writ the Trojan War, wherein
he himself had served: Thucidides (as he tells us in the beginning of his
History) was present at the things he wrote concerning the Peloponnesian War,
and saw and knew much of it. Xenophon was both Historian and Captain, and knew
many of the Things he transmits to Posterity. Diodorus Siculus (as he acquaints
us in the Entrance of his History) traveled a great Part of Asia and Europe,
to inform himself of the Things he relates, and that he might be an
Eyewitness of most of them: and it appears from what he says elsewhere, that
he went into Africa. Julius Caesar's Commentaries (which Name he was pleased
out of Modesty to apply to the best History in the World of that sort) are an
Account of the Military Acts of his own Army. He fought and writ: his Battles
were transcribed into his Book: his Blood and his Ink were equally free, his
Sword and his Pen were alike famous. Josephus accompanied Titus to the Siege of
Jerusalem, and knew himself the Acts done in the War he writes. Polybius
traveled to most of the Parts which he describes, and saw those very things
which he writes of. Procopius sets down what he knew, for he was present with
Belisarius at the Wars which he treats of, and was Eyewitness of what he
relates. Herodian writ the History of the Emperors of his own Time, and so had
the exacter Knowledge of their Actions. Suetonius was Contemporary with the
three last Emperors, whose Lives he writes. Among the Modern Historians,
Comines, Guicciardine, Sleidan, Thuanus, are commendable on this account, they
lived at the same time when most of the Things which they record were done, and
they were themselves actually concerned in many of them. Now, if these who were
interested in the Matters they delivered are thought to be well qualified on
that Account for Historians, then we ought to have the greater Regard to our
Divina Writer, who was engaged in so great a Part of the Things which he
commits to Writing. He describes those Battles at which he was present, and
records those Passages in which he had a Share, and that a very considerable
one: so that having the Relation of these things from his Mouth, we do not only
read them, but as 'twere see them. And here by the way we may see the
unreasonableness of those Men's Cavils, who think it a diminishing of the
Authority of Moses's Writings that he so often records his Own Actions and
Deportment, as if they did not sound well, nay could not be true from his own
Mouth. But it is certain that this very Thing commends his Writings, and
strengthens the Authority of them, especially when we know that he was a Person
of Integrity, and would not tell a Lie. We think not the worse of Iosephus's
Life, because 'twas writ with his own Hand; nor of the Emperor Antoninus's
(...).
Books concerning Himself, nor of St. Austin's Confessions wherein he gives an
Account of his own Actions, nor of Cardan, or Iunius, or Bp. Hall, who writ
their Own Lives, nor of Montaign who in one Book more especially makes Himself
the Subject, and relates his own Temper, Studies, Fortunes, etc. And shall we
think the worse of Moses because he sets down the Passages of his own Life in
the Books which he has written? No: this rather advances their Credit among
wise and understanding Men, who are satisfied that none was so fit to give an
account of his own Actions as this Author himself, both because he knew them
better than any Man, and because he was of that entire Faithfulness that he
would relate nothing but what was exactly true. And that he was thus faithful
and impartial, is evident from those Passages which relate to Himself, which
are frequent in these Writings, where his own Infirmities, Imperfections and
Follies are registered, where his unseemly Wrath and Passion, where his gross
Unbelief and Distrusting of God (as at the Waters of Meribah especially) and
several other Miscarriages of his Life are set down. This shows that he spared
not Himself, and that he was not guilty of Partiality: this shows that he was
devoted to Truth, and not led by Applause and Vain Glory. Whereas he might have
composed his own Panegyric, and transmitted it to future Ages, you see he
chose the contrary, and recorded his own Faults and Misdemeanors: whence it is
rational to conclude that he would not falsify in the least in any other Part
of his Writings. And as for that Aphorism of Machiavel, He that writes an
History must be of no Religion, it is here disproved and consuted: Moses was
the most Absolute Historian, and yet the most Religious; and his being the
latter, capacitated him to be the former. For no Man can so impartially deliver
the Truth as he that speaks it from his own Breast, and especially (as in the
present Case) has a practical Sense of those Divine Things which he delivers.
This is that Person who was the Author of the Pentateuch, that Excellent
Philosopher, Lawgiver, Historian, that Captain, that Prince, that Prophet, that
Man of God, who was the Inspired Writer of the five first Books of the Bible.

The first of which (as I said before) is Genesis, which begins with the
History of the Creation. And I call it a History, in opposition to the fond
Conceit of those Men who read the Beginning of this Book with Cabalistick
Spectacles only, and think there are nothing but Allegories and Mysteries in
the whole Text. But the contrary is very evident to unprejudiced Minds: and to
such as are not so, I have propounded Arguments in another Place ( viz. when I
treated of the Literal and Mystical Sense of Scripture) to take off their
Prejudces and Mistakes. This I did, because it is necessary to be firmly
persuaded of the Truth and Certainty of what we meet with here in our Entrance
into the Bible. It is indispensably requisite that we believe Moses to have
delivered these things as an Historian; and that he speaks real Matter of Fact,
when he gives us a Narrative of the Beginning of all things, and particularly
of the Original of Man, his Innocence and Happiness, and after that his Fall,
which was the Source of all Sin, of the Devil's Tyranny, of Death, of Hell, and
of all Evils whatsoever. The Knowledge and Belief of This are the Basis of all
Religion, and that perhaps was the Meaning of Colloq. Mensal.
Luther's Saying, that the First Chapter of Genesis comprehends the whole
scripture. Wherefore this is with great Wisdom premised in the Entrance of this
Sacred Volume. To which afterward are adjoined the Propagation of Mankind, the
Rise of Religion and of the Church of God, the Invention of Arts, the General
Defection and Corruption of the World, the Universal Del^ge which drowned all
Mankind but Noah and his Family, the Restoration of the World, the Certain
Distinction of Times before the Flood and partly after it, the Confusion of
Tongues, and thereupon the Division of the Earth among the Sons of Men, the
Plantation of Families, the Original of Nations and Kingdoms, as the Assyrian
Mon^^chy (begun in Nimrod or Belus) and the Egyptian Dynasty; the History of
the first Patriarchs not only before but after the General Deluge, as of Noab
the Preacher of Righteousness, of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, of Isaac
the Seed in which all Nations were to be blessed, of Jacob the Father of the
twelve Tribes, of Joseph whose Memorable Actions are here fully recorded, and
with which this First Book of Moses ^nds; unless the Book of Genesis may be
said to reach as far as (...), because of that Promise contained in it
concerning the Seed of the Woman that was to break the Serpent's Head, Viz.
Christ the Redeemer made of a Woman, and sent to subdue the Devil, and to
destroy Sin and Death.

But because this First Book begins with the Creation of the World, and is
therefore by the Rabbis called the Book of the Creation, I will here annex a
brief View of the several Distinct Steps of this Great Work, as they are
represented to us by this Inspired Writer and Divine Philosopher, who acquaints
us that there were six Days spent in erecting this glorious Fabric of the
World. And this will be a farther Proof of what I said before, viz. that in
Scripture is the Truest Philosophy. When Moses says, In the Beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth, Ver. 1. he does in these Words give us a
summary Account of all that he intended to say afterward in this Chapter: for
Heaven and Earth comprehend the Whole Creation. This first Verse then is to be
looked upon as a General Draught of the Production of all things: and the
Particulars of it follow in the next Verses, where the several Days Works are
distinctly set down. The Product of the first Day was twofold, viz. the
Terraqueous Mass (called here the Earth) and Light. There was first of all
created a Rude Confused Heap, (by Profane Writers called the Chaos) an
Indigested Mass of Earth and Water mixed together, out of which God afterward
made all Corporeal things which belong to this lower World. For we must not (as
some) imagine that the Celestial Bodies were composed out of the Earthly Chaos,
that all the Vast Spaces of the Heavenly Mansions owe their Rise to this Mass
below, and that the very Stars were the Offspring of the Earth. No; Moses gives
us to understand that this Confused Lump was the Original only of the Lower
World: for the Earth in this first Verse is mentioned as one Part of the
new-created World, as distinct from Light the other Part of the Creation. As
Light then (of which I shall speak next) was the Primordial Matter of the
Ethereal, Celestial and Shining Bodies; so this Gross and Lumpish Heap was that
of which all Dark and Heavy Bodies were compounded. This Unshapen Mass without
Form, and void, is here, by a general Name, called the Earth, though it was not
in a strict sense such; for the Earth, as a distinct Body from all others, was
the Work of the third Day. In this Place therefore by Earth is meant Earth and
Water blended together, which made one Great Bog or Universal Quagmire. This is
the plainest and truest Conception we can have of the Primitive State of the
World. And hence without doubt was derived the Opinion of Thales and some other
Ancient Philosophers, that Water, or Slime, or Mud, (for they express it
variously) was the Source of all Beings whatsoever. And certain it is that this
Terraqueous Matter was the first Origin of all those material Beings
beforementioned. Accordingly Sir W. Raleigh, in the Beginning of his History
of the World, determines, that the Substance of the Waters, as mixed in the
Body of the Earth, is by Moses understood in the word Earth. Hitherto,
according to the Mosaic History, Nature is in her Nightclothes, the World is
overspread with Darkness, which is especially said to be on the face of the
Deep, by which is meant either the whole Disordered Mass, which was an Abyss,
or else (as is most probable) the Watery Part of it; for though this and the
Earthy Parts were mixed together, yet these latter being lightest were
generally uppermost, and floted above all, and appeared on the Surface of the
Earth. Therefore that Learned Knight before mentioned observes that the Earth
was not only mixed but covered with the Waters. But the Spirit of God (as Moses
proceeds to tell us.) maved or hovered over this Dark Abyss, this Mixed Chaos,
especially the Waters, (as it is particularly said, because these were
uppermost) and hereby the Rude Matter was prepared to receive its several
Forms, and then the World began to throw off its Dark and Sable Mantle, and to
appear in a Bright Dress.

For the other Product of this first Day (and which indeed made it Day) was
Light, i. e. some Lucid Body or Bodies: which yet cast but a Glimmering
Splendour, a Faint Radiancy in comparison of what was afterward on the fourth
Day, when we are told in what certain Subjects the Light resided, and was as it
were fixed. But now it was feeble and vagrant, and was the first Result of some
^iry and luminous Matter which the Divine Spirit by his powerful Moving and
Incubation had engendered. This Bright and Glorious Matter was the Second
General Source of all Beings, that is, out of it were made the pure Ether, the
Sun and Stars, and whatever belongs to the superior Part of the World; but
these appertain to the fourth Day's Work. Now we are only to take notice of
this Light as it is here the Catholic Term for the First Rudiment of the whole
Celestial Creation (as Earth was the word to express the First Matter of the
Inferior Part of the World). And what is this Light but Fire or Flame, that
subtle Matter which heats and enlightens the World? For (...) is both lux and
ignis, as also the Greek Word (...) Light, Mar. 17. 2. Fire, Mark 14. 54. Luke
22. 50.
imports. So Heat is put for Light, Psat. 19. 6. And I could observe that (...)
is used not only in Isa. 18. 4. but in other Places to express the Hebrew Word
for Heat. Which shows the Affinity, if not the Identity of these two. This
Original Light then, which was the Second Principle in the Creation, is no
other than those fine and brisk Particles of Matter whose Nature is to be in a
Continual Agitation, and which by their restless Motion and Pressure
communicate Warmth and Light, Vigor and Luster wherever there is need of
them in the Universe. Some refer the Creation of Angels to this first Day's
Work, by reducing them to the word Heaven in the first Verse; but I have
suggested already that that Verse is a General Account of the Whole Creation,
and not of any Particular Day's Production, (or else by Heaven and Earth there
is meant the First Matter or Rude Draught of both) therefore no such thing can
be inferred thence. Nor are we to think that the Angelick Order is comprehended
under Light, (as I find some imagine, because they read of an Angel of Light, 2
Cor. 11. 14.) for it is Material Light only that is the Product of the first
Day's Work. I rather think that Moses designed not to include Angels in any
Part of that Account which he gives of the Creation, for he makes it his
Business to speak of those Works of God which were visible and sensible, and
therefore it is no wonder that the Angelick Spirits are not mentioned, for they
come not within the Compass of his Undertaking.

Hitherto we have had a View of the Two Primitive Materials of all visible
Beings in the World, viz. 1. The Formless Mass or Chaos (whence it is likely
Aristotl^ derived his First Matter, which is according to him neither this nor
that, but mere passive Potentiality, yet susceptive of any Form). 2. The Active
Light, which was made to envigorate the dull and inert Matter of the Chaos, and
afterward to be the Original of the Vast Luminaries of the Celestial Part of
the World. These are the General Elements of the Mundane System; one gross and
unactive, the other subtle and penetrating; the one the Matter of this
inferior Part of the Universe, the other of those more spacious and extended
Orbs above. This I take to be the true Account of the Origin of the World,
though I have but few (if any) that concur with me in laying it down thus; for
the Chaos is generally made the Universal Source of the World. But to me it
seems to be but One Part of it, and that of this Lower Division only, which is
very small in respect of the other. I have only this to add here, that it is
this First Day's Work alone that in the most proper and strict Sense ought to
be called the Creation, because now was made the First and Universal Substance
out of which the Works of the other Days were produced; though it is true in a
latitude of speaking, the Formation of the distinct Species of Beings was a
Creation also. And of these I proceed now to speak according to the Mosaic
Method, the same with that of the Creator.

On the second Day was the Lower Heaven or Firmament made, called by this
Divine Philosopher Rakiang, i. e. the Expansion, or according to the Seventy
Interpreters (...), whom the Vulgar Latin follows, and renders it Firmamentum.
This was produced in the midst of the Waters, and the Design of it was to
divide the Waters from the Waters, (v. 6.) i. e. (as it follows) the Waters
under this Firmament from the Waters above it. The Meaning of which is, (after
all the wild Comments on these Words) that whereas the Waters at first were
heaped together very high above the Earth in some Places, the All-wise Disposer
began this Day to make a Separation of them, and to frame an Expansion (for
that is the simple and downright Import of the Hebrew Word) between the lower
and the higher Parts of the Waters: so that now there was a Distance between
them, which was caused by the Interposition of Air between these lower and
higher Parts of the Waters. The Almighty Creator, by attenuating and rarifying
these, transmuted them into an Aerial Body, which shall always continue so, i.
e. shall remain really distinct from the crasser Subsistence of Water.
Therefore in plain Terms this Expansum is the Whole Region of Air: and we
cannot imagine any other Expansum or Out-spread Firmament which divides the
superior from the inferior Waters, i. e. the Clouds from that vast Body and
Mass of Waters which at first covered the Earth, and soon after (as you shall
hear) were disposed of into particular Receptacles, and were denominated the
Seas. But yet in a large way of speaking this Firmament here spoken of is all
that Extended Space (for that, I say, is the proper Denotation of the Word)
which reaches from the Earth to the Place of the Stars, which was made
afterward. If it be asked why this Second Day's Work has not the same
Approbation that the rest have: I answer, the Reason is not because it was not
good, but because it was but an Essay or Specimen of the two next Days Works;
for the Waters were but now begun to be separated, which afterward we find
finished on the third Day: and this Firmament was but a Beginning or
Preparative to the Production of a higher and nobler Expansum on the fourth
Day. This we may conceive to be the Reason why the Epiphonema which is added to
every Day's Work [ God saw that it was good] is not adjoined here.

On the third Day there was this fourfold Work; 1. A Complete Separating or
dividing of the Waters. 2. A Gathering of them into one Place, which was then,
and is since called the Sea. And it is most reasonable to believe that on the
same Day that the Seas were made by depressing some Parts of the Earth for the
Waters to run in, the Channels also of the Rivers were fixed, and the Currents
of Water let into them. For if (as some imagine) Rivers were made afterward by
Men, the Banks of them (or one Side of them at least) would be higher than the
rest of the Ground, by reason of the Earth dug out and cast up. 3. A Drying of
the Land, which was a necessary Consequence of that collecting the Waters into
certain Cavities and Channels in the Earth; for they being drained and sunk
down into these, the Land became dry, and had the Denomination of Earth
(properly so called) given to it. Virgil expresses it thus, (for he as well as
other Poets, as I have showed in another Place, borrowed several things from
the Sacred Records) Et durare solum, and discludere Nerea Ponto
Coepit. --
And this was not only in order to render it a suitable Habitation for Men and
Beasts afterward, but to sit it immediately for Plants and Herbs, for Trees
and Fruits, (and more especially for the Plantation of Paradise) which were the
fourth and last Production of this Day.

The next Day was employed in creating of an Etherial Heaven or Firmament, and
furnishing it with Glorious Lights. As the former Firmament or Expanse was the
Space between the Earth and Ether, so this is that vast Extension which
comprehends the Ether, and all the Luminaries placed in it, and whatever is
above it, even the Place of the Blessed, called the Heaven of Heavens. The
Generality of Expositors, I grant, make the other Firmament and this the same,
and think that the Firmament here spoken of is not mentioned as the Product of
this Day's Creation, but that here is only a new mentioning of the preceding
one. But this Mistake has run them into great Absurdities, and has made them
unable to give any tolerable. Account of the Waters under the Firmament, and
those above it. But if you quit the usual Road of Interpreters, and take the
Firmament in the 14th Verse to be different from that in ver. 6, and 7. you
solve all Difficulties whatsoever, and the Texts are clear and evident.
Wherefore I distinguish between the Firmament of Air and that of Ether, i. e.
that wherein the Clouds and Meteors are, and the other which contains the
Luminaries of Heaven. And you may observe that this, in contradistinction to
the former, is signally styled thrice the Firmament of Heaven, ver. 14, 15, 17.
This Celestial Expansion being fixed, the next Work was to garnish and adorn
it. To which purpose the Light made the first Day is now abundantly and almost
infinitely augmented and refined, and disposed of into certain particular Orbs
or Spheres, or Vortices, which are formed in this upper Part of the World. As
all the formerly dispersed Light which was scattered over the whole Face of the
Earth and Deep, was (as we expressly read, ver. 4.) divided from the Darkness,
whereby one half of the Globe was enlightened, and the other was in the dark;
(it was Day with one Hemisphere whilst it was Night with the other) so now on
the third Day this Wandering Light is gathered into the Bodies of the Sun and
Stars.

This is the Mosaic Philosophy concerning the Earth and Heavens; and (if it
were my Business here) I could show that upon true Principles of Reason it is
more consistent than any Philosophical Hypotheses of another Strain, and
especially more congruous to the Laws of Motion and the Operations of Nature
than that of Monsieur Des Carts, who tells us, that there were nothing but
Suns and Stars at first, there were no Earths nor Planets, but in process of
Time some of these Suns were overspread with Spots and Scum, and became opake,
and being sucked in by their Neighbour-Vortices, turned into Planets or Earth.
But truly, to give this worthy Person his due, he propounded this only as a
Handsome Hypothesis, a neat Philosophic Fiction, which he thought might serve
as a good Expedient to solve some Celestial Phenomenon. But he intended not
that any Man should look upon it as a Reality, and thereby exclude the Mosaic
Doctrine: For his own Words are these, Non dubium est quin Mundus ab initio
fuerit creatus cum omni sua perfectione, ita ut in co and Sol, etc. Carts.
Princip. Philos. Par. 3. Sect. 45.
It is not to be doubted that the World was at the very first created with all
its Perfection, so that there were then existent the Sun, Earth and Moon. This
the Christian Faith teaches us, and even. natural Reason persuades us to think
so: for when we attend to the Immense Power of God, we cannot imagine that he
ever made a thing which was not every ways entire and perfect. Thus he
establishes the Mosaic System, according to which the Earth was before, not
after the Heavens; yea, as gross as it was, it was the Firstborn of the
Creation, and consequently the Hypothesis about its being made by Absorption is
a Fiction. So according to Moses the Earth was the Basis and Foundation of the
World, and the Sun and other Luminaries were placed in the Firmament, which is
said to be above the Earth; wherefore the System that makes the Earth the
Center, and not the Sun, is founded on this.

Before I dismiss this Head, I might take notice how mightily concerned the
Arc^aeologist is about the Inequality of the Days Works, and especially that of
this Fourth Day, which Archaeolog. Philos. cap. 8.
he tells us exceeds all the other five, and therefore he cannot give Credit to
Mo^es's Hexaemeron. This is the wild Reasoning of this Philosophic Adventurer.
Indeed both here and in other Places where he descants on the Mosaic History,
he uses a most extravagant, and (to speak plainly) a most irreligious Liberty,
confronting the Text with an unsufferable Boldness, and playing upon it with a
most unbecoming Raillery. Is he to set the Almighty Creator his Tasks, and
proportion them as he think fit? Must every Day's Work be equal, or else must
it not be believed? Yea, is he able to tell what is equal or unequal with the
Omnipotent Deity and most Wise Architect of the World? Surely this is not the
Language of a Christian Man: Yea, (which perhaps will affect him more) it is as
sure that he dot^* not talk like a Philosop^er, for it is certain (and all
Intelligent Men will acknowledge it) that Dull, Gross, heavy Matter, abo^t which
the foregoing Days Works were conversant, is not (if we speak of the Nature of
the thing) so soon moved, shaped and ordered as that which is Tenuious, Fluid,
subtle and active. The Make of the Heavens and all the spacious Bodies of the
Stars was quickly dispatched, because the Matter of them was Ethereal, light,
tractable; and by reason of their ^iry and agile Nature they presently ran into
that Shape which they now appear in. This should have been considered by this
Cavilling Gentleman, and he ought to have made a Distinction between what in it
self is Dull and what is Active, i. e. the T^o Different Principles of the
Creation which I have before asserted. If he had done so, he would have seen
that there is no Reason to complain of Inequality in the Six Days Works. But he
mistook the System of the World which Moses describes, and thence was his
Error. I wish it was not wilful and presumptuous, for from several bold Strokes
in this Ingenious Man's Writings, one would be apt to think he inclined to
Alphonsus's Humor, who declared that if he had been at the Creation of the
World, he could have taught God to have formed the System of it better. But I
will retain a more charitable Opinion concerning this Author. And I expect that
he shoud show his Charity (as I have mine) in not censuring this my free
Descant upon what he has published to the World: for I have as great a Regard
as any Man to True and Sober Philosophy, and I own the Great Worth and
Excellency of it; but I must needs protest that I abhor the Practice of those
who exclude the Sacred Writings whilst they adhere to their own Hypothesis,
who set up such Philosophical Principles and Conclusions as directly oppose and
contradict the Revealed Truths of the Bible. And this is the Case now before
us, or else I should not have troubled the Reader with any Reflections on what
this Learned Author has written. Let us have as much (...) Philosophy as he
pleases, but none that subverts our Old Religion.

To proceed; on the fifth Day the Inhabitants of the Seas, and of the Lower
Heaven were formed. For though the chearing and warming Light, before it was
embodied and gathered together into certain Receptacles, was instrumental by
the Divine Power to produce Vegetables, yet it was not vigorous enough to beget
the Animal Life. But now this Noble and Cherishing Virtue being mightily
increased by immense Accessions of Light and Heat made to it, and being more
advantagiously placed and fixed, we find the Effect of it in the Production of
Fish and Feathered Animals: Now a Living or Sensitive Soul is first made, ver.
21.

On the sixth and last Day the Earth brought forth all kinds of Beasts and
Cattle, i. e. all T^rrestrial Animals (as on the foregoing Day all Animals
belonging to the Sea and Rivers, and to the Air, were created). And lastly Mun,
the Top and Glory of the Creatures, the most Elaborate Piece of the whole
Creation, was framed out of the Dust; and, in respect of his Diviner Part
especially, made according to the Image of God himself. He is too Great and
Noble a Being to be spoken of by the by, and therefore I shall not discourse of
him here. Only I will observe the Unreasonableness of the Archaeologist, who
positively avers that this last Day's Performance was not proportionable to the
rest, and thence condemns the Mosaic History of the Creation. But this
Disproportion is either in respect of more or of less done on this Day than on
the others. If he complains that more was done, he shows himself incon^iderate,
for hereby it appears that he takes no notice of the Creation's rising higher
and higher toward the latter end; besides that he confines the Creator
himself. But if he complains (as I suppose he does) that less was done, he
shows what low and unworthy Thoughts he has of Man: as if Mud, Water, Earth,
Clouds, Seas, Plants, Fish and Fowl, (the Productions of the former Days) were
much better than Him whom God purposely reserved to be the Complement and
Perfection of all, Him to whom every Creature pays a Tribute, Him for whose Use
and Benefit the whole World was made.

These are the (...), the Primitive Works of God, and the Several Days in which
they were made. For we are not to imagine (as Philo de Allegor. Leg. l. 1.
Hilar. de Trin. I. 12. S. Augustine. in Genesis sec. literam.
some do) that this Division of the Creation into so many Parts is only set
down for Order sake, but that really all was done at once and in a Moment: for
then the Reason given in the Fourth Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath Day,
viz. because in six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that
in them is, and rested on the seventh Day, is to no purpose, yea it is absolute
Nonsense. Therefore we must necessarily own the Gradual Progress of the
Creation. And let us not only do so, but observe the Wisdom and Providence of
the Infinite Architect in the Order and Method which he used. He in creating
began with the lowest and meanest Rank of Beings, and so ascended to higher and
nobler. Simple Elements, as Earth, Water, Fire, (or Light) Air, were produced
before the more mixed and concrete Bodies. Yea, these Elements were placed
according to the Order and Degree of Gravity, first the Earth, subsiding in the
lowest Place of all, (for the Great and Renowned Tycho disdains not this
Hypothesis) then the Waters or Abyss placed immediately about the Earth: next
the Air or Expansion, whose Position was above the Waters: lastly the Fire,
called Light, which comprehends all the Ethereal and Heavenly Bodies, which are
surmounted above all the rest. As for the Planets (which are so many Earths, i.
e. if by Earth we mean an opake Body) they are to be accounted for at another
time, and in another Place, where it will be most proper to speak of them. It
is also observable, that things that were Inanimate were first brought into
Existence, and afterward such as had a Vegetative Life: then things that had
Sense and Spontaneous Motion, and lastly Reasonable Creatures. Man was the
concluding Work of the Creation, and his Soul was the last of all; to let us
know that this sort of Beings is much more valuable than Bodies, to assure us
from the Method of God's creating that Minds or Spirits surpass Ma^ter.
Finally, when I say that the Creation ceased in Man, as in the most Perfect
Work of the Divine Artificer, as in the End to which all the rest were
designed, I do not exclude Angels, who are a Perfecter Classis of Creatures,
and are not united to Bodies as the Souls of Men are, and for that very Reason
are not taken notice of by Moses in this Account of the Visible Creation. I am
inclined to believe that these Glorious Spirits were made presently after Man,
they being an Order of Creatures superior to him. The Order of the Creation
(so far as we certainly know any thing of it) invites me to embrace this
Persuasion, for according to this those Excellent Beings should have the last
Place. According to the Steps and Degrees of the Creation, I say, it was thus.

Exodus is the next Book; which relates the Tyranny of Pharaoh, the Bondage of
the Isra^lites under him in Egypt, and their Wonderful Deliverance from it.
More particularly here are recorded the Prodigious Increase and multiplying of
these oppressed Hebrews which were the Posterity of Jacob, the Plagues
inflicted on the Egyptian King and his People, because he refused to dismiss
them; their Departure thence without his leave, though not without the Peoples;
their Miraculous Passing through the Red Sea, or Arabian Gulf; the Overthrow of
Pharaoh and his numerous Host; the Marvelous Securing and Protecting of the
Israelites in the Arabian Deserts; the strange Miracles wrought for the
sustaining and preserving of them: the Promulging of the Law to them on Mount
Sinai, which consisted of Moral Precepts, Civil or Judicial Constitutions, and
Ceremonial Rites: for the celebrating and performing of which latter, a
Tabernacle was erected (as Rich and Stately as their present Condition would
permit) by the particular Appointment and Direction of God. Briefly, this Book
represents the Church of God, afflicted and preserved: it shows that he is
pleased to suffer it to be reduced to the greatest Straits and Calamities, and
that even then he guards it by his Providence, and in good time delivers it.

But as before, when I mentioned the General Contents of the Book of Genesis, I
particularly insisted on the Creation; so now having given a brief Scheme of
this second Book, I will stay to enlarge upon a particular Subject of it, which
is very Considerable and Remarkable, viz. the (...) (as Cedren. Hist. Compend.
One calls it) the Tenfold Plague wherewith God testified his Wrath and Anger
against the Egyptians. Ten times the Israelites were detained by Pharaoh, and
so many times God inflicted Remarkable Judgments on him and his People. The
first was a severe Infliction on their Waters, that Element which is so useful
and necessary to Man. The Divine Displeasure began to exert it self here by
turning all their Rivers, Ponds, Pools and Streams into Blood. The dreadful
Consequences of which were these, (as you find them enumerated, Exodus* 7. 21.)
first, they had no Water to drink, and quench their Thirst with: Secondly,
their Fish (their great and almost only Food) died; and Thirdly, the Rivers
stank, by reason of the putrified Waters and dead Fish. So direful was this
Plague on their Waters, which they honored above all other Elements as the
first Cause and Principle of all things in World, and especially their River
Nile was gloried in, and worshipped as a God. This the Learned and Religious De
vita Mosis.
Philo gives as the Reason of inflicting this Punishment. God sent a Curse on
that which they most prized and valued. That which they excessively admired,
proved a Plague to them. God punished them in that which was most regarded by
them, and was indeed most serviceable to them. Again, this is to be observed
that the Blood of the murdered Infants, who had been drowned by one of the
Pharaoh's Command, is here represented by these Bloody Waters. Here the
merciless Tyrant may see the just Retaliation of that Crime. The Rivers being
changed into this Color, accuse the Egyptians of the inhumane Slaughter of the
innocent Babes, and let them know that their Plagues deservedly begun with
these first of all. Yea, here we may take notice of an Horrible Omen: these Red
Rivers were an unhappy but just Presage of the Fate which they should
afterward undergo in the Sea of that Denomination. If any Object here, How
could the Magicians turn the Waters into Blood ( v. 22.) after Moses and Aa^on
had done so before them? I Answer, the Universal Terms used in this Relation
are to be restrained* and understood with some Exception, (than which nothing
is more common in Scripture) i. e. when it is said all the Rivers and other
Waters were stained with Blood, the meaning is that very few Places were free
from this Infection. The Magicians then might repeat this Plague in Goshen, and
some certain Parts of Egypt where it had not taken effect before.

When this First Plague was removed, God sent a Second, viz. Frogs. Which in
part tormented the Egyptians after the same manner that the former did, for
they were of an extraordinary Nature, (and so we must suppose all the other
Creatures hereafter named to be) and infected the Waters which were lately
healed and recovered, so that there was no drinking of them, or making use of
them to any other Purpose. But whereas the former Plague was only on this
Element, this present one was every where. No Place was exempted from this
Croaking Vermin. They overspread their Fields, they crept into their Houses,
they lodged themselves in their Beds. All Places were filled with them, all
Meats and Drinks bred them. Certainly this must needs be a very Affrighting as
well as a Noisome Punishment whilst these Animals were moving and living: and
they were no less so ^fterwards, when they lay dead and putrefying all ^ver the
Land.

When this Plague was taken away, a Third succeeded in its room, an Innumerable
Company of Lice, which miserably infested both Men and Beasts. What these
Kinnim were we do not certainly know: we have no such Creature perhaps in these
Countries. But this we know that these Loathsome Insects were such a peculiar
Sort of Creatures that the Egyptian Sorcerers had not power to produce the
like, and therefore they signally called them the Finger of God, Exodus 8. 19.
This also we know that this Crawling Vermin was excessively troublesome, painful
and tormenting: and lastly, from this kind of Punishment we know this is to be
inferred, that God, whenever he pleases, can give Commission even to the
Least, the Vilest and most Despicable Animals to execute his Wrath on Offenders.

As appears also by the Fourth Plague, viz. Swarm^ of Flies, with which he
further vexed the Egyptians. Beelzebub was let loose among them, and his
Buzzing Crew would not suffer them to be at ease. The Hebrew Word Gnarob is
rendered by Greek Interpreters (...) the Dog-fly: but it is probable that the
true genuine Word in the First Traslation was (...), whence the Vulgar Latin
renders it omne genus Muscarum, a Swarm of all manner of Flies. So according to
Aquila's Version it is (...). But Antiqu. l. 2. c. 5.
Josephus stretches the Word further, and interprets it (...), wild Beasts of
all Sorts and Shapes; such as no man ever saw before, as he adds. Yea R.
Solomon and some other Jewish Expositors think that all kinds of wild Beasts,
especially Serpents and Scorpions, and such venomous Creatures, are meant. The
Author of the Book of Wisdom understood the Word thus, as appears from what he
says, Chapter 11. v. 15, 16. For the foolish Devices of their Wickedness,
wherewith being deceived they worshipped Serpents and vile Beasts, God sent a
Multitude of Beasts upon them for Vengeance: that they might know that
wherewithal a Man sins, by the same also shall he be punished. But the
exactest Enquirers into the Original Word conclude, that it signifies a
gathered Mixture of several Sorts of Insects or little flying Animals, such as
Beetles, Hornets, Bees, Wasps, Gnats, and more especially ^lies. Perhaps
Grotius is in the right, that Gnaro^ is not of Hebrew Extraction, but is an
Egyptian Word, (as was that whereby the Frogs were named) and signifies
peculiarly with them a Heap or Swarm of Flies. The vast Number of these was
sufficiently troublesome: but that was not all, these Multitudes of Insects
were Infectious and Mortal by reason of their intolerable Stench and Filth,
with which they filled the Air: whence it is said, the Land was corrupted with
them, Exodus 8. 24. And this Corruption proved fatal to many, who without doubt
would have taken up Domitian's Emploiment, and managed it better than he did,
but they were not able, for instead of stabbing these Creatures they were
dispatched themselves by a more poinant Stroke.

The former Judgments having not produced any good Effect in this People, God
sends a Fifth among them, viz. a Pestilence or Murrain, that destroyed their
Cattle, their Flocks and Herds of all Kinds: for when it is said All Cattle
died, it is not simply and absolutely to be understood (for some remained* as
is clear in the Plague of Hail afterward) but of* Cattle of all Kinds. These,
it seems, they kept and brought up for their Wool, and for Service, and to make
a Gain of them by selling them to other Nations, although they made no use of
them themselves for Food. Though the Egyptians themselves escape the fury of
this Pestilential Distemper, yet God punishes them in their Beasts. These are
destroyed, to intimate to them what themselves deserved, who live and acted
like Bru^e Beasts.

And now in the next Place it is worth our observing, that this Plague is
followed with the breaking out of Boils and Blains, Botches and Swell^ng-Sores
both in Man and Beast; that is, the fifth Plague was cured by the coming of the
Sixth: for the Venomous and Pestilential Humor which had seized on the Men,
(as I gather from Psalm. 78. 50. where this particular Punishment on the
Egyptians i^ recounted) and which had struck the Cattle dead, was called forth
into the extreme Parts of their Bodies, and so was thereby evacuated and
exhausted. Whence I infer these two Things, 1. That God may think ^it to send
or take away an Extraordinary Calamity in an ordinary and natural Way: and 2.
That one Calamity or Plague may come in the Place of another, and even wholly
remove that former Plague, and yet prove a very Great one it self. Thus it was
with the Boils and Impostumes, they were a Remedy in a natural Way against the
Pestilence, but they were likewise a Grievous and Painful Disease, and made
them unfit for all Work and Business. I will only further remark under this
Particular, that it is probable Trogus Pompeius (and from him Justin the
Historian) refers to these Botches and Boils, when he reports that the
Egyptians (by whom he means the Jews, for he and other Pagans thought they were
originally Egyptians) were driven out of Egypt because they were infected with
the Itch, and were overrun with Scabs and Sores. So Hist. l. 5.
Tacitus relates; that an Epidemick Leprosy or Scabby Disease plagued the
Egyptians Bodies, whereupon the King consulting the Oracle, gave order to purge
the Country of the Jews, and to send them into some other Place. It seems to be
grounded on this, though he (as all other Profane Historians when they speak of
the Jews) is guilty of mistaking and blundering in the way of delivering it.

The Seventh Plague that these People felt was Hail, which was a very
Prodigious thing in it self: for though it sometimes, but very seldom, rained
in Egypt, yet Hail was never seen before in that Country. But moreover this was
Extraordinary, being attended with Fire and Storms, Lightning and Thunder,
which slew all the Men and Beasts that were abroad and remained, and destroyed
all Trees, Plants and Herbs.

And because their Wheat and Rye were not at that time come forth out of the
Ground, and other Fruits of the Earth were not grown up, and so received no
harm by this Plague, therefore upon Pharaoh's continued Obstinacy another was
soon after inflicted on them, that is, Troops of Locusts and Caterpillars, (for
these latter are mentioned Psalm. 78. 46. and 105. 34.) such as never were
before in the World, nor afterward ever shall be, (as it is expressly recorded)
invaded them, and unsufferably molested them in their Houses and closest
Retirements, and quickly devoured all the Fruits of the Ground which the Hail
had not touched.

When neither this nor the foregoing Judgment had any considerable Effect upon
the Hardened Tyrant, a New one, viz. that of Darkness (which is the Ninth in
Number) is sent among them. This was such a Darkness as put out all Fires and
Lights, else they might have helped themselves by these: but it is plain they
did not, for they kept within, neither rose any one from his Place for three
Days, Exodus 10. 23. as much as to say, that their Attempts were frustrated when
they undertook to kindle or light any Fire, and they were forced to desist from
any such Undertaking, and to sit down again in their Places. This is said to be
such a Thick Darkness that it might be felt: it was accompanied with such Gross
Fogs and Mists, and those so pressing upon them, that they might be perceived
by the Sense of Feeling. So this Sense was in an unusual manner exercised
whilst that of Seeing was wholly taken from them. It is impossible fully to
express this Horrid and Frightful Darkness of the Egyptian^. He that consults
the 17th and 18th Chapters of the Book of Wisdom will find an Admirable and
most Elegant Description of it. I do not know any Profane Writer, any Classick
Author, whether Orator or Poet, that has paralleled that Excellent Piece.
There the Worthy Penman acquaints us with the probable Reasons of their
suffering in that kind, and he suggests how they were haunted with strange
Apparitions in that Long and Dismal Night, that the Terrors of their Minds and
Consciences were equal with the Affrightments of that Black Season, that these
Dreadful Shades were but the Representation of that Eternal Blackness and
Darkness into which they were to enter.

The last Plague was the Death of the Firstborn both of Men and Beasts
throughout the whole Land. There was not a House where there was not one dead;
and therefore the Universality of the Slaughter made it the more deplorable and
unsupportable. Accordingly Philo determines that (...). De vita Mos.
the Tenth and Last Plague which befell the Egyptians, far surpassed all the
others that went before. This fluctus decumanus was greater, and on some
Account more terrible than all the former Waves and Billows that beat upon
them: and indeed it was but an Introduction to their being swallowed up by
those of the Red Sea, which was the Concluding Act of the whole Tragedy. Thus I
have briefly set before you the Various and Gradual Judgments wherewith the
Egyptians were exercised. And from the whole we cannot but infer that God has
Diverse Ways of animadverting on obstinate Criminals. Their Sins shall find them
out both at home and abroad, in their Houses and in the Fields, in their
Bodies, in their Possessions, in their Relations. Yea, for their sakes the
Brutes, the Vegetables, and even the Creatures void of all Life shall bear the
Marks of God's Anger. I proceed now to the other Books of Moses, in which I
shall be briefer.

Leviticus has its Name because it treats chiefly of the Offices of the
Levites, and the whole Levitical Order. It gives us an Account of the Jewish
Service and Worship, of the particular Employments and Charges of the Ministers
of the Jewish Church, of their several kinds of Sacrifices and Oblations, (viz.
Burnt-Offerings, Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings, Sin Offerings,
Trespass-Offerings) of the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons to the
Priesthood, of Laws about Clean and Unclean things, and of Difference of Meats.
Here they are forbid to eat Blood; here they are taught how to discern the
Leprosy, and how to cleanse it. Here are Laws concerning Vows, and Things and
Persons devoted* There are also other Ordinances and Injunctions concerning
their Solemn Feasts, viz. the Sabbath of the seventh Year, the Passover, the
Feasts of First Fruits, of Pentecost, of Trumpets, of Expiation, of
Tabernacles, and many the like Usages and Rites which were strictly commanded
this People, on purpose to keep them from the Idolatrous and Superstitious
Ceremonies of the Gentiles that were round about them, and would be enticing
them to imitate their Practice. Besides, these Rites were designed by God to be
Types and Representatives of things of a far higher Nature, even of Christ
himself, and the great things which appertain to the Gospel. There is likewise
a great Number of Judicial Laws, as concerning the Year of Jubilee, about the
Redemption of Lands and Houses, against taking of Usury of the Poor: as also
concerning Servants and Bondmen. Here are Laws touching the Degrees of Affinity
and Consanguinity, and consequently what Marriages are lawful, and what
unlawful, may thence be inferred: and several other things belonging to the
Jews Civil Law. Furthermore, here are inserted several Moral Instructions, and
Excellent Precepts of Natural Religion, respecting both God and Men. Lastly,
toward the Close of all there are Blessings and Curses pronounced, the former
to such as carefully observe these Laws, the latter on those that wilfully
break them. These a^e the Admirable Things contained in this Book, and which
have been the acceptable Entertainment of the Inquisitive and Religious, of the
Wise and Good in all Ages since they have been extant.

The Book of Numbers has its Denomination from the Numbering of the Families of
Israel, as we may collect from chapter 1. v. 3, 4. where we read that Moses and
Aaron had a special Command from God to Muster the Tribes, and to take the
Number of all that were fit for War, and to Order and Marshal the Army when it
was once formed. For now in their Passage through the Wilderness they were like
to meet with many Enemies, and therefore 'twas convenient to take an Account of
their Forces, and to put themselves into a Posture ready to engage. A great
Part of this Book is Historical, relating several Remarkable Passages in the
Israelites March through the Wilderness, as the Sedition of Aaron and Miriam,
the Rebellion of Corah and his Companions, the Murmurings of the whole Body of
the People, their being plagued with fiery Serpents, Baalam's Prophesying of the
Happiness of Israel instead of Cursing them, the Miraculous Budding of Aaron's
Rod. Here also are distinctly related their Several Removings from Place to
Place, their two and forty Stages or Iourneys through the Wilderness, and
sundry other things which befell them, whereby we are instructed and confirmed
in some of the weightiest Truths that have immediate Reference to God and his
Providence in the World. But the greatest Part of the Book is spent in
enumerating those Laws and Ordinances (whether Ceremonial or Civil) which were
given by God, and were not mentioned before in the preceding Books, as some
Particulars of the Levites Office, and the Number of them, the Trial of
Iealousy, the Rites to be observed by the Nazarites, the Renewing of the
Passover, the making of Fringes on the Borders of their Garments, the Water of
Separation to be used in purifying the Unclean, the Law of Inheritance, of
Vows, of the Cities of Refuge, of the Cities for the Levites, and some other
Constitutions either not inserted into the other Books of Moses, or not so
distinctly and plainly set down. Thus this Book both in respect of the
Historical Part of it, and of the Addition of Laws, (not spoken of in the
foregoing Books) has its peculiar Use and Excellency.

Deuteronomy (which signifies a Second Law) is a Repetition of the Laws before
delivered. It is the Canonick Mishnah, or New Rehearsal of the Divine Law:
Which was necessary, because they that heard it before died in the Wilderness,
and there being now sprung up another Generation of Men, the Law was to be
promulged to them. The major Part of the People that were living at that time
had not heard the Decalogue, or any other of the Laws openly proclaimed; or
being young, they had neglected or forgot them. That is the Reason why Moses in
this Book rehearses them to this new People, and withal adds an Explication of
them in many Places, yea and adjoins some New Laws, viz. the taking down of
Malefactors from the Tree in the Evening, making of Battlements on the Roofs of
their Houses, the Expiation of an unknown Murder, the Punishment to be
inflicted on a Rebellious Son, the Distinction of the Sexes by Apparel,
Marrying the Brother's Wife after his Decease: also Orders and Injunctions
concerning Divorce, concerning Man-stealers, concerning Unjust Weights and
Measures, concerning the Marrying of a captive Woman, concerning the Servant
that deserts his Master's Service, and several other Laws not only
Ecclesiastical and Civil, but Military. There are likewise inserted some New
Actions and Passages which happened in the last Year of their Travels in the
Wilderness. Moreover, Moses in this Part of the Pentateuch shows himself a True
Father, Pastor and Guide to that People, a Hearty Lover of them and their
Welfare in such manifest Instances as these, his often Inculcating upon them
the many Obligations which they lay under from God, the Innumerable Favors
they had received from him: his frequent and pathetick Exhortations to
Obedience, and living answerably to the singular Mercies which were conferred
upon them: his constant Reminding them of their former Miscarriages, their
Murmurings and Rebellions against Heaven, and all their Unworthy Deportment
toward their Matchless Benefactor: his compassionate Forewarning them of the
Judgments of God, of the Various Plagues and Punishments which would certainly
be the Consequence of their persisting in their Sins: Lastly, his Affectionate
Encouraging them to Obedience from the Consideration of the endearing Promises
which God had made to them, and which he would assuredly make good, if they did
not frustrate his Designs of Mercy toward them by their own wilful Obstinacy.
These are the Excellent Subjects of this Divine Book, and which render it so
unvaluable a Treasury.

Hitherto of the Pentateuch, or Five Books of Moses. And that he was the Penman
of them I think need not be questioned, though I find it is, yea flatly denied
by Aben Ezra and Pererius, and lately by Hobbs and Spinosa. A very little
Portion of them was writ by him, says Monsieur Simon, who has a new Notion of
certain Public Scribes or Registers that penned this and other Parts of the
Old Testament, (which sort of Abbreviating Notaries he borrows from the
Egyptians, (as he confes^es himself) because there were such Officers in the
Egyptian Court who had a Privilege to add to or take away from, to amplify or
abridg the Public Records, he thence groundlesly infers there were such among
the Jews who made what Alterations they pleased in the Sacred Writings): which
Paradox of his I have considered, and made some Reflections upon in a former
Treatise. This I may truly say, that it is not necessary that we should know
who was the Particular Penman of this or any other Book of the Holy Scripture,
because the Authority of them depends not on the Writers of them, but on the
Holy Ghost who endited them. They are the Books of God, that is their peculiar
Character and Dignity, and that alone makes them Authentic after they have
been delivered to us by the unanimous Consent of the Church, so that there is
no absolute Necessity of our certain knowing who penned them. Yet this must be
said, that it cannot with Reason be denied that the Authors of some of these
Sacred Books are well known, and particularly there are very convincing Proofs
that Moses wrote the Books which I have been giving an Account of. This may be
evinced from our Savior's Words, Luke 16. 31. and 24. 27. where by Moses (as
is most evident) he means the Books of the Pentateuch, and consequently thereby
lets us know that Moses was the Writer of them. And more expressly the Book of
Exodus is called the Book of Moses by our same Infallible Master, Mark 12. 26.
And St. Paul tells us, that when these Books are read, Moses is read, 2 Cor. 3.
19. And both our Savior and this Apostle distinguish between Moses and the
Prophets, Luke 16. 29. Acts 26. 22. plainly signifying that as those Books
which pass under the Prophets Names are theirs, so these that are said to be
Moses's were written by him. I think this is very plain, and needs not to be
further insisted on.

As to the Objections of those Men before named against this, I forbear to
produce them, and to return particular Answers to them, because this is so
lately done by Prolegom. de Scriptore Pentateuchi.
Monsieur Clerk, and because another Mr. Abbadie, in (...) Vindication of the
Truth of the Christian Religion.
Learned Frenchman has laudably performed this Task. Especially he has with
great Vigor, and as great Success, attacked Spinosa, a Jew (as they tell us)
by Birth, but neither Jew nor Christian by Profession, but a Derider of both.
We may also find his Arguments (which are generally borrowed from Aben Ezra)
refuted with great Clearness by the Dr. Du Pin, i^ his Preliminary Discourse to
the Authors of the Books of the Bible.
Learned Professor of Di^inity at Paris, who at the same time betakes himself
to the Positive Part, and renders it unquestionable that Moses himself was the
Author of the Five Books that go under his Name. Wherefore the particular
Fancies of those few Objectors, and those no Friends to the Sacred Text, are
not to be heeded by us. As to that common Scruple which is so much insisted
upon, that in the last Book of the Pentateuch there is mention of Moses's
Death, and some things that happened after it, whence they conclude that Moses
wrote not those Books, or at least not the last of them; I take this to be a
sufficient Answer, that Moses being a Prophet, might foresee, and have revealed
to him a particular Account of his own Death, and so he committed it to writing
by a Prophetic Spirit: wherefore none can from thence prove that he was not
the Penman of all this Book. However, we will not contend here, for perhaps the
Conclusion of this Book was affixed by Joshua, or afterward by Ezra, who was
an Inspired Person likewise, and who revised the Books of the Old Testament,
and inserted some things into them by the same Spirit that endited the rest.
Notwithstanding then the foresaid Objection, which refers only to a few
Passages in the End of the Book of Deuteronomy, w^ have Reason to assert that
the whole Five Books (excepting that little Addition in the Close) were written
by Moses; these are his Authentic Records, consisting chiefly of History
(which compriseth in it the Occurrences of about 2400 Years) and Laws which
were given by God Himself to his own People, and will be of use to the End of
the World. Here is the Cabinet of the greatest Antiquity under Heaven, here are
the First and Oldest Monuments of the World.

CHAP. VIII.
A short Survey of the Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, (which is a Supplement to
the History of the Judges) Samuel, the Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, (which is a
Continuation of the Chronicles) Nehemiah, Esther. The Author, Style, Composure,
Matter of the Book of Job discussed. An Enquiry into the Penmen, Subjects,
Kinds, Titles, Poetic Meter and Rhythm of the Psalms.

NExt unto this is that Excellent History written by Joshua the Captain General
of the Israelites, and Moses's famous Successor, whose very Name without doubt
was as terrible to the Canaanites as those of Hunniades and Scanderbeg were
afterward to the Turks. Here he admirably describes the Holy War, the Martial
Achievements and Stratagems of the People of God against those Nations whose
Lands they were to possess, and at length their Victory over them. Here are
very particularly set down their Conquests over those Kings and Countries. This
Book is the Fulfilling of the Promises which were made to them concerning the
entering into Canaan, and enjoying that Land, which is a Type of the Heavenly
Canaan, the everlasting Rest which remains to the People of God, Heb. 4. 9.
Here is the Actual Possession of that Promised Inheritance, and the Division of
it among the several Tribes by Lot. The short is, in the whole Book (which I
must not now give you by retail) there are abundant Demonstrations of the
Divine Providence, repeated Instances of the Infinite Kindness of God to his
Servants, remarkable Examples of the Divine Vengeance on his Enemies, yea and
visible Proofs of his Severe Dealings with his own People when they refuse to
obey his Will, and when they act contrary to it. Here is, in the large Account
which is given of Joshua and his Actions, an Exact Character of a Worthy
Prince, a Ruler, a General: who ought to signalize himself by his Exemplary
Piety and Zeal for Religion; by his constant Sobriety, Justice and Charity; by
his undaunted Courage, Valor and Prowess; by his deep Wisdom, Policy and
Conduct. And his Great and Wonderful Success (which Ego existimo in summo
Imperatore quatuor has resesse oportere, scilicet scientiam rei militaris,
virtutem, authoritatem and ^elicitatem. Cic. Orat. de laud M. Pompeii.
Imperatori res adversae minuunt authoritatem. Caesar de bell. Gall, l. 6.
is so much required in a General) crowned all. The Whole contains the History
of the Jews from Moses's Death till the Death of their Great Commander Joshua,
in all about eighteen Years. And it is not to be wondered at, that the Age,
Death and Burial of this latter are recorded in the last Chapter of this Book;
for either (as we said before concerning Moses) they were written by him
through a Prophetic Spirit that foresaw these things, or else they were added
by some other Inspired Writer. So perhaps were those Words [ unto this Day] chapter
4. v. 9. and chapter 5. v. 9. though it is not necessary at all to believe so* for
Joshua relating some Passages that happened a good while before he wrote this
Book (which was a little before his Death) might speak after this manner very
well. And some few other Words may seem to have been inserted after Joshua's
Death: but that the Main was written by Himself there is no ground of
questioning.

The History of the Judges follows, which relates the State of the Jewish
People in the Land of Canaan, in the time of the Judges, from Joshua's Death
until Eli, that is, about three hundred Years. These Judges were Men of Heroic
Spirits, raised up by God out of the several Tribes to govern the People, and
to deliver them from their present Dangers. They were Supreme Rulers, but
Temporary; and some of them were Types of our Blessed Savior and Deliverer. In
the time of this peculiar Polity of the Israelites, there were very Notable
Occurrences, which are faithfully recorded in this Book. Here we are acquainted
with the gross Impiety and Wickedness of that new Generation which came up
after Joshua's Death; here are recorded, to their perpetual Infamy, their
Intimate Converse with those Idolatrous People that were left remaining in that
Land, their Approving of their Superstitious and Irreligious Customs, and their
Serving their Gods. Here is a particular Account of the Corruption of their
Manners, of their Profane and Scandalous Practices: which occasioned the very
Heathens to open their Mouths against them, yea to blaspheme God, whose Name
they were called by. Here also we have a brief View of the Different
Dispensations of Heaven toward this People, sometimes Relieving and Delivering
them, at other t^mes most severely Chastising them, and causing them to groan
under Tyrants and Oppressors. Here are contained in this History most admirable
Examples of God's Displeasure against Apostates and such as revolt from the
True Religion; and here are on the contrary as memorable Instances of his
Rewarding those that adhere to Him and his Cause, and hold fast their Integrity
in the worst and most perilous Times. Here are most amply displayed his Love
and Care of his Church, in stirring up so many Eminent Worthies and Champions
to fight for her, and to push them on by no less than an Extraordinary Impulse
of Spirit to enterprise and effect such Mighty Things for the welfare of his
Chosen Servants. To conclude, here and in the Book of Joshua occurs such a
plenty of Ancient Rites, Customs and Practices relating both to Peace and War,
to Civil and Religious Matters, as is able to stock an Antiquary of the first
Size. We are not certain who was the Penman of this Book. It was written by
Samuel, say the Talmudists: and it may be after one of the Books of Samuel, and
then it is no wonder if some things are here mentioned or referred to, that are
spoken of there. Others say it was not composed till Ezr^'s Time, by Ezra.

The Book of Ruth is an Appendix to that of the Judges, in whose time the
Things were done that are here related. Particularly a little before Eli's Time
they happened: then it was, that there being a Famine in Canaan, Elimelech and
his Wife Naomi, and their Sons went into the Land of Moab; and there these
latter were married, one to Ruth and the other to Orphah. After ten Years were
expired Elimelech and his Sons died: whereupon Naomi and her Daughter-in-Law
Ruth (for the other Daughter stayed behind) returned to their own Country, and
coming to Bethlehem were kindly received by Boaz their Kinsman. The Particulars
of this kind Reception and Entertainment are set down here, and the Close was,
that he married Ruth, who bare to him Obed, who was the Grandfather of David.
It is true, this is but a Private History: yet, as it is such, it contains in
it many things worthy of our observation, viz. the Difference of Children in
their Affection and Regards to their Parents; Orphah with great Ease and
Willingness left Naomi, but Ruth clave unto her: the Prudent Instructions and
Wise Demeanor of that Excellent Matron toward her Daughter the young Widow:
(Though I must needs add with reference to Ruth's Behavior, that her Boldness
and almost endangering of her Chastity, are not to be Examples to others: for
Modesty and Shamefacedness are the proper Qualities of that Sex. Wedlock is not
to be sought after by them with such peril. And therefore this daring Fact of
this Venturous Widow is to be looked upon as an extraordinary Instance, and not
to be imitated by other Females*) Here is remarkable the Merciful Providence of
God toward the Afflicted, the Widows, and Fatherless: the Reward of Constancy
and Obedience; the Blessing of God upon those that fear him and trust in him.
Besides, here are observable the Ancient Right of Kinsmen, and of Redemption,
and the Manner of buying the Inheritance of the Deceased, with other Things of
great Antiquity. Nay, this is more than Private History; as will appear if we
consider that this Pious Woman Ruth was the Mother of Obed the Father of Iesse,
the Father of David, of whom our Lord Christ came, and therefore you find her
inserted into his Genealogy by St. Matthew. Again, Ruth, a Moabitish Woman, of
the Posterity of the Daughters of Lot, was a Type, or rather indeed an Eminent
Instance of the Calling of the Gentiles into the Church, which is a Thing of no
private Concern, but of the largest Extent imaginable.

The Two Books of Samuel are Public Histories, the former whereof contains
Things done under the two last Judges, Eli and Samuel, and under the first
King, who was Saul, as also the Acts of David whilst he lived under Saul. Here
is a Narrative of the Change of the Judges into Kings, of the Republic or
Aristocracy of the Jews into a Monarchy* and of the Great and Many Evils which
they suffered as consequent upon it, all worthy of our serious Perusal and
Consideration. Here is an Account of their New King's being deposed by God,
viz. for his rash and profane Sacrificing, and his wilful disobeying the
express Command of God concerning the total Destruction of the Amalekites, and
whatever belonged to them. The latter Book ^s wholly spent in the History of
King David's Reign, that is, his Acts after Readiness Death. These ^re either his
Military Acts, his Troublesome and Dangerous, and sometimes Successful
Enterprises in War, or his Political Acts, showed in the wise Administration of
Civil Government; or his Ecclesi^^tical and Religious Undertakings, which
respect (...) Church of God in those Days. With these are mixed the great
Failings and Miscarriages of that King, (which are as particularly recorded as
his other Acts) and as a Consequent of them, the many Disappointments and
Crosses he met with, the various Judgments and Plagues which were inflicted on
him and his People by God.

The Books of the Kings are the History of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah
under the Reigns of their several Kings. The first contains the latter Part of
the Life of David, and his Death; the Glory and Prosperity of that Nation under
Solomon who succeeded him; his erecting and consecrating of the Temple at
Jerusalem: his scandalous Defection from the true Religion: the sudden Decay of
the Jewish Nation after his Death, when it was divided into two Kingdoms under
Rehoboam, who reigned over the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and under
Jeroboam, who was King over the other ten Tribes that revolted from the House
of David. The rest of it is spent in relating the Acts of four Kings of Judah
and eight of Israel. The second Book, which is a Continuation of the History of
the Kings, is a Relation of the Memorable Acts of sixteen Kings of Judah and
twelve of Israel, and the End of both Kingdoms by the carrying of the Ten
Tribes Captive into Assyria by Salmanasser, and the other two into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar, the just Rewards of that People's Idolatry and Impenitency
after so many Favors showed to them. This and the former Book together
comprehend the History of about four hundred Years.

The Chronicles or Iournals according to the Hebrew, are the filling up of
those Parts of the History which are omitted in the Books of the Kings. And
though we know not which of these Histories, viz. of the Kings or the
Chronicles, (I speak as to the main Body of the Books, not one particular
Passage, as that in the Close of the Second Book of Chronicles, where mention
is made of the Deliverance of the Jews by Cyrus, which might be added
afterward) were written first; for the Book of Kings refers to the Book of
Chronicles, and this again sends the Reader to that, yet this we see that this
of the Chronicles is more full and ample sometimes than that of the Kings: what
was left out or not so fully set down in the one, is supplied in the other. And
thence these Books are called (...), i. e. Remains, Supplements, Additions by
the Greek Interpreters. The first Book of Chronicles relates the Rise and
Propagation of the People of Israel from Adam, (which is the entire Subject of
the first Nine Chapters, which consist wholly of Genealogies) and then
afterward most punctually and accurately gives an Account of the Reign of
David. The second Book as faithfully sets down the Progress and End of the
Kingdom of Judah, even to the Year of their return from the Captivity in
Babylon.

These Books of Chronicles, together with those of the Kings and Samuel, make
up the Best and Choicest History in the World. Here we are abundantly furnished
with such Useful Notices, Truths and Maxims as these (all confirmed by Noted
and Illustrious Examples and such Instances as are Certain and Unquestionable.)
Crowned Heads are encircled with Cares, and seldom find rest and repose: though
their Lives are more Splendid, yet they are not less Calamitous than those of
the Common People. Good Kings are rare, and the Number of them is
inconsiderable in comparison of those that are Bad. The best Kings have their
Faults, and some of them of a very scandalous Nature. There is little Piety in
Princes Courts, and as little Integrity and Honesty. The People are easily
induced to follow the Examples of their Governors: and Religion and Manners
too often vary according to the Wills of Superiors. Good Kings are the
greatest Blessing, and Wicked Ones are the greatest Curse to a Nation. Princes
mistake their Measures when they either disobey God, or oppress their People.
Tyrannical Princes procure their own Ruin. The Sins and Vices of Rulers prove
fatal to their Subjects. Public Enormities are punished with Public and
National Calamities. Kings may be known by the Ministers they choose and make
use of. Those Counsels that are founded in Religion are most successful. Evil
Counselors contrive their own Destruction. Wars are the Effect and
Consequence of fighting against God. The Success of Arms depends upon the
Divine Blessing. The Church is never more shocked than under Bad Princes.
Religion and Reformation are never effectually promoted unless the Great Ones
have a Hand in them. Divisions and Rents about Religion have immediate
influence on Secular Affairs: and when the Church is divided, the State is so
too. The Revolutions in both are by the particular Disposal of the Wise
Over-ruler of the World. True Religion and Godliness are attended with Earthly
Rewards and Blessings: and the contrary bring down the greatest Plagues even in
this World. The worst Times afford some of the Best and most Holy, Religious
and Zealous Men. Whatever Changes and Revolutions happen in the Kingdoms of the
Earth, the Church of God remains secure. Though there are great and frequent
Defections, yet there never is a total Extinction of it. In a Word, the Church
is impregnable, this Rock is immovable. And many other Propositions and Maxims
of the like Nature, which are of great Service in the Life of Man, are to be
deduced from these Excellent Histories.

Ezra is a Continuation of the aforesaid Book of Chronicles, and compriseth the
History of the Jews from the time that Cyrus made the Edict for their Return
until the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was about a hundred
Years. For the Jews return from Babylon was at two several Times, viz. first in
the Days of Cyrus the first Per^^an Monarch, under the Conduct of Zerubbabel
their Captain, and Ieshua their High Priest. Here are recorded the Number of
those that returned, Cyrus's Proclamation for the rebuilding of the Temple, the
Laying of the Foundations of it, the Retarding of the Work under the Reign of
two of the Kings of Persia, at last the Finishing of the Temple in Darius's
Reign. The second Return of the Jews was in the Reign of Artaxerxes under the
Conduct of Ezra a Priest, who had been a Courtier in the Persian Court, and was
sent into Judea by Artaxerxes in the seventh Year of his Reign (which was above
eighty Years after the first Return in Cyrus's Time) to expedite the Building
of Jerusalem. This Pious Reformer observing the Peoples (...) with Strangers
and In^idels, and their joining themselves to them in Marriage, proclaimed a
^olemn Fast, and Prayed, and Mourned, and Lamented their gross Miscarriages,
and with great Earnestness and Zeal exhorted them to Reformation and Amendment
of their Ways, that they might thereby avert God's Wrath, and conciliate his
Favor and Pardon. This is that Ezra who was the Penman of this Book, and who
was also a Restorer of the Sacred Books of the Old Testament, and collected and
methodized them into certain Order, and reviewed the Copies, and amended all
Errata's that were contracted in the time of the Captivity.

Nehemiah, who wrote the Book which bears his Name, was a Jew, Cup Bearer to
the King of Persia, and returned into Judea thirteen Years after Ezra. There is
another Nehemiah who came with those that returned at first from Babylon, Ezra
2. 2. but he whom we now speak of came afterward by Artaxerxes's Leave, in the
twentieth Year of his Reign, and went back to Persia again twelve Years after,
Neh. 5. 14. This Writer begins where Ezra left of, and continues the History of
the Building of Jerusalem, and of the Deportment of the Jews in those times,
from the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes to the Reign of Darius, about fifty Years
in all. As Ezra chiefly related the Restoring of Religion and Erecting the
Temple, so this Author gives us an Account of the Building of the City, and the
Reformation of the Religion which had been restored. In several Particulars he
shows what were the Abuses and Corruptions of the People, and how they were
redressed, even by his own Hand. He tells us what Methods he took of regulating
both their Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs; in short, of Reforming both Church
and State, which were even then so early corrupted. From the whole, both here
and in the Book of Ezra, we are taught many useful Lessons, but This above all,
that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, that they shall
never have Power to extinguish this Little Flock. Israel is not always a
Captive in a strange Land. Babylon sends back her Prisoners and Bondmen. Her
very Enemies, by an extraordinary Direction of Heaven, promote her Peace and
Prosperity. For we are informed from this Part of Sacred History, that God
stirred up even the Persian Monarchs to restore his People to Jerusalem; and,
when they were there, to help and assist them, and to baffle all their Opposers.

The Book of Esther is a Particular History of what happened to the Jews in
their Captivity in the Reign of Ahasuerus, one of the Kings of Persia, whether
he was Artaxerxes Longimanus, as Nicephorus, Zonaras, S^idas, Ludovicus Vives,
Bellarmine, Cajetan, Sir W. Raleigh.
some think, or Artaxerxes Mnemon, as most Authors both Ancient and Modern say,
or Artaxerxes Ochus, as Serarius holds, or Xerxes the fourth Persian Monarch,
according to Scaliger, or Darius the Son of Hystaspes, or Cambyses, (for so
various a^e the Opinions of Authors) I will not here dispute. Only we know that
the Sacred Writings and the Profane intend the same Person sometimes, though
they give different Names. The Story is this, Haman a great Favorite and
Minion of the King, and advanced to great Honor by him, was highly incensed
against Mordecai, one of the Captive Jews, because he refused to do him
Reverence, and to Bow to him. Whereupon he resolved, for his sake, to compass
the Destruction of all the Jews in those Territories, and to that end gained a
Decree from the King to put them all to the Sword. But this wicked Design was
happily frustrated by means of Esther a Jewish Captive Virgin, who for her
transcendent Beauty had a little time before been advanced to the Throne, and
now prevailed with her Royal Husband to spare the Life of her dear Countrymen.
In this manner Haman's cursed Conspiracy was defeated, he himself advanced to a
Gibbet, and that of his own preparing, the Jews delivered from their Fears and
Dangers, Mordecai who discovered this Bloody Design to Queen Esther, and who
had before that discovered another Conspiracy, viz. against the King, which was
recorded in the Chronicles, and about this time read to him, and was in a great
measure serviceable by the Divine Providence to bring about this happy
Frustration of Haman's Plot; this Mordecai (I say) was preferred unto the
greatest Honors in the Kingdom, (and by the by let me suggest, that perhaps
from his riding the King's Horse, and thereby being preferred to Kingly
Dignity, the Story of Darius's being made King of Persia by the Neighing of his
Horse had its Rise; for, as I have often had occasion in another Place to
prove, the Gentile Historians mistook one Person for another) the Hearts and
Mouths of all the Jews in the King's Provinces were filled with Joy, and an
Annual Festival was appointed to be kept in all succeeding Generations in
remembrance of this singular and unexpected Deliverance vouchsafed to them.
This is the Sum of this Short History, in which there are many Admirable and
Surprising Circumstances which (though they could not be particularly related
here) commend it to the Reader. It is certainly a most Remarkable Instance of
God's Singular Providence and Goodness to his Church, in discovering and
defeating the Contrivances of her malicious and cruel Enemies, in delivering
her in her greatest Extremities, and in bringing Vengeance and Ruin on the
Heads of those who plot her Downfall. As to the Author of this Book, there is no
Agreement among Writers; though one would be inclined to think that it was
Mordecai's by reading chapter 9. v. 20. and chapter 12. of Apocryphal Esther, v. 4.

The next Penman of the Old Testament is Job, whose Book might have been placed
next to the Pentateuch, if it be true (as is generally believed) that he lived
about Moses's time: Though Origin, Jerome, Eusebius, Seldom.
some are of opinion that he lived a considerable time before the Israelites
came out of Egypt, and that he was before Moses. It was writ by himself, say
Origin and Suidas: but the Rabbis generally pronounce Moses the Author. Others
make Solomon the Author of this Book, discovering, as they think, his manner of
speaking in it. The most probable Account is, that the Materials of this Book
were drawn up first by Io^ himself, or one or all of his Pious Friends that
were concerned in the things spoken of here, and that they coming to Moses's
Hands, (as some of the Jewish Masters tell us) or afterward to Solomon's, were
made up into Hebrew Verse, as we now find it. For the greatest Part of the Book
is of this Composure, and indeed is the first Poetical Book we meet with in the
Bible. Whence we may infer something concerning the Nature of it, viz. that (as
Colloq. Mensal.
M. Luther well observed) Job and his Friends spoke not all the very Words
which are set down in this Book* for Men do not use to speak in Verse in their
Discourse one with another, and especially in such a Lofty Style of Poetry as
we read here sometimes. But this is true, that both their Thoughts and Words
were exactly agreeable to what is here written, and Things actually and really
happened as they are here represented: only the Whole Argument being clothed in
Verse, the individual and express Words, which they all the time used, are not
always written down, neither indeed could be. But we must by no means attend to
the Talmudick Doctors, who tell us, that this Book is not a Relation of Matter
of Fact, but writ in a Parabolical way to exhibit to the World an Eminent
Example of Patience. Nor are the Words of the Parisaan Du Pin. Bibl. Patr.
Professor to be tolerated, who says, the History is true, but the
Circumstances of it are feigned. There is no Fiction in it, because it is as to
the whole Matter of it Real, and relates what actually happened: only as to the
Words and Style, it is Poetically composed. I might observe that this
Historical Poem is in way of Dialogue, or rather is made up of feveral
Dialogues and Colloquies. It is a Dramatick Piece, wherein Six Persons have
their Parts; Job, Eliphaz, Bildad, Zophar, Elihu, and GOD, who speaks in the
Close of all. Nor is this unusual in some other Books of the Holy Scripture,
where we find that some of David's Psalms are Dialogue-wise: and nothing is
more evident, than that Solomon's Song is after that manner: besides that (as a
M^. Boil of the Style of Scripture.
worthy Person has observed) in some of the Other Writings of this Wise Man,
and in many Places of St. Paul's Epistles a Tacit Dialogue is contained, whence
it happens that that sometimes is taken by unskilful Readers for an Assertion
or an Argument which is indeed a Question or an Objection. Indeed this
Dialogizing way is of great Advantage, and carries a peculiar Excellency with
it, and therefore was (as we may take notice) made use of by the Ancients.
Drawing forth and pressing out the Truth by way of Dialogue was the Socratick
Mode; which Plato also used, laying down his own Opinion in the Person of
Socrates, Timaeus, etc. and other Men's Opinions and Sentiments in the Person of
Gorgias, etc. And Cicero dealt in this way in some of his Writings. The same
likewise we find practiced of old by some of the most Eminent Writers of the
Christian Church, as Justin Martyr, who sets forth the manner of his becoming a
Christian in the Platonic way, i. e. of a Colloquy: and the whole Discourse
with Trypho is no more perhaps than the Personating of a Christian and a Jew by
way of Dialogue. Minutius Felix's Debate between Octavius and Caecilius, a
Christian and a Gentile, is of the same Nature. It is probable that this
Ancient Pract^ce of delivering. Truth in this manner was derived from the Book
of Job, the Oldest Dialogue in the World; and which moreover is in way of a
Disputation, where Job is Respondent, his three Friends the Opponents; and
Eli^u, yea and at last God himself the Moderator. And one thing by the by I
would here observe, that it is said, chapter 31. v. 40. The Words of Job are ended:
which we must understand with reference to this Contrast between him and his
Friends; for otherwise Job had not made an end of Speaking, as we find in some
of the following Chapters. Therefore the Meaning is, that his Words in way of
Contention and Controversy with those Men were ended: and thus the first Verse
in the ensuing Chapter explains it [ So these three Men ceased to answer Job.

The whole affords us many Excellent Observations, viz. that the greatest
Wealth and Riches are uncertain, that suddenly and unexpectedly they make
themselves Wings, and fly away from the Possessors, and leave them in Want,
Distress and Misery: that Integrity and Holiness of Life exempt no Man from
this Changeableness of his Condition, are no Protection against the worst of
outward Evils whatsoever, whether procured by Satan or by Evil Men. This is
taught us in the Example of this Great Man, yea Job 1. 3.
the Greatest of all the Men in the East, i. e. in Arabia; and who was as Good
as he was Great, for Ver. 1.
he was a Perfect and Upright Man, nay Ver. 8.
there was none like him in the Earth. This was the true Arabian Phoenix, there
was none but he at that time. But this Person who was so famed for his
Greatness and Goodness, came at last to be as noted for his Low and Mean
Condition, his Troubles and Distresses of all kinds, and those too of the
highest Degree; for he was bereft of all his Dear Children by the Fall of the
House where they were, he was despoiled of all his Goods and Estate by the
Chaldean and Sabean Free-booters; he was deprived of his Bodily Health, and
smitten with Painful and Loathsome Diseases by the immediate Hand of the
Malicious Demons; he was despised, scorned, derided by the vilest Race of
People. Hence we are instructed that the worst of Temporal Evils do sometimes
befall the most Upright Persons. And we are taught from Job's Example also, that
the Holiest Men have their Fits of Impatience: they are heard sometimes to
complain and cry out under their Burden, they expostulate with God, and
question the Reasonableness and Justice of his Dealings with them, they magnify
their own Innocence at too high a rate, they are weary of their Lives, and
passionately wish for a Period of them. This was Job's Case, and may be of
other Righteous Men: they may through humane Frailty be for a time subject to
the same Disorder, and show themselves as uneasy under their Afflictions,
especially when with this Holy Man they are wounded in Spirit, and buffeted by
Satan, and lie under the Sense of God's Wrath, and have no Apprehension of his
Grace and Favor. But (as the Hebrew Doctors say) Homo non capitur in hor^
doloris fui. Talm.
a Man is not to be taken in the Hour of his Grief and Perplexity. It is not
imputed to him if he utters things that are unfitting when he is in the
Extremity of Pain and Anguish.

But yet we are to observe likewise that this Good Man, even in the midst of
his most pressing Calamities, was never quite run down by them, but at one time
or other showed by his Words and Behavior that he had got the Conquest of
them. You have heard of the Patience of Job, says St. Chap. 5 v. 11.
James; and this Patience was as eminent as his Disasters: for we hear him Job
1. 21.
blessing the Name of the Lord not only for what he gave, but for what he took
away from him: we hear him protecting, that Chapter 13. v. 15.
though God should stay him, yet he would trust in him: we hear him expressing
his Foresight, Persuasion and Assurance, that Chapter 19. v. 25.
his Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter Day upon the Earth;
and tho after his Skin Worms destroy his Body, yet in his Flesh he shall see
God. All which are most evident Arguments of his Patience under his Crosses, of
his Thankfulness to God for them, of his Strong Faith and Confidence in him
that he should be delivered from them, and of his hearty Persuasion that
nothing does or can happen to Mankind without God's Good Pleasure, nothing can
betide us without his Leave and Consent: which is the greatest Comfort and
Refreshment, the highest Repose and Satisfaction to our Minds imaginable. This
indeed is one grand Design of this Book to bring the Spirits of good Men to an
even and placid Frame on this Consideration, that God has the Government of
the World, and does what he thinks fit with his Creatures as to the outward
Condition they are liable to in this Life; that the Providence of God orders
all the Actions and Enterprises either of Men or Devils, so that nothing can
come to pass without the Divine Permission, Grant and Superintendence. This is
that which is more especially aimed at in this Book: we are taught here not to
quarrel with our Maker, not to find fault with Heaven. This does not become us
in the least; it is rather the Deportment of a Chinoise Priest, who has so
much Power over his Gods, that he is suffered to beat and whip them when they
don't act (as he thinks) as he would have them.

We have likewise the Wretched State of Wicked Men and Hypocrites most
graphically set forth in these Dialogues. We have God's Infinite Justice and
Unfearchable Wisdom fully asserted and vindicated. We have the Mighty Power of
God in some of his Creatures described by Himself in a Style befitting his
Majesty. In the Close of all we have the happy Period of Innocence and
Integrity: The End of them is Peace. God oftentimes rewards good and upright
Men in this Life with a great Plenty of outward Blessings and Favors: he is
pleased to recompense them abundantly for all their past Calamities, by
doubling upon them all those Mercies which he before deprived them of. Chap.
42* ver* 10, 12.
God blessed the latter End of Job more than his Beginning: He gave him twice
as much as he had before. All Blessings flow in now upon him in abundance:
first Ver. 9.
God accepts him, and then he is caressed by his Ver. 11.
Kindred and Friends, by his Bretbren and Sisters, and Acquaintance; he is
presented with Ver. 12.
Gifts, his Stock of Cattle (wherein the chief Wealth of those Countries
consisted) is increased, and he is blessed with a desirable Number of Ver. 13,
15.
Children, the Sons wise, and the Daughters fair. Finally, after all the Storms
were blown over, Ver. 16.
he lived an hundred and forty Years in Peace and Plenty in his Country, now
Arabia the Happy: he enjoyed the Confluence of all kinds of Good Things
relating both to himself and his Relations, and at length died in a good old
Age, Ver. 17.
full of Days, and full of the Blessings of the Almighty. To conclude, this
Ancient Book is infinitely worthy of the Studies of the Curious and
Philosophical, of the Lovers of Learning and Antiquity, of those that value the
Primitive Tongues, Arts and Customs: for here is an Excellent Mixture of all
these, which cannot but be a grateful Entertainment to Inquisitive Spirits.
Wherefore a Learned Gentleman of great and subtle Observation has left us
this Censure on the Book of Job Sir W. Temple 's Miscell. 2d Part.
Whoever considers the Subject and Style of it, will hardly think it was
written in an Age or Country that wanted either Books or Learning.

The Psalms are the next Poetic Book, and they bear the Name of David, the
Chief Author of them. Origin, Chrysostom, Augustine, Ambrose, Euthymius.
Some indeed of the Ancients held that he was the sole Author, but they can
scarcely be credited in that, because the Title of the 90th Psalm and others
tells us, that they were composed by Moses. Some of them, it is thought, were
made by Asaph, Heman, Ethan, Ieduthun, who were in David's time: but others
think these were not Sacred Poets, but only skilful Musicians or Masters of the
Quire, and did not endite these Psalms which bear their Names, but only set
them to Tunes, and sung them. Though a Dr. Lightfoot.
Modern Writer is of the Opinion that Heman and Ethan lived in the time of the
Egyptian Bondage, and penned the 88th and 89th Psalms on that occasion, in the
former condoling their present Distress, in the latter prophesying of
Deliverance. The 92d Psalm was made by Adam, says the Targum and the Hebrew
Doctors generally agree to it. It is evident, and scarcely denied by any, that
the 137th Psalm was writ in the time of the Jews Captivity in Babylon, and
therefore could not be made by David: and other Psalms seem to be made after
their Return, the Authors of which are not known. And some, it is likely, were
endited by Solomen, as the 45th, which is a Song of Loves, (as the Title
acquaints us) and is of the same Strain with his other Nuptial Song, inserted
by it self into the Holy Scriptures. It may be concluded then that the Book of
Psalms is not the Issue of One Inspired Brain only; but yet that the Greatest
Part of it was endited and written by David, who had an excellent Gift of
Poetry and Psalmody, of composing, making, and singing of Pious Songs. Such are
these Psalms, which, excepting a few of them, were the Work of this Holy Man,
and therefore they are deservedly called David's Psalms, the Denomination being
taken from the greater Part.

They are divided into five Lesser Books, which you may know thus; where you
find a Psalm ending with Amen, (as the 41st, 72d, 89th, 106th, and the last
Psalm) there is the Period of the Book, and another begins. By this you may
understand that Passage in Psalm. 72. v. ult. The Prayers of David the Son of
Jesse are ended; i. e. here is an End of the Second Book of David's Psalms: the
rest that follow are other Collections of them. Of these some are Alphabetical,
i. e. composed according to the Order of the Hebrew Letters: such is the 119th
Psalm, and is styled by the Masora the Great Alphabet, the eight first Verses
beginning with the first Hebrew Letter, the succeeding eight with the second,
and so throughout the whole Number of the Hebrew Letters: and such are the
25th, 34th, 37th, 111th, 112th, 145th, all written in Alphabetic Order, the
Holy Ghost even inspiring the Psalmist's Fancy in this Particular. It is likely
the Acrosticks, (...) ancient way of Wit, used by one of the Sibylls, and
others of old, the Initial Letters of which Verses made up certain Words, were
partly in imitation of this. Some are styled Psalms of Degrees or Ascents, as
those fifteen which immediately follow the 119th Psalm, either because the
Voice was lifted up more than ordinarily when they were s^ng, or because of the
Advantage of the Ground or Place where they were sung, viz. the Steps in
Solomon's Temple, which were fifteen, and which those who were appointed to
sing these Psalms were wont to ascend. Other Psalms are known by their Peculiar
Titles, as Maschil, i. e. Psalms of Instruction; Michtam, i. e. Golden Psalms,
called so (it is probable) because of the Precious Matter couched in them. And
several other Distinctive Titles there are, which are not so well understood,
as that of Psalm. 22. A^ieleth ha shachar: which in the Margin is rendered the
Hind of the Morning; perhaps referring to our Savior, of whom this Psalm
speaks, who is called a Hind or young Heart, Cant. 2. 9, 17. Others interpret it
the Strength of the Morning, but they know not how to apply it. Other^ the
Morning Star: some the Instrument of Mus^ck on which this Psalm and others were
played. And the like Obscure Words (as Shiggaion, Gittith, Ieduthun, Altashith,
Shushan eduth) are prefixed to many of these Sacred Hymns.

There is the Word Selah often^ used (seven^y times at least) in these Divine
Poems: but it is not easy to assign the true and proper import of it. I cannot
find the certain meaning of it, says Lib. Radicum.
Av^narius, though I have consulted all the Comments of the Rabbis. The
Chaldee Paraphrast renders it perpetuo, semper, and so several Rabbis expound
it, but can assign no sufficient reason for it. Some take it for a Musical
Note, of no signi^icancy in it self, but a mere made Word to direct the Masters
of Music in singing or playing. But then there is some difference among those
of this Opinion: For some of the Hebrew Writers think it denotes the Elevation
of the Voice, and that wherever this Word is in the Psalms, the Choristers
were put in mind to lift up their Voices. Others of them believe it is a Note
to signify a Pause, a Resting or Breathing for a time. And accordingly some of
the Jewish Doctors say that they were admonished by this Word to begin another
Sentence or Period. But another Classis of Interpreters look upon this Word not
as a Note of Music, but of Observation or Remark, and are persuaded that it is
affixed to some Sentences that are very Notable, and more especially worthy of
our consideration. In my mind R. Kim^hi is in the right, who joins this and the
former Expositions of the Word togethere, telling us that Selah is both a
Musical Note, and a Note of Emphasis in the Sense, whereby we are bid to
observe something more than usually remarkable. It is derived from sal or
salal, exaltavit, and denotes the elevating of the Voice in singing, and at the
same time the lifting up of the Heart, the serious considering and meditating
upon the thing that is spoken. It is an Argument to me that this was of use in
Music and Singing, because it is rendered (...) by the Greek Interpreters, and
(which is more considerable) because we meet with it in the Psalms only, and in
Ha^akkuk, chap. 3. v. 3, 9, 13. which Chapter is a kind of Psalm or Canticle,
as you will see in the Title of it. And that it is also a Mark of Observation and
Meditation, may be gathered from its being joined in Psalm. 9. 16. with
Higgaion, which signifies Meditation; for the Word is from Hagah, meditatus
fuit. And though in some Places Selah seems to be used where there is ^o
Emphatick Word or Sense, yet we ought to consider that this must be referred
and applied not only to the immediately preceding Word or Verse, but to the
whole Set of Verses or Periods about which it is placed. If we thus apply it we
shall see that it is used to good purpose, viz. to point out to us something
very Observable and Notable: It calls upon us to revolve in our Minds with
great Seriousness the Matter that is before us, and to give Glory to God: and
to this purpose it may be observed, that Selah, in Psalm. 46. 11. is rendered by
the Seventy Interpreters (...).

But it is the Excellent and Noble Matter which most of all commends these
Divine Poems. Some of them are Historical, giving an Account of God's wonderful
Dispensations in the foregoing Ages of the World, especially toward the Jewish
People, in their first Election out of the rest of the World, their Condition
in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in C^naan, with a Rehearsal of the particular
Mercies and Judgments showed toward them. Other Psalms are Didactick, fraught
with most wholesome and useful Doctrine, with most solid and necessary
Instruction What is there, says Homil. 1. in Psalm.
Basil the Great, that we are not taught here? Are we not instructed here
concerning all Moral Virtues, the Magnificence of Fortitude, the Exactness of
Justice, the Gravity of Temperance, the Perfection of Prudence? Are we not
i^form'd hence concerning the manner of Repentance, the measure of Patience,
and whatever other good and virtuous things we can name? Here is the Treasure
of complete Theology, here is (...) Ibid.
the common Storehouse of all good Documents. Other Psalms are Prophetical,
foreshewing the great and astonishing things which have happened since in the
World, as the Coming of the Messiah in the Flesh, his Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and most of the considerable Circumstances
appertaining to these, the Rejection of the Jewish Nation, the Conversion of
the Gentiles, the Wonderful Propagation of the Gospel, and the Success of
Christ's Kingdom upon Earth. Again, some of these Psalms are Petitory, begging
with the highest Zeal and Devotion those things which are the proper Object of
our Prayers, and thereby teaching us what we ought to implore of Heaven, and in
what manner we should put up our Addresses. Others are Eucharistical, wherein
the Psalmist discovers the Grateful Resentments of his Mind by an open
Recognition of the Divine Bounty to him, and by sending up continual Praises
unto the Author of all those Favors and Blessings daily heaped upon him: at
the same time teaching us to pay the like Tribute of Devotion to the same
Bountiful Hand, and to take all Occasions (as he does) of testifying our
Thankful Sense of the Divine Goodness. Of this sort more especially is the
113th Psalm with the five following ones, which are called by the Jews the
Great Hallelujah, or rather (as Buxtorf says) the Great Hymn, which they used
at their three Chief Feasts, especially at the Passover. This, it is probable,
is meant by the Hymn, (Mat. 26. 30.) which Christ with his Apo^tles sung after
their eating of the Paschal Lamb. Some are Hortatory, with singular Earnestness
inviting the World to acknowledge and obey the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
pathetically calling upon wicked Men to abandon their sinful Ways, and to
repent, and turn unto God; with a more special Love and Tenderness, beseeching
the Servants of the most High to fear and reverence his Name, to trust at all
times in him, and to be obedient unto his holy Laws and Statutes. Others are
Consolatory, administering Peace and Joy to all that are upright in Heart and
Life, breathing nothing but Heavenly Solace and Satisfaction to distressed
Minds, such as never came from any Mouth but what was Inspired. Some of them
are Penitential, (besides those The 6th, 31st, 37th, 51st, 101st, 129th, 141st.
Seven which are usually styled so) wherein the Holy Man with infinite Sorrow
and Remorse of Soul declares his Abhorrence of his former Sins, and his firm
Resolves and Purposes of relinquishing them for the future. Lastly, some of the
Psalms are of a Mixed Nature, comprehending several of the forementioned Heads
in them* so that there is no Book of Devotion extant in the World that is made
up of such Variety of Matter as this is, and therefore is not only the more
delightful and entertaining, but is also the more useful and advantageous, the
more suitable to the various Conditions and Occasions of Mankind, the more
fitted for the several Purposes of the Devout, the more serviceable to all the
great Ends of Religion and Godliness. For this and many other Reasons I may
conclude, that there is not such another Excellent Collection of Devotions
under Heaven as This of the Pious King and Prophet. Here are all things that
are proper to beget Religion and Piety in us, here is every thing that is
serviceable to nourish and sustain all our Virtues and Graces, and that in the
utmost height of them.

Before I pass to the next Book, I will add a few Words concerning the Nature
of the Poetry here used. This is to be said with great Truth, that these
Poetical Measures are far different from those which we have been acquainted
with in Other Writers. But then it is not to be questioned, that tho we are
ignorant of the true Quality of these Poetic Numbers, yet they are very
Melodious and Lofty, and not unworthy of the best Poets. It is not to be
doubted that there is a certain Artificial Meter observed in this Book, which
renders the several Odes and Hymns very delightful. The Animadyers* Euse^.
Younger Scaliger denies (and that with some Earnestness and Sharpness,
otherwise he would not show himself his Father's own Son) that there is any
thing like this in this Book; though at the same time he grants that the
Proverbs, and almost all Job, are Metrical. But Josephus and Philo, two Learned
Jews, and who may reasonably be thought to be Competent Judges in this Matter,
attest the Meter of these Psalms (as well as of the Books of Job, etc.) So do
Origin, Eusebius, Ierom, and some of the most Judicious Critics among the
Moderns. But then they confess that the Meter is not so regular as that of
succeeding Poets. And who sees not that even these exceedingly vary in their
Measures? It is not denied that Sophocles and Euripides, Plautus and Terence,
write in Verse: but they can scarcely be said to do so in comparison of Homer
and Virgil. There are some Hexameters, Iambicks, Saphicks, and other known
kinds of Verses in David's Psalms, but they are very rare, and seldom pure and
unmixed: but notwithstanding this, it is easy to perceive (if we be observant
and attentive) that there are several Verses together that are Matrical. The
Arabian Critics tell us, that the Alcoran is written in a sort of Verse, and
sometimes in Rythme, but every Reader cannot find this. No more can an ordinary
Eye or Ear discern the Numbers in the Hebrew Verse: for the Hebrews way of
measuring their Feet was different from that which is in use among the Greek
and Latin Poets; yet so as we may oftentimes perceive a certain Harmony of
Syllables. And as the Psalms are Metrical, so some of them are Rhythmical. This
is clear in the very Entrance of these Divine Hymns; Psalm. 1. 1.
(...) Again, in Psalm. 6. 2. (...) This is evident in Psalm. 8. 5. (...) This is
plain in Psalm. 12. 4. and 51. 16. and 63. 3. and 116. 7. and 148. 1, 2. And in
abundance of other Places there is not only a certain Orderly Number of
Syllables, but the last Words of the Verses end alike in Sound.

CHAP. IX.
The Book of Proverbs, why so called. The transcendent Excellency of these
Divine and Inspired Aphorisms. Some Instances of the Different Application of
the Similitudes used by this Author. The Book of Ecclesiastes, why so
entitled. The Admirable Subject of it succinctly displayed. The particular
Nature of the Canticle or Mystical Song of Solomon briefly set forth. It is
evinced from very cogent Arguments, that Solomon died in the Favor of God, and
was saved. The Books of the Four Great Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, with his
Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, are described. So are those of the Twelve Lesser
Prophets, Hosea, etc.

WHO should succeed David but Solomon, as in the Throne, so in the Sacred Canon
of the Bible? And He, like his Father, was a Divine Poet: his three Books, viz.
the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and his Song being written in Hebrew Verse. The
first of these Books is composed of Excellent Proverbs (whence it has its
Name.) By this word Mishle, which is here rendered Proverbs, sometimes are
signified, I. Parables strictly so called, which are no other than Apologues or
Artificial Fables, of which I have spoken under the Style of Scripture: but
there are none such in this Book. 2. By this Word is meant any 1 Samuel 10. 12.
and 24. 13.
Trite and Commonly received Saying, any Vulgar Proverbial Speech, as that in
chapter 26. v. 11. The Dog returns to his Vomit. But there are few of this sort
here. 3. Sarcastick Speeches, Gibes, Taunts, (as in 2 Chronicles. 7. 20. Psalm. 69.
11.) are intended by this Expression: and this Book of Solomon is not wholly
destitute of these. 4. The Hebrew Word denotes such Speeches as are by way of
Similitude, Ezekiel. 18. 2. of which kind there are many in this Book, as that in
chapter 11. 22. As a Jewel of Gold in a Swine's Snout, so is a fair Woman without
Discretion: and in chapter 25. 11. A Word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver. This we find to be the frequent manner of the Wise Man's
speaking in this Book: he generally illustrates and amplifies his Doctrine by
some fit Simily or Comparison, so that thereby it is as it were twice
delivered. 5. Sayings that are mixed with some Obscurity and Intricacy, such
Speeches as require Sharpness of Wit and Understanding both for propounding and
conceiving them, are denoted by this Word in Scripture. Thus an Intricate
Question or Problem [Mashal] is set down in Psalm. 49. 4, 5. and in the rest of
the Psalm there is an Answer to this Problem, a Resolution of this Difficult
Point. Proverbial Sentences are sometimes (...), unde (...).
Enigmatical, and have a Meaning far different from what the Words directly
signify. Thus you will find some Sayings that carry a Mystical Sense with them in
this Book, as that in chapter 9. 17. Stolen Waters are sweet: and in chapter 25. v. 27.
It is not good to eat much Honey; and such like Allegorical and Allusive
Speeches, which contain in them a higher Sense than the bare Words import. This
Proverbial manner of Speaking and Writing was in great Use and Esteem among the
Hebrews, and all the Eastern Countries: whence it was that the Queen of Sheba
came to prove Solomon with hard Questions, 1 Kings 10. 1. Parables according to
the Chald^e, Problems, Riddles. These were the Chidoth which the propounded to
be solved by him. Yea, this way of Speaking may generally be taken notice of in
the Writings of most of the Wise Men of Ancient Times. Pythagoras and Plato
were much addicted to this Abstruse way, and all their Followers were delighted
in Mystical Representations of things. 6. By this Word we are to understand all
Wise and Excellent Sayings, graviter dicta (as the Latins call them) Sentences
of great Weight and Importance, but plain and easy to be understood. The
Hebrews anciently called any Saying that had Graces and Wit in it Mashal; but
especially any Eminent Speech or Smart Saying for the Use of Life and Direction
of Manners went under that Name. A Moral or Religious Saying that was of
singular Worth and Excellency was styled a Proverb: for this (as Mishle, ^
mashal Praeesse, dominari.
the Hebrew Word denotes) is (...), Dominatrix sententia, a Speech that has
the Pre-eminence above others, a Saying of great Authority and Force, and
therefore deserves to be highly esteemed by all.

These Wise Moral Speeches were taken notice of, and held in great Repute of
old. Homer was a Noted Master of this Excellency, and is applauded for it by
the Learned. And indeed when I read in the skilfullest Accomptants of Times,
that this Poet flourished not long after Solomon's Days, I am apt to credit
Casaubon and Grotius, and a Famous Homerist of our own, who all agree in this,
that Homer borrowed many of his (...), his Sage Sayings or Proverbs from our
Royal Author; and they produce very fair Instances out of his Poems to prove
it. After this Great Poet, I might mention those Minor ones Theognis and
Phocylides, who are famed for their Excellent Moral Sentences* Pythagoras is
celebrated for his Golden Sayings or Verses, and so are some of his Scholars
for their Worthy Speeches proper to their School: and truly if we remember that
these Pythagoreans were enjoined by their Master a five Years Silence, we may
well expect some Handsome Sentences from them at last, when they began to
speak. I might add here the Set Sayings of the Stoics, such as Tully's
Paradoxes. Yea, I might remind you that the Sages of all Schools and Sects had
their Peculiar Motto's and Devices. As in Theoretical Philosophy there are
Axioms and Maxims, in Medicks there are Aphorisms, in Mathematics there are
Theorems, among Rhetoricians there are (...), Select Themes and Matters to
declaim upon; so in Ethics there are (...), Pithy Short Sentences, Wise and
Weighty Apophthegms, containing Great Morals in few Words; (...), Proverbs,
Short but Studied Sayings of great and frequent Use in our Lives. This Book of
Solomon is chiefly made up of this sort, and they outvy all that ever were
extant before or since. The Queen of Sheba came to hear the Wisdom of this
Matchless Prince, and to be benefited by his Divine Accomplishments; but we
save our selves the Labor of so long a Pilgrimage, he having visited us, and
his Admirable Writings being brought home to us, fraught with the most
desirable Treasures. Here is a great Number of Useful Maxims and Rules for our
Practice in the several Occurrences of our Lives. Here are Faithful Sayings,
and wort^y of all Acceptance, as the Apostle speaks. Here are Smart and Quick,
here are Grave and Sage Apophthegms. Here are Concise and Pithy Adagies, the
very Extracts and Essences of the Strongest Sense and most Precious Truth. Here
you will find Solomon as a Father, and with a Paternal Affection, instructing
his Readers and Hearers as his Sons, (whom therefore he calls by that
affectionate Title more than once in this his Admirable Treatise of Morals)
directing them in the various Passages and Affairs of this Life, and framing
their Manners most becomingly and successfully in order to another.

The whole Book is divisible into three main Parts; 1. The Inscription or Title
of the Book, which contains the Use and Scope of it, The Proverbs of Solomon
the Son of David, King of Israel, to know Wisdom, Instruction, to perceive the
Words of Understanding, etc. (v. 1, 2, etc. to the 7th) that i* to make Men
truly Wise and Understanding, or (which is the same thing) Holy and Religious.
2. The Preface or Introduction to the Book, which is a General Exhortatory to
True Wisdom and Holiness. This is the Subject of the first Nine Chapters. 3.
The Main Body of the Book (from the Beginning of the 10th Chapter to the Close
of all) which comprehends in it several Excellent Precepts, Rules and Cautions
of a mixed and various Nature, applicable to the different Circumstances, Cases,
and Occasions of Persons. These are more signally called Mishlim the Proverbs,
a Collection of S^cred Aphorisms, useful in the Lives of all Men, whether we
look upon them in a Natural, Civil, or Religious Capacity, whether we consider
them Alone or as Members of a Society, whether we speak of them as they are
desirous to live happily here or hereafter, or rather as they desire both. To
all these excellent Purposes they may be plentifully furnished by this Royal
Author, this Great Master of the Sentences, this Divine Penman of the Proverbs.

There is mention of the Words of Agur, chapter ^0. v. 1. who was the same with
Solomon, say R. Levi among the Jews, and several Christian Expositors. However,
if he be not Solomon under that Name, but a different Person, yet the Words or
Prophecy (for so they are al^o called) there contained, may be said to be
Solomon's, because collected and preserved by him. So Bathsheba's Instructions
to Solomon, chapter 31. 1. -- 10. may be called his, because he had carefully
recorded them, and in the greatest Part of his Life had observed them, But
whether the Encomium of a Virtuous Woman, or a Good Wife, from v. 10. to the
End, was penned by Solomon or his Mother is disputable: however, this we are
sure of, that it was dictated by Divine Inspiration, as the rest of the Sacred
Writ; and moreover it is observable that it is composed in Alphabetical Order,
i. e. according to the Series of the Hebrew Letters, as ^everal Psalms are,
which I took notice of before.

Before I dismiss this Book, it may not be improper here to observe concerning
several of the Proverbs, that they may be applied several ways. Accordingly as
we interpret the Similitude which is made use of in them, so we may form the
Sense of the Place: and this ought not to offend any good or wise Man. To give
an Instance or two: As he that binds a Stone in a Sling, so is he that gives
Honor to a Fool, Prove. 26. 8. The Meaning of which may be, that Honor
conferred on an undeserving Person is thrown away and lost, like a Stone cast
out of a Sling. Or thus, he that bestows Preferment and Dignity on such an one,
does as 'twere Arm him against himself; he helps to do himself a Mischief,
because he puts him into a Capacity of doing it. Others have a different Notion
of the word Margemah, (which is here translated a Sling) and by it understand a
Heap of Stones, and they frame such an Interpretation as this; He that gives
Respect and Honor to a Fool, to an unworthy vile Person, is like him that
casts a Precious Stone (for so they limit the Sense of the word Eb^n* (as
La^illi among the Latins, and (...) with the Greeks, have that particular
Signification sometimes) among common Pebbles. Others expound it thus, As one
single Stone thrown into a great Heap is scarcely discerned, and makes no
Accession to it* so by the Honor and Favor that are collated on a Fool there
is no real Addition made to him, there is ^o Alteration, he is still the same
Man. Some Learned Doctors among the Hebrews (as R. Kimc^i, Aben Ezra, Levi)
produce another Meaning of the word Margemah, telling us it is the same with
Argemon, Purpura, and then understand the Proverb thus, As he that laps up one
of the Stones in the Street in a Purple Vest, so is he that gives Respect and
Honor to a: Fool, a wo^thless Person. But the Sense is the same with what was
pro^ounded in one of the foregoing Interpretations. All these Expositions are
congr^ous enough, and ^e need not be very solicitous which of them we ^dhere
to. No Man can say of any one of them, This is the Interpretation, and there is
no other ^^tended by the Penman. It is enough that the Sense we pitch upon is
consistent with the Scope of the Place and the other Parts of God's Word.

So those Words in Prove. 1. 17. where the Wise Man (having in the foregoing
Verses spoken con^erning the mischievous and bloody. Designs of wicked Men)
uses this Simily, Surely in vain the Not is spread in sight of any Bird, admit
of liver^^ Interpretations, and all of them very ^it and apposite. First, some
render the word [Chinnam] without Cause, (and so indeed it is englished in the
11th V^rse of this Chapter) and then the Sen^^ is this, As the Fowler spreads
Nets for the harmle^s Birds, that he may feed himself with their Flem, or make
Pro^it of them by selling them to others, so Thieves and bloody Men lay wait
for the Innocent, those that never injured them, and merely to gratify their
Covetousness, and to fill their Houses with Spoil. The same Simily is made use
of in Tere^^e* Non rete a^^ipitri ^enditur, neque milvio,
Qui ma^^ faciunt nobis, illis qui nihil faciunt tendit^^
Quia enim in illis ^ructus est, in istis opera luditur.
So that this Proverb may then be used when we see Snares laid for Men, (...),
(as the LXX translate the Hebrew Word here) without Cause, when they are
Innocent. And what Solomon expresses here by the Similioude of Birds is by the
Prophet (...) set forth by another Comparison from Fishes, Hab. 1. 13, 14. But
the Generality of Interpreters ^ead the first Word as our Translators render
it, viz. in vain, and then the Text is capable of several Senses; ^. Some think
that as some of the foregoing Verses, so this is spoken by way of (...), in the
Language of Thieves and Bloody Men, who entice others to their Company, and to
partake with them in their Villainy, by laying before them the Hopes of
Impunity; as if they had said, You need not fear and be solicito^s, we will
cunningly carry our Business: though Justice seeks after us, and would bring us
to Punishment, yet we have our Eyes about us, we shall be able to foresee their
Snares, and to fly from them as Birds are wont to do from a Net spread wide
before them. Quaeque nimis pandunt retia vitat avis. Or, 2. This may be spoken
of those that are enticed by these Men, and fall under their Charm^ and
Allurements. They could never do thus unless they were blinded and infatuated.
It is in vain. to these besotted Creatures that they see the Net, that they
know the Danger; for notwithstanding this they venture upon it, and wilfully
run into it, as a Bird hastneth to the Snare, as the same Author speaks, chapter 7.
v. 23. Or, 3. if we take these Words as spoken concerning the Evil and Lewd
Enticers themselves, then there is this different Interpretation from what was
assigned before: either the Similitude runs thus, As foolish Birds being greedy
of Food, and allured by the Balt, take no notice of the Net that is spread to
catch them, and so ^^^awares are taken in it, (and because the Not that is laid
makes not the Birds more wary and cau^^ous, but notwithstanding this they fly
to the Bait, therefore in respect of these silly Creatures the Net may well be
said to be spread in vain) so the Wicked Men whom the Royal Penman here speaks
of, and whose Enticements he warns us to beware of, being led with desire of
Pr^y, do not obs^rve the Net laid to take them: or if they be forewarned, yet
they are not frighted by the Danger, but are resolved to satisfy their greedy
Appetite: and then, when they are most secure, they are suddenly surprised and
overtaken by the Judgments of God. Or else (which I take to be the plainest and
most obvious Meaning) we are to understand the Words thus, Although Villan^^^*
Complotters think themselves sure of their Prey* yet they are no more certain
of it than Fowlers are of catching those Birds which carefully observe the
laying of the Net, and by beholding the Spreading of it are admonished to fly
away from it. In vain is the Net spread in the Eyes of every one that has
Wings: so the Hebrew.

Which may be applied first of all to these Flying Inhabitants of the Air, who
have sometim^^ been in a wonderful manner employed to bring to Light the secret
Perpetration of Murder and Bloodshed. A Bird of the Air has carried the Voice,
and that which has Wings has told the Matter, Eccles. 10. 20. In vain has
the Net been spread in the Sight of these winged Creatures. Secondly, (...)
Application of these Words may be made to thos^ Innocent Persons whom these
bloody Conspirat^^^ intend to entrap. They oftentimes are extraordinarily
furnished with Eyes and Wings: they are en^bled to discern and foresee their
Contrivances, and they have Power given them to avoid them. 1 Samuel 19. 2.
Saul seeks the Life of David; but his cursed Purposes are discovered to this
latter by Iona^han* 2 Kings 6. 12.
The secret Counsels and Plots of the King of Assyria are disclosed by Elisha.
Acts 23. 15, 16.
The ^ews bind themselves with a Vow to murder St. Paul, but a Youth frustrates
their Conspiracy. It may be applied also to the Angels, who are represented as
Ezekiel. 1. 6.
Winged in Scripture, and Ezekiel. 1. 18. and 10. 12.
full of Eyes. These oftentimes discover and frustrate the bloody Designs of
the Enemies of the Church. These Ministering Spirit^ seasonably fly to the
Succor of the Righteous; they kindly hover over them, hide and protect them
with their Wings. And as Men and Angels, so God himself (who is All Eye) in a
more signal and eminent manner discovers and defeats the Machinations of bloody
Men against the Innocent. He is pleased to resemble himself to an Eagle, the
Prince of Birds, that fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad her Wings,
takes them, bears them on her Wings, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. The Eyes of the Lord run
to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of
them whose Heart is perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. And in all Ages of the
World he has raised up Instruments to help and succor his Servants. Thus in
vain is the Net spread in the Sight of every one that is bagnal canaph, Master
of the Wing, as the Original (if we will be exact in rendering it) expresses it.
And if we interpret this Proverb in this Sense, it Exactly comports with the
next Verse, They lay wait for their own Blood, they lurk privily for their own
Life: Those that thus design Mischief against innocent Persons, bring Ruin
upon themselves, and are frequently taken in that Net which they spread for
others. This seems to be the most Genuine Exposition of the Words: but every
one is left to his Liberty to choose any other Interpretation which is
agreeable to the Context, and opposes no other Text of Holy Scripture. Which of
all these Senses was at first designed by the Holy Ghost we cannot certainly
tell. It may be in such Places as these (of which there is a considerable
Number in this Book) there is a Latitude, and questionless it is best it should
be so, that we may with the greater Freedom search into and descant upon these
Sacred Writings, that we may understand the full Extent of these Excellent
Moral Observations and Remarkable Sayings of this Wise King, which for the most
part are short and concise, and therehy sometimes become somewhat difficult.
But if, (...) Im^eratoria brevital (as Tacitus calls it) was commendable, no
wise Man surely will dislike it in Solomon, especially when such Divine and
Admirable Truths are couched in it.

His next Book is entitled Ecclesiastes; for the LXX, by whom the wor^^ Kabal
is generally rendered (...), do accordingly render Kobeleth (...). It is
probable he penned it when (...) was Old, and had passed the several Stages of
Vanity. It is an open Disowning of his former Folies and Extravagancies, it is
the Royal Preacher's Recantation-Sermon, wherein he tenders himself a Public
Penitentiary. Which is the Meaning (as Dr. Light^oo^, in his Chronicle of the
Times of the Old Test^min^.
One thinks) of that Title of this Book in the Hebrew, Kohel^th, or the
Gathering Soul, because i^ this Book he recollects himself, and gathers and
r^duceth others that wander after Vanity. To this end he makes a clear and
ample Discovery of the Vanity of all things under the Sun, i. e. in this Life,
or in the whole World (a Phrase peculiar to Solomon, and in this Book only,
where it is often used). Here the Wise Man convinces us from his own
Experience, that none of the Acquists of this World are able to satisfy the
Immortal Spirit of Man, that the greatest Wit and Learning, the most exquisite
Pleasures and Sensual Enjoyments, the vastest Confluence of Wealth and Riches,
and the highest Seat of Honor, even the Royal Throne it self, are insufficient
to make a Man Happy, and consequently that our Happiness must be ^ought for
some where else. Here we are taught, that notwithstanding this World is
Changeable and ^^bie^t to Vanity, though at one time or other all things come
alike to all in it, yet the Steady and Un^rring Providence of God rules all
Affairs and Events here below; and in the Conclusion of all, God will bring
every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil. Here are ^articular Directions given us how we are to
discharge our Duty, first with reference to our selves, viz. that we ought very
strictly to observe the Laws of Sobriety and Temperance, and to live i^ a
Thankful Use of the good things of this World, and to be Content with our
Portion and Allotment in this Life, and to banish all Covetous Desires and
Projects. As we must go to the House of Mourning, i. e. be very retired and
solemn, very ^^^lous and composed, and banish all superfluous Mirth and Gaiety,
so we must eat our Bread with Joy, i. e. live in a comfortable Fruition of
these earthly Blessings, and delight in these Enjoyments so far as they are
lawful and innocent. Our Duty to Others is here also briefly prescribed us,
viz. that we ought to pay a Profound Respect to Good Kings, and to keep their
Commandments; yea, that our very Thoughts toward them ought to he Reverent.
Then, as to those who are of an Equal Level with us, or inferior to us, that
we show our selves Just and Righteous to them in all our Converse and Dealings,
and that when we see any of them reduced to Poverty and Straits, that we extend
our Charity to them, that we cast our Bread upon these Waters, that we relieve
their Wants and Necessities. Lastly, we are instructed in our Duty to God, we
are taught to approach him with ^everence and Devotion, to keep our Feet when
we go to his House, to pay our Vows to him, to remember him our Creator and
Preserver, to fear him and keep his Commandments: and we are assured that this
is the whole of Man, his whole Duty and his whole Concern.

The Canticles, or Solomon's Song, is another Piece of Hebrew Poetry, which he
writ when he was Young, and in an Amorous Vein, and yet breathing most Divine
and Heavenly Amors. If you take it according to the Letter only, it is King
Solomon's Epithalamium or Wedding-Song, of the same Nature with the 45th Psalm,
which is a Song on his Nuptials with the King of Egypt 's Daughter, but in a
Spiritual Sense it sets forth the Glory of Christ and his Kingdom, and the Duty
and Privileges of the Church, which is there called the King's Daughter. Such
is this Dramatick Poem, wherein are brought in the Bridegroom, and Bride, and
the Friends of both, alternately speaking: but we must not be so gross in our
Apprehensions as to conceive this to be barely a Marriage-Song (as Castellio
groundlesly fancieth, and therefore deems it to be Scripture not of the same
Stamp with the rest). Besides the Literal Import of the Words in this
Love-Song, there is a Mystical Sense couched in them. Carnal Love is here made
to administer to Religion, the Flesh is subservient to the Spirit: and
therefore by reason of this Mystery in this Love-Poem the Jews were not
permitted to read it till they were of Maturity of Years. If we take this
Mystical Wedding^ Song in the highest Meaning of it, it is an Allegorical
Description of the Spiritual Marriage and Communion between Christ and the
Church, it i^ a Representation of the Mystical Nuptials of the Lord Christ
Jesus and Believers. Their Mutu^^ Affections and Loves are deciphered by the
So^ Passions and Amors of Solomon and his Royal Spouse. This (though the Name
of God be not in it) makes it a most Divine Poem, and highly worthy of our most
serious Perusal and Study. For here we see the Gospel anticipated, and the most
Glorious Subject of the New Testament betimes inserted into the Old.

Object. But is it not a great Disparagement to this and the other
beforementioned Books of Solomon, that ^e was a Reprobate, and finally
rejected by God? Are we not discouraged from receiving these Writings as
Canonical Scripture when we know that the Author of them was a Damned Person?
For what can He be else, who, toward his latter end, revolted from the True
Religion, and went after Strange Gods and Strange Women? And we never read in
Scripture that he repented either of his Idolatry or his Whoredoms. Is it
likely that this Gross Apostate was inspired by the Holy Ghost? Is it probahle
that he had the Honor of being one of the Penmen of Sacred Writ?

Answ. It is true Solomon was as great a Reproach to the True Religion as ever
any Person was, if we consider all his Circumstances: His Sins were of a very
High Nature, his Faults were most Heinous and Scandalous; and that Man is half
guilty of them that endeavors to excuse them. A most provoking Crime it was in
him that had been so highly favored of God to give himself up to his Lusts: a
most horrid Offense it was, even in his old Age, in the close of his Life, (as
if now his Years had made him Decrepid and Idolatrous too) to bow down to
Idols. But shall we think that Solomon bowed so low that he could not rise
again, that he fell and never recovered himself? I confess no meaner a Man than
St. Augustine seems to be of this Opinion. This Hard Father of Infants was as
harsh against Solomon, pronouncing him a Person wholly cast out of God's
Favor, and never received to Mercy again: and some Other Fathers, as St
Cyprian, and Prosper, question his Salvation. Bellarmin and Pererius positively
conclude he was damned; but then we find Pineda, Salianus, Drexellius.
three others of that Communion and of the same Order peremptorily asserting
the contrary. Maldonate declares he does not know what to determine. Of which
Mind it seems was that Archbishop of Toledo, who ^aus'd King Solomon to be
painted on the Walls of his Chapel half in Hell and half in Heaven.

But, to wave the Opinions and Censures of Particular Persons at present, it is
generally the Judgment of the Christian Church, that Solomon repented, and was
saved. And there are such Reasons as these to induce us to believe it; 1. There
is no absolute concluding from the Greatness of his Sins that he repented not,
and that he was damned; for we are assured that King Manasse^ was a Greater
Sinner than ever he was, for unto all manner of Idolatry he added the
Diabolical Practices of Witchcraft and Enchantment, 2 Chronicles. 33. 3, etc. and
yet his hearty Repentance and Turning unto God are recorded, v. 12, 13, 19.
Yea, David, Solomon's own Parent, was a very Heinous Criminal if the Sins of
Studied Murder (which we do not find his Son guilty of) and Adultery could make
him such: and yet such was the Divine Goodness, that upon his humble
Acknowledgment of these Crimes and reforming his Ways he was acquitted of these
Offenses. And why may not the same Mercy be showed to the Son? and what ground
have we to exclude him from partaking of it upon his unfeigned Repentance? 2.
That he did repent and was saved may be gathered from 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. where
the walking in the Way of David and Solomon is mentioned as walking Holily, and
so as is Acceptable to God. Upon which Passage a Dr. Lightfoo^, in his
Chronicle of the Old Testament.
Judicious Writer has these Words; This very Place and Passage (says he) may
resolve that Solomon was no more finally cast away for his Idolatry than David
was for his Adultery and Murder. We see that David and Solomon are here joined
together, their way of Walking is represented as the same, as much as to tell
us, that as David was a Man after God's own Heart, excepting the Murder of
Vriah, and Debauching his Wife, so was his Son Solomon, excepting the latter
Part of his Life. 3. Solomon's Book of Ecclesiastes (as has been suggested
already) is a plain Testimony of his Repentance. Here he bewails his former
Follies, here he makes a Public Retractation of them, and does as it were
Penance for them before all the World. We may therefore s^fely vote him a True
Penitent, a Real Convert at last, and now a Saint in Heaven. 4. In express
Words, according to the Septuagint, his Repentance is recorded, Prove. 24. 32.
(...).
Afterward (or at last) I repented. Or, if this Version be not admitted, and
although we cannot produce an Express Text, (though that is not necessary, for
it is not any where recorded that Lot repented of his Incest, or that some
Others, whose Salvation we question not, were heartily sorry for their
Miscarriages) yet there is ground to believe his Conversion not only from what
has been said, but from what we are able further to alledg. 5. Therefore we
must consider that this Inspired Secretary of the Holy Spirit was of the Number
of the Prophets, concerning whom our Infallible Teacher says, that they are
all in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13. 28. It is not to be questioned but that
those Prophets who were made use of by God in so Extraordinary a manner as to
be Sacred Writers of the Bible, were all admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven,
and are placed in the Mansions of Glory. Besides, such Persons as these, who
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, are pronounced Holy Men of God by
St. Peter, 2 Ep, chapter 1. v. 21. None had that Honor but those who were of Real
Sa^ctity, i. e. the Prophecy of Scripture (which he speaks of in that place)
was vouchsafed to none but such. And therefore though Solomon's Repentance be
not expressly recorded, yet when we know that he was one of the most Eminent
Penmen of the Sacred Scripture, we have Reason to think, that notwithstanding
God suffered him for a time to fall into those scandalous Sins, yet he returned
afterward to him by unfeigned Repentance, and was Renewed and Reformed, and
died a Holy and Righteous Person. 6. This is evident from that Promise which
God made to Solomon, 2 Samuel 7. 15. My Mercy shall not depart away from him.
Which is commented upon by the wise Son of Sirach, (speaking of this King's
Follies and Extravagancies, and the sad Events of them) The Lord, says he,
will never leave off his Mercy, neither shall any of his Works perish, neither
will he abolish the Posterity of his Elect, and the Seed of him that loves him
he will not take away, Ecclesiastic. 47. 22. Whence we may rationally gather,
that Solomon was not cast off by God, but still continued in his Favor.

Some argue from his Name qu. Recollectus, Receptus, sc. in favorem Dei.
Agur, which they say implies his former Failings, and his being Reclaimed.
Others think his Name Iedidiah, Beloved of the Lord, is a good Intimation that
he became a True Penitent, and was saved. And some conceive, that because he
was a Type of the Blessed Jesus, he could not miscarry. But, whether these have
any Weight or no, I am confident no considerate Person can deny the Force of
the Reasons before alleged. We may from them alone conclude, that Solomon was
not finally rejected by God, yea that he was upon his hearty Repentance
received into Favor, and is now in the Number of the Blessed. And this was the
Judgment of those Ancient and Learned Writers of the Church, Cont. Jovin.
St. Ierom, Lib. 2. Apol. Dav.
Ambrose, In Psalm. 52.
Hilary, Cateches. 2.
Cyril. Let us then forget his Faults when we study his Books, wherein it is
certain there are no Errata's, he being an Interpreter of the Holy Ghost unto
us, and when he uttered these things being a Friend and Favorite of God. But
suppose we knew certainly (which we do not, and cannot, but have sufficient
ground for the contrary) that he was at last cast off, yet I do not see how
this does necessarily invalidate his Writings. God might, if he pleased, make
use of a Bad Man to pen some Part of the Bible, as he thought fit to call Judas
to the Apostleship, and to be an Eminent Preacher of the Gospel. Therefore
though we should grant that Solomon was an Apostate, yet this is no direct
Argument against the Validity and Authority of his Writings. But there being
such great Probability, not to say Reasons, on the other side, we need not fly
to this Answer, but on good ground persuade our selves that Solomon, who was
once (...) with Sacred Wisdom, never lo^t it wholly, and consequently that we
ought not to be prejudiced against what he has writ by reason of his gross
Fallings and Miscarriages.

Next, we are to speak of the Books of the Prophets. Of those who prophe^^ed
after the Divi^ion of the ten Tribes from the other two, but before the
Captivity of either, Isaiah is the first and most eminent. He was of the Blood
Royal, his Father Amoz being Brother to Azariah King of Iud^^* He was an old
Prophet, having been in that Employment under four Kings of Judah (as Isa. 1* 1.
he tells us himself): and all this time (which was about threescore Years) he
faithfully discharged the Part of a True Prophet in an impartial reproving of
the Vices and Disorders of the Age he lived in, (...) a free and open
displaying the Judgments of God which were impendent on that Nation, (yet not
forgetting to threaten and denounce Vengeance on those Foreign and Strange
People, who were instrumental in in^^^cting these Judgments, and who for their
crying Enormities deserved to be destroyed, viz. Aslyrians, Egyptians,
Ethiopians, Moabites, Edomites, Tyrians, Arabians) in a most Pathetick
Exhortation to Repentance, and in setting before them the Promises of Mercy and
D^liverance. This last especially he is most famous for, clearly foretelling
the Deliverance of the Jews from their Captivity in Babylon by the Hand of
Cyrus King of Persia; and this he expressly mentioned an hundred Years before it
came to pass. But his Predictions concerning the Messiah are the most
remarkable of all: He in plain Terms ^oretels not only the Coming of Christ in
the Flesh, but all the Great and Memorable Passages which belonged to him. He
speaks as clearly and distinctly of these as if our Savior had blessed the
World with his Presence at that very time when he wrote his Prophecy. He seems
to speak, says St. Praefat. in Isai.
Ierom, rather of things past than to come, and he may be called an Evangelist
rather than ^ Prophet. Which is the Reason without doubt of the so frequent
Citations which are made of this Book in the New Testament: for you may observe
that Christ himself, his Evangelists and Apostles, have quoted about threescore
Places out of it. I^ reading of this Book then we read the Gospel it self, we
antedate the New Testament by the Writings of this Evangelical Prophet. I have
intimated before that he is the most Eloquent of all the Prophets. He was the
Hebrew Demosthenes, as Annot. in 2 Reg. 19. 1.
Grotius rightly styles him; the Purity of Hebraism is to be seen in him, as in
the other that of Atticism. He uses many Schemes and Figures, but none is more
remarkable than (that for which that Athenian Orator was so applauded, says
Quintilian) his (...), his Excellent Art of adding Gravity, Force and Vehemence
to what he says: he continually Exaggerates and Amplifies the Matter which he
undertakes. He had (above other Prophets) an Advantage of improving his Style
by reason of his Noble Descent, and conversing with Men of great Parts and
Elocution. But the mai^ thing wherein he excels the rest of the Prophets, is
this, that he says more of our Lord Christ than all of them put together. This
is his Pec^liar Excellency, that he makes so early a Discovery of the Advent of
our Blessed Lord, and of the Great Mysteries of the Gospel.

Jeremiah was another Ancient Prophet, he beginning to prophesy in the
thirteenth Year of King Josiah, and continuing in that sacred Employment till
the last Year of King Zedekiah. He saw the Captivity of the Kingdom of Samaria,
and after that the total Destruction of the Kingdom of Judah and of the Temple.
Part of this famous Prophecy, yea most of it was after the Captivity of Israel,
and before that of Judah, (from chap. 1. to chapter 44.) and part of it was in the
time of the latter Captivity, this Prophet being not carried captive with the
other Jews, but remaining in Judea, and afterward carried into Egypt (from
chap. 44* to the end). In the whole are comprised many things of great Worth
and Moment: for here wefind this Divine Prophet laying open the Sins of the
Kingdom of Judah with an unparalleled Freedom and Boldness, and reminding them
of the Severe Judgments which had befallen the ten Tribes for the very same
Offenses and Miscarriages. Here this Weeping Prophet, this Jewish Heraclitus,
most passionately laments the miserable Condition which they were plunging
themselves into, and withal directs them how to prevent it, namely, by a speedy
reforming of their Lives. But at last he more peremptorily proclaims God's
Wrath and Vengeance against them, foreseeing and foretelling the Grievous
Calamities which were approaching, particularly the Seventy Years Captivity in
Chaldaea, which began (as some think) with the carrying away of those of Judah.
He also disswades them from breaking Faith with the Chaldeans after they were
conquered by them, and shows how unsuccessful they should be in their
revolting from them to the Egyptians. But even then he foretells their happy
Return and Deliverance, and likewise the Just Recompense which Babylon, Moab,
the Philistines, and other Enemies of the Church should meet with in due time.
Here are also several Intimations concerning Christ the Blessed Messiah and
Redeemer, and concerning his Kingdom and Government in the times of the Gospel.
Here are many Remarkable Visions and Types, wherein are represented things of
the highest Nature. And lastly, here are sundry Historical Passages of
considerable Moment which relate to those times. So that the whole Book is of
Inestimable Worth, and such as is not to be found any where but in the Sacred
Volume.

His Lamentations (which are in Hebrew Verse* and are so contrived, that in the
four first Chapters every Verse, excepting one, begins with a Hebrew Letter in
the Alphabetick Order) were written on the Death of that Religious Prince
Josiah: which appears from what is recorded in a Chron. 35. 25. Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah; and all the singing Men and the singing Women spoke of
Josiah in their Lamentations to this Day, and made (...) Ordinance in Israel,
and behold they are written i^ the Lamentations, even those which this Prophet
composed. Which is also confirmed by the Joseph, Antiq. l. 10. c. 6,
Jewish Historian, who voucheth this Poem to be a Fu^^ral Elegy on that Pious
King. To which St. Ierom adds, that this Prophet laments the Loss of Josias as
the beginning of those Galamities which afterward ensued; and accordingly he
proceeds to ^ewail the Miserable State of the Jews, and particularly the
Destruction of Jerusalem, which was not then come to pass, but is prophetically
foretold, it being not unusual with the Prophets to speak of things to come as
if they were already past: Unless we should say (as some have) that part of
this Mournful Song was endited after the taking and sacking of Jerusalem, and
the carrying the People Captive, and is a Passionate Bewailing of the
Destruction of the Temple, and the Horrid Consequences of it. In which also the
Holy Man humbly confesses the Sins of the People, and acknowledges the Divine
Justice in all that be^el them: to which he adjoineth a Serious Exhortation to
Repentance, and comforts them with Hopes of a Restoration. So that the whole is
an Exact Pattern of Devotion in times of Great and National Calamities and
Public Sufferings, and instructs us how to demean our selves in such
deplorable Circumstances.

Ezekiel was carried captive into Babylon with those that went thither in the
second Captivity* which was in the 8th Year of Nebuchadnezzar* Reign, about ten
Years before the time of the last Captivity. He prophesied here at the same
time that Jeremiah did in Iudaea, and afterward in Egypt* Many of the same
things he foretold, more especially the Destruction of the Temple, and the
fatal Issue of those that revolted from Babylon to Egypt, and at last the Happy
Return of the Jew^ into their own Land. He distinctly foretells the Plagues
which should certainly be in^^icted on Other Nations who were profes'd Enemies
of the Church, as the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Egyptians, Tyrians, and
lastly the Assyrians and Babylonians. In figurative and mystical Expressions he
predicts the Messiah, and the flourishing Estate of his Kingdom, i. e. the
Christian Church. Because the Prophet begins with Visions and Types, and ends
with the Measuring of the Mystical Temple, therefore (by reason of these
Abstrusities and Mysteries) the Beginning and End of this Book were forbid
^^eronym. Prolog. in Ezekiel.
to be read by the Jews before they came to thirty Years of Age. But the
greatest ^art of this Prophecy is plain and easily intelligible, it having
reference chiefly to the Manners of that degenerate Age; wherein the Prophet
observes and severely animadverts upon the General Corruption which had invaded
them in those Days, and which merited the severest Judgments that Heaven could
send down upon them. He ex^ibits a Particular Catalogue of the Notorious
Enorm^ties which their Kings, their Priests, their Prophets, their People were
infamous for; he labors to bring them to a Sense of these scandalous
Practices, and to make them heartily Relent for them: ^inally, like a Trne
Watchman (as he is styled) he ^^^^hfully warns them of their Imminent Danger,
and admonishes them to prevent it (if possible) by abandoning their Evil Ways.
This is the Inspired Man that penned this Book: and this is the ^ook which
contains so many worthy and excellent ^^ings in it.

Another of the Four Great Proph^ts is Daniel (who was of the Progeny of the
Kings of Judah.) (...) was contemporary with Ezekiol, and was a Cap^^^e in
Babylon at the same time that he was. There he prophesied, and there he wrote*
and ^his Book is the Result of both: the six first Chap^^^s of which are an
History of the Kings of Baby^^^, and of what be^el some of the Captive Jews
under them. Here we have Nebuchadnezzar's R^markable Dreams interpreted, we
have a Relation of the singular Courage of the three Hebrew Yo^^^ Men that
refused to fall down to his Image, with the miraculous Deliverance of them out
of the Flames. Here is unfolded Belshazzar's Fatal Doo^, contained in the
Mystical Handwriting on the Wall, with his Death that soon followed upon it,
and the Succession of Darius to the Throne, and the Translation of the Monarchy
to the Medes. It was under this Prince that our Noble Prophet was advanced to
his greatest Height of Honor: (...) whereas he had been a great Courtier and
Favosrrite in Nebuchadnezzar's time, and in the close of Belshazzar's Reign was
made the Third Ruler in the Kingdom, now he is made the First, being set (...)
all the Presidents and Princes of the Realm. This made him envied and hated,
but he was hated and persecuted much more for his Religion by the Great Men of
the Kingdom, and even by a Decree of the King's own signing committed to the
Den of Lions, there to be devoured of them. But the Hand of Omnipotence
immediately interposed, and he came out thence safe, and his Adversaries and
Accusers were sent thither in his room, who fared not after the same rate that
he did. After this he lived in great Esteem, Honor and Prosperity, not only in
this King's Reign, but under Cyrus (...) Monarch of the Persian Race. But as
our Autho^ in the former Part of this Book relates things pas^ as an Historian,
so in the six last Chapters he is al^ together Prophetical, foretelling what
shall befall the Church in general, and particularly the Jews: ye^^ his Visions
and Prophecies reach to future Event^ wherein even those that are out of the
Church ar^ concerned. What can be more valuable than h^^ Dream or Vision of the
Four Secular Monarchies of the World, and of the Fifth, which was to be
Spiritual, viz. that of the Messiah? What is more famous and celebrated than
his Discovery (by the Angel Gabriel's Information) of the Seventy Weeks, viz.
of Years, i. e. 490 Years, upon the expiring of which the Messias's Kingdom was
to be set up? What plain and signal Prophecies does this Book afford concerning
that Renowned Conqueror Alexander the Great, and his subduing the Persian
Empire, as also concerning the Fierce Wars among his Great Captains and
Commanders who succeeded him; particularly how clearly and plainly are the
Actions of Antiochus the Great, and Antiochus Epiphanes his Son, described by
our Prophet long before these Persons were in being? And many other Notable
Occurrences relating to the most public and famed Transactions on the Stage of
the World, are prophetically fore-signified and revealed by this Divine Seer:
insomuch that we may justly style this Book the Apocalypse of the Old
Testament; to which that Other of the New so often refers, and even borrows
many things of great Moment. Lastly, we may particularly note concerning this
Book, that a great Part of it is written in the Chaldean Tongue, viz. from the
fourth Verse of the Second Chapter to the End of the Seventh: the Reason of
which may be this, because Daniel was now by his ^^ng Abode in that Country
become as 'twere a Chaldean; and moreover, he thought fit to write ^ the
Chaldean Language, because he relates those ^^ings here which are proper to the
Kings of Baby^^^ and the Affairs of that Place, which could not (...) better
expressed than in this Tongue.

The Twelve Lesser Prophets (so called because their Writings are of a Smaller
Bulk) are accounted by the Jews as Duodecem Prophetae in unius voluminis
angustias coarctati. Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin. (...), Epiphan. Haeres. 8. l. 4.
c. 18.
One Book: and accordingly St. Stephen quoting a Passage out of Amos, says, It
is written in the Book of the Prophets, Amos 7. 42. The First of these Holy
Seers was Hosea, who flourished, in the Kingdom of Israel in the Days of
Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah, and of Iaroboam King of
Israel: so that he was Contemporary with Isaiah, as appears from the first
Verses of both Prophecies. He directs his Prophecy wholly against the Kingdom
of Israel, which consisted of the Ten Tribes, but is by him peculiarly styled
sometimes Joseph, sometimes Ephraim, at other times Samaria, Bethel, Jacob, and
Israel* as, on the other hand, the Kingdom of Judah is called by him Benjamin,
and sometimes Jerusalem His main Design and Business through the whole Book is
to set forth the gross Idolatry and other flagitious Practices of that
degenerate People, and to denounce the Judgments of God against them, and
particularly to foretell their Captivity in Assyria, and withal to excite them
to a due Apprehension of this Severity of God toward them, and thereby to
beget an unfeigned Remorse and Penitence in them, that they may obtain the
Pardon of their Sins, and partake of the Divine Mercy and Favor. All which is
done with a most ravishing Ardency, Affection and Zeal. As to the Stil^ indeed,
it may be observed, that as Ezekiel was the Obscurest of the Greater Prophets,
so Hosea is of these Minour ones: but this Obscurity and Difficulty are
countervailed by that Rich Treasure which are hid under them, and which will
prove an Ample Reward to those who search into it, and acquaint themselves with
the transcendent Excellency both of the Style and Matter of this Writer.

Joel prophesied in the Kingdom of Judah before the time of the Captivity,
though the particular Time is not (as in most of the other Prophets) mentioned.
But it is probable he prophesied at the same time with Hosea, who is set
immediately before him. So St. Ierom, Theodoret, Augustine, and other Fathers
think. He foretells the coming up of a Northern Army, viz. from Babylon,
which is North of Judea: Though some interpret it of an Army of Locusts and
Caterpillars, and other such mischievous and devouring Insects mentioned chapter 1.
v. 4, etc. and consequently the Prophet predicteth the horrid Devastation,
Dearth and Famine in Judea, which should be caused by them. I am for joining
both these Interpretations together, for I see it is the usual way of the Holy
Ghost in the Scriptures (especially the Prophetic ones) to express two
different Things and Occurrences by the same Words. Here is then a double Army
spoken of, viz. that of the Chaldeans, which in a short time afterward invaded
Judea, and laid it waste; and also that of Noxious Vermin, which was to be sent
as a just Penalty and Infliction for their Abuse of the Fruits of the Earth,
and the great Plenty which they had enjoyed. Whereupon he most warmly stirs
them up to Repentance; and to that Purpose enjoineth a Fast, and urges them to
a strict Observance of it from the Hopes of M^rcy and Forgiveness, and the
Removal of all those Judgments which they labor under, yea from the
Expectation, or rather the Assurance of a Blessing upon the whole Church. This
is briefly, but most admirably set forth by this Man of God. And as it refers
to that direful Judgment of Famine and Destroying the Fruits of the Earth, it
may be made use of as a Seasonable Form and Rule of Devotion and Behavior in
the time of such a Calamity.

Amos, who in his Youth had been a Herdsman in Tekoa, (a little Country-Town a
Mile and a half off of Jerusalem) is now sent to the Kine of Bashan, the People
of Samaria, the Kingdom of Israel, to reduce them to Repentance and Reformation
of Life. To which end he boldly remonstrates against the Crying Sins which were
visible among them, but especially against Idolatry, Oppression, Wantonness,
and Incorrigibleness. He spares not those of Judah, but frankly reproves them
for their Carnal Security, Sensuality, Injustice, Confident Boasting. And he
scares both of them with frequent Threatenings and Menaces, and is not afraid to
tell them that their persisting in their Sins will end at last in the Ruin of
the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel; which he confirms and illustrates by the
Visions of a Plumb-line, and of a Basket of Summer-Fruit. It is further
observable in this Prophecy, that as it begins with Denuntiations of Judgment
and Destruction against the Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, and other
Enemies of the Church, so it concludes with comfortable Promises of restoring
the Tabernacle of David, and erecting the Kingdom of Christ. He prophesied in
the Days of Vzziah King of Judah, and Jeroboam the Son of Ioash (to distinguish
him from the other of that Name, who was Son of Nebat): so that he flourished
at the same time with Hosea and Joel. But there is some Difference as to the
time, for it is added, [two Years before the Earthquake] v. 1. that is, toward
the latter End of King Vzziah's Reign.

Obadiah's Prophecy is contained in one single Chapter, and is partly a Divine
Invective against the merciless Edomites, who mocked and derided the Captive
Israelites as they passed to Babylon, and who, with other Enemies (their
Confederates) invaded and wronged these poor Strangers, and made a great
Ravage, and divided the Spoil among them: and it is partly a Prediction of the
Deliverance and Salvation of Israel, and of the Victory and Triumph of the
whole Church over all her Enemies. Some think this Obadiah was he that was King
Ahab's Steward, who hid the Prophets: then it is certain he was before these
Other Prophets. But there is no Foundation for this. We may rather adhere to
St. Ierom's Opinion, who goes upon this Rule, that when the time of the
Prophecy is not mentioned, it is to be referred to the same time that the
preceding Prophecy was writ in.

Ionah's Prophecy was directed to the Ninevites, as Obadiah's to the Edomites,
and relates how that Prophet being commanded by God to go to Nineveh, but
disobediently traveling another way, was discovered by a sudden Tempest
arising, and was cast into the Sea, and swallowed by a Whale, which, after it
had lodged him three Nights and three Days in its Belly, disgorged him upon the
dry Land. Whereupon being made sensible of his past Danger, and of his
Miraculous Deliverance from it, he betook himself to that Journey and Embassy
which were first appointed him; and arriving at that Great City, the Metropolis
of all Assyria, he, according to his Commission, boldly laid open to the
Inhabitants their manifold Sins and Miscarriages, and proclaimed their sudden
Overthrow if they repented not. Upon which the whole City, by Prayer, and
Fasting, and Humbling themselves, and by Turning from the Evil of their Ways
most happily averted the Divine Vengeance, and prevented their Ruin. A most
Admirable Instance of the Divine Mercy! A Rare Example of Universal Repentance,
and that even in a Pagan Country! Happy had the Ninevites been if they had not
relapsed afterward. Nor is Ionab's unseasonable Repining at this Dispensation
of Heaven omitted here by him, or by whoever it was that wrote this Remarkable
History; wherein we see the Integrity of the Inspired Writers, which is such,
that they are not backward to communicate to the World their own greatest
Failings, or those which the best Men are incident to. Jonah prophesied at the
same time with the foregoing Prophets, as Ierom concludes; and he is backed by
other Fathers, as Clemens of Alexandria, Eus^bius, Augustine, Theophylact.

Micah prophesied in the Kingdom of Judah before the Captivity of Babylon, in
the same Kings Reigns that the preceding Prophets did, as appears from the
first Verse. He impartially reprehends the Great and Rampant Vices both of
Jerusalem and Samaria, and is terrible in his Denuntiations of Judgments
against both Kingdoms, but more particularly he foretells the approaching
Destruction of Jerusalem: Yet he leaves not the Church without Comfort, for he
expressly foretells the Confusion of her Enemies, the Messias's blessed Arrival,
and with him the Peace and Prosperity, the Increase and Advancement, the Glory
and Triumphs of the Church. So that Micah seems to be Isaiah epitomized, giving
us that in brief which the other more largely and amply insisted on. And it may
be observed that these two Prophets are alike in their Style and manner of
Speaking, which is very sublime and towering.

Nahum prophesied after the carrying captive of the Ten Tribes, a little before
the Captivity of the Kingdom of Judah. His Prophecy is rightly called a Burden,
that Word both in the Greater and Lesser Prophets importing the denouncing of
some Grievous and Heavy Judgment: and such is this which he here threatens to
Ninev^h. For it seems this People returned to their former evil Ways after
Ionah's Preaching; and for this Reason another Prophet is sent to foresignify
their Overthrow by the Chaldeans upon this their Relapse into their former
Sins. He uses no kind Invitations to Repentance, as the former Messenger did,
but he absolutely and peremptorily proclaims their Ruin, and with a most
passionate and melting Eloquence (such as is not to be paralleled in the most
Celebrated Masters of Oratory) deciphers the horrid Nature of it.

Habakkuk prophesied in King Ahaz and Hezekiah's Reigns, as Theodoret,
Epiphanius, and others of the Ancients, probably determine; and not after the
Captivity of the Two Tribes, as Ierom thinks, for this was not past when this
Prophet writ, as is evident from chap. 1. v. 6. Lo, I raise up the Chaldeans,
who shall march through the Breadth of the Land, etc. He complains of the
Corrupt State of the Jews in those times, predicting the Invasion of the
Chaldeans as the just Recompense of their Misdoings. This is remarkable in this
Prophecy (which we find not in any of the rest) that it is composed in way of a
Dialogue. First, the Prophet speaks, chap. 1. v. 1, to the 4th: then God
answers, v. 5, to the 11th. The Prophet replies, v. 12, to the 17th: God's
Answer is in chap. 2, to the End. Then follows the Prophet's Prayer. The
Providence of God in suffering the Best Men to be miserably treated, and that
by the Worst and Vilest, is here vindicated; and the Certainty of a Happy
Revolution is assured. The Prophet also by propounding the Example of his own
Singular Faith and Patience in the greatest Difficulties and Extremities,
encourages the Pious to wait on God, to rejoice in him, and to expect
Deliverance from their Calamities, and Revenge on their Enemies in due time.
The whole was designed to be a Support and Solace to the Faithful in the time
of their Captivity.

Zephaniah, who was employed in the Prophetic Office in King Ios^as's time,
(as we read, v. 1.) a little after the Captivity of the Ten Tribes, and before
that of Judah, (so that he was Contemporary with Jeremiah) freely and plainly
tells the Jews what it was that incensed God's Wrath against them, viz. their
Contempt of his Service, their Apostasy, their Treachery, their Idolatry, their
Violence and Rapine, and other egregious Enormities which were observable in
them and their Princes. Such high Provocations as these rendered their
Destruction terrible, universal, unavoidable. And then (as most of the Prophets
are wont) he mingles Exhortations to Repentance as the only Proper Concern in
these Circumstances. He adds very severe Comminations against their Enemies,
and presageth their Downfall. He likewise comforts the Godly with Promises of
the certain Restoration of the Church, of a Release from all their former
Pressures and Grievances, of a Cessation from all their Fears, of the
Continuance of the Divine Presence and Blessing. So that this short Prophecy
contains in it all the Others, and may justly be said to be an Abridgment of
them.

Haggai prophesied after the Return from the Captivity in Babylon, in the
second Year of Darius King of Persia, sharply reproving the Jews for their
neglecting the Rebuilding the Temple, and vigorously exciting them to that Work
both by Threatenings and Promises, but chiefly by the latter, assuring them of
the Divine Blessing and Assistance in so religious and worthy an Enterprise,
and foretelling them of the Messias's Coming, and of the Glory of this Second
Temple, which should far exceed that of the first, even in this respect, that
the Messiah himself should honor this Temple with his Presence.

Zechariah entered on the Prophetic Office at the same time with Haggai, some
time after the Release from the Captivity, and he was sent to the Jews on the
same Message, i. e. to check them for their Backwardness in erecting the
Temple, and restoring the Divine Worship, but especially for the Disorder of
their Lives and Manners, which could not but derive a Curse upon them.
Therefore he exhorts them to seek the Lord, and to turn from their evil Ways,
and thereby to conciliate and obtain the Favor of God. By several Notable
Visions and Types he endeavors to confirm their Faith, and establish their
Assurance concerning God's Presence with them and Care of them, yea and of his
Whole Church to the World's End: and as a Proof and Demonstration of this he
intersperseth the most comfortable Promises of the Coming, the Kingdom, the
Temple, the Priesthood, the Victory, the Glory of Christ the Branch. Nor does
he forget to assure them of the Ruin of Babylon, which had been their
implacable Enemy. And here likewise is foretold the Great Number of Converts to
the Christian Faith, the successful Spreading and Propagating of the Gospel,
the wonderful Efficacy of the Holy Spirit in those Days, the Rejection of the
Unbelieving Jews, the utter Destruction of their City, Temple, and whole Nation
by the Romans, for their rejecting and crucifying the Messiah, and other
particular things belonging to the times of the Gospel, which none of the
Lesser Prophets speak of but this.

Malachi is the last of these Prophets, yea of all the Prophets of that
Dispensation. After him ceased Vision and Prophecy in Israel until Christ's
appearing, when Zachary, Simeon, Mary, Elizabeth, Anna, were illuminated with
the Prophetic Spirit. He prophesied about 300 Years before our Savior's time,
reproving the Jews for their Ungrateful and Wicked Living after their Return
from Babylon: particularly he charge them with Rebellion, Sacrilege,
Adultery, Profaneness, Infidelity, but especially he reprehends the Priests for
being Careless and Scandalous in their Ministry, which one thing was sufficient
to give Authority to others to be Vicious. At the same time he forgets not to
take notice of and encourage the Pious Remn^nt in that corrupted Age, who
feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name* whose Godly Converse and
Associating with one another in that debauched time, he assures them were
registered in a Book of Remembrance by God himself. This Prophet, who had
pointed before at the Messiah to be exhibited, (for he expressly ^aith, He shall
suddenly come to his Temple) now shuts up his Prophecy, and indeed all the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, with an Exhortation to remember the Law, i. e.
to live according to its holy Rules and Injunctions, and with a Promise of the
Coming of the Lord, who was to be ushered in by Elijah the Prophet, i. e. by
John the Baptist, who came in the Spirit and Power of Elias, Luke 1. 17. And so
this Close of the Old Testament refers to the New, to which I now hasten:

CHAP. X.
An Account of the Writings of the Four Evangelists: the peculiar Time, Order,
Style, Design of their Gospels. The Act of the Apostles showed to be an
Incomparable History of the Primitive Church. The Epistles of St. Paul
particularly delineated. He is proved to be the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. An Enquiry into the Nature of this Apostle's Style and manner of
Writing. The excellent Matter and Design of the Epistles of St. James, St.
Peter, St. John, St. Jude. An Historical Series or Order is not observed in the
Book of the Revelation.

NEXT follow the Sacred Books of the New Testament, the Evangelical Novels, the
New Laws of Christianity, the True Authenticks, which present us with the
actual Discoveries of the Glorious Light of the Gospel, and of the Blessed
Author of it. These were writ in Greek for the same Reason that Joseph the Jew
chose to write his Books not in his own Language, but in this, because (as he
says himself in his Preface to the Jewish War) he would have them read and
understood by Greeks and Romans, and all Persons. So Aelian was a Roman, yet
writ his Books of Animals, and Various History, etc. in Greek, because this was
the Universal Language at that time. These Writings of the New Testament are
either Histories or Epistles. The Histories are the Four Gospels, and the Acts
of the Apostles. As for the former, the Writings of the Four Evangelists, there
were none of them extant whilst Christ was on Earth, for till his being taken
up to Heaven, (which was the Consummation of all he had before done and
suffered) they could not make the Evangelical History perfect. But afterward
some of the Apostles and Disciples resolving, according to their Master's Acts
1. 8.
Order, to go and preach in foreign Regions, and to disperse the Christian
Religion over all the World, put forth the History of the Gospel in Writing
before they went about this great Work. St. Matthew was the first Inspired
Person that committed the Evangelical Transactions to Writing, which he did
about eight Years after Christ's Passion, A. D. 42. He alone, of all the
Evangelists, say St. Prolog. Ga* an^e Evang.
Ierom, Eccl* His^^ (...)
Eusebius, St. De Cons* Evang* l. 1.
Augustine, Homil. in Matlh*
Chrysostom, and most of the Ancient Writers of the Church, wrote his Gospel
first in Hebrew: which partly appears from this, that some of the Hebrew Words
are explained by the Person who translated it into Greek; who it is probable
was St. Matthew himself, as the Ancients generally agree: and so the Hebrew and
Greek Copies are both of them* the Originals. Then St. Mark and St. Luke writ
their Gospels, the one about ten (tho others say twenty), the other about
twenty (some say thirty) Years after our Savior's Death; and there are some
that invert the Order, and give the Priority to St. Luke* But all agree that
St. John was the last of the Evangelists, and wrote toward the latter end of
the first Century. But as for the Punctual Time when the Evangelists put forth
the Gospels, it is doubtful; and I do not find any certain ground whereo^ we
may ^ix a satisfactory resolution of the Doubt^punc;

This may be observed that St. Matthew and St. John were Eyewitnesses of what
they wrote: (...) St. Mark and St. Luke had what they wrote from the relation
of others. Particularly St. Mark, who was St. Peter's Companion, composed his
Gospel by his Order and Direction, and with his especial Approbation, says
Eusebius. Again, it is to be observed that tho every Evangelist relates nothing
but the Truth* yet no one of them relates the Whole Truth concerning Christ's
Life and Actions. Tho the Substance of the Gospel be contained in every one of
these Writers, yet some Particulars are found in one that do not occur in
another: which makes it necessary to consult them all, and to compare them
together. As for St. Matthew and St. Mark, we may take notice that they do not
always observe the Order of Time, and the true S^ries of the Matter: especially
the former of these is not curious in this particular. But as for the other two
Evangelists, they are very punctual, and inviolably observe the Order of things
as they happened, excepting only that Parenthesis (for such it is) in Luke 3.
19, 20. concerning Herod. Of all the Evangelists St. Luke is the fullest, and
gives the compleatest, mos^ circumstantial and orderly Relation of things:
which he himself takes notice of in his Preface to his Gospel, in those Words
to Theophilus, It se^med good to me, having had perfect Understanding of all
things, from the very first* to write unto thee in order. And yet, though his
Gospel be ample, and more methodical in the Narrative or History than the rest,
yet he is but brief in relating things that our Savior did till the last Year
of his Preaching, St. Matthew having been full in them: and in some other
things he has need of a supply from the rest of the Evangelists, and more
especially from St. John, whose Gospel (from the Beginning of the 14th Chapter
to the End of the 17th) contains those Excellent Discourses of our Savior
before his Passion, which were wholly omitted by the other Evangelists. Besides
that, this Evangelist, in the Entrance into his Gospel, is more Sublime and
Soaring than the rest, (and for that Reason is represented by an Eagle)
asserting the Divinity of Christ against the bold Heretics of that time, who
openly confronted that Doctrine. And in other Places of his Writings he has a
Peculiar Strain and Excellency, which Coll. Mensal.
Luther expresses thus, after his plain way, Every Word in John weighs two
Tuns. Concerning the Evangelists I may note this, that though they do not all
of them set down the very individual Words that Christ or others spoke, (for we
see that sometimes one represents them in Terms different from the rest) yet
those that do not so, deliver always the Sense of what was said; and even that
was dictated by the Holy Spirit, which is sufficient. And concerning St. John
particularly I remark this, that seeing he was the last of all the Evangelists,
i. e. he wrote his Gospel last, it is rational upon that Account to interpret
the other Evangelists by him, namely, where any Doubt or Controversy arises:
for he having perused the other Evangelists, and observed what Exceptions
unbelieving Men had made against any Passages in their Writings, it is not to
be doubted but that he expresses himself with greater Plainness and Perspicuity
where those Matters are concerned. This the intelligent and observant Reader
will find to be true if he consults the respective Places.

It is endless to give a Particular and Distinct Survey of every one of the
Evangelists Writings. This only can be said here, (in pursuance of our grand
Undertaking) that these Books are the Choicest History that ever were committed
to Writing, because they contain the Birth, the Life, the Actions, the
Doctrine, the Miracles, the Sufferings, the Death, the Resurrection, the
Ascension of our Lord JESUS Christ, our most Compassionate Savior and
Redeemer: All of which are the most Stupendous and Amazing, as well as the most
Necessary Matters to be known in the whole World. If this brief and summary
Account of the Gospels be not sufficient to recommend them to our Studies and
Meditations, and to beget in us the utmost Esteem of them, nothing more largely
said will ever be able to do it.

To the Historical Part of the New Testament belong the Acts of the Apostles,
wherein there is an Account given of what all the Apostles were concerned in,
viz. their choosing Matthias into Iudas's room, their Meeting together on the
Day of Pent^cost, at which time they were all inspired by the Holy Ghost
(according to Christ's Promise) visibly descending upon them, their
Determinations in the Council held at Jerusalem, with their Letters which they
sent to the Churches abroad, and several other things in which the Apostles
were jointly interested. This Book contains also the History of the first
Founding of the Christian Church, of its happy Progress and Success, especially
among the Gentiles, of the Opposition and Persecution it encountered with, of
the Undaunted Courage of the Apostles, of the Course of their Ministry, of
their Disputations, Conferences, Apologies, Prayers, Sermons, Worship,
Discipline, Church Government, Miracles. Here we are informed what were the
Vsages of the first Apostolical Ages: In a word, here we may find the Primitive
Church and Religion. All which are plain Evidences of the singular Usefulness,
Worth and Excellency of this Book. But it is chiefly confined to the Acts and
Achievements of those most Eminent Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul: and
especially and most largely here are related the Conversion, Travels,
Preaching, and Sufferings of the latter of these; for St. ^uke being St. Paul's
Companion all along, and well acquainted with whatever he did, and whatsoever
happened to him, gives us the fullest Narrative of this Apostle. The whole Book
is a History of about forty Years, namely, from Christ's Ascension^ to the
second Year of St. Paul's Imprisonment at Rome.

The New Testament consists likewise of several Epistles of the Apostles; which
are Pious Discourses, occasionally written more fully to explain and apply the
Holy Doctrine which they had delivered, to confute some growing Errors, to
compose Differences and Schisms, to reform Abuses and Corruptions, to stir up
the Christians to Holiness, and to encourage them against Persecutions. For the
Apostles having converted several Nations to the Faith, when they could not
visit them in Person, wrote to them, and so supplied their Presence by these
Epistles.

To begin with St. Paul's Epistles, they were written either to Whole Churches,
viz. of Believing Gentiles, (i. e. the greatest Part of them were such, tho
some of Jewish Race might be mixed among them) as the Epistles to the Romans,
Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians; or
of Believing Jews wholly, as the Epistle to the Hebrews: Or they were written
to Particular Persons, as the Epistles to Timothy, Titus, Philemon.

The Epistle to the Romans is made up of several Profound Discourses on such
Subjects as these, the Prerogatives of the Jews, their Rejection
notwithstanding those Prerogatives, the Wonderful Dispensation of God toward
the Gentiles, the Nature of the Law, Justification by Faith alone, Election and
Free Grace, the Conflict between the Flesh and Spirit, Christian Liberty,
Scandal, the Use of Indifferent Things, etc. But the chief thing which he
designs in this Epistle, is to show, that neither the Gentiles by the Law of
Nature, nor the Jews by that of Moses, could attain to Righteousness and
Justification, and consequently Salvation; but that these are to be obtained
only by Faith in Christ Jesus, for whose Merits alone we are accounted
righteous in the Sight of God. And then, to show that this Faith is not
separated from Good Works, he adds Exhortations to the Practice of Holiness,
Obedience of Life, and a Religious Conversation. So that this Epistle is both
Doctrinal and Practical, it directs us in our Notions and in our Manners. It
decides some of the greatest Controversies, and withal it informs us about the
most indispensable Offices of Christianity.

The next Epistles are to the Church of Corinth, the chief City of
Peloponne^us, which is now called the Morea. And Cenchrea (which you read of,
Romans 16. 1. Acts 19. 18.) was the Station of Ships for this maritime City, but
was a distinct Town from it. To the Converted Inhabitants of this great
Metropolis, (famed for its Wealth, and therefore surnamed the Rich, as
Thucydides says) ^ea 2 Cor. 1. 1.
to all the Saints in Achaia the Apostle here writes. His first Epistle to them
is against the Unsound Persuasions and Vicious Practices which he observed
among them at that time. His Design was to reform them as to their Schisms and
Dissensions, their Idolatrous Communion, their Unseemly Habits, their
Confusions and Disorders in their Assemblies, their Profaning the Lord's
Supper, their Toleration of Incest, and the like scandalous Behavior. Besides,
there are other considerable Matters which he treats of, as Marriage, Divorce,
Virginity, eating of Meats sacrificed to Idols, Christian Liberty, going to Law
before Heathens, Church Discipline, Ministers Maintenance, Spiritual Gifts,
especially the Gift of Prophesying, and. Some particular Cases concerning which
are resolved with great Plainness and Dexterity, and may be serviceable to
determine our Judgments in all Cases of the like Nature. He also admirably
descants on the Nature and Necessity of Charity, and he by multiplied Arguments
asserts the Doctrine of the Resurrection.

When the Corinthians had received this First Epistle, and as soon as the
Apostle was informed by Titus what Reformation it had wrought in them, he writ
a Second to them, in Defense of his Ministry and Apostleship, against some that
labored to bring him into Contempt among them. He threatens Offenders, he
encourages the Obedient, he animates the Faint-hearted, he confounds his
Antagonists, and that by a new way of Argument, viz. by boasting of his
Sufferings, and giving a full Inventory of them. He displays his Calamities, he
blazons his Crosses; and Victories and Triumphs do not more elevate others than
these do him. He excellently discovers the hypocritical Pretenses of False
Prophets, he vindicates his own Person and Authority, he answers the Calumnies
and Aspersions of Erroneous Teachers, he clears himself from the Imputation of
Levity, Pride, Vainglory, Severity, and other things laid to his Charge: He
asserts the Truth of his Doctrine, and the Laudableness of his Actions, and
exhorts to all Holiness and Righteousness of Life. But the greatest Part of
this Epistle is Apologetical: whence we learn, that it is not unseemly or
unchristian to enlarge on one's own Actions and Sufferings when there is a
necessary Occasion.

The Epistle to the Galatians (i. e. the Christian Brethren in Galatia, a
Region in the Lesser Asia, called also Gallo-Graecia, because it was of old
inhabited by Gauls and Greeks) is directed against the False Apostles among
them, who mingled the Law with the Gospel, Legal Works with Faith, and made the
former necessary to Justification Whereupon he again asserts the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith; so that this Part of the Epistle is a brief Summary of
the Epistle to the Romans. He proves, that these Gentile Converts need not
become Proselytes of the Jews, nor observe the Law of Circumcision, or any
other Mosaic Rite. But he tells them the right Use of Circumcision and of the
Law, and bids them stand fast in the Evangelical Liberty, and be careful that
they do not abuse it, but walk in Love and Meekness, Humility, Modesty, and
Charity, which are the Great and Noble Virtues that are to shine in the Lives
of Christians. It is easily observable that the Apostle is more Warm and
Vehement in this Epistle than in any of his others; the Reason of which is,
because he saw his Galatians so greatly endangered by their listening to the
perverse Reasonings of the Gnostics (as some think) or other Iudaizing
Teachers that were crept in among them, and were persuading them to embrace
another Gospel, to di^own and reject the Principles which he had taught them,
and to come off from Christianity to Judaism. This kindles a holy Indignation
in his Breast, and makes him with an unwonted Keenness and Severity cry out
against them, and complain of their gross Folly, yea their wilful suffering
themselves to be bewitched and infatuated by those Impostors.

His Epistle to the Ephesians, i. e. the faithful Christians of Ephesus the
Head-City of Asia the Less, (which was written from Rome when he was a Prisoner
there) divinely sets forth the Great and Astonishing Mystery of our Redemption
and Reconciliation, the Freeness and Riches of Grace in Christ Jesus, the
Admirable Benefits and Privileges of the Gospel, the Marvelous Dispensation of
God to the Gentiles in revealing Christ to them, the Excellency and Dignity of
his Apostolic Charge. He adds most Pathetick Exhortations to Constancy in the
Faith, notwithstanding the Calumnies of False Teachers, and the Peril of the
Cross. He propounds the most Cogent Motives to Love and Unity: he urges the
conscientious Performance of all the Duties of Religion, and gives Particular
Rules and Precepts for the discharging of every Christian Office; so admirable,
so Entire, so Comprehensive is this Part of the Apostle's Writings.

The Epistle to the Philippians (i. e. the Christians of Philippi, a City of
Macedonia, and a Roman Colony) was writ also when the Apostle was imprisoned at
Rome: and in it he thanks them for their Liberality toward him in his Bonds,
and for their sending Epaphroditus (their Minister) with a Supply of Money to
him. This Epistle is chiefly writ to them in return to this seasonable Kindness
of theirs, and (as that to the Galatians was the Sharpest, so this) is the
Smoothest and Sweetest, the most Endearing and Pathetick of all St. Paul's
Epistles, and is fullest of Paternal Affection. He here likewise takes notice
of and extols their Proficiency in the Gospel, and then labors to confirm them
in it: he exhorts them to Increase and Persevere in the Christian Faith, to
bear their Persecutions with Patience and Constancy of Mind, to be Humble and
Peaceable, and to be Loving to one another. He cautions them against Seducers
and False Teachers, who bad them rely on the Righte^^sness of the Law; and on
the contrary assures them. that their only Trust and Dependence ought to be on
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. He earnestly
beseeches them to be Exemplary in their Conversations, and to live in the
Practice of all Christian Duties. He lovingly and passionately Salutes them,
and Prays for them: he is every where Obliging and Affectionate; in sum, the
whole Epistle is written with a Pen dipped in Oil.

In the Epistle to the Colossians (i. e. the People of Colosse, a City in
Phrygia, not far from Laodieea and Hierapolis, in the Proconsular Asia, who
were converted by the Preaching of Epaphras, whom St. Paul had sent to them,
but now is his Fellow-Prisoner at Rome) the chief Design of the Apostle is to
Reduce those that were led away by False Teachers, whether Jews or
Philosophers. The former introduced the Mosaic Ceremonies and Observations the
latter brought in Unsound Notions and Speculations, and both of them perverted
the Simplicity and Purity of the Gospel. Wherefore the Apostle endeavors to
establish them in the true Evangelical Doctrine, in opposition to Judaism and
the Vain Deceits of Philosophy. He is earnest with them to adhere only to
Christianity, and to persevere in the Practice of all those Excellent Precepts
that belong to it. And accordingly first he mentions some General, and then
some Particular Graces and Duties. This Epistle is of the same Tenor, Subject,
and even the same Expression generally with that to the Ephesians: for the
Apostle* about the same time that he wrote to the Ephesians* did so likewise to
the Colossians, whilst the very same things were still fresh in his Memory:
whence it is that he uses the same Words often to both.

The first Epistle to the Thessalonians (or rather the Thessalonicians, for
they were Inhabitants of Thessalonica, the chief City of Macedony, and
converted by St. Paul, Silas, and Timothy) was writ on the Occasion of the
Persecutions which those Christians felt from the Jews: and in it the Apostle,
after he had expressed his Joy for their Conversion and Sincerity of Faith,
exhorts them to Constancy and Perseverance in his Doctrine, and not to be
discouraged by their Sufferings, but to continue in the Practice of Holiness as
well as in the Profession of the Gospel. To encourage them to which he reminds
them of his Boldness, Faithfulness, Sincerity, Affectionateness in preaching
the Gospel to them, and of his Present Care and Concernedness for them. He
gives several Particular Precepts of Charity and Piety, and warns them of
Christ's Second Coming, of which he adds a very Lively Description.

In his Second Epistle he corrects some Misinterpretations which had been made
by them of what he had said in the first: For it seems they mistook the Apostle
concerning the Coming of Christ, as if it were presently to happen, whereas (as
he acquaints them) there must first be a Visible Departure and Declension from
the Faith; and the Man of Sin (whom he briefly delineates) must appear in the
World before that Day comes. He heartens and encourages them under their
Sufferings, and admonishes them to continue in their Duty, from the
Consideration of the Certainty of Christ's Appearing: he prays most ardently
and affectionately for them, and interchangeably craveth their Prayers for him.
These are the Choice and Admirable Contents of these Epistles.

In the first Epistle to Timothy there are many Remarkable things treated of,
namely, the Right Use of the Law, Praying for all Mankind, Women's modest
Apparel, their Silence in the Churches, the Apostasy of the latter times, the
Duty of Servants, the Gain of Godliness, the Mischief of Covetousness, besides
several other Heads that are only glanced at. But the main thing insisted and
enlarged upon is Timothy's Duty as he was a Bishop, where we have an Excellent
and Complete Character of a Faithful Ruler or Overseer of the Church. Here he
is directed how to behave himself in that High Calling, how to discharge all
the Offices of that Sacred Function. Upon which Account this Epistle may justly
be styled a Pastoral Letter, because it does more immediately concern those
Persons who have the Charge of Christ's Flock, and have the Honor to be Guides
and Instructers of Souls. Here they may be taught all the Parts of their
Ministerial Employment, here they may furnish themselves with Exact Rules of
their Duty. This is the best Rubric and Canon for this Purpose. Nor are there
wanting particular Instructions concerning the Deacons Office, and concerning
Elders.

And such is the Second Epistle, where in likewise are farther Directions about
the Office and Behavior of an Evangelical Bishop: and he is exhorted to all
Vigilance, Patience, Prudence, Faithfulness, Diligence and Constancy in the
Ministerial Function, notwithstanding the Labors and Afflictions which
accompany it, notwithstandi^g the Discouragements, Hardships and Sufferings
which attend the conscientious Discharge of it. Besides many Other Things of
great Moment there is inserted a Prophecy concerning the Impious Seducers that
should come in the last Days, with a particular Description of them.

The Epistle to Titus is of the same Nature with those former ones, (especially
the first to Timothy) wherein he gives Directions how he ought to demean
himself as a true Evangelical Bishop or Pastor, inserting the Lively
Pourtraiture of such an Officer in the Church. For which Reason it is more
peculiarly sitted for the Use of those who are invested with that High
Character in the Ministry of the Church. But there are also Instructions
belonging to those of another Rank, and to all Christians in general; for they
are enjoined to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to live soberly,
righteously and godlily, to maintain good Works, to avoid foolish Questions and
Controversies, and (in brief) to behave themselves in their several Stations as
it becomes the Followers of Christ: So full, so large, so pregnant is this
Short Epistle.

The Epistle to Philemon was written by the Apostle from Rome when he was in
Prison, upon this particular Occasion; Philemon, one of St. Paul's Converts,
and afterward a Fellow Laborer with him in the Gospel, had a Servant who
defrauded him, and then ran away from him, and coming to Rome when St. Paul was
Prisoner there, was converted by him; whereupon he sends him back again to his
Master with this Epistle, wherein he desires Philemon to forgive his fugitive
Servant, and to be reconciled to him, and to receive him again into his Service
and Favor, and to look upon him as a Christian Brother rather than a Servant.
This the Apostle pursues with Expressions of extraordinary Love and Compassion
toward Onesimu^, whom he had begotten in his Bonds, and with great Tenderness
and Affection to Philemon, who was also his son in the Lord; and in his
Behavior toward both he shows the Authority and Bowels of a Spiritual Father.

The Epistle to the Hebrews (i. e. to those Converted Jews whom St. Paul had
known in Judea and Syria, or who were dispersed in other Countries, and at that
time being persecuted by the Unbelieving Jews, began to fall off from the
Christian Faith, and the Assemblies of the Faithful) was written to establish
them in Christianity, to assert the Preh^minence of Christ above Moses, and the
Preference of the New Testament to the Old; to show that the Priesthood of
Christ was pre^igured by that of Melchisedec, and that it far ^urpassed the
Aaronical or Levitical Priesthood; to evince the Excellency of the Evangelical
Dispensation above that of the Law; to prove that the Mosaic Rites and
Ceremonies were abolished, being all accomplished in Jesus our High Priest,
especially that all the Legal Sacrifices were fulfilled in his once offering up
himself upon the Cross for us, and that this Offering was Satisfactory unto God
the Father for the Sins of the World. This is managed with very strong
Reasoning, with a very singular and close Application, and with such a peculiar
Light and Spirit as this Divine Penman was Master of. This I may truly say,
that this Part of the Epistle to the Hebrews is the most illustrious
Confutation of the Socinian Heresy that is in the whole New Testament. For here
is plainly and fully asserted the Efficacy of Christ's offering himself as a
Sacrifice on the Cross for the expiating the Sins of Mankind. In sundry
Particulars this is most demonstratively proved, that a Complete and Full
Satisfaction was made unto God by his Death: which for ever confounds that
impious and blasphemous Doctrine of Socinus and his Followers, Quicquid passus
est Christus, nullam majorem vim per se ha^ere potest quam si quilibet pu^us
homo idem passus est. (...) de Serva^. Par. 3. c. 4.
that the Sufferings of Christ had no more Virtue and Efficacy in them than the
Sufferings of any mere Man whatsoever. After the Apostle had thus maintained
the transcendent Worth and Virtue of our Savior's Priesthood, and thence
undeniably inferred that the Gospel is a most Admirable and Excellent
Institution, he exhorts them to a constant Profession of it without wavering,
and to a Holy Life and Conversation suitable to so excellent ^ Doctrine: he with
great Industry endeavors to convince them of the Danger of Apostasy, he
confirms them in the Christian Doctrine amidst all the Persecutions and
Difficulties they labored under. And lastly, he is solicitous to prevent their
revolting by setting before them the most Eminent Examples of Faith and
Patience. These are the Momentous Themes which are observable in this Epistle.

I know some have doubted whether this Incomparable Epistle be St. Paul's, and
others have absolutely denied that it is his, yet still allowing that it was
written by some Inspired Person, and belongs to the Canon of Holy Scripture.
The Learned Grotius endeavors to prove that St. Luke wrote it. But for my Part
I have no Inclination to believe that any other Person than St. Paul penned
this Epistle: for this is most clear from that one Place, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Even as
our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you. St. Peter here speaks to the Jews, for to them this Epistle
as well as the former was written, as appears from the Title of it, Chap. 1. v.
1.
To the Strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, i. e. the Jews dispersed up and down the World, who by St. james are
called Jam. 1. 1.
the twelve Tribes which are scattered abroad. These, tho they neither lived in
Palestine, nor used the Hebrew Tongue, but lived among the Greeks, and spoke
that Language generally, and used the Greek Bible, viz. the Translation of the
Septuagint, in their Synagogues, and were commonly known by the Name of
Hellenists, and consequently were not Hebrews or Jews in the strictest and
properest Sense, yet because they were of Jewish Parentage, and professed, or
had once professed the Jewish Religion, they were still called Jews or Hebrews,
and accordingly have that Denomination here. So that St. Paul here, and St.
Peter and St. James write their Epistles to the same Persons, that is, to the
Converted Jews that were dispersed abroad, especially in Greece: and, which is
the Argument I make use of at present, St. Peter particularly takes notice of
St. Paul's Writing to these Dispersed Jews. But how does it appear that he writ
to them? Thus all the Epistles of this Apostle which we have mentioned before
(excepting this which we are now speaking of) were written either to the
Churches of believing Gentiles, or to some Particular Persons (as has been
noted already): whence it follows, that seeing he wrote to the Jews or Hebrews,
(as St. Peter testifies) he was the Author of this remaining Epistle which is
inscribed to them. We are certain that St. Paul writ to the Jews, because St.
Peter tells us so, that is, he tell^ us that St. Paul wrote to those to whom he
wrote* but St. Peter wrote to the Jews or Hebrews both his Epistles, therefore
St. Paul wrote to them likewise: and this Epistle to the Hebrews which we now
have, must be that very Epistle, because th^r^ is no other of his to them
besides it. Wherefore it is an undeniable Consequence that the Epistle to the
Hebrews was writ by St. Paul, and by none else* which was the thing to be
proved. Again, I might further add that what the Apostle Peter says concerning
St. Paul's Epistles, (or concerning the Matters contained in them, for (...)
may refer rather to (...) than to (...)) viz. that 2 Pet. 3. 16.
there are in them some things hard to be understood, does agree well to the
Sublime Matter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein so many Prophecies,
Types, Allegories and Mysteries, are treated of and applied: so that it may
probably be inferred hence, that this Epistle is referred to in particular, and
consequently that St. Paul was the Author of it. To corrobate this, we may
subjoin the unanimous Testimony of the Justin Martyr, Clem. Alexandr. Origin,
Eusebius, Council. Nic. 1. Athanasius, Cyril of Jerus. Greg. Nyss. and Naz.
Ba^il, Epiphanius, Chrysostom. Cy^^^ of Alexan^punc; Theodore^.
Greek Fathers, who generally attribute this Epistle to St. Paul: With whom
agree the Schoolmen; and all the Writers of the Church of Rome, but Erasmus and
Cajetan, and Ludovicus Vives, assert the same. Most of the Lutherans are of
this Opinion, though herein they dissent from their Master Luther; and the
Reformed Churches (as distinct from the Lutherans) are of the same Persuasion,
though Calvin be of another Mind; which shows that there are very Cogent
Reasons for this Opinion, otherwise these Parties would not dissent from their
Masters. It may be added, that Our English Church in the Title calls it the
Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews. As for the Reason of the Omission
of his Name in the Beginning of this Epistle, (which is not to be observed in
his Others) perhaps it was (as Clement of Alexandria, Athanasius, Chrysostom,
Theophilact, conjecture) because his Name was odious to most of the Jews, he
having been once a Jews, but afterward abandoned that Religion; wherefore he
advisedly left out his Name that it might not prejudice what he writ, and that
the Epistle might not be thrown away for the Author's sake. But whether this
was the Reason why his Name is not inserted (as in the rest of his Epistles) I
am not able to determine: only I am sufficiently convinced, from what St. Peter
says, that this Epistle was writ by St. Paul; that single Testimony is Proof
enough.

Here I might take occasion (having hitherto given you a brief Account of the
Excellent Matter of this Apostle's Writings, which are so great a Part of the
New Testament) to speak something concerning his Style, or rather to add to
what I have already said of it in another Place, under this Proposition, There
are no Solaecisms in the Holy Writings. This I am the more willing to do,
because some have looked upon this Apostle as a Man of no Eloquence, yea
scarcely of any Grammar and Consistency of Sense: which Imputation would argue
a great Defect and Imperfection in Scripture, and therefore I am obliged to
take notice of it. It is true, there are several things which render his Style
somewhat dark and perplexed in sundry Places. He brings in Objections
sometimes, but does not intimate that the Words are spoken in that way, as in
Romans 3. 5, 6, 7. and other Places; which makes the Sense difficult to those
that do not carefully examine the Context. In the 4th Chapter of that Epistle,
ver. 1. a Negative is left out, viz. the Answer to the preceding Question,
which should have been thus; No; he has not found. And in ver. 8. the Note of
Parenthesis is omitted, as it is in several other Places. Further, it is
observable, that the Apostle has sometimes references to Words and Things
which he had mentioned before, but which he seemed to have quite laid aside in
his Discourse. Thus he turns back again in 2 Cor. 3. 17. and refers to what was
said before in ver. 6. for those Words in the latter Place [ The Lord is that
Spirit] refer to the former one, where he speaks of the Spirit, i. e. the
Gospel and Spiritual Dispensation, in contradistinction to the Letter, i. e.
the Dispensation, of the Law. The Words then I interpret thus, The Lord Christ
is that Spirit, he is the Blessed Author and Instituter of that Evangelical and
Spiritual Economy which we are now under, and which brings true Liberty with
it, as he adds. Many Expositors labor to tack this Text to the immediately
foregoing one, but to little purpose: for they thereby make the Sense harsh and
distorted, there being nothing there to which this Passage refers. But by
reducing these Words to the 6th Verse (as it is not unusual with this Writer to
allude to some certain Expression a^ a considerable Distance) the Sense of the
Place becomes very easy and intelligible, viz. that Christ Jesus our Blessed
Lord is clearly exhibited in the Gospel, and gives Life and Spirit with this
Evangelical Administration.

Again, it is true St. Paul's Style is very full and running over sometimes:
his Pen is frequently in a Career, and is not easily stopped. All that he says
from the first Verse of the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians till
you come to the fifteenth Verse, is but one single Period. And in some other
Places he spins out his Subject into a Thread of almost the same Length. From
this Fullness of Matter it proceeds that he makes so many Excursions in his
Writings, which seem sometimes to Persons who take no notice of his sudden
Transitions, to be very Incoherent. Thus when he was proving the Dignity of
Christ's Priesthood, he undertakes to show that he was a Priest after the Order
of Melchisedec, of whom, says he, we have many things to say, Heb. 5. 11. but
yet he says nothing of him till the seventh Chapter; the Remainder of the
fifth Chapter, and the whole sixth being spent in a long Digression. But you
may observe a far longer in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 3. v. 1, 2. What
Advantage has the Jew, o^ what Profit is there in Circumcision? Much every
way, chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Where
you see he begins to reckon up the Advantages and Privileges of the Jews, (and
therefore (...), as I conceive, should not be translated chiefly, but first)
and yet here he names but One of them, for an Objection (which he undertakes to
answer and enlarge upon) takes him off for many Chapters together, and he
returns not again till chapter 9. v. 4. where he enumerates the rest of the
Privileges. And several other Instances might be assigned of his launching out
into Discourses which seem to be foreign to his purpose, which render his Style
somewhat abrupt, and his Sense intricate. He had begun a Comparison, Romans 5.
12. As by one Man Sin entered, etc. but then he strikes in with a Parenthesis in
the next Verse, which hinders him from finishing what he began till the 18th
Verse, Even so by the Righteousness of one, etc. Nay rather, he forsakes the
Comparison, and rises above it, finding the Grace in Christ Jesus rise higher
than the Condemnation that came by Adam. Whereas he began with an [ as], and
should have followed it with a [ so], he turns this into a [ much more] v. 15,
17. and then at last comes about to complete the Comparison as he had first
begun it, v. 18. There is a plain Parenthesis from the 1st Verse to the 7th in
the first Chapter to the Romans. There is another somewhat longer in 1 Cor. 11.
which begins at v. 23. and lasts to the 33d. So in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, chapter 3. when he had said, For this Cause I Paul the Prisoner of Jesus
Christ for you Gentiles, V. 1. he presently runs into a Parenthesis, which
continues till the 14th Verse, where he leaves off his Digression and proceeds,
For this Cause, etc. Thus the Redundancy of his Matter and Sense makes him
interrupt himself, and lard his Discourse with frequent Digressions, and divert
his Reader oftentimes from the present Subject he is upon. But notwithstanding
this, no Man that is Master of any Eloquence himself, or understands the Laws
of it in others, can ^asten any such thing as Illiterate, Blunt, Vnfashion'd
Language upon the Apostle.

It is true he terms himself rude in Speech, 2 Cor. 11. 6. whence Mr. Boil of
the Style of Scri^ture.
One gathers that he was but a Bad Speaker; for we cannot think, says he, that
he told a Lie out of Humility. But I reply, we cannot only think, but we must
know, that the Apostle debaseth himself here out of Christian Modesty, as when
he styles himself the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 9. yea, less th^n the
least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. Will any one say that he tells a Lie here,
though he was the Greatest Apostle, and one of the Greatest of Saints? Besides,
he might not unjustly style himself rude in Speech in this respect, that he so
frequently treats of Difficult and Abstruse Points, which are not easily
expressed, but are and must be clothed in such Language as is harsh, uncouth,
and unusual* When he discourses of Predestination, of Faith, of Justification,
of the Last Times, of the Son of Perdition, of the Day of Vengeance on the
Enemies of Christianity, of the Time of the Coming of our Lord, (yea St. Peter
tells us in that in all his Epistles there are some things hard to be
understood) it is no wonder that his Speech is obscure, and that he seems to be
(...). The Mysterious and Profound Subjects which he insists upon, and which
cannot be spoken out plainly, cause him to be thought such. His Rudeness of
Speech may be understood as the Foolishness of Preaching, i. e. that it seemed
such to some Persons, though it was not really^ so in it self. But though the
Great Apostle was pleased to diminish himself, and to speak meanly of his way
of Writing and Discourse, and tho his Adversaries or Pretended Friends were
wont to vili^y his manner of Speaking, yet let not us conceal or disguise his
Excellent Gift of expressing himself in his Writings. He was certainly a Great
Master of Language and Discourse: and indeed we could reasonably expect no
other from his Education, which furnished him with all sorts of Learning; for
as he was born at Tarsus, so it is likely he was brought up in the same Place,
which was then an Academy, and thence sent to Jerusalem, where he sat at the
Feet of Gamaliel: so that he was Master both of Heathen and Jewish Learning. It
is a Mistake of some Learned Writers of very great Note, that St. Paul's
Writings are full of Solaecisms, he being an Hebrew, and understanding little
Greek. This, I say, is a Mistake, for he was a Gr^cian by Birth, for Cilicia
was in Greece; and Strabo Geogr. l. 1^.
we read that the Inhabitants of Tarsus (his Birthplace) did strive to equal
the Athenians in the Study of Good Letters and Humane Learning. We may then
reasonably think that St. Paul, tho he was an Hebrew by Parentage, was well
skilled i^ Greek, it being his native Tongue. Therefore a Salmas. de Hellenist.
Pars 1. qu. 6.
Mode^n Critic of great Acuteness has well observed, that the Greek Tongue
was as familiar to him as Hebrew or Syriac. Shall any rational Man then think
that he was not able to speak Properly and Grammatically? Nay, shall we not
conclud^ from his Admirable Writings that he knew how to pla^e his Words, and
to speak with a good Grace? St. Ierom, who particularly takes notice that St*
Paul's Writings are full of Parentheses, Transitions* Digressions, Concise and
Abrupt Sayings, yet acknowledges that he was a most Astonishing peaker, and --
Quocunque respexeris fulmina sunt. Hieronym. Apol. pro lib. adv. ^ov.
Thundered as often as he spoke. Yea* tho on the 3d Chapter of the Epistle to
the Ephesians he hints that St. Paul's Writings were destitute of Rhetoric,
yet at Ad Pammach.
another time (to let us know that he said not this absolutely) he owns him to
be flumen Eloquentiae, a Flood, or rather a Torrent of True Eloquence.
Eusebius, who was a Good Judge of Eloquence, pronounces St. Paul a (...).
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 18.
most Powerful Spokesman, and one that was admirably skilled in the whole
Parade and Furniture of Words, and could do more this way than the most
Celebrated Orators among the Pagans. so that Coll. Men's.
Luther was in the right when he said, One of St. Paul' s Words contains well
three of Tully' s Orations. In fine, no Tongue can express the Excellency of
his Profound Writings, which not only comprise in them all the Depths and
Mysteries of Christianity, and astonish us with their High and Heavenly Matter,
but moreover do furnish us with many Elegancies and Embellishments of Oratory,
with many Florid and well Composed Periods, and abound every where with a most
Winning Eloquence, with the Charms of a most Melting and Affectionate
Rhetoric; insomuch that in some of his Epistles his Warmest Blood seems to be
the Ink he wrote with, and every Leaf is as it were the very Membrane of his
Heart.

Besides St. Paul's Epistles, which are fourteen in all, there are seven
others, viz. one of St. James, two of St. Peter, three of St. John, and one of
St. Jude; all which (except the two latter of St. John) are called Catholic or
General Epistles, because they were not directed to Particular Churches in one
Place, but to the Dispersed Converts through a great Part of the World.

St. James's Epistle was written to the Christian Jews that dwelt in other
Regions besides Judea, who consisted partly of the Ten Tribes carried captive
by Salmanassar King of Assyria, who never, that we read of, returned again, and
partly of the Two Tribes, many of which still remained in Exile: wherefore St.
James sends this Epistle to the Twelve Tribes scattered abroad. The two main
things in it are first concerning the Affictions and Persecutions which were to
be undergone for Christ's sake; where he exhorts them to Patience under those
great Trials. Secondly, concerning the Necessity of a Holy Life, where he shows
them that Justifying Faith must ^e known and manifested by Good Works. Besides,
many Excellent Caveats and Admonitions are intermingled touching Riches,
Covetousness, Hearing the Word, Swearing, Unruliness of the Tongue, Envy,
Wrath, Pride, Rash Judging of others, Self-Confidence, Forgetfulness of God's
Sovereignty and Providence in the World, and sundry other things of very great
Use in the Lives of Christians, especially of those that are in Affliction and
Adversity. Wherefore this Epistle is chiefly calculated for such.

St. Peter also (who was the Apostle of the Circum^ision) writes to the
Dispersed Jews, (such as were scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, ( i. e. the Lesser) and Bithynia, five Provinces of the Roman Empire)
those that voluntarily lived among the Gentiles ever since the Great
Dispersion, and were now become Christians, and fared the worse among the
Heathens and Obstinate Jews for being so. And perhaps here may be meant those
likewise that by Persecution were driven from their Homes in Judea, and
therefore are called Strangers, 1 Epist, chapter 1. v. 1. To these distressed Jews,
or of what kind soever they were (for De Civ. D^i, I. 18. c. 28. contr. Fa^ st.
l. 22. c. 89.
St. Augustine and ^ede, Aquinas, Lyranus, Ribera.
some others think the Converted Gentiles in several Countries are not here
excluded) he writes his first Epistle, to confirm and strengthen them in the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and in the Profession of the Christian Faith which they
had hitherto made, and to exhort them to a Greater Pro^iciency in it, and to
comfort them in their Persecutions against the Scandal of the Cross; and
lastly, to stir them up to the Exercise of all Christian Graces and Duties,
many of which, as Mutual Love, Patience, Watchfulness, Perseverance, Obedience
to Magistrates, with the particular Duties of Servants to their Masters, of
Husbands and Wives toward one another, of Spiritual Pastors toward their
Flock, he most excellently (though briefly) describes.

His Second Epistle (for it is undoubtedly his, as well as the first, though
Hugo Grotius, or he that published those Posthumous Annotations, labors to
offer Arguments to the contrary, which are enervated by Dr. Hammond in his
Notes on this Epistle) is of the same Nature with the first, exhorting the
Believing Jews to a Life worthy of Christians, to add one Virtue to another,
and to increase in all the Graces of the Holy Spirit. He asserts the Truth and
Authority of the Gospel, he shows the Danger of Backstiding, he warns them
against Heretical Teachers and Profane Scoffers that should come in the last
Days, of whom he gives a very Lively Character in several remarkable
Particulars. He voucheth the Certainty of Christ's Coming to Judgment, and the
Conflagration of the World, and thence infers the Reasonableness of preparing
themselves for that last Catastrophe by a blameless Life and Conversation. All
which is expressed in most apt and choice Words, and with that Concernedness
and Zeal which became so Eminent an Apostle.

The first Epistle of St. John (which is called Catholic or General, as being
written to all the Christian Jews wheresoever they were) is partly directed
against Seducers and Impostors (whom he calls Antichrists) risen up in those
Days, who subverted the Fundamentals of Religion, but more especially the Deity
and Humanity of Christ, as the Simonians, Gnostics, Carpocratians,
Cerinthians, Ebioni^es* and others mentioned by In Panario.
Epiphanius and De Haeresib.
Austin* whence he advises the Christians to try the Spirits, and not to be
too credulous and hasty in embracing every Doctrine that is offered them. He
has ob^ervable Notices concerning the grand Privilege of Adoption, concerning
the Love of the World, concerning the Sin unto Death. But the main Design of
this Epistle is to urge a Godly and Righteous Life, to convince those who are
called by Christ's Name of the Necessity of their walking answerably to it.
Indeed this Apostle was forced (as St. James before was) to write on this
subject, to press Good Works and Outward Righteousness, because some in those
Days turned the Grace of God into Licentiousness, making Faith exclude all
External Acts and Works of Holiness. Wherefore he offers several Plain Marks
and Tokens whereby they may certainly know whether they be Real Christians,
truly Religious, and the Children of God. The Sum of all he propounds is this,
that if they love God and their Brethren, and demonstrate this Love by the
proper and ge^^ine Fruits of it, then they may conclude they are Christians
indeed; otherwise they are mere strangers to Christianty, and to all Religion,
they deceive themselves, and there is no Truth in them. This the Beloved
Disciple and Divine Amorist incul^ates with that Spirit, Warmth and
Earnestness, which so Weighty a Subject deserves.

His second Epistle is written to the Elect Lady and her Children, that is,
says St. Epist. 11. ad Agerach.
Ierom, to some Eminent Select Church in Asia, and to all the Christians
belonging to it; for (...) among the Athenians, and Curia with the Romans, are
of the same Import with (...) an Assembly. Perhaps Ephesus is meant, says a
Dr. Hammend in loc.
Learned Man, which was the Metropolis of Asia, and so may more signally be
called (...). But it is the general Opinion of the Ancients and Moderns, that a
person, not a Church, (...) meant here; and that St. John (the Evangelist, not
another Presbyter of that Name, as St. Cata^^^. Script. Eccles.
Ierom thinks) writes to a Virtuous Lady, who was an (...) Servant of Christ, a
very Godly and Religions Woman: or it may be her Proper Name was (...), sine
articulo. Pricaeus in An^^^* in loc.
Elect, as a Learned Critic has conjectured: Which may seem the more
probable, because the word has no Article prefixed to it. It was usual with
our Savior himself (as the Evangelical Writings inform us) to make his
Applications to those of this Sex, to cherish and commend their Virtues. It is
particularly recorded, that Acts 17. 4.
of the Chief Women (afterward called Ver. 12.
Honorable Women) not a few were St. Paul's Proselytes. And to descend lower,
we read that St. Ierom took great Pains in instructing the Roman Ladies, and in
commending and encouraging their Study of the Holy Scriptures. Yea, many of his
Writings were directed and dedicated to Noble Women, Widows and Virgins, as
Paula, Eustochium, Salvina, Celantia, and several others that were Roman
Ladies, and of noble Extraction. Such is our Elect here, who is the only Person
of that Sex to whom an Inspired Epistle is written. She is commended for her
virtuous bringing up her Children, she is exhorted to abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, to perservere in the Truth, and to be careful to avoid all Delusions of
False Teachers. But chiefly the Apostle beseeches this Noble Matron to
practice the great and indispensable Commandment of Christian Love and Charity.

His third Epistle was writ to Gaius, a Converted Jew, (or Gentile, as others
think, because he has a Roman Name) a Man of a fair Estate, and who had been
very bountiful and hospitable to the Saints. The Design of the Epistle is to
own and commend his Hospitality, especially his seasonable Bene^icence and
Charity to Strangers, to those that were Exiles for the Cause of Christianity,
and to stir him up to continue in the Exercise of the same Charity and
Liberality to the distressed Brethren. Demetrius is propounded as an eminent
Example of this, for which and all other Virtues he had the good Report of all
Men, yea and of the Truth it self; that is, as he was spoken well of by every
one, so he really deserved it. On the other side, he complains of the
Uncharitable, Insolent and Ambitious Diotrephes, a Prating Opposer not only of
him and his Doctrine, but of all the true Servants of Jesus.

The General Epistle of Jude or Judas, as we render it in John 14. 22. (it
being the same Name with that of the Traitor, for it is no unusual thing for
good and bad Men to have the same Names; as in the Old Testament Eliab, Iehu,
Hananiah, etc. in the New Testament Simon, John, Ananias, are Instances of
this). This Epistle, I say, of this Good Apostle with a Bad Man's Name was
written to all Christian Churches, or at least to all the Jewish Christians
Dispersed; (the same to whom St. James and St. Peter wrote) wherein he exhorts
them to contend for the Faith, against those Dreaming Heretics and Seducers
that were at that time crept into the Church, whose Erroneous Tenants and
Ungodly Practices he here particularly deciphers, and from the Examples of
God's Vengeance on other Great Offenders infers the Certainty of these Men's
Ruin. In short, this Epistle has all the Marks of a true Apostolic Spirit,
and is of the same Argument with the second Epistle of St. Peter, and is a kind
of Epitome of it: and therefore I need not be very Particular in rehearsing the
Contents.

The last Book of the New Testament is the Revelation of St. John the Divine,
which Epithet is signally given to him here, because of the Divinity and
Sublimity of his Raptures, because he (of all the Apostles) had the greatest
Communications of Divine Mysteries. It may be referred either to the Historical
Books or to the Epistles; to the former, because it is a Prophetic History of
the State of the Church from the Apostles times to the end of the World: to the
latter, because it is in the Form of an Epistle, (after the three first Verses,
by way of Preface) viz. to the Seven Churches of Asia, at first planted by, and
now under the Government of St. John: and as it begins, so it ends after the
usual way of concluding Epistles, The Grace of our Lord Jesus ^brist be with
you all. Amm. Concerning the precise time when St. John received* and when he
wrote this Revelation, there is some Dispute: but the most probable (if not the
most generally received) Opinion is, that he being ^^nish'd into Patmos (an
Isle in the Archipelago, situated about forty Miles from the Continent of Asia)
by Domitian, (under whom was the Second persecution) this Revelation was
delivered to him about the middle of the Emperor's Reign, (but at several
times) and that he committed it to Writing about the latter end of it. As to
the Visions themselves, I will not here particularly in^ist upon any of them;
only in general it is commonly said and believed, that the Vision of the Seals
sets forth the State of the Church under the Heathen Persec^tions, from Nero to
the end of Dioclesian's Persec^tion: the Vision of the Trumpets (which follows
that) shows the Calamity of the Church by Her^sies, Schisms and Persecutions
afterward, in the times succeeding the Pagan Roman Emperors, viz. under
Papacy. And then the Vials tell what Vengeance befalls the Papal Antichrist, and
all the Churches Enemies. So that the Seals, Trumpets and Vials give an Account
of the three Grand Periods of the Church. There is great Probability of this:
but I must add, (and I will offer it to the Reader as a thing necessary to be
taken notice of in order to the right understanding of this Book) that the
Order of Time and History is not always observed here: things are not related
constantly in a certain continued Method and Series, nor are we to understand
or take them as written so. A great and prevailing Mistake it has been to
think that the Course and Order of Time are duly and all along observed in
these Writings. Whereas to a considerate Person it will appear that there is no
such thing, and that the Chapters are not writ and disposed in any Method.

This, because it may be looked upon and censured as a New Notion, I will make
good thus; the Day of Judgment is represented and described three or four times
in these Visions and Revelations, as first at the opening of the Sixth Seal,
chapter 6. v. 12, to the end: where the Description of the Last Day agrees exactly
with others in the New Testament, especially that of our Savior in Mat. 24.
and therefore to allegorize it, where there is no Occasion for it, is
unreasonable. If it be said, that the Disorder of the Sun, Moon and Stars
(which is here spoken of) signifies sometimes temporal Judgments, as the
Destruction of Babylon, Isa. 13. 10. and of Egypt, Ezekiel. 32. 7. I answer, that
though it does so, yet these Remarkable Judgments and Devastations were Figures
and Representations of the Last and Terrible one, and were so designed by
Heaven, and therefore this may well be set forth to us by the Holy Ghost in
this manner: nay, the darkning of the Sun and Moon, and the like Expressions,
are but Metaphorical in those former Instances, but here are Proper, Natural
and Real, and therefore ought so to be understood in this Place. Again, St.
John has another Revelation of this Great Day, in the End of the 11th Chapter,
from ver. 15, to the Close of the Chapter: but especially those plain Words in
ver. 18. Thy Wrath is come, and the time of the Dead that they should be
judged, place it beyond all doubt that the Final Judgment of the last Day is
here meant. Again, the Seventh Vial mentioned, Rev. 16. 17. which contains the
Last Plague, is no other than the Indignation and Punishment of That Day, as
appears from the Prodigies which accompany it, and particularly from what is
said, ver. 20. Every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found, which
expresses the terrible Dissolution of the World at that time. Besides that it
is observable in the Conclusion of the preceding Vial, which made way for this
last, that Christ says, I come as a Thief, v. 15. which manner of Expression
is particularly applied and made use of when the Day of Judgment is spoken of,
Mat. 24. 43. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 4* 2 Pet. 3. 10. And lastly, in the 20th Chapter,
from the 11th Verse to the end, there is another Vision of this Last and
General Appearance of the World, as is universally acknowledged by
Interpreters, and therefore we need not stand to clear it. Now from all this it
is evident, that there is not observed in the Visions of this Book an
Historical Order or Course of Time; for if there were, the General Day of Doom,
which is the last thing of all, could not be represented here three or four
times: This must have come in the shutting up of all, when all other things
were past, whereas now we see it is represented in the Beginning, in the
Middle, and in the End of these Revelations: Which, if it be well attended to,
is one admirable Key to open the Secrets of this Book, for hence we understand
that this Prophecy is not (what it has been thought to be) one Entire
Historical Narration of what shall be, and that first one thing is foretold,
and then what follows that in time is next set down, and so on in order. No;
the Day of Judgment being thrice at least inserted, shows, that the Visions of
this Book end, and then begin again, and then have a Period, and commence
again, and after that the same or the like Scene is opened, and things of the
same Nature are repeated. Which is a most evident Argument that this Book
consists of Three or Four Grand Prophecies or Prophetic Representations of the
Condition of Christ's Church from the time when this was ^^nned to the
Consummation of all things. Here are represented by different Types, Prophetic
Symbols and Visions, the most remarkable things which happen on the Stage of
the World, and the^ are these three, the Troubles and Persecutions which ^befal
the Servants of the most High, the ^^liver^^de of them out of those Trials, and
God's (...) ^^^^shing of their Enemies. These you will (...) set forth and
illustrated by diverse Schemes and Apparitions, by different and reiterated
Re^^esentations. And the Reason why things, tho the same, are diversely
represented, i. e. in diffe^^nt Visions over and over again, and why they are
expressed in different Terms and Words, the ^^^son (I say) why they are so
often repeated, is, ^^^use they so often come to pass in the several Ages of
the World by the wise Disposal of Provi^^no^. These Prophecies have been, and
they ^^all be yet fulfilled: for the State of the Church, as to the Cruelty of
its Enemies and Persecutors, and the Wonderful Deliverance from them, and
Avenging their Cause upon their Heads, is the same in different Ages, until the
time when Baby^^^ shall fall, and never rise again. To use the Words of a most
Eminent and Learned Bishop of our own; Dr. Patrick, Bishop of Ely, his Answer
to the Touchstone, and^.
One may easily see (says he) that Rome is here intended; and not Pagan but
Christian Rome, which is degenerated into an Idolatrous and Tyrannical State.
It is easy to see in the Book of the Revelation, that the Roman Church is
doomed in due time to Destruction.

You see then how Useful this Book is, you may be convinced of the Truth of
what is said in the Beginning of it, Blessed is he that reads, and they that
hear the Words of this Propheoy, chapter 1. v. 3. The we cannot so clearly descny
the Particular and (...) dividual Things, times and Person^ contained in t^^
tho this last Book of the Holy Scripture be in this Respect the Obscurest of
them all, tho in some Places there be Tot habet sacramenta quot verba. Hieron.
Ep. ad Paulio. de lib. Apocalypse.
as many Mysteries as Words, yet thus far it is properly Revelation, that
herein the State of the Christian Church, and the Particular Methods of God's
Providence toward it in all times are plainly revealed and discovered to us
plainly, I say, because they are so often repeated, that it is impossible to
mistake them. As Phara^^'s Dream was doubled to show the Certainty of the
things represented, Genesis 41. 32. so these Prophecies and Visions are doubled,
and tribbled; yea more than so, to assure us of the Certain Truth and Reality
of these Events, to confirm us in this Persuasion, that tho the Church of
Christ here on Earth be often troubled and persecuted, yet she has her times
of Restoration and Reviving, and there is a time of Vengeance and Recompense to
her Enemies, even in this World, but more especially at the Close of it, when
Christ shall come to Judgment.

Thus I have attempted to evince the Perfection of Scripture by enumerating all
the Books of both TESTAMENTS, and giving you a brief Account of them These
Excellent and Incomparable Books are the True Pandects indeed, the Books that
comprehend all, that treat of every thing that is necessary. They are the most
Valuable Collection of Writings under Heaven, they are of all the Books in the
World the most worthy of all Acceptance, because they are our Infallible Rule
and Surest Guide to Wisdom, Holiness and Blessedness, to the Attainment of the
most Desirable Things here, and of the most Eligible hereafter. If this and all
that I have said before do not prove them to be Compleats and Perfect, I
despair of ever telling you what will.

CHAP. XI.
None of the Books of the Holy Scripture are lost: Not the Book of the
Covenant: Nor the Book of the Wars of the Lord: Nor the Book of Iasher: Nor the
Acts of Vzziah. An Account of the Book of Samuel the Seer, the Book of Nathan
the Prophet, the Book of Gad the Seer, the Book of Iddo, the Books of Shemaiah,
Iehu, etc. What is to be thought concerning the Books of Solomon, mentioned
Kings 4. 32. 33. Objections drawn from Jam. 4. 5. from Luke 11. 49. from Acts
20. 35. from Judev. 14. from 1 Cor. 5. 9. from Col. 4. 16. fully satisfied.
Other Objections from 1 Cor. 7. 6, 12, 25 2 Cor. 8. 8. and 11. 17. particularly
answered.

But tho this be a clear and demonstated Truth, yet it is questioned and
doubted of by some. Wherefore the Fourth General Undertaking which I propounded
was this, to clear the Point of those Objections, which are wont to be brought
against it, and to show that notwithstanding these the Prefection of Scripture
is unshaken.

First, Some tell us that there is a considerable Number of Books mentioned or
quoted in Scripture, as the Books of the Covenant, the Book of the Wars of the
Lord, the Book of Iasher, etc. which seem to have been once a Part of this Holy
Volume, but now are lost. Among the Fathers Hom. 9. in Matthew. and Hom. 7. in 1
Ep. ad Corinth.
St. Chrysostom (who is followed by Theophilact) is of this Opinion. Bellarmine
and several of the Papists hold it. Yea, some Protestants acknowledge as much:
Calvin and Musculus, and our Whitaker incline this way. And Drusius is very
angry with any Man that denies that there any Books of Holy Scripture missing.
Now, if this be true, there is ground to complain of a Defect and Imperfection
in the Sacred Writings, by reason of the loss of these Books. That therefore
which I am to undertake here, is to show that there are no Books mentioned in
Scripture, as belonging to it, but what are now to be found in it, and are
really a Part of it, and consequently that the Holy Writings are not Defective,
that the Body of Sacred Scripture is not Maimed and Imperfect.

First, As to the Book of the Covenant mentioned in Exodus 24. 7. which some
fancy is lost, it is not any distinct Book from the Body of the Jewish Laws. If
we impartially weigh the Place, we shall find that it is no other than a
Collection* or Volume of those several Injunctions and Institutions which we
read in the foregoing Chapters ( viz. 20, 21, 22, 23.) which God delivered to
Moses on the Mount. It is the very same with the Book of the Law, De^t. 31. 9.
That which has caused a different Persuasion in some is this, that these Laws
are called a Book: but I shall make it evident afterward that this Appellation
is of a great latitude, and is applied to any sort of Writing by the Hebrews.

Secondly, As for the Book of the Wars of the Lord, Numb. 21. 14. which is
thought to be now wanting, the Answer given by some is, that this was an
Apocrypbal Author, and so cannot be said to belong to the Holy Scriptures, and
consequently the loss of this Book does not argue the Imperfection of the
Bible. But tho this way of Solution be tolerable, when made use of as to some
Other Books hereafter mentioned, yet I think there is no need at all of using
it here, because it is not unlikely, according to the Judgment of our Dr.
Lightfoot's Chronicle of the Tines of the Old Test.
Learned English Rab^i, that Moses refers here to himself, and a Book of his
own composing; for we read that upon the Discomfiture of Amalek God commanded
Moses to write it for a Memorial in a Book, Exodus 17. 14. and (as it follows)
to rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua. So that it may seem to have been some
Book of Directions written by Moses for Joshua's managing of the Wars after
him. Thus this Learned Writer makes this Book only to be of private use, and
dictated by an Ordinary, not a Divine Spirit: wherefore it cannot be one of the
Books of the Bible. And if this be true, then though it be lost, yet no
Canonical Scripture is lost hereby. But from what I shall propound, I think it
will be found reasonable to believe that the Book in this Place mentioned is
one of the received Books of the Old Testament, i. e. it is the Book of Judges,
which deservedly has the Name of the Book of the Wars of the Lord, because it
recounts those Warlike Enterprises which those Hero^ck Spirits stirred up by
God in an extraordinary Manner were famous for. Or Milchamoth Jehovah, the Wars
of the Lord, are as much as the Great, Wonderful and Renowned Wars (for perhaps
the Name of God is used here, as in several other Place, to augment the Sense,
and to express the Greatness and Excellency of the Thing) fought by the Valiant
Jews. To any one that consults the Text together with the 26th v. of that
Chapter, it will plainly appear that this Passage particularly refers to the
11th Chapter of Judges, v. 15 16, 17. But if you ask how Moses, who was dead
long before, could write this? I answer, though he undoubtedly writ the Book of
Numbers, as well as the rest of the Pentateuch, yet some few Passages in this
and the other Books may reasonably be supposed to be inserted afterward by
some other Inspired Persons, as I have had Occasion to advertise before. Ezra,
it is likely, revising this Book, added this of what God did in the Red Sea,
and at the Brooks of Arnon. And to give yet more ample Satisfaction to this
Scruple, I desire it may be observed, that though we translate the Text thus,
It is said in the Book of the Wars, etc. yet in the Original the Verb is in the
future Tense, (...) diceture, it shall be said: and so we may look upon it as a
Prophecy of Moses. He here foretells that afterward it shall be commemorated
how God fought for his People. When there shall be at solemn Times a Rehearsal
of the Jewish Wars, then this Passage shall be called to mind and made mention
of. And then we must look upon these two Verses, not as cited out of the Book
of Judges, but proposed to be inserted there afterward. The plain Answer then
is, that the Book of the Wars of the Lord is the Book of Judges, together with
that of Joshua, where are related the Particulars of the Holy War, i. e. the
War of the Jews against the Infidels, and that in one of these it shall be
particularly remembered and recorded what God did in the Red Sea, and in the
Brooks of Arnon, etc. and accordingly we find it inserted in the forecited
Place in Judges. Thus you see it cannot be proved hence that the Church has
lost any Part of the Book of God.

Another Book said by some to be lost is the Book of Iasher, mentioned in Josh.
10. 13. and 2 Samuel 1. 18. But some of the most celebrated Hebrew Doctors say
they have found it, telling us that it is the Book of Genesis, wherein are
contained the Acts of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob* and other Patriarchs, who were by
way of Excellence called Iasherim, Recti, Iusti. But surely that Man is easily
satisfied who can acquiesce in this. Dr. Lightfoot holds the Book of Iasher to
be the same with that which I asserted the Book of the Wars of God to be: But
there is little Foundation for it, for though the particular Narrative of the
Sun's standing still, be in the Book of Iasher, (as we learn from the Text) yet
there is no intimation that all Joshua's Wars, or the Wars of the Israelites
were registered there. This Book was according to the Excellent Annot. in 2 Samuel
1. 18.
Grotius an (...), a Triumphal Poem, in which (...) was for the Verse sake
contracted into (...). But though this be very Ingenious* yet it wants
solidity, and it is not probable that the Word would be twice mentioned ( i. e.
both in the Book of Joshua, and in the 2d Book of Samuel) in its Abbreviated
Form. The Learned Antiqu. I. 5 c. ^.
Jewish Historian seems to me to bid fairest for Truth, who ^aith by this Book
are to be understood certain Records kept in some safe Place on purpose, and
afterward in the Temple, giving an Account of what happened among the Jews
from Year to Year, and particularly the Prodigy of the Sun's standing still,
and the Directions and Laws about the Use of the Bow, i. e. setting up of
Archery, and maintai^ing Military Exercises. And if it be asked why the Title
given to these Jewish Annals was the Book of Iasher, i. e. Rects, this may be
rendered as a probable Reason, viz. because it was by all Persons reckoned as a
very Faithful and Authentic Account of all those Events and Occurrences which
it recorded, it was composed with great Vprightnes^ and Truth: Thenc^ it was
commonly known by the Name of Iasher's Book or Chronicle. And if you remember
that Iasher is translated (...) by the Seventy in several Places of the Book of
Io^, it will ^urther confirm what I say, and induce us to believe that Iasher's
Book is as much as a True Book, a Book that is not counterfeited. It was not
the Work of any Inspired Person, but was of the Nature of Common Civil Annals:
and consequently we cannot infer hence that any Book properly belonging to the
Holy Scripture, i. e. that was written by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, is at
this Day missing.

Again, some reckon the Acts of Uzziah written by Isaiah the Prophet, 2 Chronicles.
26. 22. in the Cata^ogue of such Books of Scripture as are lost. But they have
little reason to do so, for by tho^^ Words is plainly meant that Part of the
Life and History of that King which we now have in the Prophecy of Isaiah, for
the first six Chapters are ^ Relation of what was done in his Days. They give
an Account of several Passages which belong to the Church and State in that
King's Reign. And Isaiah is truly said in the forementioned Place in the
Chronicles to have written his Acts first and last, because you will find that
the Prophecy of Isaiah begins at the Days of Uzziah, v. 1. and the sixth
Chapter relates what happened in the Year that King Uzziah died, v. 1. So that
something of what was first and last in his Time is here recorded. This I look
upon as a very substantial and satisfactory Answer to the Scruple about that
Place.

Also, some would infer from 1 Chronicles. 29. 29. that all the Canonical Books of
the Bible are not extant at this Day, because there is mention of the Book of
Samuel the Seer, and the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and the Book of Gad the
Seer, in which it is said, all David' s Acts were written. But no such
Inference can rationally be made: only this we gather (which is the Solution of
the Difficulty) that Nathan and Gad as well as Samuel compiled the History that
goes under the Name of this last: and because it was made by them all three,
therefore it is represented here as three different Books. But the true Account
is that those two Books in the Old Testament which bear the Name of Samuel,
were written partly by him (the greatest Part of the first Book relating things
that happened in his time) and partly by Nathan, and partly by Gad, two eminent
Prophets in those Days, and who survived Samuel.

Then as to 2 Chronicles. 9. 29. where we are told that Solomon's Acts were written
not only in the Book ( Hebr. Dibrim, the Words, as the Book of Chronicles is
called the Words of Days) of Nathan, (of which before) but in the Prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the Visions of Iddo the Seer, which last are
called Midrash, the Story or Commentary of the Prophet Iddo, Chap. 13. v. 22.
And as to 2 Chronicles. 12. 15. where we read also of this Book of Iddo the Seer,
and of Shemaiah the Prophet, in which it is said, Rehoboam's Acts were written,
the Answer which I give relating to these Books in brief is this, that few of
them, if any, are different from those of the Kings, but are only a Part of
them, though they are here spoken of as Distinct Books, and that for this
reason, because that individual Part of the Story, viz. concerning Solomon and
Rehoboam, is quoted, which these particular Persons here named wrote. You must
know then that this Historical Part of the Old Testament was the Work of
several Persons, it was a Collection made by sundry Prophets and Holy Men, as
Samuel, Nathan, Gad, Ahijah, Iddo, Shemaiah; and the Books which they wrote are
called the Books of Samuel, and the Books of the Kings, and are generally known
by these Names; but when those Parts of them which were particucularly inserted
and written by Samuel himself, or Nathan, etc. are quoted or referred to in the
Books of the Chronicles, they are mentioned as Distinct Books: the meaning of
which is, that they are Distinct Parts of such a History, and wrote by such
Particular Persons, who altogether made up that Historical Part of the Bible.
Those Books then (for so the Hebrews call any Writings) which those Authors
abovenamed wrote are not lost, as some imagine* ^^t are still extant in the
Bible, for they are Part of the Books of Samuel and the Kings. This Answer is
grounded on 1 Chronicles. 29. 29. The Acts of David the King first and last, behold,
they are written in the Book (or History) of Samuel, and in the Book of Nathan
the Prophet, etc. which shows that the foresaid Books were a Collection made by
several Prophets, viz. Samuel, Nathan, Gad, etc. This I think is very plain,
and the foresaid Objection is wholly removed by it.

Then, as to the rest of those Books which are said to be lost, as the Sayings
of the Seers, 2 Chronicles. 33. 19. and the Book of the Acts of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.
41. and the Book of Jehu the Son of Hanani, 2 Chronicles. 20. 34. or any other which
the Objectors mention, it is granted by some very Sober Writers (not only
Foreigners but of our own Country) that these Books are really lost, but they
deny that this is any Argument of the Imperfection of Scripture, because these
Books were not absolutely necessary, neither are we certain that they were
Divinely endited. And this was the Opinion of the Ancients as well as the
Moderns. Yea St. Chrysostom and some others of the Fathers who speak of these
Books, say positively that they were not written by Inspiration from Heaven. To
this Purpose St. Augustine has this useful Distinction, Ali^ sicut homines
historica diligentia, alia sicut Prophet^e inspiratione divina* De Civ. Dei I.
28. c. 38.
the Penmen of the Sacred Scripture (says he) write some things as they are
Men with Historical Care and Diligence, other things they write as Prophets by
Inspiration from God. This then may satisfy us that all that was written by the
Prophets, and even by those Holy Men who were Authors of some Part of the
Bible, was not Canonical and Divine; because they writ some things not as
Inspired Persons, but as mere Historians. Some of this sort of Writings are
referred to in the forecited Places; and though they be not extant now, yet the
Scripture is not hereby rendered Imperfect, because these were not such Parts
of it as were Essential to it, or were of Divine Inspiration. The like may be
said when in the Book of Kings there is frequent reference to the Book of
Chronicles; those of the Bible are not always meant, being not then penned:
Besides that many things that are referred unto there are not found in these
Books. Wherefore it is probable that these were Additional Writings, not
belonging to the Body of the Canonical Scripture, nor written by Persons that
were Inspired, and consequently though they are lost, yet the Canon of the
Bible is not impaired. And indeed we find that those of the Protestant
Persuasion (as Whitaker, Willet, etc. and among Foreigners, Calvin, Beza, etc.)
who acknowledge the loss of these Books, do at the same time strongly assert the
Perfection of the Holy Scriptures: which they very consistently may do, because
they hold these Books to be no part of the Canon of the Bible.

Again, if what we have said be not fully satisfactory, this may be further
added, that the Complaint of the Loss of some Books of Holy Writ proceeds from
the mistaking of the Word Sepher, which is translated a Book, but among the
Hebrews is oftentimes no more than a Rehearsal or Commemoration of something, a
brief Narrative or Memoir, a setting down any thing in Writing, as you will find
in these following Places, Number. 5. 23. Josh. ^8. 9. 1 Samuel 10. 25. Esth. 9. 20.
Isa. 30. 8. Ier. 32. 12, 14. And sometimes it is nothing but a mere Genealogy,
as Genesis 5. 1. The book of the Generations of Adam. So St. Matthew begins his
Gospel, The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, Mat. 1. 1. i. e. his
Genealogy or Pedigree, a brief Enumeration of the Persons he descended from,
which is the proper Denotation of the Word Sepher, from Saphar, numerare,
recensere, whence Siphra or Ciphra, a Word that is used in most Languages. Some
not attending to this have fancied that a great many Books of the Sacred Writ
are embezzled, because they do not find such Formal Books as those of Iehu, or
of the Acts of Solomon, etc. now belonging to the Bible. This arises from a
misunderstanding of the Hebrew Word, which signifies generally any Short kind
of Writing or Memorandum. This, with the Answer before given, will solve all
Doubts concerning the Places before alleged.

As to the common Objection concerning the Loss of Solomon's Books, which are
said to be mentioned in 1 Kings 4. 32, 33. I answer; 1. That when some call
them Books, it is more than they can prove: it is not said that Solomon wrote,
but that he Spoke of Trees, and spoke of Beasts, etc. i. e. he learnedly
discoursed of these several Subjects upon occasion, and Spoke such a Number of
Proverbs. Here can be no Loss of Books then. But, 2. Suppose he committed these
Disquisitions and Discourses to Writing, and they are now lost, (it may be
consumed when Nebuchadnezzar burnt Jerusalem, or by some other Means imbezzled
afterward) yet still this is nothing to the purpose, because they were no Part
of Canonical Scripture. His Universal History of Vegetables, from the Cedar
even to the Hysop that grows out of the Wall, and his Books of the Nature of
all Animals in the Sea, on the Land, and in the Air, appertained to Philosophy,
and might indeed have served to have set up a Royal Society, and have been
advantageous to the Men who are employed in the Study of Nature; for these
questionless were full of Admirable Philosophy, according to that great and
matchless Measure of Wisdom which God had endued him with. Thus far the Loss of
those Writings is great, but none but Philosophers ought to bewail it. Tho I
must suggest this by the way, that perhaps there is no ground of complaining
for them neither; for it may be these Books of Plants and Animals were extant
till Alexander the Great's Days, and being perused and understood by Aristotle
and Theophrastus, by the Help of an Interpreter, they were transcribed by them,
and so set down as we find them in their Writings which have gained them so
great Fame and Renown. This may be the more credible, especially as to
Aristotle, because we read that he was a Great Plagiary, and burnt or otherwise
made away those Writings from whence he borrowed his Notions. If this be true,
it is likely we have these Books of Solomon extant still: in those forenamed
Authors we read his Natural History concerning Vegetables and Animals. But as
touching the three thousand Proverbs which he spoke, it is most reasonable to
believe that most of them were only spoken, not written down: and as for those
that were penned, we have them at this Day in the Book of Proverbs, which is
Part of the Canon of Scripture. There we have those Proverbs which the Holy
Ghost saw to be most profitable and necessary for the Church: That one would
think should content us. So as to his Songs, which were a thousand and five,
(as we read in the forementioned Place) there is but One of them that has
arrived at our Hands, and was thought worthy to be inserted into the Sacred
Writings, unless we reckon the Forty fifth Psalm to be a Song of his. This then
adds to the Excellency of these Writings of Solomon which we have, that they
are Choice Pieces, selected even by the Holy Ghost, who was the Prime Author of
them. This surely may satisfy us that the Books or Writings of this Wise
Prince, which were most Excellent, and which were dictated by the Spirit, are
transmitted to us, and are Part of the Bible. Thus there is nothing lost that
belongs to the Canonical Scripture of the Old Testament.

And whereas it is Objected that some Places are quoted in the New Testament as
taken out of the Old, and yet are not to be found there, as Mat. 2. 23. James
4. 5. Jude, v. 14. I answer as to the first, that from those Words, That it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a
Nazarene, no Man can gather that some of the Canonical Books of Scripture are
missing; because if you take the Prophets here for Prophetic Men who spoke
only, and did not write, then there were no Books of theirs to be lost. Or if
by Prophets you understand the Penmen of the Bible, it may be showed that what
they foretold is still extant in their Writings. For though those individual
Words, He shall be called a Nazarene, are not found among the Prophecies of the
Old Testament, yet the Purport and Sense of them are there, and the Places to
which they have reference are very obvious, as I have showed in that particular
Interpretation of the Words which I have offered to the Public in my Enquiry
into some Remarkable Texts of the New Testament. Thence I hope it will appear
that the Objectors have no ground for what they alledg, and also that the Jews
Cavil against this Place of St. Matthew, where they say he quotes a Text out of
the Prophets which is not to be found in any of them, is void of all Reason.

Another Place which is wont to be mentioned on this Occasion is Iam. 4. 5. Do
you think that the S^ripture says in vain, The Spirit that dwells in us
lusts to Envy? Which Words are no where to be found in Scripture: therefore,
say they, some Part of the Holy Writings is lost. And Sir N. Knatchbull seems
to say, that this is Passage taken out of the Writings of the Prophets which
^re missing at this Day. In answer to this Gro^ius and Hammond.
some say that Genesis 6. 3. is the Place of Scripture here referred to; but after
they have taken a great deal^of Pains to make this out, their labor is in
vain* for surely no Man of free and unprejudiced Thoughts will be persuaded
that those Word^ [ My Spirit shall not always strive with Man] are of the same
Import with these [ The Spirit that dwelle^^ in us lusts to Envy]. This
Exposition is built upon a mistaken Notion of the Hebrew word (...) contendet,
(which our Translators* truly rend^^ shall strive) some fancying that it is to
be deriv^^ from (...) a Sheath, and then forsooth the Soul or Spirit is a
Sword. Lowis Chapel and some Others as groundlesly make these Words an
Interrogation, Does the Spirit that dwells in us lust to Envy? and think they
refer to Numb. 11. 29. Enviest thou for my sake? The Question, say they, is a
Neg^tion, and is as much as if it had been said, Does the Scripture and the
Holy Spirit teach you to contend, to be envious and quarrelsom? No. But this
likewise is forced and strained, and an impartial Eye cannot possibly see any
Affinity between the two Places of Scripture; besides that there is one
Interrogation to introduce another, which confounds the Style. The plain and
unforced Answer is this, that St. James does not here quote any Particular
Place of Scripture, as if there were such express Words in the Old Testament as
are here set down by him. He only tells us what is generally delivered in
Scripture, viz. that Man's Nature is depraved and corrupted, that it is
inclined to Envy as well as to other Lusts and Unlawful Affections. Or, If any
^ne Particular Place be referred to more than another, it is probable it is
that of Genesis 6. 5. or chapter 8. v. 21. where we are told that the Imaginations, or
the Purposes and Desires of Men's Hearts are evil from their Youth, yea they are
only evil, and that conti^ually. The Words then are not to be understood of the
Divine Spirit, but of that Corrupt Spirit which is in Men, not the Spirit which
is of God, ^^t the Spirit of the World, as the Apostle Paul distinguishes, 1
Cor. 2. 12. This Spirit lusts to Envy, and prompts Men to all other Vices.
And (...) for the next Words [ He gives more Grace] they refer not to the
Spirit here spoken of, but to God, who, though he be not named in this Verse,
is twice in the immediately foregoing one. He gives (...) Grace; he, according
to his good Pleasure, restrains Men's Lusts and envious Desires, and te^cheth
them Humility, Submission, and all other Divine Virtues. Or (according to a Sir
N. K^atchbull.
late Worthy Critic) it, i. e. the Scripture, gives more Grace, for that it
says, etc. In this Holy Book there are Examples of some Persons in whom this
Spirit of Envy was restrained. When the Apostle then here says, Do you think
that the Scripture says in vain? etc. we must not wonder that those very Words
are not found in any Part of the Old Testament; for the Apostle only speaks
here of what may be deduced from these Sacred Writings, or what is said in them
to the same purpose, though in other Words. There are many Places of Scripture
which speak of the Lusts of that corrupt Spirit which is in us, whereby we are
stirred up to Envy and Strife. From several Texts we may gather that Man's
Nature is prone to these and the like Passions. This I take to be the true
Account of the Words.

In the same manner we are to understand Lu^^ 11. 49. Therefore said the Wisdom
of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, etc. There is no part^cular
Text that has these Words, but there are several Prophecies to this Purpose.
So Ephesians. 5. 14. He says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give the Light, is not mean^^ of any such particular and
individual Words, (...) of the Spirit's speaking in the Gospel to that Effect*
though I know Dr. Hammond and others refer i^ (...) Isa. 60. 1. and some
Interpreters to Isa. 51. 9. (...) you will not find these or such Words in
either of those Places. That Passage in Acts 20. 35. It (...) more blessed to
give than to receive, is recited as the Words of the Lord Jesus; yet we find
them not recorded in the Gospel. But our Blessed Master freq^ently uttered
Words that were of the like Import* as is easy to prove: or rather (I conceive)
we may truly say that he spoke this very Sentence, for it may be observed that
what is here quoted is not only called the Words of the Lord Jesus, but this is
added, [ how he said] to let us know that he said these very Words when he was
upon Earth. And many the like Excellent Sayings and Aphorisms he prenounced,
which (as well as innumerable Actions that he did) were kept in remembrance by
the Apostles, but were not written down, of which St. John speaks, chapter 20. v.
30. and 21. 25. So that it is impossible to prove hence that any Book belonging
to the Sacred Canon is lost.

As for the Objection grounded on St. Jude, v. 14. viz. that E^och's Book which
is quoted by this Apostle (and if it had not been Canonical, it would not have
been quoted by him) is lost; some (as Origin, Ierom, Augustine) grant it to be
so, but deny it to be Canonical, it being their Judgment that St. Jude might,
if he thought ^it, alledg an Apocryphal Writer. But according to my
Apprehension the brief and satisfactory Answer is, that there is no mention
there of any Book or Writing of ^^och, and therefore none can infer thence that
any Book or Writing of his is lost. It is only said, He prophesied, saying,
etc. which he might do, and questionless did, without penning down any of hi^
Prophetical Sayings; but they were transmitted from Generation to Generation,
and thence it was (...) the Apostle Jude inserted this into his Epistle* Nor
are we to be concerned that a Book of Enooh is mentioned by some of the Ancient
Writers of the Church, for it is well known that they had several Sp^rious
Authors among them: and (as a Du Pin*
Learned Doctor of the sorbon observes) all the Fathers, ex^^pt Ter^ullian,
reckon this that went under the Name of Enoch as such.

But are not some of the Writings of the New Te^^ament wanting, seeing there
was a Third Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, in order the first? I ^rote
unto you in an Epistle not to keep Company with ^ornicators, 1 Cor. 5. 9.
Therefore it appears hence that there was another before this which passes
commonly for the first: But this is not extant, for we have now but two that
bear the Name of that ^lessed Apostle. Answ. Nor were there ever any more, for
when he says he wrote to them in an Epistle, he means this very First Epistle
he was now writing. He refers to what he had said before in the former Part of
that Chapter; and the meaning is, When I even now wrote unto you in this
Epistle, ver. 2. not to keep Company with Fornicators, I do not mean the
Fornicators of this World. Thus St. Chrysostom and Theophylact interpret the
Place. But, if I may be permitted to vary from those Excellent Fathers, I would
propound one of these two ways of understanding the Apostle's Words. First, it
may be he has reference here to what he says afterward in this Epistle, chapter
6* v. 13. and again, v. 18. and chapter 7. v. 2. where he writes to them to avoid
Fornication. Wherefore upon reading over this Epistle, after he had finished
it, he thought good to insert this, and to take notice here of what he says
afterward; (...), I have (says he) written to y^^ in this Epistle, viz. in
some of the following Chapters against Fornication, and joining your selves to
Persons that are noted for that Vice. Or else I conceive the word (...) is put
for (...) (the Preterit for the present Tense, of which there are very near an
hundred Instances in the New Testament: and all Men versed in Criticism know
that there is nothing more common). Thus (...) is used in this very Epistle,
chapter 9. v. 15. [Neither have I written these things] i. e. at this time, in this
Epistle that I am now writing. This any Man, that consults the Context, will be
forced to acknowledge to be the true Sense of the Place: whence it appears that
(...) is equivalent with (...). So you will find the Word must be taken in the
1st Epistle of St. John, 2d Chapter: you will see and be thoroughly convinced
that (...), v. 12, 13. is expressed by (...), v. 14, 21. And thus in the Text
that is before us (...) is no other than (...), etc. I write unto you in this
Epistle not to, etc. Which that it ought to be rendered so is evident from ver.
11. (which is but a Repetition or Reassumption of this) (...), now I write unto
you: the Adverb (...) shows that it is spoken of the Present Instant Time,
though the Greek Verb be in the Praeterit. This then I offer as the plain Sense
of the Text and Context, I write unto you, O Corinthians, in this my Letter,
not to be mingled (so the Word properly denotes) with Fornicators, or with the
Covetous, or Extortioners, or Idolaters, for then you must needs go out of the
World (there being so great a Multitude of them): but this is that which I
mean, that you should avoid the Company of a Brother (i. e. a Professed
Christian) if he be given to Fornication, Covetousness, Extortion, or Idolatry.
This is the Thing which I at this time write and signify to you. So that you
see (...) is instead of (...): the simple and plain Tenor of the Words may
convince any Man of it. And therefore the true and genuine Translation both of
the former and latter (...) is I write: which makes the Apostle's Sense clear
and perspicuous. I appeal to any Man of Judgment and Sagacity, whether this
Account of the Words be not exactly adjusted to Grammar and Criticism, to the
Scope of the Apostle, and the Design of the Context: besides that it is
serviceable to the Business in hand, viz. utterly to overthrow the Surmise of
an Epistle written to the Corinthians before this which the Apostle is here
writing. If the Learned Drusius, or the Excellent Grotius had weighed these
things which I have suggested, I doubt not but they would have changed their
Minds, they would not have cried out that this Epistle here spoken of is lost.

But it is further said, that the Apostle writ (...) Epi^^le to the L^odicea^s,
as may be collected from C^l. 4. 16. which is wanting at this Day, that is,
although i^ be extant, and allowed of by some Authors, yet it is not put into
the Canon of the New Testament; wherefore the Canon is Imperfect. I answer, 1.
It is true there is an Epistle to the Laodic^ans, which goes under St. Paul's
Name, but it is generally voted to be Sp^rio^s and Counterfeit. 2. The Apostle
in that Place to the Colossians speaks not of an Epistle to the Laodiceans, bu^
from Laodicea, for (...) cannot conveniently be ^ran^^^ted otherwise. Yet I
know (...) how it comes to pass that so sharp a Critic as Sir N. K^a^chbull
holds it was an Epistle written by the Apostle to the Laodic^ans, and says it
is lost. Hi^ Critical Genius failed him here, for (...) carries no such Sense
with it. As he himself illustrates the Phrase, it should be an Epistle not
(...) but of the (...), for he says this way of speaking is frequent, as
(...), some of the Synagogue; (...), some of the (...); (...), the Stoics, or
those that ^elong'd in the Stoa. According to this Idiom which ^his Learned
Gentleman alleges, (...) should be an ^pistle of the Laodiceans, and then
it is nothing to his purpose, unless he could have proved that of the Laodiceans
or of Laodicea is the same with to Laodioea. (...) is ^endred by the Old Latin
ea qua est Laodicensiurn, which Version this Learned Man produces and applauds
as if it were on his side: but I conceive the ^mport of the Latin is not what
he represents it to be, viz. the Epistle which was written to the Laodiceans by
the apostle. At least there is no necessity of making this Construction, for it
may as well signify an Epistle written from Laodicea by the Apostle. If it be
demanded, what Epistle this was? and con^^quently, what Epistle is here meant?
The Answer is, that it is probable it is the first Epistle to Timothy, that
being written from Laodi^ea, as you will find in the Close of it. Or, 3. if he
speaks of an Epistle brought to the Colossians from Laodicea, it being wrote to
the Christians of that Place by St. Paul, it may be the Epistle to the
Ephesians, because Laodicea was a Church within the Circuit of the Ephesian
Church, which was the Metropolitan of all Asia. And Ephesus being the chief
City of this Proconsular Asia, this Epistle may refer to all the Province. As
to the Ground and Occasion of producing an Epistle to the Laodiceans, perhaps
it was this, St. Paul ordered that his Epistle to the Colossians should be read
in the Church of the Laodiceans, which was near to Colosse, Col. 4. 16. And we
must remember this, that though Colosse was a considerable City, yet Laodicea
was more considerable in that Province. But it is likely there were more
Christians in the former than in the latter; and that moved the Apostle to
direct his Epistle to the Colossians; but withal he enjoins it to be read in
the Church of Laodicea, the chief City. Now, it being read there, it was said
to be an Epistle to the Laodiceans, whence in time some feigned this Epistle
which is now extant. This I conceive may be the Cause of the Mistake and
Forgery. Lastly, if after all we should suppose (though I see no Reason for it)
that the Epistle which St. Paul here speaks of is lost, yet if the Substance of
it be contained in the Other Epistles, or in the rest of the Books of the New
Testament which we have, the Scripture is not maimed: and therefore the
Objectors have no Reason to cavil against it as Imperfect and Defective.

But an Objection of another Nature is shaped o^t of 1 Cor. 7. 6. I speak this
of permission, and not of Commandment: And v. 12. To the rest speak I, n^^ the
Lord: And v. 25. I have no Commandment of the Lord, yet I give my Judgment: And
2 Cor. 8. 8. I speak not by Commandment: And again Chap. 11. v. 17. I speak not
after the Lord. From all which Texts they gather that there is something in St.
Paul's Epistles that is not divinely dictated. He acknowledges as much
himself, say they, and we ought to give credit to him. And if it be thus,
wherein does this Part of Scripture excel any other Writings? I will return a
distinct Answer to the several Quotations. The first speaks of the mutual
rendering that (...) ( v. 3.) required in the Conjugal State: and the Apostle
shows the Extent of the Obligation of this Advice which he gives about it. I
speak this, says he, (...), in way of Permission, that is, I herein permit you
to do as you shall see Occasion, as you shall find your selves disposed. If you
can refrain in those Circumstances I mention, then do so: but if not, I allow
you to act otherwise. I speak to you (...), not of Commandment, i. e. in a
peremptory way. I am not positive, I do not command you. I have no Absolute
Injunction to lay upon you in this Matter. If you can forbear, you had best to
do so, but I have no Authority to force it upon you. Thus the Apostle lets them
see how far his Doctrine obliges, and what Authority it has. And this he
speaks as an Inspired Person: So that it is ridiculous to collect hence that he
was not Inspired when he wrote this Passage in his Epistle.

The Second Place speaks of Divorce or the Separation of married Persons in
case of unequal Marriages, viz. between Christians and Infidels. These are the
(...) the Rest, which he now distinctly applies his Discourse to. To these,
says he, speak I, i. e. I as an Apostle, I as a Person divinely enlightn'd
declare this, that their best course is to live together, and not to think of
parting. This is that which I say to those who are married to Unbelievers, and
I say it by immediate Revelation from God. That is the true Meaning of Speak I:
And any considerate Man that well weighs the Words cannot but discern it. It
follows, and not the Lord, i. e. God has given us no express Command about
this: We find nothing of it in Moses's Law which was from the Lord himself. The
Apostle refers here to what he had said before in this Chapter about Married
Persons, v. 2, 3. which was according to the Mosaic Law, Exodus 21. 10. and a
Law before that, viz. in Genesis, chapter 2. v. 24. which obliges the Married
Couple to be faithful to one another. But here, says he, in our present Case
the Lord has left no positive and Absolute Precept or Prohibition. Or, it may
have respect also to Christ our Lord, and then the meaning of I speak, and not
the Lord is this, what I now deliver to you is not from our B. Savior
directly: It is not expressly set down in the Gospel as spoken by Him when he
was here on Earth, but I gather it from the general Doctrine of the Gospel, and
I make this Collection and Inference by the Guidance of the Holy Spirit, and
not of my own Head. Thus what I advise and direct you to is from the Lord, i.
e. from the Holy Ghost, though not from the Lord in that other Sense, as if he
had given any particular and express Command concerning it. So the Force of the
Objection is quite taken of: And at the same time also, the Distinction of
Evangelical Counsels and Precepts (which is so much talked of and mad^ use of
by the Romanists) appears to be frivolus an^ impertinent.

The third Quotation is to be interpreted in the same Manner. He here speaks
concerning Singl^ Persons, such as were never married, and he acquaints them
(as before) what Authority his Doctrine concerning these has. (...), I have
not a Commandment of the Lord, i. e. I have no express Word of our Savior
concerning Virgins, as there was concerning the Divorce of Married Persons, of
whom I spoke v. 10. for our Lord had positively determined what was to be done
in that Case, Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 9. Luke 16* 18. Therefore there not I, but
the Lord himself was properly said to command. But here no Absolut^ Precept of
our Lord can be alleged; he has no where peremptorily commanded to marry, or
not to marry: And the more particular things relating to a Single Life (spoken
of here by the Apostle) are not so much as mentioned by him. Yet, says he, I
give my Judgment, as one that has obtained Mercy of the Lord to be faithful,
i. e. in an immediate and extraordinary Manner I have obtained this Favor, to
deliver faithfully what is dictated to me in this Affair, though there be no
express Word of our Lord about it. I am Divinely taught what to say, the Holy
Spirit suggests to me what Counsel to give. And therefore with respect to this
and whatever he said before, he concludes in the last Verse of this Chapter,
that he has the Spirit of God. And when he says he thinks so, it does not
denote in the least, the Uncertainty of the thing, but the Humility of the
Apostle. We are not then to imagine (as several Commentators, and of good Note
too do) that by (...), which we render. Judgment, is meant the Apostle's
^^^vate Opinion and Sentiment in contradistinction to (...) Dictate^ of the
Holy Ghost; but according to (...) plain Interpretation which I have given, we
^ave reason to believe that both in this and his other Epistles he writes all
by Divine Inspiration.

Then, as to the next Place, where the Apostle ^^ith he speaks not (...) by
command, this way of Expression is somewhat of the same Nature with the first:
which is evident from the Subject^matter he treats of, and the particular
Application of this Expression. For in this Chapter his Business is to excite
the Corinthians effectually to a Charitable Contribution for the distressed
Christi^^s at Jerusalem, and he requests that they would be very Liberal, and
abound in this Excellent and Noble Work: which yet he says he does not speak
to them (...) in a commanding Way, but ^e leaves them to their Liberty. He
would have their Charity to be free, and therefore does not command them. It is
of the same Strain with Philem. 8, 9. Though I might be much bold in Christ, to
enjoin that which is convenient, yet for Love's Sake I ^^^ber beseech. But this
beseeching them, and this professing that he leaves them to their Freedom, is
from the Lord, and from Divine Inspiration. Which ought necessarily to be
added, to clear this and the other Texts: for I do not find that Commentators
have fully interpreted and explained these Places. Only they tell us that the
Apostle does not command the things to be done, but leaves them at Liberty:
whereby they intimate that what he says is from himself, it is his Private
Opinion. But we must not harbor any such Thoughts, because if all Scripture be
endited by the Holy Ghost, (as certainly it is) then we san't admit of any such
thing here as mere Private Opinion.

The last Place alleged is, I speak not after the Lord. Which some would
interpret according to the foregoing S^nse of the Apostle in those Places I
have spoken of, but they hugely mistake the Text, and miserably distort the
Apostle's Meaning. Therefore my Apprehension of the Words is this, that as in
several other Places, so here he speak^ Ironically; The false Apostles, the
deceitful Workers, says he, whom some of you have such a Kindness for,
exceedingly boast of their great Performances among you. I think I had best to
do so too, for that it is the way to gain your good Opinion of me. I can brag
and glory of my Achievements as much as any of them, yea much more. Therefore
as a Fool receive me, that I may boast my self a little. Seeing that many glory
after the Flesh, I will glory also. For ye suffer Fools gladly, seeing ye your
selves are Wise. You and your new Teachers are Masters of great* Wisdom without
doubt, and it cannot but be a very laudable Thing to imitate you, especially in
your Boasting and Vaunting. And yet when I am forced to commend my self and
vindicate my Actions, that which I speak thus, I speak it not after the Lord,
no, by no means: I can neither say nor do any thing that is wise or good: I am
(in the Esteem of some of you) a Fool and a confident Talker, as he immediately
adds. This seems to be the clear Import of the Words, and it is not the only
time that St. Paul has addressed himself to the Corinthians in an Ironick
Style, as I have showed in another Place. Thus I hope it is manifest that the
Objectors have no Advantage from this Place of Scripture. And from all that
has been said, it is clear that the Sacred Writings are of Divine Inspiration,
and therein excel all other Writings whatsoever.

CHAP. XII.
A short View of the Eastern Translations of the Old Testament, especially of
the Targums. The several Greek Translations, more especially that of the LXX
Jewish Elders. The impartial History of them, and their Version. Some
^mmoderately extol it; others as excessively inveigh against it. The true
Grounds of the Difference between the Hebrew Text and the Greek Translation of
the Septuagint assigned, viz. One Hebrew Vowel is put for another: One
Consonant for another, sometimes both Vowels and Consonants are mistaken: The
Difference of the Signification of some Hebrew Words is another Cause:
Sometimes the Sense rather than the Word it self is attended to: Some Faults
are to be attributed to the Transcribers: Some, because the LXX are Paraphrasts
rather than Translators; they take the Liberty to insert Words and Passages of
their own. The Greek Version has been designedly corrupted in several Places.
Why the Apostles in their Sermons and Writings made use of this Version, though
it was faulty. Sometimes the Sacred Writers keep close to the Hebrew Text, and
take no notice of the Seventy's Translation of the Words. At other times in
their Quotations they con^ine themselves to neither, but use a Latitude. The
Greek Version is to be read with Candor and Caution: And must always give way
to the Hebrew Original. The chief Latin Translations of the Bible, especially
the Vulgar, examined. Modern Latin Translations, and lastly our own English
one, considered.

AGain, there are some that detract from (...) Excellency and Perfection of the
Holy W^^tings, because they observe a great Difference between the Hebrew Text
of the Old Testament, and the several Versions of it: And so as to the New
Testament, they see the Original Greek and some of the Translations disagree;
but more especially the Disagreement is seen bet^een the Hebrew of the Old
Testament, and the Greek Translation of it made by the Seventy Elders. This is
improved into a kind of Argument thus; If those Versions of the Bible disagree
with the Text, then either the Text it self or the Versions are erroneous and
f^ulty: But it is probable, and it is asserted by some Learned Critics, that
the Errors and Mistakes are in the former, i. e. in plain Terms that we have
not now the Original or True Copi^s of the Bible, and consequently that the
Bible it self is very Defective and Imperfect. To take off this seeming
Argument it is necessary that we enquire into, and give some brief Account of
the Tran^^^^tions of the Bible, but especially that we fix where the Grand
Objection lies, viz. concerning the Discr^pancy between the Hebrew Text and
that of the LXX, which seems to give the greatest Shock of all to the Assertion
which I have been maintaining.

Those Translations which are in the Eastern Languages are these that follow;
First, the Per^ick: But the Ancient Version is lo^t: And as for what is now
extant, it is seldom made u^e of by the Learned. The Coptick (so called from
Copt or Cophtus, the Name of a great City in Egypt, the Metropolis of Thebais,
the Language of that Place being the Ancient Dialect of the Egypti^ns) and the
Ethiopick are of great Antiquity, and were made and used by the Christians of
Egypt and Ethiopia. The former (as those acquaint us who have insight into that
Tongue) has a great Affinity with the Hebrew Text: And the latter is wholly
taken out of the former, and is a mere Translation of it. The Samaritan
Pentateu^h was for the Use of the Samaritan Jews, who used that Dialect, and
acknowledged only the Books of Moses. It is ancient and of good Account, though
not void of Errors and Corruptions, as Archbishop Usher and Hottinger have
observed, and particularly enumerated the Faults: But yet, if we will show our
selves Candid, we cannot but grant that where it varies from the Hebrew, it is
generally by way of Illustration or Paraphrase. The Syria^ Version is of good
Repute, and very conformable to the H^brew in most Places, notwithstanding what
the Learned De Septuagi^t. Interpre^.
Vossius has enviously suggested. The Arabic follows the Seventy and its
Faults, and is not so ancient as the Syriack, nor so exact, but is of good Use,
and may serve to corroborate the Authority of the Hebrew Text. Concerning all
these Eastern Translations, except the Syriack, it may be observed, that though
they are generally taken out of the Greek Version of the Seventy, (for that
only was the Authentic Scripture with the Churches of the East) and though
they were made and writ at several times, yet they do very much agree with the
Hebrew which we have at this Day: And whenever in any Place they vary from it,
it is generally in some little things, wherein there is no prejudice to Truth,
or the Variation is only as to the Paraphrastical Part, where we cannot expect
an exact Rendering of the Original; and with any considerate and unbiassed Man
this will not pass for any Proof of the Corruption of the Original.

But of all the Translations which are in the Oriental Tongues, the Chaldee is
of the greatest Esteem and Reputation among the Learned. This is called the
Targum from the root Targam interpretari, so that the Targum is the
Int^rpreting or Translating the Bible into another Tongue; and because there
was among the Jews of old no Translation but the Chaldaick* that was by way of
eminency called Targum. The Occasion of this Version was the Change of the
Tongue among the Jews: They in the Time of the Captivity in Babylon, which
lasted 70 Years, corrupted the Hebrew Tongue, that is, they mixed Hebrew (their
own Tongue) and Chaldee (the Language of that Place where they were) together.
Yea, tho the Scribes and Learned Men had not forgot the Hebrew, yet the common
People had, and being ^sed wholly to the Speech of that Country, they
understood only Chaldee. Wherefore that they might have the Bible in a Language
which they understood, several Chaldean Targums were made on the Books of the
Bible, indeed on all but Daniel, and Ezra (which were half Chaldee before) and
the Paralipomend, which were explained in the Books of the Kings. These
Targu^^im were made by different Authors, and at diverse Times. First, there
was that of R. Jonathan, which was a Translation or Paraphrase rather on the
Prophets and the Historical Books. He is said to be R. Hillel's Disciple, and
to have lived a little before our Savior's Nativity. Secondly, there was that
of Onkelos^* which was only on the Pentateuch. This Author lived soon after
Christ's Time: Though I know a very Mons. Simon Crit. Hist. l. 2.
Confident Writer tells us, that there is reason to doubt whether Onkelos and
Jonathan were the Authors of those two Chaldee Paraphrases, and he positively
avoweth that the Time when they were made cannot be known. Moreover, it is
asserted by Is. Vossius.
another of as great Confidence and Learning, that neither the Paraphrases of
Onkelos nor Jonathan are a thousand Years old, and particularly that that of
Onkelos is not so much as mentioned by any Jew or Christian who was not after
St. Ierom some Ages. The same was said before by as Morin. Exercitat. Bibl. l.
2. Exercitat. 8.
Positive a Man, but was never proved, and therefore we have no reason to
attend to it, much less to believe it, especially since we know the Design of
the Man, which was to beat down the Credit and Value of all Translations of the
Bible but the Latin one. It appears from sufficient Authors, that these two
Chaldee Paraphrases are some of the antientest of the Jewish Writings on the
Bible, and it appears from these Targums themselves that they agree with the
Hebrew Text which is extant at this Day. Thirdly, there was the Jerusalem
Targum, called so either from the peculiar Dialect of it, or from its being
first published in that place. This was upon the Pentateuch only, and was
written (as is generally thought) by R. Iochanan after the Destruction of
Jerusalem. To these 3 Chaldee Paraphrases (which were of Greatest Authority
among the Jews, and were read in their Synagogues) are wont to be added two
others, viz. the Targum of Jonathan (the Rabbi before mentioned) on the
Pentateuch, and the Targum of Joseph the Blind on the Psalms, Job, Proverbs,
Esther, Canticles. And there were other Versions of some other Books of the
Bible which were made for the sake of the dispersed Jews in Chaldea, and were
likewise called Targumim, all which are unanimously acknowledged by the
Learnedest of the Ancients and Moderns to be faithful Translations of the
Original; and none but prepossessed Minds can find any disagreement between
them as to the Main. It is true these are Paraphrasts rather than Translators,
and therefore it cannot be expected that these Targumists should render the
Hebrew Word for Word: It cannot rationally be thought that in this free way of
giving the Sense of the Original they should be exact: They intended a Comment
only in some places, and not an exact Version.

To pass then from the Translations which have been made in the Oriental
Tongues to some Others, I will in the next Place speak of the Greek Versions of
the Bible, and more especially of that of the Septuagint. The Greek
Translations of the Old Testament are either those that were made since our
Savior's Time, or that Celebrated One made before it. As for those that were
made since Christ's Time, the Author of the first of them was Aquila, who lived
under the Emperor Adrian, and was converted from Gentilism to Christianity, and
then forsook Christianity and turned Jew, and translated the Old Testament out
of Hebrew into Greek. He was a very Morose Interpreter, even to Superstition
adhering to the Hebrew Letter, and altogether averse from the Seventy's
Translation. The next Greek Version was that of Theodotion, in the Emperor
Commodus's Time, who was an Ebionite or Judaizing Christian. A third was put
out in the Emperor Severus's Reign by Symmachus, who was first a Jew of the
Samaritan Sect, and afterward a Christian, but an E^ionite or Judaizing
Heretic, wherefore he is called Semi-christianus by St. Ierom. These were the
Authors of the three first Interpretations of the Old Testament that were
composed after our Savior's Days, and you hear what kind of Persons they were.
One of these Translations was wholly Literal, the other took a Liberty and
followed the Sense, and the third was of a middle Nature: But none of them were
ever publicly received, and read by the Church. Wherefore there is no reason
to quarrel with the Hebrew Text, and to accuse it of Corruption if we find that
these vary from it: Though to speak impartially, the Translations of these
foresaid Men (notwithstanding that they bear the Chracter of Apostates and
Heretics) dissent not from the Hebrew in any thing of considerable Moment.
There are two other Translations mentioned, but we know not the Authors of
them. These five with the LXX's Version made up Origen's Hexapla. As for the
other Greek Interpretations of the Old Testament which were published
afterward, viz. that of Lucian the Martyr, and the other of Hesychius, they
were not (properly speaking) New Versions, but only New and Correct Editions of
the Septuagint Translation, which was purged from its Errors and Faults by
these Worthy Undertakers. So much concerning the Greek Translations since
Christ.

Our main Business is with that which was before our Savior's Days, that First
Translation which was made of the Bible by the Jews, that most Famous Work of
the Seventy Elders about 250, others say about 260 Years before Christ's Birth.
It is true, before the LXX set about the Version of the whole Bible, some part
of it was translated into Greek. viz. Moses's Writings in the time of the
Persian Monarchy, if we may believe Megasthenes, who is quoted by Prap. Evang.
l. 9. c. 3.
Eusebius. And Strom. l. 1.
Clement of Alexandria attests, that some part of the Old Testament was turned
into Greek a little before Alexander the Great's Time. Which is not improbable
if we consider that from about the time that Alexander the Great transferred
the Persian Monarchy to the Greeks, the Greek Tongue spread it self, and became
the Universal Language, insomuch that the Jews in Asia, Egypt and Greece forgot
their Hebrew, and understood the Greek only. But this is not the Version which
I am now to speak of, which is the Celebrated Translation of the Seventy Jews,
who rendered the whole Book of the Old Testament into Greek: And it seems
(according to what has been said) there was a kind of Necessity for it,
because in the East the Hebrew was grown to be an unknown Tongue, and the very
Jews generally understood nothing but Greek. Some have observed a considerable
Disagreement between the Hebrew Text and this Greek Version, and hereupon they
undertake to form an Argument against the Perfection of the Holy Scriptures;
for they argue thus, There is great reason to assert the Authority of this
Translation, and to believe it is True and Genuine: Which, if it be granted,
makes the Hebrew Text to be suspected, nay it will follow thence that it is
faulty and defective, because there is so vast a Difference between the one and
the other. If this of the Seventy be a True Version, then the Hebrew of the
Bible which we have is not the True Original, but is corrupted and depraved,
and consequently there is a sufficient Prooof of the Scripture's Imperfection.

Now because this may seem to have something of Reason in it, and because the
greatest Controversy is about This Translation, I will insist much larger on
this than on any of the others, and endeavor from the whole to evince the
Truth of this Proposition, that the Hebrew Text is not at all faulty, but that
it remains still in its Original Purity and Perfection. Here first it will be
necessary to enquire into the Occasion, and into the Authors of this famous
Greek Version, and also into the Manner of their performing it, and from these
to gather of what Authority it is. Ptolomee surnamed Philadelphus, King of
Egypt, about the Year of the World 3730. erected a vast Library at Alexandria,
and furnished it with all the choicest Books he could procure: But
notwithstanding this, he thought it imperfect till the Hebrew Bible was added
to it. Accordingly by the Direction of Demetrius Phalereus, who was the
Library Keeper, he caused this Excellent Monument of Learning to be deposited
in it. But because he was ignorant of the Language in which it was written, he
by Letters importuned the High Priest and the Rulers at Jerusalem, to send him
some Persons to translate it out of the Hebrew into the Greek. Whereupon they
sent him Seventy or Seventy two Interpreters, in imitation perhaps of that
Number of Elders which Moses was commanded to take with him when he went up to
the Mount to receive the Law. And these Select Persons betook themselves to the
Employment which the King set them about, and first translated the Pentateuch,
and a while after the rest of the Old Testament into Greek. This is generally
allowed by the most Exact Searchers into History to be real Matter of Fact, as
being vouched by Writers of very good account, and whose joint Authority in
this Case we have no reason to suspect.

As for some Particular Circustances which relate to this Matter, as the Place
where they met, their Mavellous Consent in the Work, and the Time they
dispatched it in, these may be doubted of, though for my part I see no solid
ground of denying them altogether. The whole Translation was finished in 72
Days, says Aristaeas (or Aristaeus, for his Name is written both Ways) one
that was a great Favorite of King Ptolomee, and writ the History of this Greek
Translation of the Jewish Elders: But this Author is thought to be spurious by
De Histor. Graec.
Vossius, and by some other Learned Men before him. As to the Place, Philo the
Jew, Justin Martyr, and others tell us it was the Great Tower in the Isle of
Pharos, which was set up to direct the Mariners in the dangerous Seas about
Alexandria. Upon which a Mr. Gregory.
Great Critic turns Devout, and exerts his Fancy very piously, observing this
to be a proper Place for such a Work, the Bible being truly a Light to lighten
the Gentile World, a Light hung out to guide all doubting and troubled Souls in
the Storms and Tempests they meet with. And there were Distinct Places (if you
will credit some Jewish and Christian Writers) wherein these Interpreters
separately performed the task which they were set about. They did the Work each
of them in diverse Rooms, say the Talmud and the Rabbis. They were put into 70
distinct Cells when they translated the Bible, says Justin Martyr in his
Apology to the Roman Emperor: And moreover he adds that he was at Pharos, and
saw what was left of those Cells* And with him agree Irenaeus, Clemens of
Alexandria, Epiphanius, Cyril of Jerusalem, and Augustine. And further, though
an Arabic Commentator on the Pentateuch (whom Mr. Gregory cites) reports that
the 70 Seniors disagreed in their Translation the first time, and so were set
to it again, yet these Fathers take notice of no such thing, but tell us that
though these Translators were separated into distinct Places by themselves, yet
they all agreed in the same very Words and Syllables. Which they borrowed, it
is likely from De vit. Mos. l. 2.
Philo, who had expressly said they all exactly agreed on the same Names and
Words to interpret the Chaldee by, (for he calls it the Chaldee instead of the
Hebrew) as if some Person stood by them and invisibly dictated to them,
although the Chaldee might be translated diverse ways, the Greek Tongue being
so copious. And he further adds that Ibid.
there was a Feast yearly in the Pharos, whither the Jews went to solemnize it,
and to see the Place where this Version was made. But how can this be
reconciled with the Scalig. de Emen^. Temp.
Fast appointed to be kept by the Jews on the 8th Day of Th^bet or December,
because the Law of Moses was translated into the Greek Tongue by the Jews of
Alexandria in Ptolomee's Time, at which time they say there was Darkness three
Days together over the whole World? That therefore which Philo says, seems
rather to be said on purpose to inhanse the Credit of this Translation, for
which reason we may justly question the Truth of it. Josephus who purposely
Antiq. Jud. l. 12. c. 2.
treats of the turning the Law into Greek by King Ptolomee's Order, says
nothing of the Different Cells, nor does he represent the Interpreters as
Inspired Persons. And St. Ierom, who was a Searching Man, was the first of the
Fathers that opposed and contradicted this Story, declaring that he could not
believe any thing concerning these Distinct Rooms and Apartments, and the
Miraculous Agreement of the Interpreters in these separated Cells, giving (...)
in Pentateuch.
this Reason for it, because neither Aristaeas nor Josephus speak a Word of
them.

But some are not satisfied with this, but roundly tell us that Ierom had made
a New Translation of the Bible out of the Hebrew himself, wherein he very much
differed from the LXX, and so he was obliged to disparage the Cells and the
Translators, to make way for his own Translation. This is the uncharitable
Censure which Mr. Gregory.
One gives of this Great Father. And as for Arist^as he comes off thus with
him, it is no wonder that he says nothing of the Cells; for this Aristaeas who
is quoted by St. Ierom, is not the genuine Author, but a spurious one, for the
Fathers quote many things out of him which are not to be found in this Book.
But F. Simon* Crit. Hist. l. 2.
Another tells us another Story, viz. that the Hellenist Jews, who read the
Translation of the ^0 in their Synagogues, were the Inventers of this History
of the Translators, and put it out in one Arist^us's Name. And the same Person
moreover presents us with this New Conceit, that it was called the Translation
of the Seventy, not from Seventy Translators who were the Authors of it, but
from the Seventy Judges, i. e. the Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, who authorized and
approved of it. Then, as for Josephus, we are put off thus by Mr. Gregory, viz.
that he is wont to comply with his Readers, and uses not to put Great and
Wonderful things on their Belief if he can help it, as appears in his Relation
of the Israelites passing the Red Sea, and Nebuchadnezzar's going to Grass,
etc. so here he omits the Seventy Seniours their Consenting in that wonderful
Manner in the Translating the Hebrew Bible, because it would have been
incredible to the Gentiles, that Persons separated and shut up from one another
should agree so exactly. To this effect you will ^ind that Notable Critic
speaking: But it will appear to be a very Sorry Evasion (as those of the other
Persons before mentioned are) if any Man look narrowly into it; for upon the
same ground that he gives here, that Jewish Historian might have omitted most
of the things he relates, because they are very Great and Wonderful, and far
exceed the Belief of a Pagan.

We are not then to attend to such poor Suggestions as these, and to swallow
all that has been related by Writers concerning the Seventy Interpreters.
Neither is there reason to disbelieve all they have said, but in this (as in
most Historical Relations) we ought to credit what is most Probable, and to
reject the rest. We need not with Epiphanius and Augustine hold that the
Seventy Interpreters were divinely inspired, and that their Translation of the
Bible was done in a Miraculous Manner, and that it is of Divine Authority,
which we may ^ind some Writers aiming at; but on the other hand there is no
ground to affirm that all which Aristaeas and Aristobulus say concerning the
Seventy's Version is Fable and Fiction, as the Du Pin.
Parisian Professor of Divinity pronounces, but very rashly in my Judgment. We
have no reason to deny the Chief and General things which are related
concerning the Seventy Seniours who were employed in turning the Old Testament
into Greek; we have no reason to question their Skill and Ability (as to the
Main) to perform that Task, we have no reason to deny the Authority of their
Version, i. e. that it was really Theirs, and that it is Genuine. We are
certain that it was approved of by the Testimony of all the Jews who flourished
before the Destruction of Jerusalem, viz. Aristaeas, Eupolemus, Aristobulus,
both the Philo's, Josephus, etc. We are certain that the Hellenist Jews, i. e.
such as lived among the Grecians, and read the Scriptures in this Version, and
prayed and performed all other Offices in Greek, esteemed it equally with the
Original, and read it constantly in their Synagogues. We are certain that
Christ and the Apostles followed this Translation generally: And we are sure
that the Greek and Latin Church for 400 Years received and approved it, as the
most Authentic of all the Greek Translations.

But this, you will say, makes the Objection stronger: For if the LXX's Version
be of such Authority, and yet differs from the Hebrew, then this shakes the
Credit and Authority of the Hebrew, which is the Original Scripture. But I
answer, we are giving the Greek Translation of the Seventy its due, but we do
not intend hereby to wrong the Hebrew: Yea, our design is to give unto both
what belongs to them; which I find several Learned Writers of late are
unwilling to do. When I affirm that the Septuagint's Version was not only
heretofore, but is to this Day of undoubted Authority, and is the most
Authentic Greek Translation of the Old Testament that is extant, I do not say
it is Faultless, and that it is to be equaled with the Hebrew; but I
positively assert that it has many Errors and Mistakes, many faulty Omissions
and Additions, many Disorders and Corruptions in it, and yet that
nowithstanding this it is the most Authentic and justly esteemed Version among
all the Ancient ones, and is of great use in the Church. It was hotly disputed
of Old which of these two, the Hebrew Bible or the Seventy's Translation,
should have the Pre-eminence. Some in a very high Manner extolled the latter,
and disparaged the former; then came Ierom, and was not content to cry up this,
but immoderately inveighed against the other, and cried it down as not to be
suffered. And we have seen this Old Controversy newly started and revived by
some of late: Some on one side applauding the Hebrew to the Height, that they
wholly disregard the Greek Version of the 70 Elders; others on the other side
crying up this with a vilifying of the Hebrew Text. Ludovicus Capellus goes
this latter way, but he is outdone by Morinus, who shows himself a Sworn Enemy
to the Hebrew Text, and at a high Rate defends the Greek Translation of the
Seventy in all things: insomuch that a Man may plainly see he resolves to do it
at a Venture, whether there be any reason for it or no. He is backed by Isaac
Vossius, who pretending he saw the Hebrew Text magnified and adored by some
Men, (Half-Iews he calls them) thereupon undertook to stand up for the
Septuagint, and destroy the Authority of the Hebrew Original. It will not
suffice this Gentleman to say the Greek Version of the Elders is Divine, but
from his Discourse he would have us gather that the Hebrew Text is scarcely
Humane, it being so disordered, so lame, so miserably corrupted. These are the
Extremes which Men unadvisedly run into; that they may extol the Greek Version,
they shamefully vilify the Hebrew Text. But I will take another Course, not
endeavoring to oppose one of these to the other, but so far as it is sitting,
reconcile them both: Which I will do by showing you what is the true Difference
between these two, and whence it arises.

First then, the Difference which we observe to be between the Hebrew Bible and
this Greek Version, proceeds from the mistaking of one Hebrew Vowel for
another. Though the 70 Interpreters were sufficiently skilled in the Hebrew,
yet they sometimes translated it amiss because they did not make use of the
Hebrew Vowels or Points, they translated by those Copies which had not the
Points added to the Hebrew Text. Some indeed have alleged the Difference
between the Hebrew and the Seventy Version, as an Argument to prove that Points
were not anciently annexed to the Hebrew Bible; for hence it is, say they, that
there is that Variety of Reading: The Bible was at that time without Vowels,
and consequently a great many Words were capable of being read, and accordingly
translated Diversely. But this is a Fallacy, for though the Mistakes in the
Greek Version proceeded partly from the want of Points in the Hebrew Bibles, i.
e. those Bibles which the 70 Interpreters used, yet it does not follow thence
that no Hebrew Bibles had Points. For so it was that all their Bibles were not
written with Points, but some Persons, to expedite the writing them over, left
them out. The short is that though these were from the beginning, (as has been
said in the Entrance of these Discourses on the Scriptures) yet they were not
always used; and when they were used, they were not always carefully attended
to: Whence happened many of those Mistakes which we may take notice of in the
Version of the Jewish Elders. They either had those Bibles which had been
transcribed without Points, or they mistook the Points themselves out of
Carelessness or something that is worse. The Instances of this kind are very
numerous, but I will content my self with naming a few only.

In Genesis 14. 5. Beham in Ham (i. e. the Land of Ham) was read by the LXX Behem
in ipsis, and accordingly rendered by them (...). In Genesis 15. 11. the Word
(...), diffiavit, ^latu abegit, was read (...) consedit, they attending not to
the Vowels but the Consonants only, and thence they translated it (...) he sat
by them, whereas according to the Original we rightly translate it, he drove
them away. The Septuagint did not read it Ba Gad (two Words) Genesis 30. 11. but
Begad, and accordingly translated it (...). So in Genesis 47. 31. according to the
Hebrew we read it Israel bowed himself upon the Bed's Head, but according to
the Septuagint upon the Top or Head of his Staff; for these Interpreters in
their unpricked Bibles mistook (...) for (...), i. e. a Staff instead of a Bed,
and accordingly translated it (...). The Errror proceeded hence, that those
Hebrew Words have the same Letters, but the same Points do not belong to them.
In Chap. 49. 6. Cabodi, my Glory, is rendered (...): Whence it is plain that
they took Cabedi to be the Word. And in another Place the Mistake is quite
contrary, as in Lam. 2. 11. Cabedi, my Liver, is translated (...), because they
read it Cabodi my Glory. Instead of Lachem Shegnarim, War in the Gates, Judge.
5. 8. the Seventy thought it was Lechem Segnorim, barley Bread, as it is in some
Copies. In Judge. 7. 11. they mistook the Word Chamushim, armed Men, and read it
Chamishim, and accordingly rendered it (...) fifty Men. The Hebrew Word is (...)
ad oculum meum, in 2 Samuel 16. 12. but the 70 read it (...), and thence rendered
it (...). In 2 Kings 2. 24. they mistook hu for ho, and thereupon inserted a
strange unintelligible Word, (...), into their Translation in that Place. They
likewise read some Places in the Psalms with false Vowels, and by reason of
that Mistake interpreted Ve el, and Deus, as if it had been Ve al, and non,
Psalm. 7. 17. and Sam, possuit, as if it had been Sh^^ nomen, Psalm. 40. 5. and
Middeber, a peste, as if it had been Middabar, a verbo, Psalm. 91. 3. So in
Psalm. 22. 29. it is plain that they read it Napshi instead of Naphsho, and
consequently render it (...) They overlooked a Vowel in Psalm. 2. 9. for the
Word is Terognem, thou shall break them, but they thought it was (...), thou
shall feed them, and so translated it (...). Their mistaking of Vowels may be
seen in their translating of Isa. 6. 10. which they do thus, (...), the Heart
of this People was made fat; for they read it Hoshman in the Conjugation
Hophal, whereas it should have been Hashmen in the Imperative of Hiphil.
According to the Original we render Isa. 7. 20. a Razour that is hired: but the
LXX render it that is made drunk, whence it is plain that they thought the
Hebrew Word (...), which is here used, came from the Verb Shakar, in^bri^vit,
whereas it is derived from Sakar, mercede conduxit. They read the Letter Shin
with a dexter Point, whereas it should have been read with a sinister, In Isa.
9. 8. it is evident that they mistook the Points in the Word (...) verbum, and
read it (...), pestis, mors; and so instead of the Lord sent a W^rd into Jacob,
the reading according to them is, the Lord sent Death into Jacob, (...) for
(...). They translate Isa. 24. 23. thus, the Brick shall be melted, and the
Wall shall fall; whereas according to the Hebrew it is thus, the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed: and the Reason of this strange and palpable
varying from the Original is this, (as St. Comment. in Isa.
Ierom has observed) because the Septuagint read (...) a Brick instead of
(...) the Moon: and they mistook (...) a Wall, for (...) the Sun. Again, in
Isa. 56. 11. (...) is translated (...), because they read it ragnim, mali,
instead of rognim, Pastores. The Seventy Interpreters render a Clause in Ier.
3. 2. thus, as a Crow in the Wilderness, etc. which proceeds hence, that the
Hebrew Word (...), a Crow, has the same radical Letters that (...) or Gnarabi
has, which signifies an Arabian: but the Mistake was in the Vowels. In Ier.
46. 17. for (...) ibi they read (...) nomen, and accordingly render it (...).
They read it (...), in igne, for (...) (...) faetor, and so render it (...),
Amos 4. 10. They translate Zech. 11. 17. thus, (...), supposing the Hebrew Word
to be (...) Pastores, not (...) Pastor. In Mal. 2. 3. Zerang, Seed, is rendered
(...) a Shoulder, for no other Reason than this, that Zeroang was mistaken for
Zerang. And in many other Places the Seventy Interpreters mistook the Hebrew
Words by not observing the Particular Punctations of them: which is one Cause
of the Difference between the Greek Version and the Hebrew Text. The not
attending to this has made some, and Drusius, Ludovic. Capellus, Mede.
those of no mean Note, imagine that the Hebrew Copies which we now have vary
in many things from the Ancient ones which the Seventy used when they
translated the Bible. A very groundless Imagination certainly, for it is most
evident that this Difference between the Seventy and the Hebrew proceeds not
from the Corruption of this latter, but from the Mistake and Oversight of the
former. Any Man that is willing to see what is before his Eyes may plainly
discern that in all these Instances beforementioned one Word is taken for
another, because the Pointing was wrong. This must needs be, otherwise those
Greek Words which the LXX use would not so exactly answer to the Hebrew Words
which we say they mistook for the true Original ones.

2. The Difference sometimes proceeds from mistaking one Consonant for another:
as in Genesis 6. 3. although jadon be from dun, contendere, and therefore we
rightly render that Place, my Spirit shall not always strive, or contend; yet
the Septuagint derive it from dur, habitare, permanere, and so translate it
(...). The Affinity of the Letter ^ and ^ occasioned this Mistake, the
Transcribers of the Copies which the Septuagint used having, it is likely, put
one Letter for another, they being so like in Shape. (Thus in many of our
English Bibles instead of the word Bands, Isa. 28. 22. we find it printed
Hands, h and b being like one another.) Comment. in Ezekiel. 27.
Ierom observes that (...) is the Seventy's Translation of been Dedan, Ezekiel.
27. 15. for they read it Redan, not Dedan, mistaking Resh for Daleth, because
those Letters are of a resembling Figure. So in other Places the Likeness of
these two Letters is the Occasion of the LXX's wrong interpreting of Words:
thus in Job 32. 19. they thought the Word was (...), and accordingly render it
(...), faber aerarius, (the singular for the plural) whereas the Word is (...)
novi^ In Isa. 16. 4. the Hebrew Word Sad, a Destroyer, is rendered (...),
because the Word was Sar in the Seventy's Copy. And as Resh is taken for Da^th,
so this is sometimes taken for that, as in Genesis 22. 13. (...), behind, is
rendered (...), because they thought the Word was (...), one. In Genesis 49. 14.
(...), asinus, is translated (...), which could proceed from no other Cause but
this, that they supposed the Word to be (...), desiderabile. How could they
render Charash, fabri, in Exodus 35. 35. by (...), if they had not believed the
Original to be Chadash, which is of Affinity with kadosh? In Psalm. 109. 13.
Achar is translated (...), whereas it should be (...), but they read it Achad,
una. And (...) it not reasonable to think that a Daleth was in the Place of a
Resh in Zeph. 3. 9. i. e. that their Copies had it bedurah instead of berurah,
electum, ^urum? and accordingly they rendered it (...), for they took it to be
two distinct Words with a Prefix thus, be dur ah: otherwise it is impossible to
imagine how they could translate it ^o. Sometimes the Likeness of Beth and Caph
causes a Mistake, so (...), he shall eat, Eccles. 5. 16. is rendered (...) by
the Greek Interpreters, because they read it (...), and luctu. In Psalm. 29. 2.
there can be no ground of their Version (...) (...) this, that they took a
(...) for a (...), and so instead of (...), in decore, they read (...), in
con^lavi. In Isa. 51. 18. there is a Mistake of (...) for (...), and likewise
of (...) for (...), otherwise they would not have rendered Menahel (...),
consoldtor: It is evident that they read Menachem instead of Menahel. And
sometimes where there is no Similitude in the Letters they take one Word for
ano^^er. So they read (...) instead of (...), and upon that Mistake translated
the Word by the Greek (...). is the known Word that signifies a Forehead, but
in Ezekiel. 3. 8. it is rendered (...), of which I can give no other Account but
this, that the Word in their Copies was (...) vi^^oria, a Nun for a Mem. I am
apt to think, that whereas the Hebrew Word in Zeph. 2. 15 is (...) desolatio,
their Books had it (...), corvus, and thence they render it (...). When I
observed the Difference between the Original [ there shall be a Fountain
opened] Zech. 13. 1. and the Seventy's Version, [ there shall be a Place
opened] I soon found the Mistake in this latter, viz. their reading of (...)*
locus, (whence they render it (...)) for (...), sons. Lastly, I am persuaded
that the Verb Barak was thought to be the Root in the latter Clause of v. 19.
of 1 Samuel 2. and thence (...) is the Word used by the LXX, but the right Word
is bara^ which is mistaking one Consonant for another, a Caph for an Aleph. But
I submit my Thoughts concerning these Texts to the Judicious, who will either
join with me, or heartily accept of my Conjectures. I mention not here any of
those Instances which the foresaid Learned Father has given, showing how the
Seventy take one Letter in a Word for another, and so have made quite another
Word of it, and accordingly have translated it. Hottinger also has brought
sundry Exampl^^ to show that they erred as to Consonants, that they palpably
mistook them from the Likeness of one to another, and so rendered the Text
falsely: when^^ there must needs be a Difference between the H^brew and the
Greek Bible.

3. They sometimes mistake both Vowels and Consonants: As in Judge. 5. 10. the
Word was thought by them to be Tsacharajim, and on that Supposal was translated
(...): but the right Word was Tsecharoth, candidae. In Isa. 26. 14. Rephaim,
mortui, is rendered (...), because the Word was supposed to be Rophim, medici.
In both which Instances not only Letters but Points are mistaken. That Place,
Genesis 49. 10. (...), or (...) (which was the ancient Greek Version, as Justin
Martyr and Origin testify) is rendered so from their taking Shelo, ille cujus,
or cui, for Shiloh. And in the same Verse instead of the Hebrew (...)
Congr^gatio, they took the Word to be (...), from the Root (...) expectavit,
and thence they render it (...) expectatio. Again, in ^ 22. of this Chapter
instead of (...) incedebat, they read it (...) minorennis, and accordingly the
Greek Word is (...). They took a Daleth for a Resh, and moreover were mistaken
as to the Points. So in 1 Samuel 6. 18. they read Eben for Abel, and so
interpreted it (...), a Mistake of a Nun for a Lamed, together with an
Oversight as to the ^ricks. And in chapter 19. 16. Kebir, pulvinar, would ^ot have
been rendered (...), unless the Word had seemed to them to be Cabed, jecur: so
that it appears they failed not only in a Consonant but two Vowels. I doubt not
but they thought the Word ^as (...) vivet, Job 8. 17. and accordingly they
under it (...), whenas the right Word is (...) ^idebit. Can there be any Reason
assigned why Be^^jeth is translated (...), in visione, Numb. ^6. 30. but this,
that they read it Baroeth? Vau and Iod are alike, and so were mistaken one for
the other, and [^] instead of [:] in the beginning of the Word. Any observant
Eye may perceive by the Seventy's Version, (...), Isa. 29. 3. that they took
the Hebrew Word to be (...), ^hereas the true Word is (...), Caddur pila,
(...). In Hos. 12. 12. (...) boves is according to the Greek Translators (...),
whence one may ^^ess that Sharim was thought by them to be the Original Word.
Lamnatseach is the Title of the fourth Psalm, and several others, but they
thought it to be Lanetsach, and hence rendered it. (...), for Netsach is a very
large Word, and both with and without Lamed before it, is sometimes adve^bially
taken, and is as much as in finom. Thus they erred both as to a Letter and the
Vowels. And so they did in Psalm. 22. 24. where the Word (...) Mimmennu, but
they read it Mimm^ani, as appears by their translating it (...). It is worth
observing that (...), thou shall be feared, (or, as Our Translators render it,
thou may be feared) Psalm. 130. 4. is strangely rendered by the Greek
Interpreters (...), for thy Name'^ sake: which is a Fault of the Transcribers,
the^ writing those Words instead of (...)* for thy La^'s sake. This we may
gather from the Vulgar Latin, which continually follows the LXX in the
Translation of the Psal^s, and renders (...) propter legem tuam, and thence we
may see how the Mistake arose, viz. from their reading (...) for (...), or they
derived the Word from Iarah, which in Hiph^l signifies to teach, (whence Torah)
wher^^ the rigth Root or Theme is jara, timuit. The Sventy render Ier. 16. 7.
thus [ they shall, not break Bread for them]; but according to the Hebrew it is
[ they shall not tear themselves for them]: whence it may be gathered, that
instead of (...) they read it (...). So in Ezekiel. 34. 16. a Letter as well as a
Vo^el is mistaken, viz. (...) for (...), and Vau for Iod: instead of (...), I
will destroy, they read (...), I will keep. The Hebrew in Hos. 14. ^ is (...),
Calves, but the Greek is (...): where it is evident that the Seventy read
(...), fructus for p^rim, vituli. This certainly is a plainer and fairer
Account of this Difference between the Hebre^ and the LXX in this Place than
what Dr. Pocock fancifully suggests, who tells us that the Seventy's (...) is
the same with (...), which is the Word they use for an Holocaust, which being
of young Bullocks (but we know that sort of Sacrifices was of other Animals as
well as these) (...) is made use of for ^alves, for these Sacrifices were like
Fruit or Banquet after a Meal. But a Man would rather think they were the Meal
it self, for these whole Burnt-Offerings, were the substantial Service of the
Jews, even when there were no other Sacrifices besides at the same time. But we
must give these Arabian Criicks leave to propound their Conjectures as well as
other Men. In Hab. 1. 5. they erroneously read (...) for (...), and so
translated it (...) instead of (...).

4. It happens that the Translation of the Seven^y differs from the Hebrew
Original, because the same Words in Hebrew signify different things, and
consequently the Rendering of them may be va^ious, and sometimes seem to
disagree with the Original Text. As in Isa. 58. 9. because the Word (...)
signifies both a Pot and a Thorn, the Seventy render the Plural Word (...)
Thorns: before the Thorns feel the Briars, i. e. are entangled in one another,
which is presently done. This seems to be the Sense they intended. What we
according to the Hebrew render the Valley of Baca, or (in the Margent)
Mulberry-trees, Psalm. 8^. 6. is translated by the Septuagint the Valley (...)
of the Mourner, or Weeper, because the Hebrew Word (...) which may be derived
either from (...) Morus, or from (...) R. Jonah and R. Jehudah explicant per
^allem in qu^ stilla^ aqua (...) Lachryma ab Oculis. Pagnin.
flere, plorarc, is equivocal, and so may be differently rendered. And in the
same Verse, from the Ambiguity of the Word Moreh which is Doctor, Legislator,
as well as Pluvia, the Seventy render it (...). Isa. 28. 16. is truly
translated by us, He that believes shall not make haste, but according to the
Seventy Seniours it is thus, He shall not be ashamed, which is a true
Translation also, for the Hebrew Word (...) signifies both, as is Pocock Not.
Miscell. in Port. Mos. c. 1. Dr. Castle in Lexic. Heptaglot.
evident in the Writings of the Hebrews. The like is observable in Ier. 31.
32.(...), which we translate I was a Husband: but the Seventy render it
(...)(which by the way we may take notice is a Fault of the Transcribers, for
it should be (...) (as we learn from Heb. 8. 9. where this Place is alleged) I
regarded not. The Ground of the different Version is this, the Verb (...) has
both these Significations, viz. to be a Husband, and to despise, or not have
regard to. I have already on Discourse of the Style of Script. Chap. 7.
another Occasion set down the Different Significations of Hebrew Verbs, which
the Reader may consult, and thence enlarge upon this Head. Indeed the Places
are almost innumerable, wherein you may see this Particular exemplified. This
therefore will in a great Measure solve the Difference between the Hebrew and
the LXX's Version, viz. that one Word signifies two or more things, and thence
may be differently rendered. Where there is a Variety of Significations in the
Words, there may well be expected some Diversity in the translating of them.

5. It is no wonder that the Translation of the 70 varies in many Places from
the Hebrew, because these Interpreters do sometimes rather express the Sense of
the Hebrew Words than exactly render them. Thus in Genesis 23. 11. (...) is the
Word to express (...) Sons of the People. By the Life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42. 15,
16. is in the LXX's Version (...), i. e. by the Health of Pharaoh, because this
bears the same Sense with the other. So Shebet a Scepter, Genesis 49. 10. is (...)
a Prince or Ruler according to the Greek Translation. To be delivered from the
Sword of Pharaoh according to the Hebrew, or from the Hand of Pharaoh, Exodus
18. 4. according to the Seventy, is the same. (...) the Son of a Bull or Cow,
Lev. 1. 5. is rightly according to the Sense rendered (...) a Calf. (...), Deuteronomy.
25. 2. a Son of Stripes, is according to the true meaning translated (...)
worthy of Stripes: Chereb the Sword is (...) War, Lev. 26. 6, 36, 37. Job 5.
15. and to fall by War, Numb. 14. 3. (as the Greek Interpreters render it) is
the same as to fall by the Sword, as the Hebrew has it. Been Elohim, Deuteronomy. 32.
8. Job 1. 6. and 38. 7. are (...) with the LXX, for by the Sons of God are
meant Angels. Iad is rendered (...), Josh. 4. 24. because the Hand of the Lord
and the Power of the Lord are equivalent. The Seventy make bold to turn Majim
Water into (...) Wine, 1 Samuel 25. 11. for as by Bread in this Place is meant
all Manner of Food, so by Water we are to understand all Sorts of Drink, and
consequently Wine it self, for the Text speaks of a Feast, yea such a one as
was like the Feast of a King, v. 36. They do not fully render 1 King. 22. 5. 2 Chronicles. 18. 4. when they translate it enquire of the Lord to Day, for according
to the Hebrew it should be enquire at the Word of the Lord to Day: but the
meaning is the same. In Ne^. 4. 2. you read according to the Hebrew of reviving
the Stones, for the Root is Chajah; but these Interpreters express it by the
Verb (...), sanare, because reviving or healing the Stones in this Place are
synonymous. In 2 King. 20. 7. Hos. 6. 2. the same Hebrew Verb is expressed by
(...): and in Genesis 47. 25. Prove. 15. 27. Ezekiel. 33. 12. and other Places by
(...) and (...) they being Words of the like import with Chajah. Dibre hajamim,
Esth. 2. 23. is (...), and not amiss, but the Sense (not the Words) is attended
to. In Prove. 11. 8. Mitsadah angustia is according to the LXX (...) Venatio,
Persecutio, which is a Word of the like, tho not the very same Import. In the
Close of Esth. 10. 3. the Hebrew Noun is Zarang, semen, but the Greek Word here
used is (...), because it is of the same Signification in this Place, for to
speak Peace to all his Seed or to all his Nation (which were of the same Seed
and Race) are the same. (...) is the Word that the Seventy make use of in Job
6. 4. but Ruach is the Original: yet any observing Man cannot but discern the
Congruity of the Greek Word, for the Blood is the Vehicle of the Spirits; and
besides to drink up the Blood is an Elegant way of Expression. The Hebrew Word
Keren a Horn, Job 16. 15. is not un^itly translated (...) Strength, the Sense
being minded, and not the Word. The Drops of Water, Job 36. 27. are explained
by (...) Drops of Rain. Keren happuk, Job 42. 14. is rendered (...), referring
to the Greek Fable of Amalthea's Horn, which signifies all manner of Good
things, and so comprehends in it the meaning of that Name given to one of Job's
Daughters. And in several other Places in this Book the Hebrew Terms are
explained rather than translated. Bagnal Canaph, Prove. 1. 7. is (...); Bagnal
Aph, chapter 22. v. 24. is (...); Bagnal Nephesh, chapter 23. v. 2. is (...), all which
Versions are Exegetical. So is that in Eccl. 10. 20. Bagnal Hakephanim,
Gr.(...). Iathad a Nail, Isa. 22. 23. is rendered (...) a Ruler, but the Sense
is preserved; for that Promise that Eliakim should be a Nail fastened in a sure
Place, imports his being advanced to Shebna's Office or Place of Rule, as the
foregoing Verses as well as those that follow plainly show. The Daughter of
Tarshish, Isa. 23. 10. is Carthage according to the Seventy, because they
thought this Place was meant by those Words. They render Dibre Haberith, Jer.
34. 18. (...), whereas it should be the Words of the Covenant according to the
Original: but who sees not that it amounts to the same? What according to the
Hebrew is the Mountain of the Lord, Mic. 4. 2. is the House of the Lord
according to the Septuagint, but these two differ not in the Sense, because the
Temple, the House of God, was built on Mount Sion. The Word Derek a Way, Jer.
23. 22. is (...); in 1 Kings 22. 52. it is (...); in Ezekiel. 20. 30. it is (...);
in 2 Chronicles. 13. 22. and 27. 7. it is (...); in Job 34. 21. and 36. 23. it is
(...); in Prove. 31. 3. it is (...): but in all these Places the true meaning of
the Hebrew Word is maintained. (...) in 1 Chronicles. 2. 20. Ie^. 16. 14. Ezekiel. 2.
3. and 35. 5. and 37. 21. and 43. 7. is rendered by the Greek Translators (...),
but in all these Texts you will find the Sense of the Hebrew Word kept up. So
Jehovah Tsebaoth is rendered in above fifty Places (...). should be translated
(...), but instead of it we read (...), 1 Samuel 15. 24. (...), Exodus 17. 1.
(...), Numb. 3. 16. So Lashon, which (exactly speaking) is the Tongue, is
rendered (...), Job 15. 5. (...), Isa. 54. 17. (...), Esth. 8. 9. In accuracy
and propriety of Translation Shaphah is (...), but the general Signification of
the Word is preserved when the Word (...), Ezekiel. 24. 22. (...), Genesis 11. 7.
(...), Prove. 16. 21. (...), Ezekiel. 36. 3. are used.

I could add several hundreds more of the like Nature: but I will at present
mention only a few Instances out of the Book of Psalms. That is a very
remarkable one, Psalm. 2. 12. where (...), apprehendite disciplinam, is the
rendering of (...) osculamini filium, the LXX not intending here barely to
Translate, but taking the Liberty to render the Sense, not the Exact Words of
the Original. When Heathen Kings and Governors are admonished to kiss the Son,
i. e. to submit to the Government of Christ, the Meaning is, that they should
accept of his Doctrine and Discipline, and live and act according to these. But
others solve this Translation by telling us, that the word Bar had heretofore
different Significations, and denoted both a Son and Discipline. If this could
be made good, it belongs to the Fourth Particular, where we spoke of the
Diversity of Significations which some Hebrew Words have. Again, in Psalm. 18.
2. and 31. 3. they intended not an exact Version, but rather chose to give the
Sense of the word Selang a Rock, when they expressed it by (...) in the former
Place, and (...) in the latter. In Psalm. 19. 4. their Line, Cavvam, is rendered
(...), their Sound or Voice, because it amounts to the same Sense and Intention
of the Psalmist; unless you will say they read it (...) instead of (...), and
then it is to be reduced to one of the former Particulars. The word Machol,
Dancing, is not improperly rendered (...), Psalm. 30. 11. because it is of the
very same Import. In Psalm. 40. 6. the Sense of the Seventy is the same with
that of the Hebrew Text, although the Translation be not Word for Word. Mine
Ears have thou ^pened, says the Hebrew: a Body have thou prepared me, say the
LXX. Here is one meaning, though the Words differ: Christ is here introduced
speaking of his Incarnation, when God the Father gave him a Body, and prepared
and fitted it for the Cross, where it was to be nailed, as the Ear of that
Servant who loved his Master, and would not depart from his Family, was fastened
for a time to the Door-post; Exodus 21. 6. Deuteronomy. 15. 17. on which Ground of
Similitude the opening or boaring of the Ear is changed into preparing or
framing a Body, ^itting it for that Work and Service to which it was designed.
The Sense then (which is the main thing) is the same, viz. that Christ had a
Body given him, that he assumed our Humane Nature, that thereby he might be
Obedient, and perform the Part of a Servant. Nay, the Words themselves are not
much different, for the Hebrew Verb (...) Buxtors. Lexic. and Concordant.
signifies as well apparare or comparare as fodere, perforare, and therefore is
well rendered by (...). Moreover, the Ear, which is the Organ of Obedience and
Compliance, is Synechdochically put for the Body: nay, perhaps the Hebrew Word
Ozen signifies a Body as well as an Ear, for it is well known how different
Senses one Word has among the Hebrews. I could observe to you, that it is
rendered (...) by the Septuagint, Job 33. 16. (as well as (...) in this Place)
and (...) in Prove. 26. 17. which may convince us of the Ambiguity of the Word.
Besides, we know the Latitude of the word Heezin, which signifies both to hear
and to obey. It might be added, that as the Opening or Boaring the Ear
signifies Voluntary Subjection or Obedience, and speaks a Willing Servant,
(though not this only or altogether, as I have showed elsewhere) so the word
(...) likewise denotes a Slave or Servile Person, Rev. 18. 13. Thus opening and
preparing, the Ear and the Body agree: and the Sense of both put together is
this, Thou have made me Obedient. Thus the Hebrew and Greek do friendly accord,
so that we need not say with Mr. Isaac Vossius, that the Jews have corrupted
this Place to evade the Prophecy. So in Psalm. 105. 28. the Sense was attended
to, not the Express Words; for whereas in the Hebrew it is [they rebelled not
against his Word], the Word [not] is left out in the Septuagint, they following
(as they thought) the Meaning of the Place, for they supposed it had Respect to
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, who, when these Plagues (here spoken of) were upon
them, rebelled against God's Word. The Negative Particle lo may here be taken
Interrogatively, (as in other Places, Isa. 9. 3. Hos. 4. 14.) and then the
Words run thus, Did they not rebel against his Word? which is as much as to
say, they did, therefore the LXX translated it Affirmatively, they rebelled,
which is the same with our Old English Version, which we use in our Service,
they were not obedient. But if we take [^^] here as a downright Negative, then
the Place refers not to the Egyptians, but to Moses and Aaron, these rebelled
not against his Word. Not of these, but of the others the Septuagint, it is
likely, understood the Text, and accordingly rendered it. And in many other
Places the Translation is not Literal, but follows the Sense. Which is observed
by the Judicious Dr. Pearson in his Paraenetick Preface before the Cambridg
Edition of the LXX's Bible, where St. Ierom's Exceptions against this Greek
Version are answered and made void, by showing in several Instances that though
we find not the same Words there that are in the Hebrew, yet we find the like
Meaning. That is sufficient, because that was the thing the Seventy intended,
for their Business was not to tie up themselves closely to the very Words and
Phrases of the Hebrew: Which gives us some Account of the Difference between
the Greek of the Old Testament and the Original.

6. This sometimes proceeds from the Errors committed by the Transcribers of
the Greek Copies. Their Carelessness in writing them over has been partly the
Cause of the Variation of the Readings in the Hebrew and the 70 Interpreters:
as in Prove. 8. 22. (...), Dominus creavit me, is, by the Fault of the
Amanuenses, put for (...), possedit me, which answers to the Hebrew (...). Not
but that the word (...) may here admit of a good Interpretation, for we may
understand it of the Eternal Generation of Christ. But (...) is exactly
answerable to the Original, and is the same with (...), which is the Word used
by Aquila in his Version of this Place. Wherefore we may justly impute (...) to
the Negligence or Ignorance of the Scribes, as St. De Civ. Dei.
Augustine does. And Epist. 28. ad Lucin.
Ierom complains of this sort of Men, that they sometimes wrote not what they
found, but what they understood. And without doubt upon a diligent Search we
might ^ind that the LXX's Copy is faulty in other Places by reason of the
Scribes, through whose Hands (and those not a few) it passed.

7. The 70 Interpreters are wont to add many things by way of Paraphrase, and
on that Account must needs seem to disagree with the Hebrew. Thus to explain
Genesis 9. 20. ish haadamah, they in^ort the word (...) thus, (...), a Man, i. e.
a Husbandman, of the Earth. Morigim is the Word for threshing Instruments, 2 Samuel 24. 22. Isa. 41. 15. the Nature of which is expressed to us by the Words
which the LXX use here, viz. (...), and (...), for the manner of Threshing in
those Days was with Cart-Wheels. In Ier. 32. 35. (...) is added to explain the
word (...), for the Signification of Moloch is a King. In Ezekiel. 38. 2. (...) is
prefixed to (...) to acquaint us that Rhos was another Name of Scythia, whence
the Russians. But this short way of Commenting or Paraphrasing on the Hebrew is
so usual and frequent with them, and so plain and obvious to be taken notice
of, that I need not Particularize.

8. They sometimes insert Words without any Ground or Occasion, Words which
ought not to be inserted. Thus though the Hebrew Text says, Genesis 8. 7. Noah' s
Raven went forth, going out and returning, yet the LXX say it returned not.
Here is a flat Contradiction; though perhaps we may reconcile the Hebrew and
Greek, by saying, Noa^'s Raven did return unto the Ark, but not into it, but
was fed by him out of the Window. Or it is likely, say some, he hovered about
the Ark, bringing his Prey (Carcases floating on the Water) and devouring them
on the top of the Ark. But this is mere Conjecture. So the Seventy Interpreters
put in Cainan as Arphaxad's Son, Genesis 10. 24. but the Hebrew omitteth him, and
puts Salah in his stead; unless you will say with Bochart, that this and the
former Interpolation were the Fault of the Transcribers of the Seventy's
Copies, of which before. But further, the LXX usually add entire Sentences of
their own, when there is no need of a Paraphrase or Comment: as in the 14th
Psalm, ver. 3. they take several Passages out of Scripture, which are
applicable (as they thought) to that Place, and there insert them, whence
instead of seven Verses in this Psalm, according to our last English
Translation (which follows the Hebrew) there are eleven it it, according to the
Old one used in our Service, which follows the Septuagint. Thus in Prove. 6.
after what is said there (v. 6, 7, 8.) of the Ant, they make bold to add
something concerning the Be, (...), etc. So in Isaiah and Jeremiah, and other
Books, they take a great Liberty: there are several whole Sentences added that
are not in the Hebrew, and many are left out that are in it. To instance at
present only, in two of this latter sort, those Words in Prove. 22. 6. Train up
a Child in the way he should go; and when ^e is old he will not depart from it,
are wholly omitted; and the whole thirtieth Chapter of the Proverbs, and part
of the one and thirtieth, are left out in this Translation. This is the
Greatest Fault we have hitherto met with in the Greek Interpreters: but now
comes one which is much greater, and indeed unpardonable, if it be true.

9. Then, It is thought by some that in many Places they have wilfully
corrupted and perverted the Text. It is thought at least that they did not
exactly translate some Places, because they were loath to expose the Bible to
the Gentiles. This was too rich and precious a Treasure to be imparted to them.
It would be a profaning and polluting of it to lay it open to all Men. It is De
Arcan. Cathol. Ver.
Galatinus's Persuasion, that in their turning the Hebrew into Greek they
altered several things, because the Ethnicks were at that time unworthy of the
Knowledge of those Divine Mysteries contained in the Bible: and this the Talmud
it self witnesses. The Pagan World was not able to bear several of those
things: they would have seemed Absurd and Ridiculous to them if they had been
translated as they were in the Original. Hence, says he, the Seventy's Version
is imperfect, and seems to differ, yea really does differ from the Hebrew in
many Places. And a Dr. Lightfoot.
Learned Doctor of our own tells us, That they translated the Bible
unwillingly, they being loath to impart the Knowledge of the Scripture to
Heathens: therefore, though being commanded by Ptolomy, they undertook this
Work, yet going about it with unwilling Minds they did it Slightly and
Perfunctorily, and it is likely Falsely in some Places. And this was long ago
the Opinion of St. I^rom, who plainly declared, that U^icunque sacratum aliquid
Scriptura testatur de Patre and Filio and Spiritu Sancto, aut aliter
interpretati sunt, aut omnino tacuerunt, ut and Regi satisfacerent, arcanum
fidei non vulgarent. Praefat. in Pentateuch.
wherever any thing occurred in the Old Testament concerning the Sacred
Trinity, it was either misinterpreted or wholly concealed by these 70 Elders:
and this, he says, was done by them partly to please King Ptolomee, and partly
beca^se they had no mind to divulge the Mysteries of their Faith to the World.
Thus, as In Proaemio super Quaest. in Genes.
he observes (...) Isa. 9. 6. they left out five or (...) Names of Christ, and
put in the place of them [the Angel of the Great Caun^el]. They would not let
it be known that That Child was God, lest they should be thought 10 worship
another God; and therefore they purposely and ^allciously concealed those
Glorious Titles attributed to Christ, and more especially That [the Mighty
God]. But this Author is more candid and mild in his Censure of these 70 Elders
when in other Places he tells us, that many of those Copies and Editions of the
Greek Translation, which were then abroad, were corrupted by the Fault of the
Transcribers, and that it was his Design in his Latin Version to correct them.
Again, he imputes their Mistakes to their Ignorance, saying, Illi interpretati
sunt ante adventum Christi, and quod nescieb^nt dubiis protulere sententiis. --
Non damno, non reprehendo Septuaginta, sed considentes cunctis illis Apostolos
praefero Praef. in Penta^euch.
they made this Translation before the coming of Christ, and so knew not what
they rendered in many Places, and therefore did it obscurely and dubiously.
Wherefore he professes he condemns not the Seventy, but only prefers the
Apostles before them, their Writings being nearer to the Hebrew Original.

And truly I am not thoroughly convinced that the Interpreters themselves did
wilfully corrupt the Translation, that they designedly misinterpreted the
Hebrew Text, and fals^^ied in the forementioned Place and several others: for
the Messiah, the Christ, was not come then, and there was no Controversy about
him; and therefore, according to my Apprehension of things, it was too early
time of Day to misrepresent or corrupt the Bible where it speaks of him. I
rather think this was done afterward, namely, after our Savior appeared in
the World, and had been rejected by the Jews as an Impostor. Then these Places
before mentioned, and several others, began to be perverted; then the
Circumcised Doctors attempted to pare off some Passages, to make some
Alterations in the Copies of the LXX which they got into their Hands. Then it
was that they corrupted the Chronology of the Bible, which was of great Use to
them. Hence it is that you find such a Difference between the Hebrew Copies and
those of the Seventy, about the Age of the World. It is not to be questioned
that the Jews made an Alteration in the Years mentioned in the Pentateuch,
which relate to the Lives of the Patriarchs, more especially those before the
Flood, in that Catalogue in Genesis 5. According to the Hebrew Text there were
1656 Years from the Creation to the Flood, but according to the Greek there
were about 2250. The younger Chronolog. Sacra.
Vossius is a smart Advocate for the Septuagint, and following their
Computation tells us, that 4000 (wanting ^ive or six) Years were expired before
Moses's Death, and that from thence to our Savior's Coming were above 2000
Years, so that Christ was incarnate at the end of the Sixth Millenary, or the
beginning of the Seventh. The Sum is, that according to Vossius and the LXX's
Reckoning, the time of the World's Beginning anticipates the Vulgar Era at
least 1400 Years. This lengthning of the Account in the Greek Bible we owe to
the Jews after the Coming of Christ, especially after the Destruction of
Jerusalem. They then out of their Hatred to Christians changed the Chronology
of the Greek Interpreters, expunged the Contracted Era, and introduced a
larger one, i. e. they added one thousand four hundred Years to these Books.
And their Design in doing this was to confute the Opinion of the Messias's
Coming. It would appear hence that the time was past, according to the general
Sense of the Rabbis. For this Reason they made this Alteration in the Greek
Translation, though they could not effect it in the Hebrew Copies. Hence arises
the Difference between the Hebrew and Greek Computation. But we are assured
that the Sacred Chronology delivered by Moses is certain, and the Calculation
true and authentic, because the Hebrew Text is so, (which I have demonstrated
in another Place) and consequently the Greek Version is to be corrected by
this. But this Error of the Septuagint is not originally theirs, but is to be
imputed to the latter Jews, (I mean those soon after our Savior's Passion) who
designedly and on purpose depraved the Greek Copies of the Bible. They were the
Authors of several Interpolations, Additions, Omissions, Changes in the Order
of the Words, and wherever they saw occasion to make such Alterations as they
thought would be to their purpose. Accordingly we find that their Translation
is depraved in five very considerable Prophecies, viz. Isa. 9. 1. Hos. 11. 1.
Zech. 9. 9. and 12. 10. Mal. 4. 5. all of them relating to the Proof that Jesus
Christ is the True Messiah. If any Man peruseth these Texts, and compares the
Hebrew and the LXX's Version together, he will easily be induced to believe
that this latter has been corrupted by some Jews on purpose to serve their
In^idelity and Averseness to Jesus, and that they might not be urged by
Christians at any time from the Testimonies in this Greek Translation.

Object. But if the present Version of the LXX be so faulty and vicious, why is
it quoted by Christ and his Apostles, why is it followed by them generally, as
was before acknowledged? If the Evangelists and Apostles who were immediately
directed by the Holy Ghost quoted this Translation, surely the Authority of it
is unquestionable.

Answ. It cannot be denied that the Writers of the New Testament often cite the
Version of the Septuagint; yea, and I will grant moreover, that they follow
this Translation when it differs from the Hebrew; thus St. Luke, chapter 3. v. 36.
takes in Cainan into the Genealogy, because he found it in the LXX. St. Luke,
Acts 13. 41. or rather St. Paul in his Sermon (recited by him) retains the
corrupt Version of Hab. 1. 5. The same Apostle in Romans 3. 13. follows this
Version, though it takes in four or five Verses more than are in the Original.
In Romans 9. 33. the same Apostle alleges Isa. 28. 16. Whosoever believes on
him shall not be ashamed, which is not according to the Hebrew, but the Greek.
In Romans 11. 8. he quotes what Isaiah says chapter 29. v. 10. but not according to
the Original, but the Septuagint, though their Translation [(...)] be
disagreeing with the Hebrew. In Phil. 2. 15. he uses the same Words and Order
that are in the LXX, although they invert the Order of the Words in the Hebrew,
which is this in Deuteronomy. 32. 5. a perverse and crooked Generation; but they
render it (...), a crooked and perverse Generation. So in Heb. 10. 5. he
produces that Place abovementioned, [ a Body have thou prepared me] although
these Words disagree with the Letter of the Hebrew, and are wholly conformable
to the Septuagint. And lastly, (to name no more at present) when the Apostle
tells us, that Jacob worshipped leaning upon the top of his Staff, Heb. 11. 21.
it is evident (as has been already showed) that he follows the Seventy, who in
their unpricked Bibles read [Matteh] a Rod or Staff for [Mittah] a Bed. Thus it
is frankly acknowledged, that the Writers of the New Testament make use of the
Greek Translation of the Jewish Elders, even when they depart from the Original
Text. And there was good Reason for it, because the Greek Version was at that
time generally received and approved of by the Jews: wherefore the Apostles
being to deal with these Men, they prudently made use of it, and quoted it upon
all Occasions. And it was better to do so than to give a stricter and exacter
Translation of their own, because this might be liable to Scruple and
Controversy, whereas the other was universally entertained and approved of.
Besides, as a Dr. Light^oot, Hor. Hebraic.
Christian Rabbi observes, the Jews who were to read this New Testament could
not quarrel with the Quotations because they were taken out of the Book which
was translated by those that were Jews, and those very Eminent ones too. And
then, as to the Gentiles also, there was a necessity of the Apostles using the
LXX's Translation in their Writings, because these understood not the Hebrew
Tongue: wherefore it was requisite to take their Quotations out of this
Translation, lest otherwise the Gentiles, in whose Hands the Greek Bibles were,
observing that what the Apostles cited was not according to These, should
question the Truth of it, and of the New Testament it self. Thus there was a
kind of Necessity of using this Translation oftentimes: but this is no Proof of
its being faultless and void of all Mistakes and Errors. The Inspired Writers
used this Version, not because they wholly approved of it, but because in their
Circumstances they could not do otherwise. But further, I answer, that though
the Evangelists and Apostles followed this Translation generally, yet it is as
certain that they did not do it always. The Reader may see here several Places
drawn up to his View, wherein this is apparent; and among them he will find
those Five Prophecies beforementioned, and see that the Evangelists follow not
the Seventy in their Translation of these Texts, they knowing that they were
derogatory to the Messiah, and to the whole Gospel.

The Evangelists differ from the Seventy's Version in these following Places;
Mat. 1. 23. taken from Isa. 7. 14. Mat. 2. 6. Mic. 5. 2. Mat. 2. 15. Hos. 11.
1. Mat. 4. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Mat. 4. 15. Isa. 9. 1. Mat. 8. 17. Isa. 53. 4. Mark
1. 2. Mal. 3. 1. Mark 10. 19. Exodus 20. 12, 13, and^. Luke 1. 16, 17. Mal. 4.
5, 6. Luke 2. 23. Exodus 13. 1. Luke 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Luke 4. 18. Isa. 61. 2.
Luke 7. 27. Mal. 3. 1. Luke 10. 27. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. John 1. 23. Isa. 40. 3. John 6.
45. Isa. 54. 13. John 12. 15. Zech. 9. 9. John 12. 40. Isa. 6. 10. John 19. 36.
Exodus 12. 36. John 19. 37. Zech. 12. 10.

I might have drawn up the like Catalogue of Places in the Epistles; I only
direct your Eye at present to these ensuing ones, Romans 4. 17. Gal. 3. 8. Gal.
4. 30. taken from Genesis 17. 4. and 12. 3. and 21. 10.

More particularly I might observe to you (in pursuance of what I have
asserted, that the Evangelists and Apostles do not always make use of the LXX's
Translation) that when these Inspired Writers of the New Testament have
occasion to quote the Old, they sometimes keep themselves to the Hebrew Text
exactly, and have no regard at all to the Words of the Greek Interpreters. It
was long since noted by St. De Script. Eccles.
Ierom, that when either St. Matthew or our Savior in his Gospel quotes the
Old Testament, they follow not the LXX, but the Hebrew. Again, sometimes the
Apostles follow neither the Hebrew nor the Septuagint, but use some Words and
Expressions of their own, and Paraphrase rather than Translate. This they do to
bring the Texts they alledg closer to the purpose, inserting such Words as give
an Emphasis to them, and show the true Scope and Design of the Texts. Therefore
we cannot, we must not hence infe^ that either the Hebrew Original or the
Seventy's Version are corrupted; because it was not the Design of the
Evangelists to quote the very Words, but they thought fit to use a Latitude,
and to express the Text of the Old Testament not in exact Terms, but as to the
Meaning and Import of it. So in the quoting that Text, Mic. 5. 2. Thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, the
Evangelist does it not verbatim, but sets it down thus, Mat. 2. 6. Thon
Bethlehem, in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes of Judah*
for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my People Israel. Here
are six or seven Words that are not in the Hebrew, neither are they in the
Seventy's Version. Yea, there is a Negative put in the Place of an A^^irmative;
for whereas the Prophet says, though thou be little, the Evangelist says,
thou art not little, or not least, which shows that he minds the Sense and
Scope of the Place, not the very Words: for though Bethlehem was little,
considered in it self, as being a small Town, yet it was not little on another
Account mentioned by the Prophet, viz. its having the Honor of being the
Birthplace of our Lord. Or if this inserting of a Negative may be solved
another way, (as Vide The Style of Scripture, Page 335.
some have thought, and as I have showed in another Place) yet still it is
evident that the Evangelist does not recite the very Words of Micah, but
changes Ephratah for the Land of Judah, and thousands for Princes, and i^
other Words and Particles varies both from the LXX and the Original. And in
many other Texts I might show you, that the Writers of the New Testament do not
tie themselves up to the very Words of the Old Testament, but choose rather to
paraphrase, or give the Meaning in other Expressions. Thus we see the
Translation of the LXX, though it be often, yet is not always followed in the
New Testament. Likewise, although the Apostles in these Writings were
immediately directed by the Holy Ghost, yet they confined not themselves to the
express Words of the Spirit in the Original Hebrew: and we see that, though not
^lways, yet often they followed the Septuagint, because it was generally
received, and they thought it not fit to vary from the Translation which was
used in the Church: and we see likewise, that when they vary from this
Translation, it is no certain Argument that they did not allow and approve of
it, for they intended not an Exact Translation themselves, but a Paraphrase,
and a rendering the Sense rather than the Words.

The Result then of all is this, that we ought to have that Respect and Esteem
for the LXX's Version which it deserves: (to which purpose the J. P. Prae^at.
Paraenetic.
Judicious Examiner of it before mentioned is to be consulted, who shows how
necessary it is for all Divines to be acquainted with it) we ought not to extol
it (as some extravagantly have done) above the Hebrew, nor to depress and
vilify it (as others have done) as if it were of no Worth or Authority. We
ought thus to behave our selves; we must not wholly reject it, because most of
its Faults and Mistakes proceed from the mere mistaking of Vow^ls or
Consonants, from the Ambiguity of Words, from the Liberty which they take of
Paraphrasing, and from the Neglect of Transcribers. But on the other hand, we
ought not wholly to embrace this Translation, because it has fallen into ill
Hands, and has met with some designing Men (it is probable) who have
endeavored to deprave and corrupt it, yea and have actually done it in some
Places. We are concerned therefore to read it with Candor and Caution; with
the former, yea the Oldest Greek Translation of the Bible that is, because it
has been used by the Sacred Penmen of the New Testament, because it may be
made use of by us for the better understanding and clearing the Sense of the
Hebrew, and to other very good Purposes, and because the disagreement between
it and the Hebrew may as to the Main admit of a Reconciliation, as I have
partly showed, and you may further see in the Learned Mons. Simon. Crit. Hist.
Book 2.
Critical Historian. With the latter also, i. e. with Caution we must consult
this Version, because we know it has justly merited the Censure of the
Learned; not only of St. Ierom the best Hebrician of all the Fathers, but of a
great Number of other Observing and Inquisitive Writers, who find that this
Translation does frequently, and sometimes very grossly dissent from the Hebrew,
and for that Cause reprehend it with great Seriousness. For this they all agree
upon, that where the Greek Version of the 70 is not conformable to the Hebrew
either in Words or Sense, (as in diverse Places it is not) it is perverted and
corrupted; and where it is so, we must impeach This, and not the Hebrew of
Error and Imperfection.

That Assertion of the Younger Vossius, viz. that the 70 Interpreters had the
Authentic Copy of the Hebrew Bible, and translated exactly by that, but that
the Hebrew Bible which we now have is corrupted, is justly to be exploded as
not only Bold but Pernicious: wherein he extremely grati^ies the Romanists, who
contend that the Hebrew Text is depraved, that they may defend the Authority of
the Vulgar Latin. But those that are not led by Prejudice discern that this is
mere Design, and that the Business of those Men is to defend the Authority of
their Church by what Artifices they can: Wherefore they give no heed to them,
and particularly in this present Matter they despise their fond applauding of
the Septuagint, and their groundless Cavils against the Hebrew Text, and
notwithstanding their impertinent Suggestions find reason to adhere to this
unshaken Truth, that the Hebrew Text only is void of all Faults, Errors,
Mistakes, Blemishes, Defects, Depravations, and that it is this we must
ultimately rely upon. Wherefore where there is a Difference between the Version
of the 70 Seniours and the Hebrew, That is to give place to This, and not This
to That. And lastly, which is the rational Conclusion from all that has been
said, there is no Proof of the Scripture's Imperfection from this Disagreement
between the Hebrew and the Greek.

Next, I will speak of the Latin Versions of the Bible, which even in St.
Augustin's Time were so many that they could not be numbered, as Latini
interpretes nullo modo numerari possunt. De doctr. Christian^, l. 2. c. 11.
he says himself. All the Latin Translations of the Old Testament before Ierom
were made out of the LXX's Version, and not out of the Hebrew Original, for
generally the Fathers before Ierom used and adhered to the Greek Version. But
he attaining to great Skill in the Hebrew contented not himself with these
Second-hand Versions, but undertook and finished a Translation of his own,
wherein he followed the Hebrew Original. The Chiefest Latin Versions were these
three, 1. that which was called Itala by St. Augustine, by St. Ierom Vulgata,
and by Gregory Vetus. This of all the Latin Editions was the most generally
received and used, and was really the Antientest of all the Latin Translations.
But this was but a Translation of a Translation, viz. that of the 70, and must
have undergone the same Censure with the Greek Version (of which I spoke
before) if it had been now extant. But it is not, it is wholly lost: only the
Psalms remain, and as much as is found quoted here and there in the Fathers and
Ancient Writers. 2. St. Ierom's Version, for this Learned Father observing the
Errors in the several Latin Versions (the Italian especially) which were in his
time, did (as I said before) translate both the Old and New Testament himself:
the first he wholly did by a New Translation out of the Hebrew Original; the
second was rather a Correction and Emendation of the Old Latin or Italian
Version than a New One. The Psalms, because they were daily sung in the
Churches, and could not without offense to the People be changed, remained the
same that they were in the Old Version. There is no occasion to add any Censure
of Ours here concerning this Translation, because it agrees with the Original
Hebrew. Only we will observe that when St. Ierom had finished it, it was not
presently received by the Latin Church, but many Bishops refused it, and St.
Augustine particularly forbad it to be read in his Diocese, so greatly did they
esteem the Greek Version of the LXX. Many that were ignorant in the Hebrew
Tongue spoke against this Translation as a mere Innovation, and fell heavily
upon the Author of it: But he with great earnestness defended his Work, and
sometimes repaid the Invectives of his Adversaries with too much Bitterness.
Though some Bishops and others disliked his Translation, yet it was authorized
and approved of by Damasus (the then Bishop of Rome, by whose Command it was
first undertaken) and a great Number of other understanding Persons, who saw
its conformity to the Hebrew Text, and perceived it was void of those Mistakes
which the other Latin Translations abounded with. whilst this Division Iasted
both the Translations were publicly read, i. e. they read some Books of the
Bible in Ierom's Version, and others in the Italian: and this lasted till the
time of Gregory the Great. At length another Translation prevailed, viz. 3. The
Vulgar which we now have, which is made up of both the former, and is called by
the Romanists Vetus and Vulgata. This by degrees got the better of all the
others in the Roman Church, and was generally used by them, and is still
Authentic there, and is the Vulgar Latin which they now so commend, yea, which
Gregorius de Valenti^, Gre^serus, Titelmannus, etc.
some of the Church of Rome hold to be of Divine Inspiration, and consequently
free from all Faults either in Words or Matter: and there are others of them,
as Genebrard and Mariana, who extravagantly extol it, and they would persuade
us that both the Italian and St. Ierom's Version and comprised in this one.

But it is evident that this is not the Old Italian Translation which was used
before Ierom and Augustin's Time, for that was made out of the Greek Version of
the 70 Interpreters, whereas this differs from it in many Places. Nor is this
Vulgar Latin of the Church of Rome St. Ierom's Version, because that was
exactly according to the Hebrew Text; but this though it comes nearer to the
Hebrew than to the 70 Interpreters, yet it often varies from the Hebrew, and
adds many things to it, as in the Book of Kings especially, and in other
Places: So that this Modern Vulgar Edition is not the Pure Version of Ierom,
but mixed of his Translation and of the old one which was in the Latin Church
before his Time: And this is the Opinion even of those Great Romanists Baronius
and Bellarmine. We know then what censure to give of this Latin Edition of the
Bible, it is for the greatest Part of it very Ancient, and has been used many
Ages in the Church, and is justly reckoned to be a very Learned Translation,
for which reason Fagius, who was well skilled in the Hebrew Tongue, and Drusius
whom all acknowledge to be a Learned Critic, had a great Reverence for this
Edition, and give a very high Character of it: and Beza and Grotius prefer it
before all other Latin Translations. Yet this is certain, it has many things
faulty in it; it leaves the Hebrew very often, and follows the Septuagint or
the Chaldee Paraphrase, or even some Rabbin. Luoas Brugensis took notice of
above six hundred Faults in it: and Isidore Clarius a Spanish Abbot (and
afterward of the Council of Trent) observed eight thousand Errata's in it.
Besides that it has many Barbarous Words, the Sense in many Places is
corrupted, and sometimes quite lost. Sometimes it runs directly contrary to the
Original Text, as in Genesis 8. 7. non revertebatur instead of revertebatir: And
in 1 Cor. 15. 51. Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur; whereas
according to the Greek it should have been, Non omnes dormiemus, sed omnes
mutabimur: And several Instances might be produced of the like Nature. So far
is the Vulgar Latin from being absolutely Authentic, as the Sess. 4.
Council of Trent determined it to be even before that Edition was mended. But
see how that Council baffles it self; it defines the Vulgar Latin to be the
Authentic, and then orders it to be Corrected, and printed again. Accordingly
the Popes set about the mending of it, first Sixtus the Fifth put forth a
mended Copy, and tied all Persons to that: when he was dead Gregory the
Fourteenth set about the correcting of that Edition: and afterward Clement the
Eighth amended Pope Gregory's in many Places. This was done after the Council
of Trent had declared the Vulgar Latin to be the Auth^ntick Copy: Which, with
what we have suggested before, is a clear Proof that it deserves not that
Epithet, but that there were and are still in it many Corruptions. In vain
therefore does the Church of Rome prefer this Vulgar Latin Edition of the Bible
before the Hebrew and Greek Originals; unreasonably do the Doctors of that
Church complain of the Defects and Errors of these, yea maliciously do they
urge the Disagreement between these, especially the Hebrew and the Vulgar
Latin, and thereby endeavor to accuse the Sacred Scriptures of Imperfection.
The Sum is (notwithstanding what the Romanists and some others that are their
Abettors, endeavor to impose upon the World) the latter, i. e. the Vulgar
Latin is ever to be corrected by the former, viz. the Hebrewd, and not this by
that.

Besides these 3 Old Latin Versions there are others that may justly be called
Modern; for soon after the Year of our Lord 1500, there arose several Learned
Men well skilled in the Tongues, who seeing the Corruptions that were in the
Latin Versions, and comparing these with the Originals, endeavored to correct
them by those Fountains. Hence after the Attempts of Ximenius Archbishop of
Toledo in hi^ Opus Biblicum Complutense, which came out A. D. 1515. and was the
first Polyglot Bible; and after the publishing of Psalterium Octoplum in a
short time afterward by Justinian an Italian Bishop, there A. D. 1527.
appeared in the World the Translation of all the Hebrew Bible into Latin by
Santes Pagninus a Dominican Friar. This Version was made Interlinear with the
Hebrew Bible by A^ias Montanus; or rather, this Version which Pagni^ had put
out being not exactly Literal, Montanus supplied it, and fitted it to the very
Hebrew Words, and then put out a New Edition: and many Years after this it was
reprinted in the King of Spain's Great Bible which Montanus put forth. Cardinal
Cajetan also turned the Old Testament out of He^brew into Latin. Isidorus
Clarius cannot so properly be called a Translator, as a Corrector of the V^^gar
Latin. Malvenda a Dominican rendered some Books of the Old Testament into this
Languag^ The Renowned Erasmus (whom. F. Simon takes n^ notice of in his
Catalogue of Transta^o^s) tur^'^ the New Testament into Latin.

Hitherto I have mentioned Roman (...) next follow Protestants and those of the
(...) Religion, the first whereof was Sebastian (...) German, who published his
New Latin Version o^ the Old Testament three Years before (...) came forth, and
afterward corrected it and put in out anew. He is a most exact Renderer of the
(...) Sense of the Hebrew Text. Leo Judah a Zuinglian of Helvetia translated the
Old Testament out of Hebrew, and it was published after his Death, about the
Year 1543; the last Edition of which is usually called Va^ablus's Bible,
because he added (...) to it, or the Biblia Tigurina from the Place (...) where
the Translator was Pastor. He (...) a kind of Paraphrase, to make the Sense
(...) easy and plain, whereas Munster more rigidly followed the very Words.
Afterward Castellio put forth a Latin Translation of the whole Bible, for
which he is severely reproved both by Papists and Protestants, as if it were
too light and florid, too quaint and fanciful; but if we consider the Design of
this Translator, which was to recommend the Holy Scriptures by presenting them
in a Neat and Elegant Style, we shall see little reason to blame him. The New
Testament was turned into the same Language by Theodore Beza. And last of all,
Ianius and Tremellius did both of them jointly translate the Old Testament out
of Hebrew, and Tremellius alone the New Testament out of Syriack: a Work which
is mightily applauded by the Learned Buxtorf (who had Skill to judge of it) and
is constantly made use of in his Lexicon. As to the Osi^^ders (Father and Son)
though they be reckoned among the Modern Translators by F. Simon, yet I do not
see that it can properly be done, because they only put forth the Ancient Latin
Version Word for Word in the Old Edition, with some Corrections of their own in
the Margin, not altering the Text at ^ll. These are the Latter Versions of the
Bible, all which have more or less amended the Faults of the Vulgar Latin, and
have brought us nearer to the Fountain. Upon the whole I conclude that these
several Learned Translators are all of them in their kind very useful, some by
keeping close to the Original, others by using a Latitude. They have presented
us, but in a Different Style and Mode, with the true genuine meaning of the
Original, and none but Frivolous Objectors can complain of any considerable
Disagreement between these Ver^^ns and the Hebrew or Greek Text. The Differenc^
that is between the Translations themelves is usually in the Diversity of
Expressions used by the Translators, which causes no Disagreement between them
and the Originals. But if any other Difference be found, we know that the Latin
must always give way to the Hebrew and Greek, and be regulated by them as the
Clock by the Sun. Take this in the Words of a Great Man, even of the Roman
Persuasion; Wheresoever, says he, the Latin Translators disagree, or a reading
is suspected to be corrupted, we must repair to the Original in which the
Scriptures weres writ, as St. I^rom and Augustine and other Writers of the
Church direct: so that the Truth and Sincerity of the Translations of the Old
Testament must be examined by the Hebrew Copies, and of the New by the Greek
Ones. So Cardinal Ximenius in his Preface to Pope Leo.

Having gone thus far, I will now proceed farther, and speak concerning Our Own
Translation. Our Countryman Bid about 700 Years after Christ translated the
Bible into Saxon. Wickliff about 600 Years afterward translated it into the
English Language, then understood and used by the People of this Place. Not
long after this John Trevisa, a Cornish Divine, set forth the whole Bible in
English. In the Year 1527, Tindal translated the Pentateuch and the New
Testament: and afterward both he and Coverdale joined in the Work, and
finished the Translation of the whole Bible. Tunstal and Heath (both Bishops)
translated it anew: and in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign Archbishop
Parker and other Bishops made another more Correct Translation, which was
called the Bishop's Translation, or Bible. In K. James's Time another came
forth, which we make use of and read in our Churches at this Day. It is certain
that this last English Translation of the Bible is in great repute among
Foreigners, and is acknowledged by them to be the most exact that is extant. We
have as great reason to own it to be such, especially if we take it with the
Margin, where are set down the several Senses of many Original Words, whether
Hebrew or Greek: so that where there is any doubt of the meaning of the Word
which occurs, we may take our choice. Our English Bibles surpass all other
Translations as to this, and hereby it comes to pass that the Holy Scriptures
are faithfully and fully represented to our People, and they are laid before
them in their native Purity and Perfection, so far as the Skill and Labors of
those Translators attained to at that time. And yet I conceive it would be no
Derogation to our English Bible if it were once more revised, and the
Translation made more accurate and exact in some Places than it is. Which leads
me to the Next General Part of my Undertaking, viz. the Emendation on of the
present English Version.

CHAP. XIII.
Our English Translation showed to be faulty and defective in some Places of
the Old Testament. But more largely and fully this is performed in the several
Books of the New Testament, where abundant Instances are produced of this
Defect: and particular Emendations are all along offered* in order to the
rendering our Translation more exact and complete. The Date of the Division of
the Bible into Chapters and Verses.

I Will now, according to what I propounded in the Entrance into this
Discourse, attempt to show the Defect of the present English Translation, and
at the same time to let you see how it is to be supplied and remedied; that so
this Sacred Volume may be presented to the Readers in its Utmost Perfection.
There is a great Number of Places both in the Old and New Testament which ought
to be otherwise rendered, but I will chiefly confine my self to the New
Testament at present. It is true the Margin of our Bibles does give us another
Sense or Version of the Words in many Places: but those I shall pass by,
because they are already before the Reader's Eye. I shall take notice of those
Words only which are not otherwise translated in the Margin. Many Corrections
of the English Translation are attempted by that Excellent Knight Sir Norton
Knatchbull, in his Annotations on the New Testament: but I have not inserted
any of them here, because I design to mention those only which are of my own
Observation, and which at several Readings of the Bible have occurred to me. I
will instance in those Mistakes and Faults alone which are ^ot (that I know of)
found out and observed ^y any other Persons. Nor am I in this Attempt
endeavoring so much to discover a False Version as ^o render the present one
(which is Good and Excellent) b^tter; by laying aside some unfit Words and
Modes of Speech* and by substi^^^^ng others in their room, and by changing the
^rame and Disposition of some particular Periods.

Those few Places of the Old Testamant which I offer to be amended are these;
Genesis 27. 38. Have ^^ou but one Blessing? where there is a Word left out, viz.
that distinctive Particle (...); so that according to the Hebrew it should be
rendered thus, have thou but that one Blessing? The Omission of [ that] is a
Fault in Our Translation, as well as in some others. In 2 Kings 5. 18. the word
(...) is thr^^e used* which signifies to bow* but we translate it to worship in
one of the Places; which I reckon as faulty* because the same Words ought to be
translated alike. I^ Psalm. 14. 2. the true Version is the Sons of Adam. In
Psalm. 104. 25. the Hebrew Word (...) should be rendered Swimming, for that is
the Denotation of the Word when it is applied to Fishes. In the Old English
Translation of the Book of Psalms which is used in our Divine Service, there
are many things that require Correction: but because it may be our Church
retains it for the same Reason, that when St. Ierom translated the Bible into
Latin, he did not alter the former Version of the Psalms, but left it entire as
it was, because these were sung in the Public Assemblies, and People generally
had them by Heart; wherefore he was loath to discompose so settled a piece of
Devotion; for this Reason I will say nothing here toward the Amendment of this
Translation. In Isa. 1. 13. we read of vain Oblations, the new Moons and
Sabbaths; but in the Hebrew these are in the singular Number, and therefore
should be so translated: Particularly as to the word^ [ Chodesh] the new Moon,
it will not be distinguished from Chodashim, new Moons, which you find in the
next Verse, unless you observe the Distinction between the singular and plural.
Isa. 2. 10. is translated thus, Hide thee in the Dust for fear of the Lord, but
not rightly; for the Hebrew (...) must be rendered either in these Words [from
the Face of the terrible Lord] or these, [from or because of the Presence of
the Lord of Terror] or thus, [from the Presence of the Terror of the Lord], and
so it must be translated in ver. 19. where the Words recur again. It may be
some may look upon (...) as an Expletive here, because it is so in many Places,
but we know that in many other Places it is not; and seeing that Word here may
bear a Positive Signification, there is Reason we should take it so. It is my
Persuasion that the applying of the word Fury to God, in Lev. 26. 28. Job 20.
23. Dan. 9. 16. Mic. 5. 15. Zech. 8. 2. and above forty times in Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, is very blameable; for the Hebrew Words Aph, Charon,
Chemah, Chamath, have no such ill Import; they only signify the Heat or Height
of Anger, and are rendered (...) by the Seventy. But Fury is something of
another Nature, and denotes Excess and Exorbitancy of Wrath, and even Madness
it self. Therefore I apprehend our Translators have done ill (though I question
not their innocent Meaning) in attributing such a Passion to God. Wherefore
instead of Fury, let great Anger or great Wrath be used in the Translation.
Again, i^ I would be Curious I could blame our Translators for using the word
Benjamite or Benjamites, Judge. 3. 15. (and in half a score Places more) instead
of Benjaminite or Benjaminites: for (as I have hinted before) the Word being
used to signify the Children of Benjamin, or the Sons of Iemini, (as it is in
the Hebrew in some Places) it must needs have those two Letters more inserted
into it, otherwise you cannot derive it from those Words: wherefore it must
needs be Benjaminites, not Benjamites, as our English Translators have
curtailed it. As to the Words Tire and Tyrus, the former of which is to be
found in Isaiah and Joel, and the latter in Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other
Prophets, I conceive it were better to use one of these only, for why should
not the Name of the same Place be expressed and written the same? Let it then
be Tire or Tyrus, but not both. Here also I might take notice of some Unfit and
Obsolete Words, the changing of which for others that are more in use would
render the English Version much better. Thus fet, 1 Kings 9. 28. or ever,
Eccles. 12. 6. Dan. 6. 24. chaws, Ezekiel. 29. 4. and 38. 4. grins, Psalm. 140. 5.
and 141. 9. taches, Exodus 26. 6. aliant, Job 19. 15. Psalm. 69. 8. might be
changed into fetched, before, Iaws, Gins, (or Traps or Snares) Tacks, (or
Clasps) alien, especially this last being the Word which is used in other
Places both in the Old and New Testament. Instead of the word after in several
Places, it were better to use according to. Who should be put in the Place of
which, when there is reference to a Person, not a Thing; otherwise there is a
Confusion and Misunderstanding in many Texts, unless we have Recourse to the
Original.

But they are the Defects in our English Translation of the New Testament which
I principally designe^ to insist upon: therefore those I h^sten to, which are
as follow. In Mat. 3. 7. and so in chapter 23. v. 33. our Translators render (...)
Generation, but it should be in the Plural. This Fault is amended in Luke 3. 7.
in the marginal Reading, where there is added [ Broods]: and in Mat. 12. 34. in
some English Bibles it is translated [ Generations]. it should be so in this
Place, and wherever else the Word is mentioned; for if we will be exact in
our Translation, we must assign Plural Nouns a Plural Signification. This I
think no Man will deny. In Mat. 5. 18. (...) is rendered thus, till all be
fulfilled, but the word (...) is in the Verse before, which we render to
fulfill: therefore it is requisite in my Opinion that there should be another
English Word for (...), that two different Words being placed so near together
may not be translated alike. Let that Clause therefore be englished thus, till
all ^e done, or til^ all come to pass. In chapter 5. 22. (...) may very properly be
rendered the Sanhedrim, both because that particular Council or Court of the
Seventy two is meant, and because that Word is the Corruption. of (...). In v.
37. (...), should be translated is of Evil, not comes of Evil. In Mat. 8. 22.
(...), etc. which we translate [ let the Dead bury their Dead] is better turned
into our Language thus, leave, or suffer, or permit the Dead to, etc. for so
the Imperative (...), and the Person to whom Christ speaks, are clearly and
distinctly denoted: suffer thou the Dead to bury their Dead, thou who art one
of my Disciples, and have other Work to do. In chapter 11. v. 27. it is improper to
say, no Man knows the Son but the Father, as if the Father were included in
Man: but indeed the Greek Word (...) is more general, and should be translated
none, or not any one. The right Translation of Mat. 13. 21. is not [when
Tribulation or Persecution ariseth] but it should be thus, [when there is
Tribulation or Persecution] or [when Tribulation or Persecution happen]: but
the former of these, viz. [is] best answers to the Original Word (...). In Mat.
14. 6, [danced before them] should be [danced in the midst] according to the
Greek (...): and you will find that thus it is translated in Acts 4. 7. In Mat.
14. 26. (...) may be rendered [it is an Apparition] rather than [it is a
Spirit]: for though a Spectrum or Angel (good or bad) appearing be vulgarly
called a Spirit, and was so called of old, as is evident from Luke 24. 37, 39.
yet (...) and (...) being two distinct Words, we ought not to render them
alike. The Translators were sensible of this when they exchanged the word
Spirit for Phantasm in the Margent: but I conceive the word Apparition is to be
preferred before that, because it is more in use, and more intelligible. He
walked on the Water, says our Translation, Mat. 14. 29. but in the Greek it is
(...), Waters, and therefore they mistake the singular for the plural. I offer
it to Consideration, whether (...), Mat. 15. 9. may not be rendered thus,
[teaching Doctrines which are the Commandments of Men] or by inserting of [and]
which seems to be implied in this Place, thus, [teaching the Doctrines and
Commandments of Men]. Commandments seems to be put after Doctrines by way of
Apposition. In ver. 22. instead of those Coasts we read [the same Coasts], and
for [cried, saying unto him] we read [cried unto him, saying] which are both of
them disagreeing with the Greek. In the last Verse of this Chapter (...), might
be englished [he went into a Ship] rather than [he took Ship]; for though this
latter Phrase be the vulgar way of speaking, yet the former is more agreeable
to the Original. Mat. 16. 4. [there shall no Sign be given unto it] varies from
the Greek, according to which it should be [a Sign shall not be given unto it].
Not and no are two different Parts of Speech. In the same Chapter, ver. 22.
(...) is not to be rendered be it far from thee, but ^e favorable to thy self.
In v. 23. we read [he turned and said] but it is in the Greek [he turning said].
In v. 27. there is a double Fault, for instead of [he shall render] it is said
[he shall reward], and [according to his Works] (in the Plural) is put for
[according to his Work] or his Doing. in chapter 17. v. 12. the Greek is (...), i.
e. they acknowledged him not; which is more than they knew him not, according
to our Translation. In chapter 18. v. 10. the Greek (...) should be rendered see (as
it is in some other Places) and not take heed. In the same Chapter, v. 23.
(...) should not be translated [to a certain King] but [to a Man that was a
King]. See Luke 24. 19. In v. 28. the same Servant should be that Servant, for
the word is (...). In chapter 19. v. 11. the Greek is (...), all do not receive,
whereas according to our Translation it is all Men cannot receive. In chapter 20.
v. 2. grant that they may sit is not the right englishing of (...), but say
that they shall sit is. In chapter 21. v. 33. he hedged it round about, should be
rather thus, he set a Hedge about it, for in the Greek there is both a Verb* and
a Substantive (viz. (...)) which are not expressed in our Translation. In chapter
22. v. 9. we render (...) the high Ways, but this does not express the two
Greek Words, which may be englished thus, the by-goings out of the Ways, or the
thorow-Passages of the Ways, for (...) has both Significations. That is a
palpable Error of our Translation in chapter 23. v. 13. ye shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men, whereas it should be before Men, or in the Sight of Men,
for that is the known Signification of (...). In ver. 24. (...) is to strain a
Gnat, not to strain at a Gnat. The Jews were wont to strain all their Wine,
lest any little insects should be mingled with it, that they might not swallow
any such Unclean Animals as Gnats, or the like. To this our Savior alludes
here, he reminds them of their superstitious separating or straining the least
Insects from the Liquor which they drank: and therefore our present Translation
is amiss. In Mat. 24. 34, 35. (...) is the word in both Verses, and seeing it
is rendered pass away in the latter Verse, it should not be bare passing in the
former, as if the word were not the very same. The plural is put instead of the
singular in chapter 26. v. 44. saying the same Words, but in the Greek it is (...).
Likewife our English Translation is not exact in v. 73. thy Speech bewrays
thee, but the Greek is (...), makes thee manifest. I know these two are of the
same Signification, but that is nothing to the purpose, for we are speaking of
a Translation which supposes the Exact rendering of one or more Words into
another Tongue, if it be capable of it: so that we are confined to Words (where
it is possible and convenient) as well as Sense. Our Translators render chapter 27.
v. 5. in this manner, He departed, and went and hanged himself, but I conceive
it ought to be translated thus, He went apart, or aside (first), and (then)
went, and strangled himself. (...), he retired, as the word is used, Mat. 14.
13. John 6. 15. and other Places. It would be a Ta^tology, if it were no more
than he (...), for that is the same with ^ent, which follows. I translate it he
strangled himself, because this word ^akes in both strangling or choking
himself with (...) or Melancholy, and also with a Hal^er. In v. 9. of this
Chapter there should in the Margin ^e added the Place of Jeremiah which is
referred to, viz. Ier. 32. 9. as well as that of (...). In ^. ^2. we read [the
Graves were opened] but^ it should rather be the Monuments or T^^bs* and so
indeed our Translator^ render the word (...), v. ^0. The true rendering of (...)
in v. 6^. ^s not ^s you can, but as you know* and then those Words there must
not run thus, make it as su^e as you can, but make it sure, as you know* i. e.
as you know how, as you know best. These are the Places in the Evangelist St.
Matthew which I conceive are to be corrected in our Translation, because they
are not conformable to the Original, but some of them especially seem to vary
much from it. There is a Fault or two likewise which perhaps may be imputed to
the Printer rather than the Translators, as that in Mat. 8. 14. [his Wives
Mother] which should be [his Wife's Mother] for it is not plural but singular.
So in Mat. 10. v. ul^. which speaks of a Cup of cold Water, you may observe,
that Water is not in the Original, and therefore should be written or printed
in another Letter, as those Words that are not in the Original generally are in
the English Bible of the last Translation. I might take notice of the Omission
of a notable Reference in Mat. 2. 23. As in other Places generally the Texts
that are referred to either in the Old or New Testament are set down in the
Margin, so here it would be convenient to do the like, i. e. to place Acts 24.
5. on the side of those Words, He shall be called a Na^^rene.

I proceed to the Evangelist St. Mark, where I have but one or two Places to
offer. Our Translators have not been exact in rendering (...), chapter 1. v. 26. for
they do not translate it a great Voi^e but a loud Voice, and the like they do
in many Luke 1. 42. and 8. 28. and 17. 15. Acts 8. 7. and 14. 10. and 26. 24.
Rev. 5. 2. and 8. 13.
other Places. But though a great Voice be a loud one, yet (...) and (...), (or
(...)) and accordingly great and loud (or sonorous) are two different Words,
and if we would be exact we must make a Difference between them in the
Translation. Cry aloud, said Elijah, I Kings 18. 27. but according to the
Original it is, cry with a great Voice, therefore these Words are clapped into
the Margin to show what is the literal and truest rendering of the Words. And
certainly, where it may well be done, it is best to keep close to the Letter,
and accordingly in the forenamed Texts (...) (which answers to (...) in that
Place of the Kings) is to be rendered a great Voice: and so you will find it
englished in one Place, Rev. 16. 17. unto which all the rest are to be made
conformable. In chapter 6. v. 49. (...) is an Apparition, not a Spirit, and
therefore that Word is to be preferred before this. (...), in chapter 7. v. 2. is
rendered, that is to say: but the exact Translation is, that is. In v. 8. (...)
should be translated Washings, but we english it in the singular. In Mark 10.
46. there is a Word over-added in our Translation, for (...) is well rendered by
the way, or by the way side, therefore our English Version by the highway side
has something superfluous in it. If you consult chapter 15. v. 3. you will not
find any Greek at all (in some of the best Copies) to answer to those Words,
but he answered nothing. Some may think why is a redundant Word^ in the 14th
Verse of this Chapter: but it is an English Expletive, and fitly answers to the
Greek (...) in this Place, (...); why, what Evil has he done?

In St. Luke's Gospel I find several Passages that are translated amiss: as
first in chapter 1. v. 3. having had perfect understanding of all things, which may
more sutably to the Greek be changed thus, having had exact understanding in
all things, for the words (...) and (...) require this Alteration. Ver. 37.
(...) seems not to be fully rendered [nothing]: and the word [unpossible] here,
and in chapter 18. v. 27. should be changed into [impossible], especially seeing
that is the word in all other Places in our Translation. In chapter 2. v. 19. (...)
is translated [all these things], but in v. 51. it is rendered [all these
sayings]: but there is no Reason that I can see for this Variation, wherefore
the former and latter Place ought to be englished alike. In chapter 6. v. 29. the
Greek Words (...), are thus interpreted, Him that takes away -- forbid not to
take, etc. But this is defective, for the Preposition (...) is wholly left out:
therefore the Words must be rendered thus according to the Greek, from him that
takes away -- detain not: and this without doubt is the Signification of (...)
here, for Critics have observed that this Verb denotes not only a forbidding
by Words, but by Force and Violence. In v. 38. withal is superfluous, and
should be left out, as you will see if you consult the Place. In chapter 7. v. 28.
least is put instead of less. In v. 47. (...) is put for (...), (as is not
unusual among Authors) and accordingly it should be rendered not for, but
therefore she loved much. Indeed you cannot make Sense of the immediately
ensuing Words [but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little] unless
you interpret the Word thus: and the Tenor of the Parable (especially v. 42,
43.) shows this to be the Meaning. Wherefore (...) is like the Hebrew (...),
which signifies therefore as well as for. In chapter 8. v. 7. (...) should be
translated other, and (...) in the midst, as also this latter in chapter 10. v. 3.
There is a misplacing of the Words in chapter 11. v. 36. the bright shining of a
Candle, instead of a Candle by bright shining, for the Greek is (...). In chapter
12. v. 39. the good Man of the House is too vulgar an Expression, and may be
changed into the Master of the House, which is the genuine Signification of the
word (...). Those Words in v. 46. at an Hour when he is not aware, may well be
altered thus, in an Hour in which he knows not, for so it is according to the
Greek, (...). In chapter 16. v. 8. the due rendering of (...), is not wiser in the
Generation, (as it is rendered) but for or toward it. And besides, it is (...),
which ought to be translated for their own Generation. In chapter 17. v. 9. I trow
not, may be changed for I think not, (...): and it is best to leave out all
Obsolete and Antiquated Words, as I wist, I wot, or ere, etc. and change them
for those that are more in use. In v. 13. (...) in the singular is wrongly
translated Voices in the plural. In v. 29. (...) is trans^ated [the same Day]
but in the next Verse it is [in the Day when]; one of these, viz. the former, is
not the right Translation: Neither is that in chapter 19. v. 44. one Stone upon
another, for in the Original it is, a Stone upon a Stone. That is not an
accurate Version in chapter 22. v. 22. as it was determined, for the Greek is (...)
according to what was determined. And that is not exact in chapter 23. v. 46. I
commend my Spirit, for (...) being in the future Tense should be rendered [ I
will commend.] In chapter 24. v. 17. (...) is sad, but this is short and defective,
and so the Translators thought when they rendered this very Word in Mat. 6. 16.
[of a sad Countenance] which is the true import of the Greek Word. (...) in v.
38. of this Chapter should be rendered do ascend, or rise up, if we will express
the full meaning of the Word.

Some Texts of St. John are not so well translated as they might be, as chap.
1. v. 15. John bare witness of him, which being in the present Tense in the
Greek should be rendered [beareth witness.] In chapter 3. v. 2. [the same] is not
according to the Greek (...), which signifies this Man. In v. 8. [canst not
tell] may be changed for [knowest not] which is more simple, and according to
the Greek (...). So in 2 Cor. 12. 2. the like alteration may be made. In v. 16.
[whosoever] is not the true English of the Greek (...) every one. Our
Translators in chapter 4. v. 23. turn (...) thus, he seeks such to worship him;
but query whether it will not be better thus, he seeks such worshippers of
him, (...) being put here for (...), of whom he spoke in the former Clause of
this Verse. In the last v. of this chap. (...) is translated Miracle, but then
it would not be amiss to put the proper Signification of the Word, which is a
Sign, in the Margin, at least. In chapter 6. v. 9. the Word (...) one is left out
in the Translation. The 53d v. according to the Greek is thus, Ye have not Life
in you, but in the English thus, Ye have no Life in you. In v. 63. it is better
to use the Word [enliveneth] than the Word [quickneth,] because this latter to
those that understand not the Original, and consider not what follows in the
Verse, is a dubious Word, and they may think that it signifies to make quick,
agile, or nimble: wherefore it is better for the sake of some English Readers to
lay aside the old Word [quickneth] both here and in some Psalm. 119. often. And
it is better to use the Word [alive] than [quick] in Number. 16. 30. Psalm. 55. 15.
and 124. 3.
other Places, and to use the Plainer Word [enliveneth] or [maketh alive.] Chapter
7. v. 17. is translated thus, If any Man will do his Will; but it is short of
the (...).
Greek, according to which the Words must run after this manner, if any one
wills (i. e. desires, purposes or resolves) to do his Will. Again, (...),
v. 26. is not exactly englished thus, this is the very Christ, but thus, this
is verily or truly, or indeed the Christ. In chapter 8. v. 3. the Preter perfect
Tense is mistaken for the Present Tense, brought for bring: this latter must be
used here, especially because the Words go on in [They say unto him.]
the next Verse in the Present Tense, and are accordingly rendered by the
Translators. The 14th v. of this Chap. [though I bear record of my self, my
record is true] should be translated after the manner of chapter 5. v. 31. if I
bear witness of my self, my witness is not true] because (...) and (...) are
the Words in both Places, and therefore it is fit in the same Book to render
them alike, and not (as here) record in one Text, and witness in another; [bear
record] in one Place, and [bear witness] in another. In v. 56. [to see my day]
is not an exact rendering of (...), but this rather [that he may see my Day.] In
chap. 10. v. 10. for is redundant, and therefore may be omitted. Or else turn
for into that he may, which is according to the Greek (...). In chapter 11. v. 26.
he shall never die is not the strict Version of (...), i. e. he shall not for
ever die. In chapter 12. v. 43. the Praise of Men and the Praise of God, should be
the Glory of Men and the Glory of God, for (...) is the Word in both Places. In
chapter 13. v. 28. there is no mention in the Greek of a Table, though there be in
the Translation: but however, if this must be mentioned here, then (...) must
be rendered thus, none of those that sat or lay at the Table, not as it is now,
no Man at the Table: See chapter 12. v. 2. In chapter 15. v. 22. the Word Cloak may be
changed for Pretense, for the Greek is (...). Our Translators make these Words
in chapter 17. v. 2. [that he should give eternal Life to as many as thou have
given him] to be the English of (...), but the right rendering is this, [that he
should give eternal Life to them, which is all that thou have given to him for
them,] or [that all which thou have given to him, he may give unto them, namely
eternal Life.] In chapter 19. v. 8. [that] should be [this] according to the Greek
which is (...). Query whether (...), chapter 20. v. 4. may not be better expressed
than by that single Word [outrun.] In the 8th v. of this Chapter (...)
therefore is forgot in our Translation, and ought to be supplied. Those Words
in the 10th v. (...) may be rendered thus, Therefore the Disciples came again
(or returned) to themselves: of which Translation I have given a particular
account in another Place. And here, before I quit the Evangelists, I might take
notice of an undue rendering of the Words (...) which occur in all of them, as
Mat. 9. 10. and 26. 7, 20. Mark 6. 22, 40. and 8. 6, 11. and 14. 18. and 16.
14. Luke 5. 29. and 22. 27. John 6. 10. and 12. 2. and 13. 12. and several
other Places, where they are expressed in our English Translation by sitting or
sitting down; but they properly signify lying down* leaning, lying along, or
lying on one side, and so should be rendered.

In the Acts of the Apostles, chapter 1. v. 12. the English Version is very
deficient, for whereas it runs thus [which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath-day's
Journey,] in the Greek it is after this manner [which is near to Jerusalem,
containing a Sabbath-day's Journey.] Those two Words (...) and (...) are
omitted. In chapter 2. v. 13. (...) may be rendered sweet Wine (i. e. the best and
most generous Wine, which would soon intoxicate those who took a great Portion
of it) as well as new Wine, which is generally sweet and luscious: at least the
former rendering of the Word may be set in the Margin. In v. 40. (...) is be ye
saved, not (as we render it) save your selves* though it is true some Copies
read it (...). In v. 47. (...) refers to this Place, and is to be rendered the
saved ones, not (as it is in our English Bibles) such as should be saved. In chapter
4. 14. we read [they could say nothing against it,] but according to the Greek
it is [they had nothing to say against it.] The 32d v. is rendered thus, the
Multitude of them that believed were of one Heart and of one Soul, but the
Greek runs thus, the Heart and Soul of the Multitude of them that believed was
one. The 9th v. of the 9th chapter cannot but be thought to require some
Correction, for there is no Word in our Translation that answers to (...):
therefore thus the Verse should be rendered, And he preaching boldly (for so
(...) ought to be rendered, and there is an Example of it, v. 27.) in the Name
of the Lord Jesus spoke and disputed against the Grecians. But in our English
Version the Word (...) is left out untranslated. In chapter 10. v. 10. eaten is
instead of tasted, for (...) is of the latter import. In chapter 11. v. 17. (...)
should be [who (not what) was I?] In chapter 12. v. 12. (...) should be rendered and
Praying, but (...) is forgot. In chapter 13. v. 20. the direct rendering of (...) is
after these things, not after that. In v. 22. there is something redundant, and
something wanting, for (...) should be rendered [after my Heart,] not [after my
own Heart,] and in the next Clause (...) should have been translated [Wills] in
the Plural. I might add also that (...) might here be more plainly and simply
rendered [he shall do] than [he shall fulfill.] Besides, not only in this Place,
but in all others in the Old and New Testament [after] when it bears this
Signification should be exchanged for [according to.] In v. 27. (...) is
rendered [because they knew him not,] whereas the plain Translation is [knowing
him not, or having not known him.] In v. 42. (...) is rendered to be preached,
but that is not the usual Translation of the Word in other Places, for (...) is
to be spoken and (...) is to be preached. In chapter 15. v. 20, 29. (...) ought to
be englished thus [from what is strangled,] and not as it is now in the Plural
Number [from things strangled.] In chapter 16. v. 1* and in many Acts 16. 1. Romans
16. 21. 1 Cor. 16. 10.
other Places [Timotheus] is in the English Translation, whereas this Word is
expressed with some Variation elsewhere, and he is called Timothy. This is to
be blamed, because (as has been hinted more than once) the same Greek Word,
especially a Proper Name, ought to be rendered the same in all Places. In chapter
17. (...) is translated Areopagus, v. 19. and Mars-hill, v. 22. as if ^t were
not the same Word. This I here blame again, and shall afterward animadvert
upon, viz. the Un^itness of translating the same Word differently in the same
Chapter or Book. Either one or the other Version is to be stuck to. In v. 21.
there is no notice taken of the Word (...), which should be rendered
[sojourning,] or [who sojourned there.] In chapter 19. v. 19. (...) is englished
[fifty thousand Pieces of Silver,] but not rightly, for there is not the Word
[fifty] in the Verse, but the true rendering of the Greek is [five Myriads, or
five times ten thousand Pieces of Silver.] It is granted that this is the same
with fifty thousand, but the Translation should be according to the Words in
the Original, which are [five Myriads.] I dislike the rendering of v. 24, 25.
for the reason beforementioned, viz. because the very same Word is differently
translated. (...) in the former Verse is rendered Gain, in the latter Craf^, but
without doubt it ought to be rendered alike in both: which will suggest unto us
the True Translation of that Word. Demetrius the Silversmith brought (...), no
small Trade (so I render it) to the Craftsmen, whom he called together, and
said, Sirs, ye know that by this Trade (so (...) must be translated again) we
have our Wealth. This I take to be the true rendering of the Words, for it is
not probable in the least that the Word (...) should signify two Different
things in so short a Space. Besides, it is plain that it is meant here as I
have represented it; for Demetrius here spoken of, was a Man of a very Great
Trade, and had several (...) and (...), Artificers and Workmen (as they are
here called) under him, and so is said to have brought them no small Work or
Trade: wherefore he warmly stirred up these and their Fellows to cry up Diana
and her Worship; otherwise their Trade (which is here translated their Craft)
would fail, that Trade by which they had their Wealth. Thus the Signification
of the Word (...) is the same in both Places, as I conceive. In v. 40. (...)
ought thus to be englished [to be impeached of Sedition for or concerning this
Day,] i. e. for what we have done this Day. The Word (...) in chapter 21. v. 1.
which we translate [were gotten from] might be expressed in the Margin thus
[were snatched from] or [were plucked from,] for this is the known meaning of
the Word. In v. 35. (...) were better translated because of, than for, this
latter being used here in an obsolete manner. The 22d v. of the 22 d chapter is
imperfectly expressed in English thus, they gave him Audience unto this Word:
The Word [unto] is not presently understood, and therefore should be changed
for [until] which is more intelligible; [They heard him until this Speech] and
no longer, that is the plain rendering of the Text. In chapter 23. v. 27. (...) is
not an Army (as it is translated) for the Context shows that so Great a Number
is not meant, but we are to understand by this Word a certain Party of
Soldiers, and therefore it were better to translate it the Soldiery or
Soldiers, as we find it rendered in v. 10. In the 29th v. (...) is translated
[I perceived.] but the true English is [I found.] In chapter 24. v. 3. and ^n chapter
26. 25. it were better to change [most noble] ^^to [most excellent], both
because of the true Import of the Greek Word (...), and because it has been so
translated in Luke 1. 3. Acts 23. 26. In chapter 24. v. 11. according to the Greek
we are to read the Words thus, there are not more than twelve Days, and not (as
Our Translation has it) there are yet but twelve Days: and in the latter
Clause of this Verse [for] is superfluous. In chapter 25. v. 14. there is no regard
to the word (...), therefore we ought to insert it thus in English, when they
had tarried there many Days. The Translation of chapter 26. v. 8. [Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with you that God should raise the Dead?] may be
mended thus, What? is it judged a thing incredible with you if God raises the
Dead? In v. 11. [strange Cities] should have been expressed thus in the Margin,
[Cities that are without] according to the Greek (...). The plain Version of
(...), v. 26. is, I stand judged or arraigned, not I stand, and am judged. The
true Import of (...), chapter 28. v. 2. is not little (as it is rendered) but common
or vulgar Kindness. In v. 11. the Translators forgot to put [ Jupiter's Twins]
in the Margin, for neither the word Castor nor Pollux is in the Greek, only the
word (...). We ^et, v. 13. is a Word now out of use.

In the Epistle to the Romans, chapter 2. v. 2. [we are sure] in the Interpretation
of (...), which is no more than [we know], therefore the other is too high a
Word. In v. 5. [against] is [in] in the Greek, and therefore we can do no less
than mention it in the Margin. In chapter 3. v. 2. (...) should be rendered first,
not chiefly, for the Apostle is reckoning the Privileges of the Jews in order,
Imprimis, says he, to them were committed, etc. and after a long Digression he
goes on, and enumerates the rest of the Privileges. In v. 4, 5. of this
Chapter, and in several other Places in this Epistle, and in some other of his
Epistles, he uses that Form of Speech, (...), which answers to the Form of
Detestation in the Old Testament, (...), and to the Latin absit, and signifies
no other than let it not be; wherefore it is falsely translated [God forbid] in
compliance with the vulgar Form of Speech. In v. 5. (...) may be rendered [is
not God unrighteous?] for (...) is a Particle of Denying as well as of
Interrogation; but according to Our Translation [not] is left out, which I
would have in the Margin at least. That in Romans 8. 37. we are more than
Conquerors, is an ill Translation, because the Greek is a Verb. viz, (...),
therefore should be rendered, we do more than conquer. There is a Defect in the
Version of chapter 9. v. 3. I could wish that my self: for (...) can be no less
than I my self. In v. 11. (...) is better rendered might remain or abide than
might stand. In chapter 11. v. 8. (...) is not fully rendered; there being two Words
in the Greek, it should be translated with some Emphasis, [unto this very day].
In v. 25. [wise in your own Conceits] is not according to the Greek (...), and
therefore the true Translation is [wise in your own selves.] In chapter 12. v. 9.
it is according to the Greek [abhorring], not [abhor]; it is [cleaving], not
[cleave]: and in v. 17. it is providing], not [provide]. In chapter 14. v. 11.
[that] is left out before [every Knee]. In chapter 15. v. 16. (...) is translated
[minister], and (...) [ministring,] but they being two distinct Words I
conceive there should be some Difference in the Translating them: therefore I
apprehend that [administring] will be a good rendering of the latter, this Word
showing that the Words in the Greek are not the same, and yet that their
Difference is not great.

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 1. v. 7. coming should not be in
the Text, and Revelation in the Margin; but if you will make any different
Reading, let coming be placed in the Margin, and Revelation in the Text it
self, because this is the very unquestionable rendering of the Greek (...). In
chapter 4. v. 8. (as also in 2 Cor. 11. 1.) I would to God is a superfluous
Version, for the Greek is only (...), I wish, I would: and so it is barely
translated in Gal. 5. 12. and Rev. 3. 15. and accordingly may as well be so
here. In chapter 7. v. 18. the true rendering of the Greek (...) is ne reducat, not
attrahat, sc. praeputium: but because it is in a matter which requires modest
and chaste Speech, I do not urge any Alteration in the English. In v. 25. I
have no Commandment is not exactly according to (...), i. e. I have not a
Commandment. In chapter 10. v. 6, 11. you read Examples and Ensamples, but why is
there any Variation at all in these Words when in both Places the Greek Word
(viz. (...)) is the same? In chapter 11. v. 3. (...) should be translated I will,
not I would: however, let this latter be set in the Margin. In v. 14. [a Shame]
should have been translated [Dishonour], for it is (...) in the Greek, and is
opposed to (...) in the next Verse, which intimates this rendering of the Word
to be most proper. In v. 28. [that] and [that] should be changed into [the] and
[the], or there should be an Asterisk pointing to the Margin, where must be set
down what the Greek signifies. In v. 29. [Iudgment] should not stand in the
Margin, but be taken into the Text, because besides the proper Denotation of
the Greek Word, the Context absolutely proves it must be rendered Judgment, and
not Damnation; for the Apostle speaks of that Temporal Punishment which the
Corinthians pulled down upon their Heads by their unworthy and profane
celebrating of the Lord's Supper: for this Cause many are weak and sickly among
you, and many sleep, v. 30. This is the Judgment which they did eat and drink
to themselves, and it is opposed to Condemnation with the World, v. 32.
therefore it cannot in this Place be translated Damnation. In chapter 12. v. 28.
[Miracles] is [mighty Works] in the Margin, but falsely, for in the Greek it is
[Powers], and so you will find it rendered in the Margin, which refers to the
next Verse, where the same word (...) occurs, (...) ought to be rendered in chapter
14. v. 40. according to order, not in order, for this latter denotes only a
Methodical Acting. In chapter 15. v. 58. the simple plain Version is best
[knowing], according to the Greek (...).

In the second Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 2. v. 5. the Translation seems
not to be sufficient unless there be added a Parenthesis to shut in those
Words, that I may not overcharge you. But of this I have spoken in another
Place; only I will add, that both in this Epistle, and in that to the Romans,
and indeed in most of this Apostle's Writings, where there are frequent
Parentheses, it would be convenient to give notice of this to the Reader, by
inserting the usual Notes or Marks whereby they are expressed. In chapter 5. v. 9.
(...) is not sufficiently expressed by we labor: I think it might be more
fully translated, we ambitiously strive, or we studiously endeavor. In v. 10.
of this Chapter (...) should be translated, we must all be manifested, or made
manifest. And so indeed the Word is rendered twice in v. 11. and I have often
cautioned against the different translating of the same Word, where it will
admit (as here) of the same Version. Indeed here is in this 11th Verse a plain
reference to the (...) in the foregoing one: so that unless we translate it
alike in both Places, we show that we do not take notice of the Apostle's
reference. Besides, to appear before the Judgment, etc. is thought by the mere
English Reader to be only making our Appearance, i. e. to be present there. We
do you to wit, chapter 8. v. 1. calls for an Emendation, it being an Obsolete
Expression. The plain English of the Greek (...) is we make known unto you. In
v. 21. of this Chapter our Translators render (...) [providing for], whereas in
Romans 12. 17. they render it [providing]: but I have often suggested that the
same Words ought to be translated alike. In chapter 11. v. 6. (...) [rude in
Speech] had better be rendered [plain or unskilful in Speech], for in our
English Idiom the word [rude] is as much as unmannerly, and therefore it is not
well adapted to English Ears, which we are partly to consult in our Translation
which we design for their Use. In v. 9. the Translation would^ be more exact if
instead of [in all things] we read [in every thing], it being in the singular
Number in the Greek, to which all Translations of the New Testament are to
conform as far as they can.

In the Epistle to the Galatians there is something that may be amended in the
English Translation, as in chapter 1. v. 16. [that I might preach him] but in the
Greek it is (...), that I may preach the glad-tidings of him. In chapter 3. v. 7.
[the same] should be [these], for the Greek is (...). In chapter 5. v. 20, 21.
instead of Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Drunkenness, you must read them in
the plural Number, because they are so in the Original. The true rendering of
(...), v. 23. is not there is no Law, but, the Law is not, i. e. it was not
made, neither is it designed to condemn such things or such Persons as are
there spoken of.

In the Epistle to the Ephesians, chapter 1. v. 16. (...) signifies Remembrance as
well as mention, wherefore the former should be put into the Margin: (See Phil.
1. 3. 2* Tim. 1. 3.) In chapter 2. v. 10. (...) should not be rendered [which], but
[by which], the Sense of the Apostle being this, God out of his infinite and
inexhaustible Love has from eternal Ages ordained and decreed to prepare all
his Elect by good Works, to fit them by these for his Service, to enable them
by the performing of these to walk as becomes the Chosen of the Lord. Or, it is
likely the Apostle by the full Extent of these Words lets us know, that Good
Works are our Preparative ^ven for Heaven and Happiness, we are fitted by these
for the Glory above. In chapter 5. v. 3. [once] is not in the Original, and
therefore must be expunged the Translation. In chapter 6. v. 18. there can be no
Reason assigned why (...) is not rendered at all times or in every Season,
seeing this is nearer to the Original than always. In the same Verse
[thereunto] is not the full English of (...), which must be rendered thus, [to
this very thing.] I could also take notice of the false spelling, v. 16.
[fiery] for [fury], which is to be found not only here but in other Places both
in the Old and New Testament, and generally among all Writers whomsoever, as if
it came from fire, not from fire.

In Philip. 1. 7. (...) should not be translated [meet], but [just]. In v. 23.
[which is f^r better] comes short of the Greek (...), which the Vulgar Latin
renders mult^ magis melius, and we accordingly should english it [which is ^uch
rather or far better] or [far the best], the Comparative perhaps being put for
the Superlative. Besides, the word (...) is left out, which shows that this
Clause is the Reason of what went before: for the Apostle desires to depart and
to be with Christ, and gives this Account of his Desire, for this is (...)
better: so that his Desire is Rational and well-grounded. In chapter 2. v. 19. I
trust is not the right rendering of (...), but I hope: especially seeing I trust
in v. 24. is the Version of (...), a different Word. I follow after is the
rendering of (...) in the 3d Chapter of this Epistle, v. 12. but it is not a ^it
Expression when it is spoken of running in a Race (as here): his great
Endeavor was to forget those things that are behind, as he adds in the Words
immediately ensuing: Therefore rather translate it I follow on, or I press
toward, for so the Word is rendered in v. 14. In this and the next Verse (...)
should be translated to lay hold upon, for it is an Agonistick Word used to
express the Combatants or Victors laying hold with their Hands on the Prize
that was hung up. But apprehending (which is the Word that our Translators use)
is more ambiguous, and does not so plainly set forth the Metaphor. In v. 21. of
this Chapter he shall change, is too low a Word for (...), which might rather
be rendered he shall transform, or he shall change into another Form or Figure,
especially seeing this Expression has a Reference or Allusion to (...) (which
may more exactly be rendered conformable to) immediately ensuing in that Verse.

In the Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 1. v. 12. [God and] or [God even]
should be inserted before the [Father], for you will find [(...)] in the
Original. In chapter 3. v. 5. I do not see why we need translate the single word
(...) by two Words [inordinate Affection]: that one word Passion will suffice.
In chapter 4. v. 2. (...) is rendered [continue], but in Romans 12. 12. it is
[continue instant]. It is faulty, because (as has been said) the same Words,
when they are meant of the same thing, ought to be translated alike. Indeed
this could not be expected, seeing the Bible was translated by different
Persons, and perhaps did not compare their Translations together: but for the
future this may be thought of and amended, if a New, or rather a more Correct
Translation of the Bible be attempted.

I pass to some Other Epistles: in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. there is no need of rendering
(...), a Cloak of Covetousness, when the plain and genuine Signification of the
word (...) is a Pretense. In chapter 4. v. 4. [his Vessel] is not sufficient: but
according to the Greek it must be [his own Vessel]. Seeing (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2.
6. is translated [what with-holdeth] I think (...) in the next Verse ought to
be rendered [he that with-holdeth] not [he that letteth]. In the 1st Epistle to
Timothy, chapter 2. v. 4. our Translation might be altered thus, [who wills all
Men to be saved, and to come unto the Acknowledgment or acknowledging of the
Truth], for (...) cannot be rendered otherwise than [willeth], and (...) is not
Cognitio, Knowledge, but Agnitio, acknowledging, and so it is rendered, Tit. 1. 1*
Again, in v. 9. of this Chapter there is a Mistake in the Printing, broidered
for broided, (for so it is in Coverdale and Tindal, whence this Translation was
borrowed) or braided, i. e. plaited. Here therefore must be an Amendment, for
broidering is quite another thing; or the word plaited may be taken out of the
Margin, and set in the Text. In chapter 4. v. 8. (...) ought to be englished thus,
is profitable (not profiteh* as if the Greek Word were a Verb) to or for a
little (not barely little): for when we read it [bodily Exercise profits
little] the Sense conveyed to us by those Words is, that there is little or no
Profit accrues to us by it: but the true Meaning (as I conceive) of the Place
is, that the bodily Exercises of the Athleticks (of which he often speaks in
his Epistles) were, as to some things profitable, viz. in respect of their
Health, Credit, Pleasure, etc. but Godliness is (...), upon all Accounts
advantageous; where you see that (...) is opposed to (...), and therefore as
that is rendered unto all things, so this should be unto a little, signifying
that there is some Profit in those Agonistick Exercises. After those Words in
the next Verse, this is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, there
should be a full Period, whereas in our Bibles there is a Colon, as if it
related to the next Words. But this Verse has reference to the foregoing one,
This, i. e. what was said in the Verse before, is a faithful Saying. Ver. 16.
[unto thy Doctrine] is not according to the Greek (...); [Thy] is not there:
Rather render the whole Clause thus, Take heed unto thy self, and unto
teaching, the two main things which are required of a Minister of the Gospel,
and comprehend his Whole Duty. In chapter 5. v. 4. (...) should be rendered [to show
Piety toward their own House or Family], whereas (...) is not taken notice of
in our Translation, which is thus, [to show Piety at home]. In v. 16. according
to the Greek it should be thus rendered, if any believing (or faithful) Man, or
believing (or faithful) Woman. [Believing] is twice in the Original, but in Our
Translation but once. In chapter 6. v. 4. (...) should not be rendered Strif^,
because (...) just before is translated Strife of Words. These being different
should wholly differ in the Translation: therefore let Contention be the word
for (...), as it is rendered in some other Places of the Apostle's Epistles. In
v. 15. the word (...) should be taken notice of in the Version, and accordingly
(...) is to be englished thus, in his own or proper times. In the second
Epistle to Timothy, chapter 4. v. 3. the exact Version is [the time will be]: and
in v. 14. [render] should be the word instead of [reward]. In the Epistle to
Titus, chapter 1. v. 3. (...) should be englished [in his own times]. In v. 10.
(...) might in the Margin be rendered, according to its proper Signification,
Deceivers of Minds. In chapter 3. v. 4. the word Pity is falsely put in the Margin,
for (...) signifies God's Love to Man, not Pity: therefore that Word should be
left out.

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 1. v. 3. if we would be exact, (...),
should be rendered effecting the cleansing* or working the purging of our Sins,
whereas it is barely translated purging our Sins. (...),* v. 14. is to inherit
Salvation, not to be Heirs of Salvation. (...), chapter 4. v. 12. had better be
rendered living or lively than quick, because this is an ambiguous Word, and
signifies not only Life, but sometimes Swiftness. Why should not (...), v. 15.
be plainly and simply rendered to sympathize with, or have Compassion on, rather
than to be touched with a feeling? (...), chapter 10. v. 8. is according to the
Law, not by the Law. In chapter 10. v. 1^. (...) should, for the expressing the
Sense more clearly, be rendered the Lord says, that it may not be thought that
says the Lord belongs to the foregoing Clause, but that it may appear it
refers to the following one: For the Words run thus, After that the Holy Ghost,
in the Scripture, had said before, This, etc. the Lord said, (viz. in the next
Words) I will put my Laws, etc. In v. 23. of this Chapter (...) is the
Confession or Profession of Hope, not of Faith, as our Bibles read it. Again,
in v. 34. (...) seems to be misplaced in our Translation, and the Words should
not be rendered [knowing in your selves that ye have], but [knowing that ye have
for your selves], viz. laid up for your selves in Heaven, etc. for the Greek
Preposition (...) will well bear this Signification here, it being in the New
Testament of a very large Extent. However, this rendering of it, and the
referring of (...) to (...), and not to (...), may be taken notice of in the
Margin. In chapter 11. v. 12. as good as dead is but a vulgar way of speaking; and
seeing the plain English of (...) is [as to these things dead] I see no Reason
for using this manner of Speech in this Place. In v. 23. our English Word
proper (especially as it is now used) does not express the Sense of the Greek
Word, and cannot well be applied to Moses when he was an Infant. Therefore
(...) should rather be rendered fair, as the Word is translated in Acts 7. 20.
or goodly, as we render it in Exodus 2. 2. where the LXX use this Greek Word to
express the Hebrew Tob. In v. 37. the English Version of (...) is this, they
were slain with the Sword, but it is very deficient, the true rendering of the
Greek being this, they died by Slaughter of the Sword. No Man can translate it
otherwise, therefore here is need of correcting our English Bibles. In chapter 12.
v. 1. there is a palpable misplacing of the Words, which ought to be amended;
[seeing we also are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses] must be
altered thus according to the Greek [we having such a Cloud of Witnesses
encompassing us]: and instead of [let us lay aside] read [let us, laying aside,
etc.] In v. 16. one Morsel of Meat does not answer to (...), which should be
rendered for one eating, or rather for one feeding, which comprehends both
eating and drinking, for this Place refers to Genesis 25. 34. Jacob gave Esau
Bread and Pottage, and he did eat and drink: Which shows that one Morsel does
not fully contain the Sense of the Words. In chapter 13. v. 2. (...) is not so
properly translated [be not forgetful to entertain Strangers] as thus [forget
not the entertaining of Strangers, or the loving of Strangers, or Hospitality]
(as it is rendered in Romans 12. 13.) for this Translation shows which is the Verb,
and which is the Noun. In v. 8. [is] is left out without Cause: for though
(...) among the Greeks be sometimes omitted in such Propositions, yet it is
always understood to make the Sentence entire: But in the English it ought to
be expressed, and particularly here, Jesus Christ is the same, or else nothing
is affirmed, and so the Sense is left imperfect. Our Translators render v. 16.
thus, [to do Good and to communicat^ forget not] but it is most exactly rendered
in this manner, forget not doing of Good and communicating, for these latter
are Substantives, not Verbs; and there should be a Distinction made between
them in our Translation.

In 1 Pet. 1. 7. (...) is rendered at the appearing, but in v. 13. at the
Revelation. This latter is the true Word, and therefore let it be used in both
Places. In chapter 3. v. 20. leave out a. In chapter 4. v. 7. (...) should have been
translated Prayers, not Prayer. Concerning 2 Pet. 1. 10. No Prophecy of
Scripture is of any private Interpretation, I animadvert, 1. That any is not in
the Greek, nor need it be in the English. 2. It is (...), and consequently
should be rendered every Prophecy is, etc. 3. (...) is not private but proper,
and so these Words, every Prophecy of Scripture is not of proper
Interpretation, may be understood thus, Some Prophecies in Scripture have,
besides the Proper and Primary Interpretation, a Secondary one: Or, the first
and literal Signification of them is not the only Sense to be looked after in
them, but there is a higher and greater (which is the second, and as 'twere the
improper Sense) couched in them. In c^. 2. v. 16. [he was rebuked] is not
according to the Greek, but it should be [he had a Rebuke] or Check. In v. 18.
(...) [great swelling] may better be rendered [over-swelling] and so in Jude, v.
16.

In 1 John 2. 20. you read an Unction, and v. 27. the anointing: but there is
the same Greek Word, viz. (...), wherefore the rendering of it should be alike
in both Places. In St. Iude's Epistle, v. 8. [filthy] should be left out, for
there is no such Word in the Original. Our Margin indeed takes notice of it,
but then the word [filthy] should have been in different Letters, as those
Words that are not in the Greek usually are distinguished in the New Testament.
(...), v. 13. is rendered the Blackness of Darkness, but the same Words are
englished the midst of Darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 17. which seems to be the most
proper Translation: however (as I have suggested on the like occasion) let one
of them only be retained. In v. 14. (...) may be rendered (and most properly)
[prophesied unto these], viz. denouncing Judgment against them, as you read in
the next Verse.

Lastly, in the Revelation I might observe that in chapter 3. v. 20. (...) may most
properly be translated [I have stood]: therefore let it be so englished in the
Margin, if not in the Text. In chapter 4. v. 4. instead of Seats let Thrones be
read, with the word [other] in different Characters before it. It is not sit
that the same Word should have two diverse Readings in the same Verse. In v. 6,
8, 9. let [living Creatures] be taken out of the Margin, and be set in the Text
it self in the Place of [Beasts], which is not a sit Word for those that are
represented by that Vision, especially when (...) (not (...), the word here) is
the word which is rightly translated the Beast in this Book. In chapter 11. v. 17.
those Words, (...), are not rightly rendered, which art, and wast, and art to
come, but thus, who is, and was, and is to come. In chapter 13. (...) in v. 13. is
translated [Wonders], in the 14th [Miracles], which ought to be corrected for
the Reason so often given, viz. because the same Greek Word should be rendered
by the same English one, if there be no apparent Cause for the contrary. In chapter
14. v. 13. (...) should be rendered with them: [their Works follow with them.]
In chapter 16. v. 12. the way of the Kings who are from the Risings of the Sun, is
the true and literal Version of the Greek (...); but in our present English
Translation (...) is absorp'd.

These are the several Places which I conceive ought to be altered, and
translated more exactly. I say not this to impair or derogate from the Credit
and Honor of our English Translation, much less to condemn the Present
Edition, or to expose the Scriptures themselves; but my Design is to represent
them in their native Excellency and Purity, and to contribute by this Critical
Essay toward so worthy an End. For it is certain that nothing can more commend
the Holy Writ than an Exact Translation, i. e. such a one as faithfully
represents to us the Express Text of Scripture. Wherefore I humbly offer the
forementioned Places to the Consideration of the Learned and Judicious, and
leave the whole or part to be approved or rejected as they shall think fit.
Perhaps when our Church Affairs are settled, this will not seem unworthy of the
Thoughts of a Convocation, who I question not will see that the Revising and
Correcting of our English Translation of the Bible in all or in most of those
Places (and in several others which I have not here propounded) is very
requisite. It is my judgment that as out of the Vulgar Latin and the Modern
Latin Versions, one entire one might be made in that Language that should be
generally used in Quotations among the Orthodox Learned, so a New English
Translation might be composed out of this Last Edition as to the main, but with
such New Alterations and Amendments as should render the Style and Sense in
many Places more accurate, and should make it acceptable to the most Curious
English Readers. And here I advise that the Marginal Notes of the Present
English Bible be often consulted, because the best and most genuine
Translations of Words are frequently put there. But in the foregoing
Animadversions I have taken no notice of those different Significations of
Words which are placed there. I have only offered those that have not hitherto
been observed.

In the last Place I might add something concerning the Division of the Bible
into Chapters and Verses. It is not to be doubted that Moses, the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles writ their Books without any such Partition, and this
was the way of all other Writers of old. But it appears that the Books of the
Prophets were divided afterward into Parashes, before our Savior's Time, and
this distribution of them is often mentioned in the Talmuds. This was done by
the Jews for the more methodical reading of them in the Synagogues. Some of the
Justin Mart. Dialog. cum Tryph. Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 3.
Greek Fathers take notice of this Distribution, (and consequently it was made
before their Time) for they mention the (...) in the Old Testament, which
signify the same thing, and Praesat. in Daniel.
Ierom speaks of a Pericope of Jeremiah. Yea, if I mistake not, this sort of
Sections or Parashes is mentioned in Acts 8. 32. and is called there (...). The
Books of the Evanglists and Apostles were afterward divided into certain
Sections by some of the Primitive Bishops and Pastors, for the more convenient
reading of them, herein imitating the Jews who had done the same in the Old
Testament. These are called (...) by the Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. Athanal.
Orat. 3. cont. Arian. Basil de Baptismo, l. 3. quaest. 4* Chrysostom. hom. 3. de
Lazaro.
Eastern Fathers, and Lectiones by the Latin Ones: They were the same that we
call Chapters. Verses were also ancient, but not the same that are at present,
nor were all the Books so divided. St. Ierom tells us he distributed the Books
of the Chronicles and that of Ezekiel into Verses. And some of the Books of the
New Testament were thus divided: particularly the Epistle to the Galatians was
parted into these (...) by Origin, as Prae^at. in Epist. ad Galat.
Ierom informs us. But it is certain that all these Partitions, whether into
Chapters or Verses, were very much different from what we have at this Day. To
this purpose it is observable (as Heinsius and some other Critics out of Suidas
relate) that the New Testament was divided into (...) and (...); and so far as
I can gather from the Account which they give of these two, the former of these
was the division of a Book into Chapters, and the latter into Verses or some
such small Portion: though at this Day there is a quite different Sense of the
Words, for the (...) are the greater division, and the (...) the lesser. As to
the Division of the whole Bible (consisting of 39 Books of the Old Testament,
and 27 of the New) into distinct Chapters, as they are now among us, viz. 779
in the Old Testament and 260 in the New, it was made by Lanfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury about the Year 1060: others say by Stephen Langton, who was
Archbishop of the same See in K. John's Time, about the Year 1200. It is said
by others that Cardinal Hugo twenty or thirty Years afterward was the first
that contrived the Distinction of Chapters of the Old Testament, for fitting
the Hebrew Text to the Concordance of the Bible, which he was Author of. The
dividing of Chapters into Verses was more lately, being the Work of the
Industrious and Learned Robert Stephens about eightscore Years since. But
whoever were the first Authors of this Division of the Bible into Chapters and
Verses, it is certain that it is not rightly made. The beginning of the 10th
Chap. of Isaiah should not be cut of from the 9th Chapter, for it belongs to
it, and at the Close of the 5th v. of the 10th Chap. (which is so now) the 9th
should end. And many other Chapters in the Old Testament are ill divided. But
especially in the New Testament one may see that the distinction of Chapters
and Verses now in use was drawn up in haste, whereby some Matters that should
have been united are severed, and vice versa. The 1st Verse of the 4th Chapter
to the Colossians should have been joined to the third Chapter: and the
Division of the Verses in many other Places ought to be corrected and altered,
as Sir N. Knatchbull has in several Instances showed. We may take Iunius and
Tremellius for an Example, who have altered the Chapters sometimes in the
Latin; and it might be as convenient to imitate them both in the Old and New
Testament in English.

Nor will this Changing or any other Alteration which I have before suggested,
be any Argument at all of the Imperfection of Scripture. This remains entire in
it self, and is not in the least changed. And the ^esign of my present
Enterprise was to assert this, and to evince the Perfection of the Original
Text, and to let us see that all Translations must be regulated by that. No
Version of the Bible is so absolutely Authentic that we ought to adhere to
that, and no other. Ut Veterum librorum fides de Hebraeis Voluminibus
examinanda est, ita Novorum veritas Graeci Sermonis normam desiderat. Hieron.
Epist. ad Lucin.
The Hebrew of the Old Testament and the Greek of the New are the only
Standard, and all must be examined and tried, altered and amended by this. It
is granted there is some Variation in the Copies, but the Diligent and
Unprejudiced may find out what is Genuine. Some have fancied that the
carelessness of Transcribers has caused some Literal Faults, but then they
acknowledge that none of them are Material and Considerable, they relate not to
Faith and Good Manners. This is the very Confession of Spinoza, who has spoken
so ill of the Bible; This I can certainly affirm, Tractat. Theolog. Polit. cap.
9.
says he, that I have not found any fault or variety of readings about the
moral Documents, which may render them obscure and dubious. Wherefore our
Assertion still remains impregnable and unshaken, that the Sacred Volume of the
Scriptures is Complete and Perfect, and has all things in it which can speak
it a most Consummate Work.

CHAP. XIV.
The Reader is invited to the Study of the Bible, as he values the Repute of a
Scholar and a Learned Man. That he may successfully study this Holy Book he
must be furnished with Tongues, Arts, History, etc. It is necessary that he be
very Inquisitive and Diligent in searching into the Mind and Design of the
Sacred Writers: In examining the Coherence of the Words: In Comparing Places
together: In observing and discovering the peculiar Grace and Elegancy, and
sometimes the Verbal Allusions and Cadences of the Holy Scripture, of which
several Instances are given. He must also be Morally qualified to read this
Book, i. e. he ought to banish all Prejudice: He must be Modest and Humble: He
must endeavor to free himself from the Love of all Vice: He must with great
Earnestness implore the Assistance of the Holy Spirit.

IT remains that I conclude with a serious Address and Invitation to the
Reader, to admire and value this Book which is so transcendently Excellent and
Complete, to prize it above all others whatsoever, constantly to read, peruse
and study these Holy Writings. The Laws of that Vile Impostor Mahomet, are
styled the Alcoran from (...) legit, as much as to say the Book is to be read.
And shall we not think that that Sacred Volume which contains the Laws of our
Heavenly Master and Infallible Teacher, deserves that Respect from us? For this
reason the Hebrews call the Holy Scripture Mikra, i. e. lectionem, because it
is to be read by all, because this Divine Book is to be universally perused,
revolved and searched into. We are not forbid to be acquainted with Other
Authors, such as may conduce to u^eful Knowledge whether secular or religious,
especially such as may be someways helpful toward the understanding of the
Scriptures. But there is a great Number of Writers that are trifling, vain and
useless: others are dangerous and pernicious. Meddle with neither of these: or
if you have, lay them out of your Hands forthwith, and take up the Bible, the
only Book that is Worthy of your most serious perusal. Behold here the Book of
God! There are no Writings any where like these, none can afford any thing
comparable to them. It may be observed that the Holy Spirit has made use of
diverse Sorts of Persons in the penning of this Volume, Moses bred up in the
Schools of the Egyptians, Daniel one of the chief of the Wise Men and Princes
of the Persian Court, David and Solomon Kings, Jeremy and Ezekiel Priests, Amos
a Herdsman: in the New Testament Matthew a Converted Publican, Paul bro^ght up
at the Feet of Gamaliel, the rest of the Evangelists and Apostles Fithermen and
Tradesmen: that hence Persons of all Ranks and Degrees may be admonished to
converse with these Sacred Writings, that they may think themselves concerned
in these Messages delivered by different Ambassadors. I have sometimes observed
that some Men of no contemptible Learning and Reading, and who are acquainted
with store of Good Authors, have no regard for this Excellent Book, and never
think themselves obliged to look into it. But this argues a great defect of
Judgment, (to say no worse now) for even in the Point of Scholarship they
cannot be without the Knowledge of the Bible. So far as they are Ignorant of
this, they are deficient in Learning: for (as I have demonstrated) this Book is
fraught with all Humane Learning, and gives Instructions concerning the
choicest Arts and Sciences. Upon which account it is of such universal use,
that no sort of Persons can be ignorant of it without great Inconvenience and
Damage. He is no Antiquary that is not skilled in these Writings which are of
the greatest Antiquity: He is no Historian that is not acquainted with the
Important Transactions of this Book: He is no Statesman or Politician who has
not insight into the Excellent Maxims and Laws which are found here: He is no
right Natural Philosopher who is not acquainted with the Origin and Make of
this Mundane System as they are represented in the Mosaic Physiology in the
first Chapter of Genesis: He is no Accomplished Grammarian, Critic or
Rhetorician who is ignorant of that Philological Learning which these Writings
afford: And chiefly he is no Good Man or Christian who is a Stranger to those
Admirable Rule which are here laid down. Wherefore it is the concern of all
Persons to converse with the Scriptures, and to apply themselves with great
diligence to the reading of them, and that daily and frequently. Let this Holy
Book be seldom out of your Hands. Though you have often perused it, yet
continue to do so still, Non est similis qui legit lectionem suam centies ei
qui legit ^am centies and semel. Talm.
for you will thereby receive infinite Advantage. There is ever something
gained by a fresh and repeated reading of it. Some new Matter is discovered, or
the old is illustrated and confirmed: We either know more, or know better than
we did before.

That our Reading of the Holy Scriptures may be of this Nature, and that we may
study and understand them aright, I propound these ensuing Rules and
Directions. First, It is requisite that we furnish our selves with other
Learning to make our selves capable of understanding the Bible. All Arts
require a Master and Teacher, even the lowest and mechanical. All Trades and
Sciences are to be learned: none presumes to meddle with them till they have
been instructed in them. And yet we may observe that all degrees of Persons
pretend to interpret the Scriptures, though they were never instructed, never
prepared, as [Sola Scripturarum ars est quam sibi passim omnes vendicant. Hanc
garrula anus, hanc delirus senex, hanc sophista verbo^us; hanc universi
praesumunt, laeerant, docent, antequam discant.] Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin.
St. Ierom complained of old. A great many imagine that the Weakest Brains can
comprehend the Contents of this Book, and without all other knowledge attain to
the meaning of them. But this is a gross Mistake, and is one cause of Men's
wresting and corrupting the Scriptures: They are (...), 2 Pet. 3. 16.
unlearned, and unwilling to be taught, (for so the Word imports) they neglect
the means of Knowledge, they use not the proper Helps conducing to it. Or
whatever they were in St. Peter's Time, we are sure that now a competent
Measure of Humane Learning is required to understand these Writings: For though
they surpass all Humane Wisdom, yet it is as true that they have strictures of
all Arts and Sciences in them, and are written in the Learned Languages, and
(as I have showed formerly) contain in them all sorts of Words, Phrases and
Idioms: Wherefore there is a Necessity of the Arts and Tongues for
understanding this Book. In the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, of the
Apostles and Evangelists, there are the Rites, Customs, Manners, Opinions,
Sayings, Proverbs, of almost all Nations in the World, especially of the
Ancient Hebrews: Wherefore a Knowledge of their Writings and Ancient Monuments,
a Converse with History and Antiquities, are absolutely requisite, especially
for explaining the difficult Places. And to have a true Notion of several
Passages in the Epistles of the Apostles, Ecclesiastical History in needful,
which gives us nitice of the Heretics of that time, or of those concerning
whom the Apostles prophetically speak. The Writings of the Fathers are to be
consulted, and that with great application of Mind, that we may not mistake the
Interpretations which those Learned and Pious Men give of the respective Places
of Scripture, that we may be edi^ied by their Religious Comments, but not
imbibe any of their Errors. This which I now say principally concerns the
Guides and Ministers of the Church, who are supposed to be Men of Learning and
Scholarship: and truly a great Part of the Bible is more especially fitted for
such. It is their province to expound and teach this Holy Book, which is it
self a Library, and is of that Nature that it cannot be rightly understood and
explained without acquaintance with the Ancient Writers of the Church, without
skill in the Tongues, Rhetdrick, Logic, Philosophy, History, Criticism; for as
it is furnished with all Literature, so it requires all to unfold it aright. As
for the Apostles, tho some of them had no knowledge in Arts and Sciences, yet
that Defect was abundantly recompensed by the extraordinary Gifts and
Endowments of the Holy Ghost. So most of the Primitive Christians in the
Apostles Days, who were not Hebrews, understood the Language in which the Old
Testament was written by their Gift of Tongues. And as for the Greek of the New
Testament, it was universally known, and so was in a manner the native Tongue
both to the Jews and others of that time. But Men are not now instructed in
Strange Languages by the Spirit, nor are they born with Hebrew or Greek,
neither are they Inspired with Arts and Humane Knowledge: and consequently Study
and Reading and Long Exercise are indispensably requisite. S^rom^ lib. 6.
Clement of Alexandria would have his (...) i. e. his Perfect and Complete
Theologu^, be skilled in Humane Literature and Philosophy. Inshort, to be a
Consummate Divine, and thoroughly knowing in the Bible, it is necessary that he
be a Man of Universal Learning.

Secondly, that we may read and understand the Scriptures it is requisite that
we be exceeding Attentive, Observing, Considerate; that we be very Inquisitive,
Thoughtful and Diligent. This Rule may be explained in several Particulars;

1. We must use great Thoughtfulness, Diligence and Care in penetrating into
the Design and Sense of those Inspired Writings. St. Chrysostom delivers the
Rule thus, (...) etc. in cap. 1. ad Galat.
we must not only examine the mere naked Words, and insist upon them simply and
absolutely considered, but we must chiefly attend to the Mind and Intent of the
Writer. Sometimes instead of an Absolute meaning of the Words in Scripture,
they are to be taken Comparatively, or with Limitation, they must be restrained
to the Matter in Hand. As to Instance, No Man can say that Jesus is the Lord
but by the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. 3. i. e. no Man can say so from his Heart.
There is that Reserve implied. Where I am, ye eannot come, John 7. 34. i. e. ye
cannot come yet, but afterward you shall. All that came before me are Thieves
and Robbers, John 1 o. 8. i. e. all False Prophets (for he means them) are
such. It is reported that there is such Fornication among you as is not so much
as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his Father's Wife, 1 Cor. 5.
1. This sort of Fornication was not only named but practiced among the
Gentiles, for there are several Examples in Pagan Story of marrying the
Father's Wife, therefore here must be meant the more Sober Sort of Gentiles.
And so in many other Places things which seem to be absolutely spoken are to be
understood in a restrained Sense.

2. It is necessary that we be very thoughtful and inquisitive about the
Context, the Dependence, the Connection of those Places which we search into.
We are to be exceeding mindful what the Words refer to, what Coherence they
have with what went before and what follows. To Know the true Sense of them we
must carefully observe the Subject Matter: for this is certain that
Propositions are true or not true according to this. You will meet with several
Instances of this in my former Discourses on the Holy Scriptures, and therefore
I will forbear to mention any here. Only I offer this at present as a General
Rule for guiding us to the true and genuine meaning of Scripture.

3. This Attentiveness and Care must be exercised in Comparing one Place with
another, or with diverse others, if there be occasion. For (as an Mr. Herbert's
Priest to the Temple.
Intelligent Person rightly suggests) all Truth being consonant to it self, and
all being penned by one and the self-same Spirit, it cannot be but that an
industrious and judicious Comparing of Place with Place must be a singular help
for the right understanding of the Scriptures. This One Rule, if well and duly
observed, will carry us through most of the Difficulties of the Bible. For this
we may depend upon that the Scripture is its own Interpreter, that the best
Comment on this Book is it self. Wherefore let us not be hasty and giddy, but
diligently compare the Scripture with it self: for there are certain Texts and
Passages of the Bible that are allied to, and symbolize with one another. The
observing of this will be of great Advantage to us. Thus Genesis 49. may be
explained out of Deuteronomy. 32. The Blessings and Prophecies of Jacob concerning the
Tribes receive Light hence, and also from the particular Histories in Joshua
and Judges concerning the Actions of the several Tribes. This ought to be
remembered that Obscure and Difficult Places of Scripture are to be explained by
those that are Clear and Easy. We must interpret those that are Uncertain by
Texts that are undoubtedly certain and plain. So as for those that are Brief
and Contracted, the best way is to expound them by those that are Large and
Full. The Beatitudes in Luke 6. are the same, but epitomized, with those in
Matthew. 5. and therefore there is good reason to explain the former by the
latter. That Text of Isaiah. chapter 6. v. 9. Hear ye indeed, but understand not,
etc. is contracted in Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Iobn 12. 40. but it is at large
in Mat. 13. 14, 15. and accordingly thence the Sense appears best. And whilst
we are expounding one Place by another, we must not forget to search diligently
into all the Circumstances of either, and to consider distinctly by whom, of
what particular thing, to whom, at what time, on what occasion they were
spoken. If we be thus Industrious and Attentive, we shall be effectually
directed to the right meaning of the Texts, and we shall find none of those
Contradictions which Unthinking and Careless Readers through want of Collation
of Texts imagine to be in Scripture.

4. This Inquis^tiveness and Observation will lead us to a discovery of the
singular Elegancy and Beauty of the Sacred Style. There are peculiar Forms and
Modes of Speech in several Nations, proper to them, and it is very hard to
rende^ them in another Tongue: or if you attempt it, the Elegancy vanishes.
Thus there is a particular Excellency and Luster in the Phrase and manner of
Expression which the Holy Ghost uses in this Book: it is such that it
sometimes rises above the strain of the most Eloquent Orators of Greece or
Rome. But this cannot be taken notice of by the generality of Readers, because
it is impossible to discern it, unless with great sedulity they search into the
Words themselves, and by being acquainted with the Original come to perceive
the peculiar Grace of the Words and Phrases. Thus in the Greek of the New
Testament there is in many Places a most Remarkable Choice of Words, and a
Wonderful Accommodating them to the Matter spoken of. Many Words in this
Language are so full and comprehensive that they cannot be expressed in
English. We do not reach the pregnancy of the Word (...), Gal. 6. 3. and (...),
Tit. 1. 10. for in these Words is included not only deceiving but self-deceit,
or deceiving and imposing upon a Man's own Mind. Yea the latter Word which is
barely rendered Deceivers, may import the deceiving of the Minds or Souls of
others. Our Translators are forced to use two Words to render that single one
(...), Iam. 5. 16.(...), 1. Pet. 4. 15. is translated by a Poriphrasis, six
Words in English for one in Greek, but indeed this is a Compound or Double
Word. There is more in the Original, Luke 21. 34. than can be expressed in the
Translation: We render it thus, Take heed lest your Hearts be overcharged: But
there is a Mavelous Elegancy in the Greek which ordinary Readers cannot
perceive. For (...) is an equivocal Word, and signifies not only the Soul and
its Faculties, but that noble Visous of the Heart well known by that Name, and
also that Part of the Body which is the receptacle of Meat and Drink, viz. the
Stomach. This is a Criticism not unworthy the taking notice of, and it much
inhanses the Sense of our Savior's Excellent Caveat here. That (...) has this
latter Signification sometimes, is evident from the Name of that Distemper
which Physicians give to the Pain in the upper Ori^ice of the Stomach, which
being near to the Heart, affects that; whence the Distemper is called (...) and
(...). It is vulgarly called Heart-burning, which is indeed a Distemper of the
upper Mouth of the Stomach, and should rather be called Stomach-burning, which
is when this part of the Body is pained and disordered by reason of some sharp
and noxious Humor. The Stomach and the Heart affecting one another by Consent,
the former has been called by the Greek Word which is given to the latter.
Thus Galen testifies that the old Physicians used the Word (...) in this Sense,
and accordingly the Cardiac Distemper was that of the Stomach. The affinity of
these Words might also be showed in the Latin Stomachus and the English
Stomach, which denote sometimes that Great Spirit and Stubborness which ^ave
their Seat in the Heart. But it most manifestly appears (as I have shew^d) in
that Language wherein the New Testament is written; and St. Luke who was a
Greek Physician, and well skilled in the Terms of the Art, did particularly
refer to this, and notably uses a Word that signisies both the Stomach and
Heart properly so called, because this fitly agrees to what our Savior says,
that they should not be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, wherein
the Stomach is mainly concerned, nor with the Cares of this Life, wherein the
Heart and Affections are most interested: Wherefore a Word that imports both is
very elegant. A parallel Place is that Acts 14. 17. -- filling our Hearts with
Food and Gladness: where it is plain that (...) is an equivocal Term, and
signifies something else besides Hearts: for if there were not this Ambiguity
in the Word, filling their Hearts with Food would be a very odd and
unaccountable Expression. But the Translators could not use both Senses,
therefore they set down one, and left the other to be understood: But the
Doubtful Word, according to the Subject matter, may be applied both ways, that
is, their Stomachs were replenished with Food, and their Hearts (as that
signifies the Soul and its Affections) with Gladness. And further to
corroborate this Criticism, and to show the peculiar Excellency and Pregnancy
of the Scripture-Stile, the word (...) is appropriated to the Stomach in Iam.
5. 5. Ye have nourished your Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter: for here by a Day
of Slaughter (as all Expositors of any Note grant) is meant a Day of Feasting,
because on Great Festivals many Beasts were killed for Sacrifice, and a great
part of them were eaten by the Sacrificers and their Friends, Prove. 7. 14. Isa.
22. 13. And consequently by Hearts we are to understand their Stomachs and
whole Bodies, and by nourishing them is meant feeding and pampering of them.
The Apostle rebukes the Gluttony and Intemperance of the Voluptuous Men of that
Age, who made every Day a Day of Slaughter, a Day of Feasting and Revelling. I
could parallel this with a Passage in the Old Testament, where leb has the
same ambiguous Signification with (...); Comfort ye your Hearts, Genesis 18. 5.
which is spoken of Abraham's entertaining the Angels, and refers to the Morsel
of Bread there mentioned, for so he was pleased to call his Generous Provision
which he made for his Guests. Stay, says he, support, sustain (for so the word
sagnad signifies) your Stomachs, and thereby refresh and comfort your Hearts
with this Entertainment. So the word (...) is used in an equivocal Sense by
Homer on the like occasion; for speaking of Mercury's lliad. ^.
being entertained by Calypso, he says, -- (...), He supped, and stayed his
Heart (or his Stomach) with Meat. Thence Bread is called Mishgnan, fulcrum,
sustentaculum, I^a. 3. 1. a Stay, a Staff. And among the Old Hebrews Segnudah
(i. e. fulcimentum) was a Dinner: and so Food among us is known by the vulgar
Name of Sustenance. I hope that from all these things which I have alleged,
the Critical Notion which I offered is made very plain and obvious.

And in several other Instances I could make it good that there are those
Peculiar Graces of Speech in the Sacred Writings which the most Exquisite
Translations cannot fully reach. I will particularly instance in one sort,
which are usually called Paranomasia's, i. e. Elegant Allusions and Cadences of
Words. Thus there is a clear Allusion to Iapheth's Name in Genesis 9. 27. Iapht
lejepheth. There are no less than three of these in one Verse, Genesis 11. 3.
Nilbenah lebenim, nisrephah lisrephah, hachemar lachomer. In Genesis 49. there are
several of these Verbal Allusions, as Iehudah joduka, v. 8. Dan jadin, v. 16.
Gad gedud jegudennu, v. 19. which are plain References to the Names of Judah,
Dan and Gad. There is a Paranomasia in the word Chamor, Judge. 15. 16. which
signifies both an Ass and a Heap, but this is quite lost in our Translation,
Heaps upon Heaps, with the Iaw-bone of an Ass. The Mount of Olives is in way of
Contempt called the Mount of Corruption, Mashchith, 2 Kings 23. 13. alluding to
Mishchah, anointing, for which the Oil of Olives was serviceable. In Psalm. 39.
11. the P^almist alludes to the Names of Adam and Abel when he says (...), All
Adam is Abel, or every Man is Vanity. And Selah is here added to denote the
Emphatick Elegancy of this Passage. And again, Psalm. 144. 4. Adam is like Abel:
We render the Hebrew right enough, Man is like Vanity, but then the Nominal
Allusion is not expressed. There is a great Number of Paranomasia's in Isaiah:
as in chapter 1. v. 23. Sare sorerim, the Princes are rebellious. Chapter 5. v. 7. he
looked for Mishphat, Judgment, but behold Mishpah Oppression; for Tzedekah
Righteousness, but behold Tzegnakah a Cry. Four of these pleasant Cadences you
meet with together in chapter 24. v. 3, 4. Hibbok tibbok, hibboz tibboz, dibber
dabar, oblab noblah. Chapter 32. v. 7. Chelai chelav, the Instruments of the Churl.
Some observe the Likeness of Sound in the Hebrew Words for Bridegroom and
decketh himself, and for Bride and Jewels, chapter 61. v. 10. We may observe in
Ier. 6. 1. a plain Allusion to the word Tekoah in the Word preceding it. A
remarkable Cadence is to be taken notice of in Mic. 1. 14. the Houses of Aczib
(the Name of a Place) shall be Aczab a Lie: and the Learned Dr. Pocock
observes, that the Prophet in the next Verses has Allusions to the Names of
those other Cities Mareshah and Adullam, in what he there says of them. The
like you find in Zeph. 2. 4. where the Destruction of Gaza and Ekron is
foretold, but there are no Footsteps of it in the Translation. The last Place I
will mention in the Old Testament is Zech. 9. 3. Tire built her self a
strong-hold, Tzor built her self Matzor.

This way of speaking is used also in the New Testament by our Savior and his
Apostles. (...), the Wind blows where it lists: so is every one that is
born (...), of the Spirit, John 3. 8. The same Word signifying Wind and Spirit,
Christ takes occasion thence to speak after this Allusive Manner, which no
Translation can express. So (...), Mat. 16. 18. cannot be discerned in the
English Translation. St. Paul has several Verbal Likenesses in his Epistles,
as 1 Cor. 0. 21. (...). 2 Cor. 5. 8. (...). Philein. v. 11. (...). 2 Thessalonians. 3.
11. (...), which Henry Stephens has expressed by the like Paranomasy in Latin,
^i^il agentes, sed curiose satagentes. And several others of this kind there
are in this Apostle's Writings which are more commonly taken notice of, and
therefore I omit them. Grotius and some others think there are Allusions to the
Names of the Seven Asiatick Churches in the things that are said of them in the
Epistles to them, Rev. 2d and 3d Chapters: but perhaps that is too fanciful.
This we are certain of, that this Mode of Speech was not unusual among the
Oriental Writers, and so it is no wonder that it occurs sometimes in the Holy
Scripture. Even among some of the best Roman Authors this is no unfrequent
thing: thus Verres, the Avaritious and Extorting Praetor of Sicily, is by Tully
called Verrens, Sweep-all. And many such Verbal Jests this Grave Pleader has
in his Orations, and other Parts of his Writings; which shows it was thought to
be a Pulchritude in their Style. So Martial played upon the idle Mariners; Non
nautas puto, sed vos Argonautas. Horace begins his Epistle to one Albius, a
Patron of his, thus; Albi nostrorum sermonum candide judex; Alluding in that
Epithet to his Name: and he has several other of these Charientisms. Which we
cannot but sometimes observe likewise in other Ancient Writers of good Account.
But that which I remark at present is, that even the Sacred and Inspired Style
disdains not this manner of speaking; which none are capable of taking notice
of but those that have some Knowledge of the Original Languages in which the
Sacred Text is writ. And in several other Particulars it were easy to show the
Gracefulness of the Holy Style, and that singular Turn and Peculiar Air in the
Original which cannot be expressed in the Translation. There are many Words,
Phrases and Sentences which must lose a great deal of their native Weight and
Spirit by being done into another Language. Therefore on this, as well as on
the other Accounts before-named, we must be very Considerate and Attentive when
we read this Divine Book.

Thirdly, There must be great Moral and Religious Qualifications likewise: for
this is the Book of God, and therefore we must come to it with agreeable
Inclinations, Wills and Affections. Men complain that there is a great
Contention about the interpreting of Scripture, and Different Parties cannot
agree: whence they proceed to blame the Obscurity and Uncertainty of the
Scripture it self. But herein these Persons themselves are very blameable, for
this Disagreement in the interpreting of Sacred Writ arises not wholly from the
Obscurity of it, nor does it proceed from the Uncertainty of it, (as some would
suggest) but from Men's Depraved Minds and Passions. Wherefore our main Care
ought to be,

1st. To free our selves from all Wilful Prejudice and Perverseness, which have
been the first and original Causes of misunderstanding the Scriptures. Thus the
Infernal Spirit, when he tempted our Savior, most perversely quoted Psalm. 91.
11. and misapplied it to his purpose. And from him Heretics and Seducers have
learnt to cite and make use of Scripture to evil Designs, viz. to uphold some
Error or Vice. What an Ancient Writer of the Church says of one sort of
Heretical Teachers, that (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 27.
they interpret the Sense of the Holy Writ according to their own Pleasure, is
true of them all: their constant Practice is to strain and distort these Sacred
Writings, to construe them according to their own Fancies, and to make them
like an Echo, speak what they please. Their great Work in consulting and
turning over this Volume is to find something they may misinterpret for their
own Ends. Their Affection to a particular Cause makes them believe and assert
any thing, though never so improbable: and then they alledg Scripture to back
it, though it be wholly foreign to the purpose. These Persons are of the Number
of those Depravers of Truth, who (as Basil. M. Orat. 2. in Hexa^m.
One of the Ancient Fathers gives us their Character) do not accommodate their
Minds to the Scripture, but pervert and draw the Mind of the Scripture to their
own Wills. This glossing and expounding of the Bible, according to Men's corrupt
Fancies, is, as Colloqu Men^al.
M. Luther has expressed it, like straining Milk through a Colesack: it
blackens and de^iles the pure Word of God, it depraves and falsifies the Mind
of the Spirit. Those Men are to be abhorred that submit not their Thoughts and
Conceptions to this Sacred Standard, who compel the Scripture to serve their
Private Opinions, who make no conscience of putting a Text upon the Rack to
make it speak what it intended not, of miserably torturing it, that they may
force it to confess what it never meant. These Persons should be reminded how
great a Sin it is to distort and deprave the Holy Writ, and designedly to draw
it to another Sense than it naturally bears. And the Penalty is as grievous as
the Crime; for, as the Apostle St. Peter informs us, this Generation of Men
wrest the Scripture unto their own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Wherefore let
none presume to be guilty in this Nature, and dare to follow their own sinister
Imagi^ations in the interpreting of the Inspired Writings, but let them attend
to that Advice of a Pious and Learned Author, Mr. Mede Diatrib.
We should be more willing to take a Sense from Scripture than to bring one to
it. Let us strive to know the naked and pure Meaning of the Spirit; and in
order to that read the Bible with an Unprejudiced and Sincere Mind, which is an
Excellent Interpreter. Whereas it is a certain Truth that Perverse Minds will
pervert the Scriptures.

2dly. We ought to read these Divine Writings with great Modesty and Humility.
Let it not trouble us that some Parts of them are not level to our
Understandings. And where we cannot solve some things, let us not arrogantly
pretend to do it. It is no Disgrace to confess our Ignorance here. I can assure
you this has been done by the Learnedest Heads. There is a Learned Ignorance,
as Epist. 121. cap. 15.
St. Augustine terms it, and we need not be ashamed to be Masters of it. These
four things (mentioned in Eccles. 12. 6.) I understand not, says Castellio. I
scarcely understand the thousandth Part of this Book, says he concerning the
Apocalypse. And it is frequent with this Learned Man to say, I know not the
Meaning of this Place. That Man is impudently rash who dares profess that he
understands one single Book of the Bible in all its Parts, says Opus in
Psalmos.
Luther. I own it that I am so blind that I cannot see any thing at all in that
dark Place of Scripture, Amos 5. 26. says the De Dis Sir.
Great Seldom. But the contrary Temper and Spirit have swelled some with proud
Conceits of their understanding some Passages of this Book, when they have no
true Apprehension of them in the least, and accordingly they have endeavored
in a supercilious manner to impose their crude Sense upon others, not craving
but commanding Assent to what they have propounded. These bold Men forget what
the Wise King says. Prove. 25. 1.
It is the Glory of God to conceal a Matter, to speak sometimes in so dark and
hidden a manner that there is need of great searching, studying and enquiring
into the things that are said: and yet at last they remain abstruse and
unintelligible. It has pleased God, the Wise Governor of the World, that the
Scripture should have Difficulties and Obscurities in it, that there should be
some things hard to be understood. But as Socrates said of Heraclitus's
Writings, What he understood of them was very good, and so he believed that to
be which he understood not; the like may we with more Reason pronounce
concerning the Sacred Scriptures. The Matters which we have Knowledge of (which
are the main Body and Substance of the Book) are Excellent and Divine; and so
there is Reason to conclude that those Parts of it which are hidden from us are
of the same Nature. There is no occasion to find fault with the Sovereign
Wisdom of God, but it is our apparent Duty to lay aside Pride, and to exercise
Humility, which will capacitate us to understand even those Great Mysteries and
Abstrusities when we have with much Diligence and frequent Study searched into
them.

3dly. We must think our selves concerned to purge our Hearts and Lives from
all De^ilements of Vice. For it is certain that a quick Brain, a subtle Head,
and a nimble Wit, are not so much required to the understanding of Divine Truth
as an Honest Mind and a Religious Practice. To Men of polluted Consciences and
profane Manners the Scriptures seem dark and mysterious, but to those of
sanctified Minds and holy Lives they are as to the most part plain and clear.
These Qualifications render them as bright as a Sunbeam. What the Turks are
said to write on the backside of the Alcoran, Let none touch this Book but he
that is pure, may with great Reason and Justice be written on the Holy Book of
Scripture, and that only: for a Pure Life is the best Commentator on these
Writings, A wonderful measure of Knowledge and Insight into these Divine Truths
which are here contained, is the Effect of observing and practicing the Holy
Precepts of this Book. This then we ought to urge upon our selves, to come to
the reading of Scripture with defecate and purged Minds, with Love to what it
dictates, and with Obedience to it. This should be our principal Care, to live
well, and to walk according to this Excellent Rule. All our Religion, and the
whole Conduct of our Actions in this World depend upon the Scriptures:
therefore let us be directed and governed by the Infallible Maxims, Precepts,
Promises, and Threatenings of this Book. We see Men live by Custom, by the
Dictates of Others, or by their Own Opinions, which oftentimes prove erroneous,
and lead them into unwarrantable Practices. But they would not be thus
misguided if they consulted These Lively Oracles of God, this sure Word of
Prophecy, if they regulated their Actions by this Exact Canon. And hereby we
are certain to improve our Knowledge in this Holy Book: for by living according
to it, we shall the better understand it; by minding the Practical Contents of
it, we shall have a full Discovery of its Principles and Doctrines.

Lastly, That we may attain to a right understanding of the Sense of Scripture,
that we may have a due Perception of the Meaning of what is delivered here, let
us most earnestly invoke the Divine Aid and Assistance. He that reads this Book
without Prayer, can never expect to be blessed with a complete Knowledge of it.
For it is the sole Work of the Divine Spirit to illuminate our Minds
effectually. There is required the special Help of this Heavenly Instructor to
direct us into Truth: wherefore he is called John 16. 13.
the Spirit of Truth, and 1 John 2. 20.
the Unction from the Holy One, whereby we know all things. The same Spirit
that endited these Holy Writings must enlighten our Minds to understand them:
Which I find thus expressed in the Words of our, Church, Second Homily of the
Scripture.
The Revelation of the Holy Ghost inspireth the true meaning of the Scripture
into us: in truth we cannot without it attain true Saving-knowledg. And a
Learned and Pious Son of our Mother gives his Suffrage in these Words, Mr.
Herbert's Priest to the Temple, or Country-Parson.
Wicked Men, however learned, do not know the Scriptures, because they feel
them not, and because they are not understood but with the same Spirit that
writ them. Seeing then a Spiritual Illumination is requisite in order to the
comprehending of Scripture-Truths, we ought with great Fervor and Zeal to
request it, we ought with a singular Devotion to repair to this Infallible
Teacher, and with mighty Importunity beseech him to Psalm. ^19. 18.
open our Eyes that we may behold wondrous things out of the Divine Law, and to
conduct our Reasons aright in our Enquiry into this Sacred Volume. And He that
commands us to implore his Help, will certainly vouchsafe it to all sincere and
devout Supplicants. The Eyes of our Understanding shall be irradiated with a
Celestial Beam, and we shall feel an internal Operation of the Spirit on our
Hearts, communicating Light and Wisdom. By the Assistance of this Blessed Guide
we shall not miscarry in our Searches and Endeavors: This Divine Book shall be
laid open to us, and we shall have its Mysteries and Depths disclosed to us so
far as is convenient for us; and no rational Man ought to desire any more. Yea,
as it is with some of those that have studied for the Ph^losophick Elixar,
though they attain not to it, yet in their impetuous Search after it they find
out many Excellent Things admirably useful for Mankind, which are a Recompense
of their Labors; so though we may fall short of some Grand Secrets which are
treasured up in this Inspired Volume, yet we shall not fa^l of some Choice
Discoveries that will make us amends for our most laborious Enquiries. We shall
mightily improve our Knowledge, and we shall likewise be under the special
Benediction of Heaven. The Rabbis tell us, that when R. Jonathan writ his
Targum on the Bible, if at any time the least Fly lit upon his Paper, it was
presently consumed with Fire from Heaven. But though this be Romantic, and
after the rate of the Rabbis, yet it is a sober Trutl^ that God will protect
us in reading and studying the Holy Scriptures. Whilst we are thus employed,
nothing shall disturb or hurt us; the Divine Arm will defend and prosper us,
and we shall peruse this Book with that happy Success which we prayed for. In
short, by continual conversing with this Book, which is the only one that has
no Errata's, we shall know how to correct all the Failures of our Notions and
of our Lives: we shall enrich our Minds with a Stock of Excellent Principles,
and we shall be thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: we shall be conducted
to the highest Improvements of Knowledge and Sanctity in this Life, and to the
most. Con^^mmate Happiness in another.

FINIS.
Books written by the Reverend Mr. John Edwards.
AN Enquiry into several (...) Texts of the Old and New Testament, which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a Probable Resolution of them. In two
Volumes, in 8^.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, Vol. I. with a Continued Illustration of several
Difficult Texts throughout the whole Work.

A Discourse con^^rning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, Vol. II. wherein the Author's former Undertaking is
further prosecuted, viz. An Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts which contain
some Difficulty in them.

A Discoeurs concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, Vol. III. treating of the Excellency and Perfection of
the Holy Scriptures, and illustrating several difficult Texts occurring in this
Undertaking.

All sold by Jonathan Robinson, John Tailor, and John Wyat.


