THE DOXOLOGY Approven: OR, The singing Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
in the Worship of GOD, Its lawfulness and expediency proven from the Holy
Scriptures, Councils and Fathers, and the Scruples of the Weak thereanent,
cleared.

BY Mr. ROBERT EDWARD, Minister of the Gospel of Christ at Murrois.

(...). St. Basil in Liturgia. (...). St. Chrysostomus in Lyturgia. 1 Cor. 11.
16. Quod si quis videtur contentiosus esse, nos ejusmodi consuetudinem non
habemus, neque Ecclesiae Dei and Doxologiam respuere. Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the
God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. EDINBVRGH, Printed by
the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Sacred Majesty, Anno
DOMINI, M. DC. LXXXIII.

A



To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Aberdence, Viscount of Farmertin, Lord
HADDO, METHLICK, TARVES and KELLE; Sheriff principal of Edinburgh and Aberdene:
Lord High-Chancellor OF SCOTLAND.
My Lord,
WHatsoever Maxim relating to Religion, albeit it be neither Fundamental nor
Orthodox, yet these Persons who are entangled in Error, and Slaves to their
Corruption; if they fancy that Maxim to be both Fundamental and Orthodox, close
with it in their Judgment, embrace it in their Will, and dandle it upon the
knees of their Affections; yea, they idolize it as fondly and furiously as
these Pagan Ephesians did their Image of Diana, Acts 19. 34, 35. which they
strongly believed fell down from Jupiter; yea, often they lay all the stress of
their Religion upon that their Opinion, and will concenter with none in Love,
but with these that will concenter with them in their Judgment, and cry up
their great Diana with them; nay, they are so transported with their Fancy,
that their Idol-Maxim is esteemed by them one of the noble Parts, and lies so
near to the Heart of Religion, that there is no Salvation but in that way of
theirs, albeit it were a Path never beaten before, and far from the true old
Way: wherefore they think they are obliged in Conscience to separate, and keep
no Church Fellowship with these that are not of their Judgment; hence a Schism
and Separation in Worship, flowing from Separation in Affection, and that from
Separation in Judgment, and when once Altar is reared up against Altar, follows
Sword against Sword, and Camp against Camp, Division and Schism in the Church,
begetting Sedition in the State: Therefore St. Paul, among the wicked works of
the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. has coupled Seditions and Heresies together. This sad
truth is known to the Learned, by many Histories in many Kingdoms; and of the
strong affinity betwixt Schism and Sedition, St. Basil writes most pithily;
Hippocrates (...). Basil Tom. 2. lib. de Spiritu Sancto contra eunomium
Arianum, cap. 30. Sufficiens est inimicitiae causa opinionibus dissentire and
erroris similitudo res est quavis conjuratione fidelior ad seditionis
societatem.
Twins were so near of Nature, that always when the one was sick the other
also; but Church and State are of a nearer union, for these same Persons both
for Souls and Bodies are Subjects and Servants to God in Christ, united by the
same Faith and Worship, in relation to Eternal Happiness, and Subjects also to
one and the same King on Earth, united by the same Laws, in relation to their
civil and external Well-being; and as the Spiritual Concernment and Eternal
Salvation of that Body will more affect it then its short and external
Well-being on Earth, so any Member in that Body disjoynted, in regard of
Spiritual-union, will cause such a stir and trouble, as during the time of its
dislocation, the whole Body will be so tormented, that no civil Bonds will
prevail to compose them: They will brag to sacrifise their Temporal Life, for
their Eternal Salvation; hence arises debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, 2 Cor. 12. 20. then confusion and
every evil work, James 3. 16.

Wherefore as a compassionate Member of the Mystical Body of Jesus, the least
of the sons of Levi, whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseer of a part of the
Flock of God, I have written this little Treatise for information of the
Judgment of the weak Lambs of the chief Shepherd, who being unskilful in the
word of Righteousness, refuse to sing the Doxology, because of their Doubts and
Scruples, which by this Treatise, through the help of God, I have endeavored
to remove, that there be no longer division in Judgment, Affection and Worship,
upon that account.

My Lord, All the Miseries and Confusions in this Land, (more than forty Years
continuance,) began at Schism in the Church, which is well known by sad
experience, and its Tragical History is written with red Capital Letters of
Blood, that he who runs may read it; with the blood of his Royal Majesty, now a
glorified Martyr, with the blood of many Nobles and Worthies, and thousands of
other Subjects: therefore the King of kings, in His gracious Providence, with
his Vicegerent over these Kingdoms, has placed your Lordship in the civil
Watchtower of this Kingdom, to espy and prevent Sedition in the State, and
consequently to have a watchful Eye against Schism in the Church; especially
seeing the great fundamental Maxim of some in this Kingdom, was not only
dangerous to the State consequentially, and by its tendency, but substantially
such.

And seeing the purpose of this little Treatise is for healing and preventing of
further Schism and Error in Judgment, tending to Sedition, I have presumed to
entreat your Lordships Patrociny; for albeit it be little in quantity, yet its
Subject Matter is so glorious, to wit, Singing glory to our infinitely glorious
God; and the duty so unquestionable, that the Universal Church will join in the
Practice with your Lordship, and say Amen; not only the reformed Churches, but
also all these of the Greek and Latin Communion, yea, all Christians to the
ends of the Earth.

My second Attractive, Are the many and rich Talents of Grace and Gifts with
which the Father of Lights has eminently endued your Lordship of knowledge and
prudence, of Piety and Justice, of Zeal to the true Christian Religion, and
Loyalty to his Majesty, by which your Lordships knowledge and deep Judgment, ye
are able exactly to ponder the weight and validity of the Reasons brought to
prove the lawfulness of singing the Doxology, and the levity and weakness of
the pretended Reasons brought against it.

Therefore trusting your Lordship will follow his steps, on whom the Spirit of
the Lord did rest, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
council and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa.
11. 2. And that you will piously observe the holy ways and stately steps of the
Lord's Providence toward you, and so understand the loving kindness of the
Lord, Psalm. 107. Verse. last, and Psalm, 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein; and the slighting of this
pious and pleasant Duty, is a great sin, Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not
the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them,
and not build them up. I am confident, your Lordship with much
Spiritual-pleasure and joy in the Lord, has observed his loving Kindness to
you, as to another Moses drawn out of the Waters, Exodus 2. 10. to be a selected
Servant, faithful in all the House of God, Heb. 3. 5. another Eliakim, on whose
Shoulders the Lord has laid the Government, Isa. 22. 20. and as your Lordships
Father of blessed Memory died a Martyr for his Loyalty to his King, with many
other Worthies; so our Kings Majesty, matchless for Piety in Life and Death,
gave all these Worthies a meeting, in dying a glorious and royal Martyr for the
Liberty of his loving Subjects; and as the wise and greatly beloved Daniel, one
of the children of the Babylonish Captivity, of the seed of the Princes, was so
endowed with gifts and graces by the Father of the Fatherless, that he was
thought worthy to sit Judge in the gate of the Kingdom, Dan. 2. verse. last, So
your Lordship, the son and heir of your Martyr Father, being a Fatherless-child
of the late sad Captivity in Scotland, descending as the righteous heir from
the ancient and honorable Family of the Barons of Haddo, one of the ancient
Families in this Kingdom of Scotland, being cast upon the care of your heavenly
Father, having enabled you by more then ordinary gifts and graces, and advanced
you through many orderly steps of Dignity, has at last caused your Lordship to
sit supreme Judge in that very City and Judgment Seat, where your Father
suffered so sad and unjust a Sentence; therefore shall Men say, Verily there is
a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges in the earth,
Psalm. 58. last verse.

The Fountain of Civil Honor is the Kings Majesty, and that Power and
Privilege he has received from the King of kings, and accordingly, Esther 6.
6. the word of the King was, What shall be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor? but it is sure that the supreme Fountain of this honor
is the King of kings, who gives forth a Rivolet of this Privilege of Honor
to all Kings under Him, so that when the King of kings, by His overruling and
gracious Providence, puts it in the heart and hand of a Christian King under
Him, to set his heart and eye upon a deserving and worthy Person; then the
Glory of Gods stately steps of overruling Providence, and a work beseeming a
gracious and a just King joined together, is conspicuous and notour to every
good Christian within that Sphere of Jurisdiction, and this same is the happy
juncto of the King of kings, and his Vicegerent in these united Lands for
advancing your Lordship: What more suitable then this, for the son and heir of
a royal Martyr Father, to advance the son and heir of a loyal Martyr Subject?
As the Kings of kings is the Giver of every good Gift, so of Riches and Honor,
and the Receiver is obliged to be thankful to the Giver, which thankfulness is
best demonstrate in his improving these Talents to the glory of the Giver, to
the good and comfort of his Neighbor, but the more comfortable advantage is
that to his own Soul, a Spiritual gain of Peace with God, which passes all
understanding, and joy unspeakable and glorious, which is Heaven upon Earth,
and conversing with better then Angels, having his conversation in Heaven,
having the Heart mortified and crucified to the World, and all its Riches and
Honors, which to them are loss and dross, being put in the balance with
Christ, Phil. 3. ^, 8. and as this is rare to be found to be honorable, and
honored of all Men, and yet to be humble, Riches to increase, and yet not to
set the Heart upon them, to abound in Plenty to the Cups running over, and yet
be temperate, and the sensual and inferior Powers of the Soul not to blind and
then enslave the rational Powers thereof is rare to be found, and flows from
more then ordinary Grace; hence your Lordship may well infer, that all the
external Honor and Dignity which the Lord has conferred upon you, which are
good Gifts in themselves (and not to be slighted,) yet they are of far less
value then the inward Spiritual and Heavenly Graces wherewith the God of all
Grace has beautified your Soul.

As it is a matter of sad lamentation to the Godly, and of mourning in secret,
when they see the evil example of great Ones so prevalent upon the lives of
others, as Profaneness to lift up the Horn, and Satan to erect his Throne, and
Piety be Heart-broken, then slighted, then mocked, all which Sins kindle much
Wrath, and brings down sore and inevitable Judgments upon a Land; so in the
contrary, it is matter of great joy to all the Godly in the Land, for which
they render hearty Praises to the God of Heaven, and looks upon it as a token
for Good, (that the Lord will make us glad, according to the days wherein he
has afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil:) even your
Lordships good example, for the good example of the great, is more prevalent
and effectual upon the Hearts and Lives of Men, then the most eloquent Oratry
or convincing Reasons can prevail upon them, for the Orator is not able
constantly to be beating upon the Ears of his Hearers, but will weary on his
part, and the Hearers nauseat on their part; but for the good and holy example
of the pious Life of the Great, is not an exhortation to Holiness once a Week,
or once a Day, but continually without Interuption, and cries aloud without
Noise, and insinuates without Affectation: Therefore, every pious Ruler, first,
and most considers the All-seeing-Eye of his Maker, to whom he must give
account; so in the second place, he considers the Eye of his Inferior
looking upon him, and ready to make the Rulers life and actions his Pattern,
shining with all Grace and Virtue, will be so prevalent and conspicuous, that
it will cause Profaneness to be afraid and hide it self, and cause Piety and
Virtue receive their due estimation and honor, that so the Lord's Glory and
the Kingdom of Jesus may be advanced, and many Souls gained and saved, and thus
the Lord may take pleasure in his People, and yet delight to do us good, and
say, Psalm. 132. verse. 14. This is my rest, here will I dwell for ever, for I
have desired it, and make our land Hephziba and Beula; Which God of gods, and
Judge of all the Earth, as He has multiplied Honors upon your Lordship, so it
is the Hope, Expectation, and Prayer of all good Subjects in this Land, that
your Lordships chief study, and constant endeavor, may be, to promote the
Lord's Glory, by a constant tenor of Piety and Justice, that the mountains may
bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness, Psalm. 72.
verse. 3. that ye may raise up the foundations of many generations, and be
called the repairer of the breaches, Isa. 58. verse. 12.

That the Church and Kingdom may long enjoy your Lordship, as one of their
great Blessings from the Lord; That Mercy and Truth may meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace kiss each other, Psalm, 85. So that by the good Hand of
your God upon you, Truth and Piety, Order and Unity, Peace and Prosperity in
Church and State may abound; that after many good days, ye may obtain that
Approbation, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy
Lord; which is the sincere and fervent Prayer of,

Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, ROBERT EDWARD.
Murrois, the 20. of February, 1683.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 4. Line 29. for who, read which. In the Contens, p. 2. l.
9. for Cor. r. Chr. p. 6. l. 42. for Sam Satanius, r. Samosatenus. p. ibid. l.
last, for Serinium r. Syrmium. p. 13. l. 8. for videbent, r. viz. p. 23. l 43.
for Rowa, r. Tomo. p. 41. l. 25. after (...), add (...). p. 49. l. 18. for
university, r. universality. p. 45. l. 40. for (...), r. (...). p. 65. l. 27.
for his, r. this. p. 73. l. 30. for care, r. cure. p. 80. l. 30. for
Justinianum, r. Institutionum: p. ibid. l. last, for saved, r. received p. 89.
l. 21. for Desert, r. Desert. p. ibid. l. 22. for verse. 29. r. verse. 20. p.
ibid. l. 32. for Sins, r. for their Sin. p. 91. l. 39. for Isa. 4. r. Isa. 40.
p. ibid. l. last, for word or reproach, r. words of reproach. p. last, l. 11.
for Covenant, r. covenanted. p. ibid. l. 17. dele it.

As for other literal Escapes, they are recommended to the discretion of the
Christian Reader. THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
HE whose Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The
Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, even He was truly called Wonderful,
because of His two Natures, and there wonderful, if not also unspeakable union.
(...), inconfuse, inconvertibiliter, indivulse and inseperabiliter, Council*
Chalcedon. Act. 5. Anno Domini 451. Episcop. 630. Quod and confirmatur in
Synodo 6. Aecomen. Constantinop. Anno 681. Epis. 289. non modo quoad Christi
duas naturas, sed and duas in eo voluntates naturales, and duas duarum
naturarum and voluntatum operationes vel (...),. 8. and repetitum.. 9. quoad
operationes.
Counselor, for in Him dwells all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
Col. 2. 5. The Mighty God, the same to us, a Child born, Isa. 9. 6. The
Everlasting Father, and to us a Son given. The Prince of Peace being our Peace,
Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. and Peacemaker, our Ranson and Redeemer, wonderful in His love
to us, whose dimensions passes Apostolic knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. who loved not
His life unto the death, for his love was stronger then Death, who by His death
was the death of Death, Hos. 13. 14. who hated His life being put in the
balance with His love to us. This wonderful Lover and Prince of Peace, died in
bodily (...), ineffabiliter simplex Jesus compositus est Dionys. Areop. lib. de
Div. nominibus, cap. 1. and Cyril. Alex. (...), ineffabiliter and
incomprehensibiliter.
thirst, but His soul thirsting much more for our Salvation; in His last Supper
(which He left in Legacy to the Church His Spouse, as a love Token,) Supper
being ended, He inculcates Love and Union as the badge of His Disciples, John
13. 34, 35. John 15. 12, 17. the same again third and fourth time, and in His
Prayer, John cap. 17. after that His farewell Sermon before His death,
ingeminates His Petitions to His Father, that these whom thou has given me,
may be one, verse. 11. and 21. and the third time, verse. 23. Should not the
Commands and Prayers of a dying Lord, and lover of His Brethren and Spouse, be
highly regarded, and carefully obeyed, backed with the entreaties of the Holy
Ghost by his Penman most pathetically. 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you brethren,
by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that
there be no divisions amongst you, that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind, and in the same judgment, Philip. 2. 2. If there be any consolation
in Christ, if any comfort in love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any
bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, of one mind; So exceeding wonderfully the two
Natures of God and Man were united, to unite Christians to God in Christ, and
in them to one another, and our Savior His body was rent to keep His Church
from rent, His Soul and Body separate to keep His Church from separation; He
prayed before His death for their union, He died to unite them, and the Holy
Ghost, the God of Peace and Love, charges them in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
to be united in one mind, and in one judgment; and yet alace, how many in this
Land, who profess themselves the Brethren and Sisters of Jesus, left their
first Love, and violated this commanded union with their Brethren and Mother
Church of Scotland, who did once hang upon her Breasts, and sucked the Breasts
of her Consolations, Isa. 66. 11. were dandled on her knees, and nursed with
the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. yet too many of these, not only
despise their Mother Church, but also run from her in scattered and confused
Troops, as if they were fleeing in the day of Battle from the sword of the
Pursuer, yea some cry out and swear they will lend their ear no more to their
Mothers Instruction, they will have no more of her Milk, nor eat of her Bread
in the Lords Supper, nor pollute their Children with her Baptism, and albeit
their Mother cry after them with bowels of tenderest Christian compassion, they
answer with disdain, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
then thou, Isa. 66. 5. see what is the Lords answer to these, these are a smoke
in my nose, a fire that burns all the day, and behold it is written, before
me I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense it into their
bosom; That your words to your Mother Church are the same in substance with
these forecited in Isaiah, is clear to any impartial Reader, therefore I
entreat you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, let not that fire and smoke of your
Separation provoke the Lord any longer.

At present I intend not to survey all the particulars of the present Schism,
but only this, viz. the refusing to sing the Doxology in the public Worship of
God, which makes a sad and unchristian-like Rent, for in one Paroch-Church you
may hear the Doxology Christianly sung, but in the next Paroch-Church no
mention of it, non in the wandering Conventicle at the Hill side, or in the Den,
they have gone from Mountain to Hill, they have forgotten their resting place,
Jer. 50. 6. and have forgotten the Doxology, as if they were all
Antitrinitarians, Jews, Turks, or Pagans, yea, and too often in the same
Church-Assembly, both in City and Country, when it comes to the closing of the
Psalm some sing the Doxology decently, others sitting by who did sing the Psalm
instantly turn silent at the Doxology, yea, some are worse, deriding and
scoffing the Singers of it, this among Christians is a lamentation, and shall
be for a lamentation, Ezekiel. 19. 14. tell it not in Gath, but (no doubt) it is
proclaimed at Rome long ago, who rejoice in our halting, and say, aha, aha, our
eye has seen: Aquinas in locum, 1 Job. 2. 19. Erant de Ecclesia sacramentorum
perceptione non charitatis communione, non erant ex nobis predestinatione aut
electione, and ideo ex recessu eorum Ecclesia non est damnificata sicut nec
corpus damnificatur cum humores pravi exeunt de corpore; nam si suissent ex
nobis praedestinatione aut electione mansissent utique nobiscum, i. e.
finaliter mansissent in consolatione fidei, and idem summae part 1. quaest.
23. art. 4. in concl. omnes a deo praedestinati sunt electi and dilecti and
art. 3. post concl. praedestinatio includit voluntatem conferendi gratiam and
gloriam and resp. ad 2. Praedestinatio est causa gratiae in hac vita, and
gloriae in vita sutura imo, Tridentini Sess. 6. can. 15, and 16. Collatis
fatentur praedestinatos ad vitam infallibiliter perseveratures itaque
Tridentini cum Aquinate sunt in hoc puncto Remonstrantibus multo Orthodoxiores,
Lomb. itidem Sent. lib. 1. did. 40. capitulo 1. Nullus praedestinatus potest
damnari at labi and postmodum converti and salvari nam Schisma and Haeresis qua
tales non sunt peccatum istud irremissibile at Ecclesia universalis penitenti
absolutionem nequaquam negavit quum Deus misericors hanc tabulam penitenti post
naufragium concessit cui Doctrinae S^ Claro adstipulatur, Problem. 30. page 255.
But lest the Roman Church insult against us, because some have separate from
our Church, and thence infer that we are not of the true Church, I answer, that
albeit a Church be Orthodox, some may depart from them, and no fault be in the
Church, but in them that separate from her; dare any man impute a blot to the
Christian Church in St. John's days, when there went some out from the
Apostolic Church, when they were not of us, says the Apostle, 1 John: 2. 19.
for if they had been of us, they had no doubt continued with us. 2. I answer,
These who are separate from their Mother Church, and died in that time, I judge
they have repented before the searcher of Hearts, and obtained Mercy, but the
secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. as for these of the Separation as
yet alive, albeit they have fallen, they may arise, they have left their
Fathers House with the Prodigal, but they may repent and return, for albeit
they were bent on their Separation, as St. Paul on Persecution before his
Conversion, so as he did it ignorantly, and therefore obtained Mercy upon his
repentance, 1 Timothy 1. 13: so I judge in Charity, their Separation flowed from
their ignorance also, and therefore is a large door of Hope opened for Mercy to
them upon their repentance; This answer will satisfy the most rational of the
Roman Church. 3. I answer, Blessed be the God of order, who stilleth the noise
of the Seas, the noise of their Waves, and the tumult of the People, Psalm 65.
7. who has reduced the proud and swelling Waters of that deludge of Disorder,
which threatened the overtopping of the Mountains, to abide within their wonted
Channels; I wish these Waters may abate more and as with their Bodies they give
external obedience to Order, so all this Church may be of one Heart and Soul,
keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, it being observed, that
the refusing to sing the Doxology, is the most known Sibboleth, Judge. 12. 6.
whereby these of the Separation are known from these that are orderly, and the
refusing to sing it, proves a demonstration of too strong inclination to
Separation; Therefore we resolve to take pains for its refutation, and if this
opinion of the unlawfulness to sing the Doxology were merely a speculative
question in Divinity, and did not tend to practice, the knowledge thereof might
safely and prudently be kept up from the Vulgar, for many such questions are
wisely kept close within the walls of the Divinity School, which the Vulgar
(although they did hear them dispute in their Mother Tongue) could not
understand them: Not the less in these same questions the learned can dispute
pro and contra, and be of contrary Judgments, and yet keep Love and Charity,
but this Question anent the Doxology tends to Practice, and that in the public
Worship of God, and that not only on the Christian Sabbath, but also on the
Week day, and therefore the refusing to sing the Doxology is a daily stumbling
to the Weak.

If any particular man, or particular metting of Churchmen, although they were
a Body, Representative of many Particular Churches, yet it were Presumption in
them, to press any Duty upon their Christian Brethren, who were not within
their Line of Jurisdiction, but surely the Singing of the Doxologie, is far
otherwise, for it has the Authority, Approbation and Practice of the
Universal Church, more then 1300. Years by past; which (with the Lords
assistance) we shall clear, from Antiquity, for in the 2. Greek Liturgies of
St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom, who both lived in the 4. Cent. after our Lords
Incarnation, (...), Chrisost. Litur. Page 20. grlat. Eandem Doxologiam habet
Basilius in sua Lyturgia.
The Doxologie is to be Seen, and Read unto this day; For these 2. Greek
Liturgies, are used in the Public Worship of God daily, or weekly, sometime
the one, sometime the other, in all the Churches of the Greek Communion, which
contains thousand thousand Christians: In which Greek Liturgies, this Prayer is
to be found in Greek, their Mother Tongue give unto us, That with one Mouth,
and with one Heart we may Glorify, and Sing Praise together, to the most
Honorable and Magnificent Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to all Ages, Amen. The beginning, and foundation of which Prayer, is
indyted by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 6. That we may with one mind, and with one
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. (...).
And according to this Prayer, from the rising of the sun, to the going down of
the same, throughout the whole World, where ever Christianity is truly
professed, the Doxologie is Sung, with one Heart, and with one Mouth unto this
day; except by a few of late, in Britain; whom I entreat seriously to consider
these Questions, from that Text, Romans 15. 6. Is it not God, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, who indyts that Prayer. 2dly. The hearing, and granting of that
Prayer, throughout the Christian World, is it not the blessing of God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, in fulfilling the Christians Prayer, indyted by God
Himself; then dare any Christian deny, that it is lawful to sing Glory to God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with one heart, and mouth: seeing God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, commands and allows Christians to glorify Him, with one
heart and mouth.

Upon consideration of the Blooding Wounds, and Torn Bowels of my Mother
Church, in Christian compassion, I am pressed in Spirit, to speak a word in Her
behalf, which I intend chiefly for two sort of Christians; First, To these Babs
in Christ, and of lesser knowledge, who are obedient to their Mother Church,
and do not forsake this Her Law, Prove. 6. 20. of Christianity, but sing the
Doxologie. Be ye steadfast and immovable, be not drawn away from that Duty, by
the evil Example, or Counsel of any, who would intise or mislead you, to
increase their Sour Leaven, and Prosylits: I declare to you, as an Ambassador
of Christ, that you shall not have cause to repent you, of singing Glory to
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in the Day of your Account, to Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; when the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost shall be with you, and your Grace consummat in
Glory, and your Prayers turned into Hallelujabs: As for these who refuse to
Sing the Doxologie, and think it a Sin to Sing it, or at least, have their
doubts anent it, for want of better Information, these are of three Sorts. 1.
The weak Lambs, who yet are seeking the way to Zion, and to please God in all
good Conscience, to these I am willing to tender the sincere Milk of the Word,
because of the Command of the Great Shepherd of our Souls, John 21. 15. If you
love me, feed my Lambs, these I entreat in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to
consider the danger of an Erroneous Conscience; For St. Paul was once, yet more
zealous then ye are, in a wrong way, of which he gave prudent and Christian
warning to other Zealots, Acts 26. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I
ought to do many things contraire to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing
I also did: of which Erroneous Zealot Jews, he bears record, Rom 10. 2. That
they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge; So of you I judge in
charity, that your Zeal is sincere, and abundant, but the defect is in your
knowledge; and in such a case, the more Zeall, the more danger; and therefore
be not Children in understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Be no more children tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Be aware to
despise, or reject the Light of sound Instruction, and side no longer with
Antitrinitarians, and the like Blasphemous Heretics, all which the universal
Church has declared Excommunicat, as such, from the Communion of Saints, and
forgivenness of Sins, side no more with these Monsters. The God of Truth
reveall His Truth unto you, and give you understanding in all things; for to
you I owe great compassion, and tenderness of bowels: As for the 2d. Sort,
called Christians, to wit, the cunningly painted Hypocrite, and the openly
Profane, I have a word alloted for them, reserved till near the close of the
Treatise.

Here I have an Apology to make to the Learned, who may object, what needed so
much to be written, to prove or defend that Practice, which none in the
universal Church, for 1300. Years did call in question, to whom, in all
humility I reply, these are not written for Information, or Reformation of the
Learned, in this Point, who stand in need of neither, being assured, both of
the Lawfulness, and Experiency of this Duty; but they also know, that there is
too many of late years, in Scotland, who refuse to sing the Doxologie, to whom
I am resolved to become all things to them all, whether weak, or more knowing,
that by all means, I may gain some, for whose cause I have multiplied Arguments
to prove the lawfulness of the Doxologie, having to teach these weaned from
the Milk, and drawn from the Breasts, to whom Precept must be upon Precept, and
Line upon Line, Isa. 28. 9, 10 I hope none will say, that the Holy Ghost uses
either Tautologie, or Battologie, in the foresaid 10. verse, when he doubles
both the Precept and the Line; So I have brought, for Information of these
little Ones, and Lambs of Christ; Reason upon Reason redoubled: For as the
strong should have their stronger Food; So the Bab's their Milk: And some be
more moved with one Reason, and some with another; herein I intending that
great Postorall Duty to do all things for Edyfying, 1 Cor. 14. 26. 2 Cor. 12.
19. And in Citing modern Divines, I have made most use of these, who will be
most acceptable, and convincing to the Refusers of the Doxologie; And if at any
time, (for defense fo Truth,) I bring Proof from any bygone Practice of
themselves, and their way, I here declare, that it no ways to irritat, but to
bear in the Truth with the more power, my purpose being to do all in Love, and
what makes for Peace and Healing. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle unto all Men, apt to Teach, patient, in meekness Instructing those
that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 28. and 25.

That which is not written in the Vulgar Tongue, in this following little
Treatise, in a distinct Section toward the Right Hand, is intended for the
Learned.

Finally, I ingenuously declare, That my first and chief End, is the Glory of
God, and I pray, through the Lords blessing, it may prove the End, and Essect
of the work: In the next place, I intend the furtherance of the Peace, and
Prosperity of my Mother Church, in Clearing, and Removing of mistakes, among
the Children, at least, to make the Rent and Breach less, that the weak might
be strengthened, and confirmed in their Judgment, in their Singing the
Doxologie, that the Scruplous may be informed, the Averse convinced, and
Reclaimed, Contentions and Swellings pacified, and removed, as far as Relates
to the Doxologie, that all with one Heart and Mouth may Sing, Glory to God,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and as my God and Savior was subject to his
Blessed Virgin Mother, and has commanded me to be meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.
29. So in all due humility, as one of the least of the Sons of my Mother
Church, what I have written on this Subject, in submission, I lay it down at
her Feet, fully resolving to obey the Law of my Father in Heaven, which is not
to despise, or forsake the Law of my Spiritual Mother on Earth. Prove. 1. 8. and
Prove 6. 20. That our Father in Heaven may have all the Glory, His Church
Edification, and the Lambs of Christ their Milk, which shall be my desire, and
Prayer at the Throne of Grace.

THE CONTENTS of the Several Chapters.
Chap. I. Proves the great Fundamentality of the Doctrine of the most blessed
Trinity, from the Sacred Scriptures, and illustrateth it by Fathers, and
Councils, and modern Divines; and answers the common Objection. Chap. II.
Contains a Catalogue of the chief Blasphemers of the Blessed Trinity, the
first 400. Years, with the many evils of Sin and misery, that followed
thereupon; and how the Lord from Heaven, and His Church on Earth, gave
effectual and prevalent Testimony against them. Chap III. Contains the rise
of the Arian Heresy, in the Fourth Century their Persecution, and Activity,
their Fashood, Injustice, and Cruelty, and the Testimony, both of God, and His
Church against them. Chap. IV. The unanimous Practice, and Appointment of the
universal Church, for Singing the Doxologie, be Occasion of Satan, and his
Supposts great Opposition to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and in that their War
against God. Chap. V. The cause of the continuance of the Doxologie, in after
Ages, viz. The continuance of the Churches Persecution, and Temptation from
Arians, and other Blasphemers of the Trinity, as Eutichians within, and
Mahumitans without the Church; and the Rise and Growth of the Socinian Heresy,
notwithstanding Gods witness against them, and the Church, and Magistrates
endeavors in many Kingdoms, these Blasphemous Antitrinitarian Heretics,
remained and nested with Anabaptists, and Quakers, all three Blasphemous
Antitrinitarian Heretics, which gives sufficient cause, for the continuance of
the Doxologie. Chap VI. The lawfulness of Singing the Doxologie proven by these
Arguments. 1: Because all Christians are Baptized in the Name of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. 2. They believe, or profess their Faith, in Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. 3. They believe Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be their Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier. 4. Their, Faith, and Hope of Eternal Glory, is from
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 5: God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost made all things,
and especially for His Glory. 6. This Lord of Glory often calls man's tongue His
Glory. 7. From the practice of the Saints and Angels 8. From Gods Command 9.
The Appointment and Practice of the universal Church. 10. The indivisibility of
the Worship we give to God one in Essence, and three Persons Illustrat by
Fathers, and Councils. Chap. VII. The lawfulness of singing the Doxologie,
proven by the induction of all it is Parts 12. from the three Holies Isa. 6. 3.
Chap. VIII. 13, Reason from that Song, Revel. 5. 9. 14. From Gods Command 1
Cor. 16. 20. Illustrat by Councils and Fathers. Chap. IX. 15. Reason from the
necessar Difference of the Christians worship, as in reading of the Word,
Prayer, and Sacraments, they exceedingly-diffet from Christians, shall not then
also be a difference betwixt the Christian singing of Psalms, and the Jews, by
singing the Doxologie. 16. As the Jews in their Psalms of David, close many of
them with a Doxologie, answering to the measure of their Light dispensed to
them, in the Old Testament; So it becomes the Christian to have a Doxologie
answerable to their greater measure of light of the Trinity in the New
Testament. 17. Reason founded upon the signification of Jehovah Elohim, which
is often in the Doxologie of the Old Testament. Chap. X. A Reason given for
singing the Doxologie, satisfactory to every strong Christian, and that born in
also upon the weak Christian, by Scripture Reason. Chap. XI. The Reasons why
the General Assembly was not in power to lay aside the Doxologie, proving their
great reluctance to their own deed, with several other circumstances
alleviating the same. Chap. XII. That invalid Scruple answered, because the
Doxologie is not to be found altogether in one place of Scripture, and the
convenience of singing is proven. Chap. XIII. The many evils that flow from the
refusing to sing the Doxologie. Chap. XIV. An exhortatory conclusion to the
strong and orderly Christian, to receive and embrace with all Christian Love,
and tenderness every weak Christian, who shall return from their wandering in
Error, to live in Order and Unity in the Bosom of their Mother Church.
THE DOXOLOGY Approven.
CHAP. I.
The great fundamentality of the Doctrine of the most blessed Trinity, proven
from the Sacred Scriptures, and illustrated by Fathers, Councils, and Modern
Divines, and the great Objection answered.

AMongst all the Divine In symbolo Athanasil ab ecclesiae universali recepto,
utpote in principio; and fine fidem in trinitate personarum esse necessariam ad
salutem ((...)) his asseritur.

Zanchius de Deo, lib. 1. part. 1. cap. 1.. 2. quaestio de Trinitate, ut est
omnium in Theologia creditu maxim necessaria, ita omnium cognitu dissicillima.

Meisnerus contra Socinianos site probat plurimis argumentis, primum, and
magnum articulum fidei christinae esse unum Deum in Trinitate personarum quibus
argumentis adstipulatur, Hoorn. Beek. Socinianismi confutati. 1. lib. 1. cap.
9. a page 226. ad page 243. and Voetius select. disp. theol. par. 1. page 472.
dogma de trinitate est fundamentale (...); imo fundamentum fundamenti, quia
fundat alia dogmata fundamentalia; quod multis ibid probat, and Melanct. loc.
commun. cap. 27. summa Evangelii erudite comprehensa est in verbis baptismi.

Eusebius Pamphilus in conc. Niceno fatetur symbolum Nicenum paucis solum
verbis differ a symbolo quod inquit nos ab episcopis antegressis accepimus,
cumque lavatro baptismatis abluti essemus audivimus, Socrat. hist. eccles. l.
1. c. 5. and Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 12.

Socrates Hist. lib. 7. cap. 17. Judaeus requirens baptizari, ante baptismi
participationem multis diebus fidem christianam addiscere, cum precibus, and
jejuniis praecipitur, idem cap. 30. lib. 7. gens Burgundorum a Paganismo
conversa petit Baptismum quae post septem dies in eis catechisandis impensos
cum praece, and jejunio votum obtinuere hinc canon. 46. Conc. Laodicen. anno
dom. 364. Baptizandos oportet fidei symbolum discere, and baptizanti reddere.

Symbolum Con. Nicen. anno. dom. 325. Constantinopolitani anno dom. 381.
Chalcedon. anno dom. 451. Symbolum Athanasii, Symbolum quod habet Irenaeus lib.
1. adversus Haeresis cap. 2. primum concilium Toletan. conc. Lateranum in
omnibus praedictis symbolis habetur articulus trinitatis: and tanta cura
Paganos Catechimenos articulum trinitatis docuerunt, ut Lucianus qui vixit sub
Trojano anno dom. 120. formulam catechizandi catechimenos addisceret nam
inducit Christianam siccine Ethnicos catechizantem (licet animo blasphemo) Deum
alte regnantem, magnum, aetherium, atque aeternum fiilium patris, and spiritum
sanctum ex patre procedentem unum ex tribus, and ex uno tria.

Patres Concilii Constantinopolitani anno dom. 383. mittunt libellum Synodicam
Romam at Damasum, aliosque Episcopos ibidem convicatos, in quo exhibent fidei
suae Confessionem Fidei Nicenae consentaneam (...) and consentaneam baptismati
(...), and Nazianzenus his contempora^^us orat. 32. (...).

Socinus anno dom. 1604. scribit epistolam Smaltio itidem Sociniano de baptismo
ut non necessario remittendo, atque ad synaxin excipiendis hominibus vitae
honestae ac probatae religionem christianam professis quamvis nunquam
baptizatis: adeo abhorrent, acfloccipendunt baptismum.

Satan ut fidem nostram ab ipsis radicibus convelleret, partim de divina filii,
and Spiritus Sancti essentia; partim de personali distinctione ingentes pugnas
semper movebat, Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 13.. 21.

Servabat tamen Dominus in Papatu renascituri suo tempore populi semen, manebat
salvus baptismus in Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti nomen; quamvis
perigrinae linguae usu, and multis aliis conspurcatus superstitionibus: manebat
frustra toties oppugnatum unitatis essentiae, and trinitatis personarum
fundamentum, manebat doctrina de duabus Christi naturis, Beza epist. 81.


Mysteries of Christian Religion which it has pleased God in His infinite
Wisdom, Mercy and Goodness, to reveal to His Church on Earth, on which they are
to build their Faith and Salvation, the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity one God
in three Persons, is the first in order, and of great concernment, even the
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. These three bear witness to the truth of all
the Scriptures, then assuredly to this truth also, that they are three Persons
in one Godhead, and among the twelve Articles of the Apostolic Creed, this
Mystery of the Trinity takes up three.

This sacred Mystery is most clearly manifested in our Savior's Baptism, Mat.
3. 16, 17. Luk 3. 21, 22. John 1. 32 33. The Father speaks from Heaven, this is
my well beloved Son, while at the same time the Son is baptized in Jordan and
the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven in the likeness of a Dove, and lighted
upon God the Son, and abode upon Him.

Moreover, The Sacrament of Baptism being ordained of God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, the first Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace; in it all the
Promises of Mercy and Salvation are sealed to Believers, and by it Christians
are solemnly entered into the Church and House of God: so that the Contemner of
this Sacrament debarreth himself from Salvation. Therefore God Himself has
appointed this Program to be prefixed upon the Porch of His Church, that this
Almighty God in whose Name we are baptized, and in whom we Believe, is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and It cannot be supponed, but that these Men and Women
who were Proselyted, and being Pagans before, admitted to the benefit of
Christian Baptism, behoved to take a time to learn the Grounds of their
Religion: therefore the the Doctors of the Church, not only wrote Catechisms
for these young Christians, who therefore, betwixt their first offering of
themselves to the Christian Church, until the time they were baptized, were
called Catechumeni: These Doctors also wrote certain short Sums of Christian
Faith commonly called Creeds, that before these Pagan Catechume in received
Baptism, they were to give a confession of their Faith contained in their
Creed; in all which Creeds, written by the Church, whether longer or shorter;
and in their Catechisms, the Doctrine of the Trinity was a special part, and
accordingly that Synod of Divines at Westminster in their lesser Catechism have
not omitted the Trinity: So the reformed French Church in Geneva have a little
Catechism, containing only twenty one short Questions, on which they examine
these who are at first to be admitted to the Lords Table, which little
Catechism begins with the Trinity, and is bound in with their French Version of
the Bible, printed at Geneva 1567.

The Sacred Trinity being the Program of Christian Baptism, proved the strong
and invincible Fort of the Christian Faith in the Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead, against the Arrians, and other Antitrinitarian Heretics: wherefore
Socinus, who has drunk much deeper in the poysonable Cup of Blasphemy against
the blessed Trinity then the old Arrians, has very slightingly written of the
Sacrament of Baptism.

The second great Mystery of Christian Religion, is, that the Word was made
Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and this the Holy Ghost calls the great Mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh, 1 Timoth. chap. 3. verse. 16. which
Mystery, viz. that the Word, the second Person, God the Son was incarnate, and
not the Father, or the Holy Ghost; this cannot be known and believed aright,
until first we know and believe that there are three distinct Persons in the
Godhead, therefore our Savior, Joh. 17. 3. joins these two together, This is
life everlasting, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent; and the Apostle Paul, Coloss. 2. 2. to the acknowledgement of the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.

If it be objected, that it seems to be a hard saying, That the Knowledge and
Faith in God, and three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in Christ God
and Man in one Person, is necessary to Salvation: Seeing both these are profound
Mysteries, so far above Humane Reason and Capacity, I answer, first, Not only
these two are great Mysteries, but also the whole Gospel is a Divine Revelation
of a continued tract of Mysteries, Mark 4. 11. Romans 16. 25. 26. Ephesians. 3. 9, 16,
19. Coloss. 1. 26, 27. called the great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. for
there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved,
but the Name of Jesus, Acts 4. 12. who is the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.
10. the Author of Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and the Gospel is called the
Knowledge of Salvation, Luke 1. 77. the Word of Salvation, Acts 13. 26. the Way
of Salvation, Acts 16. 17. the Salvation of God, Acts 28. 28. the Power of God
to Salvation, Romans 1. 16. the great Salvation, Heb. 2. 3. so that whosoever
will not believe these Gospel Mysteries, is damned. I answer secondly, that to
Divine and Saving Faith, as such demonstrative knowledge in the Logical Sense,
far less comprehensive knowledge is required; but the Lord condescending to
Man's Humane weak Capacity, accepts of Faith, albeit apprehensive Knowledge go
before it, not always requiring that they know how such a thing is true, but
that howsoever it is true: And because of the mysteriousness of these Gospel
Divine Truths, there is a necessity for a Christian to deny himself, before he
can follow Christ, Matt. 16. 24. deny his carnal Wit and corrupt Reason,
therefore in the Lord's work of Man's Conversion, in which He applys His
exceeding great and Mighty Power, Ephesians. 1. 19. He casts down Imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and
brings into captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.
5. where albeit the Almighty Hand of God is first in order, and chief in the
work, yet the Christian himself, willingly consents to captivate all his carnal
Imaginations and Thoughts, and over the belly of them all, gives the assent of
Faith to the Mysteries of the Gospel, because they are the Truth of God, who is
infinite in Truth, and cannot Lie; for he who piously and humbly captivates his
Thoughts to Christ, will stop the mouth of all Objections of corrupt Reason,
with Abraham, against hope believing in hope, Romans 4. 18. which assent of Faith
gives God far more Glory, then the assent of Science, which flows naturally
from the force of that natural Light, born in by the knowledge of the Cause;
but the assent of Faith is supernatural, being a supernatural Grace and gift of
God, with all its degrees: And because the Mystery of the Trinity, and Christ's
Incarnation, were so high above Man's corrupt Reason, therefore in the first
400. Years of the New Testament, Satan wrought mightily in the Children of
Disobedience, and did find it an easy work to raise up many blasphemous
Heretics, who in the pride of their undaunted Heart, refused to captivate
their corrupt Reason to believe the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation,
which were not contrary to Reason, but above it.

CHAP. II.
This Chapter has three Parts First, a Catalogue of the Chief Ringleading
Heretics, against the Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity, the first 400. Years.
Secondly, The many evils of Sin and Misery, that followed upon these Heresies.
Thirdly, How the Lord and His Church opposed and confounded them.

AS for the Roll of the Ring leading Heretics, after our Lord's Ascension,
(intending brevity) We pass by all the Errors, or Heresies mentioned or
foretold in the New Testament. Matthew. 24. v 9. and 24. Act. 20. v. 29, and 30.
Acts 15. Romans 16. v. 17, and 18. Gal. 1. 6, 7. Col. 3. v. 1. Col. 9. v. 10.
Col. 2. v. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Col. 9. 1. 2 Timothy 2. v. 17, 18. 2 Timothy 3. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 8. Albeit therein be instanced diverse Doctrines of Devils, and
St. Peter foretells, that some would deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. v.
4. and St. John 2 Epist. 4. 3. mentions many Antichrists in the General, and
denyers of Christ, but particularizeth none as such; for Simon Magus, Act. 8.
18. Was a baptized Christian, and falling in the Sin of Simonie in a most gross
manner, was justly and bitterly rebuked by the Apostle Peter: And Ecclesiastic
Hystoriographers record, that thereafter he returned with the Doge to his
vomit, and with the Sow, to the wallowing in the mire; went to Rome, and
turned to his old trade of witchcraft, where he was admired for his Lying
Satanical Wonders (as before his Baptism) he had been admired in Samaria, Act.
8. v. 9, 10. and blasphemously called himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 2 cap. 1. and cap. 12. 13, 14. Ignatius Epistola ad
Tralesios Ireneus, lib. 1. cap. 20. Justinus Martyr Apologia secunda fusius.
Cerinthus blasphemed Christ Jesus to be only a Man, and not the Messia, Anno
Dom. 75. Ireneus, lib. 1. cap. 25. and lib. 3. cap. 3. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 22.
The third Ringleader Heretic Ebion, vented the like Blasphemies; by occasion
of which three Heretics, and their many followers, the Apostle St. John, who
lived to this time, wrote the Gospel, in which his chief intent is to prove, and
maintain against these Blasphemous Heretics, that Christ is God and Man in one
Person. Ireneus lib. 1. cap. 26. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 21. Ignatious epist. ad
Trallianos, Epiphanius heresy 51.
Cerdon Blasphemed, that the God of the Old Testament was not Christ's Father,
Anno Dom. 143. Ireneus lib. 1: cap. 28. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Valentinus, of whom came the Genosticks, rejected the Doctrine of the Sacred
Trinity, and made up a fiction as it were of three Gods, Anno Dom. 145. Eusebius.
lib. 4. cap. 10. Ireneus lib. 1. cap. 1. and alibi passim multis refutat.


Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. ult. Eumcum prioribus refutat, Ignatius, nominatim Epist.
ad Tralianos.
Theodotus, That Christ was only Man, he denied Christ to be the Word, Joh. 1.
1. An. Dom. 194.

Hos refutat Tertul.
Praxeas denied the Trinity, his Followers were called Patripossiani, Anno Dom.
210.

Hos refutat. Tertul.
Melchizedeciani blasphemed, that Melchizedeck was greater then Christ.

Eus. lib. 7. cap. 5. refutatur ad Athanasio.
Sabellius denied the blessed Trinity.

Damnatus in Concilio Antiocheno, Anno Dom. 272.
Samosatenus, denied Christ to be God, Anno Dom. 269.

Eus. lib. 7. cap. 25. Socrat. 1. lib. 1. cap. 17. Exortus est Anno Dom. 276.
eum Augustinius multus and eruditus refutavit.
Manes and his Followers denied Christ, and the Holy Ghost to be God.

Damnatus a 318. Episcopis, Socret. lib. 1. cap. 3, 4, 5. Theodoret, lib. cap.
1. 7. Sozomen lib. 1. cap. 16. Anno Dom. 325.
Arius, denied the second Person of the blessed Trinity to be one in substance,
co-equall and co-eternall with God the Father, he was confuted in the Council
of Nice, his Blasphemy condemned and he Excommunicated, An. Dom. 325.

Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 24. a Basilio magno in disputatione devictus.
Photinius fell unto the heresy of Sabellius and Sam. Satanius, he was
condemned in the Council of Serinium.

Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 35. ab Athanasio and Basillo refutatus.
Macedonius, denied the Holy Ghost to be God, Anno Dom. 360. He was condemned
in the General Council of Constantinople. Anno Dom. 381.

Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 33. in hoc concilio contra Nestorium Cyrillus magnam
sustinuit partem.
Nestorius, denied the Personal Union of Christ's Divine and Humane Natures,
Therefore was condemned by a General Council, at Ephesus by 200. Bishops, Anno
Dom. 431. And being obstinat, was banished by the Emp. Theodosius Albeit these
forementioned Heriticks all Blasphemed the Sacred Trinity, yet none of them,
but were poisoned with more Errors besides, for man's corrupt heart is a too
fertile soil to receive Satan's Inventions.

Di onisius Episcopus Alexandrinus. Eus. lib. 7. cap. 6. Anno. Dom. 260.
One of the Ancients, by reading the Blasphemies of Heretics, did not only
condemn them, but also abhorred them the more; So I wish every Christian
Reader of this Little Catalogue to make the like good use of it, for the
Learned read them at length, in the large Volums, and from this Catalogue, the
Learned may Collect the Reason, why the subtle Serpent, the Enemy of Gods
Glory, and Man's Salvation, was so much set against the Doctrine of the Trinity;
even because of it is great fundamentality, in the Christian Saving Faith.

In the second Part of the Chapter follows the manyfold, and sade evils, both
of Sin and Misery that were caused by these Blasphemous Heretics.

1. The Lord of Glory was in a High Degree dishonored, and greatly provoked to
anger; So that the Learned, and Pious, in there consuming Zeal, and holy
Indignation, did admire the Lords long Suffering Patience; crying out, O God
how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for
ever? Psalm. 74. 10.

2. Too many followed those Blaspheming Heretics, and their Pernicious ways;
and that often in the particular Kingdom, where their Blasphemy was first
invented, and sometimes their Pestilentious Breath spread abroad, and infected
more Kingdoms with their Poison.

3. Satan, and the power of Darkness sometimes seemed to triumph, and
Wickedness to lift up it is horn on high, and the smoke of the Bottomless Pit to
darken the Face of the Earth.

4. Many weak Christians, and tender Lambs of Christ staggered, and stumbled,
being troubled with the Words of Heretics, almost to the subverting of their
Souls, now in a fainting condition, their hearts, being moved as the Trees of
the Wood with a mighty Wind? and many in danger to perish, for whom Christ died.

5. The sade condition of these Flocks, no doubt, moved their Pastors, in holy
Zeal, like St. Paul, to wish these incorrigible Heretics, who did what in them
lay, to destroy the Flock of God, Accursed from the Lord, as they were cut off
from the Church, Gal. 5. 12. even these wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness-for ever, Jude v. 13.

6. Sometime unstable Church men, were Deceived, and Ensnared, who, when
Learned, Eloquent, or both, they prevailed mightily, both in City and Country;
Like that time, when the Great Red Dragons Tail, did draw the third part of the
Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth, Revel. 12. 3 4. Hence a fearful
Rent, and Schism was made in the Church; Hence came Biting, Devouring, and
Consuming one another, Gal. 5. 15.

7. The Jew and Pagan, were hardened in their Errors, and a stumbling block
insuperable laid in the way of their Conversion.

8. The Jew, (and in after Ages the Turk joining with them) did gladly ^rasp at
the opportunity, to increase the Fire of Con^ention, by joining with the
Heretics and Apostats, and strengthening their hands against the Orthodox; And
took the more boldness to Blaspheme that worthy Name by which we ate named,
Iam. 2. 7.

9. The frequent and beautiful meetings of the Flocks of Christ, being Seduced,
Diminished, and Scattered, caused their Faithful Pastors to offend, Mourn and
Lament these of their Flocks that had fallen; Like the Loving Mother, weeping
over, not One only, but Many of Her Children dying together: And to ly^ all
night in Sackcloath, and weep betwixt the Porch and the Altar, to be in great
heaviness, and continual sorrow of heart, and almost to wish themselves
accursed from Christ, for the welfare of His Church, and their Flocks therein,
Romans 9. 21.

10. When sometime the Faction of Heretics grew strong, as in particular of
the Arians, having, by the subtility of the Serpent, obtained the Secular Power
to join, and side with them, and so did many Years Persecute the true Church of
Christ, not only to the spoiling of their Goods Imprisonment, or Banishment,
but also many thousands having suffered Cruel Torments, at last Sealled the
True Faith of Christ with their Blood and Death: Of which Arian Persecution
against the true Church of Christ, we intend hereafter to give you a more
particular account.

Follows the third part of the Cha^ter, wherein we shall give you a Compendious
account, of the Good and Holy Means which the God of Truth, who walks in the
midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, and His Church the Pillar, and Ground
of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Having the Truth dwelling in them, and therefore were
Fellow-helpers to the truth: in this time of Jacob; trouble; Windowing, and
Fiery Trial; The Lord stirred up, and inspired the Learned Doctors of His
Church, to plead the cause of their Mother, against these Wolves and Foxes, who
made Havoc of the Church: which Doctors, in their Generation were Burning and
Shining Lights, did earnestly contend for the Faith once delivered unto the
Saints, Jude 3. Were valiant for the Truth, and suffered it not to fall in the
Streets; but gave those Heretics public Disput, as they found Opportunity;
Refuted them by their Writings, left to the Church in their several Volums to
this Day, wherein they Refuted not only the Heresies that rose in their own
Days, but also all the Heresies that Blasphemers had spread before their time,
and by Painful and Zealous Preaching of the Truth, they Confirmed their
Flocks, and furnished them with Powerful preservatives against the Poison of
Seducers.

Ignatius and Justinus in suis Epistolis Justinus epistola ad Philippenses
Dominus mittens Apostolos jussit baptiz^re in nomen Patris Filij and Spiritus
Sancti (...), and Epist. ad. etc. Philadel-Phienses, (...). quod ad Ignatium in
suis maltis epistolis ad varias Ecclesias perquam erudite omnes Hereticos se
priores confutat, confundit praesertim antitrinitarios (3.) Irenaeus justo
volumine and summo labare scripsit polemice adversus Hereticos se priores and
contemporarios. (4) Cyprianus justo itidem volumine multus est in veritate
christiana stabilienda quam hi quatuor heroessanguine consignarunt.
A second Mean, Beside the thousand thousand Christians that Sealed the
Christian Faith of the Trinity with their Blood, and Death; among them many
Pious, and Learned Bishops, not only defended the Truth of God by their Pen,
and Writings, as a foresaid; but also Sealed that Truth which they had Written,
and Preached, by their Blood and Death; As Ignatius, Justin, Irenaeus and
Cyprian, and many others, who wrote learnedly in defense of the Sacred Trinity,
against Blasphemous Heretics.

The third Means, As these glorious Martyrs, for the Glory of their Lord,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Sealed His Truth with their Blood: So the Almighty,
who only does wonders, appended His own Seall to His own Truth, in their Death,
by many miracles of diverse sorts. First, of stupendous Courage, and Ignatius,
a militibus Romam conductus in Epist. quam ad Romanos praemisit, vehementer
christianos hortatur, Romanos and adjurat ut eorumnullus solicitet magistratum
Romanum ut Ignatium a morte liberate; fassus se exultaturum tormenta, and
mortem pro Christo submenta, and martyrium evadere se ommnino abnuere; sed
instexibiliter desiderare: qualis fortitudo in pluribus martyribus fuit
conspicua.
Joy given them from above, to the Admiration and Confusion of their their
tormenting Enemies. 2dly. Miracles manifested without them in their Death, as
the Learned may read in the Church History; often the wild beasts refusing to
devour them, and sometimes the fire to burn them. Hujus instantia in Polycarpi
martyro commemorantur haec miracula in itinere ad ignem voce e Coelo
confortatur 2. dum stat in igne ingens flamma ad distantiam corpus
circumvallat, quasi sanctum dei attingere renuens ita ut miles illud observans
[flamma crudelior] Policarpi corpus hasta confoderit (3) sancti combusti corpus
suavissimum, and fragrantissimum emisit odorem Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 14.
Yea, 3dly. the Lord wrought many Glorious Miracles at the Graves of Martyrs
after their Death, of which there are many Examples in the Church History.

The Fourth Mean, whereas Solomon says, in the multitude of counselors there
is safety; Therefore the Doctors of the Primitive Church did meet in Councils,
as they saw need, in this or that Kingdom; but sometimes also, they did meet
more solemnly in greater numbers, sometimes 3, or 4. sometimes 600 Bishops
together, besides more then the double number of Presbyters, and these of the
most Learned, and Pious Divines, that were in the Christian World, out of Asia,
Africa, and Europe by long, and perilous journies, crossing Sea, and Land,
beginning with Patres Synodi Nicerni jejunium indixerunt, ut Deus utilitati
Ecclesiarum consultum vellet, Teo: doret in ancorato.
fasting and praying. To which Councils respective, the then reigning Heretics
were Summoned to appear, and appearing were examined anent their Errors, their
Errors refuted, and sometime, yet seldom, themselves converted, but if
obstinat, their mouths stopped; their Errors, and Blasphemies condemned, and
accursed; themselves Excommunicat; and sometimes also Banished by the supreme
civil Magistrate, and for the further confirmation of the Faith of following
Generations, and establishment of the Posterity in the Truth. The Church did
put in register, the proceedings of these famous Councills, whether National,
or General against these several Heretics: As also their several Acts, for
Order and Decency, which Books are extant to this day in great Volumes.

As for these Heretics, albeit the Lord did permit them for a season, to try
His People, if they would cleave to His Truth, or not, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. And that
the approved might be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11: 13: Yet the Lord blessed the
pains of His faithful Servants against them, So that these Storms were turned
to a Calm, and these Heretics wholly made known, and He who sets bounds to
the proud waves of the Sea, set also bounds to Satan's Malice; and put a hook in
the nose of these Blasphemers.

The Fifth Mean, The Lord from Heaven did manifest His Wrath and Indignation
signally against some of the special Ring-leading Heretics, or else by the
hand of the civil Magistrate.

Eus. lib. 2. cap. 1. 13, 14. Egesippus lib. 3. cap. 2. Epiphanius lib. 2. her.
22.
Simon Magus, at Rome, by the help of Devils did flee in the Air; but fell down
and was bruised to death, at the prayers of the Apostle Peter.

Secondly, Elimas the Sorcerer, was by God, miraculously smitten with
blindness, for his Anti christian perverseness, Acts 13. 11.

Eus. lib. 5. cap. 15, 18.
Thirdly, Montanus, and his Prophetess Maximilla hanged themselves.

Eus. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Fourthly, Theodotus by force took his flight toward Heaven, but fell down,
and died miserably.

Fifthly, Buddas or Terebinthus, Nicen through Sorcery did fly up in the Air,
but fell down and brake his neck.

Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Sixthly, Manues a Persian Heretic, the King of Persia caused take off his
skin, flayed alive, filled it with Chafe, and hanged it up at the Gate of the
City.

Socratas lib. 1. cap. 21.
Seventhly, Arius being observed by the Bishop of Alexandria, that he was a
dangerous Heretic and mighty proud, while he is under Process, intends to come
to the Church of Alexandria to morrow, in a presumptuous manner? wherefore the
Bishop, all that night stayed in the Church, with Fasting, and Prayers and
Tears wrestling against Arius; who, to morrow going to that Church, a sudden
Terror of Conscience, and vehement louseness of Belly did assault him, that he
was forced to go aside to the next public Jacks, where all his bowels gushed
out; a fit Deathbed for so vile an excrement of Satan, whose breath had bred
the most deadly pestilency that ever was in the World, whose manner of Death
was a mercy to the World, and a Beaken of his Shipwreck, fixed by the Almighty,
upon the dangerous Rock of his Blasphemous Heresy.

Prosper in chronico.
Eighthly, Priscbillianus, Anno Dom: 400. being, condemned by a Church Council
at Bordeaux for his Blasphemies against the Trinity, with others of his Stamp,
was beheaded by the Emperor Maximus. All the foresaid Blasphemers of the
Trinity, the Lord stigmatized with a miserable death, to the terror of others.

CHAP. III.
Contains the rise of the Arian Heresy in the Fourth Century, their
Persecution and Activity, their Falsehood, Injustice and Cruelty; and the
prevalent Testimony both of God and His Church against them.

AS in the first 300. Years after our Lord's Ascension, His Church was sore
vexed by Ten bloody Persecutions, raised by Pagan Emperors, and molested by
Antitrinitarian Heretics, of which we have given you a short view in the
former Chapter; So in this fourth Century, Satan the Father of Lies, Anno Dom.
324. filled the Heart of Arius (a proud Presbyter in Alexandria) with
Blasphemies against the second Person of the Blessed Trinity, wherefore, the
famous Council of Nice, consisting of 318. Bishops, conveened partly for
examining and confounding of Arius Error in the Year 325. where after long
dispute granted to the Adversary, his blasphemous Error was condemned and he
Excommunicate: Notwithstanding, thereafter his Errors spread like a Gangren,
and that chiefly by occasion of two Emperors Constantius and Valence, whom the
Arians seduced to their Heresy, and so the Arian obtaining the Arm, and
Countenance of the Civil Power to their wicked Faction, they left no mean
unesseyed to increase and strengthen their Party, and spread their Poison,
which we intend to treat of in this Chapter, in these particulars.

First, Their indefatigable pains in conveening Church Councils, Secondly, The
Falsehood and Injustice in their Proceedings. Thirdly, Their hellish Policies.
Fourthly, Their monstrous Cruelty against the Orthodox. Fifthly, The Lord's
witnessing against them, both by His Church and His own immediate Hand of
Justice upon them. To return to the first of these, in imitation of the
Orthodox and true Church, like Satan, they transformed themselves into Angels
of Light, did conveen Councils, sometime in one City and Kingdom, and sometime
in another, as they judged most expedient for their purpose; where they
composed diverse Creeds, but all Heterodox, and differing from the Nicen Creed;
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 32. In fine breviter colligit numerum symbolorum
Arrianorum particulatim and oppidatim novem videbent.
Their first Council held at Tyrus, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 22.
The second at Jerusalem, The third at Antioch, where they composed their first
Arian Creed, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Fourthly, Four prime leading Arians presented to the Emperor a second Arian
Creed, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Fifthly, The Arians in the East sent a long Creed to the Bishops in the West,
which they rejected. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Sixthly, At Syrmium in Illyria the Arians wrote two Creeds, Sozomen lib. 3.
cap. 10. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Seventhly, In a Council at Ariminum, the Arians wrote a sixth Creed, Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 29. Sozomen lib. 4. cap. 16.
Eighthly. At Nica in Thrasia the Arians wrote a Creed, which deceitfully they
called the Nicen Creed, Sozomen lib. 4. cap. 18.
Ninthly, The Arians held a Council at Seleucia in Ifauria, Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 32.
Their last two Councils they held at Constantinople and Antioch, where they
Decree, that the word Substance Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 31.
and Person, of one Substance, of another Substance, all these Ariani multis
pseudosynodis convocatis in quatuor factiones abiere, quarum quaeque priore
insanior, prima factio petit in omnibus symbolis hoc expungendum quod filius
sit patri (...): factio secunda quod sit in symbolis exprimendum filium esse
patri (...), tertia factio filium esse patri tantummodo (...): quarta factio
filium esse patri (...) dissimilem and iri sunt app^llati anomei, and (...),
quod blasphemarent filium esse (...) ex non exist^^^^bus hi express damnantur
in symbolo Niceno and hujus quartae factionis fuit ipse Arius Sozomen lib. 4.
cap. 21, 28.
be expunged out of all Creeds, By all which we may perceive the Arian applying
all his Oars, going to and fro, and walking up and down in the Earth,
compassing Sea and Land to conveen Councils, thereby to frame Mischief by a
Law, to engage and inslave unstable Souls, by the Shadow of a Chruch Sanction,
making Proselyres, strengthening his Faction.

Having spoken of their indefatigable Pains, let us in the second place observe
their deceitful Dealling, their Deeps and Devices, which the Father of Lies
(the old and crooked Serpent) had taught them: First, Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia being justly degraded by that Orthodox Council of Nice, for his
obstinacy in Arianism, and he, together with Arius, banished by the Emperor
Constantine, he wrote to the Emperor a penitential Letter, wherein he
subscrived the Nicen Creed, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 10.
(but with a double Heart,) and so was restored to his Place and Function; and
Arius followed his example, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
both in subscriving and dissembling, remaining in the gall of Bitterness with
Simon Magus, and in the Synagogue of Satan; wherefore shortly thereafter the
Lord purged His Church of Arius, by an extraordinary and horrible death, even
then when he was in the height of his Pride, going to that Church in grandour,
where he had spewed out his Blasphemies against the Son of God, even that King
of Saints, who thought it no robbery to be equal with His Father, commands him
to halt, not permitting him to enter into the House of God to pollute it, but
thrust him into a common Jacks by the way, where the Lord cast out all his
Intrals with his Excrements, and cast him effectually out of His Church, and
stopped his blasphemous Mouth. Notwithstanding all this great and visible
Judgment on Arius, his Brother in Evil (Eusebius of Nicomedia) would not learn
Righteousness, but hardened his heart in Pride, turned an obstinate and violent
Persecuter of the true Church and Saints, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 25.
and chief Leader of the Arian Faction, adding Perjury to his Blasphemy.

Thirdly, As the Arians were Perfidious in their beginning, so in their
Progress, they learned at the Accuser of the Brethren, to turn impudent false
Accusers of the Orthodox Church men, which they acted in these forementioned
pretended Church Counsels; And first, the great Athanasius, who as a divine
Hero, stood in the Breach for the true Church, to whom both the Emperor and
Bishop of Rome deferred great respect in their Letters, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18.
yet him they strived to affront in their Councils, and falsely accuse that he
had cutted off a Man's Hand, which Hand they produced in their Council, having
the Man himself fast in Prison; but by good and remarkable Providence, the Man
escaped out of their Prison, and came to Athanasius in Council, with both his
Hands whole, to the great confusion of his accusing Arian Enemies. Thereafter
they produced an impudent Whore accusing Athanasius of Adultery with her, but
Athanasius so convinced her in the face of the Synod, that she had not a word
to answer: But Eustathius the Orthodox Bishop of Antiochia, him they accused
also of Adultery with another impudent Whore, whom the Arians suborned, and she
did swear it; and albeit the innocent Bishop did constantly assert his
innocence, yet they degraded him, and obtained at the Emperor to banish him;
but thereafter, that wicked Woman (in the just Judgment of God) falling Sick,
and dying in great bodily Torments, confessed her grievous sin of Perjury
against innocent Eustathius, and that the Arians had hired her with a Sum of
Money. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 21.


A fourth instance of their deceit and subtilty, The Arian perceiving by more
then 30. Years sad experience, that the Creed of that famous Council of Nice
had given their cursed Cause a deadly wound, they craftily resolve to conveen a
Council in that same City of Nice, and there write an Arian Creed to their own
mind, and vent it for the old Orthodox Nicen Creed, and so to deceive the
Vulgar: But He whose Throne is in Heaven, had them in derision; for when the
Arians began to conveen in that City of Nice, the Lord sent a great Earthquake,
which caused the Arians (with fear) flee out of the City: Hieronimus ad annum
domini 372.
But that Plot failing them, they hardened their Neck like an Iron Sinew, and
with a Whores Forehead, persist in a like wicked Design; for, understanding
that in Thracia, the next adjacent Country, there is a Town called Nicea,
thither they hasten, and hold their Council, and conclude upon a blaspemous
Arian Creed, deceitfully calling It the (c) Sozomen. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Nicen Creed.

A fifth instance of their Falsehood in these their many Councils, where Satan
had his Throne, and Antichrist kept the Chair; They wrote nine several Creeds,
not all confirming or explaining the former Creed, but some of them containing
Contradictions, of which themselves were ashamed, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25.
for a Liar should have a good Memory; yea, in the last of these Councils they
ratify their Council at Seleucia and its Creed, and cursed the Creed at
Ariminum, because it was not Heterodox enough. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 4.


As we have seen the Activity, Perfidity and Falsehood of the Arian in spreading
their Heresy, so in the fourth place we shall take a view of their Hellish
Cruelty, practiced against the Orthodox and true Church of God: For they
poisoned (with their Arianism) the Emperor Constantius, who began his Reign
Anno Dom. 336. and Valence, who began his Reign Anno Dom. 366. th^se two
Emperors they instigate to raise cruel and bloody Persecution against the
Orthodox during the time of their Empire, of which we shall only mention a few
notable Instances.

First, The Arians at Constantinople raised a great Tumult of Sedition, that
many Christians were trodden under Foot to Death. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 9.


Secondly, The Arian Emperor Constantius having banished the Orthodox Bishop
of Constantinople, the Arians strangled him in his Exile, and the Orthodox
Bishop of Adrianople died in Prison with Torments. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 21.


Thirdly, Great Persecution was raised by the Arians in the Cities of the East
against the Orthodox Christians, by Banishment, spoiling of their Goods, and
sundry kinds of Torments. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 22.


Fourthly, The Arians at Alexandria upon the Lords Day invaded with Arms the
Orthodox, and having kindled a great Fire, apprehended Orthodox Virgins (who,
as they thought, would soonest yield to them,) these they threatened with
Burning unless they turned Arian; but percelving these holy Virgins invincible
Courage, resolute to die Martyrs for the Glory of the Sacred Trinity, they
violently in the open Streets, pulled off all their Clothes, to put them to
shame, and mocked them in their nakedness; but these Virgins being of undaunted
Courage to suffer for the Name of Christ, them the Arians so wounded on the
Face, that their nearest Relations did hardly know them; and forty Men they
scourged with Rods, that some of them died, yet they refused to give their dead
bodies to their Friends to bury; and these who outlived their Scourging, part
of them they Banished, of others not banished, the Chirurgians had great
difficulty to pull out the Thorn Pricks out of their Flesh. At that same time,
the Arians killed more then thirty Orthodox Bishops in Egypt and Lybia, and
banished sixteen more, whereof some died in their cruel usage by the way, others
died in the place of their Banishment; of which Martyrs the World was not
worthy. Socrat, lib. 2. cap. 23.


Fifthly, In Constantinople and the Country about, many Orthodox Bishops were
banished by the Arians, and other of the Orthodox that refused to communicate
with the Arians they cruelly tormented their Bodies, and then scobbing their
Mouths, violently thrust in the sacramental Elements of the Lords Supper, and
that not only of Men and Women, but also of Children, and these who were most
reluctant they detained in Prison and Torments, that so the Arian intended by
this his work to get the honor that the Orthodox did communicate with them,
but profane forcing proved the Arian Communion to be the Table of Devils; yea,
they thrust the Papes of some holy Women into a Chest, and closing its lid, cut
off their Papes with a Saw, and others they burnt off their Papes with a red
hot Iron. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 30. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 14.


Sixthly, The Arians in Alexandria conspired with the Jews and Pagans, and all
three raised great Persecution against the true Christians there; they
apprehended the holy Virgins, stripped them naked as they were born, and led
them through the Streets, obscenely mocking them, and if any Beholder (in
Christian compassion) did speak but one word in their favors, they were driven
away with Wounds; thereafter, many of the Virgins they ravished, some they
killed, and refused to give their Bodies to their Parents to be buried; yea, in
this Tumult the Arian and Pagan committed so great abomination that I am
ashamed to render them in English, Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 20.
a most profane Pagan being a chief Acter of these Abominations, acted both in
the Pulpit, and on the Altar of the chief Church of Alexandria; it was too like
a Stage Play of Satan's divising against God's Word and Worship, the most
profane the Devil could devise, and all this acted in the presence of the Arian
Bishop, whom the Pagan Spokesman thus saluted, O Bishop! who denies the Son of
God, thy coming is welcome to us, Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 22.
our god Serapis embraces thee, and brought thee hither; observe how well the
Devil and the Arian does aggree, like Heart and Joy: This Pagan god Serapis,
had a Church in Alexandria where he was worshipped, and in it a monstrous
great Image, at that time much worshipped by the Pagans there. What true
Christian can read the Perjury, Falsehood and hellish Cruelty of the Arian, and
their atheistical profaning of the Lord's Supper, and not look upon them as
incarnate devils, against these antichristian and profane bloody Arians, who
blasphemed both the Son and Holy Ghost. The Orthodox Church were most zealous
to defend the Truth, and for that cause, to sing the Doxology in their public
Worship, exactly according to the words of the Holy Scriptures: For then the
Arian also kept the singing of their own Doxology, but it was different from
the Orthodox and Holy Scriptures. Now, considering the true Churches hard
condition, when the Arians persecute them, and yet these holy Christians were
most willing to suffer Martyrdom for the Name of Jesus, and also to sing the
Doxology, therein professing their Faith in one God, in three Persons, Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, equal in Power and Glory: Now, I would ask the Christian
now a days, If the Lord in His Providence did put them now in such a condition,
to be persecuted to the death by the prevailing Arian, whether or not they
would be content to suffer Martyrdom in defense of the honor of Christ, and
also with the Orthodox Christian to sing the Doxology? would they both sing and
suffer as these did, who are now singing triumphant Songs to Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, having trod Satan and Arians under-foot; I willingly judge in
Charity to these weak Lambs, they would then with the Orthodox Christians, both
join in singing the Doxology, and also in suffering with them for the Name of
Jesus; Then I ask them again, if they would have sung the Doxology if they had
been going to the Stake to die in desence of the honor of Christ against the
cursed Arian; then have they not as good reason and cause to sing Glory to the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for His merciful Providence to them, who knowing
their weakness better then themselves, has preserved them from such an hour of
temptation, and fiery trial, not suffering them to be tempted above that they
are able: But furthermore, I give you this warning, that if ye affirm with the
three Children, you would sing in your fiery trial, but refuse to sing now when
ye are preserved from it: Look to your selves that ye be not tempting God to
cause you suffer Arian Persecution, that then ye may praise the glorious
Trinity better, which now ye refuse, because the Lord frees you from Arian
Persecution; this sore Trial the Lord avert.

In the last part of this Chapter, we shall observe the Testimony given by God
and His Church in this fourth Century chiefly against the Arian; First, As for
the true Church, they were not deficient to bear witness to the Truth, but as
opportunity served, they conveened Orthodox Councils, and among others, one at
Sardica, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
of 370. Orthodox Bishops, where the Arians Accusations against Athanasius and
other Orthodox Bishops were examined, and all found false and forged. Another
Council at Jerusalem, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Anno Dom. 351. A third at Millan of 300. Bishops, Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 15.
in which Councils they ratified the Orthodox Truth and Nicen Creed; and before
that Anno Dom. 363. a Council of about 200. Bishops at Ariminum ratified the
same Orthodox Nicen Creed.

As the Orthodox Church, during the time of the Arian Persecution,
notwithstanding of all the cruelty used against them, the Churchmen gave
Testimony against the Arian, by Preaching, Writing, and Disputes, and both the
Churchmen and their Flocks by valiant suffering of Martyrdom, and sealing the
Truth with their Blood: So the Lord Himself from Heaven, diverse ways did bear
Testimony against the Arian, and for His Truth; first, in granting Signs and
Wonders to be done by the Orthodox Church in this fourth Century, and in the
Arians hottest Persecution, when in the mean time, the Arians had no Miracles
amongst them, nor did they pretend to any; and although they had pretended to
work Miracles, yet the Arians Miracles had been nothing but Satan's lying
Wonders: But God honored even the persecute Orthodox to work glorious
Miracles; for instance, the Arians having banished some Orthodox Christians to
a remote Island in the Sea, where the Pagans worshipped the Devil, seated in a
Grove, these banished Orthodox Christians first cast Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 19.
out the Devil out of the Pagan Priests Daughter, then converted her and her
Parents, and at last the whole Pagans of that Island to the Christian Faith. So
the Devil could not stand before these Orthodox Christians.

A second instance, Moses an Orthodox Christian was famous for working of
Miracles, who coming to Alexandria, refused to receive Consecration to a
Bishopric from Lucius Bishop of Alexandria, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 29.
because he was an Arian, but reproved him sharply, proving him to be
altogether void of the true Principles of Christian Religion; but that same
worker of Miracles received Consecration from the Orthodox Clergy to the said
Bishopric.

As the Lord did bear Testimony to the Orthodox Christians, and their Faith, by
giving them the gift of Miracles, and not to the Arian, so did that Lord as
Judge of the World declare and manifest His Wrath against the chief Arian
Persecuters in this Century. First instance, Constantius the first Arian
persecuting Emperor, who as he was false to God in turning Arian, so his
kinsman Julian (whom he choised to be General of his Army) turned false to him,
who having rebelled, Constantius leads an Army against him, but died by the way
in Silicia, sore lamenting, and repenting of his Arian Heresy. Theodoret. lib.
2. cap. 32.
Second instance, The other Arian Emperor Valence was Satan's evil Instrument,
perverting the Goths to Arianism, (of which Poison they were not cured some
hundreds of Years thereafter,) Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 27.
and for the Emperors reward, the Goths rebelling, beat him and his Army in
Battle, and he flying to a little Tower, they burnt the Tower and him with
Fire. Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 3. and Hieronimus chronico ad annum 382.
Third instance, The Wrath of God was remarkable in the death of George the
Arian Bishop of Alexandria, (whose cruelty is mentioned in this same Chapter
before, in the sixth instance of the Arian Cruelty, where this Arian George was
Ringleader,) for not many Years after the foresaid instance of Persecution, the
Pagans in Alexandria raised a seditious Tumult against the said George, pulled
him out of the Church by the Ears, tied him to a Camel, then did tear him in
pieces, and burnt him and the Camel to Ashes. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2.


CHAP. IV.
The unamimous practice and appointment of the universal Church, for singing
of the Doxology, because Satan and his supposts mad and stupendous opposition
of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and so warring against God.

THe Glorious Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, being the great fundamental
Article of our Christian Faith, and that Christ is the Son of God, the second
Person of the blessed Trinity; upon which Rock the Christian Church is built,
Matthew. 16. 18. By which Name they are saved, Acts 4. 12 Even the great mystery
of godliness, God manifested in the Flesh, which Mystery cannot be known, nor
believed aright to Salvation, unless we first know and believe that the Son
sent by, and from the Father, was incarnat, and not the Father, John 17. 3. To
this point we have spoken in the first Chapter; Therefore Satan, in the three
first Centuries stirred up most Heretics against the Sacred Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God, to which we have spoken in the 2d. Chapter.
Thirdly, The Arians, who rose in the Fourth Century, being more Active and
Subtle, False, Bloody and prevalent, then any Heretics which were before them,
persecuted the true Church of God, in an Hellish manner, for this cause, the
then Orthodox Church, as they used many good means, for strengthening the
Christians in the Faith, and confuting, confounding of Heretics, as Preaching,
Disputs, Writtings, Councils, and Church Censure, by Excommunication: all which
Means, the God of Heaven Countenanced, and Blessed with good Success: So in
that Fourth Century, the True Church, in their Public Worship did appoint,
that at the close of singing the Psalm, they should sing this Doxology, Glory
to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, in which Deed they have
imitate the Lords own Example, commanding Moses, now therefore write ye this
Song for you, and teach it the Children of Israel, put it in their mouths, that
this Song may be a witness for me against the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 31. 19.
So the Primitive Church perceiving, by sad experience, Satan's incessant malice,
in stirring up Heretics against the Sacred Trinity, and Man's Natural
weakness, and pronness to listen to Error, and believe Lies, especially against
the blessed Trinity, most prudently and Piously aggreed, and unanimously to
sing the Doxology to the blessed Trinity, in the public Worship of God, to be
a Witness against the Arian, and other Blasphemers of the Trinity, and for
Confirmation of the Orthodox, and sound Believers in the True Faith, for
Singing Glory to God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being in it self, a Lawful,
and Holy unquestionable Duty of Christians, albeit there were neither Heretic
to oppose, and Blaspheme, the Trinity, nor Devil to tempt them to that wicked
Deed, then finding both wicked Men and Devils, by Experience, enemies to that
found and saving Truth, makes the singing of the Doxology, besides it is
Lawfulness, and Expediency to be most useful, and edifying for the People of
God, and a strong preservative against Antitri^itarian Heresies.

Here we are not to think, that the Doxology, or praising of the Holy Trinity,
was not used by the Doctors of the Church, these burning and shining Lights,
before and beside the public singing in the Church, for the Sacred Trinity
being the great Fundamental of the Christian Faith, and object of Divine
Worship, these Doctors ordinarily closed their Prayers, or Sermons, or other
Writtings with the Doxology, Anno Dom. 165. Policarpus, Bishop of Smirna (who
had been the Disciple, of the beloved Disciple, St John) dying a glorious
Martyr, in presence of many thousand Jews, Pagans and Christians, ready to
step into the Fire, closed his heavenly Prayer thus, I glorify thee through
the everlasting high Priest Jesus Christ, thy welbeloved Son, to whom with the,
and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory, World without end, Amen. Here this blessed
Martyr not only sealled the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity with his Death, but
also the Blessed Glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Sealled that
same Faith of this Faithful Martyr with many miracles at his Death; of which
we wrote in the second Chapter. Eus. lib. 4. hist. cap. 19.
About the Year of Christ, 190. Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus, Let us
praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who one, is all, and in whom are all,
altogether Good, Beautiful, Wise, and Just, to whom be Glory, now and for
ever. lib. 3. paedagog.
In the Year of Christ 325. The famous Council of Nice having condemned Arius,
and his Blaspheming Associats, for denying the Co-eternity of the Son, and Holy
Ghost with the Father, they writ a Synodical Letter to the Churches of
Alexandria, Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; which they close with a Doxology to
the Sacred Trinity, Thus, By the help of God, the Father Almighty, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, with the grace of the Holy Ghost, to whom be glory for ever,
Amen. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 9.


The Synodical Epistle of the Council of Illyricum closes thus; these things
are inacted to the glory of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for ever. (...),
Sozemen lib. 3. cap. 19. (...).


Sozomen closes the Preface to his Church History to Christ, with God the
Father, and Holy Ghost be Glory for ever, Amen.

(c) Macarius a Churchman in Egypt, who lived in the reign of Constantine and
Constantius, closes his 12th, 16th, and 17th. Homolies with the Doxology.
About the Year of Christ 360. in the Church of Antioch, being a Patriarchall
See at Public Worship, were conveened most part Orthodox, but some Arians
mixed with them, when they came to that part of the Worshhip, which a
Chronologer Nicephorus, Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 9. cap 24. Ait eos cecinisse
Doxologiam ad sinem Psalmodij.
writes, was immediately, after their singing the Psalm, then the Orthodox did
sing the Doxology, Glory to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
according to the Doctrine of the Nicen Council; But the Arians who were with
them in the Church, differing from the Orthodox, sang Glory to the Father, by
the Son, thereby purposing, that the Father was greater then the Son, which
difference in the singing, being perceived by Leontius Leontius tametsi
sordibus Arianae blasphemiae fuit inquinatus tamen eas callide admodum
occultare studuit, Etenim cum clerum, and Laicam etiam multitudinem in duas
parts divisam cerneret Orthodoxos adhibentes conjunctionem and Filio, and
Spiritui Sancto, Arianus vero ante Filium (Per,) ante Spiritum Sanctum (In.)
praeponere; Ipse totam glorisicationem tacitus secum recitavit adeo ut qui ei
proximi; erant solum hanc particulam in secula seculorum audirent, haec
Theodoretus, lib. 2. cap. 24. Ex Athanasio.

Regnante Anastasio diuterius Arianorum Constantinop. Episcopus cum quendam
Barbam nomine baptizare intenderet, and spreta dominica institutione diceret
baptizatur Barbas. (...), hoc dicto aqua in columbethra evanuit Barbas vero
arrepta fuga exivit and miraculum hoc cunctis significavit, Haec scribit
Theodorus lector in collectaveris lib. 2. and Nicephorus calisti, lib. 16.
hist. Eceles. cap. 35.


then Bishop of Antioch, and inclining to Arianisme, putting his hand to his
Gray Hairs, said, when this snow is melted there will be much Mire, by Age, and
Experience, and Humane Prudence, he did foresee the Storm of the Arian
persecution of which I have spoken somewhat in the 3d. chap. of this Treatise,
for the Orthodox did sing the Doxology, according to the Words of our Savior
in the Gospel, in the Words of His Divine Institution of Baptism, Matthew. 28.
19. All three in one manner to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but
the Arian did sing Glory to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost, where,
observe, that the Arian as yet did not altogether refuse to sing the Doxology
upon any pretended reason or scruple of Conscience as some men do now, but it
is like the singing of the Doxology was then performed by the Orthodox with
such Zeall, and unanimity, that the Arian was as yet afraid, or ashamed
altogether to refuse the singing of it, as some now do.

Basil the great, who lived in the Year of Christ 369. in his Book concerning
the Holy Ghost, cap. 27. He writs, that the most ancient Fathers did sing Gods
praise, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to the Word in Baptism, and
these two great Doctors Basil and Chrysostom, who were contemporary Bishops in
the Greek Church each of them wrote a Greek Leturgy, being their Mother tongue,
which both are used at this day, in all the Christian Churches of the World,
that are within the Greek Communion: In Lyturgia, St. Basil prope finem (...).
The one Lyturgy on the Sabbath Days (...):
The other Lyturgy on all other Solemn Days, and in both these Lyturgyes, the
Doxology was, and still is used these 1300 Years without scruple, or alteration
(...).
Gregory Nazianzen in his sixth Orration concerning the Holy Ghost, we worship
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one Godhead and power to Him, be all glory
honor and power for ever and ever Amen.

In the Year of Christ 370. St. Jerome wrote to Damasus, Bishop of Rome, that in
all the Churches of Rome, Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as it was
in the Rome 1. Council. page 625. editionis Parisiensis.
beginning, is now, and for ever, be sung always at the end of the Psalm.

Concilium Vasense provinciase sub Imperio Theodosij inmoris cap. 7. cujus
titulus ac propter haereticorum incredulitatem post gloria, Patri, etc. sicut
erat in principio, etc. semper dicatur, quia non solum in sede apostolica sed
etiam per totam Orientem, and totam Africani vel Italiani propter Haereticorum
astutiam qui dei filium non semper fuisse, sed in tempore caepisse blasphemant
in omnibus clausulis post Gloria Patri, etc. sicut erat in principio. etc.
dicatur, etiam and nos universis Ecclesijs nostris ita dicendum esse decrevemus.
About the Year of our Lord 444. in the Council of Vason, an Act is made,
because of the unbelief of Arian Heretics.

Because not only in the Apostolic See, but also throughout all the East, and
in all Africa and Italy, to guard against the deceit of Heretics Blaspheming,
that the Son of God was not ever with the Father, but began to be in time;
therefore, in all their closings of singings in the public Worship, after
these Words, Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in all these other
Churches is added, as it was in the beginning, so we appoint that the same
Words (as it was in the beginning) be mentioned in the Doxology in all our
Churches also.

Symbolium Nicenium in sine. (...).
Hence we may observe, That this addition (as it was in the beginning, was not
first appointed at Vason, for their Act bears the contrare, that it was used in
Churches far and near, before that time, which Jeromes desire to Damasus
proves: But this Act at Vason gives the clear reason of the addition, viz. To
guard the flock of Christ the better against Arian Heretics, whereof some said
there was a time when the Son of God was not.

Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, one of the chief Fathers in the Nicen
Council, to refute the Arian, brings that Text Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 3.
among many others, John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God, by him all things were made, and if he made all
things, then he was before the world, and also before that beginning, and
consequently Eternal, as that Father reasons well, and St. Basil after him,
for It were nonsense to say that there were priority of time in Eternity; For
Arius said there was a time, when God was not a Father: Therefore the
infallible Theologue of St. John began his Evangell with these words, intending
in his Gospel, to assert Christ's Godhead against two abominable Heretics in
his time, Ebion and Cerinthus at whom Arius had learned his Blasphemies, and
from this same Text, Calvin refutes both the old Arian and Servetus a vile
Blasphemer, his own contemporary, who was burnt at Genevah, for a most
blasphemous Heretic. In the Year of Christ 627. in the third Council of
Toledo, consisting of the Churchmen of Spain, and Galatia inact, whosoever
says not Glory to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost let him be
accursed; by saying they mean singing, For then four hundred years before that,
the Doxology was sung in all the Templet of the universal Church. And so in
this Council, all of them in the close of the same, in the praises of God, they
cried, Glory to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as the Learned may
read in the Tomes of Councils, by this cursing mentioned in this Council, It
appears, they judged, that no Orthodox Christian would refuse to sing the
Doxology, they did not imagine any will refuse except a Heretic.

In the Year of Christ, 633, in the Fourth Council of Toledo, there are some
accused, for rejecting the Sacred Hymns composed by Hilary and Ambrose two
famous Saints, and being received, and used in the Churches, yet these Men
refused to sing them, because they were not in the Holy Scripture, for which
refusal they were Excommunicat, yet these same very Men, did not scruple nor
refuse to sing the Doxology, which was then constantly sung in the Church, at
the close of every Psalm: Hence it is probable, that these men who refused to
sing the Churches Holy Hymns, and were willing to sing the Doxology, did
estimat it of a higher rank, and counted it in with Divine and Spiritual Songs.

(...), etc. Quocirca at mea fert sententia major merces and praemium potius
apud justum indicem reponitur quam veteribus illic martyribus cum illi in
confessa positum reportarent martyrij apud homines existimationem and laurealas
a Deo acceperint suas vobis autem desint in certamine pari a populo collati
honores, Basil tom. 2. Epist. 303. page 1074.
The Learned have observed, that the Arian persecution which was in this Fourth
Century, was more bitter to the Souls of the Saints, and true Christians, then
the Suffering during the ten Persecutions, in the first 300. Years, from Pagan
Emperors: for then the Christian Martyrs received their Crown of Martyrdom
from their Lord in Heaven, with acclamations of praise from all their
contemporary Christians without all malignant murmr, or obloquie; which was a
sharp sput to hasten Christians to run that race; for ingenuous spirits know
what humane applause will do even to the godly, to encourage them to a good
action, and rouse them up to their Duty, even allowed by God, Phil. 4. 8.
Whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise think on these things: But in this fourth Century, the Christian
suffering Persecution, and Death It wat not from Pagans, but from these that
called themselves Christians, even the Arian, who being prevalent, and putting
to Death the Orthodox Christians, yet the Arian cries out, these are not true
Christians, but we; they are justly suffering Death for Errors in Christianity;
Therefore writs the Learned, that the Martyrs in the fourth Persecution their
reward will be greatest in Heaven.

And because this Persecution was so much the sadder to the Orthodox Christian,
and in this Century, the King of Saints, who promised His presence to His
Church on Earth, seemed to be asleep, like that Matthew. 8. 24. while the Ship is
filled with waves: yet in the mean time, though thus he had decreed, to let His
brittle Vessel, and His Disciples suffer a Storm, yet therefore he provided two
excellent Pilots in this Century, and endued them with so great a measure of
Piety, Learning undaunted Courage, and Prudence, that the one succeeding to the
other, in the Eastern Church, where the Arian Storm did most rage; by Dispute,
and Writing, and courageous Sufferings, they faced the Enemy, and kept the
Flock of Christ together. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and after him
Basil Archbishop of Caesarea, both which keep the Still of Great, until this
day; for they got it, because of their worth, Athanasius, even from the Arian
Emperor Constantius, and Basil from the Apostat Emper or Julian: As is to be
seen in both their Letters of record, with St. Basils Letters of sharp rebuke,
which did become a pious Bishop to Julian an Apostat.

As for the Arian, as ye read in this Chapter before, in singing of the
Doxology, shuned to sing it according to the Scriptures, Glory to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, but by the Son in the Holy Ghost, which
was a deceitful Invention, and the Church History tells us the thing it self,
but does not unfold the intrigue and mystery of it; which St. Basil has done
at full length; for that their singing in that their new devised way, was a
subtle trick of the Devil, for under it they couched their Error, and
Blasphemy; only giving Glory to God the Father, and for the Son, considering
him only as the Fathers Instrument, but not equal with Him in Glory, and far
less the Holy Ghost, which depths of Satan are found out by St. Basil, to the
shame of the Arian, of which he writs at large, which the Learned do read.
Basil tomo 2. lib. de spiritu sancto contra Arianus cap. 2, 3, 4, 5. and 25.
cap. 7. 10.
And that they were so obstinat in their Errors, that nothing could prevail to
gain them to sing the Doxology according to the Scriptures, lib. de spiritu
sancto. cap. 25. (...), scilicet isti Citius abjectarent linguas quam hanc
vocem recipeant. and idem cap. 25. Doxologiam Ariani recitat tibi Patri honor
and gloria per unigenitum filium tuum in spiritu sancto, qui sermo nunc
usitatior est istis ipsa, ut ita loquar respiratione, and cap. 29. in orient
Orthoaoxi dignoscunt suos ab Arianis signo Doxologiae.
That they would as soon quite their tongue, as quite that form of Doxology,
which they used: where St. Basil grants, that their way of singing the Doxology
might be exponed in an Orthodox sense according to the Scriptures, but was not
to be suffered in these Heretics, because it was well known they sang them in
an Heretical and Blasphemous sense, against the Son and Holy Ghost.

Yet reflecting upon the Arian practice, observe, that they did choice it as a
less evil, and scandal to sing the Doxology with some change of the short
syllabes of interjections, conjunctions then not to sing it at all; For to have
refused the singing of it, had been a shorter cut; but the reason was, public
shame would not suffer them altogether to seperat from the Orthodox Church, in
that so unquestionable a duty, and so well known a part, of the Christians
public worship, then let these in Scotland, who call themselves Orthodox, and
refuse altogether to sing the Doxology, either one way or other, see to it, and
I beseech them to commune with their own hearts, and smit upon their own
Breast, and amend.

They who are pleased to read the History of the Arian Persecution in this
fourth Century, will perceive the true Church of Christ at a very low ebb, and
under one of the greatest eclipses that ever it suffered since the two
Disciples said, we trusted that it had been He, Luke 24. 21. and the eleven
Apostles were weeping in secret, Mark 16. 10. yet the Lord who brought David
out of his Deeps, and Daniel out of the Lions Den, and the three Children out
of the seven times hotter Furnace, Jonah out of the Whales belly, and Lazarus
out of the grave, and commanded the dry scattered Bones to stand up a strong
Army, Ezekiel. 37. 10. and in the beginning, commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness, and brings Good out of Evil, out of the Churches Persecution and
low condition, brought the more glory to His own Name, and more strength of
Faith to His Church, whereby the Arians ungodly way of proceeding when they got
the Power in their hand, they declared to the World what they were, even not
the true Church of Christ, but the Seed of the Serpent, promoting their
Religion by Injustice and Perjury, the Children of Abaddon and Apollyon, that
Liar and Murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. promoting their hellish
Religion by cruel tormenting and murdering of the Orthodox, they being the
first that usurped the name of Christian, withal, intending to propagate their
Religion with Fire and Sword, which is not Christ's way, nor of His true
Christians, but of Antichristians; and therefore in persecuting of the true
Church, as they had learned it at the Pagans, who lived before them, so they
were glad to take the help of the Pagans who lived with them; therefore the
Lord at last brought the Arian to confusion, and put their lying Lips to
silence, so that ever thereafter, they were hated and abhorred, and despaired
ever to prevail any more as they had done. The second Good which the Lord
brought out of this Evil, was the perfect settling of the Christian Faith, the
Lord bestowing on the Orthodox such Courage to suffer, such Faith and
Constancy, and heavenly Joy, that the Arian was confounded thereby; yea, and
while the Orthodox were suffering for the Glory of God and His Truth, the Lord
from Heaven did approve and seal His Truth which they believed and professed,
even making them His Instruments to work glorious Miracles; but in the mean
time the Arian wrought no Miracle, nor so much as pretended to work any lying
Miracle, as Jannes and Jambres did against Moses, to the hardening of Pharaoh;
wherein I observe the Lord's wonderful Providence so overruling the Arian,
that they did not so much as mint to a Miracle, whereas the Miracles of the
Orthodox Church were undeniable, and thus the Lord from Heaven did dicide the
Contraversie betwixt the Arian and the Orthodox in favors of His Church, and
this the Lord's doing did so confirm them in the true Faith of the blessed
Trinity, that the gates of Hell ever since was not able so to brangle it, and
also His Church which had used the Doxology to the blessed Trinity in their
public Worship before that time, was now more confirmed in their Practice, and
resolute to make use of it without fail ever thereafter, especially in the
public Worship.

In this Chapter at Page 24. we spoke anent the addition put to the Doxology,
mentioned in the Council of Vauson (as it was in the Beginning.) If some object
that that addition is obscure, and does not clearly assert the Eternity of the
Trinity before the World began, as (for ever) in the close of the Doxology
asserts the Eternity of the Trinity for ever after the World: I answer, we have
proven indenyably from the Church History, that these words (as it was in the
Beginning) in the Doxology are taken from the first Chapter and first Verse of
St. John's Gospel, which words, the Holy Ghost there made use of, to assert the
Co-eternity of the Son with the Father, and therefore that same Text was used
by the Fathers of the Nicen Council against Arius, who denied the preceding
Eternity of the Son with the Father; and the Fathers of the Council of Syrmium
against the Arians writ, that Ebion and Cerinthus who were blasphemous
Heretics in the days of the Apostle St. John, denied the Godhead of the Son,
and consequently his Co-eternity with the Father: And therefore as the scope of
all St. John's Gospel is chiefly to prove Christ's Godhead against these two
Heretics, so albeit that first Proposition, in the Beginning was the Word,
taken alone, by way of separation from the following words, will not prove any
Eternity or Co-eternity with the Father; yet join it in coherence with the
following words, and that will clear the right Sense of this Beginning in the
first of John, and the Beginning mentioned in the Doxology, and ye will find it
the same in Sense with the first words in holy Writ, Genes. 1. 1. In the
beginning God made Heaven and Earth; and the same work of Creation is here
attribute to the Son, in the third following Verse, all things are made by Him,
etc. so that the Sense of these words in the Beginning, both in the beginning
of Genesis, and beginning of John's Gospel, is clearly this, as from the
Beginning was the Word, and that Word was God, so is now and ay shall last; And
as in the Beginning all things were made by Him, and so He was Eternal before
the World that He made in the beginning of Time, as in the beginning of Genesis
God was Eternal before the making of the World, for to take any single
Proposition in Scripture, and admit no Sense to it but that which that one
single separate Proposition will afford, and so admit no further clearing of
its Sense from antecedent and consequent Scriptures. The Fathers and Doctors of
the Church have ever made that practice the mark of a Heretic, or at best of a
heretical and contentious Spirit, so that the meaning of the words, as it was
in the Beginning, compared with the rest of the Verse, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was God, is as much in Sense, as if the Doxology had said, as
it was from Eternity is now and ay shall last. Vide sis Basil in Tomo primo, in
locum, 1 John 1. Prove. 8. 23.


CHAP. V.
The cause of the continuance of the Doxology in after Ages, viz. The
continuance of the Churches Perfecution, and Temptation from Arians, and other
Blasphemers of the Trinity, as Eutichians within, and Mahumetanes without the
Church; and the Rise and Growth of the Socinian Heresy, notwithstanding Gods
witness against them, and the Church and Magistrates endeavors in many
Kingdoms, these Blasphemous Andtrinitarian Heretics, remained and nested with
Anabaptists and Quakers, all three Blasphemous Antitrinitarian Heretics, which
gives sufficient cause for the continuance of the Doxology.

IN this fifth Chapter I intend to give a brief account of the Molestation and
Persection that the Church of Christ suffered from the remnant of Arians, and
other Antitrinitarian Blasphemers, beginning at the fifth Century, and
continued to this very present time; therefore I divide it in two parts, The
first containing the Antitrinitarians for 1000. Years, even to the sixteenth
Century; The second part containing a list of the chief Socinians, Quakers, and
others who deny the Sacred Trinity. In the beginning of the fifth Century, the
great Tempest of the Arian Power and Persecution was much abated in the Mercy
of God, who will not suffer the rod of the Wicked to ly always on the lot of
the Righteous, lest the Righteous put forth their hand to iniquity, Psalm. 125.
3. And among the many other means used by the Church against these blasphemous
Heresies, the Lord blessed that mean, especially of the Churches Councils,
especially these General Councils of Nice, Ephesus, Constantinople and
Chalcedon, which (as Beza well characterizeth them) holiest Meetings the Sun
saw since the days of the Apostles, who proved (against these Blasphemers)
terrible as an Army with Banners, and like a Rock on the Sea shore that breaks
all the Waves that violently beat upon it, but it self remains whole and
immovable, Beza Epist. 81. Amplissimus ille Nicenae, Ephisinae Chalcedonensis,
Synodi concessus; quo nihil unquam sanct us nihil Augustius ab Apostolorum
excessu Sol unquam aspexit, qui putat fundamentum omnis Religionis, id est very
Dei cognitionem maximos illos, and praestantissimos angelos Dei non tenuisse,
san^ indignus est qui in Ecclesia Dei sentiatur.
for why, the Christian Faith of these General Councils was built upon the
Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail, Mat. 16. 18.

In this fifth Century and some following, not only the Arians were not
altogether extinct, but still remained a Prick in the side of the true Church,
especially these barbarous Nations, who were not under the command of the
Christian Emperors, to wit, Goths and Vandals, who were turned Arians, and
persecuted the true Church so far as they had Power or Opportunity.

Secondly, In the midst of this Century arose another sort of Heretics called
Eutichians, Blasphemers against Christ, who vexed the true Church about 300.
Years, and sometimes were cruel Persecuters. Beza, Itidem exercuit Ecclesiam
crassissimum illud Eurichis delirium annos plusminus trecentos, subinde
interpolatis, and novo quodam suco oblitis erroribus renascens.


Before the Arian and Eutichian Heretics were crushed, Satan stirred up the
Mahumetans, who are professed Blasphemers of the Sacred Trinity.

In the Year of Christ 441. The Vandals in Africa being Arians, put to death
the Orthodox Christians by cruel Torments. Prosper. in chronico.


Anno Christi 447. arose a mad Monk, who falsely taught the mixing together of
Christ's two Natures, and so destroying them both, he was condemned by a
General Council at Chalcedon, of 630. Bishops, Anno Domini 451. This Heresy
continued the longer, and prevailed the more, because of two Emperors
Anastatius and Heraclius favorers of the same. Evagrius lib. 265. and cap. 8.
and cap. 10. and lib. 3. cap. 5. add 22. and lib. 4. cap. 9, and 10.


Anno 489. Many Orthodox Bishops in Africa were banished by the Arians who were
prevalent there. Palmerius in chron.


Honoricus King of the Vandals, Arians in Africa banished more then 400.
Orthodox Antonius chronico, part 2.
Bishops, some he burnt to Ashes, and some of them their Tongues were pulled
out, who flying to Constantinople, spoke miraculously as if they had had
Tongues. Evagrius lib. 4. cap. 14, and 15.


Anno 448. The Eutichians in Alexandria slew the Orthodox Bishop Proterius in
the Church, harled his body through the Streets, and gnashed his Bowels with
their Teeth. Evagrius lib. 2. cap. 8.


Anno 496. Many Manicheans, who also were Blasphemers of the blessed Trinity,
were detected at Rome, and their Books burnt.

Honoricus King of the Vandalls, in Africa, being Arian, banished at once 5000.
Orthodox Christians. Centuria Magdeburgesis


Anastasius the Emperor, Anno Dom. 520. Commanded not a Trinity; but a
Quaternity to be worshipped, he was smitten with a thunder bolt, and so dyed in
his wicked Reign, 300. Orthodox were killed, and some Orthodox Bishops banished
Petrus Diaconus and Platina.


Centuria Magdeburgensis Centuria 6. cap. 8.
Theodoricus Arian King of the Goths in Italy persecuted the Orthodox there,
and the King of the Arian Goths in Spain slew his own natural Son for turning
Orthodox.

Magdeburgensis Centuri^s centuria 6. cap. 9.
The Goths in Spain, who had long persecut the Orthodox Christian, they were
at last converted to the true Faith Anno 585.

In the seventh Century, the Monotholites, which were a Branch of the Eutichian
Heresy troubled the true Church, for the Emperor Constance was a Monotholite,
and also Heraclius Arjovaldus King of Lambards was an Arian, Anno Dom. 640.

Rotharius another of their Kings was Arian also, in the seventh Century;
beside the trouble that the Church endured from the Eutichian, and Monotholite
Heretics, which were chiefly in the Eastern Church at Constantinople, and
Alexandria, so be the Arians in Italy.

In this Century arose Mahamet, and composed his Alcaran, Anno Dom. 622. In
which Blasphemously they deny the blessed Trinity; These not only spread, and
prevailed mightily in Asia, and Africa, but also crossed the Hellespont, and
molested Greece, both with the Sword, and Blasphemies; yea, also they crossed
the Mediterranian over against Spain, and Italy, at last, Anno Dom. 829. came
over with a Navy, from the Coast of Barbary, and spoiled Rome, and returned to
Africa with the Prey, and again, Anno Dom. 845. Palmerius in chronico.
came over and spoiled Rome the 2d. time, and Anno Dom. 933. came over the
third time, and spoiled Genoa.

In the 7th Century, the Orthodox Church gave Testimony against Heretics, in a
Council held at Rome, Anno Dom. 650. of a 100 Bishops, and upward, where the
Monotholites and the Antitrinitarians were condemned, and another there of 125.
Bishops, and a third at Constantinople, Anno Dom. 681. of 150. Bishops.

And as the true Church gave Testimony against the Antitrinitarian Heretics,
so the Lord from Heaven, by His signal Judgments; For First, Honoricus King of
Vandalls in Africa, an Arian, and cruel persecuter of the Orthodox, was long
tormented with Venomous Boils; at last was consumed with Worms, and so ended
his wretched Life.

Secondly, in this same Century, Theodoricus King of the Goths in Italy a vile
Arian, having murdered an Orthodox Noble Man Senator, named Symachus,
thereafter shortly sitting at Table, the head of a great Fish dressed in a Dish
set before him, which he imagined to be the head of Symachus, and was so
stupefied, that he dyed with fear.

Abaliardus, a professor in Paris, about the year 1143. wrote Blasphemously
against the blessed Trinity, whom Bernard refuted, and then there conveened a
Council of Churchmen in France, where he was confuted, convinced, converted
Caranza folio 258.


In the Year, 1215. in the Council of Lateran, Joachim Abbas his Erroneous Book
against the Trinity, was condemned, to which he submitted Caranza folio 260.


If it be objected, that seeing, in the Church History, and Councils, from the
seventh Century to the fifteenth, there is only mention of two Antitrinitarian
Heretics, and consequently these Blasphemous Heresies being now banished, and
buried; and seeing it is granted, that the Doxology was first appointed to be
sung in the Church, by occasion of Antitrinitarian Heretics, for confirming in
the Faith, the Lords People against their Blasphemies, why then was it any
longer continued after the cause was removed? I answer, because the Church then
perceived, by comfortable experience, that the constant singing of the Doxology
in the Public Worship of God, had proved an excellent mean, to confirm
Christians in the Doctrine, and Faith of the Trinity, and to guard them against
the temptations of Satan, and his supposts, and their own corruption, who were
all yet lying in wait, to blow at the Ashes of the little spunks of the said
old Blasphemies, that seemed to be buried many hundred years before. This is
Calvin's Metaphore, and accordingly it came to pass, for in the year of Christ
1531. Satan did fill the heart, and furnished the pen of a Spaniard Servetus
with the Blasphemies, and black Venom of that Old Serpent, and now we intend
to begin the 2d. Part of this Chapter, and to manifest to every Christian
Reader, that if the universal Church had good cause to appoint the singing of
the Doxology because of the Blasphemies of the Arians against the Sacred
Trinity: So now in this old and doting Age of the World, the Church have much
cause to continue that ancient practice, for the new, and late opposers of this
blessed Trinity in this Age, are more blasphemous then ever the old Arian was,
of which the rise and growth in Europe, we intend to give you a summar account.

First, That Spaniard Servetus being a Physician by profession, traveled 30.
Years in Pole, Hungary, and Transalvania, practicing Medicine, but infecting
Souls with his Blasphemies (a worse disease then all his Bodily Cures) For
which he was first apprehended, and imprisoned at Lions in France, but escaped
Prison there, afterward having written some Books against the Sacred Trinity,
he was apprehended at Geneva, for his Blasphemies, and obstinancy in them, was
condemned by the Magistrate, and burnt quick, Anno Dom. 1553.

Beza Epist 81.
Genevas just punishing of him, is approven by the Cantons of Tygurie Calvin.
Epist. 157.
Scaffusium Calvin. Epist. 158:
Melancton, and Calvin. Epist.
Aecolampadius rcfuts him, and Calvin also, in his Institutiones, and Opuscula,
and Melanthon in his Fourth Volumne, who, in the Year, 1556. writs to the
Vesalians vulgo the Veisle, that if any maintained Servetus Errors, he should
be expelled out of their Town: and Cardinal Hosius one of the three, that
presided in the Council of Trent in his Works, follo, 352. Writs, that Servetus
justly deserved so to die for his Blasphemies, and Beza gives a just but black
Testimony of him. Beza Epist. 81. In unico Serveto revocati sunt ab inferis
Somasatenus, Arius and Eutiches, Marcion and Apollinaris, quod ibidem erudite
probat inductione comparativa.


Servetus, having strongly fermented four Disciples; to wit, Valentinus,
Gentilis, Alciat of Milan, Gibradus, and Blandrata. First, Valentinus spread
his Errors secretly in Geneva, for which, being taxed, renunced them under his
own hand, under pain of perjurie; notwithstanding began to spread them the
second time; for which he was imprisoned, and to be liberat from Prison, wrote a
second Recantation of his Blasphemies; and at the command of the Magistrate,
burnt them publicly with his own hands: Thereafter spread his Errors in
France, and Italy. Arius was but once perjured, but he twice; then he went to
Pole, where he did meet with Blandrata and Alciat his old Companions; which two
had also fled out of Geneva; and these three spread their Errors in Pole two
years, until the King of Pole banished them out of his Dominions; then
Gentilis wandered through Austria, Moravia and Savoy, at last was apprehended
within the confines of the Republic of Bern, and for his doubled perjury, and
obstinancy in his Blasphemies against the blessed Trinity, was judicially
condemned at Bern by the Magistrate, and burnt in the Year of Christ, 1556.
Bucan. loco 1. quest. Sect. 5. Beza epist. 81.
The History whereof is written at length, by Aritius Professor at Bern.

Third Blandrata a Physician, disput often against Calvin at Geneva, thereafter
in Germany, Helvetia and Pole vented his Errors, at last turned Arian, Anno
Dom. 1569. and wrote against the Trinity, Faustus Sosinus in his Book of
Epistles, page 687. calls Blandrata his great Patron, to be ever in honor with
him, but at last Blandrata was brother son, and died Beza epist. 81.
miserably.

The Fourth Alciot turned Mahumitan, and fled to Turkey. Beza epist. 16:


Gilbraldus died of the Pestilence, Beza writes of other two, whereof the one
^rowned himself in a well.

The other Ochinus, how miserable he died, all Pole knew, as writs Beza, and
Cardinal Hosius.

Staucarus in Pole wrote against the Sacred Trinity, which the Orthodox Synod in
Pole condemned, and the Divines of Hidelberg, and Tigurie refuted, and Calvin
also, An. Dom. 1563. and Beza 1568. Beza epist. ad Polonos 28.
An. 1567 a Book written at Alba Julia by the Heretics in Sarmatia and
Transylvania is refuted at large, by Zanchius de tribus Elohim, Georgius
Paulus, Superintendent of the Heretical Churches in the Dioces of Croco, of
whom writs Beza Epist. 81.

Statorius against whom Beza writs Epist. 15, and 16.

Andrew Dudithius, sometime a Bishop in Hungary, and a conspicuous member of
the Trent Council, he left the Roman Church; to him Beza writs his first Epist.
Anno Dom. 1570. both large and loving, yet at last he fell in the snare of the
Transilvanian Heretics.

Sylvanus Pastor in Hydelberg turns Arian, and Traitor against his Prince
Palatine; For these two crimes he was beheaded, Anno Dom. 1522. His Colleague
Menzerus escaping out of Prison, went first to Pole, then to Transylvania, at
last to Constantinople, and there turned a circumcised Turk; he dyed crying,
and roaring most terribly, that the Turks said, they never saw such a fearful
death, and that he was a Child of Satan; and the Reader may think no wonder of
his desperate death, seeing he had renounced his Savior, and Baptism.

Saedelius in Pole denied Christ's Divine Nature, and the New Testament.

Laelius Sosinus an Italian, foresaking the Errors of the Roman-church, Calvine
wrote an Epistle to him, Anno Dom. 1555. of him Beza writs Epist. 81.

Faustus Socinus, his Nephew leaving Italy, came to Tyguri, with his Uncles
Papers, where he spent three years in private Studies, he was of a quick wit,
but too proud, and bold, he confesses in his writs, that he had little Logic,
Greek, or Hebrew, he went to Transylvania, and there spread his Errors, he was
in such repute with these Heretics, that even at this day they are designed
Socinians.

Franciscus Davidis, about the Year 1580. Superintendent in Transylvania, to
that Sect of Heretics, denied that Christ was God, or the Messiah, or should
be worshipped; For which the Prince of Transylvania cast him in Prison, where
he turning mad, dyed in despair, affirming he saw the Devils came to take him
away with them.

Poleologus a Dominican at Rome,, fled to Poland; turned Arian, but was brought
back to Rome, and burnt.

Smalcius Socinian Preacher at Racovia, wrote a large Socinian Catechism,
Printed, Anno Dom. 1608. As Socinus had written another, and still the
Socinians are busy scribbling their Blasphemies, and Printing them, at
Goslavius, Anno Dom. 1613. And Nicolaides Anno. Dom. 1614.

An Advocat at Paris, Anno Dom. 1616. caused Print Abailardus his Blasphemies,
which had been condemned, and accursed, by a Church Council, above 500. years
before.

Anno Dom. 1620 Servetus Books were turned in Dutch, and Printed in Belgia in
which he blasphemes the most blessed Trinity. Triceps cerberus diabolicum
phantasma and illusio.


Doctor Forbes, Anno Dom. 1631. refutes a dissertation of a certain Socinian
then newly written. Instructionum historico Theologicarum, lib. 1. cap. 7.


Anno Dom. 1642. Crellius, Socinian Preacher at Racovia, has Printed a Book
against the Trinity, and after him, Stychmanus.

The Socinians not only increased in Pole, and Transylvania, but also are come
to Belgia, where they consort with the Arminian, For Anno Dom, 1611. The
Orthodox Synod in Pole writs to Paraeus, regrating, that the Socinians in Pole
made much of Arminius; and now the later Arminians are poisoned with
Socinianism, as is clear from the writtings of Episcopius their Chiftain.
Socinanismi confutati tom. 1. page 92.
It was granted indeed, that the Socinians are banished Belgia by public
Proclamation of the States of the Natherlands, yet notwithstanding, many
Socinians lurk there, under the notion of Remonstrants, and Anabaptists, both
which Sects are tolerat there, and who all three join, and agree in many of
their Opinions, as writs Hoorn Beek, Divinity Professor at Utright, Anno Dom.
1650.

Voetius de tolerantia Antitrinitatiorum ministri remonstrantes non pauci in
Socinianis erroribus deprehensi inter quos celebres Hendricus Slatius Adolphus
Venator Gesterani duo, and complures in Zuid. Hollandia. Ann-Dom. 1618. and
1619. Idem Voetius in thesebus de necessitate, and utilitate dogmatis de
trinitate scribit, quod Remonstrantes inter suos tolerent, foverent, promoveant
eos omnes quos Socinianis aut Anabaptisticis Erroribus, aut pejoribus
opinionibus delibutos, probe noverint E. G. Velsingium, Tonbergium.
Anno Dom. 1638. Sartorius a Socinian at Amsterdam wrote a Letter to Adam Frank
Socinian Preacher at Claudiopolis, which the Prince of Transylvania
intercepted, and caused Print, where is written, that in Holland there is a
great harvest of Socinians. (a)

The Socinians do not only lurk, and multiply in Belgia; but which is
lamentable, are creept over to England. Mr. Edwards Ganerene part prima,
Printed at London; Anno Dom. 1646. Writs, That here the Doctrine of the Trinity
by too, too many is called a Popish Tradition, and part, third page 58. Thus he
writs, all men may see, that many in England are Arians, and Antitrinitarians,
he writs also, page 136. a Letter from Holland to London, dated 1646. Here we
burn the Books of the Socinian Errors, and they dare not be sold in these
parts; but at London, is taught Blasphemy against God, and his Christ: and a
Minister in Holland, wrote a Letter, dated October 18. 1646. to some Ministers
in London, that diverse English Merchants were seeking to buy Socinus Works,
and Crellius, etc. from a Stationer in Holland; and when the Stationer
answered, that these Books were prohibit by the States General, the Merchant
replied, nevertheless you may transport them from other Nations, and we shall
give you for them what you will, and the General Assembly in Scotland, Anno
Dom. 1648. Sess. 43. Writs thus, Socinianisme is now spread in England. As for
our sentiment upon the Socinian, there was in the ancient Church two Heresies,
that were most dangerous, and prevalent; First, the Arian, then the Pelagian,
both which the Orthodox Church zealously opposed, and justly condemned; but the
late Socinian has drunk in all the poison both of the Arian and Pelagian, and
much more.

Secondly, That as the Ancient Church did condemn Arius, and Pelagius in their
Councils, and being obstinat, Excommunicat them: So the Ancient Fathers
Athanasius oratione prima contra Arianos multis probat Arianos non debere dici
christianos.

Idem scribit Theodoretus, lib. 2. cap. 16. Fulgentius and Hilarious ad
Imperatorem Constantium.


denied the Arian to deserve the name of Christian, yea, the moderns both
Papists and Lutherians, that wrote against the Socinians, deny them also to be
Christians, the same does Gomarus and Doctor Forbes in his Theological
Instructions, lib. 10. cap. 13, Sect. 14. denies the Socinian Baptism to be
valid.

The Professors of Leyden, Anno Dom. 1598. gave their judgment of Osterodius
the Socinian his Writs, that they led Men very near to Turcism; and Grotius
writing of the Piety of the States of Holland, says, Seeing Heresy is the
Venom of the Church, and that suddenly working, yet there are degrees in
Heresies, whereof some are more hurtful then others, but a worse Heresy then
Socinianism is not to be found; at the very mentioning of which all the godly
should shrink.

Against this Heresy, not only the Civil Magistrate and Church, but also the
God of Heaven by His immediate Hand of Providence has given Testimony; the
Magistrate has put them to death, not only in the reformed Church, but also
the Roman Church: Thus the Parliament of Pole being informed Anno Dom. 1638.
that the Socinians in Racovia had begun to print a Book of Blasphemies against
the Sacred Trinity, Libri titulus, Tormentum Throno Tritnitatem deturbans.
they did take from them their Bibliotheck Printinhouse, and Press, and being
many, banished them the Town: As for the immediate Hand of God upon the
Socinian, it is remarkable both in Temporal and Spiritual Judgments, that some
of them were their own Murderers, and others of them died in Despair, others
renunced Christ and turned Mahumetan.

Thus having spoken of the Socinian, remains a word of the Anabaptist and
Quaker, who also are Blasphemers of the Trinity; That the Anabaptists are such,
the Professors of Leyden are sufficient Witnesses; Profess. Leidens. disp. 23.
in antithesi Sabellius and Praxias, and hodie libertini, and Anabaptistae
quidam, trinominem Deum statuentes, and personarum realem distinctionem
tollentes, modumque tantum patesactionis varium inducentes Patrem incarnatum
passumque revera statuunt.
As for the Quakers, who not only are in England and Jreland, but even some of
them scattered in Scotland; It Is well known by many of their own printed
Pamphlets, and by the Books of others, their mad Pranks, and Blasphemies, and
Disputes against the Sacred Trinity; for instance, The Phanatick History
printed at London, Anno Dom. 1660. page 54. In a public Dispute at Cambridge
they denied the Sacred Trinity, with Blasphemies that I abhor to write; And
Anno Dom. 1657. a Book printed at London, by John Stalham, called the Reviler
rebuked, wherein he refutes Quaker, Richard Fairnworth, who printed and spread
a Pamphlet about that time, wherein he denied the Holy Ghost to be a Person in
the Trinity. Therefore as the Universal Church of old did piously and wisely
appoint and practice the singing of the Doxology, to confirm the Flock of
Christ against the dangerous Blasphemies of Arius, and other Antitrinitarian
Heretics; so to this day the Universal Church do still continue that practice
to guard their Flocks against the Blasphemies of Anabaptists and Quakers, but
especially Socinians, who in horrid and hellish Blasphemies out do the old
Arian.

CHAP. VI.
The lawfulness of Singing the Doxology proven by these Arguments. 1. Because
all Christians are baptized in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 2. They
believe, or profess their Faith, in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. They
believe Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be their Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier. 4. Their Faith, and Hope of Eternal Glory, is from Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. 5. God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, made all things, and
especially for His Glory. 6. This Lord of Glory often calls Man's Tongue His
Glory. 7. From the practice of the Saints and Angels. 8. From God's Command. 9.
The Appointment and Practice of the Universal Church. 10. The indivisibility of
the Worship we give to God one in Essence, and three Persont, illustrate by
Fathers and Councils.

IN the former Chapters, I having described the occasion upon which the
Universal Church did appoint the singing of the Doxology, to wit, The abounding
of Blasphemers against the Trinity, proven in the first three Chapters.
Secondly, The unanimous Agreement of the Church for singing the Doxology in the
fourth Chapter, and the reason of its continuance in the Church to this day,
even because the Church ever since has never altogether wanted some
blasphemous Heretics within the Church, besides the Turk and Jew, both deniers
of the Trinity without the Church. Follows the second part of this Treatise,
which is subdivided thus: First, I prove by many Arguments the lawfulness of
the singing of the Doxology, in the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth
Chapters: Secondly, I answer some Objections in the eleventh, and twelfth
Chapters: Thirdly, I show the many Evils from the refusing to sing the
Doxology; Lastly, I close with an Exhortation to receive with all tenderness,
all that shall return from their Errors.

In this and some following Chapters, I have accumulate Arguments, because, I
supponed I did write to some Christians weak in Knowledge, I say weak in
Knowledge, because I am loath to judge that any Christian strong in Knowledge
will deny its lawfulness, unless their Judgment be strangely overclouded by
prevalent Prejudice, and if any such there be, we have also brought Arguments
for their perusing: We begin with Arguments for the Weak.

All who are baptized in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to them it is
lawful to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But all Christians are
baptized in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; therefore, to all
Christians it is lawful to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Second Reason, All who believe and profess their Faith in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to them it is lawful to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
but all Christians throughout the World believe and profess Faith in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, therefore it is lawful to all Christians throughout the
World to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Third Reason, All who believe or profess that God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is their Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; to them it is lawful to sing
Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But all Christians believe and profess,
that God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is their Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier; Therefore, etc.

Fourth Reason, All who believe, hope, and profess to enjoy eternal Glory in
Heaven, from and with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to them it is lawful to sing
Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But all Christians believe, hope, and
profess to enjoy eternal Glory in Heaven, from and with the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; Therefore, etc.

Fifth Reason, God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, made all things for His own
Glory, and Man's chief end is to glorify God, the first words of the lesser
Catechism of the Westminster Synod; Therefore it is lawful for Man to glorify
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in a Song.

Sixth Reason, God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost has given to Man his Tongue and
Speech, that therewith he may glorify God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
Therefore, often in the Book of Psalms, Man's Tongue is called his glory, Psalm.
57. 8. Awake up my glory. Psalm. 108. 1. I will sing praise with my glory. Psalm.
16 9. My heart is glad, my glory rejoices; which glory, the Maker of the
Tongue (Acts 2. 26.) expones to be the Tongue, in these words, My heart did
rejoice, and my tongue was glad. Psalm. 30. 12. That my glory may sing praise
unto thee, and not be silent, O Lord my God: Shall then, Man's Tongue, his
glory, be commanded silence by Man, and not to sing glory to God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, when his Maker gave him his Tongue to sing glory to his
Maker.

Seventh Reason, That which is the practice of the Angels, and of all the
Saints in Heaven and Earth, is lawful, but to sing glory to God Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, is the practice of the Angels, Luke 2. 14. The heavenly host
sang glory to God, and Rev. 5. 13. All in Heaven and in Earth did sing glory to
God.

Eighth Reason, That which is commanded of God is lawful, but to sing glory to
God is commanded by God, I prove the assumption, Psalm. 96. 1, 2. These
commanded, Sing unto the Lord, and verse. 3. declare his glory, and verse. 7, 8.
give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name. etc.

Ninth Reason, That which has been the constitution and constant practice of
the Universal Church these 1300. Years without scruple, or refusal, and still
retained in all the reformed Churches, after their purgation from Idolatry and
Superstition, that is lawful; the same Argument is used by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
16. to stop the mouth of the Contentious, to wit, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.

Tenth Reason, Rationis fundamentum illustratum. Justinus Martyr, in
expositione fidei sive unam, duas, vel tres personas proferamus, necesse est
animo semper possidere (...) de Patre Filio, and Spiritu Sancto.

Athanasius lib. de communi essentia Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, cap.
00 quod non sunt tres dii (...). Idem in Symbolo (...).

Basilius magnus lib. 5. contra Eunomium cap. 15. (...), licet haeretici
disrumpant sese non tamen disrumpetur Trinitas.

Nazianzenus Orat. 40. Quae est in sanctum baptisma (...). Idem Orat. 37. (...).

Ephiphanius Haeresi 62.. 3. (...).

Haec eadem est doctrina communiter Scholasticorum Alensis in summa Theologiae
part 3. quest. 3. membro 1. Articulo 3. Aquinas 2. 2. quest. 81. articulo 3.
and quest. 84. articulo 1. Et Franciscus a Sancto Claro in expositione
confessionis Anglicanae, Orat. 28. negat unam personam divinam praecise sumptam
esse terminum formalem adorationis latriae, sed deitatem primario, and personas
ut identiscantur cum essentia.

Calvinus Institut. lib. 1. cap. 13.. 2. Si non consideramas tres persanas in
deitate, nudum, and inane duntaxat Dei nomen sine vero Deo in caerebro nostro
volitat, and. 6. ubi in Scripturis fit simplex Dei mentio, and indefinita non
minus ad Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum pertinet nomen hoc quam ad patrem. Et.
20. In eundem sensum Amesius meduil. lib. 1. c. 6.. 26. Equalis honor omnibus
personis divinis equaliter a nobis debetur.


That which is commanded by God is lawful; but to sing glory to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, is commanded by God; Therefore, etc. I prove the minor, the
glory commanded by God, and given to God is indivisive, and due to all the
three Persons equally; so says the lesser Catechism, they are equal in Power
and Glory, and whenever a Christian sings glory to God, then it is not only
lawful, but also necessary that in the thought that Christian at that same time
shall ascribe that glory to all the three Persons, which if he do not, he is
worshipping an Idol, and not the true God; then, whatever thought of a
Christian is lawful and commanded, it is lawful for him to express that thought
with his Tongue then when he is singing glory to God, and lawfully and equally
in his Mind is giving that glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, then it is
lawful for him at that same time to give that glory expressly with his Tongue
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for all the Worship and Adoration that the
Christian gives to God, should, and is rightly given to God, one in Essence,
and three in Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who all three have one
Almighty Power, one Will, one external Action, in hearing our Prayers, and
granting our Requests, and therefore the Worship given to them is indivisible,
therefore Perkins says well, writing on Matthew. 6. verse. 9. We should worship
the whole Trinity conjunctly, and not one Person alone, and when we name God
alone, we should in our mind worship the three Persons also; Then upon the
sound and infallible Doctrine of Christianity as no Christian dare deny the
lawfulness of singing Glory to God, so upon the same ground, and as infalliby;
no Christian dare deny the lawfulness of singing Glory to God Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.

The ninth Reason in this Chapter being taken from the Custom of the Church,
and that in Imitation of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11. ver. 16. For in this
present Case, the duty being proven lawful, according to the Word of God,
which we have done in the former eight Reasons; the practice of the Church (if
the Apostles Argument hold good) is sufficient warrant to clear the Conscience,
of every particular Christian, for doing of the duty; therefore, albeit we have
handled before somewhat of the Antiquity, and Universality of this Practice, in
singing the Doxology, and using it in our Devotion, yet for further clearing of
that truth, and satisfaction to the scrupulous, we shall clear it yet more from
Antiquity; St. Basil, who was mighty in the Scriptures, and a Son of thunder
against the Arian in his time, and so took occasion to write of the Doxology,
being the great badge, and standard of Christinaity against the Arian, writs
thus, Basil tomo 2d. lib. de spiritu sancto, cap. 29. consuetudinem psallendi
Doxologiam habemus acceptam ab antiquitate Patrum and proavorum, page 218.
citat non solum Irenaeum, sed and Dionysium Alexandrium, ad Dionysium Romanum
his verbis scribentem, congruenter nos forma a Senioribus accepta concordibus
votis Patri, and filio Domino nostro Jesu Christo, cum Spitu sancto sit gloria,
and impertum in secula seculorum: imo testatur Clementem cujus multe extant
Epistolae adeo que Apostolis contemporarium fuisse usum Doxologid, and
Originem, and Africanum Historicum, and Gregorium Thaumaturgon, and Firmilanium
in suis libris, quod ad suam praxin lib. de Spiritu Sancto, cap. 7. page 157.
de seipso ita scribit, (...).
That he received the Custom of singing Glory to the Father, as an Heirship
from his Fathers, learned it at him that baptized him, and cites many of the
Ancient Fathers, even to the days of the Apostles that used the Doxology, and
that the Fathers before him did appoint it to be sung in their Kirks, and as
this shows it is antiquity, so he writs accordingly of his universality, that
from the East and the West, Mesopotamia and Cappadocia, Nations, and Cities
long before his time, and the memory of all men used the Doxology.

But if it be objected, that yet it is uncertain when the Church first began to
sing the Doxology in the public worship of God, and therefore it is to be
rejected, I answer, First, The duty being lawful, and iufallibly grounded on
the Word of God, so it cannot be denied, but the using of it is very Ancient,
in the Church of Christ. 2d. Answer, by the light of Nature, and Law of
Nations, a constant good Custom, long practiced many hundred years without
control, or any apparent evil in the practice thereof, turns into a Law, Basil
de spiritu sancto. cap. 27. (...).

Quod si glorificandi modum veluti scripto non traditum rejiciant proferant
nobis fidei professionis probationem de scripturis Calvinius institut. lib. 2.
cap. 16. 18. hacttenus symboli Apostolici Orationem secutus sum, quia dum
paucis verbis capita redemptionis perstringit, vice tabulae nobis esse potest,
in qua distinct and sigillatim respicimus, quae in Christo attentione digna
sunt, Apostolicum autem nuncupo de authore interim minime solicitus, Apostolis
certe magno scriptorum veterum assensu ad scribitur, sive quod ab illis in
commune conscriptum, ac aeditum existimabant, sive quod compendium istud ex
doctrina per eorum manus tradita, bona fide collectum, tali elegio confirm
andum censerunt, neque vero Authori dubium est quin a prima statim Ecclesiae
origne adeoque ab ipsis Apostolorum soeculis instar, public, and omnium
calculis receptae confessionis obtinuerit, undicunque tandem initio fuerit
profectum, nec ab uno aliquo privatim fuisse conscriptumvere est quam simile ab
ultima usque memoria sacrosanctae inter pios omnes authoritatis fuisse constet;
quod unice curandumest, idextra omnem contraversiam positum habemus totam in eo
fidei nostrae historiam succincte, distinctoque ordine recenseri nihil
autemcontineri quod solidisscripturae testimonijs non sit consignatum: quo
intellecto de authore vel anxie laborare, vel eum alioquo digladiari nihil
attinet, nisi quiforte nonsuficiat certam habere spiritus sancti veritatem, ut
non simul intelligat aut cujus ore nunciata, aut cujus manu descripta fuerit.


for universal practice, answers to univeral voices, that all who practice it,
are content that it be a Law, and as it is so in the State, by Analogy, it is
so in the Church, therefore St. Paul does not reason from a Church Canon, he
says not we have made an Act in the Church for such a thing to be done, but
only this, the Church has no such custom, therefore, would he say, this is as
strong as a Church Act. 1 Corinthians. 11. 16. I am glad that the Synod of Divines
did not reject the Apostolic Creed, but has retained it at the end of their
Shorter Catechism, albeit they cannot tell no more then Calvin when it was
first written, or made use of in the Church, but confesses it Orthodox,
lawful, and consonant to the Scriptures, and very ancient, and in all these it
aggrees with the Doxology, then if you retain your Creed, albeit none tell who
first wrote it, or when it was first made use of, so I plead for the Doxology,
that same privilege, that albeit it cannot be proven from Scripture, when it
began to be used, yet it having all the good properties of the Creed, should be
retained in the Church as long as the Creed.

Yea, seeing the Creed retains the style Apostolic, because of it is great
Antiquity, so some of the learned incline to think, that the Doxology is also
of Apostolic antiquity, for that it was used in the Church long before the
Nicen Creed. It was proven by Basils words, and Athanasius, who was a young
Presbyter at the Council of Nice, and there a great refuter of Arius, yet long
before he dyed, Basil writs diverse Letters to him, Epist 47. And diverse
following reverencing his Gray Hairs, but so as they were Bishops contemporary,
and Bazil writs, that the Doxology was used in Europ, and Asia long before the
Council of Nice even past the memory of Man, and seeing in the Primitive Kirk
many Catechumine Men and Women were solemnly Baptized in their public worship,
who had chiefly learned in their Catechism the Doctrine of the Trinity, and
gave a confession of it at their Baptism themselves, and in that their public
worship were always sung holy Hymns to God (as the learned know) what more
probable then that these, especially the Catechumeni who were now Christians of
understanding, as they were Baptized presently in the name of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and gave a Confession of their Faith, in Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, that they also in their public worship did sing Glory, to that Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose name they were newly Baptized.

Some asks the question, upon what Text of Scripture the Doxology is chiefly
founded, for answer: It has two parts, to wit, The three Persons of the
Trinity, which are the object of that worship: Secondly, the Glory given to
them, which is the Act of worship in the Doxology, accordingly, the giving of
Glory to God is founded on many Scriptures, but there is one full, and express,
Romans 11. the last verse, Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen. But seeing the object of the worship, in three
distinct Persons of the Trinity is most clear in the Words of the Baptismal
institution, Matthew. last, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; therefore with Athanasius, Bazil, and the rest of the
Greek Fathers, we think that the Doxology is chiefly grounded upon that Text in
Matthew. It is true, some of the Learned would build it on that Text, Romans 11.
And that because they allege the three Persons of the Trinity insinuate here,
which though it Lombardus lib. 1. senten. distinct. 36. capitulo 3. putat cum
Augustino in lib. 1. de trinitate, cap. 6 in loco praedicto 11. capitis ad
Romanos indigitari distinctionem trium personarum: astibi certum est to loco
non satis perspicuum datur fundamentum fidei trium personarum trinitatis, and
pro argumento invincibili quod Eunomius Arianus istam textam citat, ut patet
Basilei, lib. 1. contra Eunominium dum dat confessionem suae fidei, page 7.
Credimus inquit, in unum Deum, ex quo sunt omnia, and in unum unigenitum dei
filium eundem verbum dominum nostrum Jesum Christum per quam sunt omnia, and in
unum Spiritum Sanctum paracletum. Haec Arij confessio fidei in trinitatem
subolet hunc locum ad Romanos and ipse Arianus prius rumperet quam consiteretur
se credere in Patrem Filium and Spiritum Sanctum aut ita proferret Doxologiam,
ut scribit Basilius.
were granted, that the three Persons are there insinuat, yet the other Text
being full and express, and the strongest Bulwark against the Arian, therefore
that Text in Matthew, is the chief ground for the Doxology, for to glorify God
according to that Text in the Romans is so general, that the Arian could easily
subscribe to such a Doxology.

CHAP. VII.
The lawfulness of singing the Doxology, proven by the Induction of all it is
Parts 12. from the three Holies, Isa. 6. 3.

IN this Chapter we prove by Induction, that all the Parts of the Doxology are
in the Holy Scriptures, from whence we deduce this Reason; that Divine Glory
which in the Holy Scripture is given to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that same
Divine Glory is lawful to sing to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we prove the
assumption, that Glory is given to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Romans 11. v.
last, To God be glory for ever, 1 Timothy 1. 17. To God be honor and glory forfor
ever and ever, Amen. 2 Timothy 4. 18. To God be glory for ever and ever, 1 Timothy 6.
v. 16. To God be honor and power everlasting for ever, Jude v. last, To God be
glory now and for ever, Amen. Galat. 14. 5. To God and our Father be glory for
ever and ever, Amen. and the same Words Philip. 4. 20. Secondly, Glory to God
through Christ, these words you shall find, Romans 16. v. last. Ephesians. 3. 21. Heb.
13. 20, 21.

Thirdly, To Christ be glory now and for ever, Amen. 2 Peter 3. v. last, Revel.
16. Revel. 5. 12. He is the Lord of glory, 1 Corinthians. 2. 8. James 2. 1. He is
crowned with glory, Heb. 2. 9. The Lords glorious branch Isaiah, 11. 10.

The Holy Ghost, Pet. 14. 14. The Spirit of glory is glorified.

Thus we have proven from Scripture these parts of the Doxology, Glory to the
Father, to the Son, and Holy Ghost, for now and ever: There remains one word to
be cleared in the Doxology, to wit, As it was in the beginning, for clearing of
which, we wrote in the end of the fourth Chapter, that these words were added to
the Doxology, because of Arian Heretics, and that in the fourth Century, when
Arius denied that the Son was with the Father from all eternity, but affirmed
that there was a time when the Son was not, and these Ancient Doctors of the
Church, knowing that the first Words in St. John's Gospel, in these three
Verses, were indicted by the Holy Ghost, and written by the Apostle John his
Penman, to assert the Co-eternity of the Son with the Father, and that against
Ancient Heretics, who lived in the Apostle St. John's time, and were
Blasphemers of Christ, the Church therefore has made choice of that same Text,
as fittest against the Arians Alexander Alexandriae Episcopus Concilij Niceni
Membrum Arij Blasphemijs infensissimus, in sua Epistola ad omnes ubique gentium
fratres scribit Arium asserere tempus aliquando fuisse cum filius Dei non
esset, quod sic refutat in initio Evangilij Joannis. In principio erat verbum,
itaque non erat tempus cum non esset Socrates lib. 1. cap. 3. and Syrmiense
concilium in symbolo damnat eos qui dicunt, erat tempus, aut seculum quando
(...) non erat: ibidem anathemate 25. Si quis dicat Christum ex quo, ex Maria
natus est initium accepisse, ut Deus esset anathema sit, ut Samosatenus, Ebion,
and Cerinthus.
Thus have we cleared, that all the Words in the Doxology, are express
Scripture, and according thereunto; and if any object, that it follows not to
be lawfully sung in the Church, except it were in Scripture, all contiguous
together as one of the Psalms of David, to these in this place, I only give
this Answer, That the reformed Church of France, in their public worship sing
the Apostolic Creed turned in Meeter, and is therefore printed, and bound in
with their Psalm Books, and yet that Creed is far less continued Scripture
then the Doxology. And the Learned know, that the Church of France is famous
not only of old time, for many glorious Martyrs before the Council of Nice,
but also in the beginning of Reformation from Popery. Origines, in hunc locum,
Is. 66. 3. ait hic trinitatem insinuari Athanasius, tom. 1. operim page 154.
255. (...). proferunt glorificationem, dicentes sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, tres
personas perfectas ostendunt, and sub una voce Dominus unam substantiam
declarant idque (...), in confuse, and indivise subinnuens, nec Angelos nec
Homines debere nec audere colere essentiam divinam, and non una colere tres
personas ut supra probatum, hoc idem Athanasius ait detestandos ac procul
abigendosesse Arianos dicentes ac si ipsi interfuissent angelos illos in primis
vocibus exclamandi sanctus maxima voce usos esse, in secundis autem non tam
magna voce, in tertia, adhuc submissiori, ac primam sanctificationem propriam
legittimamque esse, secundam autem inferioris notae, tertiam adhuc gradatim
deterioris conditionis esse. In eandem sententiam scribit Caesarius Gregorij
Nazianxeni frater dialogo primo responsione ad interrogationem 13. Epiphanius
in ancorato 10. and 26. (...) hic hymnus Isaiah. 6. 3. quem Gre. (...) vocant
canitur in liturgijs Basil, Chrisostom. and Gregorij, ut Damascenus, lib. 3.
Orthodoxae fidei, cap. 10. interpretatur quod ter sanctus, sit tribus personis
trinitatis (...); and in ordine baptismi secundu^ Aethiopes habetur Sanctus,
Sanctus, Sanctus Pater, Filius and Spiritus Sanctus, nunc and semper, and in
secula seculorum Amen. Anno Dom. 451. Hic hymnus trisagius in Council oecumen.
Chaledon. 630. Episcoporum fuit cantatus, and inter actu hujus Concilij
refertur; and postea Ecclesia universalis to hymno est usa, ut colligitur ex
Constantinopolitana Sinodo. 5. Praesidente Menua ejus sedis Patriarcha, ubi
Petrus Gnapheus Antiochiae Episcopus damnatus quod in suae Ecclesiae Lyturgia
Heretice trisagio, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus addidisset qui pro nobis
crucifixus est, ubi per ter sanctus interpretantur, tres Personas Trinitatis,
ut videre est in Epistola monitoria ad eundem Gnapheum, prioribus consentiunt
Theodoretus sermon, 2do. de curandis Grec. affecto. Cyrillus in tum textum,
Augistinus sermon 38 de tempore, Et haec eadem est sententia theologorum,
modernorum Calvini institut, lib. 1. cap. 13. Is. 6. cap. 11. and 15. and 28.
Zanchij tomo. 1. lib. 1. cap. 2. Isa. 6. cap. Seraphim occinunt Patri Filio and
Spiritui Sancto, quod etiamsi Antitrinitarij Transilvanij negent, hunc textum
nunquam mihi eripient. Polani syntagmate lib. 9. cap. 15. Professores Leidenses
disp. 7. thesi 16. Bucan. loco 3. 7. Ames. meduli. lib. 1. cap. 5 17.
The second Part of the Chapter containing the twelfth Reason, it is taken from
Isaiah cap. 6. v. 1, 2. 3. The Prophet Isaiah in a vision saw the Lord sitting
on a Throne, and the heavenly seraphims crying one to another holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. Here the learned
prove, that this song is sung to the Sacred Trinity, as if these Seraphims had
said, Holy Father, Holy Son, Holy Ghost; for that same Lord of Hosts, in the 8.
v. speaks in the plural number who will go for us, just so, Genesis 1. 26. And God
said let us make man after our likeness: which speech the learned agree to be
spoken by the Sacred Trinity. Secondly, We shall prove that glory to the three
distinct Persons of the Trinity is meant here, First, That glory to the Father
is meant none will deny, no not the Arian, nor Socinian. Secondly, we prove
that glory to the Son is also meant here, for God the Son was also here, for
the Prophet Isaiah saw His glory here, which is proven, John 12. 41. The
Prophet Isaiah saw Christ's glory, and spoke of Him even then, when the Lord
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, Verse 40. which commission
Isaiah received, Isaiah 6. 10. after he had seen Christ's glory, then if God the
Son was here, the 2d, holy is to him. Thirdly, the Holy Ghost was here, which I
prove, it was the Holy Ghost here which spoke to the Prophet Isai. 6. 9. The
Lord said, go tell this people; but Acts 28. 25. That same Lord is the Holy
Ghost; well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto our Fathers,
saying, Go unto this people and say, hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, etc. Then seeing the Scriptures prove the three Persons expressly
were here, it cannot be denied, but the three holies were to the three Persons;
therefore the Doctors of the Ancient Church, and universal Councills, and
approven Orthodox Divines, unanimously teach, that here the Seraphims in their
Chore are singing a Doxology to the blessed Trinity, and consequently this
Doxology is a Scripture Song, therefore the Divines of Westminster Synod, in
their Notes upon Revel. 4. at the 8. Verse singing the like three Holies with
them, in the 6. of Isaiah 3. Verse, which they also quoat, and coment thus;
They contiually praise God, and set out the Trinity of the Persons in the
Godhead.

Did not the Angels, in this 6. of Isaiah sing the Doxology to the Glorious
Trinity? The universal Church in their General Council have taught so, and
also practiced accordingly, The Fathers, both before, and after that Council,
with Calvine, and the rest of the reformed Church teached so, and the Synod of
Divines in their Notes on the Revelation teached so; will ye not then go along
with the Universal, and Reformed Church, or will ye go along with the Synod of
Divines on the Revelation; to that Synod you gave the Credit to draw up your
Creed, or Confession of Faith, and Catechisms, and will ye not give them credit
in the matter of the Doxology, that the Heavenly Seraphims sang Glory to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shall the Angels come from Heaven to Earth, to
give you a good example to sing the Doxology, will neither the Universal Church
on Earth, nor Angels in Heaven move you to follow their holy example, I answer,
it will move all these on whom that Judgment has not fallen, pronounced,
Isaiah 6. 9, 10. Hear indeed, but understand not, make the heart of this people
fat: As ye love your Souls, bewar of that Judgment, which is my prayer for you
at the Throne of Grace.

CHAP VIII.
13. Reason from that Song, Revel. 5. 9. 14. From Gods Command, 1 Chr. 16. 20.
Illustrat by Councils and Fathers.

THe thirteenth reason is taken from the 5. Chap. of the Book of Revelation,
thus collected; John the Divine saw a vision in Heaven, and heard them sing a
new Song, verse. 9. continuing to the end of the Chapter: and verse. 13. Every
creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as
are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, blessing, honor,
glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. Here the university of singing is so great, that it
comprehends the universal Church of all Christians, yea, of all the Angels in
Heaven, and all Saints in Heaven and Earth, both the Church Militant, and
Triumphant. 2. What are they singing? Blessing, honor, glory, and power. 3. To
whom do they sing this Doxologie? I answer, to him that sits upon the Throne,
and to the Lamb: And that the weak may better understand that there are two
Persons of the Godhead distinctly expressed here, for them more clearly
distinguished in the 6. verse. In the midst of the Throne stood a Lamb, who came
and took the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne, Verse.
7. And that both the Father and the Son sat upon the same Throne, Revel. 3. 21.
at the end, I am set down with my Father on his Throne. And Revel. 22. 3. and
1. verses, both the Throne of God and of the Lamb, and not Thrones. But the
weak may say that the Holy Ghost is not named in this Song? To whom I answer,
that it is the Doctrine and Faith of the universal Church, containing all
Christians, from the of the Sun to its going down, Athanasius lib. 1. de
Communi essentia trium personarum probat Trinitatem sedere in Throno,
Nazianzenus Orat. 26. Docet Spiritum Sanctum esse Patre Filioque, (...), and in
Lyturgia Graeco Tomo 2. Bibliothecae Patrum Graec. Latin. page 112. Ita Deum
invocant, (...), expers principii Trinitas impartibilis essentia eidem incidens
throno unitas.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one and that same glorious God sit and reign
conjunctly upon one and that same glorious Throne in Heaven, according to the
lesser Catechism, There are three Persons in the Godhead, equal in power and
glory: So that here while they sing glory to him that sits upon the Throne, the
Holy Ghost is also necessarily to be meant, and lawfully is to be expressed,
according to the orthodox Doctrine in the former reasons. Seeing then all the
Saints and Angels in Heaven and in Earth join in this Song with a loud voice,
what a pity is it that some Christians should refuse to join in singing this
Doxologie, yea, abhor it as a sinful action, and by shuning it, think they
abstain from evil? I beseech you in the fear of the Almighty consider that
word, Isai. 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil.

The General Assembly of this Church, Anno Dom. 1647. at Edinburgh, August 28.
Sess. 25. did ordain Mr. Zachary Boyd to turn the Scriptural Songs (beside the
Psalms) in the Old and New Testament in Meeter, for the use of the Church, as
Mr. Zachary himself professes in the Preface to the said Songs, Printed at
Glasgow, Anno Dom. 1648. But this Song in the Revelation 5. 9. I find not among
the Scriptural Songs; why he omitted it, the reason I know not, but this I
know, the Holy Ghost calls it a Song as expressly as any in the Bible. 2. The
singers are all Christians. 3. The Subject is solemn, and the duty undeniable
to all that call themselves Christians. Mr. Zachary Boyd in his Letter to the
Ministers of Scotland, of the date, Glasgow, 27. of February, 1648. (which
Letter he prefixes to his Scriptural Songs which he turned in Meeter) says
that the Church having the use thereof, may in obedience to the Apostles
Precept, Ephesians. 5. 18. In Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, make melody in
their heart to the Lord.

The 14th reason that we bring, is from 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Give unto the Lord the
glory due unto his Name; whence with a little Explication the lawfulness of
singing the Doxologie may be proven: And first, from Christ's words in his
Divine Institution of Baptism, Mat. 28. verse. 19. Baptize all Nations in the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; So according to Christ's
words, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is the Name of God; then seeing we are
commanded to give glory to Gods name then to give glory to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. And if any would foolishly cavil here are three names, let this
suffice to stop their mouth, that God who is truth it self has called it, in
the Name, in the Singular Number, and not Names, in the Plural: Justin. in
expositione fidei (...), in doctrina baptismatis unite nobis Patris and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti, unum nomen traditum est Athanasius, lib. 1. de unita
Deitate Trinitatis, ad Theophilum in eundem sensum and Gregorius, Nazianzenus
Oratione 40. quae est in sanctum baptisma, (...), Epiphanius haeraesi 62. 4.
(...), in uno nomine Trinieas appellata Arium refellat idem in Ancorato, 22.
(...) Trinitas in uno nomine nominata Gaudentius sermon 14. non ait in
baptismi institutione in nominibus sed in nomine quia unum Trinitatis est nomen
and Ambrosius, lib. 1. de Spiritu Sancto, cap. 14. in baptismo unum nomen quia
unus est Deus, Augustinus lib. 3. contra Maximinianum, cap. 22. unum nomen quia
hi tres sunt unum. Fulgentius ad Felicem notarum, cap. 2. nomen unum Deitatis
quod triplicari non potest idem observant. Lombardus and Aquinas.
Therefore the Doctors both of the Greek and Latin Church have piously and
learnedly dived into the mysterious cause of this one Name, and with one
consent they agree that it is to teach the unity of the Essence, together with
the Trinity of the Persons, then for our purpose, if Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost be the Name of God, and three distinct Persons in the Godhead are to be
known and believed necessarily to salvation by all Christians who are baptized
in that Name; and seeing God in his mercy and goodness has made Baptism a
Seal, applying to Christians benefits of unspeakable value, given by Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, shall it not then be Gods due from man, and man's duty to
God, to give God the glory due unto his Name, even to this his Name, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, yea, and to sing it; for proof of which, amongst many
Texts take the 23. Verse of the foresaid Chapter, 1 Chronicles. 16. Sing unto the
Lord all the earth. So that from these three Texts, 1 Chronicles. 16. 23. and 29.
with Mat. 28. and 19 I collect this conclusion, all baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, should sing Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: and if any object that 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. by Gods name is meant himself, I
answer, be it so, but God himself is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Now Christian, when you have read these reasons, I entreat you to lay them to
heart, especially the first nine, being most plain, and ponder in each reason
the first two sentences, which no Christian will or dare deny, albeit he know
no more but the common grounds of reason, and Christianity: and if you grant
both the first sentences, and yet deny the third sentence following on that
reason, then know that truth has got the victory, and you are convinced: And
if you assent not to sing the Doxologie, ye detain the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. and rebel against the light, and hate the light,
John 3. 20. And they who wilfully harden themselves, would not embrace the
truth, albeit Christ the wisdom of the Father were Preaching it unto them,
unless he did apply his Almighty gracious power, as he did to Saul in his
conversion, Acts 9. ver. 5, 6. Which he does not ordinarily on those that
harden themselves, and close their eyes against the light, darting in upon
their understanding; for he resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble
and lowly. The Apostle speaks of unreasonable men, by which are meant the
unbeliever, and unregenerat; For the true believer his saving Faith clears up,
and fortifies his reason: Therefore if thou be a furnished and true believer,
and grant the truth of the first two sentences of any one, or all the reasons,
then thou will assent to the third sentence, which is, to sing Glory to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and if thou find thy heart inclining to consent,
then blow at that spunk that is kindled in thy soul by the Holy Ghost, and go
to thy knees in all humility, sincerity, and self-denial, and beg of him to
lead thee in all truth, and to show thee the good and the right way, and
whether it will tend more to the glory of God, to sing Glory to the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, or to be dumb and silent, and say in your heart, I will
not sing glory to God, even when my Fellow Christians are singing it.

Do you believe with all your soul that God sent his Son from Heaven to earth
to bring you from earth to Heaven; that Christ suffered the sorrows of death
and hell, to save thee from endless torments, and will ye refuse to sing glory
to him for so doing and suffering for you; If a poor brother of Jesus were
asking an alms from you, and you would not give him one mite, and yet would say
at that same time to standers by, if that poor man were going to Prison, I
would give him a great sum of money to relieve him, would they believe you, or
rather laugh you to scorn? So when you are desired to sing glory to the blessed
Trinity, and ye refuse to do it, who would believe you that you would suffer
tormenting flames for the glory of that blessed Trinity. I know you will say
you have some reasons why you refuse to sing the Doxologie, but ye would have
no reason to refuse martyrdom? I answer, your corruption, that prompts you
with excuses to refuse to sing the Doxologie, which is the easier duty, would
furnish you with more excuses to shun burning; so that ye who will not give God
his due honor, to sing glory to him, it is too like would never suffer
martyrdom for him, and so the true ground of your refusing is want of true
Faith, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake.

As for your pretenses and excuses you bring for not singing the Doxologie, lay
it to heart, that your excuses which your prejudged Conscience it may be
accepts of, so as to give you a seeming and deceitful peace for a time; yet
trust not that he who is greater then your Conscience will accept of these
excuses, which in this life men who are blind, and partial Judges in their own
cause thinks to be good and relevant. Our Savior in the Gospel gives a list of
excusers of themselves, but the Judge of quick and dead tells the true reason
which the excusers would not have told, Mat. 22. 5. they made light of it: But
I entreat you make it not a light thing to refuse to sing Glory to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; for these reasons I have set before you are founded on the Word
of God, by which we shall be judged, and your pretenses and excuses in that day
will be burnt with the hay and stubble, 1 Cor. 3. 12.

CHAP. IX.
15. Reason from the necessary Difference of the Christians Worship, as in
Reading of the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, they exceedingly differ from
Christians, shall not then also be a difference betwixt the Christian singing
of Psalms, and the Jews: by singing the Doxology. 16. As the Jews in their
Psalms of David, close many of them with a Doxology, answering to the measure
of their Light dispensed to them in the Old Testament, so it becomes the
Christian to have a Doxology answerable to their greater measure of Light of
the Trinity in the New Testament. 17. Reason, founded upon the signification of
Jehovah Elohim, which is often in the Doxology of the Old Testament.

TAke three Reasons more to be pondered by the judicious and unbyassed
Christian, The first is thus grounded, the Worship of God consists in two
parts, either God speaks to us, or we speak to God; God speaks to us in the
Word, read, or exponed by Preaching; We speak to God by Prayer, suiting things
needful to Soul and Body, or by Praises of His infinite Excellencies, and for
His Benefits. These two last, to wit, Petitions or Praises, are either done
without Song or in a Song; but so it is, that God in His infinite Wisdom and
Goodness has made the Christian Worship in the New Testament to differ from
the Jews Worship in the Old Testament, in fullness, clearness, and
comfortableness; they had only the Old Testament, we have the New Testament
added to it; they had the Old Testament read and exponed by the Churchmen and
Prophets, we have Old and New Testament both read, exponed and preached more
plainly and fully to our greater saving Knowledge and Comfort, for the least in
the kingdom of Heaven is greater then John Baptist, Matthew. 11. 11. Secondly,
Our Prayers and Praises of God in the New Testament are proportional to the
Word read and preached, even more full, clear and comfortable then the Jew had
in the Old Testament; but so it is that the obstinate and impenitent Jew
refused to join with us Christians in any of these three parts of the Worship
of God; they will not hear the Gospel read, because it is the Gospel of Christ,
whom they reject and blaspheme; they will not hear the Word preached, because
we preach Christ crucified, which is to the Jews a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.
23. Thirdly, They will not join with us in Prayer, for they refuse to pray to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and they will seek nothing from God in the Name of
Christ. Fourthly, They reject our Sacraments, for they refuse to be baptized in
the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, nor yet will they communicate with us,
because it is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ: Seeing then the
all-wise Lord has made the Christian to differ from and excel the Jew in the
Word and Sacraments, in Preaching and Praying, is it not convenient and
suitable to the other parts of our Christian Worship, that we differ from them
in our singing also, which is not a diverse part of Worship distinct from Prayer
and Praises without Song, but a diverse manner of pronouncing it; for example,
all that is in the Psalms, that is sung to God with a Tone; it is lawful for a
Christian to worship God with these same words without a Tone or Song, in
Prayer and Thanksgiving; so they differ not upon the matter, but in the manner
of pronouncing them: But the adding of the Christian Doxology to the close of
our singing of the Psalm, makes a suitable difference betwixt the Christians
singing of the Psalm with the Doxology, and the Jew in their Worship singing
the same Psalm without the singing of the Christian Doxology: Moreover, Is it
convenient or decent, that a Jew who blasphemes the Son of God, and denies the
blessed Trinity, who are without the Communion of Saints, that they shall have
it to say or brag, although I abhor to join with the Sow, (for so they call the
Christian,) nor will I hear their Gospel read or preached, nor will I join with
them in Prayer, (for they abhor the Name of Christ;) yet says the Jew, I will
not abhor to join with them in singing the Psalm, for they sing nothing but the
Psalms of David just as we do, they sing in their Mother Tongue as we do in the
Hebrew? would not the Christian think himself affronted at the Jews offer, and
if any in the Church refused to sing the Doxology, he could say I am free to
refuse the Doxology as some of your Christians refuse.

2. Many of the Psalms close with a Doxology or Praise to God, some one way
some another, and this Doxology is most often in the last Verse; but sometimes
in the penult Verse, and then the last Verse is some particular reason and
ground given for that particular Doxology. These who please to search the
Psalms more diligently will find it so, to wit, Psalm. 18. and 75. in their last
and penult Verses; and in all these Psalms following you may observe a
particular Doxology in the last Verse of every one of them, to wit, Psalm 7, 8,
13, 21, 24, 26, 30, 35, 41, 45, 52, 57, 59, 61, 66, 68, 71, 72, 89, 97, 99,
100, 103, 111, 118, 124, 136, 140, 145. and besides, there are other Psalms
that all close with one and the same Doxology, to wit, Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm 104, 105, 106, 115, 116, 117, 135, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150. Hallelujah,
and in the Book of the Revelation, chap. 19. three Companies end their Praises
to God with that same Hallelujah, retaining the Hebrew in the Greek Text. The
first Company much People, verse. 1, 2, 3. close their Praises with Hallelujah.
Secondly, The twenty four Elders, and four living Creatures, in the second
Chore, close Amen, Hallelujah. Thirdly, Another great multitude, verse. 6. being
commanded, give their Hallelujah.

And as many of the Psalms close with a Doxology, so some of the scriptural
Songs, as Exodus 15. 18. Isaiah 12. 6. Isaiah 38. 20. Habakkuk 3. 18, and 19. 1
Chronicles 16. 36. Now, as in the Old Testament the Lord had teached the Jews
to close their Songs and Psalms with a Doxology, (for in them I find a Doxology
about forty eight times,) so in the New Testament, seeing it has pleased God
to reveal Himself more fully then He was pleased to do in the Old Testament to
the Jew, and make the Doctrine of the Trinity the badge of Christian Baptism,
and that Doctrine being so much opposed and blasphemed by Jews, Turks and
Heretics, shall it not then be lawful and expedient for the Christian, now the
only Church of God, to close their Psalms with such a Doxology as may not only
be a confession of their Faith in that great fundamental of the Trinity, and
foundation of Christianity, but also to discern the true Christian Church from
the Jews Synagogue, who are now Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah, Hos. 1. 6, 9. and so
distinguish them from all other Meetings who pretend to worship the true God,
and are but Antichristian Synagogues of Satan, and Blasphemers of the glorious
Trinity.

The last Reason may be thus grounded, Amongst the ten several Names whereby
God (in the Old Testament) has been pleased to design Himself, Jehovah Elohim
are the two chief: First, Jehovah is (...) Est Dei nomen proprium, and (...)
(cujus contractum (...) Psalm. 68. 4.) nunquam legitur cum affixo ante vel post
se, ita ut ultima litera nunquam mutetur, est a radice (...) quod idem cum
(...) fuit est erit and ita Spiritus Sanctus interpretatur, Apocal. cap. 1.
verse. 8. (...) significat Dei esse, and existententiam. Deo essentialem,
adeoque aeternam, and omnis entis creati causativam, inesse, and conservari,
and ita communiter exponunt Theologi, and Rabbini, est and tertium Dei nomen ab
eadem radice, Exodus 3. 14. inquit Moses si dicant Egyptij mihi quod nomen ejus
Dei qui mi sit te ad nos respondet Deus (...)

(...), quod Arius montanus interpretatur ero quod ero, quod Deus contraxit in
immediate sequentibus (...) misit me ad vos ERO, quod communiter interpretantur
SUM, and in novissima Versione Vernacula I Am haec tria Dei nomina, eandem Dei
essentiam and existentiam significant, alia duo rarius usitata, sed Jehovah
saepissime, quod habet nonn^nquam alia Dei nomina sibi adjuncta ut (...)
adonai, Judic. cap. 16. v. 8. vel (...) 1 Samuel cap. 1. verse. 11. and (...)
Psalm. 7. verse. ult. sed saepissime omnium associantur duo nomina Jehovah
Elohim, verbi gratia, initio verborum Decalogi, Ego Jehovah Elohim, hinc in
quibusdam Psalmis, ac aliis Hymnis in Verbo Dei non raro est legere Jehovah
Elohim itaque Doxologiam quasi Psalmi clausulam adjungere, ad insinuandam
sanctissimae Trinitatis glorificationem, ver. gra. Psalm 144. verse. ult.
beatitudines populi cujus Jehovah (...) in his Doxologiis tres sunt
notabiliores (prima circa initium regni Dividis primo libro Chronicorum cap.
16. verse. 36. ubi Psalmum in publico cetu claudit Doxologia benedictus Jehovah
Elohim a seculo usque in seculum tum dixerunt totus populus, Amen. 2. Doxologia
Jehovah Elohim est primo libro Chron. cap. 29. ubi convocatis regni ordinibus,
qui cum Davide aurum argentum, etc. In Templi structuram liberaliter
obtulerunt, tum David benedixit public Jehovah Elohim, verse. 11, etc. deinde
verse. 20. edixit David toti congregationi benedicite nunc Jehovah Elohim sic
benedixerunt tota congregatio Jehovah Elohim, haec quidem Davidis, and
congregationis benedictio videtur absque cantu Deo oblata. 3. Davidis Doxologia
solemnior Jehovah Elohim videtur prorsus ultima jam moribundi inquit Tremellius
sanctam ipsius animam Deo reddentis, Psalm. 72. 18, 19. benedictus sit Jehovah
Elohim, v. 19. and benedictum nomen gloriae ejus in seculum, impleaturque
gloria ejus tota terra, Amen and Amen. huic Davidis Doxologiae seraphim, Isai.
cap. 6. verse. 3. stantes clamabant Trinitati Doxologiam ut supra probatum est
hujus tractatus pagin^ 47. plena est omnes terra gloria ejus; quod quam belle
respondet and quasi implet verba Davidis nempe impleaturque gloria ejus tota
terra.


Gods most proper Name, most often used in the Old Testament, it comes from an
Hebrew word that signifies To Be, and so Jehovah signies Gods Essence and Being
of Himself, and the giving of Being to all His Creatures; therefore Exodus 6. 3.
the Lord prefers His Name Jehovah to His other Name God Almighty, for this Name
implies Gods Almighty Power, to wit, Elshaddai, but Jehovah imports Gods
infinite Perfections; therefore Psalm. 83. 18. God alone His Name is Jehovah,
and Isa. 42. 8. I am Jehovah, that is my Name, and Exodus 15. 3. Jehovah is His
Name, therefore Number. 6. 24, 25, 26. when God endites the words of the Blessing
to Moses, how the Priest should pray over his People, it is all in the Name of
Jehovah, and so the Lord puts His Name Jehovah upon His People.

The second Name of God most frequent in the Old Testament, is Elohim; it is
the Plural Number, and is sometimes indeed used in the Old Testament in the
Singular Number, but not so often by far as it is in the Plural Number: It is
dispute among Divines what can be the reasons why the Lord should take to
Himself so often a Name signifying More, to wit, a Plurality, and to join that
to another of His Names, to wit, Jehovah, which is of the Singular Number, for
albeit often in the Old Testament God design Himself by other more Names, as God
Almighty, Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, etc. yet most often He designs Himself
Jehovah Elohim, which is ordinarily rendered in the Bible, Lord God? For answer
to the question proponed, generally it is this, That albeit from these two
words there cannot be demonstrate the Unity of the Godhead, and Trinity of the
Persons by a convincing Argument against obstinate Jews and Antitrinitarian
Heretics, yet from it may be brought a probable Argument to moderate and sober
spirited Christians, to prove that Moses and other Pen men of the Old
Testament, who themselves undoubtedly did know the Mystery of the Trinity, as
Moses, David, Isaiah, etc. and therefore when they did so often write these two
Names of God together Jehovah Elohim, the first being the Singular Number, the
second the Plural, did thereby intimate the Unity of the Essence in the Godhead
with the Trinity of Persons; therefore Pareus on Genesis, page 23. having
dispute the question, at length concludes, No godly Man will deny the
probability of this reason drawn from Elohim, joined with another word of the
Singular Number as it is here with Jehovah; and so think the Westminster Synod
Notes, on the first two words of Genesis, Elohim Bara, the first Elohim being
in the Plural Number jovned with Bara in the Singular Number, He did creat; and
that Moses, and the rest of the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures in the Old
Testament did know this Mystery, is out of question to the Doctors, both of the
Reformed and Roman Church, all which, with the Fathers and Councils, bring many
strong and clear Arguments from the Old Testament to prove the Mystery of the
Sacred Trinity: Therefore Tremellius, a Jew born, in his Notes upon Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make Man after our own image, says God; Note this here, God Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, one God in three distinct Persons so appoint; Let us, here
says Tremellius is a Testimony of the Sacred Trinity, and that not an obscure
one: And therefore the Westminster Notes prove from the Scriptures, that Moses
was not ignorant of the Doctrine of the Trinity; and it is observable, that in
the first three Chapters of Genesis, Moses nineteen times calls God Jehovah
Elohim; and who will deny that Abraham saw Christ's day, John 8. 56. and did not
David call Him Lord, when in the Spirit of Prophecy he spoke of Him. Mat. 22.
44. and Isaiah saw His Glory, John 12. 41. And if some object, If there be so
many clear Testimonies in the Old Testament of the Doctrine of the Trinity, how
came it to pass that now the Jews who have, and read the Old Testament, deny
the Sacred Trinity? The Scriptures will answer you, our Savior in the Gospel
pronounces them blind, Mat. 15. 14. the blind lead the blind, and often
elsewhere, and so the Apostle calls them, Romans 11. 7. were they not broken off
for their Unbelief, Romans 11. 20. till the fullness of the Gentiles come in; and
since their rejection and breaking off, the Vail is on their Eyes until this
day while they read the Old Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 13. yet it will not follow,
but that the Mystery of the Trinity was known to the Saints, and saved in the
Old Testament, who believed the Covenant of Grace made with Adam in Paradise,
the seed of the Woman should tread down the head of the Serpent, which our
blessed Savior was to the Saints in the Old Testament, as well as to us the
Way, the Truth and the Life, Joh. 14. 6. and the same to day, yesterday, and
for ever, Heb. 13. 8. So that as the believing Jews and Church of God in the
Old Testament, did believe the Doctrine of the Trinity (albeit we grant that
that Mystery of the Trinity was not so clearly revealed to these Saints in the
Old Testament, as it is now to us Christians under the New Testament) asserted
to them in many Testimonies of Scripture; so they, reading and hearing the
Hebrew Text, which was their Mother Language, and therein two Names of God so
often joined together Jehovah Elohim, the one in the Singular, the other in the
Plural Number, the Holy Ghost and His Penmen did thereby insinuate to them the
Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity; and according to this, in many of the Hebrew
Psalms, and some Spiritual Songs, there is a Doxology to Jehovah Elohim,
closing the Psalm, to wit, these Psalms following, 76, 80, 84, 90, 92, 99, 144,
146, and 1 Chronicles. 16. 36. and Chap. 29. verse. 20. and Psalm. 72. verse. 18, and
19. If then the Jew closed many Psalms with the Doxology to the blessed
Trinity, shall not the Christian, to whom the Mystery is more clearly revealed,
and in which he is baptized, and without which he cannot be saved, (for no
Salvation without Christ, Acts 4. 12.) and he who denies the Son has not the
Father, 1 John 2. 23. and as the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the
Son, Job. 15. 26. so he who has not the Spirit of the Father and Son dwelling
in him is none of Christ's, Romans 8. 9. therefore the Jew, Turk, and
Antitrinitarian Heretics, who are ashamed of the Name of Christ in this Life,
Christ will be ashamed of them when He comes in His Glory with His holy Angels,
Mark 8. 38. But for us Christians, let us not be ashamed to believe and confess
to our Salvation, and give Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and with that
Doxology to close the Psalm with it all our life, yea, also close our days with
it on the Deathbed, following the example of that sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm.
72. which he sang at the close of his days, a Prayer for his son Solomon, a
Prayer full of comfort and faith in the Son of God, this Psalm he closes with a
Doxology to Jehovah Elohim, ver. 18. Blessed be Jehovah Elohim, the God of
Israel, and blessed be His glorious Name for ever and ever, and let the whole
Earth be filled with His glory, Amen, and Amen. So, as the Jew had their
Doxology Glory to Jehovah Elohim for ever, and we have Elohim more clearly
manifested, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, then shall it not be lawful for
Christians to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for ever.

For further clearing Jehovah Elohim, its intimating the Doctrine of the
Trinity, as I have observed in the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, that these
two Names of God when put together, especially in the Prophets, are most
ordinarily used (although not always) upon one of these two occasions, First,
When the Lord is to difference and contradistinguish Himself from all false and
Pagan gods, and then ordinarily it is rendered in the English Bible, the Lord
my God, or thy God, or the Lord our God, or your God. Secondly, It is used when
the Lord is giving to His Church some notable Promise of a great Deliverance,
either bodily or spiritual in the Messiah, and so an evangelick Promise, and
both these ways Jehovah Elohim intimats a Trinity, for the Pagans all confessed
a Deity, but none of them Trinity in Unity. As for affixing Jehovah-Elohim to
evangelick Promises in the Old Testament, it might be the most proper Name to
insinuate a Trinity which was to be yet more clearly manifested in the Gospel;
were it not that I intend brevity, I could instance both these, and clear them
from many Scriptures in the Old Testament.

CHAP. X.
A Reason given for singing the Doxologie, satisfactory for every strone
Christian, and that born in also upon the Weak Christian, by Scriptural Reason.

I Supponed in the Preface, that the strong Christian and learned was so clear
in their judgment, of singing the Doxologie, that all the former Arguments I
brought, was only for satisfying of the weak; and all these reasons are well
known to the learned; but because I know the learned does not any thing,
especially in the matters of God, but that for which their Conscience is clear;
and the warrant of their Conscience is the holy Word of God: and therefore the
learned in singing the Doxologie, are perfectly assured that the same is
grounded upon the infallible Word of God, or deduced from it by clear and good
consequence, and they know Cum tenellis Christi Agnis, and in sermon justitiae
imperitis ad ardua progredi non expediat at eruditis in Christo fortibus est
abunde compertum doctrinam evangelicam de Christiani certitudine propriae
falutis a plurimis pessime abusam esse nam ut Pontisicii Recedunt a veritate ex
una part. ita Ecclesiae reformatae pars maxima, sed pessima, recedunt a
veritate ex alia part, dum nullus non impiorum crepat usque ad insaniam ipsum
esse certissimum de sua salute: proinde ad hujus veritatis exactiorem
investigationem and in Verbo Dei trutinatione, professores Christianismi sunt
primo dividendi in vere credentes ad salutem, and in reliquos profitentes fidem
ore, sed non credentes cord, quibus tamen contingit fides dogmatica,
historica, vel literalis sacrarum Scripturarum in qua fide Satanas praeomnibus
impiis excellit, attamen vere credentibus solis, at non omnibus certitudo
salutis contingit, itaque sunt subdividendi in fortes and infirmos, infirmis in
fide certitudo salutis non contingit, quia ob defectum cognitionis Scripturarum
non possunt reflectere in suos actus fidei and alia fidei, (...), quae sunt Dei
ordinaria media Christianum ad certitudinem salutis provehentia, and in
particulari infirmus Christianus in cognitione puer nequit colligere suam
certitudinem syllogistice, hoccine quicunque crediderit in Christum salvabitur,
at ego credo in Christum, ergo ego salvabor nam infirmus in fide licet possit
dicere ego credo idque vere and sincere tamen non cum ista certitudine super
quam possit fundari certitudo conclusionis, and sit cum conclusio sequatur
debiliorem partem, infirmi conclusio non certo concludit ipsi certitudinem
salutis, proin solas fidelis fortis in fide certitudinem salutis adipiscitur,
nec hi omnes nam non pauci in fide fortes heri; hodie incidunt in flagitium
scandalosum conscientiam vastantem protinus, and moraliter, and judicialiter,
hesterna certitudo salutis evanescit quid quod alius non minus in fide fortis
heri, incidit in deliquium solaminus hodie cum Jobo, quod non fuit causatum
peccato flagitioso; sed ob alios fines, justo, and Sancto Deo cognitos, and in
Scholis Theologorum observatos: Quod ad Christianos non credentes ad salutem,
est certo certius eorum nullum certitudinem salutis adipisci. Et tamen hos
subdividimus in hypocritas Scripturarum sciolos, and profanos in flagitiis
volutantes, horum uterque jactat certitudinem salutis; ad diverso modo,
flagitiosus dum jactat certitudinem propria salutis, novit se mentiri, at
hypocritarum multi asserunt and aliqualiter gaudent in certitudine salutis,
quorum error est praesumptionis; nam quod ad minorem syllogismi (Ego credo)
sibi ipsis imponunt, nam vere opinantur se, credere, licet eorum fides non sit
accepta a Deo ad salutem, proinde inferunt conclusionem ego salvabor aequaliter
praesumptuosam, cum assumptione, qui hypocritae in sua assumptione ego credo
mentitiuntur Logice, sed non Ethice.

Christianis itaque fic divisis and subdivisis in classes eorum pars multo
minima sed tamen optima certitudinem proprie salutis acquirit, nempe solummodo
fortes and in cognitione Scripturarum, Fide and Sanctificatione itaque ab hac
certitudine removentur non solium flagitiosi and hypocritae quin and Agni
Christi tenelli qua tales quin and fortes in fide aut sub deliquio gratiae
sanctificantis, aut gratiae solaminis.

His positis inter eruditos videtur hanc questionem posse agitari number sit
possibile, aut saltem probabile Christianum posse esse certum de sua salute,
and eundem non esse certum de hac veritate, bonum est and expedit Christianum
psallere Doxologiam Patri filio and spiritui sancto, ratio dubitationis est
haec, probavimus nullum Christianum habere certitudinem propriae salutis nisi
in cognitione religiosa scripturarum, in fide, and sanctificatione fortem: at
vix est verisimile hunc fortem christianum acquisivisse certitudinem propriae
salutis, quae veritas est dissicillima acquisitu quia multum excedit lumen
naturae, and solum fundatur in lumine gratiae, at haec veritas Deus est licite
hymno glorificandus Pater, Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus haec propositio non
solum fundatur in himine scripturarum, and gratiae, sed etiam in lumine
naturae, ut probatum est.

Alia ratio probans certitudinem salutis esse veritatem acquisitu difficiliorem
quam eam praedictam de Doxologia haec est plurimi quibus nunquam contingit
certitude vera salutis quia impossibilis at ex eisdem non pauci qui callent
sensum Scripturarum Literalem Historicum, and dogmaticum, praecip^e si in
Philosophia sunt been versati quamvis vel Hypocritae, vel flagitiosi tamen haec
veritas, licet glorificare Deum Patrem, Filium and Spiritum Sanctum hymno
facillime potest ab ijs comprehendi, quia Christiani millies milleni nec ad
salutem credentes in Christum nec pij, tamen has duas veritates certo credunt
scilicet licet Deum hymno glorificare and hanc assumptionem, Deus est Pater,
Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus, and Simodo sint Philosophi nullatenus de
conclusi^ne dubitabunt, itaque possit mirum videri homines cognitionis fidei
pietatis, and certitudinis propriae salutis multum jactantes and attamen eosdem
quasi sit mysterium incomprehensibile an sit licitum (vel expediens saltem)
Deum Pat^^m, Filium and Spiritum Sanctum hymno glorificare dubitantes nec mirum
videatur objectum fidei justificantis, and de sua salute Christiani certissimi,
and hypocritae dogmatice solum credentis, and de sua salute incerti idem esse
nempe Deum Patrem, Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum; nam justificatus credit in
Deum toto cord, Patrem, Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, and in Christum (...)
sibi salvatorem, at hypocrita credit esse Deum eumque esse Patrem, Fi^ium, and
Spiritum Sanctum, and Scripturas Dei Verbum esse veras, at neutiquam credit in
Deum. Patrem, Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum, and in Christum salutorem fidei
justificante co^ purificante, renovante, and ipsum Deo in Christo vinculo
Spiritus Sancti in Aeternum uniente hypocritae fides est more speculativa in
cerebro fluctuans at credentis ad salutem in cord radicata pieque fiducialis
and practica.


that the Doxologie is of this nature; which reason of the strong is thus
framed, whatsoever is clearly lawful from the light of Nature, and the Word of
God, that to the religious Christian is lawful to do; but to sing glory to God
is clear from the light of Nature, and from the holy Scriptures, therefore it
is lawful for the religious Christian to do it. First, It is clear from the
light ol Nature, because many learned Pagans, who had no more but the light of
Nature, did sing holy Hymns of praise to their gods; this is abundantly clear
in Humane History, and undeniable. Secondly, The Holy Scriptures are full of
it, especially the Book of the Psalms, commanding us to sing praises to God;
now this proves infallibly the general, that it is lawful to sing glory to God:
Which Conclusion being proven, I make up a second Reason, and takes the proven
Conclusion for the Major; and I reason thus, It is unquestionably lawful to
sing glory to God, I assume, God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; then it is
unquestionably lawful to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and if any
think themselves strong, and being under prejudice, are not satisfied with this
reason, I would ask them if their Infant Baptism was not an act of lawful
Worship, and done in faith of the Minister that Baptized, and of their Parent
that required and received that Sacrament for their use; in both which I judge
the Minister consecrat and administrat the Sacrament lawfully, and their
Parents lawfully received them from the Laver of Regeneration, and yet I would
gladly know from these that are not content with singing the Doxologie, because
it is not express in Scripture, that the Christian sing glory to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, why then do they not reject their Infant Baptism because it is
not express in Scripture Baptize Infants, but well proven to be lawful by
necessary consequence from Scripture, which with the universal Church we think
a sufficient ground for Infant Baptism. And what is the cause that
Antipedobaptists have fallen in that error, and separat from the true Church?
Even because they were too deep in that opinion, that necessary consequence
from Scripture is not sufficient warrant for an act of religious Worship, of
which error ye would be aware, lest it draw you into other greater errors then
you are aware of.

2. What express Scripture had Rahab to receive the Spies, conceal them, and
send them away safely, Joshua 2. 9. etc. Heb. 11. 31. Jam. 2. 25. All which
that she did in Faith, is proven clearly from these quoted Scriptures, then her
faith was good, and acceptable to God, albeit only built on good consequences
from Scripture.

3. I ask of you John who comes to Church, and Communicats, taking the Lords
Supper, whether your worship be in faith, which I in charity suppon it is; but
where is your express warrant in your Bible, you John, such a man, come and
worship, and take the Lords Supper as the pledge of your salvation? These words
are not to be found in the whole Scripture, why then dare ye come to worship
and take the holy Sacraments? I think ye will or should answer, because in the
express Word of God there is a general invitation; Come to me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. From which
gracious general invitation I suppon ye assume in sincere and good Conscience I
John am heavy laden, and labors to be freed of my burden by all the good
means appointed by God preparatory to that holy Sacrament, which if you can
truly affirm in the sight of God, then I dare assure you in the Name of Jesus
that your worshipping, and communicating is in faith, albeit you have not
express warrant in your Bible for you such an one by name to communicate.

4ly, You John believes to be saved, but no express warrant have you in your
Bible, that you John such a one shall be saved, yet I suppon with you in
charity, your Act of Faith to be allowed, and accepted of God, and to be
comfortable to your Soul, for I suppone it well grounded on the Word of God,
His Promise, and Command, whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved, John 3.
16. and John 6. 40. But I John such a one believe in Jesus Christ, therefore I
John such a one shall be saved, the General Promise is express in the Word, but
not your two following Acts of Faith builded thereon, and yet you will assume
they are Acts of true Faith, and for the first of the two, it is truth is best
known to your selves, who are alone privy to that heart secret of yours, 1 Cor.
Chap. 2. 11. For all within the visible Church say, I believe in Christ,
according to the Apostles Creed received by the universal Church, for an Act of
true Faith, and yet a great part speak not truly, This is a sad, but sure
Truth, but as truly as thou believes in Christ, it is assuredly as true thou
shall be saved, then if I grant that your Act whereby you believe to be saved,
is True Faith, and rightly believed by you, albeit it is not express in in your
Bible, then why shall not this be an Act of Faith, when a Christian believes it
is lawful to sing Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, albeit these words
be not express in the Bible altogether but deduced from the Scripture by
infallible consequence, I could proceed further in this point, but because the
Babes are not able to bear it, and the Learned are fully clear in this Truth, I
shall not insist, and these who will not assent to the Truth, the defect is in
themselves, and not in the Truth, for Children, so long as they are such, will
think, speak and understand as Children, for which the strong Christian should
not despise the Babes, but consider they were once Babes themselves, and on the
other hand, the Children should not presume, nor overwean themselves, nor judge
uncharitably of the strong, but that they sing the Doxology in Faith; grounded
on a strong Scriptural Consequence, as when the weak Christian takes his
Sacrament, and I request the weak Christian to think soberly of himself; when
David a Man according to Gods own heart, said in sincerity, Psalm 131. 2. I
have quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his mother, and if ye will
ask wherein he so behaved, he tells you himself he did not aspired things too
high for him. If every Christian would do so, there would be more peace in the
Church.

CHAP. XI.
The Reasons why the General Assembly was not in power to lay aside the
Doxology, proving their great reluctance to their own deed, with several other
circumstances alleviating the same.

IN this Chapter, we are to answer the Grand Objection, to wit, That the
singing of the Doxology in the public worship of God, was laid aside by the
General Assembly of this Church, Anno Dom. 1649. To this my first answer is,
that Assembly has forty two Sessions mentioned in the Index of the imprinted
Acts thereof, but the laying aside of the Doxology is not mentioned in the
Printed Acts of that Assembly, nor yet in the index of the imprinted Acts,
therefore, seeing there is no mention in the Register of the Church, to prove to
Posterity, that the Doxology was laid aside, it may put some to demurr in that
affair, seeing there is no legal proof of it extant. 2 dly. I answer, though the
laying aside of the Doxology was res gesta, yet seeing there is not a word of it
in the Register of the Church, the laying of it aside, will come under the
Notion of an unwritten Tradition to Posterity, 3 dly. I answer, That it is to
be considered whether or not the General Assembly was in potestate, and had
lawful power to lay aside the Doxology, for in their National Covenant, they
grant their Religion as reformed, at the first expelling of Idolatry, and was
Ratified in Parliament, in Anno Dom. 1560. And it is Confession of Faith to be
Christ's true and perfect Religion, that they shall adhere to it all their days,
to which they bind themselves with Solemn and fearful Curses; but so it is,
That at the said Reformation, in the Lyturgy then appointed, and Printed at the
beginning of the Psalm Book, Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, as it was in the beginning, is now, and aye shall last, is extant
in Print; yea, in that Psalm Book of the Church of Scotland of the old Edition,
there is great variety of the Meeter Poesies and lest any of them having their
diverse Tune should want the Doxology sung at the close of it, each of these
diverse Poesies have a diverse Doxology one in substance with the ordinar
Doxology, but differing in some words, being framed to be sung according to the
particular musical Tunes all which Doxologies were in use in the Church of
Scotland after the Reformation, which Book is yet extant Printed at Aberdeen
cum privilegio, in Anno Dom. 1638. So that the National Covenant compared with
our first Reformation engadgeth us in all Scotland, not to quite the Doxology,
under the pain of perjury; as for that foresaid Lyturgy of Scotland, which was
Printed, and bound in with the Psalm Book, it was drawn up by the General
Assembly, Anno Dom. 1560. and 1555 and 1567.

The Fourth Answer, The General Assembly, 1639. August 30. Which day, that
Assembly has enacted, thus. The General Assembly considering, that the
intended Reformation being recovered, may be established; Ordains, that no
Innovation, which may disturb the peace of the Church, and make division, be
suddenly proponed, or enacted but so as the motion be first communicate to the
several Synods, Presbytries, and Churches, that the matter may be approven by
all at home, and Commissioners may come well prepared, unanimously to conclude
with settled deliberation upon these points, in the general Assembly: Which Act
of Assembly, as it was prudently made, so accordingly practiced thereafter, for
in the General Assembly, Anno Dom. 1642. August 6. There are four Overtures
Printed with the Acts of that Assembly to be advised by Presbyters against the
next Assembly; So that his laudable Act was carefully obeyed in other things
but not so in laying aside the Doxology: For it was done abruptly, without the
knowledge, or advertisement of particular Churches, Presbytries or Synods, who
should have been acquainted before and canvassed the matter, before any thing
had been determined in the General Assembly anent the Doxology, and the laying
of it aside, which was an innovation suddenly proponed, and instantly passed to
the discomforming division of themselves from all transmarin Protestants, yea,
and from the universal Church.

Fifthly, In the Solemn League and Covenant of Scotland and England, approven
by the General Assembly of Scotland, Anno. Dom. 1643. August 17. In the said
League and Covenant, with hands lifted up to the most high God, they swear
sincerely, and constantly to endeavor the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland in Worship (but then the Church of Scotland
in their Worship did sing the Doxology,) to endeavor the Reformation of
Religion in England and Ireland in Worship, etc. according to the Example of
the best Reformed Churches. but then, and to this day the best Reformed
Churches did use, and still use the Doxology in the Worship of God, as is to be
seen in the particular Psalm Books, in Helvetia, Geneva, France and Holland,
etc. Here in the Solemn League and Covenant, are two ties on the Covenanters in
both Nations to use the Doxology.

Sixthly, The same General Assembly, Anno Dom. 1643 After their approbation of
the League and Covenant, in their Answer to the Syned of Divines in England
August 19 Writ thus, That you may be more closely united to the best Reformed
Churches in Worship, etc. But so it was, that Scotland, and the best Reformed
Churches, did then, and to this day use the Doxology, and in another Letter of
the said Assembly, to the Parliament of England, they writ thus, That the
Purpose, and End of the League and Covenant, is, for settling, and holding fast
of Unity and Uniformity betwixt the Churches of this Island, and the best
Reformed Churches beyond Sea; but all these Churches beyond Seas, did then, and
still does to this day sing the Doxology, then surely the Church of Scotland,
even after their taking the League and Covenant, as it did tie them to keep the
Doxology, so they sincerely purposed to keep it, and their practice was conform.

Seventhly The General Assembly, Anno Dom. 1645. Feb. 3. post merid. S^ss. ^o
By their Act, they establish the putting in execution the Directory
notwithstanding, in the close of that Act, they dissent from England expressly
in two particulars, anent the manner of giving the Lords Supper. As also Sess.
16. Of that Assembly, they freely dissent from the Westminster Synod. in other
two particulars, as also, they provide, that this shall be to prejudice to the
Order and Practice of this Church, in such particulars as re appointed by the
Books of Discipline, and Acts of General Assemblies, and are not otherwise
ordered and appointed in the Directory: And this Act is not only to be found
Printed in the General Assembly, Anno 1645 But also the said Directory was
Printed at Edinburgh, in the said Year, by Order both of Church and State, and
the foresaid Act of the General Assembly of Scotland Printed, and prefixed to
it.

Now among th^se particulars, in which the Church of Scotland preserves her
Right, and protests timously, norwithstanding the Derectory, and wherein the
Directory has not appointed other ways, the singing of the Doxology, and the
ordinar manner of Blessing the Lords People, at the close of the Public
Worship are two; for neither of which are particularly ordered in the Directory
contrarily, as for the Doxology, no mention to sing it, or not to sing it. 2
dly. For the blessing of the Congregation, these are their Words, Let the
Minister dismiss the Congregation with a solemn blessing. but no particular
word of a Directory, mentioning either the blessing in the Old Testament, Numb.
6. 24, 25. Or in the New Testament, 2 Corinthians. 13 14. As they are both
mentioned in their express words, in our Scots Lyturgy, at our Reformation;
page 29 As also the said Scots Lyturgy has the Doxology Printed in the Psalm
Book, so that both from the National Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant
from many Acts of General Assemblies, and Letters of the said Assembly, it is
without doubt, and notour, that the Church of Scotland, when they laid aside
the Doxology, were no ways in power to do it, but on the contrare, by both
Covenants, and many other previous Oaths of their own, oblidged still to retain
it, and not by quitting of it, so far as to have made a Schism from the
Reformed Churches, with which they had Solemnly sworn to keep Union in Worship;
but beside all these Ties of their own Vows and Promises willingly taken by
themselves, which does denude them of all Liberty and Power, to lay aside the
Doxology.

I bring this Reason, to wit. As the General Assembly of this Church did bind
up their own hands from laying aside the Doxology, by both Covenants, and many
Acts of General Assemblies beside, so there are Reasons brought from the
substance of their deed to invalid at the same, as First, there is a Rule in
the Word of God, Whether ye eat, or ye drink, do all to the glory of God, Then
every Church Act should be done to the Glory of God, then the tenor of this
Church Act must come to this, for the Glory of God, we lay aside singing Glory
to God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, this is a hard saying, and like a Paradox,
For he that offers praise, glorifieth me, Psalm 50 13.

2dly. Consider that the Almighty can, and does make Laws to His Creature, and
His Will and infinite Goodness is a sufficient Reason to Him, stat pro ratione
voluntas, but Men, both in Church and State, they and their Laws both are
subject to Censure, and control of the Supreme Lawgiver, and therefore Men's
Laws ordinarily have a Rational Narrative on which they are founded for all good
Laws, are founded upon good Reasons and Reasonable Men should be led by
reasonable Laws, especially when they are invalidating one former Law, or
Decree. not out of use, or forgotten; but used for many Years, with
approbation, yea, even to that very hour: Then this Law required a very grave
and weighty Narrative, but the Act for laying aside the Doxology, had no such
Rational Narrative, and in so far, it is invalidat, from having the essential
of an Act, for it is like, they could not have a rational Narrative for it,
therefore, it was the prudency of the General Assembly, to bu^y in silence both
the Act, and it is Narrative; This shows their unwillingness to the thing, and
therefore I hope there may the rather an Act of Oblivion, or rescissory pass
upon their imprinted Act.

Thirdly, We challenge the Roman Church, that they lean too much to unwritten
Traditions, but I fear they may retort the Argument upon us, that some of the
Reformed Church, adhere too much to unwritten Tradition, for the layin^ aside
of the singing of the Doxology, is not in the Word of God, nor in any Act of
the Church, and therefore, if there be any unwritten Tradition, owned by the
Reformed Church, this must be it; For why, some people make as much dinn, and
reluctance, to sing the Doxology, as some of the Roman Church does, for keeping
of their unwritten Traditions.

4. No particular Church in this or that Kingdom has power to change any thing
in the Public Worship of God without the consent of the Supreme Civil
Magistrate; ^^umble not at this, for it is the Doctrine of the Church of
Geneva, Theses Genev. B^zae. Anno Dom. 1586. cap. 84. T^es. 18 harum denique
legum and statuendarum and tollendarum potestas ordinaria and legitima nequit a
pastoris unius arbitrio neque 1 solius alicujus Presbyt^rii judic^n pendere sed
accedente Christiani Magistratus consensis and authoritate cum denique and
comprobance grege ista vel pomvel aboleri debent.
who also require the consent of the flock, as needful, which was granted by
the General Assembly of Scotland, 1639. and yet in laying aside the Doxologie
without the foreknowledge or consent of their flocks, they went contrary to
their own Act, and also contrary to the Canon of the Church of Geneva, for the
Church of Geneva very orderly requires the consent of the Magistrate, and his
Authority to any such innovation, but so it was that the consent of the
Magistrate, so (...) as we can learn, was not at all required to the laying
aside of the Doxologie, and for less was it obtained. And if that Act of the
General Assembly, 16^9 August 30. had been obeyed, to wit, that the laying
aside of the Doxologie had first been debated in Synods and Presbyteries,
before it had been presented to the General Assembly, 1649 (considering the
many reasons which I have brought, which judicious Presbyters would have made
use of) It is very probable to me that the General Assembly foresaid had
retained the Doxologie, notwithstanding of some in England who desired to lay
it aside, and so they had dissented in the matter of the Doxologie from these
in England, as well as they dissented from them to other particulars of far
less moment, notwithstanding they so much wished union.

5. Having proven by many reasons the invalidity of laying aside the Doxologie,
yet because some weak Christians have been ready to think that the General
Assembly in the year, 1649 did lay aside the Doxologie in the Public Worship
of God, because they thought it unlawful to use it: For answer, it is a very
uncharitable thought to judge of any Minister of the Gospel, and such as were
members of the General Assembly, or these Divines in England, that they were so
grossly ignorant as to think the singing of the Doxologie unlawful. 2: That
the General Assembly not only thought it not unlawful (for then they would have
laid it aside willingly, and registrat their deed in the Books of their General
Assemblies, to deterr all others from singing the Doxologie; but seeing they
left no word of it in their Register, It was because in their prudence they
would not black Paper with it, far less Print it to be read by Posterity, being
a deed in which they did not glory; but to the which, if I may say, they were
compelled, as St. Paul speaks o^ himself in another case, 2 Cor. 12. 11. by the
importunity of these in England, and that they might upon after considerations
reassume the Doxologie the more easily, that there was nothing in the Register
against it.

6. That the General Assembly, Anno Dom. 1649. did not reject the Doxologie, as
unlawful is thus proven; some leading Ministers who were upon the secrets of
that Assembly, did thereafter without scruple sing the Doxologie in Family
Worship, acknowledging that the Assembly did only lay it aside in Public
Worship, to please some Brethrens desire in England, but the laying of it aside
in Families was not intended by the Synod.

7. When the Kings Majesty returned home, and Church affairs were settled, and
the Doxologie with his Majesty's express consent reassumed, and put in practice
again, then these Ministers who were present in that Assembly, 1649. and the
rest of the Ministers in Scotland, who had all submitted for laying it aside
for a time, lest they should seem contentious, did more willingly reassume it,
then they laid it aside.

8. These aged Ministers who are yet alive, (for it is now 33. years past) can
testify, that that General Assembly, 1649 were far from any scruple, or
thoughts of judging that the Doxologie was unlawful.

9. In the General Assembly, 1645. Sess. 15. they enact, that the Ministers
bowing in the Pulpit (although a lawful custom in this Church) be hereafter
laid aside, for satisfaction of the desires of the Reverend Divines of the
Synod of England, and for uniformity with that Church so much endeared to us:
that then the General Assembly declare their bowing in the Pulpit a lawful
custom, then much more did they think so of the Doxologie, for the singing of
the Doxologie is of much moment, it being occasioned upon a most weighty
consideration, to wit the strengthening of Christians against the damnable
heresy of the Arian, which heresy was not only damning, but also these
Heretics activity, and bloody cruelty (when they got power in their hands) did
threaten the utter subversion of the true faith of the Church of Christ,
therefore the universal Church spread to the ends of the earth, have ever since
unanimously kept the practice of the Doxologie.

8. Their laying aside of the Doxologie would appear not to have been done
cordially, but because of the importunity of these in England, for albeit they
had received the Directory, Anno Dom. 1645. at which time these in England left
the Doxologie, who had embraced the Directory; yet for all that importunity
from England, the General Assembly of Scotland did not lay aside the Doxologie
until August, 1649. and when it was mentioned by the Moderator of the General
Assembly to be laid aside, Mr. David Calderwood, an aged man, a Minister of
great experience, and of unquestionable integrity, as to these times, spoke to
the hearing of the whole Synod. Moderator, I entreat that the Doxologie be not
laid aside, for I hope to sing it in Heaven, to which speech he received no
satisfactory answer; and I doubt not but many in that Synod by their silence
did approve his saying, as a sound and seasonable testimony in favors of the
Doxologie; and I do not remember that the Doxologie was laid aside by a formal
suffrage of the whole Synod, by calling of the Roll; only some next the
Moderator gave their consent: and howsoever, the not Registrating of this deed
cannot be imputed to the sloth of their Clerk; for these who were acquaint
with these times know well that they were not sloathful in business, but
servent in spirit. But it seems strange to me that some in the General Assembly
of Scotland in that year, 1649. could have so strong hopes of a comfortable
union with England in matter of Religion, and upon that account to lay aside
the Doxologie to please them, when the General Assembly, Anno 1648. Sess. 21.
complains at length of the perfidie of many Sectaries in England, who had once
with Scotland taken the League and Covenant, and now had broken it in all its
six Articles, and were hinderers of the work of Reformation in England; and the
General Assembly, Anno 1649. Sess. 27. writ, that now the Sectaries in England
were the prevailing party, who had subverted the Government, and appointed a
vast toleration in England.

As for these Brethren in England who requested the General Assembly in
Scotland to lay aside the singing of the Doxologie, no doubt they had taken the
League and Covenant, and on this account are called Brethren; but in that
Covenant they did solemnly vow and swear to Almighty God to reform Religion
according to the best reformed Churches; but all the reformed Churches have
still retained the Doxologie, why then did not these Brethren in England fear
that Oath, the mark of the truly godly, Eccl. 9. 2. And if any would thus
excuse them, that they were persuaded by such strong reasons as they thought
liberate them from their Oath, in regard of singing the Doxologie, I answer,
granting that it is possible they had such thoughts, as may be in charity
supponed: To which I reply, If they had, as they thought, such strong reasons
convincing themselves, then they were bound to impart that new and rare light
unknown to the universal Church for more then 1300. years, they should have
imparted that spiritual gift, and not hid that talent of knowledge in their
Napkin, nor set their Candle under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, to give
light to all the house, not only of the reformed, but even of the universal
Church.

2. It may be thought that they were obliged to clear themselves of giving
offense in separating from the Reformed Churches, contrary to their Covenant,
and quitting the Doxologie without so much as rendering one reason for their
making a breach from the reformed Churches in their uniformity in Worship,
which they did swear in their Covenant.

I am also sorry that with their quitting of the Doxologie, these in England
did also quite both the solemn blessings in the Old and New Testament which the
Reformed Church uses in the closing of the public Worship that they would
neither give God his due, nor his people; not him his solemn glory, nor them
their solemn blessing, and so they have not left a blessing behind them, and it
is like their way has not been the more blessed in their deed: for as their
laying aside of the Apostolic blessing, 2 Cor 13, 14. (which Text the
universal Church takes for one of the chief Texts in the Word-of God for
proving the great fundamental point of faith of the Sacred Trinity) So the
universal Church had made use of the Doxologie these many hundred years bygone,
as a strong preservative against seducing of people to error anent the Trinity.

As for the General Assembly of Scotland, as they piously, and prudently, in
these unsettled and reeling times, retained both the blessings of the Old and
New Testament in their Public Worship, with the rest of the reformed Churches:
So it was a good presage that in the Lords good time they would reassume and
sing glory to the blessed Trinity with the rest of the reformed and universal
Church, as now they do at this day, for which we give glory to the blessed
Trinity.

CHAP. XII.
That invalid Scruple answered, because the Doxologie is not to be found
altogether in one place of Scripture, and the convenience of singing it proven.

THe Apostle Paul as a good Pastor professes he became all things to all men,
that by all means he might save some, 1 Cor. 9. 22. So I am informed that some
Christians weak in knowledge, because the General Assembly for a time did lay
aside the Doxologie, therefore they in an ignorant mistake thought it unlawful
to be sung; and they are promoved in that error upon this weak reason, because
the Doxologie is no^ express in continued Scriptures, as the Psalms of David
are: I answer, first, If a Preacher whom they like well Preach, or Pray, or
Praise God in Prose, or without a Song, although neither of these three, their
Sermon, Prayer, or Praise, be express Scripture, but only according to
Scripture (and I heartily wish it be always so) then without all scruple they
join in these as parts of Gods Worship, when neither that Sermon, Prayer, or
Praise is the express Word of God; but if we praise God with a Tone, or Song,
it must either be in the Psalms of David, or else it is an abomination to them:
But does not the Apostle command to praise God in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, Ephesians. 5. 19. In which place the Learned dare not exclude any H^mn, or
spiritual Song in Scripture, and we have proven already the D^xologie to be of
this nature.

2. I answer, whereas they say nothing should be sung in Public Worship but
express Scripture, then let them be pleased to learn this truth, that the
Psalms which they sing in Meeter or Verse, are but a Paraphrase, or short
Commentary upon the Scripture for no Church nor Divine rejects the express Word
of God, but for Paraphrase it is ordinary to reject one, and authorize another,
as the Church finds expedient; and thus the General Assembly of Scotland
rejected the old Paraphrase of the Psalms, as not so fit as need were in some
things; and caused make a new Paraphrase in Meeter, and authorized it to be
used in Churches, therefore no Paraphra^e is the express and pure Word of God,
so they are in a mistake singing an imperfect Commentary of man's making when
they think they are singing the pure Word of God, and yet you sing it, without
scruple of Conscience; then I reason that any judicious Christian understanding
that all the parts of the Doxologie are either exp^ess Scripture, or so
infallible Divine fundamental and saving truth, that they have been received
without scruple or contradiction these 1300. years by the universal Church; so
that all that time not one Christian did carp at any one word of the Doxologie;
but as for the Paraphrase in Meeter upon the Psalms, as that old is rejected
for its faults, so some do object and carp at some words and lines in the new
Paraphrase, which ye sing without scruple; so that by consequence a learned and
judicious Christian will sing the Doxologie with more clearness and contentment
then some lines of the new Paraphrase, although I think that last Paraphrase
any defect in it is compatible to the peaceable and moderate Christian; for
this I write, not that any should reject the late Paraphrase, but that they who
accept of the Paraphrase do not despise or reject the Doxologie.

3. I answer, In our Psalm Books in Scotland, printed shortly after the
Reformation from Popery, we also printed with the Psalms some spiritual Songs
and holy Hymns, with liberty to sing them in the Church; So the Church of
Geneva, reformed Church of France, and the Church of Belgia, have printed
together with their Psalms of David many Scriptural Songs and holy Hymns, and
have authorized them to be sung in the public Worship of God, with the Lords
Prayer, Ten Commandments, and the Apostolic Creed, all turned in Meeter, and
sung in the Church; and dare any in Britain, who own the name of Protestant,
condemn this practice of the reformed Churches beyond Seas, without the
deserved reproof of Ignorance, ^ride and Perverseness; therefore Mr. Baxter in
his Method of Peace of Conscience, pa^. 411. writes thus, In my weak judgment,
if Hymns and Psalms of Praise were new invented as fit for the state o^ the
Gospel Church and Worship, to laud the Redeemer come in the Flesh, as expressly
as the work of Grace is now express: As David's Psalms were fitted to the former
state and infancy of the Church^ and more obscure Revelations of the Mediator
and His Grace, it would be no sinful humane invention, or addition, nor any
more want warrant then ou^ inventing the form and words of every Sermon we
preach, or every Prayer that we make, or any Catechism, or Confession of Faith;
nay, it seems o^ so great usefulness, as is next to a necessity, and if there
be any convenient parcels of the ancient Church that are fitted to this use,
they should deservedly Petrus Martyr Comment. in quintum caput Judicum v. ^. 4.
curandum ne in templis quaevis promiscue canantur s^d illa tantummodo quae
divinis literis continentur, aut quae inde justis conclusion^bus eliciuntur,
and cum verbo Dei ad amiusium consentiunt: nam si senestra inventis hominum
aperia^ur, verendum est ne musica ecclesiastica tandem ad nugas and fabulas
re^idat, at approbat Hymnos Ambrosii cani in Templis Symbolum Athanasii and
Psalmos Augustini contra Donatistas.
be preferred, for doubtless, if Gods usual solemn Worship on the Lords days
were fitted and directed to a pleasant delightful praising way, it would do
very much to frame the spirits of Christians to joyfulness, thankfulness, and
delight in God, than which there is no greater care for the doubtful, pensive,
and self-tormenting frame of some Christians: O try this Christians, at the
request of one who is moved by God to importune you to it Isa. 58. 14. Thou
shall delight thy self in the Lord, compare this with Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord
will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he will rejoice over
thee with singing.

If it be objected that the Doxology is defective, because it expresses not
the unity of the Essence in the Godhead with the Trinity of the Persons, to
wit, that we do not express glory to God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? to which
I answer, first, That it is beyond all question that these three Persons
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are one glorious God, and so all true ChrisTians
from the rising of the Sun to its going down, do firmly believe and unanimously
profess, therefore to sing it after that manner, no doubt were Orthodox; then
ye will urge, why was it not so appointed at first to be sung in Churches? for
answer to which question, I perceive that the Westminster Synod in their
Directory, Anno Dom. 1645. for Baptism, have appointed the Sacrament of Baptism
to be administrate in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, without adding one word more, albeit they did well know and believe that
these three are one God, which no doubt they have done, following closs to the
example of that great cloud of Witnesses, to wit, the Universal, and
particularly the reformed Churches, lest otherwise they had presumed to teach
our Savior, who is the wisdom of the Father, to speak better and more full
Divinity.

And this leads us to the chief Answer, to wit, Why the Doxology Ecclesia
antiqua fidem suam in tres personas divinas aequales ejusdemque trinitatis
Doxologiam super Christi verbis baptisma instituentis accuratius fundarunt
patres concilij Constanti^op. secundi oecumen. and ab Ecclesia universali in
hunc diem approbati mittunt libellum synodicum Roman ad Damasim aliosque Epis.
copos ibidem convocatos in quo exhibent fidei suae de Trinitate confessionem
(...), and consentaneam baptismati (...), Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap.
9. and Nazianzen his contemporandus oratione 32. Anno Dom. 381. (...), and idem
Nazianz^ Oratione 6. de Spiritu Sancto (...).

Quod ad Arianorum perversam ac haereticam Doxologiae corruptionem ab Ecclesia
Orthodoxa damnatam consule, Theodoretum Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 24. ex
Athanasio.


does not express the unity of the divine Essence with the Trinity of Persons,
even because these ancient Doctors of the Church and Apostolic Men in their
holy and due reverence given to our Saviors words, when he appointed Christian
Baptism, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; to the Doxology would neither add nor alter from that divine
Pattern, and accordingly Basil the great writes, Epist. 78. We must as we have
received, even so Baptize, and as we Baptize, even so Believe, and as we
Believe, even so give Glory. As for the Arian, about the Year of Christ 360. in
the Cathedral Church of Antioch, the Arians singing the Doxology, were observed
to change the words appointed by our Savior in Christian Baptism, and instead
of singing Glory to the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, did sing Glory
to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost, which presumptuous change, the
Orthodox Church did condemn, as flowing from an Antichristian heart, inspired
from Hell, yet pretending somewhat of an Angel of Light, for their heretical
Spirit was seen through their Mask, in that they did not keep fast the form of
sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13

Others object, To oblige Christians to sing the Doxology, is to take away
their Christian liberty, who should have it still in their option to sing it or
not sing it when they please? I answer, God never appointed Christian Liberty
to warrant disorderly Confusion, which God disowneth; for according to this
Objection, in a Church Meeting, there is one half at such a Diet that will not
sing the Doxology, because of their Christian Liberty, and the other half will
sing it at that same Si Ecclesiae incolumitati been prospectum volumus
diligenter omnino curandum est ut diligenter omnia and secundum ordinem siant,
ut cum in hominum moribus tanta insit diversit as, tanta in animis varietas,
tanta in ingeniis judiciisque pugna, neque politia ulla firma est nisi certis
legibus constituta, nec nisi stata quaedam forma servari ritus quispiam potest,
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 27.
time because of Christian Liberty; and then who will deny this to be horrid
and scandalous Confusion, very dishonorable to the God of all Glory, who is
not the Author of Confusion, 1 Cor. 4. 33. and has commanded all things to be
done decently and in order; and therefore has given power to His Church to
appoint such and such things to be done decently and in order, as is clear in
Calvin's words.

If it be objected to the Christians, to sing the Doxology so often, to wit,
once at least each diet of Public Worship, is to make an Idol of it, I answer
that defect, they who lay any weight on this Objection, it is of knowledge, to
wit, That the frequent practicing of any lawful Duty, in obedience to lawful
Authority, is to make an Idol of it, Deuteronomy. 6. v. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Commands
Parents to teach His Word diligently to the Children, When thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when
thou rysest up, etc. and inculcats, Deuteronomy. 11. v. 18, 19 20. Does here the Lord
command to make an Idol of the Word, Psalm. 1. 12. Blessed is the man that
meditats in the law of the Lord day and night, is that, to make an Idol of Gods
Law, 1 Thessalonians. 5 17. Pray without ceasing, is to make an Idol of Prayer, then to
sing the Doxology at the close of the Psalm, does not make an Idol of it, it
being done to the Glory of God, and in obedience to lawful Authority, and so
for conscience sake. 2. Answer, It is not the frequency of the Action, that
makes it Idolatrous, but trusting in the Action, although never so lawful, and
albeit, but once done; if a covetous worlding find a rich Treasure, he makes it
his Idol, the first moment, so he who would give the half of his goods to the
poor at one dell, and trust in it, as a sufficient price to buy therewith the
Glory of Heaven, has in so doing committed Idolatry 3. Answer, A Christian may
abuse any Lawful Duty, by trusting in it, and so idolize it, but it will not
follow, that therefore such a Duty is unlawful in it self, as to give Alms to
the Poor, etc. and therefore should not be commanded, because it may be a^used.
4. Answer, Trusting in any Duty is a sin of the heart, which man cannot see in
his neighbor, and so has neither ability to judge, nor yet Authority. 5.
Answer, Be awar that thou who pretends Christian Liberty, and therefore refuses
to sing the Doxology, or else under pretense of fear to Idolize it, see thou
make not an Idol of thy Christian Liberty, or of thy panick fear of Idolizing
the Duty, for in this condition, the Proverb is made true, The fear of a man
causes a snare, Prove. 29. v. 25. And that thou makes an Idol of thy pretended
liberty of Conscience, or pretend^d fears of the Idolizing the commanded. Duty,
is thus proven, that whatsoever ^ m^n prefers to his obedience to God, that he
Idolizeth, but the disorderly Christian prefers the maintaining of his
Christian Liberty, or pretended fear of Idolizing to the Duty of his obedience
to God, therefore he Idolizeth his Christian Liberty, and pretended fear of
Idolizing, for God commands him to obey Superior Powers in things Lawful, and
therefore in particular to sing the Doxology, and all his answers is, his
Christian Liberty, or fear of Idolizing forbid him to sing it, and so he may
shake of all obedience to God and Man, under pretense of Idolizing the Duty.

Some say, they will not sing the Doxology, because the Bishops brought it in:
First Answer, This Reason is invalid; for the singing of the Doxology being
proven, to be a good and lawful Deed, will ye abstain from a good Duty,
because he whom you suppose to be your enemy, advises you to do it: This
conc^it involves you in a snare of your own making. If your enem^, to ens^^re
you, bid you fear God, will you not do it? I hope you will say you will do it,
notwithstanding then, abstain not from a good Duty in contempt of an^ man.

2dly. Do the lawful Duty, least your Schism, and refusing give offense, I
will ask you, Are you less oblidged to sing the Doxology then our Savior was
oblidged to pay Tribute, but He paid Tribute, least He should offend, Matthew.
17. verse last.

3dly. The word of God commands, if thy enemy hunger, give him meat, and does
not the same Lord by infallible consequence command thee to take his meat,
where he offers it, thou standing in great need of it: Then let it be supponed,
that providence put you in such extremity, that ye are at the point of death
for hunger, and the Bishop in charity, at the Lords command offers you Meat,
although you account him your enemy, you are bound in Conscience before God to
take his adivise, and Meat both; beware to say you would refuse it; for that
would nor help, but weaken your cause, For if you in pride refuse his meat
offered, y^ are your own murderer, and being a selfmurderer, you kill both your
Soul, and your Body, therefore I hope having pondered your twofold danger of
Soul and Body, you will grant to take the Bishops Meat, for your own good, and
look on him as one sent of God for your good in that strait, then ye will grant
its lawful for you to obey the Bishops advise.

4thly. If the Bishop shall recommend it to your Paroch Pasture, who has the
charge of your Soul to recommend it to each Family, to have Family Worship^
would you cease from the Duty, because it came of the Bishop, I think you would
not; and that because you had a higher warrant then the Bishop, that made you
to obey, even the God of Heaven: Then although ye look not to the Bishops
desire, to sing the Doxology, obey the command of God, to glorify him with all
the Powers of the Soul, and Members of the Body, which he gave you to glorify
him with them; and if the Bishop exhort you to walk in the way to Heaven, will
you refuse to do it? and I will assure you, in the Name of Jesus Christ the
great Bishop of our Souls, before whose Judgment ^eat we must all appear, that
notwithstanding your sinful contempt of Bishops, in that day you shall see
many Bishops who had been Ma^tyrs Confessors, burning and shinning Lights, Sons
of Thunder, and Consolation, standing in that day on the right hand of Jesus
Christ, with their flocks, their Crown and joy, will you refuse to stand on
Christ's right hand, because many Bishops will be there or rather, will ye not
be glad to back the Bishop in his way to glory, A^! then your old new light
will be buried in Eternal Oblivion, and the Father of Lights will give you an
new and eternal Light, to wit, that Bishops, which in your Error you misjudged,
as going to hell, then ye will know assuredly they were going to Heaven on
better grounded Faith then you, (your scruples with which you troubled your
selves, and the place in the World wherein you lived, will be all cleared, th^n
your hard thoughts that you entertained of Bishops, and many other Christians,
better then your selves, will be blotted our of your judgment, to all
Eternity, and if Mr. Calderwoods hopes do not fail him, you will sing the
Doxology in Heaven, with the Bishops: But I charge you, who are not the Lambs
of Christ and truly regenerat, that ye presume not to claim to this word, for
it is none of yours, but the Childrens Bread.

5thly. Why do ye pretend your disguist of the Bishops, to be the cause of your
refusing to sing the Doxology, did you not refuse to sing it before they were
Reestablished, and that because the General Assembly laid it aside, whom ye
obeyed, then ye refused to sing it before they returned, and if they had not
returned, would you have resumed it, I think you will not say it: Then if the
Bishops had not returned still to this day you would have refused to sing it.

6thly. I will give you better Information, ye with the rest of all this Kirk,
are desired to reassume the Doxology, by Authority of the King's Majesty, for
ye know it is the will of God in His Word, to invest the King with a power to
restore the decays of Religion, when they happen, and so did the good Kings of
Judah, Asah, Jehosaphat, and Josiah; and accordingly our Kings Majesty, being,
by the King of kings wonderfully and mercifully restored to his Crowns and
Scepters, according to his duty of thankfulness, and Authority from the Lord
given to Him, He perceiving that the Doxology was laid aside, in a time of
confusion, when there was no King in Israel, even that part of the Kirk's
public Worship, wherein we not only agree with the universal, but more
especially, with the Reformed Kirks; Therefore, seeing all the Reformed Churches
with the Universal retained the Doxology, and the General Assembly of Scotland
laid it aside, when they were not in power to do it, therefore the Kings
Majesty, by His Authority, wisely, and piously recommended the reassuming of
the Doxology, therefore in refusing to sing the Doxology, ye disobey the King
in that which is lawful and right, therefore my request is to you to fear God
and Honor the King, by singing the Doxology, and thereby you shall first
honor God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and then your King, for albeit, at the
casting off the Yoke of the Popes usurped Power, some of the Reformed Kirks did
quite the Government of the Kirk by Episcopacy, yet none of these Kirks did
ever affirm, that Monarchy, or Kingly Government was unlawful, no, nor yet
Episcopacy, for albeit some of them quite Episcopal Government, because they
had not Rents to sustain them, yet they granted the Government to be lawful. I
have more to writ upon this Point, but it is not for the Babes, who have need
of Milk and not of strong Meat.

There remains one doubt to be answered: because the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 6. 12.
(...) Beza reddit conducens Pastor spiritualiter utile hoc verbum invenitur,
John 16. 7. 1 Cor. 10. 33. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Heb. 12. 10. Anis. medul. Theolog.
lib. 2. 6. 16. res media dicitur expedire cum omnibus circumstantiis
consideratis ad gloriam Dei and aedificationem proximi facit.
Has a distinction, All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient? therefore some may say according to this distinction, albeit the
singing of the Doxology be lawful for a Christian, yet it will not follow,
that it is expedient to sing it, for answer, as we have proven by many
Arguments the lawfulness to sing it, so we shall clear the expediency which
can be best cleared from the Holy Scriptures, therefore, 1 Cor. 10. 28. The
Apostle says, All things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. The
Greek word, which is rendered expedient, may be rendered profitable, or
conducing, that is, for the Christians spiritual good, and edification, but so
it is, that the singing of the Doxology to the blessed Trinity is most
conducing. First, To the glory of God, 2dly. To the edification of the
Christian, in the most fundamental point of all Divinity, and this was the
true cause, why the universal Church has agreed so unanimously these many
hundred years, to retain the Doxology in the public worship, and for guarding
of the Lords Flock against A^itrinitarian Blasphemous Heretics, so that it
cannot be objected, it might be expedient then, but not now, for to the old
Arians are now added Socinians, Anabaptists, and Quakers, which Errors are come
to our doors. 2dly. If any will yet be contentious, to deny the expediency of
it, we Answer, that the most competent Judge on earth to prove it is expediency,
is not this, or that private Man, nor yet this, or that private Church, but the
universal Church, which to this day retain it, and use it, and therefore by
their practice they declare to all particular Christians, that they judge it
not only lawful, but also expedient, which is a satisfactory answer to all
rational Christians.

CHAP. XIII.
The many evils that flow from the refusing to sing the Doxology.

HAving proven the Lawfulness, and Expediency of singing the Doxology, and
answered the Doubts, and Scruples to the contrare, we shall hasten to a close,
having mentioned the evils that flow from the refusing to sing the Doxology,
the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 20. Mentions the evils that flowed from their
divisions at the Kirk of Corinth, to wit, debates, envyings, wraths, strifs,
back-bitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, and all these are the sad
effects of their divisions, 1 Cor. 3. 3. That same Apostle writting to the
Galatians, has yet sadder evils, Galat. 5. 15. If you bit and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumeed one of another, which judgment I
pray God in his mercy to avert from this Land, what bodily evils of Bloodshed,
Spoiling of Goods, Desolation of Families, many Widows, and Fatherless
Children, these are the sad and sore evils, that they are very dull and
sensles, who takes not this to heart, but the spiritual evils of Sin, and
Scandal is far more provocking in the eyes of the Lord, and First, The sin of
Sedition against the lawful Magistrate, which not only brings down the wrath of
God upon a Land, but, if not repented of, ends in damnation to Soul and body,
as appears, Romans 13. From the beginning, another evil, the great Scandal given
to the grieving of the Strong, and stumbling of the Weak, when they see the
Commands of the lawful Magistrate, commanding a thing so lawful, as to sing
the Doxology, yet to be contemned and slighted, The Apostle Paul, in that same
place, Romans 13. Says, we should obey the Magistrate, not only for fear of Gods
Wrath, and the Magistrates Wrath, but also for conscience sake, is it not then
strange Religion, when the Lord bids oney the Magistrate in all things lawful
and that for Conscience, sake, that in the mean time, they who call themselves
Christians, and conscientious will answer for Conscience sake, we will refuse
to obey the Magistrate, can it here be supponed that their Conscience that will
not obey, is a good Conscience, when the Conscience in the Word named, Romans 13.
Is certainly meaned good conscience, except ye will make it such Divinity as
this; It is good Conscience says the Lord is His Word, to obey the Magistrate,
in things lawful, and also according to your refusal, it is good Conscience to
disobey the Magistrate therefore be pleased to consider, that there is a twofold
superstition,, First positive, which is most ordinar, to which the old
Pharisees were much addicted; There is also a negative superstition, of which
we have example, Colos. 2. 19. Touch not, taste not, handle not; there is an
other example of the same, Romans 14. 3. Where ye will find a superstidious (eat
not) upon consideration of which two Texts, see that your refusing to sing the
Doxology come not in, in that category (sing not) in which place ye may find a
controversy betwixt two sorts of Christians the strong in knowledge, and the
weak, the strong Christian believes that he may can any thing, and not ask
question, or scruple for Conscience sake, and him the Apostle approves, and
allows, for him the Apostle defends against the weak Christian, in the end of
the 3. verse God has received him, to wit, the strong Christian, and albeit
the weak Christian, who is stiff through his ignorance to (eat not) yet the
Apostle condemns him, because he proudly, and ignorantly thought these things
unclean, whereas the Apostle says, they were not unclean, and therefore the
strong made no scruple, but eat, and is approven of God. So in the 14. verse of
this 14. Chapter, the weak thought that unclean, which was not unclean, and
therefore refused to eat it, then apply this to your own Consciences, who
says, (sing not) because your Conscience thinks it unlawful to sing, when we
have proven already, that it is both lawful, and expedient; See then that ye
are not as wrong with your (sing not) as these weak Christian Romans were with
their (eat not) The strong Christian thinks it clean to sing, and dutiful, and
is approven of God, ye think it unclean, and unlawful, and are not approven of
God, because ye obey not the Magistrate in that which is lawful, and I pray you
consider in the 14. verse of that Chapter, the Apostles vehement and emphatick
expression, I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus Christ, that there is
nothing unclean of it self: So I know and am persuaded with the universal
Church, that the Doxology is not unclean, nor the singing of it an unclean
Action, and though ye judge him that sings, God has saved him.

In these two ranks of Christians, strong in knowledge, and weak, I perceive a
fault in each of them mutually toward the other, verse 3. The weak judged or
condemned the strong, for the Greek word (...) signifies both, as if they had
been sinning in their eating, and as people that made no conscience of their
doings: So beware it be not your sin proudly and ignorantly to condemn them
that sings, as it were a sin. There was a sin also on the other hand in the
strong that despised the weak, for their refusing to eat, because of their
scrupulous and ignorant conscience; therefore it is my humble request to all
that sing the Doxologie, that none of them despise or set at naught him that
sings not, upon mere ignorance, his conscience being sincere, for despising
is a sin against Christian love; therefore even these who in great weakness
sing not, yet bestow Christian love on them, and still the more, if ye see any
sign of Christ in them, and be willing to instruct them in the spirit of
meekness; for which cause I have written these lines for your information, and
am to exhort you to tenderness with them in the last Chapter.

And if any object that there is some diversity and difference betwixt
particular Churches which viosits not Christian union, as in some Churches they
kneel at the receiving of the Lords Supper, in another Church they sit, in the
third they stand; I answer, albeit diverse Churches in diverse Kingdoms have
diverse ways, yet no Church in one and the same Kingdom allows such a latitude
as this, receive the Communion standing, or not standing as you please; but
every Church have their settled way and uniformity, otherwise it would violat
the Apostles rule, let all things be done in order and decency, 1 Cor. 14. verse
last, and make confusion, of which God is not the Author, as it is verse. 33. of
that same Chapter: and according Justinianum, lib 4. cap. 10. 27. Si Ecclesiae
incolumitati been prospectum volumus diligenter omnino curandum est ut decenter
omnia and secundum ordinem fiant, at cum in hominum moribus tanta in sit
diversitas, tanta in animas varietas, tanta in ingeniis, judiciisque pugna
neque politia ulla firma est, nisi certis legibus constituta, nec nisi stata
quadam forma servari ritus quispiam potest.
Calvin writes judiciously, that there cannot be order and decency unless there
be one certain state form; so that this difference in some Churches one from
another, will not allow in the same Church some to sing the Doxologie, some
not: For as Calvin did sing it to the day of his death, so neither at that
time, nor never before it, was the singing of the Doxologie called in question.
2 Answer, Albeit the universal Church has judged some things of less moment
then that the universal Church should be tied to an uniformity in them, because
Church Communion might be kept firm amongst diverse Churches, notwithstanding
that they differed in some smaller particulars; of which Socrates in his Church
History, lib. 5. cap. 21. writes at length, which the Learned know, yet there
are some things belonging to the Church of so weighty and important
concernment, that the universal Church judged it no ways expedient that
particular Churches should be left to their own choice, but that the universal
Church should agree upon one certain way wherein all particular Churches might
keep uniformity according to the rule of Gods Word, for order, and decency, and
peace; and therefore the learned know what contentions fell out in the second
Century, betwixt the Church in the West, and the Churches in lesser Asia; for
these in lesser Asia kept their Feast of Easter the same day that the Jews kept
their Passover; but the Christians in the West kept their Feast of Easter upon
the first Sabbath day thereafter: And albeit in this mean time the foresaid
West and East Churches their judgment and practice was diverse upon that
matter, yet on both sides they who were strong in knowledge still kept Church
Communion one with the other, as Socrates proves learnedly in the foresaid Book
and Chapter, so that Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, afterward a glorious Martyr
of Jesus Christ, albeit he did celebrat Easter in that same day with the Jews
Passover, as ordinarily did all his Neighbor Bishops in lesser Asia, yet
coming to Rome he Communicate with their Bishop upon their Christian Sabbath
day, which differed from his day of giving the Communion at home; but because
there is infirmity and weakness in many Christians, therefore after that
diverse day of keeping of Easter raised such broils and contentions betwixt the
East and West Church, that there was no visible nor seasible way for preventing
a fearful rent and schism in the universal Church, until the general Council of
Nice did appoint all to keep one day, which the universal Church has kept ever
since; therefore Beza in his 24. Epist. and 14. thereof, distinguishes well
betwixt Ecclesiastic constitutions, some are universal, some particular, and
without all controversy the singing of the Doxologie is of universal
constitution; for as we have proven from antiquity of Fathers, and Councils,
the singing of the Doxologie was the practice and judgment of the universal
Church, therefore as the universal Church resolved to keep Easter upon a
differing day from the Jew, who crucified the Lord of glory, and still
blasphemes him, as Constantine the Great insinuats in his pious Letters after
that Council of Nice; so that same universal Church resolved to keep the
Doxologie, as a testimony against the Arians, and all such blasphemous
Antitrinitarian Heretics.

Then to apply, the singing of the Doxologie is like the keeping of Easter on
the Christian Sabbath day, and not with the Jew on their day, to which both the
Civil Magistrate by their Authority, and the Church by their Spiritual Authority
did agree at the Council of Nice: as for that Text which we cited, Romans 14. of
Christians in two contrary opinions about meat and days; the Civil Magistrate
nor Church had not as yet interponed their Authority, but it was still
Arbitrary for the Magistrates external power, they being then all Pagans, to
them both the Jewish and Christian Religion were accounted superstition about
words and names, as said the Pagan Magistrate, Acts 25. 19. and they thought it
below them to take notice of these things: as for the Church Authority, which
was then Apostolic, the Learned know the reason why they did not determine
these questions of meats and days, because there was a time allotred of
interim betwixt the death and honorable burial of the Jews Ceremonies, which
time of their honorable burial was not yet expired: and the Epistle to the
Romans was written in this interim, during which time the Jewish Ceremonies of
meats and days, etc. were mortui to the strong Christian Jew, and they were
freed of their yoke, by taking on Christ's easy yoke, and to the weak Christian
Jew who was not clear to quite these Ceremonies as yet during this interim they
were indifferent, and not mortiferi: So that place foresaid, Romans 14. I fear be
misapplyed by these that refuse to sing the Doxologie; for the case alters in
this, the Doxologie is determined to be used both by the universal Church, and
all civil Christian Powers, but these meats and days when St. Paul wrote to
the Romans, were yet left arbitrary, therefore St. Paul reproved these weak
Christians for their ignorance, in not eating: but how much more bitterly had
he reproved and condemned them if their not eating had been a breach of the
command of the Church and State, as now it is in refusing to sing the
Doxologie? Yet as the singing of the Doxologie agreed upon by the universal
Church differs from the keeping of Easter on the Christian Sabbath, and not on
the Jewish Sabbath, in two particulars; 1. The universal Church did more then
200. years differ in keeping the Christian Easter; but all that time not one
iota of objection or scruple against the singing of the Doxologie. 2. The
Scandalizing Act of difference of keeping Easter, was but once in the year, but
the refusing to sing the Doxologie is a scandal every weekly Sabbath.

This your refusing to sing the Doxologie, which the universal Church judges
to be lawful and expedient, is offensive and evil both to these within, and
these without the Church; for these within the Church I make this Hypothesis,
that there being many thousand Protestants beyond Seas who hear that some in
Scotland have made a separation from their Mother Church, and yet these same
beyond Seas do not study the particular grounds, or pretended causes of that
separation; yet these same persons being certainly informed that these of the
Scots separation, among other differences, refuse to sing the Doxologie; which
refusal of theirs is so notorious in their Public Worship, that it is like the
Ointment upon the right hand which cannot be hid. Then what will Protestant
Strangers over Seas conclude? Even this, that seeing there is in Scotland some
who without just cause have abandoned the Doxologie, contrary to the judgment
and practice of the universal Church, then it is very like that their other
pretenses for their separation are as unwarrantable; this refusing to sing the
Doxologie is also evil to these without the Church; which I thus illustrat, a
Turk, Jew, or Pagan, being in the way of conversion to Christianity; and having
learned that there is one God, and three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
for in this Name he is to be baptized; and being thereafter informed that these
same men who are to Baptize him refuse to sing Glory to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in their Public Worship; in what a demurr and doubtful perplexity
would that Turk be? Or would he receive Baptism from these who were to Baptize
him in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and yet would not themselves
sing Glory to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and also forbid him to sing it, would
not that doubt debarr him from Christian Baptism, and Salvations or else upon
better information that these who refused to sing the Doxologie were but a
han^ful, who did separate themselves from the many thousand thousands of
Christians who did gladly sing the Doxologie: Would not that Turk join himself
gladly to that Church, whose Word, and Works, Sacraments of God, and his other
Worship, was harmonious, where they did Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, did also in their Public Worship sing Glory to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.

This bygone information, as I directed is only to the weak and gracious Lambs
of Christ; yet because I know there are other sort of Christians, to whom,
though I owe not so great respect as to the Lambs, yet I will tender them this
word, ye who refuse to sing the Doxologie, pretending Conscience for your
refusing, ye are either painted Tombs, and cunning Hypocrites, or openly
profane ones, who proclaim your sin like Sodom. First, I speak to the
Hypocrite, thou gravely assevers that you dare not sing the Doxologie, le^^ you
should wrong or grieve your Conscience: but how comes it to pass that against
thy knowledge and Conscience thou lives in secret heinous sins? will thou in
that day when thou gives account of thy self to the all-seeing God the searcher
of hearts, and the eyewitness of thy secret sins, pretend Conscience as thy
defense for thy schism now in refusing to sin, the Doxologie, when he who is
greater then thy Conscience knows thy false and seigned words? Ah! thou will
rather be speechless then, Mat. 22. 12. as now thou art when thou should sing
the Doxologie. Therefore to prevent that disaster, I entreat you be not silent
now, but sing the Doxology, least in that day, the Judge of the Quick and Dead
declare, to thy confusion, that thy refusing to sing the Doxology was not
Conscience, nor Religion, but vain Glory, Interest, Selfseeking, and Faction.

As for you who liv^ in oppen scandalous sins, as Drunkenness Whoredom, etc.
and yet dare say, we cannot sing the Doxology, because of Conscience toward
God, To you, hear the Lords answer, Psalm 50. 16. Unto the wicked, God says,
what have thou to do to declare my statutes? Seeing thou hate^^ instruction,
being partaker with the thief, adulterer and sclanderer. 2dly. Does not thy own
heart smyt thee, as a mocker of God, and all Religion, when thou pretends
Conscience, and when it is seared long ago, as with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
3ly. You may indeed increase the number of your party, but you diminish their
credit, then let all who pretend Conscience, depart from iniquity, and sing the
Doxolowy.

When was it that the General Assembly laid aside the Doxology; even when the
Army of the English Rebels, (who had proved false to God, in the matter of
Religion, false to the King, in matter of Loyalty, false and perfidious to
Scotland, in stead of thankfulness to them for their assistance, came in
against them with the Sword, having established a vast toleration, so that,
that Army was made up of the dross, and dregs, and scume of England, and even
then, when Religion in Scotland and England was in greatest danger, then to lay
aside the Doxology, was like that inference, the enemy is approaching,
therefore put out your Matches, then consider the evils that immediately, and
inevitable came upon Scotland, after they laid aside the Doxology, what glory
we lost, First, the purity of Religion, by their vast tolleration, which, with
their Sectarian and Blasphemous Army, they brought into Scotland; Secondly, We
lost our Liberties, for no man durst wear a Sword, or Weapon for his defense,
but this was a just judgment, to take a Sword from a man, when he had killed
his Father.

(...). Quis potest haec absque genetu commemorare? annon ideo manifestum est,
ut vel puer intelligat, haec quae nunc fuit esse proemia defectura fidei.
And last of all, St. Basil looks upon it as a fearful prognostic, of
departing from the truth, when he perceived the Arian not to quite the Doxology
altogether, but to change it from the right words, he greatly feared a falling
from the Faith to follow, so as long as ye refuse to sing the Doxology, ye
continue in the begun separation which is a fearful evil, it keeps a door open
to more sin, and sorrow to follow, for by that separation, ye keep in your
heart a disgust at your Mother Church, as faulty, and assure your selves,
through ye had no more Errors at present, but that one, that ye refuse to sing
the Doxology, yet that Error will not be alone, for Error begets in the Soul a
Sinful inclination to more Error, as the Apostle speaks of Erroneous Spirits,
they grow worse and worse are not now too many turned Quakers, and some sweet
Singers, whose beginning in Error was but small.

And to put a close to the Roll of the evils that follow the refusing to sing
the Doxology. Is it not both sin and shame to offer to God a lame Sacrifice of
worship, for they who refuse to sing the Doxology offer to God a lame Sacrifice
of praise, and they are cursed by God, who offer to him the Sacrifice that has
blamish, when they have better and will not offer it: As for these that refuse
to sing the Doxology, and think it needless, or evil, these in their heart, and
by their deed condemn their Neighbor Christians, for offering to God a
mostruous Sacrifice, as having a Leg more then enough, in the 2 Chronicles. 5. 13.
When was it that the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord, even when
the singers, verse 13. were, or one to make an sound to be heard in praising
and thanking the Lord, but this is far from the practice of these, who will no^
join in the praises, which discord in the Lords Song, cannot be but displeasing
to him: So that such practice of singing and not singing at one time, yea,
worse singing and grieving at one time, for no doubt, he that sings not grieves
at him that sings, and looks very like the confusion, that was after the return
of the Captivity, at the laying of the foundation of the Temple of Jerusalem,
when one part was praising and rejoicing, another part weeping and howling, and
the last continued evil, Is a continued Heart-burning, and discontent in the
hearts of these, who refuse to sing, and keeping a door open still for more
separation.

To close this Chapter, as Mr. Calderwood said, in great zeall, in that
foresaid General Assembly, That he hoped to sing the Doxology in Heaven; So let
no Christian think it a paradox, for the learned do know, that it may be proven
by sound Divinity, for, if in Heaven, our praises to God shall be perfect
(which is most surely true) then we shall praise him in all his Attributs, in
all his mighty Acts, especially in his Word, and everlasting Gospel, then we
shall eternally glorify the infinitely glorious Essence, in the mysterious
Trinity of the Persons; for seeing in Heaven there will be neither Petition, nor
Prayer, nor Preaching, which make up a great part of our worship on earth, and
so all our worship in Heaven shall be praises, and that to all Eternity; and
seeing our knowledge of God in Heaven shall be far more perfect then it was on
Earth, and then we shall see God face to face, and know him in Essence, and
Persons more perfectly then we do now on Earth, and consequently, our love to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost much more perfect, so the perfection of our praises
and incessantnesse, without wearing, shall answer to our greatest perfection in
knowledge, and love to God, therefore it may be christianly supponed, that we
shall join in Heaven with these four living Creatures, Revel. 4. 8. who rest
not day nor night singing, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, who was, and is,
and is to come; where was this trisagium uttered, The first two Verses of this
Chapter affirm, that it was in Heaven, who were the living Creatures that kept
this Chore of laus perennis, the Assembly Notes upon it, says, it was the
Ministers of the New Testament. 3dly. What was the subject of their praises,
the Assembly Notes say, they continually praise God, and set out the Trinity of
the persons in the Godhead.

If any please to object, the Church appointed the Doxology to be sung, to
guard the Flocks of Christ against Antitrinitarian Heretics, but in Heaven
there is no danger, for no Devil, nor Antitrinitarian will be there to tempt,
and the glorified Saints will be made perfect in Holiness, I answer, when
Isaiah 6. 2, 3. The Seraphims cried one to another, by way of Authem, Holy,
Holy, Holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory, Here I
hope was neither Arian nor Antitrinitarian, yea, I affirm, according to the
Seraphims singing a Doxology to the Trinity, that although there had never been
Antitrinitarian Heretic, nor danger of Devils to tempt them to that heresy,
seeing the Angels in Heaven did sing a Doxology to the blessed Trinity, which is
granted by the universal Church, then shall it not be lawful, expedient, and
comely for Christians to sing Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whose motto
in Baptism, is to be Baptized in Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Therefore, to conclude this Chapter, these who have Scruple, or Doubts to sing
the Doxology for want of knowledge, my prayer is to God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, who is the Father of Lights, to reveal even this unto them, that we may
with one Mind, and with one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 6. Now to God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be glory in
the Church, by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages, world without end Amen. Ephesians
3. Chap. at the last verse.

CHAP. XIV.
An exhortatory Conclusion to the strong and orderly Christian, to receive and
embrace with all Christian love and tenderness every weak Christian, who shall
return from their wandering in Error, to live in Order and Unity in the Bosom of
their Mother Church.

BEing now to conclude this little Treatise, As its scope and aim is for
healing and helping home of the wandering Sheep, so my work in this Chapter is
to remove all Stones and Stumbling Blocks out of the way of the weak Lambs
returning to their Folds again; and I beseech you, put not the blame so much
upon these Lambs, as upon these Men w^o drew them away and missed them; and let
all good Christians rejoice in their return, and welcome them home, and that
because of the manifold Evils that this Kingdom was groaning under, which now
God in His Mercy has almost removed: Was not in many Families the Father
against the Son? and a Man's Enemies these of his own Household? did not many
Flocks forsake their Fold and resting Place, and strayed in the gloomy and dark
Day? was not the empty Walls of many empty Paroch-Churches mourning? and the
Stones of-emptiness crying out? and Pastors lamenting that their Flocks were
departed? and a few left? yea, sometimes the Pastor so evil entreated, by his
Flock turning Wolves, that he must needs convey himself away out of that place,
some being spoiled, some wounded, some killed, some like desolate Widows
mourning in secret in a desolate Retirement, like Jeremiah in his wished
Cortage in the Wilderness, Jer. 9. 2. and for a long time the Magistrate loath
to use rigor, which made them the more inexcusable, and at last they display
an open Banner of Rebellion, whereby they wilfully run themselves into a
Labyrinth of Miseries, to be killed and spoiled, and many impoverished, and not
a few suffered death by the hand of Justice, whose infatuate Souls (with that
four leaven of their dangerous Doctrines) was at their death a far more sad
spectacle to the Godly then their bodily death, which remembers me of David's
bitter mourning for his traitorous son Absalom's death; and this Malady and
sore Disease came to so great a height, that it threatened death, which was more
then once prevented by opening of a Vein, and many thought our Disease
incurable, and that it would turn at last to be a rooted Hectic to the
consuming of the Marrow; but blessed be our kind Samaritan, who beyond the
expectation of many, and much more beyond our deservings, has pitied us, for
it was a time of love, and when we were lying in our Blood, he said Live, again
he said Live, Ezekiel. 16. 6. even when the Enemy was saying there is no help for
him in God, yet he has poured in Wine and Oil in our Wounds, and letten us (by
sweet experience) know that there is both a Physician, and Balm in Gilead; and
the God of our Health has rebuked that Fever, and has commanded and created
deliverance: Then let every one of us rejoice in God, and count it our glory to
be workers together with God: Is this a time of healing? let us concur and
contribute our help; Is the Lord's Flock returning? then cast up, cast up,
gather out the Stones; Has the Lord Jesus awakened out of sleep, and rebuked
the Winds and Seas, so that now there is a great Calm, then let us all help to
row to bring the Vessel to a safe Harbor; when the Lord is bringing back the
captivity of His People, let our Mouths be filled with laughter and our Tongue
with singing; behold and see, not one Dove alone returning to the Ark of their
Mother Church with an Olive branch, Genesis 8. 11. but a whole cloud of these
Doves are flying to their Windows, Isa. 60. 8. Are not the Pastors returned to
their Flocks with joy who went away weeping, returning with the full blessing
of the Gospel of Christ, now to bring forth the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness of their sad and desolate retirement and widow-head, Lam. 3. 27,
28, 29. like St. Basil returning from the Desert, and St. Athanasius from his
Exile; and now that promised Blessing shall be given them, Isa. 30. v. 29. your
eye shall see your Teachers. And now my Brethren, who had precious retirement
to read, meditate and pray, and a sad cross to put you to it, then with
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 15. let your profiting appear to all. Ye know what Luther
writes, Prayers, Meditation and Temptation made good Theologues, and the Flocks
that have been mispending their time, had the more need to redeem the time.

Now I turn my speech unto you in this Church who are strong, and have overcome
that evil one, and have obtained Grace to live orderly before God and His
Church during the time of these Confusions; as your compassionate Souls did
grieve for Sin, weep in secret before the Lord to enlighten, inform and reform
them, to reclaim and reduce them, therefore has the Lord given you a gracious
return of your Prayers, in returning them; then open your loving Hearts, and
embrace them, and these hands that were with outstreached arm lifted up to God
for them, let your arms embrace them, and by word and deed, and contenuance,
express the sincerity of your love to them, and as the Lord has given you more
knowledge then to them, let it be your generosity not to insult over them, or
despise them, but with all tenderness not to look down, but to stoop down to
their Weakness, and let the strong elder Brother stoop down with his Hand, to
hold by the hand or arm, a younger Brother learning to Walk, and count it his
Glory to speak with him in his own childish Dialect, and take little steps with
them; then I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus, reproach them not for bygones,
but pass an act of Oblivion, and in time coming, use all gentleness and
forbearance, and so gain them to love you; and in all things indifferent and
undetermined if he be not clear for the one way, condescend to him and follow
his way; bear with his infirmities, rashness, incivilities and ignorances, and
others overweaning themselves as if they were strong in Knowledge; this is an
infirmity of many weak, and yet for Peace sake, the strong ought to bear with
it: Now this Duty of the Strong in bearing with the Weak, the Lord presses
much in His Word, Romans 15. v. 1, 2. Why has the Lord given thee more
Knowledge, Mortification, Patience, etc. then to the Weak, but for this end, to
bear with their Infirmities? for their Spiritual good, for which St. Paul gives
you his holy example, 1 Cor. 9. 22. For the weak became I as weak, that I might
gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some: and Chap. 10. v. 33. I please all men in all things, not seeking my own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved: Here is a great
placebo, and yet no Flatterer, but in his converse acceptable both to God and
Man. The Spirit of Christ is not a sour, censorious, sullen and carping
Spirit, but meek, gentle and easy to be entreated. When the Child as yet but
an intrant in the World, and learning to speak, will ask the Parents some
childish question, will the Parents be incensed to inflict Chastisement, or
rather will they not pass it with this Meditation, When I was a child, I
thought as a child, I understood and spoke as a child, 1 Cor. 13. 11. So, if
any weak Babe in Christ propone or start any question in Religion (to which
many Babes are too ready,) do not think that ye are always bound in Conscience
to answer them, for many times our Savior did it not, Act. 1. 6. Jo. 21. 20.
And the Apostle to Timothy speaks of foolish and unlearned questions, which
produce strife and no edification, 1 Timothy 6. 4. then let the strong wave the
question with a general answer, Jo. 16. 19. or instead of speculation leading
to practice and holy life; Luke 13. 23. Yea thirdly, It may be waved if it be
beyond the sphere of the Larger Catechism, for Questionators that furnishes
their common Discourse with Questions, are unsavory company to the Godly, and
the weak Christian should not be entertained by the strong Christian with
Questions; it is expressly against the Apostles rule, Him that is weak in the
faith receive ye, but not unto doubtful disputations, Romans 14. ver. 1. then let
neither strong nor weak Christian (especially in Company) move any question of
Religion, especially these that belong to the present Differences, least the
Strong touch the Weak on the old Sore, and so but grieve and irritate, which no
doubt grieves the Spirit of God, and is not the healing way: As for the Weak, I
entreat them who have been wandering in Mistakes, to resolve in the strength of
Christ, in all time hereafter, to live orderly as to the Church, and loyally as
to the King and Rulers under him, and then he is a cursed Man that will not be
loving and kind to thee.

Then let the strong imitat their Father in Heaven, who when his prodigal Son
returns, no word of his sin (with which the elder Brother did upbraid him) but
ran, and met, and kissed him, gave him new clothes, and shoes, adorned him with
a Ring, feasted him and made merry, Luke 15. 20. He ran and met him, and fell
on his neck and kissed him, and imitate the Son of God, the great and good
Shepherd, who brings home on his shoulder rejoicing one wandering sheep, does
he not rejoice much more now then in reduceing so great a flock?

And the Fathers kindness to his returning Prodigal, is so sweet a subject,
that I delight to mark in it further, that when the elder Brother uncharitably
endeavored to exasperat his Father against his younger Brother, casting up his
old sins, the Father rejects the elder Brothers bitter Libel: See both the last
and 24. verses, his Brother was dead; and is now alive, he was lost, and now is
found; its gemination shows Emphasis, he was lost when dead in sin, but now
alive to God to righteousness; he was the lost and wandering Sheep, he is come
home a penitent sinner: And compare the 24. verse with the last yet more, my
Son thy Brother he is sibb to thee, but sibber to me, which the words imply;
therefore though ye would let him go as he came, yet will not I, O dear younger
Brother be not afraid to return, nor scarr to come home, but first see that
thou make thy peace with thy Father, verse 21. And although some churlish elder
Brother (like Eliab too young David) would unchristianly chide thee, take
courage, it is not that bitter Brothers house thou art coming home to, but thy
Fathers; meditate and think on these things, for to be a ready antidote against
the bitter Pills of some; and albeit some of the stronger Brethren be not so
kindly, comfort thy self here is thy Father pleading for thee, and so is thy
elder Brother in this same Chap. Luke 15. 6. who when he has brought home his
wandering sheep, rejoicing calls together his friends and neighbors, and
says, rejoice with me: then assure thy soul that Christ's real friends will
rejoice at thy return, welcome thee, embrace and love thee as their own bowels.

Then let us in this great act of charity, and tender love to the weak
returning Lambs, imitat our blessed Redeemer, and elder Brother, who came from
Heaven to Earth to seek and save the lost sheep, Luke 19. 20. who bears the
Lambs in his bosom, and leads them gently that are with young, Isai. 4. 12.
and will be more loath to over-drive them then Jacob his young Children and
Flocks, Genesis 33. 14. Then be thou compassionat toward them: Is the Savior
bearing them in his bosom? then grieve them not, for he cannot but see it, and
be grieved. Is he leading them gently, then dare thou beat them back with word
or reproach, like the piercings of a sword?

The Lord leads the lame and the blind in the way they do not know to Zion
weeping, the woman with child, and she that traveled with child, Jer. 31. 8.
Mark the four sorts in the world, the fittest objects of man's compassion, and
help lame and blind, the woman with child, and traveling with child; and the
first two most despicable, yet the Lord despises none of them; but seeing they
are weeping and coming to Zion, he is eyes to the blind, and legs to the lame;
therefore strive thou so to do with holy Job, 29. 15. And beware on the other
hand to deserve the curse for laying a stumbling block before the blind, or
make them wander out of the way, Deuteronomy. 27. 18.

Is our blessed Savior binding up that which was broken, strengthening that
which was sick? Ezekiel. 34. 16. For he will not break the bruised ^eed, nor
quench the smoking flax, Mat. 12. 21. Then thou strong Christian follow that
same trade, strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees of these
Lambs.

Did the Son of God assume soul and body, flesh and blood, that he might give
his flesh to feed his Lambs? and charges Peter as he loved him, feed his Lambs,
Joh. 21. 19. And what kindness thou shows to his Lambs, in the day of thy
accounts he will count it up to thee as done to himself, Mat. 25. 45. Lay hold
of this opportunity as a good Mere at to employ to the uttermost all thy
talents of gifts and graces, lay them out in helping to bring home the Lambs of
Christ, and in learning to bear with the infirmities of the weak Lambs: Look to
thy perfect copy that has no blot in it. Joh. 3. verse. 1. and downward, what
pains our Lord takes on Nicodemus, bearing with his rudeness and weakness in
knowledge, though some of his Questions were most childish; but our Savior
will not put out the spunk of his smoking flax, which kept kindling from that
time forth, for he pleads Christ's cause behind his back, Joh. 7. 5. And as a
true believer his faith kythed when the Apostles were weaker in faith, durst
not be seen, nor kyth; and with Joseph of Arimathea waited on Christ at a dead
life, and with living faith helped to enbalm and bury his Saviors body: What
knows thou but some of these weak Lambs whom now thou helps to come home, but
hereafter when they grow stronger they may help thee at a dead lift: Our
Savior did decree it, and foresee it in Nicodemus, no doubt, but thou can do
neither.

The woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 7. when our Savior is hungry, thirsty, and
weary about midday, after his journey, she not only refuses him a poor drink
of water, but checks him for requiring it; notwithstanding he did not only bear
with her uncivility, but also he offers her better water; which she not only
refuses, but gives him two checks in stead of thanks for his offer: but he who
did bear our sicknesses, did bear with her infirmities, although he said, How
long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you; and this was a part of
his penance for thy sins: then thou proud worm, shall thou storm or skunner at
thy Lords command and example, to bear with the infirmities of the weak.

It is probable thou will propound this doubt, shall I show all that kindness
to these of which I may have probable grounded doubts that they are not
gracious? For answer to thee, thou art not a fi^^ Judge of hearts; if their
Lord and thine has bestowed on them the privileges of the visible Church, and
they profess faith in that same Savior with thee, then he allows thee to judge
charitably of them, and converse with them in Christian fellowship, and love;
yea, does not our Lord, Mat. 9. 10. who hates all workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.
5. as such, yet he did converse with them, he condescends to eat with Publicans
and sinners, as their spiritual Physician, who loved mercy better then
sacrifice; for the prudent Physician will bear with many morosities in speech
and behavior from his Patient, and all for their good, intending their health:
And if some would object, granting it to be a point much belonging to the
Physicians Calling and Trade, yet they doubt if ordinary Christians be to tied.
I answer, Thou art as strongly bound as he by thy Christian Calling, bear ye
one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 7. Romans 15. 1.
The great Physician will examine thee upon this his Law, as well as the
Physician upon his Cures: for thou will find in the day of thy accounts, thou
will be as well examined how thou employed thy Talents of knowledge,
mortification, patience, and charity, in winning and strengthening thy weak
brother, as well as the Physician how he employed his skill for healing of his
sick Patients: See how the Creator of Angels condescends to converse, eat and
drink with Publicans and sinners, to the admiration and ignorant sinful
stumbling of the proud Pharisees, these whited Tombs: See and admire how that
Lamb of God admits that woman, a great sinner, known for such in all the Town
she lived in, Luke 7. 39. to k^s his feet without ceasing, when Simon the
Pharisee in the mean time, who had invited Christ to dinner, wondered that such
a holy Person suffered such a vile sinner to touch him, but the Pharisees were
utterly ignorant of this Doctrine, the strong to stoop and support the weak,
and their Satanical pride made them incapable of it, for our Savior who knew
what was in man, describes them, Luke 18. 11. They trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised others, which two sins are inconsistant with
true Grace: then let the strong Christian beware of these two sins, and thus
hitherto we have set before the eyes of your Soul the blessed example of our
blessed Redeemer, then I beseech you, who are strong in Christ, by the meekness
and gentleness of Christ, that ye bear with the infirmities of the weak Lambs,
and count it your glory.

But it is probable, that some unwilling to this Duty, will strive to shune the
yoke, as being absurd, and so no binding Duty, why, say they, to bide the
strong counterfite, and dissemble, and fain themselves to be weak, when he is
strong; I answer, their is a great difference betwixt simulation and
dissimulation, for the first is lawful, and our Savior practiced it, Luke 24.
28. Christ made as though he would have gone further, Beza renders it
(fingebat) which I like not so well, the Syriack Interpreter (faciebat eos
putare) But Aretius simulabat: For clearing up of this Christian policy of
simulation, for the good of the weak Christian, First, All the time our Savior
was upon the stage of this World, did he not hide the glory of his divine
Nature, under the Rags of the mortality infirmities, and misery of His humane
nature, Isaiah 53. 2, 3. He has no form nor comeliness, there is no beauty,
that we should desire him, verse 4. We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God
and afflicted, for he did not manifest His Glory, but only to his own,, and
that only in some degrees, as, and when it pleased himself, John 1. 14. And
when the two Disciples were going to Emmaus, Luke 24. 16. their eyes were held
that they did not know our Savior, who dare challenge any fault here? And when
a Christian in his lawful actions propones more ends then one, which is lawful
for him, it is lawful for him to conceall some of these ends, that the King of
kings condescends to man's weak capacity, as if he had eyes, ears, hands, feet,
and passions, when all these are infinitely below his purity, and perfection, so
the Parents and Nurse speaks such broken language to the Babe, as it best
understands, and the end makes it lawful, the child's edification, and this
same makes the condesending of the strong to the weak lawful and acceptable,
Romans 15. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification; yea, St. Paul caught the Corinthians with guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16.
All Trades have their secrets, so practical Divinity, and many cases of
Conscience: therefore Augustines answer upon this question, in his 19. Epist.
that these simulations, and stoopings of the strong to the weak, is not
mentientis astu, sed compatientis affectu, but that same Apostle 2 Cor. 11. 29.
seems to aggravate this doubt, who is weak, and I am not Weak, then St Paul is
really weak with the weak, which seems repugnantia in adjecto, when he was
really strong, both in Knowledge, Faith, and Holiness, how then was he weak? I
answer, through compassion, and the more strong in Sanctification, the more
sympathizing, and compassionat, his Soul the more wounded with sorrow, and so
the weaker through compassion, and that in two conditions, First, to apply to
the strong Christian, are some returning cordially to live in peace, and order,
and thou seeing them weak, be weak with them, stooping to them, taking half
steps with the weak Lambs, and not thy own strong long steps, are they now
shortly recovered out of a dangerous sickness, be very anxious that you
occasion not them to relapse, was their foot disjoynted, is it now set right?
then help them to take easy and even steps; there is another sort not yet come
to land, but on a Ship broken plank wearing to shore, let thy Soul be weak for
them, fearing and dreading their sinking, and be using all good means to bring
them safe to land, the Mother though in good health, if she see her Child weak,
and in danger of death, in her compassion will she not turn really weak, and be
at the sowning for fear and grief.

As we have set before you the example of God, and Jesus Christ our
Peacemaker, so we shall press the Duty, being so acceptable to God and good
men, with more perswasives, and first, seeing there is no gaining of our
neighbors spiritual good so readily, as by gaining their love first, for then,
and not till then will they take advise, or information, willingly, and
therefore, the most effectual way to gain them from their Error, is to
persuade them of our love to them, which is only best accomplished by loving
kindness, and carriage toward them, for no man will take advise, information,
or counsel from him whom he suspects, or thinks to be his enemy.

2dly. Thou art oblidged in Conscience, in thy judgment of charity to look on
him as an Elect, it may be as real as thy self, then if thou have that
charitable judgment, to think thy self Elect also; ^^ in the name of him who
has elected you both, charge you to be kind to him, especially, if you were in
Christ before him; see what kindness Judah an strong elder brother, many ways
bestowed on his younger and weak brother Benjamin Genesis 44 33 I will be a bond
man to my lord, and let my younger brother Benjamin go home to his father, what
knows thou, but thy weak brother may be the beloved Benjamin? then use, and
improve all thy gifts, and graces to bring home that darling Benjamin to his
Father and thine.

3dly. Look upon thy weak Brother as dear to Christ as thy self, even the price
of his Blood and Death, consider, Romans 14. 15. and 1 Cor. 8. 11. And therefore
beware of that fearful ^^n of destroying thy weak brother for whom Christ
dyed, by thy stubbornness, and unkindnesse to him, be aware to give him a sower
look, or down look, thou little knows, how little a stone will cause his weak
foot to stumble.

4ly. Look upon thy weak Brother as a Member of that same Mystical Body of
Christ with thy self, 1 Cor. 22. 17. Where the eye cannot say to the least
Member, the finger, or toe, I have not need of thee, verse 20. But on the other
part, when the weakest, or smallest toe of thy foot is hurt, will not the Mouth
cry, I am hurt, and suffer with it, and seek Cure, verse 16. The hand will
apply the salve, and the eye see that it be well and right done, then if thou
be a well seeing eye, and have but a little sore toe, yet he is a Member of that
same Mystical Body of Jesus, who will feel his sore, and cure it.

5thly. Christ Jesus is head of all that Mystical Body, whereof both that weak
Lamb and thou art Members, and he is a feeling and compassionate head, Ephis.
4. 15. And thy kindness to the weakest of ^is Members, he will take it and
repay it as done to himself, if thou edify in love the least Member of his
Mystical Body, Ephesians. 4. 12. O^ if thou despise, and hurt the weakest of ^hese
his M^mbers will not that Glorious Head, whose eyes are as a flame of fire,
Revel. 1. v^rse. say, I have seen, I have seen. Exodus 3. 7.

6thly. Look upon thy weak Brother, as a living stone in that holy and
spiritual Temple, whereof Christ is the foundation, and chief corner stone, and
Chris^^ also the Master Builder, commands thee who are strong to polish thy
weak Brother, and build him up in the Faith, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

7thly. Consider him as a little Temple to God. 1 Cor. 6 19. Then for thy Lords
sake, who dwells in it, help to polish and adorn it until the Cape-stone be
put on, this do at his command, who might have left thee in thy natural
condition, a leprous st^n^, and cast thee into that unclean place without the
City^ Levit. 14. 40.

8thly. As the whole body of Believers are ^hri^^'s Bryde, and Spouse, his
Sister, his Dove, his Undefiled, then this same Relation has every particular
Believer to Christ; Therefore help to deck and adorn his Spouse (the weaker the
more tenderly) as a Bride prepared for her Husband, let her not have cause to
complain to her Husband, that instead of adorning thou did rather rob and ^ull
off.

9thly. Beware to disdain that younger Brother, for his weakness, and
infirmity, and ignorance at present, what knows thou, but for all that he may
redeem the time, and overtake thy self, and run by thee and prove a stronger
Christian, and greater Saint, first on Earth, and then in Heaven not thy self.

10ly. As truly as in nature thou was a Babe before thou was a Man in strength
and stature, so in Grace and Knowledge thou was once a Babe, and it may be
profane also, which motive St. Paul pres^eth, Tit. 3. 2 3. Be gentle, showing
all meekness to all men, for we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobed^ent,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, but it may be thou will say, but
I was never disloyal^ ^o my King. I answer, thank God for his good providence
in thy goo^ education, in regard of Loyalty, but has thou not been disloyal to
the King of kines, by many wicked lusts?

11thly. What knows thou, bu^ ^ere thou die, thy Soul's condition may be as
pitiful, and low, as the weakest Lamb, that now thou sees reurning to the
Fold, what knows thou, but thou may fall in scandalous and grievos sin, and
thereby be brought to the very brink of despair, or with Job, in a desertion,
crying, pity me, pity me, O my friends, for the hand of God has touched me,
Job 19. Chap. 21. This motive is pressed by St. Paul^ Galat. 6. 1. Brethren, if
any man be overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted.

12thly If thou be oblidged in Conscience to lay down thy life, for thy
Brother, 1 John 3. verse 16. then certainly it is chiefly for the good of his
Soul, even as Christ laid down his life for him, then thou art strongly
oblidged to do the lesser Duty for thy weak brothers spiritual good, even to
be kind and compastiona^ toward him.

Has no^ the Lord put it in the heart of the most cruel Tiger, and devouring
Lion to be kind, and loving ^o their young ones, and the Reason is the same in
the general, the Parents are strong, and their young Ones weak, and has need of
their help, and that Law o^ God in nature is obeyed, the Lyon^ss gives suck to
^er young weak O^^s, and the Sea Monster draws out the breast, and gives suck
to their young Ones, Lam^nt 4 3. So thy ^o^d commands thee who art strong to
help thy weak Christian Brother.

Yea, does not the whole building of Heaven and Earth keep inviolable, by these
Laws which their, and our Creator gave them, for their own particular, and
mutu^l preservation, First the Earth furnishes Fuel to feed the fire, and
entertain^ it in us ^owells a^ appears in many Countries. 2dly. The Earth keeps
also in its bowels the treasures of wind, which by their blowing, help to keep
both Air and Water from corrupting. 3dly. The Sea furnishes the Earth with
Water, sending it up to the Clouds, and they down to the Earth and by conveying
Water through the bowels of the Earth t^ furnish continual springs on the
tops of the highest mountains. 4ly Does not the stars send down their
influences many hundred thousand miles from Heaven to Earth, and rules the four
Seasons of the Y^a^. Job 38. verse 31. 33. Yea, the Sun and Moon send down
their influences, not only much conducing to the welbeing of Man and Beast, but
also to the vegetables, Deuteronomy. 33. 14. Precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun
and Moon, yea, their influences pierces to the bottom of the Seas, and bottom
of the Mountains; So in this lower World, the King of Saints ha^h a City. His
Temple, His House, and every Believer is a stone thereof, o^^ such City this
King of Saints has given Laws, even that the strong and able Citizen, shall
help to build the weak, that they may be f^i^l the more firmly united to Christ
the Foundation by stronger Knowledge, and Faith, and better polished by more
holy Life.

As this Duty is great and good, so many Graces are required in the S^ul of the
strong, for performing this Duty to the weak, and first, Christian love, for
knowledge puffs up, but thy charity will edify the weak Brother, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
It suffers long, is kind, envyeth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, does not behave it self unseemly, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4. If thou then have this
Charity to thy Brother, how sweet a converse will it procure betwixt thee and
thy weak Brother. The second Grace Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Clothed with
Humility, in lowliness of Mind, each est^eming other better then himself, Phil.
2. v. 3. Thirdly, Meekness, Phil. 4 5. Gen^le, showing all Meekness to all M^n,
slow to Anger, if thou be of great understanding, Prove. 14. 29. a ^reater
Vassalage to thee then if thou ha^ taken in a City. Prove. 16. 32. which three
Graces are joined together, Ephesians. 4. 2. and Coloss. 3. 12. as beseeming Graces
to the Elect, and especially to Churchmen, who should be of he strong
Ch^^^ians that we are speaking of, whose office is to please ^he Flock for good
to their edification, 2 Cor. 13. 10. and should do all things for their
edifying, 2 Cor. 12. 19. gentle to all, in Meekness instructing these that
oppose, 1 Timothy 3. 6. And here I will speak a little to my reverend Brethren of
the Ministry, especially to these ^ho have had the most grieved hearts for the
wandering of their Flocks, and now finds their comfortable return, I hope I need
not press you to loving kindness toward them, for I (...). Sane quidem essemus
omninum mortalium absurdissimi si schisma^e and distractione Ecclesiarum
ob^ectaremur nec membrarum Christi corporis coalitionem ante omnia ^lta hona
reputaremus Tom 2. epist 342. Idem ep^st 265. initio (...), at in cord meo
tantum illius desiderium Ecclesiarum pacificandarum accensum esse affirmo ut
vita mea libentissime redemptum velim illud oddi incendum and invidiae quod
nequam ille spiritus concitavit extinctum penitus consapitumque esse.
th^^k every good Minister of Jesus Christ in this iuncto, will be so
overjoyed, that he will rather incline to the other ex^remity of indulgence to
them who return, and will be far from all ^artness and so^rness toward these
returning Lambs of hi^; and albeit hitherto they have possi^ly miscarried to
thee, by word or deed, yet seeing their Father and thine has forgiven them the
ten thousand Talents and thee also, then likewise must thou Christianly so give
the small Mi^es of Offense which any of the Flock have committed against th^^,
remembering these words of great St. Basil, who endured the heat of the day, in
the time of the Arian Persecution and says, that Churchmen of all other would
be most abominable, if they did not love the runiting of the Members of
Christ's Mystical Body before all Earthly things, yea, and himself wishes
th^re union of the Church more than his own life.

As Love, Humility, and Meekness are fit Graces in the Strong, for helping the
Weak, so is also heavenly Wisdom, which is peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated, Jam. 3. 17. and courteousness; 1 Pet. 5. 8. so that the strong
Christian who is endowed with these Graces; instead of aggraging the sins of
infirmity of the Weak, he will rather excuse them in tanto for their ignorance,
as Peter does the Jews, Acts 3. 17. and Joseph his Brethren, Genesis 50. 20.
Secondly, He will ^ear with the froward Speeches of the Weak, as the Lord does
with Jonah, chap. 4. verse. 9. For he that covers a transgression seeks
love, Prove. 17. 9. yea, Love covers all sins, Prove. 10. 22. to wit, of
Infirmity. Thirdly, They will answer ^he froward words of the Weak with
Meekness, for a soft tongue breaks the bone, Prove. 25. 15. Eli in his
imprudent rashness did mistake holy Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 14. by her soft and
humble answer Elies mistaken reproof was instantly turned into a prophetical
blessing of her, which the Lord fulfilled.

This Duty of the Strongs bearing with the infirmities of the Weak, must always
be subordinate to our pleasing of God, which two are very well consistent; for
our Savior (and so should every good Christian) increased in favor with God
and Man, Luke, 2. 52.

The Babes and Lambs of Christ must be ranked in two sorts, First, Some weak in
Knowledge but not so weak in sanctifying Grace; others, some more Knowledge,
but less sanctifying Grace, and accordingly the strong should carry toward
them; but they will find it much easier and sweeter to converse with these weak
ones, who have some measure of Sanctification, though their Knowledge be weak,
and these weak ones again must be suboivided, some only Weak; some both Weak
and Sick, that is, not only weak in Knowledge, but also Sick by reason of
Desertion or Soul perplexi^ies^ tending to Despair; these, of all the weak
Lambs, must be and should be most tenderly dealt with, and of these especially
our Savior speaks in His Gospel, better a Milnstone be hanged about his Neck^
and he be drowned in the deep of the Sea, then he offend one of these little
ones that believe in me: Be cautious to try out, and careful to oversee these
Lambs by any others.

As for you that are Strong, because you are not all of one size, I confes^ the
talk of bearing with the Infirmities, and gaining of the Weak to r^qui^e strong
Shoulders, and the Graces abovementioned required in the Strong for that Duty
proves no less. And therefore ye that are strong in K^^wledge, but we^k in
Mortification and Sanctification, no doubt that ^^sk will be more difficult to
you; and therefore my humble advice to you is, that if you find you are not
sufficiently strong in Mortification and Patience as to bear with the
Infirmities of them, beware o^ falling in reasoning or disputing with them, for
that will make no Healing, but rather more Strife: But withal, I would charge
you to make this choice, rather to bear with the weak Lambs then for pleasing
of Men to bear too much with Sinners, which is a displeasing of God; and thou
who will not stoop to bear with the infirmities of the Weak, does not thy
Father in Heaven bear with thy infirmities and grosser sins? does not thy
Neighbor, with whom thou converseth, bear with thee also? nay, he deserves not
to be born with, or live in Christian Society who is ^o passionate and
wrathful, that he will neither bear word or look, for in many things we sin
all, especially in sins of infirmity; beware thou be not like Job's Friends,
who had some measure of Knowledge, and came with real purpose to comfort their
Friend, but for want of Charity they proved mi^erable Comforters, and instead
of binding up his Soul wounds, ranckled them more.

As for you who are strong both in Knowledge and Grace, though the task be hard
and difficult sometime to the strongest Christian, as upon this account
sometimes ye will have to do with a Lamb so weak in Knowledge, that they will
think you scarce deserve the name of Christian, or that you have Grace, or are
walking in the way to Heaven; the best confutation of these is to live with
them, and before them in all good Conscience, and by time they will be
convinced of their Error toward you.

As for you who are profane in your Lives, and yet have more Knowledge in
Religion then the weak Lambs, beware ou^ take it not upon you to reproach these
Lambs, for in so doing you serve the Devil, ye break the heart of the tender
Lambs, ye grieve the Spirit of God; and who gave you authority to insult over
them, for to do these Lambs any good to their Soul condition, thou has no Grace
to do it, being a slave to Satan and his Lusts thy self; beware of the cu^se of
Amal^k, 1 Samuel 13. 3. his name to be blotted out from under Heaven, because
with a cruel heart he pursued and sm^^e the hindmost, s^eble, faint and weary
of Israel; and Ezekiel. 34. 20. 1. because the strong Ca^^el thrust with side and
shoulder, and pushed all the dise^sed with their horns, therefore will I
destroy the fat, and the strong, I will ^ed them with judgment, I will seek
that which was lost, bring again that which was driven away, bind up that which
was broken, strengthen that which was sick.

As for you Lambs, when you consider all this care that your Heavenly Father
takes of you, draw not hence this weak conclusion. That because your Father in
Heaven commands the Strong to bear wi^h your Infirmities, and to please you,
for your good to Edification, do not overwean upon that, as if your Father in
Heaven love you better then the Strong Christian, know you not, that the Father
on Earth, when he has a young tender Child very sick, or in danger of Death,
he will command his elder Brother, who is yet more beloved of the Father, then
that young Child, yet he will command him to sit up in the night, and attend
his sick Brother, forbid him to speak a word to offend him, why then is all
this care of the Father, even because the young one is weak, and sick, and in
danger of Death, and therefore has need to be tenderly dealt with, therefore on
the other hand, when thou considers thy Heavenly Fathers tender care of thee,
and thy salvation give him this thankful meeting, to wit, when any Strong
Christian accosts thee in Christian love, to gain thee from thy Errors, to
tender the Information, and Instruction, beware thou reject not such a
Messenger, Commissionated from thy Father but with all Meekness and Gentleness
lend thy Ear, and thy Heart to sound Instruction; and if thou will keep Church
Communion, and live orderly, thy Heavenly Father will more and more clear thee
of thy doubts, and mistakes, and resolve to follow the advice of the Apostle,
Philip. 3. 16. Which comes to this, that seeing thy Neighbor Christian, and you
agree in the Fundamentals, and saving Truths of Religion, to wit, one
Catechism, and Confession of Faith, which are the complete Rule to lead you
both to Heaven, walk jointly together in that way of Faith, and Holy Life; and
for any other difference in opinion, till ye be cleared of your doubts, there
is no danger for your Soul to let them lie asleep.

And for you that are Strong, remember that Precious Promise, in the Covenant
of Grace, Their sin I will remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. And none of his sins
that he has committed shall be mentioned unto him, Ezekiel. 18. 22. and 33. 16.
So in this be ye followers of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5. 1. Therefore I
charge you, that their bygone escapes be mentioned no more, as you would have
your Heavenly Father keep that Covenant of Grace to you, in the day of your
accounts, therefore let an Act of Oblivion, in the Souls of the Strong in Gifts
and Grace be passed, in favors of the Weak, who have returned, or are in the
way of returning to the Bosom of their Mother Church, that so these Weak Lambs
reflecting with an holy, and inward Indignation against themselves, for their
bygone Mistakes, and Wanderings, may rejoice in the Lord, for the kindness, and
Christian Brotherly Love, Humanity and Acceptance that they find, even from
these whom before they looked upon, during their separation as castawayes, and
and now they find that Truth confirmed, Charity suffers long, and is kind;
all which Christian Kindness they finding in you, who are Strong, it may prove
a strong Convincing and Gaining Argument upon their Spirits, that you have
been, and are still in the Right Way to Heaven; For by this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another, John 13. 35 And he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John 4. 16.

And for you, beloved in the Lord, who through the good hand of God upon you,
are returned to your Mother Church, to Communion in Word and Sacraments, let
there be no Schism in your Worship, but join with your Mother Church, and Holy
Church Universal, in singing the Doxology with them, make straight paths for
your feet, least that which is Lame be turned out of the way, but rather let it
be healed, Heb. 12. 13. Do not so far as in you lies make lame and halting
Worship, if you be silent, when others are singing Glory to their God; shall
your loving Mother Church receive you again in her bosom, and will ye be
unthankful and grieve her Soul, in retaining that halt which ye learned
straying on the Mountains, and retain still to be a scandal to your Brethren,
and a grief to her that bare you, God forbid.

As the Lords Covenant with Noah, and with mankind in him, and Sealled it with
a visible Sign, to continue to all Generations, that he would not any more
destroy the earth with a flood, and according to that Covenant has ^terat His
Promise; I have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves toss themselves, yet
cannot it prevail, though they roar, yet they cannot pass over it; I beseech
the Lord, if it be His will that such another Inundation of Errors, with such
Confusion, and disorder never overrun these three Kingdoms again, until that
day that the Lord send forth His Angels, and gather out of His Kingdom all
things that offend, and the King shall seperat the Sheep from the Goats, and
there shall be perfect Union, in singing one Song, with one Heart and Mouth
unto all Eternity, To Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, and to
the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Praise, And shall be Glory and Praise, by all
glorified Angels and Saints World without End.

AMEN.
FINIS.

