AN ORDINANCE For the Continuance and Maintenance of the ALMSHOUSES and
ALMS-MEN CALLED POOR KNIGHTS, AND OTHER Charitable and Pious Uses, Whereof the
late DEAN and CANONS of Windsor were Feoffees in Trust.



Thursday the Fifteenth of February, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That the Ordinance
[Entituled, An Ordinance for the Continuance and Maintenance of the Almshouses
and Alms-Men, called Poor Knights, and other Charitable and Pious Uses, whereof
the late Dean and Canons of Windsor were Feoffees in Trust] being passed by His
Highness the Lord Protector, with the Consent of His Council, on Saturday the
Second of September, 1654. be Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. MDCLV.

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE Continuance and Maintenance of the Almshouses, and
Alms-Men, called POOR KNIGHTS And other Charitable and Pious Uses, Whereof the
late Dean and Canons of Windsor were Feoffees in Trust.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector being zealous to continue and establish all
Works and Foundations tending to the Advancement of Learning, or any other
Charitable and Pious Use or Uses whatsoever; and more particularly the
Charitable and Pious Work and Foundation of the Almshouses, and Alms-Men,
called Poor Knights, and of certain necessary Officers, (to wit, a Minister, a
Weekly Lecturer, a Register, a Chappel-clerk, a Sexton, a Clock-keeper and
Bell-ringer, a Porter belonging to Windsor Castle; and also of Four Scholars,
whereof two in the University of Oxford, and two in the University of
Cambridge, and of preaching in the said Castle and Town of Windsor, and Relief
of the poor there; in relation whereunto the late Dean and Canons of Windsor,
were Feoffees in Trust of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter
expressed for the Uses aforesaid: And His Highness taking notice, That the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled, did by the late Act for Abolishing
of Deans, Deans and Chapters, etc. and settling their Honors, Manors, Lands and
Hereditaments in the actual Seisin and Possession of Sir John Wollaston, and
other Trustees in the said Act named and their Heirs, Provide, That all and
singular the Revenues, Rents, Issues, Fees, Profits, Sums of Money, and
Allowances whatsoever, which before the First of December One thousand six
hundred forty one, had been, and then ought to have been paid, disposed and
allowed unto, and for the Maintenance of any Grammar School or Scholars, or for
or toward the Reparation of any Almshouse, or for any other charitable Use,
payable out of any of the said Premises, should be and continue to be paid and
allowed as they were before the said First day of December One thousand six
hundred forty one, Any thing in that Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, as in and by the said Act, amongst other things, more at large
it does and may appear: Since which Act His Highness being informed and fully
satisfied, That the Lands and Tenements hereafter expressed, so by the said Act
vested in the said Trustees are yet still charged and chargeable with the said
charitable and pious Uses, with which the same were formerly chargeable; And
His Highness resolving to continue, settle and establish for ever the said
charitable and pious Work and Foundation, and likewise Governors for the better
ordering, managing and disposing of the said Revenues to those charitable and
pious Ends and Purposes, Has, by and with the consent of His Council Ordained,
and it is Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Commissioner
Whitlock, Lord President of the Council for the time being, Lord Wharton,
Colonel Sydenham, Colonel Mountague, Colonel Mackworth, Colonel Jones, Francis
Rous Esquire Provost of Eaton College, Major General Skippon, Colonel George
Fleet-wood, Cornelius Holland, Simon Mayn, Esqs; sir William Roberts Knight,
Christopher Whitchcot Esquire, sir John Thorowgood of Kensington, Edward
Cresset, William Trumbel, Thomas Wood, Esqs; Doctor Thomas Cox, Nicholas
Lockier, Nathaniel Ingelo, Fellows of Eaton College; The Major of Windsor for
the time being, Matthew Day, William Mills, Thomas Chapman Alderman of the said
Town of Windsor, Richard Winch, Alexander Hays, Gentlemen, or any Five or more
of them; and such others whose usual places of habitation shall be at
New-Windsor or Eaton, or within Thirty Miles of the same, which shall from time
to time for ever hereafter be nominated and chosen in and to the places and
steads of such of them as shall decease, or for just cause be removed by the
most part of them which then shall be Governors, to be and succeed in the place
and places of him or them deceasing, or so being removed, shall and may be
Governor of the said Almshouses, and of the Members, Goods, Lands, Tenements,
Revenues and Hereditaments of the same, at all times for ever hereafter: And
the said Governors and Almshouses shall for ever hereafter stand and be
incorporated, established and founded in Name and in Deed of a Body Politic
and Corporate, to have Continuance for ever by the Name of The Governors of the
Almshouses of WINDSOR Castle, and that the said Governors may have a perpetual
Succession for ever; And that they and their Successors may for ever hereafter
have, hold and enjoy, and to all intents and purposes, and shall from
henceforth and for ever stand and be actually seized and possessed of the
Structures, Messuages, Lands, Rents, Revenues, Profits, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, The said Act for abolishing of Deans, Deans
and Chapters, etc. or any other Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding;
That is to say, The Structures or Almshouses called The Poor Knights Lodgings
in Windsor Castle, with all Rooms, Out-yards, Gardens, or any other the
Appurtenances thereunto belonging, in as large and ample manner, to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, as the said late Dean and Canons, or any person or
persons claiming by, from or under them, did or might enjoy the same; and also
of and in the several Rectories and Parsonages, with all and singular their and
every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever hereafter expressed; that is to say, All those the
Parsonages or Rectories impropriate of St. Jermans, Upwimborn, All Saints,
Wimborn, Franckfaln, Shaw, Plimpton, S. Mary's Plimstock, Sampford, Spyny,
Plympton, Mary Brigston, Broadwinch, Ottrey, S. Mary Northam, Ipplepen,
South-Mowlton and Ilsington, lying and being in the several Counties of
Cornwall, Dorset and Devon, some or one of them; and all that the Rectory or
Parsonage impropriate of Aberguilly in the County of Carmarthen; all that
Rectory or Parsonage impropriate of Mara alias Llangarth, in the County of
Brecon; and all that the Rectory of Icorn in the County of Gloucester; and all
that the Rectory of East-Beachworth in the County of Surrey; and all that the
Rectory or Parsonage impropriate of Istleworth cum Twickenham, in the County of
Middlesex; and all that the Rectory of Ikleton in the County of Cambridge; and
all that the Rectory of Shiplake in the County of Oxon; and all those the
several Prebends of Alcamings and Urshfont, together with the Parsonage of
Urshfont, in the County of Wilts, and certain Tithes belonging to the Prebend
of Bedwyn, in the same County; and also all those the several Rectories or
Parsonages impropriate of Ambroshbury, Titcomb, Froxfield and Stapleford, in
the said County of Wilts, or by what other Name or Names soever the said
Rectories or Parsonages and Premises respectively are called or known; together
with all and every the Gleab-Lands, Tithes, Portions of Tithes, Fruits,
Profits, Emoluments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said several
Rectories, Parsonages and Premises respectively belonging, or in any wise
appertaining or accepted, reputed or taken as part, parcel or member of them or
any of them, late parcel of the possessions of the late Dean and Canons of the
late Kings Free-Chappel of S. George in New-Windsor, as Feoffees in Trust for
the Uses aforesaid (Except all such respective parts and parcels of any the
said Rectories, Parsonages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments as have been
heretofore sold by the Contractors for Sale of Deans and Chapters Lands, and
for which any the Purchasers have paid in the respective first Moyeties of
their Purchase-Moneys) To be held for ever hereafter by the said Governors and
their Successors, of His Highness the Lord Protector and His Successors, in
free and perpetual Alms, absolutely acquitted, and for ever hereafter
discharged of, and from all Assessments and Taxes whatsoever, ordinary and
extraordinary, heretofore granted by Parliament or otherwise, or by or upon any
other pretense demanded or claimed; And that the said Governors and their
Successors, by the same name, shall and may have power, and are hereby
authorized to Demise and Grant any of the beforementioned Rectories, Lands or
Premises (the said Almshouses and places of habitation heretofore designed and
used for the said Poor Knights, or any of the Officers or Servants to the said
Almshouses belonging within the Castle of New-Windsor aforesaid excepted) to
any person or persons whatsoever, not being a Governor or Governors thereof,
for or under, or not above or exceeding the Term of the Twenty and one years in
Possession, and not in Reversion; whereupon shall be Yearly reserved at least
Three fourth parts of the true Yearly value of the same, to be rated by a just
Survey to be taken thereof within Ten years before every such Demise and Grant,
and to take, require and purchase, and to sue and be sued, and to do, perform
and execute, all and every other lawful act and acts, thing and things, good,
necessary, or profitable for the said Incorporation, and the Charitable and
Pious Uses aforesaid, in as full and ample manner and form, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as any other Incorporation, or Body Politic or
Corporate, fully and perfectly founded and incorporated may do: And that the
same Governors and their Successors for the time being, or any Five or more of
them, may make, have and use one Common Seal, such as they shall think fit, for
the doing and confirming all and every thing and things, touching or in any
wise concerning the said Incorporation, or the Charitable or Pious Uses
aforesaid, other then such acts and things as are hereafter appointed to be
done and performed by a greater number of the Governors.

And be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Tenant and
Tenants of the said Rectories, Parsonages, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments herein beforementioned, or any of them; and every person and
persons claiming by, from or under them or any of them, shall henceforth pay
the several Yearly Rents, Sums of Money, and other Annual Revenues and Profits
arising out of the Premises respectively, unto the said Governors and their
Successors, or unto such person or persons as they shall appoint in the House
called The Governors House or Lodgings in Windsor Castle, belonging to the Poor
Knights, or such other place as shall be appointed by the said Governors or any
Nine or more of them, at such days and times as the same shall respectively
become due and payable; and in default thereof, to suffer all such Forfeitures
for Non-payment, as either heretofore they were, or hereafter they shall be
subject to by any Covenants, Proviso's, or Agreements made between them the
said Tenants, and the said late Dean and Canons, or the said Governors and
their Successors.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governors and
their Successors shall have, receive and take all such of the said Yearly Rents
and Sums of Money, and other Annual Revenues and Profits as became due and
payable at any time since the last Payments thereof made, either to the said
late Dean and Canons, or to the Parliament, or any authorized by them to
receive the same, testified by their lawful Acquittances respectively; And
shall and may call to account all and every the Tenant and Tenants of the said
Lands and Premises, concerning any such Arrerages as aforesaid: And if any the
said Tenants refuse to pay such Arrerages unto the said Governors and their
Successors, or unto such person or persons as they shall appoint, Then the said
Governors and their Successors, shall and may at their Election either take the
aforesaid Forfeitures, or bring an Action of Debt against every such Tenant or
Tenants, person and persons, his and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
in any of the Courts at Westminster or elsewhere, and recover the same with
Costs and Damages; In which said last mentioned Action or Actions of Debt, no
Defendant or Defendants shall be admitted to plead any Statute or Statutes of
limitations of Actions, Any Law, Statute or Statutes to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Governors and
their Successors, shall for ever hereafter, out of the Lands, Tenements, Rents
and Revenues hereby established, maintain the said Almshouses and the Members
of every of them, and shall order, rule and govern the same, according to such
Statutes as are to be found amongst the Statutes of the late Dean and Canons of
Windsor, touching or concerning the said Almshouses, and other the said
Charitable and Pious Uses, or by such other Statutes, Rules and Orders, as
shall at any time be conceived and made by the said Governors, or any Five or
more of them, under their common seal, for the better rule and government of
the same, not being superstitious nor derogatory to the Government now
established, nor repugnant to any the standing Laws of this Nation: And the
said Governors and their Successors, or any Nine or more of them, are
authorized and hereby enabled from time to time, to place such person or
persons (as have faithfully served the Commonwealth as Commissioned Officers in
the Army, and are now out of Commission, and incapable of doing Service, either
by reason of Age, or for want of some Limb lost in their Service; provided,
that since their said service done for the Commonwealth, they have not acted
any thing prejudicial to the Commonwealth, nor are dissatisfied with the
present Government) in the said Almshouses, in any place which now is, or
hereafter shall be void, as they shall think most deserving: Provided always,
That the Recommendation, Approbation or Consent of His Highness the now Lord
Protector during his natural Life, and his Successors, for the placing of such
person or persons respectively, be first had and obtained.

And be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Governors and
their Successors, or any Nine or more of them, shall have Power to remove any
that now are, or hereafter shall be Preachers in the Town and Castle of
New-Windsor, for Scandal or other just cause; and within Three months next
after any of them so removed, or after the decease of any of them, to elect in
the place of him or them so removed or deceased, such able, learned and godly
Preachers, as they shall think most deserving; And shall from time to time
choose such fit person or persons into the place or places of Register,
Chappel-Clerk, Sexton, Clock-keeper and Bell-ringer, and Porter, as they shall
sinde able and honest, when they come to make an Establishment under their
Common Seal: And the said Governors and their Successors, or any Nine or more
of them, are hereby further authorized and enabled, to make choice of Four
Scholars from time to time as they shall think fit, to be sent to the
Universities aforesaid; And are hereby further authorized to make such Alowance
to the said Preachers, the said Four Scholars, the said necessary Officers, and
the said Alms-men, and so far to relieve and employ the poor at work, and
repair the Church or Chapel in Windsor Castle, and the said Almshouses, as
the Rents, Revenues and Profits any way arising from the Premises can any ways
bear or be charged with.

And whereas His Highness is likewise informed, That Sir Peter Lemeir and Sir
Francis Crane, Knights, deceased, intended a further Addition of Five poor
Knights or Alms-men to those formerly in Windsor Castle, did by their several
last Wills and Testaments devise and give a certain Proportion of Land and
Money for the Erecting of Five Houses, and competent maintenance for such
additional Alms-men or Poor Knights so to be established as aforesaid; Be it
therefore Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Five Alms-men or
Poor Knights so to be added, shall be of the Foundation, and under the
Government and Rule aforesaid: And the said Governors, or any Five or more of
them, are hereby authorized to call before them the Executors or
Administrators, and all and every person and persons any way concerned in the
execution of the Wills of Sir Peter Lemeir and Sir Francis Crane touching the
Premises, and to require the same to be done and settled accordingly; And to
make such Laws, Orders and Decrees for the Settlement thereof, not derogatory
to the Government hereby established, as are agreeable to the Wills and
Intentions of the said Sir Peter Lemeir and Sir Francis Crane, and most
convenient and necessary for the Establishment and Maintenance of the said
Additional Alms-Men or Poor Knights, and the same to certify and return under
the Hands and Seals of the said Governors, or any Five or more of them, into
the Court of Chancery.

And it is hereby Ordained, That the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
England for the time being, shall require and enforce the due execution and
performance of the said Orders and Decrees, as in other Cases of Charitable
Uses is usually done and performed.

And forasmuch as His Highness is informed and fully satisfied, That the
Rectories, Parsonages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and Premises before
specified, after the expiration and determination of the several Estates and
Terms of Years now in being, may be improved over and above the present Rents
and Sums of Money reserved, due or payable upon any Demise, Lease or Grant now
in being of the Premises, which do in the whole amount unto the Sum of Eleven
hundred eighty six pounds thirteen shillings and five pence by the year.

And for that also it is the true intent and meaning of His Highness, that the
said Charitable and Pious Uses shall be fully satisfied and performed from
henceforth and for ever, out of the Rents, Issues, Revenues and Profits of the
Premises, His Highness has, by and with the Consent of His Council Ordained,
and it is Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the Rents,
Sum and Sums of Money, Issues, Revenues and Profits of all and every the
Rectories, Parsonages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises
beforementioned, over and above the Sum of Eleven hundred eighty six pounds
thirteen shillings and five pence, wherewith the same Premises stand charged to
the charitable and pious Ends and Purposes aforesaid, shall be and remain from
henceforth and for ever, at the only Disposition and Appointment of His
Highness and His Successors, to such Uses, Intents and Purposes as His
Highness, with the Assent of His Council, shall from time to time limit and
appoint, Any thing in this present Ordinance contained to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

Passed 2 September. 1654.
Thursday the Fifteenth of February, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That the Ordinance
[Entituled, An Ordinance for the Continuance and Maintenance of the Almshouses
and Alms-Men, called Poor Knights, and other Charitable and Pious Uses, whereof
the late Dean and Canons of Windsor were Feoffees in Trust] being passed by His
Highness the Lord Protector, with the Consent of His Council, on Saturday the
Second of September, 1654. be Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. MDCLV.


