COMETOMANTIA.

A DISCOURSE OF COMETS: Showing their Original, Substance, Place, Time,
Magnitude, Motion, Number, Color, Figure, Kinds, Names, and, more especially,
their Prognostics, Significations and Presages.

Being a brief Resolution of a seasonable Query, viz. Whether the Apparition of
Comets be the Sign of approaching Evil?

Where also is inserted an Essay of Judiciary Astrology, giving Satisfaction to
this grand Question, Whether any certain Judgments and Predictions concerning
future Events, can be made from the Observation of the Heavenly Bodies?

Both occasioned by the Appearance of the late Comets in England and other
Places.

London, Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1684.

TO THE Right Reverend Father In GOD, SETH, Lord BISHOP OF SALISBURY, AND
CHANCELLOR OF THE Most Noble ORDER OF THE GARTER.
MY LORD,
I Dedicate This to your Lordship, and if any shall ask the Reason, I know no
other than what all England knows as well as I, and that is the place you hold
in the Church, and in the Esteem of the Learned World, your great and admired
Worth, your Skill in the profoundest Sciences, of which your Excellent Works of
Astronomy, and particularly your Praelections of Comets are an undeniable
demonstration. Those that know either your Lordship or me, will not say I
flatter you; for your vast Merits command all that can be said, and for my part
I am not inclined to fawn upon any Person.

I cannot expect, my Lord, you should approve of this inconsiderable Present,
yet I persuade my self your Lordship will not be displeased at the good meaning
of the Offerer. I need not acquaint your Lordship that it is part of one of the
Canons of our Church, That Poor Beneficed Men may go in short Gowns. Can. 74.
We mean Folks, my Lord, must do as well as we can. I submit the whole to your
Lordship's Censure, and hope you will not lay open those Faults which, it may
be, none but your self can see. But I will usurp no farther on your Lordship's
Patience, than only by begging your Pardon that I have done it so far already.

I am, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Dutiful Son and Obedient Servant.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THou see here that I have sent a short Essay into the World; and I doubt not
but it will be an evident Conviction to all sober Minds of the Presaging Nature
of Comets. That which I have to say in behalf of the Piece is this, that I
never met with so much on this Theme in any Writer, whether English or Latin,
or of any other Language. If I had, I protest to Thee seriously I would not
have troubled Thee with this Essay of mine. To be plain, if what is here
presented be not the most rational and impartial, the fullest and best Account
that has hitherto been given of the Doctrine of Comets, and of Judiciary
Astrology, I am sure it is that which I intended should look something like it.
Nor do I pronounce this in Ostentation, for I have considered the Point it
self, and I have likewise read other Men's Accounts. I may say with Seneca, Sen.
Nat-Qu. 1. 7. c. 29.
(in the Book where he purposely treats of Comets) That I have searched and
enquired nec cum fiducia inveniendi, nec sine Spe. I abandoned all Confidence
and Presumption in this present Inquisition, but withal I Despaired not of
attaining to True Notions and Sentiments in this matter. I hope it will not be
looked upon as an unpardonable Crime, that I have got out of the common Road
sometimes, or when I light into it, that I keep not pace with other Travelers.
I declare I am for a free and rational way of thinking and discoursing. I have
a great fancy for Rabbi Achiva's Advice, Ne coquas in eadem olla in qua socius
tuus jam coxerit, Do not blindly adhere to what others have maintained. Brag
not of other Men's Inventions, but show something of thy own.

I might tell the Reader that I have endeavored to proceed with all Caution
and Modesty, and have avoided the Imputation which generally lies upon those
who handle this Subject, viz. their fond and idle way of Pointing peremptorily
at such and such particular Events which shall certainly follow the Appearance
of Comets. Besides, I have in other things studied to deliver my self with all
Moderation, which I am sure will not be displeasing to those who are Masters of
Reason and Prudence. I could have said much more upon the Subject. The Reader
may perceive from the numerous heap of particulars here inserted, that I might
have spun this Discourse into a far greater Length, and swelled it into a
larger Size. I have hinted Arguments, and contracted some Topics, which I
could easily have enlarged. But I was unwilling to be tedious, and I had a mind
the Reader should rise with an Appetite. As for the Idle and Envious, and such
who resolve that none shall see any thing of theirs in Public, I expect that
they should cavil at my Endeavors. They that sit still and cannot afford to
write, are the dreadfullest Objectors, the sorest Critics of all. I have
nothing to add now, but to bid defiance to Them, and to wish the Ingenuous and
Candid Reader to do so too.

THe Absence of the Author has occasioned the omission of these two Clauses,
which the Reader is desired in his perusal to insert in the following places:
viz. Page 18. Line 14. insert [And, which is the greatest Luster and Credit of
this Opinion, I find it espoused by that Profound Philosoper, and Reverend
Prelate of this Nation, Praelect. de Comet.
the present Lord Bishop of Sarum: He asserteth that Comets are Perpetual
Bodies, and that no new Comets appear, but the very same which were seen
before.] Page 59. line 1. insert [And I might tell you here what a great Light
of our Church and of Astronomy says in the Conclusion of his Excellent
Discourse concerning Comets: Taedet me divinationis in re tam incerta: I am
weary of divining (says he) upon this uncertain Subject: All our Philosophy
here is but Conjectures and Surmises.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. line 22. read Manilius, p. 23. l. 17. r. Julius Caesar Scaliger, p.
27. l. 11. r. Libertus Fromondus, l. 16. r. assert. p. 40. l. 3. r. the force,
p. 41. l. 18. r. Conick, p. 52. l. 17. r. disquisition, p. 57. l. 19. r.
turning, p. 63. l. 4. r. Impostures, p. 119. l. 16. r. and Assistant, p. 124.
l. 18 r. divinitus, p. 268. l. ult. r. vacavi.

Cometomantia.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Original, Substance, Place, Time, Magnitude, Motion,
Number, Color, Figure, Kinds, Names, and more especially the Prognostics,
Significations and Presages OF COMETS.
I Have observed that some of late, who think they make no inconsiderable
figure in the Age, have bore up very briskly against that common and so long
received Opinion, That the Appearance of Comets is ominous, and* portends some
calamitous Events to the World. They look upon This as a mere vulgar Error,
and will not be persuaded that it has any other Foundation than the
prejudicate Fancy and Imagination of the deluded People. I must freely profess
my self to be one that has other Notions of this matter; and having satisfied
my self about it, I will try whether I can do the same to others: For I take it
to be a laudable Endeavor, and at present a seasonable one, (we having so
lately been allarmed by the sight of such glaring Bodies in the Heavens) to
propogate the Sentiments which I have of this Doctrine, and to reduce those
that are mistaken to right Apprehensions of it.

Four things then I design:

1. To enquire into the Nature of Comets, that is, (as the Title of this
Treatise gave it you) their Original, Substance, Place, Motion, Figure, (which
last contains the different Species or Kinds) and whatever other circumstances
and Phenomenon belong to them, and from all these, and the different Disputes,
Controversies and clashing Opinions concerning them, to evince them to be
Extraordinary and Portentous.

2. I will from the consideration of the true Nature of Causes and Signs prove
them to be both Effectual and Significant, and particularly that they bode
Calamities and Evils to the World.

3. I will add the numerous suffrage of sacred and profane Authors to back my
Opinion; for though I confess I never thought the Cause of Truth was to be
decided by majority of Votes, yet in this Case I dare venture to put it to the
Poll.

Lastly, I will answer the Objections which are brought to invalidate my
Assertion, and there among my Replies to other Cavils, I will purposely
encounter Judiciary Astrology, and soberly and impartially give my Notion of
it; which if it prove not to be exactly adjusted to some Men's Measures, yet I
hope it will be found to answer to the Standard of Reason, which I reckon to be
much better.

In the first place I am to enquire into the Nature of Comets: and here I must
begin with the Substance or Matter of them. But behold! (as an Eviction of what
I have already suggested, and what will more evidently appear in the sequel,
viz. the dubious and uncertain Sentiments of Philosophers and others about
these Bodies) there were some of old who would by no means allow them to have
any Substance or Consistency at all, but to be mere Appearances: which is as
much as to say, There are no such things in Reality. This Opinion is thus
represented by Seneca the Philosopher, in that Book which I shall have occasion
often to cite, Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 7. cap. 19.
Quidam nullos esse Cometas existimant, sed species illorum per repercussionem
vicinorum siderum, aut per conjunctionem cohaerentium reddi. They held that the
Phenomenon which are called Comets, are caused by the Reflection or Refraction
of the Beams of the Sun, or Moon, or the neighboring Stars, or by a
conjunction of many Stars together. They tell us at other times, that their
Production is the same with that of the Rainbow, the Parelion, and Halo, and
that they are not distinct from those luminous Bodies which they are near to.
But certainly it is a great piece of Philosophic Folly to think that they are
mere shows, and not of a real consistency. This might be confuted from several
Topics, but especially from these Two: namely,

First, Their Duration, their constant and continued appearance for so long a
time: whereas, if they were only seeming and fantastic Spectacles, they
would not hold out (as they do) so many days, nay weeks, not to say months.

Again, if they were Images they would not be seen Alike, and in the same Shape
to all persons in what situation soever; the Angles of Incidence must needs
vary. But it is well known that they appear with the same Figure in diverse and
distant Countries to all spectatours: whence it is proper to conclude that they
are real Physical Beings. Well then, granting them to be Substances, what Kind
of ones are they, Spirit or matter? Some have had so high an esteem of Comets,
that they have ranked them among Immaterial and Intellectual Spirits. Pliny,
the Elder, in the Second Book of his Natural History, and the Five and
twentieth Chapter, (which likewise I shall frequently quote in the following
Discourse) acquaints us that the Comet which was seen seven nights together
after the assassinating of Julius Caesar in the Senate House, was believed by
the vulgar to be that Great Man's Soul received up into Heaven among the number
of the Gods. Eo sidere significari vulgus credidit Caesaris animam, etc. The
same is testified by Suetonius and Plutarch, in the Account which they give of
Caesar's Life and Death. Nay, this was not only the conceit of the Roman
Rabble, but the said Pliny tells us, that Democritus, who one would think
should have laughed at this among the other Follies of Mankind, espoused this
persuasion, viz. That Comets are the Souls of Deceased Heroes. And (to see how
taking such Dreams and Whimsies are with some heads) Bodinus seems to be hugely
pleased with it, Theatr. Nature. l. S 2.
and is very inclinable to believe that those Blazing Lights are the Souls of
brave Men departed, and carried up to Heaven, and there triumphing. I might
suggest here (as somewhat relating to this purpose) that the Transmigration of
Souls into Stars was an ancient Ethnic Dream, and so might be the occasion to
some of thinking also that departed Spirits (if very brisk and generous) mount
aloft, and presently turn into Coments, and in those fiery Mansions display
their pristine vigor and mettle. Others, though they hold them not to be Souls
of Men, or departed Ghosts, yet they forsake not the notion of their being
Spirits: that is, they maintain that they are Spirits of a lower Rank and
Quality, near of kin to the finest and subtilest matter: Thus I remember the
high-flown Chemist asserts them to be a certain Compound of Spirits, Paracels.
Iid. de Meteor.
but what he means I am not so skillful an Adept as to understand. This only I
apprehend, that He, and much more Those who make them to be irradiated Souls
above, exalt the Nature of Comets too high. It is enough that they are of the
order of Corporeal Beings. And being so, it will be asked in the next place.
What are the Materials of these great Streaming Bodies? Are they of Terrestrial
or Celestial Matter? Which of these two are they, Earth or Ether? Here
likewise Philosophers are divided, and cannot agree on their Verdict. Aristotle
and his Partisans declare, that they are of Earthly Extraction, and no other
than Meteors, raised from great heaps of dry and viscous Exhalations. Many of
the Stoics are pleased to side with the Aristotelians, and generally all those
that hold them to be bare Meteors, and to be placed under the Moon, say they
are of a Terrestrial origin. But here again they are subdivided, Meteor. l. 1.
c. 7.
for some maintain that they are Earthly matter Inflamed: Thus the great
Aristotle, and some late Astrenomers, as Regiomontanus, a groat Promoter of all
Mathematical and Astronomical Studies* and that learned Frenchman Piso, and
others, hold that Comets are set on fire by the rays of the Sun. Whereas
others, as Heraclides Ponticus of old, and some of late will have them to be
subtle and Diaphanous matter exhaled from the Earth into the Air, and there,
by reason of the Sunbeams which they receive into them, Enlightened and made
bright, but not Enflamed. But that Comets are of Earthly Original, though it
was credited of old, and by a few of the Moderns, yet it will hardly gain
belief at this time of Day. It is now generally asserted, that most of them are
above the Moon (of which you shall hear more anon:) and if their Seat be so
high, it will be difficult to persuade men that they were exhaled from the
Earth. It is impossible so much Matter should be amassed together as must serve
for a Comet, which is of so great a bulk, and lasts so long as some of them
have done. It the Diametre of some of them be four times, nay, of the larger
sort of them, be ten times greater than the Earth, Snellius de Cometa anni 1618.
(as one who was Professor of Mathematics at Leyden has calculated it, the
Earth and Sea cannot afford Matter enough to make One of them.

This Opinion then being exploded, another is to take place, according to which
the Chaldeans among the ancient Philosophers, and the Moderns generally, as
Cardan, Tycho Brahe, Galilaeus, Des Carts, and many others, affirm that Comets
are constituted of Celestial Matter. But alas! though they agree in this in the
general, yet in the Particular Explication of it they are found to dissent from
one another; for it is hotly disputed whether these unusual Lights are bred
from the Effluvia of all the Planets, or from the Sun alone, or from the other
Stars. Cometograph. l. 7.
Hevelius the Learned Professor of Mathematics at Dantzick undertakes to
decide the Controversy by avowing that they are made of the Effluvia and
Evaporations of both Erratick and Fixed Stars, but especially of the Sun, there
being so great an Exhalation of matter from this vast Body, that it is able it
self alone in one Year to make innumerable Comets. So that according to this
Gentleman, these uncommon sights in the Heavens are so far from being Wonders,
that it is rather a Wonder, and against the course of Nature, that they do not
always and in numberless Companies appear. An Assertion unworthy of so acute
and ingenious a Philosopher! for he renders the most Glorious Luminary of
Heaven, and that which is the Masterpiece of all the Works of the Creation,
the most Irregular and Monstrous Body in the World, whilst he would offer this
to our belief, that whereas by its natural Make, it ought to afford matter for
infinite Comets, yet it perpetually acts contrary to its Frame and
Constitution, and produces not one Comet sometimes in Twenty Years. In my
judgment this is but mean Philosophy, and it can never prove good Astronomy,
though I have otherwise a profound Respect for that Worthy Person, who by his
excellent and elaborate Writings has both merited and purchased a great Name
and Repute among all those who are addicted to Mathematical Studies, and has
particularly obliged the Virtuosi in England by communicating his Notions to
them with so much freedom.

Thus I have in some measure showed the Disagreement of the Learned Tribe about
that part of the Doctrine of Comets which respects their Original, whence I
shall afterward prove them to be Extraordinary and Presaging: but it is little
I have hitherto effected; I must hasten to dispatch what is yet behind of the
same Argument. Let us then ask these Men of Skill, What were Comets before they
appeared to us in this shape, and under this Name and Character? Our great
Mathematicians and Philosophers are at odds, as to this point. If you enquire
of the famous Monsieur Renatus des Carts, (that man of France who was as great
a Reformer in Philosophy as Calvin, his Countryman, was in Divinity, he whose
Philosophy was so Taking and Charming, that a wise Queen quitted her Crown to
be at leisure to study it,) this great Man tells you they were Fixed Stars; for
his Hypothesis in brief is this, That those fixed Lights have their Maculae, or
thick matter, which he calls the Third Element; and being freed from these,
sometimes some of them come into view, and go for New Stars; but being overrun
by them, they are absorped into another Vortex, and become Comets. So that
Comets are fixed Stars first Incrassated, and then Apostatized. This is the
Noble Romantic Philosopher, who mingles Heaven and Earth together, or rather,
confounds one with the other; and he that could imagine this Earth of ours once
to have been a Sun, may be pardoned if he presents us with such a notion of
Comets as you have heard. Others are very vigorous in defending them to be
Planets, or Wandering Stars, but distinct from the seven celebrated ones, (for
they hold that there are more than those which are ordinarily reckoned.) The
Dogmatists of this Persuasion were the Pythagorean Philosophers of the Italick
Sect, the Chaldeans (as Stobaeus relates, Ecolg. Physic. c. 3.) Hippocrates,
Diogenes, Phavorinus, Epicurus, Lucretius, etc. and of late Cardan, the noted
Physician of Milan, Fracastorius an excellent Professor of the same Faculty in
Verona, Fienus, Vallesius, (l. 1. de Philos. Sacr.) and some others. These, I
say, contend that they are Planets, that is, that they are Thick, Dark, Opake
Bodies in themselves, and that they borrow all their Light from the Sun. And
herein the learned Hevelius agrees with them, who will not allow Comets to have
the least Light of their own, but they receive it all, as other Planets do,
from the great Source of Light, and propagate it to us by Reflection, as is the
guise of Planets: and hence he gathers (and consistently enough with his own
Hypothesis) that the Tails of Comets must needs be made by the Sun, of which I
shall speak immediately. And the French Philosoper before named, though
otherwise a Dissenter, strikes in here, and declares that they receive all
their Light from the Sun, and in that resemble Planets. You must know likewise,
that, according to the judgment of the forementioned Philosophers, these
Planets or Comets (call them which you please, for it is come to that) have
existed always from the first Creation, but have been hid in the Heavens for a
time, and at length come into view. They seem to us to be New, but they are
really of the same date with the first Origin of all things. Seneca lets you
know this was his Opinion, Non existimo Cometen subitaneum ignem, Not. Quaest.
l. 7. c. 22.
sed inter aeterna opera naturae A Comet is a Temporary Planet, in regard of
the People to whom it appears, but otherwise it is from Eternity, supposing the
World (as that Philosopher does, but falsely) to be so. A Comet is a wandering
Star, that after a certain Revolution wheels about, and comes into sight: after
it has lost it self a great while, it finds its way into our Hemisphere. It is
a Planet that has gone Incognito a long time, and has been seen by none but
the Sun, if our natural Philosopher represents it aright: Sunt qui haec sider a
perpetua esse credunt, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.
suoque ambitu ire, sed non nisi a sole cerni. They come into our sight after a
long Circuit and Risque, and then vanish, and retire to those Remote places
where they were at first. And there I leave them and proceed. According to the
Assertion last propounded, Comets are single Planets not before known, seen and
observed by us. Now in the next place you shall see that another pack of
Philisophers will not suffer them to be single Stars: no, they must be several
Stars or Planets intermingling their Lights. The Patrons of this were Zeno,
Anaxagoras, Democritus (even that Democritus who held they were the Souls of
Heroes; for you must take notice, that one Philosopher may hold two or more
opinions of the same thing,) these would needs have Comets to be (...), a
Coapparition of diverse Errant Stars together, viz. when they seem to touch one
another by reason of their Neighborhood; as the great Stagyrite has presented
us with their Doctrine, l. 2. Meteor. c. 8. Or as Seneca more briefly; Comets
according to them (says he) are Conjunctio cohaerentium siderum, ( Not. Qu. l.
7. c. 10.) a Club of many Stars: and Plures Stellae quae current, Many Stars
running into one, Not. Quaest. l. 7. c. 3. Or, according to the Astronomical
Poet, Subjuncta Sidera, Marilius, l. 1. Astron. Another thus, a Comet is (...),
a Synod, or an Assembly of Stars joining their Light together. Plutarch. de
Placit. Philos. This, it seems, was the sense of that Historian who gives an
account of a Comet of a dreadful aspect which visited the Eastern part of the
World in the Year 383. and he expresses it thus, Nicephor. Eccles. hist. l.
12. c. 37.
(...), etc. A great Company of Stars (says he) was gathered together, and the
Light which came from them all with great violence made up one huge Flame,
which appeared in the likeness of a Sword. Some of the Moderns undertook to
solve the Phenomenon of a Comet after the same manner, as Cysatus Professor of
Mathematics in the University of Ingoldstadt, and Licetus a Philosopher of
Genua lib. de Novis Astris and Cometis. After the rate of These Men's Astronomy
a Comet is an Association or Fellowship of Stars, which seem to be but one
Star, because they stick so close to another. It is a Congeries of Numberless
Lights which lovingly mingle their Rays together, and so make as it were one
long straggling Star. This has some affinity with their Fancy who think a Comet
to be a kind of Galaxy, and perhaps they might borrow their conceit from Father
of Philosophers, Aristot. l. 1. Meteor. c. 10.
who treats of the Milky Circle and Comets in the same Chapter, and seems to
solve one by the other. From what has been said it is evident that it is not
agreed among the knowing and curious, whether Comets be fixed or wandering
Stars, and if they be of this latter sort, whether they be single, or several
ones. That they are not a Congeries or Heap of Stars is excellently well proved
by One who treats on this Theme designedly: Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 7. c. 12,
13, 14.
and I am clearly of the judgment that it may as substantially be demonstrated
that they are No Stars at all. For weigh the nature both of the Planets and
fixed Luminaries, and you will find that Comets have nothing of their qualities
and properties. It is not the nature of either of those kind of Stars to be
greater at first, and then to decay and dwindle, and at last to be extinct, or
(as some few Comets have been, as Seneca and Pontanus report) to be little at
sirst, afterward to grow greater, and at length to lose both their greater and
lesser bulk. This never was of the constitution of Stars: Nor have Comets any
thing of the Motion or other Properties of Stars (as I shall show afterward,)
and therefore I cannot discern how they can properly be called, or thought to
be Stars.

Having thus far spoken of the Original Matter whereof Comets are thought,
according to the different Genius and Sentiments of Men, to consist, I come now
to consider their Place and Situation, though I have intimated something
already of These, and it was necessary to do so, because their Original and
Place are so nearly related and depend upon each other. But I will now treat of
This more designedly, and from the wondrous variety and inconsistency of
opinions concerning Comets I will advance to prove that they really are and
ought to be reckoned as Prodigies.

And first let us attend to those who place all Comets below the Moon. These
are the Peripateticks, and many of the Stoics; and they are followed by
Philosophers and Mathematicians of later time, as Regiomontanus, Iunctinus,
Fracastorius, Julius Caesar, Scaliger, Claramontius, and several others, whose
persuasion is this, that Comets are sublunary Meteors, i. e. Exhalations
mounted up to the upper and highest Region of the Air, and that there they
hover, and at last are set on fire and blaze. But certainly we might be brought
off from embracing such a Tenet as this, by considering, that if Comets were
Meteors, they would jump and skip here and there, as other Meteors are observed
to do; and they must needs be subject to such a Motion, both because they are
often driven with the Wind, and because they cannot but be set on running and
leaping by their own fire. Such considerations as these have moved diverse great
Philosophers and Astronomers to reject the Aristotelian way, and to enter upon
another more probable and rational. They think it a degrading of Comets to
thrust them down into the Elementary Region, and therefore they have
universally agreed to exalt them above the Moon.

This was practiced before Aristotle by the old Chaldean and Pythagorean
Philosophers, by Democritus, Anaxagoras and Zeno; and after their time by the
Judicious Seneca, and since that by the acutest and most discerning Moderns, as
Cardan, Tycho, Galilaeus, Keplar, Longomontanus, Cartesius, and great numbers
of other Learned Men. They prove their point by the Paralax, which is the
Diversity of sight, or change of Aspect, or the Difference between the True and
Seeming Place of a Star or any other thing hanging in the Region above us. This
in all the Comets that have been observed by them was lesser than that of the
Moon; Ergo they are above the Moon: For it is certain that that Body is by so
much the more elevated from the Earth, by how much the lesser its Paralax is,
as the greater this is* the thing seen is the nearer; and on the other side,
the lesser this is, that is the further off. And for this Reason the ingenious
French Philosopher places Comets in the Liquid Ether, between the Regions of
the Planets and the fixed Stars, because (says he) they have none, or an
unspeakably small Paralax or Variation of Sight to those diverse spectators that
look on them at the greatest distance.

I know the greatest Astronomers have differed about the Doctrine of Paralaxes,
whereof the incomparable Tycho Brahe, and that noble Italian Philosopher and
Mathematician Claramontius, are a famous Instance. The renowned Galilaeus,
Julius Scaliger, and Bodinus laugh at the proof which is brought from the
Paralax. Ricciolus Almagest. lib. de Cometis.
And a skillful person of late, who undertakes to be Umpire between the
Aristotelians and Tychonists, concludes peremptorily that there is no
Mathematical demonstration for Comets being above or below the Moon. But it may
be they mean no more than this, that Paralaxes are uncertain, or rather, that
the taking of them truly and exactly is extreme difficult, the instruments are
not every way good; and several Refractions which happen may hinder the just
sight.

And now one would imagine there should be no farther disagreement than this,
that some Comets are above, and some below the Moon, some in the Heavens, and
others in the Air. But we shall find it otherwise; for a third sort acquaint
us, that the very same Comets are sometimes below and at other times above the
Moon: So Christopher Clavius, Libertus, Fromondus, Licetus, Resta, Caboeus
Professor of Mathematics at Genua, Bulialdus that eminent Gallick Astronomer,
and particularly the sagacious Kepler asserts that a Comet may come down from
the Ether into the Air. In Cometar. Physiolog.
Though it was generated above the Moon, yet there is good reason to believe
that it may fall down; and such a one was that which appeared A. D. 1450.
Phranza. Chronic. l. 3. c. 20.
and eclipsed the whole body of the Moon, as the Histories and Catalogues of
Comets inform us. Such was that which was seen at Christ's Nativity (if it were
a Comet,) and such was the famous Sword-Flame which appeared over the City of
Jerusalem a year together. We are sure that two of these were Sublunary Comets.

Some Comets then are situated as Aristotle says they are, and whilst the
Astronomers, that came afterward, endeavor to prove the contrary, and that
all the Comets that ever appeared are Celestial, This attempt of theirs is to
be looked upon as an extreme on the other hand. It is enough to say that most
Comets have been high and lofty; and indeed it was fit they should be so, that
the World might take the greater notice of them.

As I hope I convinced the Reader before, that the Generation and Production of
Comets is a difficult search, so from what has been since delivered, I doubt
not but their Situation and Place appears to be of the same quality. So
perplexed are these Points, that no less than a douzen Opinions are reckoned up
by a modern Astronomer concerning the Matter and Place of Comets. Ricciol.
Almagest.


There is still another great difficulty to be considered, and that is the
Motion of Comets, which by all Astronomers is looked on as extravagant and
unaccountable. Whether these Bodies take their Journey in a direct Line, or a
circular one, and arch-wise (as the Planets) is disputed by them; and at last
it is commoly said, that the way they take is transverse and oblique. You may
hear them cry out very despairingly, that they imitate neither the motion of
the Sun, nor other settled Luminaries, but are perfectly sui juris, they take
their own course, and that commonly is very unnatural. Some go on directly in
the true course of the Zodiac, but others run through it backward, as Bodinus
(Theatr. Not. l. 2.) and Hevelius (Prod. Comet) observe. And not only one
Comet differs from another in its Motion, but oftentimes from it self: Nay,
sometimes it remains fixed in the same place, and stirs not one way or other;
which our Naturalist so often alleged takes notice of, when he says, Moventur
autem alii Errantium modo, alii Immobiles haerent, Not. Hist. l. 2. This only
is observed, That though some at one time or other have moved to all the Points
of the Heavens, yet they generally and usually veer by their own proper Motion
toward the Poles. But why they appear rather without the Tropicks than within,
and why they make their passage through Boots, and the great Bear, and for the
most part are seen about the Poles either Southern or Northern, but especially
the Northern, and why they do not show themselves in the height of the Heavens;
These are all unaccountable, that their Motion may be answerable to all other
things observed in them, and that there may be some proof made of what I have
undertaken, viz. that Comets are an Irregular and Anomalous sort of Lights set
up on purpose in the Heavens to invite the Inhabitants of the Earth to behold
them, and to bid them do something more than that, as I shall show afterward.

But the main thing that puzzles is the Figure which Comets appear in, the
affrightning Brush or Stream which they show.

First, how came they to have any such thing at all? And,

Secondly, How comes it to pass that this Stream or Blaze is always opposite to
the Sun? And after I have examined this, I will speak of the more particular
Figures or several Species of Comets.

First then, what Philosophy can give an account of the Flaming Brush which
issues from them? But here, before I pass any farther, it must be remembered
that Astronomers speak of three sorts of Comets:

1. That which they call the Hairy one, viz. when the Rays are spread on all
sides alike, and are equally in a Circle expanded, like the Hair of a man's Head.

2. That with a Beard, which is when a Comet emits its Rays toward that part
of the Heaven to which it moves.

3. That which appears with a Tail, viz. when its Beams are extended toward
that part of Heaven from which it recedes: Or the difference between the
Bearded and Tailed Comet is only from the different aspect to the Sun: the one
showing itself before the Sun rises, looks toward the West; the other
appearing after the Sun is down, turns its Stream Eastward. I know some make
the distinction otherwise, namely, as to the Erection of the Figure, it is like
a Beard or Mustaches; and as to the Depression of it, or Hanging down, like a
Tail. But the old Dictatour of Philosophy reduces those three kinds into two,
Aristot. Meteor. l. 1. c. 9.
(...). A Comet (says he) is generated according to the Figure and Shape of
the Exhalation which is drawn up by the Sun: if this be set on fire on all
sides alike, and be exactly round, then it is properly called a Comet, or Hairy
Star; but if it be extended in length* then it is a Bearded one: And this
comprehends under it all the blaze and stream of Light which proceeds from
Comets, call it Beard, or Tail, or what you please.

The former of these (which Aristotle says is the True Comet) is seldom seen,
and I do not remember that I ever read above two or three Instances of it. The
latter is the more known and celebrated kind, and may, by that great
Philosopher's leave, be properly called a Comet, according to the true
Etymology of it expressed by the Poet, Flamma Comas imitata volat, manilius
tenuesque Capillos.

Now it may deservedly be asked, What is the Reason of this strange Figure? Why
do not Comets appear to us round, (be they flat or disciform in themselves, as
some imagine, that is not much to the purpose, but) why do not the whole bodies
of the Comets appear to be Globous, as all other Stars, both fixed and
erratick, seem to be? What makes those differ from these? Why are the Rays and
Splendor of a Comet carried further than that of other Stars? Why sends it
forth such straggling Beams? Since the Figure of all Stars is Globular or
Sphaerical, what causes a Comet (if it be a Star) to be of a long Figure? Why
do not all other Stars shoot out such Streams as this? I desire not to make
difficulties, but certainly these Questions have not been solved to the
satisfaction of any diligent and curious Enquirer. Such Reasons as the learned
have suggested I will set down, and I am confident that it will be made clear
from them, as from all other things appertaining to Comets, that they are a
sort of Phenomenon which were made to puzzle the World, and that their strange
Nature signifies to us their more strange events.

I am to let you know then, that, according to the different Hypotheses taken
up, some write, that the Tail or Beard is part of the Comet; others on the
contrary as stiffly maintain, that it is not part of it, but is only the Rays
of the Sun shot through the Comet's Head.

First, It is said, that the Tail is part of the Comet, or (as Seneca
represents Apollonius his judgment) the long Tail is the form of this kind of
Planet: The Body of the Star is made of this Figure. But, according to
Aristotle, i. e. if it be a Peripatetick Comet, the Head of it is supposed to
be troubled with Fumes and Vapors, and these being overheated by the Sun, are
set on fire, and so the Tail is no other than the flame of the burning Meteor.

But seeing a Flame by its natural Lightness tends upwards, why is not the Tail
of every Comet exactly erect? For they suppose Comets to be low, and their
Flame to be seen in its just proportion, whereas the fixed Stars and others are
not supposed to appear Shaerical, because of their vast Distance from us, which
confounds all distinction of Figures. Piso's Specul. Comet.
One very Astronimically skilled solves it thus:

The Flame of the Comet (says he) does not move directly upwards, and appear
erect because of the solid Orb above it; (for he believes these Comets with
Tails or Beards are in the Concavity of the Orb of the Moon:) hence the Flame
is forced downwards, just as the Flame in an Oven or Furnace, beaten from
above, strikes toward the sides. But if it be so, how happens it that the
Flame is not seen on both sides or ends, but only on the hinder part of the
Comet? How comes that part which is next to the Sun to be always without a
Train or Stream? The Flame of the Comet is driven by the Wind toward one side,
as we see plainly in Torches when the Wind blows, so the Peripateticks give an
account of the Tail or Bush of a Comet. But if it were caused by the Wind, then
there must be always a great Wind stirring as long as Comets appear, and the
Blaze of these would increase as that increases; but I never read that any such
Observation was made, and we know by experience that Calms have accompanied the
Appearance of Comets, whatever violence of Weather happened afterward.

Besides, if the long Train were occasioned by the Wind, it would also
disappear when the Wind is allaid. Moreover, the Wind has not blown from the
same Point of Heaven all the time of the Comet's appearing. And that it should
do so to all Comets is yet stranger: You may as well say, and maintain it,
that the Wind is ever in the same Corner. But, after all, if I should add, that
Comets are above the Wind, as it is hugely probable they are, then this way of
solving the Difficulty is quite overthrown.

In short, according to the Aristotelian Hypothesis of a Comet being a heap of
Inflamed Exhalations, I do not see how the Tail can be made out; for this being
a Flame, and lighter and rarer Matter than the head of the Comet, it should
tend upwards in the form of a Pyramid, as it fares with all other Flames.

Again, such a heap of viscous Vapors must needs burn on all sides, if it be
equally kindled, and then the long Train is spoiled: or if the matter does not
burn equally, then certainly There where the Fuel is most capable; and how can
that be supposed to be always just opposite to the Sun? But if the Wind cannot
solve the Phenomenon the Sun must: accordingly Kepler, Gassendus, and others
say, that the Tail, being of the same matter with the Head, only more rare and
subtle, is driven and thrust by that force of the Suns Rays toward that part
of the Heavens which is contrary to the Sun.

It was soon seen that this thrusting and shoving of Sunbeams was a very
precarious Notion; and therefore the most judicious Astronomers go another way
to work. They abandon their Opinion who think the Tail belongs to the Substance
of the Comet, and is a Flame issuing from it, and in stead of that they defend
this for Truth, that the Tail or Beard is no other than the Beams of the Sun
transmitted through the Diaphanous Head of the Comet. This is embraced by
Cardan, Longomontanus, Scaliger, and that famous Triumvirate of Astronomers,
Tycho, Kepler, Galilaeus. If these say true, the Transparent Body of the Comet
is illuminated by the Solar Rays, and the Sun, thus shining through it, and
causing a various Refraction and Repercussion of Light, makes that Splendor
which we call the Tail or Tresses of a Comet. In order to this they fancy the
Body of the Comet to be like a Globe or Ball of Glass, which by its
Diaphanousness imbibes the Beams received from the Sun, and those Beams passing
through it appear on the Reverse of it. Such a kind of Trajection or striking
of the Sun's Rays through the Head or Body of a Comet, is the cause of its
Beard or Tail. But this will not clear the Point; for then the Tail should not
be of that Figure it appears, but of a Comic one, as the Rays appear behind a
Glass-Ball, viz. broad toward the Glass, but narrower and sharper the other
way. But the Trains of Comets appear otherwise, they being large and wide at
the Cuspis, or end, but lesser and more contracted toward the Head of the
Comet. Thus the Laws of Optics and the Rules of Perspectives will be
endangered if we tie our selves to this Hypothesis.

Besides, This is attended with other insuperable Difficulties; for if the
Comet be Diaphanous, where are the Suns Rrays terminated, and by that means
reflected to us? There ought to be some Opake matter to stop the Rays, and so
to reverberate them to us. Say that by the Transparency of the head of the
Comet the Sun's Rays are transmitted, and so the Train is in a fair way to be
made, yet there is required moreover an Opacity to receive and turn back those
Rays to our Eyes, that we may see them. This is done, if Tycho Brache's saying
so will suffice: Astronom. Instaur. Progymnasm.
The Rays of the Sun (says he) passing through the Comets Head meet with some
matter in the Ethereal Region which is darkish, and so reflects them back to
us: thus the blazing Stream is produced. But,

First, This supposes Thick and Opake Matter in the Ether, which ever before
passed for Pure, Subtle, and Perspicuous.

Then, Suppose there were such Matter in the Ethereal Regions, yet if this
reflection were from the Ether, why are we so long without Comets? for in that
Impure Ether, which lies behind the Comets, the beams are reflected constantly.

Likewise, if the Beard of a Comet had no other Production, it would be spread
not only toward that part of the Heavens which is directly opposite to the
Sun, but on every side. And this also leads me to enquire after an answer to
the Other Question I started, viz. Why the Bush or Main of the Comet always
turns it self from the Sun, and consequently if it appears before Sunrising,
it points toward the West, and if it be seen in the Evening it stretches
itself toward the East, sometimes directly, at other times with some Deviation
more or less, either Northward or Southward?

I having invalidated that Tenet of the Suns Beams passing through the Head of
the Comet, and being reflected to us from I know not whence, there can no solid
Reason be given of their direct Opposition to the Sun. And then as for those
who say the Comets propagate and transmit such a glaring Light to us by
Reflection (as all the Planets do) from the Sun, (for according to Hevelius,
and some others, the Head and Tail of Comets are dark Bodies,) it is certain
that if they borrow all their Light and Blaze from the Sun, there is yet a more
desparate and forlorn account given both of the Tail of a Comet, and of its
Opposition to the Sun, and then also the Moon, and Saturn and all the other
Planets would be Bearded or Tailed.

I might now enquire into the different Species, the various (...) (as the
Philosopher calls them) of Comets. For this Stream which I have been
discoursing of is not always of the same Configuration, but has appeared in
diverse Shapes and Resemblances. These several Species are set down by an
Ancient Astronomical Poet in a very Elegant manner, Manilii Astronom. 1. l.
and by a Philosopher almost as ancient, (I mean him whose Treatise of Comets I
have occasion often to use) who reckons up Twelve several Species of them, Not.
Hist. 2. l. 25. c. But I foresee it will be more proper to enlarge on this
particular when I come to the next general Head of this Discourse, where I
shall handle Comets as real Signs. In the mean time I will entertain the Reader
with some other matter which is Pertinent to our business, and which will give
him a further Insight into the Nature and Quality of these mavelous
Appearances, and serve to advance the knowledge of such as are inquisitive
Searchers into the Works of God.

Of the Number of Comets somewhat may be said; I will give you the Sum total of
the Catalogue which Baptista Ricciolus has made, and that is 154. for so many
Comets had appeared in the World from 480 Years before Christ's Nativity to the
Year of our Lord 1618. His Catalogue reaches no further either backward or
forward; but Hevelius takes a wider compass, for the Comets (says he) recorded
by the Historians, or Philosophers, or others, from the time of Noah's Flood
(of what was before that, he pretends not to give any account) to this day (and
he writ his Cometographia in the Year 1668) are in number 250. It is not
unlikely that some others have appeared, and even from the beginning of the
World, as when God cast Adam out of Paradise, (of which anon,) but they have
not been registered and transmitted to the notice of Posterity.

That which I shall observe to you is this, That many of these Comets, and
others that appeared since, have fallen to our share in a short time. We have
seen five or six of them in less space than Twenty Years. For, not to go back
so far as the Year 1618. when four Comets appeared one after another, (some or
all of which are discoursed of in the Writings of the greatest Astrologers of
that time) we can with ease remember the years 1664. and 1665. both which are
memorable for the dreadful appearances in each of them, but they are the
rather to be mentioned by me now, because they are most signal Instances of the
Direful Events which ensue Comets, if such a Pestilence and Fire as presently
after happened may be styled so. Afterward, in the Year 1672/3;, we were
visited with another Comet, and again, in 1680; and lately, in this present
Year 1682. These in so short a time, in less than the space of Eighteen Years,
are very Notable. If I prove that these Strange Lights are Boding, (which I am
hastening to) I cannot see but that we shall be very much concerned.

I might add one word of the Time, which is another Apendage or Circumstance of
the Doctrine of Comets. It has been observed that they appear indifferently at
all Times of the Year, the Spring and Fall, Summer and Winter, as is evident
from the Tables of Comets which are extant, which agrees with that of Seneca,
Non magis certum est illis (i. e. Cometis) Tempus quo appareant, quam Locus
ullus ultra quem non exeant. cap. 12. But the Autumn generally is the time of
their appearing, say the most Astronomers: but if you demand a Reason to be
rendered of it, it will be impossible to offer one that is satisfactory,
especially if Comets be acknowledged (as they have been for a considerable
time) to be situated above the Moon, and even among the highest Planets; for
earthly Exhalations cannot mount in a short time to so high a place. So that it
is in vain to enquire into the Reason of the Time, as well as other
circumstances, of their Appearance.

I could say something also of the Color of Comets, for History is full of
Variety here, representing some as pale and wan, others as darkish and cloudy:
some as golden or yellow, others, as silver like, bright, clear, and so
transparent that Stars have been plainly seen through them: some of a ruddy
complexion, and bloody, and fiery, others of a leaden and livid hue, all
differing according to the mixture of more or less Light.

Lastly, the Smell as well as Color of Comets has been taken notice of; and
this has happened only then when they have hung hovering near the Earth; an
Instance whereof Historians give us in that Comet which was seen A. D. 396. in
which they acquaint us that a strong and Sulphurous Smell was felt.

And thus I have, in pursuance of the first Task I set my self, enquired into
the Nature of these Heavenly Bodies: I have particularly considered their
Origin, Make, Figure, Situation, Motion, and the rest of the Phenomenon
appertaing to them. And I may with confidence aver in the close of all, that he
who sees not how difficult, if not impossible, it is to unriddle the Nature of
Comets, sees nothing in Philosophy and the Nature of Things.

What contrary Accounts do Philosopher give of them?

Those that will not wholly grant the Efficacy and Operation of Comets, must,
whether they will or no, confess their Influence in This, that they have caused
grievous Wars and Feuds among Astronomers, who (we see) are engaged with great
vigor against one another, and in the conclusion purchase nothing but
Obscurity and Uncertainty. The variety of their Opinions, and the interfering
of some of them with Themselves, undeniably prove to us, that the things they
search into are rather to be admired than explained.

I think I have at one time or other read a good round company of Authors that
treat of Comets, and I could never yet find that the most knowing and judicious
among them are confident and peremptory in the asserting of their Hypothesis
about them: no, they unanimously acknowledge their Ignorance and Shallowness,
they own themselves to be non-pluss'd, and have no other Esteem and
Apprehension of these strange Sights than of things most wonderful and
astonishing.

One of the greatest Natural (as well as Moral) Philosophers that ever the
World bred, Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 7. c. 1.
speaks in the beginning of his Book of Comets after this manner concerning
his intended Disposition of Comets: Quae an vera sint Dii sciunt, quibus est
scientia very. Nobis rimari illa and conjecturare in Occulto tantum licet. He
pretends not to Science, but contents himself with bare guessing. Cap. 30.
And (in the same book) he gives this Reason of it, Quam multa praeter Hos (i.
e. Cometas) per secretum eunt, nunquam humanis oculis orientia? Neque enim
omnia Deus humanis oculis nota fecit Quota pars operis tanti nostris oculis
committitur? The great Governor of the World has thought fit to hide many
things from us, and amongst them the Account of these Phenomenon is one. More
particularly he ingenuously confesses, that that of the Tail or Bush must be
attributed to the Nature of Comets, (so he expresses it,) Cap. 27.
and (as he explains himself) to causes which are occult to us.

Though others have thought they have been able to solve these Phenomenon, yet
our great Philosopher was not ashamed to confess his Inability, and therefore
he chose to resolve them into some secret Virtue and wonderful Power; which
also made him style a Comet Novum e coelo Miraculum. Tychon. Progymnasm. tom. 1.
Tycho Brahe, allied to the chief Nobility of Denmark, but more related to
generous Truth, speaks thus, Cum iis non invite sentio qui Cometas intra
Naturae secreta nondum explanata reponunt, eosque ex occultis causis provenire
asseverant. Comets are rightly ranked in the number of those secrets of Nature
which are kept close to this very day, and it is very rational to believe, that
they are the Products of hidden Causes. Both this excellent Astromer, and
another clebrated Mathematician, Regiomontanus.
whom Germany boasts of, frankly acknowledge the shallow notices they have of
these Bodies, and, like true Philosophers and Christians, confess, that the
wonderful Works of God surpass Man's profoundest Knowledge.

And hear the faint words of that admirable Astrologer, who is so famous for
his several learned Treatises, Kepler Optic. Astron.
Quia quantum volo non possum, liceat ergo quantum possum proestare; Since I
cannot, by reason of the difficulty of the performance, make what Discoveries I
would about the nature of Comets, I will sally out as far as I am able, though
I know (alas) my Attempts will be very Feeble and Imperfect, where the Subject
I treat of is so lofty and arduous.

What says that Modern Meteorologist? Fromondus.
Ego Cometas in maximis and abditissimis Naturae Miraculis pono: If any one
would know (says he) what account I make of Comets, I declare, that I rank
them among the greatest and most hidden Miracles of Nature. And after he had
been rendering a Reason of the Tails of Comets, and refuting other men's
Opinions, he complains that he remains unsatisfied, and that such Lank
Accounts would rather starve than satiate an inquisitive Mind, Haec tamen non
omnino mihi mentem implent, Meteorolog. l. 3. c. 4.
sed abeundum tamen jam est vel semifamelico. And speaking there of other
Phenomenon of the Beard or Tail, he concludes at last most devoutly and
ingeniously in these words, Sed quam neque hoc, neque quicquid aliud prospicio,
mihi intellectum in tranquillo ponit! Ite nunc, mortales, and acie illa Divina
rimamini and penetrate, quam unius etiam Cometae barba vobis hebetat and
obtundit. Neither this Hypothesis, nor any other, that I ever met with, yields
me satisfaction. How then can ye, fond Wretches, pretend to search, and even
pierce into Divine Mysteries with that sorry Wit of yours, which you see one
Hair of a Comet is able to blunt and turn the edg of? And so he goes on to
confess and bewail the defects of Philosophy and our Understandings.

Another Writer, Franc Resta Meteorol. l. 1. c. 5.
on the same Subject, talks after this rate, Haec quidem possibilia sunt, sed
non nisi Divinando determinari possit qualiter de facto res se habeat: Perhaps
this way of explaining the Nature of Comes is not altogether impossible, but
in my mind there is no man can directly tell us how things really are, unless
he had the Art of Divining.

A late Astronomer, in imitation of the Great Men before cited, Ricciol.
Almagest. Tom. 1. pars poster.
reckons Comets inter Arcana mundi, and abditissima naturae Miracula: and in
the same place he makes bold (and yet with a great share of Modesty) to say,
that God propounds this Splendidum Aenigma nunquam solvendum: he puts this
Riddle to the World which no Philosophy will be ever able to explain. This
subtle Jesuit, who had set down and examined whatever others had writ
concerning the Production of a Comets Train, and its turing it self constantly
from the Sun, as if he despaired of solving the difficulty in a Philosophical
way, at length betakes himself to this Freak, viz. Ricciol. Tom. 1. de Cometis.
that the Face of the Comet is turned toward the Sun like an Heliotrope, or as
one Face of the Loadstone turns it self to one of the Poles. Would not one
imagine that he might as well have said, to solve all, that the Head of the
Comet had Brains, and knew when it was to Face about?

There is Another who refers the business to a secret Antipathy between the
Rays of the Sun, Fancisc. Fernandez.
and those of a Comet, insomuch that these latter are, as it were, afraid of
the former, and consequently fly away from them. But the Jesuit grows more
sober afterward, and finding, after all his exquisitive Searches, that the
Doctrine of Comets was obscure and unaccountable, at last he ascribes the Make
and whole Regimen of them to God, Tom. 1. pars poster.
or some Intelligences; and in the close of his Learned Tractate of Comets he
ends thus, In re adeo incerta liceat tandem nobis ex hoc Labyrintho si non
exire, at certe evolare. It is impossible (says he) in such a perplexed Maze
as this, to find my way out fairly and orderly; and therefore I hasten to get
out how I can.

You hear in what humble and despairing Language they utter themselves. And it
is certain, that the Persons who speak after this manner had great Insight into
Philosophy, and were the chief Favorites and Confidents of Nature. It had been
an easy thing for them to have pitched upon an Hypothesis, and gone through
with it against all Opposers; and they had Credit and Authority enough to back
what they had a mind to avow. This was not the course they took, but they
suspended their Judgments, and nothing but mighty Dissatisfaction and Amazement
appear in their Writings; and instead of being positive and decretory, they
confessed themselves Silenced and Puzzled. These great Dictators in Philosophy
would not be found in this odd posture, if the matter of their disquisition
were not some thing Extraordinary and Wonderful, nay, if every thing in these
Bodies were not Rare and Astonishing: which is a demonstration that they were
set up in the Heavens on purpose to call our Eyes to them, that they were
designedly placed there to create Wonder, and to be taken notice of, and that
they are the Amazing Finger of God to the World.

But though the wisest and subtilest Heads were backward in giving an Account
of the Natural Philosophy of Comets, yet (as you shall be convinced afterward)
they are plain and peremptory in delivering their Opinions concerning the
Effects, Ends and Events of them, the consideration of which is my next, and
indeed my Main Business.

Having then dispatched our Enquiry into the Matter, Figure, and other
Properties of Comets, I am to show you in the Second Place, that they carry in
them the true Nature of Causes and Signs, or (as others are pleased to word it)
of Operative and Indicative Signs. Some have stiffly denied both these, but I
doubt not but I shall make it evident to any Considerative Man, that they lie
under a great Mistake.

I assert then that Comets signify both Naturally and Arbitrarily, that is, in
Themselves, and likewise by Divine Institution. Whether you consider them
Physically or Theologically, they are certain Indications and Signs of future
Evils.

To prove them to be Causes or Operative Signs I will treat of them first
Physically, and here I will offer to you these two things;

1. That they have a Connection with the Nature of the things produced.

2. That they are plain Representations and Resemblances of the things
signified, as Signs ought to be.

First, I say, They have some Agreement and Connection with the Nature of those
things of which they are said to be Omens. And it is necessary that this be
cleared unless we will step directly into Magic and Divination. The things
which lead us to the knowledge of future Events must have a Natural Connection
with the things they are said to point at, or else they may justly be reckoned
to be vain and Fantastic: as Tully excellently proves the vanity of the
Gentile Divination from this, that those means which they used, as the Bowels
of Animals, the Chattering of Birds, and the like, had no cognation and
alliance with the fortuitous things, the knowledge and foresight of which they
pretended was acquired by them. He shows that there is not any Consent or
Sympathy between these things, and thence concludes they are Cheats and
Impostors. And so here, it may be justly asked, Are future Evils produced by
Comets as by their proper Causes? What certain Connection is there between those
Calamities and these Apparitions, so as that we should be able to gather from
these, that such effects will assuredly follow? We are certain that the
Philosophers of old thought there was some Affinity between them, and that
Comets were both Signs and Causes. It is vouched by them once and again, that
great and vehement Winds, and excessive Drougth, are the Physical Effects of
these Appearances. (...), if they appear often, Aristot. Meteor. l. 1. c. 9.
they portend Winds and Drougth. And immemediately after, (...), if they be
frequently seen, the years are remarkably Dry and Tempestuous. Lib. 2. 7. c. 28.
Our Philosopher in his Natural Questions is of this persuasion, and observes,
that after Comets (and he gives particular Instances) great and continued
Tempests (accompanied with Earthquakes) followed, as the Natural Effects of
them. And not only the Ancient, but Modern Sages aver the same. Thus the
Learned Kepler, ( lib. de Cometis) and Cardan (lib. de rerum varietate, l. 1.
c. 1.) prove the Natural Effects of Comets, and the latter of these is not
confuted by his acute Opposer, (Scalig. Exercit. 79. etc.) According to these
it is no uneasy thing to make it evident, how by the extraordinary and
hurtful Heat which is produced by a Comet, both when it is in Sight, and after
its Extinction, several other Evils are caused in a Natural way. From the Air
and Earth being infected, how easy a consequence is there of Barrenness and
unfruitful Seasons! If it once be admitted that Comets distemper and inflame
the Air, and exhaust the Succus of the Earth, it will necessarily follow, that
a barren Soil, and the corrupting and blasting of the fruits, must be the
Products of them: And from these will naturally ensue Dearth, Scarcity and
Famine. And, as the inevitable Effect of both, we must expect Sickness,
Diseases, Mortality, and more especially the sudden Death of many Great Ones,
because these are sooner and more easily hurt than others, for their delicate
Feeding, and Luxurious course of Life, and sometimes their great Cares and
Watchings, which weaken and infeeble their Bodies, render them more obnoxious
than the vulgar sort of People. Hence it is that Comets may deservedly be said
to presage the Death of mighty Monarchs and Princes, to be Funeral Torches to
light Kings to their Tombs. And because by their noxious and infectious
Irradiations, Men's Blood is apt to be heightened into Fevers and Calentures, and
all malignant Distempers, and even into the most contagious Diseases, the
Consequence of a Raging Pestilence from a Comet is very easy and natural, if
not almost necessary. Thus it is plain, that the greatest and most dreaded
Calamities have a Dependence on these Prodigies, and are the Real and Physical
Effects of them.

And whereas it is Objected, That the Effects of Comets (as they are presented
to us by those that treat of them) are contrary to one another, this is soon
answered; for that there should be Contrary Effects from the same Cause is no
unusual thing in Philosophy; wherefore great Inundations likewise (no less than
Drought) may be the Product of these Causes; for that intemperate Weather which
the Flames of Comets beget, causes an extraordinary heap of Vapors and
Exhalations to be drawn up, which form themselves Naturally into Clouds, and
those Clouds in a short time must needs fall down in excessive Showers and
immoderate Rains. And it might be showed also that great calms, as well as
Storms and Tempests, Cold and Frost, no less than extreme Heat, may be the
Effects, i. e. secondary Effects of the same Cause.

Moreover, It is no hard Enterprise to show how Comets are the Causes of Civil
and Political, as well as Natural Events. For from what has been said before,
viz. that they portend the Death of Princes, it follows, that they probably
Bode great Changes and Vicissitudes in Kingdoms, in reference to Religion and
other Matters; for History abundantly informs us, that these are oftentimes the
Consequences of a new Prince's succeeding in the Throne.

Besides, from the inflamed Spirits of Men, caused by a distempered Air, Wars
and Tumults, Broils and Seditions naturally proceed. So that Comets have been
the Causes and Forerunners, not only of great Storms and Concussions in the
Air, but of Turbulent and Tempestuous Seasons in the State, of Confusion,
Massacres, Slaughter, Bloodshed, and Mischiefs of all Dimensions, both at home
and from foreign Quarters. These have been thought, by men of sober Philosophy,
to have been the significations and Presages of Comets. I will sum up all their
Dire Effects in these plain Verses which I lately met with: Dira Cometarum
proles pestisque famesque,
Seditio, regum foedera, vincla, neces.
Excidium patriae, ventorum praelia, morbi
Insoliti, caedes, funera, nulla fides.
Dissidium nubis, tremulae telluris hiatus,
Fulgetra cum tonitru, fulmineaeque faces.
Aestates siccae, aut nimio mox imbre madentes,
Externo infuso milite vastus ager.
Dira locustarum volucrumque examina, regum
Translata hostili sceptra videnda loco.
Abdacti ex patria populi, civilia bella,
Diluvia, and pecorum non abolenda lues.
When once a direful Comet spreads its Train,
Contagious Deaths, and pining Famine reign.
Monarchs make Leagues to render Empire sure,
Sedition now keeps Gaols and Deaths in ure.
Countries are Sacked, impetuous Storms arise,
And Bodies feel unheard of Maladies:
Slaughter grows bold, Faith seeing this expires;
The heated Clouds disclose their inbred Fires,
And now by Sympathy in Thunder groan,
The Earth Quakes and Trembles at the dismal Tone.
Heaven mourns in scorching droughts, and then again
Despairing weeps in lavish showers of Rain.
A foreign Foe in glittering Arms appears,
And dries up the poor Remnant of our Tears.
The Airy Region then displays its Host
Of scarce-known Fowls which hover over the Coast.
See next how Sceptres here and there are hurled,
And Regal Globes are tossed about the World.
Some are led Captive to a Foreign Strand,
Whilst Wars at home afflict their Native Land.
Great Deluges come next: and' cause the Fate
Is Universal from a Comet's Date,
Not only Men but Beasts must in it share:
Hence Rot and Murrain are the Cattels fare.


Such Effects as these may be expected from those Causes; and I do not see why
they may not be called Physical Events, since they proceed from those as from
Natural Causes and Agents. Nor does the eminently knowing Kepler dissent from
this, though (when he speaks of the Comets, that appeared in the Years 1607,
and 1618.) he holds they are the Causes of Disorders and Calamities here below,
by a certain kind of Sympathy which the Sublunary Elements have with the
Heavenly Bodies: for notwithstanding his expressing himself after that manner,
he means no other than what Aristotle, Ptolemy, Cardan, and others, did, viz.
That there is a Natural Connection between Comets and those Evils which are seen
to ensue them* though it must be granted that these Portentous Sights are not
Necessary Causes, i. e. Those Dismal Effects do not certainly and infallibly
follow them: one is not necessarily and always the Product of the other, (of
which more hereafter.)

But that which I say, and I think I have proved, is this, that they are
commonly chained together like Natural Causes and Effects, and that the Natural
Power of those Causes is able to produce, and generally does actually produce
such Effects; and this is enough to prove them to be True Causes.

Secondly, They are (as Signs ought to be) Plain Representations of the things
signified. We may learn from the very Make of Comets what they are designed
for. Their Figure is representative of that which is meant by them. Sometimes
they display themselves in the shape of Besoms, as if they taught us by that
homely Emblem, what we ought to do, viz. to remove our Defilements and
Pollutions, not to say, as if they were sent to tell a Nation that they shall
be swept away and destroyed for their Sins. How often (without any help of
Fancy) does this prodigious Light appear in the likeness and proportions of a
Rod, to acquaint us that it was designed to correct and discipline a froward
People, and that we ought to submit to it is Pedagogy? When we see it at another
time representing it self like a Torch or Flambeau, (...)
how can we think otherwise than that it is sent to give more Light to the dark
World, or if it despise that, to show that it deserves to be burnt up? I know
that all this will pass with some for mere moral Reflections or divine Fancies.
It will be said that some devout Fools will make things to be like any thing
they please. But then I desire to know whether the old Pagan Philosophers were
a sort of Religious Fools, whether Seneca and Pliny (whom I have often brought
on the Stage,) especially the latter of them, whose Writings let us understand
he was one of Those Fools who say in their Heart there is no God, whether
These, and all the profound Astronomers who have writ of the Figures of Comets,
and did it not to exercise their Fancies, but to display their Judgments,
whether These, I say, were Religious and Fancifull Fools? Until this be
Answered I proceed.

Who knows not that these strange Flames appear most commonly in the shape of
Military Weapons, and Instruments of War and Blood? You may see one appear like
a Dart or Arrow; (...).
another like a Lance or Spear; (...).
a third bowed like a Warlike Horn or Trumpet; (...).
as it were to sound an Allarm from Heavens a fourth in the figure of a Sword,
(...), and Ensiformis.
a known Weapon of Blood and Slaughter. The Head of This Last represents the
Hilt, and the Train the Blade of the Sword, which sometimes is straight, and
sometimes like a Falchion. Several of this sort have been seen in the World. It
is very probable that That at the beginning of things, I mean that Flaming
Sword which turned every ways at the entrance Genesis 3. 24.
of Paradise, belonged to this Species. Indeed this could not have been better
expressed than by the Original (...), and by the Version of the Seventy (...);
especially with the addition of the Adjective (...) anceps, bipennis, two
edged, representing a Sword which cutteth both ways, i. e. Both the sides of
that Comet's Tail were alike, and of equal make: And whereas the Text says
that Cherubims were placed at the entrance of Paradise, it lets us understand
that Angles were particularly Administering in showing this extraordinary
Prodigy, and perhaps for this Reason among others these Ministering Spirits are
called a Flaming Fire, Psalm. 104. 4. This Comet (as it is the Nature of them)
produced Barrenness; the Earth (according to the Curse) brought forth Thorns
and Thistles. This likewise presaged all the other sad and deplorable Effects
of our first Parents Expulsion out of Paradise. Such a Sword-Comet appeared in
the Year of our Lord 70, or 71, being the first Year of the Emperor Vespasian.
It hung over Jerusalem a whole Year before it was Taken and Sacked by Titus,
Joseph. de Bell. Iudaic. l. 6. c. 31.
as one who was an Eyewitness of it assures us.

But lest that should be thought to be God's peculiar and singular Ensign, and
not to be paralleled, or to be made use of in the present Case, (as some will
not permit us to allege this Instance of Ierusalem's Comet,) I will produce
some others, and the most remarkable I have read of are these which follow:

A terrible Xiphias, or Sword-Comet, appeared when the Civil War between
Octavius and Mark Antony began, which was 42 years before Christ's Birth.
Another of the like Figure showed it self A. D. Nicephor. Eccles. hist. l. 12.
c. 37.
383. or (as others) 392. in the Reign of Theodosius: This appeared 40 days,
and was a little before Valentinian was slain, and Eugenius invaded the Western
Empire. Such another Flaming Sword was seen over the City of Constantinople,
about the Year of our Lord 400. This (...) (as the Historian calls it) was so
great, that it reached from the Horizon to the Zenith. Nicephor. Eccl. Hist. l.
13. c. 5. Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 6. Sozomen l. 8. c. 4.
and of this likewise speak other Historians. This happened when the so much
dreaded Gainas, the Barbarous and Tyrannical Commander of the Goths, brought
the Gothish Army into Thrace, and miserably wasted the greatest part of Greece,
and was about to encompass Constantinople, and take it. An Ensiformis, but of
lesser size, appeared 30 days in the Year 632, Funccius Spondanus
or 633. before Persia was taken by the Saracens. These were no Fantastic
shapes, such as the feigned Images and Iconisms of the Constellations of the
Dog and Bear, etc. but they were Real and Substantial, and no man need nourish
any lavish Fancy to make out these Shapes and Resemblances; from which we may
certainly infer that they are truly Significant and Presaging. I must confess
that Gaffarel (in his Book of Curiosities) and Cornelius Gemma ( de Not.
Charact. divin.) are too Fantastical in their interpreting the Figures of
Comets, and too punctual in determining the effects from such Likenesses and
Shapes. But, as I am no Slave of these Cosmocriticks, so I must needs profess
that it is irrational and impious to disregard the Finger of God in the
peculiar shape of some Comets, because some idle Writers have indulged their
Fancy and Humor, and have showed themselves conceited in the account they give
of the Figures of Comets.

Thus far I have considered these Heavenly Bodies Naturally, and as they are in
themselves: Now it remains that I treat of them Theologically, as they are by
Divine Appointment and Institution rendered Significative.

It is the Pleasure of the great Moderatour of all things, (and that is
sufficient) that these should be set up as Signs. And This is acknowledged even
by those who will not be brought to confess the former. (...). Damascen. de
Fid. Orthod. l. 2. c. 7.
The Heavenly Bodies are not constituted Causes, but Signs of Wars, says a
Religious Man. Future occurrences are discovered by these Heavenly Lamps, Non
Naturali Causarum nexu and ordine, Petav. Theol. Dogm. Tom. 3. l. 1.
sed Dei Natu and Auxilio, says another. Nego Cometam (says Fromondus,
Meteor. l. 3. c. 3.) calamitatum Physicam causam, non nego tamen Signum ex
Institutione divina esse, quam omnium temporum Historia affirmat. But I will
make it plain, that Both these are very consistent, and that the consideration
of Comets in both these respects is Rational and Accountable. We may treat of
them not only as Natural Philosophers, but as pious Men and Christians. I know
God sometimes speaks to the World by Supernatural Signs, without making use
of Second Causes, and even against the course and order of Nature. These are
Divine Signs only; but now I am speaking of such as are Natural Signs and
Causes, i. e. produced in a Natural way wholly or partly, and are Physical
Causes of such and such Effects, and yet are Divine Signs likewise: For it may
be worth your observing, that the Same things may be Natural Causes and
Effects, and yet Divine Tokens. The Rainbow signifies the Covenant between God
and Man, and therefore is styled the Token of the Covenant, 9. Genesis 13. but
withal it is a Meteor that has a Natural Production, and the Cause of it is
made out by Philosophy. Fire and Brimstone from Heaven burnt up the lewd
Sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah, and yet when I read in Genesis 14. 10. and in
profane Writers, that these Cities were near to many Pits of Slime, and fat and
pitchy Clay, I can well conceive also how that dreadful Conflagration was
carried on even by Natural Causes, how the Fire broke out of the Earth to meet
that which rained from Heaven, and consequently how the Destruction of those
places may partly be attributed to the Nature of the Soil, and the Combustible
Matter it afforded. The Tower of Babel was without doubt demolished by the
Signal Hand of the Almighty; Antiquit. l. 1. c. 15. De Praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 4.
yet it may be true which Josephus relates, and after him Eusebius, that that
great Pile was thrown down by a Tempest and extraordinary force of Wind. With
which agrees the Sybil's Verse, -- (...). -- Lib. 3. Orac.
In Elias his time the Drought which happened in Syria and Iudaea, was a
Calamity which is wont to be produced by Natural Causes, and from it Naturally
followed a Famine; but both these were peculiar Signs of the Divine Anger, and
by these God showed his Wrath against the Sins of the People. The Thunder and
Lightning which were procured by Samuel were in Harvest Time, (1 Samuel 12. 16.)
which is supposed to be a warm Season, and therefore according to the Natural
course of things a fit time for that sort of Meteors; yet we know that they
were designed to be marks of God's displeasure and Anger. And the Holy
Scripture informs us how at other times God has created Awe and Terror by
them. The Jews received their Law in Thunder and Lightning, and on other
occasions were affrighted into a remembrance of their Duty by the same means.
The voice of Thunder rouzes some stupid Souls into the serious belief of a
Divine Power. Coelo Tonantem credimus Iovem. Horat.
Nothing in Nature leaves such impressions of Fear as loud and repeated
Thunderclaps. Some Emperors who were in a manner Atheists, (and
notwithstanding that (which is strange) made Themselves Gods) yet used to
Tremble at this horrible Allarm from Heaven, and to confess a greater Power
than themselves, which is as much as to disown their Self-Divinity. This made
Caligula get under his Bed. And Tiberius, another of Jupiter's Brothers and
Fellow-Gods, was glad of his Chaplet of Laurel to secure him from Lightnings.
These few Instances above named are sufficient to convince us, that the same
things are not only Natural Causes or Effects, but that they signify by God's
Appointment. And This may be applied to Comets, which as they are produced
themselves in a Natural way, viz. from a Collection of matter in the Heavens,
though after some uncertain and unaccountable spaces of Time, so they produce
Effects in the same Natural course: and yet God uses them as Tokens of his
Wrath, and appoints them to be Divine Signs, and to Bode extraordinary things
to come. Which was the sense of one of the Writers of the Byzantine History.
(...). Mich. Glycas. Annal. pars 1.
The Comets (says he) which are seen in the Air are produced in a Natural way,
yet withal they proclaim the Deaths of Kings or other Illustrious Personages:
And for this he quotes St. Basil the great. From which it is evident that the
same Things may have certain and manifest Causes in Nature, and are likewise
appointed by the Author of Nature to presignifie future Events, so that it is
possible not only to attain to a Physical Knowledge of them, but a kind of
Divination. But my main business at present is to make good this Latter, and to
prove that Comets are Signs of future Calamities ex Instituto Divino, that it
is God's Will and Pleasure they should signify such things.

In order to this I will only premise that God gives Notice beforehand by
evident Tokens what he intends to do afterward, supposing there be no
Prevention by amendment of Men's Lives. This is the meaning of the whole sixth
Chapter of the Book of the Revelation, which is an Account of the Opening of
the Seals, and sets before us the Forerunners of the Judgments which were to
follow. And though it is presented in the way of a Vision, yet if Men's Eyes
were Open it would be seen to be the usual Method of the Most High in the
World. Accordingly I aver, that Comets are Warnings and Harbingers of God's
Wrath and Displeasure against the Wickedness of Mankind, and also of the
Effects of that Displeasure, which are some ensuing calamities. They are
undeniable Arguments that there is some great Disorder in the World, and that
things are exceedingly amiss. They are signal Testimonies that Sin and Vice are
predominant; for these are the only things that provoke God to Anger. Now
those prodigious Appearances in the Heavens are fitted to this Purpose, ( viz.
of allarming us, and giving Notice of ensuing Evils) because they are both
unusual and affrighting.

First, As they are Rare and Unusual, they are serviceable to this purpose. For
it happens, it seems, by the Make, or rather the perverse Disposition of
Humane Nature, that what is common and frequent, and according to the ordinary
course of things, is slighted by us, and thence it is necessary that we should
sometimes be surprised and extraordinarily moved by Objects that are rare and
uncommon. Sol spectatorem nisi cum deficit non habet. Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 7.
cap. 1.
-- Si quid turbatum est, aut praeter consuetudinem emicuit, spectamus,
interrogamus, ostendimus. Adeo Natural est magis Nova quam Magna mirari. It is
an Eclipse that makes the Sun to be gazed at. If we epsy any thing that is
strange and out of Order we presently stare at it, we start many Queries about
it, we point at it, and show it to others. So natural a thing is it become to
admire what is Rare, rather than what is Great.

But the Appearances we are speaking of are both Rare and Great, and therefore
doubly deserve to be taken notice of, and to be made the Subject of our deepest
Admiration. Worthily did our Philosopher begin his Book of Comets with those
excellent words, Nemo usque eo tardus and hebes and demissus in terram est ut
ad Divina non erigatur, ac tota mente consurgat, utique ubi Novum aliquod e
coelo Miraculum fulsit. He must be a Sot indeed, and sunk into the very Earth
who does not lift up his Soul to God, and what is Divine and Heavenly, as soon
as he beholds such a miraculous Apparition as a Comet.

Again, These great Bodies are Affrighting, and that on a double account.

First, The Rarity of them (which I before spoke of) makes them so. For to what
purpose are these unusual Spectacles shown by God to the World? To what end are
these strange Shapes set before us? There are innumerable Lights of Heaven of
an entire round Figure which we constantly behold, but what mean these which
appear but seldom, with fiery Scrolls or flaming Labells issuing from them? It
is downright sottishness to think that these are set up for vain shows and
useless sights. It is unworthy of Providence to defend this. But it is highly
reasonable to think that they are appointed by God to affright and terrify the
World, to denounce future Judgments, and to forewarn Men of the Wrath to come,
and to let them expect the emptying of the Vials of God's Anger upon them.

Secondly, Their Posture and Figure, (as has been partly suggested already)
render them Terrible. They have such a Frame and Shape given them by God as is
apt to stir up Fear and Dread. You have read in what Images they appear: And
though I know it may be said that there are other Shapes (besides those I
mentioned) which are not danting and affrighting, yet, as those Bodies
themselves are Irregular and Monstrous, and of a Figure different from all the
Luminaries of Heaven, they are on that score Terrible. And you may remember
that all the Phenomenon belonging to Comets (of which I have given a particular
Narrative) breed an unspeakable amazement and Consternation. Wherefore are
these strange Lights hung up so high in the great and spacious Theater of
Heaven, but that all Eyes should behold them, and tremble at them? In short,
the Eternal Being looks angrily upon the World in the Blaze of a Comet.

If it be asked Why God gives Warning of future Calamities by such Harbingers?
I answer, He does it,

1. That Men may Expect and Provide in time against those unhappy Events. And
the merciful Governor of the Universe bids us by such Monitors Prepare for
his Judgments, either by making our selves ready to receive them with Patience
and contentment, or by what wise Expedients we can to guard and defend our
selves against them. Appositely whereunto says the Byzantine Annalist, Mich.
Glyc. Annal. par. 1.
(...). God indulges to men certain Signs by which they may have a Prospect of
what shall be, and so by that means consult their Safety when the Storm comes:
according to that remark of the wisest Head, A prudent man foreseeth the Evil,
Prove. 22. 3.
and hides him self. Or,

2. We are admonished by these Heavenly Nuncio's wholly to Prevent and Divert
the Evils which are Threatened. And this is to be effected by humble Prayer and
Supplication, by Repentance and Turning unto God. These Celestial Prodigies are
purposely set up by the Omnipotent Creator to fright the wicked out of their
sins. They are Admonitions to them that they should not indulge their Pride,
Lust, Oppression, Covetousness, Profaneness, and that they should not think
because of their greatness and Riches to go unpunished. As often as a Comet
appears, a solemn Fast and Humiliation should be observed, Devout and Earnest
Prayers should be put up, to divert the Storm from falling on our Heads, and
that utter Confusion and Destruction may not be our portion. Pope Calistus,
above 200 Years ago, Platina in vit. Calist.
ordered the Litany and Public Prayers to be solemnly said several Days
together, merely upon the appearance of these Signs. The nicest Protestant may
safely follow this Order, I mean, have recourse to his Prayers upon the same
Account. A Christian Divine cannot have a better Text to preach Repentance from
then a Comet. Hence he may with a becoming Warmth and Zeal invite Men to amend
their ways, and to be reconciled to the Incensed Majesty of Heaven, and so to
flee from the Wrath and Vengeance which otherwise would fall upon them. This
Finger of God beckoneth from Heaven to call us thither. These Signs Above are
to make Us better who are Below. They are sent for the sake of the Good, even
the Wise Virgins, who are sometimes inclined to Slumber, and to be forgetful
of their Duty: for the sake likewise of the Worst and most secure Sinners, who
run greedily into all excess of Riot, and refuse to be reclaimed by the usual
means which are afforded them. Such Wretches may happily be startled out of their
Security, and have their Eyes opened by these unusual and strange Flashings of
Fire from above; these Flames from Heaven may be serviceable to keep them out
of Hell.

If this sounds like popular Preaching, and be counted Pulpit-Harangue, I will
be cantent to sit down a while; and let us hear what kind of Doctrine a
Lay-Astronomer (and he one of the most accomplished and judicious that this
latter Age can boast of) will deliver on this Subject. Thus he Preaches on the
Comet that appeared in the Year 1607. Kepler De Physiologia Cometarum, l. 3. p.
3.
Affirmo Cometam hunc a Deo inter sidera exhibitum, ut esset Testimonium
universis and singulis mortalitatis suae, utque admoneantur decretum esse Deo
brevi bonam generis humani partem promiscuae conditionis, quacunque fati lege,
ex hoc mundo transfer. -- Monere itaque Coelestem Praeconem ut pro se Deo
quilibet reconcilietur, migrationi se paret. The sum of this Great Man's
Astrological Theology is this, That the Appearance of Comets, those Celestial
Heralds and Criers, is for such weighty purposes as these; namely, To remind
men effectually of their Mortality and unsettled duration of Life, to acquaint
them that it is the design of Heaven in a short time to snatch the present
Inhabitants out of this World, and to translate them to another: and therefore
that all ranks and conditions of men are concerned to fit themselves for their
Departure, and to make their Peace with God before they go hence. What an
Admirable Funeral Discourse does this Christian Astronomer make on a Comet! Let
us hear another Sermon on the same Text, a Text which I have already, and shall
yet farther prove to be the Word and Voice of God. Thus then I will give you in
English the sense of what you may read in another Language of that Modern
Glory of Mathematics, Bapt. Ricciol. Almagest. Nov. Tom. 1. par. poster. l. 8.
Comets (says he) are ordained by Divine Providence, that we should lift up
our Eyes to Heaven, and admire God in his visible Tokens there, that we may be
invited to a Dread and Reverence of the Divine Majesty, by beholding such
wonderful and unusual Signs, that we may daily expect some great thing in our
own and other Countries, and provide for such Tidings; that we may, by the Fear
and Awe of God wrought in us, betake our selves speedily to Repentance and a
holy Life: and lastly, that hence we might have some Representation and
Specimen (as it were) of the Sign of the Son of Man, and of those terrible
wonders in Heaven and Earth, which shall precede the Coming of Christ to
Judgment. Lo! what excellent Divinity a Comet affords! How devoutly do these
Sons of Urania discourse! But you do not hear them talk thus of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, the ordinary and leiger Luminaries of Heaven. No: They know there is
a vast difference between Them and the other extraordinary Heralds that make
their Appearance to us. These are made for other uses and purposes, and as they
are fatal in themselves, and in their own Nature, so they are signs set up by
God ex Instituto, to foretoken future Evils.

But how can we certainly know that Comets are Appointed for such purposes? If
they are Divine Signs, where has God told us so?

I answer, God speaks to and instructs Mankind not only by his written Laws,
the Sacred Scriptures, but by the Dictates of Reason, by the course of Nature,
and by Acts of Providence. God speaks by These as well as by his Word. These
are plain Intimations of his Mind, and hereby he is used to discover to us what
he would have us do or forbear. I may know God's Will and Pleasure by the
Order and Frame of things which he has constituted in the World, and by the
frequent Results and Consequences of them.

From the Consideration that Comets are of a Peculiar Make and Figure, and in
all respects different from the other Heavenly Bodies, and also from the
General and Perpetual Observation that they prove Fatal to Countries and
Kingdoms, (as Kepler, and several other eminent persons have observed, and
particularly set down the public Miseries and Calamities which have insued in
diverse Nations soon after the appearing of Comets: and the History of all Ages
has given abundant proof of it) from these Considerations I am sufficiently
Authorized to look upon them as God's Hand. I am forced by this to take notice
of the Divine Pleasure and design in them.

But if any one shall still urge the Question, and ask me, Where are we told
that these Comets and Prodigies are Divine Signs?

I Answer, We are told so directly in the Infallible and Holy Book, by one who
was an accurate Observer of the Works of God; Thou have given (says he) a
Banner (or) a Sign, Signum, Sir. Arab. Castal. (...) Seventy Interp.
Significationem, Vulg. Lat.
a Token unto them that fear thee, Psalm. 60. 4. Thou, O God, who are merciful
to all Mankind, but in a special manner to those who fear and serve thee, art
pleased to give warning of approaching Evils, and as it were to hold up a
Signal, that thy Servants may be admonished to avoid the impendent Danger, even
when hardened sinners are overtaken and crushed with it. Such a Banner was that
which appeared to Constantine the Great, presaging, as Victory to his Army, so
Confusion to that of his Enemies. Such a Signal and Token is every Bearded
Light that shows it self in the Heavens, though it is difficult to bring some
prejudiced minds to believe it.

I answer again, that the Scripture expressly abetts this Doctrine in the 28th
of Deuteronomy, where Moses, or rather God, threatens the People, that if they
will not observe to do all his Commandments, all these Curses shall come upon
them, viz. Scarcity, Famine, Drought, Pestilence, Sword, Blasting, etc. Now
these Calamities are the signs of God's Wrath, for they are denounced and
threatened here as such: whence it undeniably follows that the Causes and
Procurers of them, which I have proved Comets to be, are no less the Signs and
Marks of the Divine Displeasure; for no rational Man can deny, that the Cause
here must be of the same nature with the Effect: So then these Menaces and
Threatenings in Scripture prove those Appearances to be Significative, and that
they are appointed by God to portend evil Tidings to the World.

You see then what it is I defend, viz. That Comets are Signs of approaching
Calamities, and Monitors of God's Anger to Mankind. If upon some difficulties
which might be alleged, I should be induced to wave the one, yet I persuade my
self the other is impregnable: But I have proved both, especially the latter,
which I most insist upon. And I may lawfully, without being over-bold, conclude
from the Premises, that these extraordinary Lamps of Heaven are presages of
future Evil, and that God has instituted and empowered them for that end.

I have now dispatched my Second Task, and in that I have partly prevented my
self as to the Third which I propounded, which was to show what abundant
Suffrage my Assertion has from all ranks of Writers. But now I will purposely
pursue that Undertaking, and I will be the shorter in it because I have done so
much toward it already.

That it may appear then that I maintain no Paradox, and that I dote not on an
Opinion by my self, I will let you see that what I have offered concerning the
Presages and dreadful Effects of Comets, is the Sense of the Wise and
Judicious; and if Authority be an Argument, we must needs close with the side I
have taken. Let the Poets stand forth first, who were the Earliest
Philosophers, Naturalists, Astronomers, nay, the first Divines, and therefore
Competent Judges in the Case.

The Prince of Poets (and therefore I will begin with him) enumerating the
several Prodigies which foresignified the Death of Julius Caesar, and the Civil
Wars which afterward followed, makes this Remark among the rest, -- Nec diri
toties arsere Cometae. Virgil. Georg. 1.

Never so many cursed Lights
Were seen before to plague the nights.


And in another Book, -- Cometae
Sanguinei lugubre rubent. Aeneid. 10.
--
These Comets blush in Gore to think
What Deluges of Blood they drink.


Marcus Manilius, an Ancient Poetic Astrologer who lived in Caesar Augustus
his days, and dedicated his Books of Astronomy to him, relates the dismal
Effects of Comets in the close of the First Book of his excellent Poem, Nunquam
futilibus excanduit Igninibus ether. Manil. Astronom. 1. l.

With Lights of such a fiery train
The Heavens never burnt in vain.
And then he proceeds to particularize the horrid Effects of them, Squalidaque
elusi deplorant arva coloni
Et steriles, etc. --


And afterward, Quin and bella canunt Ignes, subitoque Tumultus,
Et clandestinis surgentia fraudibus Arma.
It would be too tedious an Employment to transcribe all, or to translate any
thing in that place.

The affrighting and fatal nature of Comets is excellently deciphered by Silius
Italicus (who flourished in Vespatian's time) in these words, though he brings
them in by way of Comparison, Crine ut flammifero terret fera regna Cometes
Silius, l. 1. Punic.

Sanguineum spargens Ignem, vomit atra rubentes
Fax coelo radios, and saeva Luce coruscum
Scintillat sidus, terrique extrema minatur.
As when a Comet with its flaming Beard
Appears, at which the fiercest Realms are scared,
Scattring abroad its bloody Fire, and soon
The Heavenly Torch being more dismal grown
Vomits out deeper-coloured Flakes, and then,
Having Disgorged thus, clears up again,
And shines with Brisker but more cruel Light,
Threatening the World with Death and its last night.


Though I know some will have this spoken of Three several sorts of
Appearances, and they hold that a Comet cannot be said Scintillare (as fixed
Stars do,) according to that of Cornelius Gemma, Nullus Cometarum unquam visus
est Scintillante lumine visum ferire, sed tristis semper and lugubris
tranquillo effluvio. But I only Reply that Poets do not speak like
Philosophers.

The same Person relating the Prodigies that foreran the horrible Slaughter at
the Battle of Cannae, speaks directly and positively.

-- Non unus Crine Corusco
Regnorum Eversor rubuit Lethale Cometes. Punic. l. 8.

See! Sholes of Comets their bright Tresses wave,
Blushing to send whole Kingdoms to their Grave.
Another giving an account of the Portentous Sights that appeared before the
Civil Wars which happened between Caesar and Pompey, adds this black Character
of a Comet, -- Crinemque Timendi
Sideris and terris mutantem Regna Cometen. Lucan. l. 1. Pharsal.

Lo! at its wild disheveled Hair
Kingdoms run mad, and Statesmen stare.


I might add Claudian's, -- Cometes
Prodigiale rubens. -- De Raptu.



And again, Et nunquam coelo spectatum impune Cometem.

And Tibullus his -- Belli mala signa Cometen. Lib. 2. E. leg. 5.
That likewise of another Astronomical Poet, Apparere solent, Regalia Fata,
Cometae. Palingen. l. 11. Zodiac.

A Comet in the Heavens burns
To light great Monarchs to their Vrns.


I might add to these a piece of venerable Antiquity, viz. part of the Sybills
Verses, (now they may deservedly be called Oracles) which speak of the Signs
and Presages of future Distresses. (...), Sibyl. l. 8.

(...)
(...).
Look what Strange Lights do mount the Hemisphere,
And in the Skies what Bearded Flames appear;
Sure Omens ever of a Laboring State,
Of bloody Battles, and a Hostile Fate.


And in another place, ( l. 3.) (...)
(...),
(...).
What can these blazing Tapers else portend,
But Sword, and Famine, and the fatal end
Of some great Warriors, who are wont to call
And by bold Actions court their sudden Fall?


I conclude this Rank of Authors with that plain Determination of some Ancient
Sage, now scarce known, (...).
There never yet a Comet shone
But evil followed thereupon.


But perhaps it will be said that Poets are a fancyfull sort of People, and for
that Reason are not much to be heeded. They talk of Men and Women turned into
Stars, and indeed they have a gift of Extolling persons to Heaven when they
please. They will make a Head of Hair a Constellation, as they did Berenice's,
and what will they not then do with the Shagged Locks of a Comet? We know what
they have done in that Case: they have represented them (as they ought) fierce
and terrible, and though they cloth their matter in verse, yet they are as
serious as any prose. If it be said that they speak according to the sense of
the Vulgar, (whom it is their work to please,) and therefore are the less to be
attended to, I answer for them and my self together, that though I do not find
my self inclined to be led by Popular Humor and Caprice, yet I see no reason
to reject and explode an Opinion because it is Common, and has had the General
Suffrage of Mankind to vouch it. This should rather prompt us to embrace it
with the greater Seriousness, and induce us to believe, that what has thus
gained the Universal Vogue of the World, is certainly founded on some clear
Deductions of Reason which are Common to the whole Race of Men.

But I will pass from the Poets to Others who are thought to be of Profounder
Judgments. Expect now no Fancies and Raptures, but solid and judicious
Determinations.

To begin with the great Orator and Philosopher, he backeth the Prince of
Poets, acquainting us that in the Civil War between Octavius Augustus and Mark
Anthony, it was observed that Comets were the Harbingers of the Miseries that
then befell them: Stellae quas Graeci Cometas, nostri Cincinnatas vocant, nuper
bello Octaviano magnarum fuerunt Calamitatum praenunciae. Cicero. l. 2. de Not.
Deor. And in the same place he leaves this serious Memoire for Posterity to
consider of, That this is a Truth which has been confirmed by various Examples
(many of which he instances in) from All Antiquity.

Next let us hear the two Excellent Natural Philosophers who writ purposely of
Comets (if I may once again bring them in to testify in this Cause, after I
have done it so often.) A Comet (says Pliny, l. 2. c. 25.) is Terrificum magna
ex part sidus, ac non Leviter piatum. A Star (so he calls it) which in a
huge manner terrifies and astonishes the World, and never goes off without
great Mischief. And he shows the Truth and Experience of this in the
foregoing Age and in his own. Take Seneca's Thoughts in those few but plain
words, Not. Qu. l. 7. c. 17. Cruenti quidam, Minaces, qui Omen post se futuri
sanguinis serunt. Some Comets (he would have said All, but that his Master Nero
was not to be offended, as you shall perceive afterward) are very cruel, and
threaten us with the worst of Mischiefs: they bring with them and leave behind
them the seeds of Blood and Slaughter.

Next, let us look into a few Historians, and see whether they were of the same
Mind. The Comet which was seen in Nero's time is thus mentioned by one that
writes his Life, Stella Crinita, Sueton. in Nerone.
quae summis Potestatibus exitium portendere vulgo putatur. But this being an
Account only of the vulgar Opinion, let us hear him speak his ownsense; which
he does in another place thus: Praesagia mortis ejus praecipua fuerunt exortus
Crinitae stellae, Sueton. in Claudio.
quam Cometen vocant. The chief and most Considerable Presage of the Emperor
Claudius his Death was a Comet which was observed to rise in the Heavens. The
Ecclesiastical Historian gives us this Note upon Gainas (that bloody Arian) his
Beseiging Constantinople, Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 6.
(...). So great was the danger which hung over the City, that it was
presignified and portented by a huge Comet that reached from Heaven to Earth,
the like to which no man ever saw before. What says another in his Relation of
a Comet which appeared before the Death of Johannes Tzimiscas the Emperor of
the East? Cedren. Hist. com. pend.
(...). It foreshewed the Death of the Emperor, and those immediate Calamities
which were to befall the Roman Dominions by reason of their Civil Wars. And of
a wonderful large Comet that was seen in the Reign of Constantine, Surnamed
Monomachus, he speaks thus, (...) It Portended Calamities that were to befall
the World in a short time after. Shall I set down here the memorable Words of
Anna Comnena, that Learned Lady, the Daughter of Alexius, the Greek Emperor,
whose Life she writ, and called it Alexias? She, speaking of a great Comet that
was taken notice of before the breaking in of the Galls upon them, thus
delivers her sense: (...). This happened (says she) by the usual
Administration of Providence in such cases, for it was not fit that so great
and strange an Alteration of things as was brought to pass by that coming of
theirs should be without some previous Denunciation and Admonishment from
Heaven, Alexiad. l. 12. And this Noble Female Historian tells us, that all the
Enquiry then of Spectatours was, (...); What Evils does this New Light in the
Heavens come to warn us of? What strange Tidings does this Messenger from above
arrive with? Let me adjoin the remarkable words of Machiavel, that great Master
of History and Policy, who thus speaks of Comets, Vt ut se res habeat,
Experientia certe compertum habemus talia signa sequi solere magnos aliquos
Motus. However it comes to pass, so it is, that we have it vouched by
Experience, that some great commotions are the consequents of such Signs as
these. Disp. l. 1. c. 56.

Now I will produce professed Mathematicians and Astronomers who have
maintained the Presage of Comets. And not to name Claudius Ptolemaeus, the
Prince of Astrologers, who flourished about 135 Years after Christ, and settled
this Doctrine in the 98, 99, and 100 Aphorisms of his Centiloquium; I will
only make use of such as are Enemies to the Judiciary part of Astrology, and
some of whom have professedly, writ against it. Such a one was the admirable
Tycho Brahe, who yet denies not the Presage of Comets, It being irrational
(says he) to think that God and Nature show these unusual Lights to no
purpose, and that they are of no use to the World: and accordingly he sets down
his Conjectures and Prognostications of the New Appearances then in the
Heavens. Only he condemns those who are peremptory, and imagine their
Conjectures to be infallible, and in the close of the first Tome of his
Progymnasmata (where he delivers this) he laments the Weakness and Shallowness
of our Knowledge concerning the Stars, much more of those that are
extraordinary Luminaries.

I forbear to transcribe the words of another Modern Astronomer, Longomontanus.
a Learned Dane, and contemporary with the Assistant to the Noble Tycho. You
may consult his Appendix ad Astronomiam Danicam.

A Third great Ornament of Mathematics his few words to this purpose are very
observable. Christoph. Clavius.
Writing concerning the New Appearance in 1572, It a mihi persuadeo (says he)
stellam illam vel tunc a Deo Opt. Max. procreatam esse ut Magnum aliquod
Portenderet, quod cujusmodi sit adhuc ignoratur. Which though, it is confessed,
was not spoken of a Comet, yet it is sufficient to discover the sentiment of
that profound Astronomer, as to the Presaging Nature of Unusual Sights in the
Heavens, and particularly of the Bearded Lights we are discoursing of.

A fourth Learned Mathematician, Piso. Specul. Cometae.
who writ of the Comet that appeared A. D. 1618. and says little there in
favor of the Significancies of those Phenomenon, yet at last he shuts up with
these notable words, It is not my design, notwithstanding what I have delivered
of Comets, to reckon them as vain Scare-crows and Bugbears, but let there be,
for all me, this Opinion fixed in Men's Minds, That there are portended by them
great Evils and Calamities, whereby God (who hears and sees what we do, and is
both Judge and Avenger) is wont to revenge the Injuries which are done to him.

I could give you several Passages (savouring of a Christian Philosopher) out
of the Works of that learned Professor of Mathematics in Maidenberg, who
Commented with so great Credit on the Second Book of Pliny's Natural History:
take that short one thus, Ideo Perterrefacti and Attoniti spectamus Cometas
quia tot seculorum Observatio testatur magnas Clades orbi terrarum, Milichius
Commentar.
Excidia Civitatum, Regnorum Mutationes, and alias publicas Calamitates per
Cometas denunciari. There is good ground for the usual behavior of Men as to
Comets, for they have Reason to gaze at them with so much Terror and
Astonishment as they do, because it has been proved by a large Induction of
Experience and Observation, that they denounce great Slaughters to the World,
Sacking of Cities, Subversion of Kingdoms, and other public Disasters.

I will adjoyn also the Suffrage of the Skillful in Theology, who cannot be
denied to be competent Judges of these Heavenly Objects. One of the Ancient and
most Renowned Fathers tells us that a Comet foresignified the Death of
Constantine the Great; Basil the great. Hexaemer.
and he proceeds to pronounce more generally, that as often as those rare
Spectacles visit the World they are the Signs of the Succession of Kings,
(...). And another speaks home to the point, saying, (...). Theodoret Quaest.
15. in Genes.
When we see a Comet or Bearded Star, we know thence that the Invasion of
Enemies, or the Destruction of Cattle, or a great Mortality among Men are
approaching. Those Venerable Lights of the Primitive Church, Tertullian,
Augustine, Chrysostom, professed they were persuaded that these New
Appearances are immediately sent by God as forerunners of some dismal Effects;
but I forbear to set down their particular Words: and the rather because I am
sensible that the Ancient Fathers are little regarded by our Youthful
Opiniators, who are wont as rudely to pluck at these Reverend Beards as at
those of Comets. I will give these men a Taste then of some Divines of Latter
Times. Besides what has been already alleged out of the Writings of the
Learned Professor of Divinity at Lovaine, This may be added out of the same
Author, that the end and Design of all Comets is Comminatio Divinae Manus and
Flagelli imminentis, Fromond. Meteor. l. 3. c. 3.
, a Threatening the Inhabitants of the Earth with some wonderful stroke and
Scourge which they shall in a short time feel from God's Hand. An honest
Preaching Friar will tell you as much in an Astrological Campanella, Astrolog.
l. 2.
Essay of his, where he admires the sottishness of those Persons who cannot be
brought to an Admiration of Comets, and will by no Arguments be persuaded of a
Truth which shines so bright, viz. That these extraordinary Bodies Bode
Disasters to the World. Another Modern Clergyman of great Note (and who might
also have been ranked among the Mathematicians) delivers his sense after this
manner, Ista quidem quae rarius eveniunt, Dionys. Petav. Theol. Dogm. Tom. 3.
l. 1. c. 10.
neque Ratis ac Descriptis Intervallis existunt, ut Cometas, Igneas Effigies
Armorum, ac reliqua ejusmodi, arbitror Signa esse Malorum ingruentium divitus,
and ex Alto edita ad perterrendos and commonendos homines -- Non temere
creduntur Crinita illa Sidera certis temporibus ostendi Divinitus, velut ex
alto signa quaedam impendentium Malorum, cujus rei plenae sunt Historiae. Nec
is sensus est Mathematicorum tantum ac Divinaculorum, sed etiam Piorum and
gravissimorum hominum, quos omnes (ut de Vulgi tam alte concepta opinione
taceam) falli ac decipi, non est asseverare Prudentis. The Attestation of this
person is the more considerable, because he was a Professed Enemy not only to
Genethliacal Predictions, but to all other Astrological Divinations, which he
undertakes to confute in the 3d Tome of his Dogmata Theologica, book 1. chap.
9. The import of his noble Testimony is no other than this, that these rare and
unusual Bodies, which have no set and periodical Time of Appearing, are Certain
Signs of Future Events. It is no rash and groundless belief that these are on
purpose set up on High to be as it were Beacons to give notice of some imminent
danger, and to be looked upon as significations of very dreadful occurrences.
This is confirmed by the History of all Ages, and this is the sense not only
of Judiciary Astrologers, and such as pretend to Divination, but of the most
godly and serious Heads, who certainly make a considerable number in the World:
and no man in his right Wits will say that All these (not to speak now of the
Vulgar) are deceived, and conspire in one grand Error. Maraviglia. Pseudomant.
Ex. plos. Dissertat. 13.
I will offer you the words of a late Learned Italian Divine, Professor of
Ethics in Padua; they are these: It is assured (says he) from the known
Experience of all Times, that whenever Comets appear, they portend some
Changes, Slaughters and Calamities, but the Cause of such things is not easily
assigned, nor has it been sufficiently searched into by any. Dissertat. 22.
And afterward, when he had enumerated several Comets which appeared in diverse
foregoing ages, and had assigned the particular Fatal Accidents which were
portended by them and presently broke out, he concludes in such General words
as These: In every age of the World Comets have been observed to give Notice of
Public and Common Evils which were forthwith to follow them, nor is it
necessary or expedient to quote the particular Annals of all Times to make this
farther evident. And the Suffrage of this Learned Churchman is the more to be
valued because the Design and Aim of his whole Book is to invalidate the
Presages of all other Heavenly Bodies; so that it was the mere conviction of
Reason and Truth that made him Except these, and declare that they are really
portentous.

Thus you hear what Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Historians and Politicians,
Mathematicians and Divines have said of this matter. I have one Testimony more
to add, and it is of a Person, who was all these, I had almost said, more than
these. For though he was no Divine by Function and Profession, yet how vastly
accomplished he was in the Study of Theology and the Scripture, his Works have
proclaimed to the World. And it is as well known how excellent a Poet, Orator,
Historian, Statesman, etc. and how great a Master of Reason and all useful
Learning he was. This man, who was Himself a Prodigy; thus gives us his
Thoughts in few but decisive words concerning these wonderful Ostenta we have
been treating of, Solent magnas rerum Conversiones praecedere Cometae, Gladii
Ardentes, aliaque Signa ejusmodi. Grotius in Proph. Joel. cap. 2. v. 30.
Comets, and Fiery Swords, and such like Signs are wont to be the Forerunners
of great Changes in the world.

I have done now with my Testimonies, and truly I am heartily glad of it, for I
affect not to muster up the Writers, and to see Authors stand in Rank and
File. I know that good Sense will defend itself without a Bead-roll of Learned
Names. But it was Necessary on this occasion to heap up Quotations, because
those of the contrary Opinion are pleased to brag of their Authors. But I hope
it will now appear that all the World is not of their side, and that the
assertion which I maintain is not only the sense of the Many, but of the grave
and wise, the sober and judicious, and those whose Sedate Judgments overruled
their Imaginations. Men of all Studies agree in this; Humanity and Divinity
concenter here; heathens and Christians, the Popish and the Reformed, and some
of every Persuasion are heard to declare that Comets are supernatural Signs,
and were appointed to terrify and admonish this Inferior World, and to be
Precursors of approaching Miseries. But that which I most mind, is, that we
have on our side the ablest Judges and best Advocates of this Cause, for such I
reckon the truly Pious and Virtuous to be. I have observed both in Men's studied
Writings and ordinary speakings, that those who favor this Point are generally
found to be Persons of a greater Inclination to Piety and Goodness than others
are. They seem to have minds more Divinely enlightened, and more inwardly
touched with the sense of Religion and the Providence of God in managing the
World. And who are they that defend the contrary? Commonly (I do not say
always) they are Men of greater Wit than Conscience, they know how to blanch a
bad Cause, they delight to show their Skill in maintaining an Argument and
weathering a Paradox. They are likewise great Flatterers and Parasites, and
love to humor the Age. They nourish the sottishness of People, and give
Narcoticks and Opiates to those that are of themselves drowsy and stupid. And
if this be done by those who are of that holy Functioon which engages them to
give warning to their flock of imminent Dangers, to discharge the Office of
Watchmen, and not to sow Pillows under a soft and Effeminate Generation of Men;
the Crime is yet more Black and Intolerable. They carry on the Plot of Atheists
and Epicures, to root out the Notion of a God, to extirpate Providence, to
debauch Men's Lives and Manners, and to blot out the sense of another World.

I am now to enter upon the Fourth and Last General Part of my Discourse, which
is to Answer the Objections which are levelled against the foresaid Doctrine.
For so it is that there are a sort of People who in defiance of the Nature of
things, the clear Discoveries of Reason, the Direction of Providence, the
Divine Testimony of Scripture, and a Cloud of Humane Witnesses are resolved to
maintain their Post, and in order to that they discharge with great fury
several severe Cavils against the opposite side, and think thereby to fright
others from coming over to Us, and embracing our Assertion.

First, It is Objected that our Doctrine proceeds from Pride and a haughty
Spirit. Gassend. Meteor.
These Men (say they) have an over-fond conceit of themselves, as if God took
especial care of them in every thing that happens. Cannot a Star appear, but
it must be for their sakes? What is the Reason they are so concerned? It
proceeds from no other bottom than this, viz. The unsufferable Vanity which
some abound with, who think themselves such Persons to whom Prodigies
(forsooth) must be sent.

I answer,

1. That this is a gross mistake, that Comets or the like Prodigies appear for
the sake of one sort of Persons only, or that any Intelligent man ever said so.

2. Whereas it is said that it proceeds from the Pride and vain Conceit of Men,
that Comets are thought to signify, I retort with undeniable Truth, that it is
the effect of Pride and Arrogance to reckon them as needless and Trivial, and
to despise the manifest Work of God. Nay,

3. This is an Argument of gross Profaneness as well as Pride. This is clear
from the present Cavil that the Patrons of that Cause carry on (as I said) the
Plot and Design of Atheistical Spirits, who would exclude God from the
Government and Care of the World. Whereas it is certain that all ranks of
Beings, but especially rational Creatures, are under the Eye and Conduct of
Heaven. The Stoics said well, that as Man was made for God, so all things were
made for Man. The whole Mass of the Creation is serviceable to this Darling and
Delight of the Almighty. Man is as it were the Center of the World in respect
of final Causes, Bacon's Sapient. Ve^er.
says an understanding Person. The Celestial Bodies as well as those of a
lower Order administer to his best Advantages. When the Man after God's own
Heart had considered the Heavens, Psalm. 8. 3, 4.
the Work of God's Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which he had ordained, he
cried out, (as himself tells us) What is Man that thou art mindful of him? and
the Son of Man that thou visitest him? As if there were no greater Argument and
Demonstration of the Divine Care and Providence over Mankind, than what is to
be observed in the Heavenly Bodies. And if it be said that those words speak of
the Natural and Regular Appearances in the Heavens, as the Sun, and Moon, and
ordinary Stars, I reply that the Argument is the stronger on our side; for if
the usual and ordinary Luminaries are a proof of God's Mindfulness of the
Inhabitants of this Inferior World, then much more the strange and
extraordinary ones are such. And this is sufficient ground to consider the
Heavens (as that Holy man did,) to regard and take notice of the Works of the
Lord, and the Operation of his Hands, especially to observe and admire those
Signs in the Heavens which so seldom appear. To look up toward them, and take
an exact view of them, is most suitable to the piercing Nature of Man's Soul,
and to the Erect Figure which God has bestowed on his Body. It is so far from
savouring of Vanity and Pride to think that those Prodigies are sent for his
sake, that it is his duty to believe so, and to attend seriously to the import
of them. For by Comets God is pleased as by new Arguments to urge and inculcate
his presence in the World, that when the ordinary course of Nature and
Providence does not move men, they may be rouzed by these Wondrous and Rare
Objects, and have their Eyes effectually opened to see and confess a God.

A Second Cavil is of this nature, viz. that it has been observed that great
Advantages have been the Events to some Persons and Places after a Comet has
appeared, and therefore there is no reason to reckon it as a Sign of God's
Anger, but rather of his Favor. Does not the Philosopher thus speak of the
Comet which was seen at the beginning of Augustus's Reign, Cometes in uno
totius orbis loco colitur in Templo Romae, admodum Faustus Divo Augusto
judicatus ab ipso. And afterward, Si verum fatemur, salutare id terris fuit.
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.
It was thought to be so auspicious that it was worshipped by the People of
Rome, and the Emperor himself judged it to be a most happy Phenomenon.

I Answer,

1. If any one has maintained that no good Effects or Advantages have ever
followed the appearance of Comets, it is nothing to me, I do not defend it,
neither is there any Reason for it. It is my Opinion that the very Rise and
Production of them in those parts of the Heavenly Regions where they are
generated is to good and excellent Purposes; for it is probable that the acute
Kepler is in the right, who conceives a Comet to be a long Collection of
corrupt and filthy matter, a kind of an Apostem in the Heavens, that as in
Man's Body putrid Humors often gather into one part, so they do in the
Heavenly ones. And these superfluous and excremental humors breaking out, the
Ether (like the Body of Man) is thereby kept Sound and Hale, the unwholesome
matter is purged and drained away by these Catharticks. By this means the
Heavens exonerate themselves of Noxious Qualities which had been long
gathering, and would in time corrupt them. So that the evacuating of this
matter is for the Preservation of the Heavens. The Sun and other Luminaries
fare the better for the expulsion of this gross stuff which would otherwise
overrun them with Thick Maculae.

Thus the very Production of Comets is advantageous to the Heavens. But that is
not all; they are so likewise to the Inhabitants below.

I have in the foregoing Discourse granted that Comets are sent out of Kindness
and Favor to Mankind, as well as to a Contrary End. They are to call the
offending World to Repentance, and to remind them of their greatest concern,
which things, if they be heartily pursued, will produce unspeakable Advantages
and Blessings.

2. I grant that Comets have not been without good and advantageous
Consequences; and indeed it cannot be otherwise. For the Calamities which
happen to some prove beneficial to others. With evil Effects there are good
ones always joined; such is the excellent mixture of Providence in the
administration of the World. Blessings then may follow Comets. As suppose the
Plague (which none will deny to be a great evil) be the natural issue of these
Prodigies, yet by this a City and whole Country may receive great Advantage. A
sweeping Pestilence made way for Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, by removing
those who were her most Implacable and potent Enemies. By this means a
considerable number of bad men may be carried off; and some of those who remain
and are spared, may by that Mercy be reduced to a better understanding of
themselves, and a thorough amendment of their Lives, which are good and
desirable Effects. Or suppose War to be the consequence of a Comet, who knows
not that if one party is vanquished, the other overcomes? Though Violence,
Death and Ruin be the allotment of the former, yet Joy and Victory are the
purchase of the latter. Thus that portentous Apparition which Constantine the
Great beheld in the Heavens, though it was auspicious to him and his Army, as
the Inscription of it told, yet it proved most Fatal to Maxentius and his
Forces. Or say that some great Prince is cut off by the malign Influence of one
of those Heavenly Signs, then what follows but this, that as he loses his
Crown, so another gets it? And as his being cut off may prove a deplorable Loss
and Calamity if he were good, so it may happen to administer the greatest
matter of Joy, and actually produce the most Happy Consequences imaginable if
he were of a contrary quality; and much more, if he be succeeded by a Person
who wants none of the Accomplishments belonging to the Character of a King. So
that those who started the Objection have gained no more than this, that what
is good to one is oftentimes of a contrary Nature to another; those very Events
which some find to be Fortunate, others experience to be unlucky and Fatal.
Where there is the death of Princes there will be the Succession of new ones.
And show me any man that has the confidence to deny this.

3. I grant also, that though Comets portend and bring evil upon Men, yet the
All-wise Maker and Disposer of the Universe can derive the greatest good to
them thence. And on This Divine Consideration it must be acknowledged that they
are Heavenly Evangelists, and Messengers of glad Tidings, they are propitious
Flames, and in a Remote manner signs of the Divine Favor and Good Will. But

4. I Answer directly, that though they may be followed with some Good Events,
yet This is merely Accidental; because it is almost impossible that any evil
should happen without some good. If we remember what was said before, viz. That
these Heavenly Preachers are sent to give notice of God's Displeasure for the
sins of the World, we cannot but acknowledge that their Primary Token is the
Evil of Punishment, that they are Divine Presages of Wrath and Vengeance, if
Men will not repent and amend. Particularly, to reply to the Instance mentioned
in the Objection. It is no wonder that the Comet which appeared after Julius
Caesar's Death, was thought by Augustus to be auspicious, since by his Death he
came to succeed in the Empire. But he that shall read the Relation of the
bloody Wars and horrid Commotions which the People of Rome had experience of
immediately after the Rising of that Comet, will be of another judgment, and
not call it (as Pliny flatteringly does) Salutary and Lucky. The grave Stoic
(whose Morality one would imagine should not teach him to be a Parasite) says
that the Comet which shone in the beginning of Nero's joyful and happy Reign,
Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 7. cap. 17.
Neronis Principatu laetissimo Cometis detraxit Infamiam, took away from that
sort of Prodigies the Infamy which they lay under. It seems then they had
before an ill name, they were thought till that time to be unlucky and ominous.
Yes, and they were thought so then, and ever after; only Nero it seems was to
be flattered, and Seneca was to let him know that that strange Spectacle in the
Heavens assured great Happiness to the whole World by reason of his Reign. But
will not any one who has read the passages of that Emperor's Life abhor such
rank flattery, and with greater Reason conclude that that Comet, and others
that appeared in his Time, (as no less than four appeared, one whereof lasted
six months) presaged the monstrous and unheard of Villainies committed by him
when he ruled? That as he came into the World with his Feet forward, which made
his Birth ominous, so the unusual Blazes in the Heavens rendered his whole Life
portentous? Who will not say that they fore told the World of his cruel,
inhumane and barbarous Exploits, void of all Compassion and Remorse? viz. his
setting Rome on fire that he might better conceive the Flames of Troy, and sing
to his Harp the Destruction of that City: his killing his own Mother, his
putting his own Wife to Death, his dispatching with a kick of his foot his
Mistress (or rather his Wife afterward) Poppaea, his slaying his Aunt, his
killing his Tutour and Master Seneca, (the very man who here flattereth him and
his Comet,) his bloody Rage against all his Kindred and Friends, (as Suetonius
says of him, Nullum adeo necessitudinis genus est quod non scelere
perculerit,) his Madness against the Christians, on whom he maliciously laid
the firing of Rome, his implacable Hatred of Christianity it self, which he
showed in being the first that ever made an Edict against it. It was rightly
therefore said of an Historian, Cedren. Hist. compend.
(...) (...). To all his other Villainies he added this, That he fought against
Heaven, and was the first Persecutor of the Word of God. And, as notorious
Instances of this cursed and Hellish Rage, Those two great Apostles and Pillars
of the Church, St. Paul and St. Peter fell by his Hands. Pliny had Reason then
to call this Emperor humani generis hostem, one that had bid defiance to all
Ranks of Mankind, and to style one of the Comets that was seen in his Reign
Sidus Saevum, a furious and outrageous Star, l. 2. c. 25. Nay, we are told that
upon the sight of a Comet he found himself enflamed afresh to Bloodshed: and he
used to put some Noblemen to Death to expiate and purge away the Hurt which
these Prodigies procure, as an Astrologer taught him, says Suetonius. And the
same is averred by another credible Historian, Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
Sidus Cometes, sanguine illustri semper Neroni expiatum. And who will not
likewise think that the unusual and strange Appearance in the Heavens in his
days signified his unheard of and prodigious Lust, his Filthyness and
Lasciviousness of so monstrous a nature, described partly by the Author who
writes his Life, Sueton. in Nerone. c. 28, 29.
and it may be reflected on by St. Paul, in Romans 1. 26, 27? Who is not inclined
to believe that the strange Ostenta in those days seen at Rome, pointed at this
execrable Emperor, Theodoret. de Cur. Graec. Affectib. Sermon. 3.
(...), who practiced all kind of Lasciviousness and Wickedness to the full?
Lastly, may it not be thought that they portended his violent and Tragical End,
the just Guerdon of his bloody Life? Thus maugre the flattering humor of a few
vain Men, these Sights were Boding and Prophetic, the Forerunners and Signs
both of moral and penal Evils. And the same may be pronounced of all the
Bearded Flames that ever shone in the World, nay even of the Star which
appeared at Christ's Nativity; for though the Officious Sages who came from the
East rejoiced at its Appearance, yet without Controversy, when it appeared
more openly and universally, (as it is probable it did afterward, as I may
have occasion to show at another time, and on another Subject,) it threatened
Woe and Misery to the Unbelieving World, and likewise presignified the bloody
Persecutions which the Devil and his Instruments would be Authors of against
the Followers of our Savior.

A Third Objection is formed thus: J. Scaliger. Exercitat. 79. sect. 2.
Many Comets have been seen by us, but they have been followed with no mischief
throughout all Europe: Besides, many Eminent and Illustrious Men have dyed,
Kingdoms and Principalities, and Noble Families have been destroyed without any
Notice given by a Comet.

Here are two grievous Impeachments together of the Doctrine of Comets. As to
the former, viz. That it has been observed that no Hurt has followed Comets,

I Answer,

1. That notwithstanding what this daring Objector suggests, you have heard
what others, and those of great Credit and Fame, have said and writ. The
Renowned Kepler has set down the fatal Events of many Comets. Ricciolus, and
Hevelius after him, give us a Catalogue of all the Comets that appeared before
and since Christ's Birth, with the remarkable occurrences that ensued upon them
in the World. And now judge whether Scaliger (who was a man that would say any
thing for his Cause) outweigheth this Tripple Testimony of Persons of so good
Account: besides that Others might be made use of here to attest the ill
effects of Comets in the several Ages of the World.

2. Whereas some tell us that no evils have been the Consequences of the Comets
which they have seen, I have this to say to them, that it is none of my fault
that they do not live to see those Consequences. They profess they behold no
hurtful Effects of Comets, and thence rashly infer there are none. But I
retort upon them with that which is satisfactory to me, (and may be so to
them,) that the Hurt and Evil are deferred, but may come at last. This may
happen thus, because of the Nature of Things themselves, Comets do not always
operate presently, by reason of some Indispositions and Alterations in the
Elements, and the Dependence they often have on several Causes. For this Reason
it may be we feel at this very hour part of the Effects of those Comets, which
visited us in 1664, and 1665. And it may be we shall not experience the full
Influence of the two last which appeared, till some years hence. Say not then,
because you see not the Effects of these strange Shows, that they are vain
Sights, and because they are not followed forthwith with notable Alterations,
that therefore there are no Evils that issue from them. Moreover, It is against
the Nature of these Prodigies that they should have a speedy effect, for (as
has been said) they are sent to warn Men of the Judgments which their repeated
Crimes deserve, and to stir them up effectually to be sensible of their
condition, and to mourn for their Offenses, and implore the Divine Favor, and
betake themselves to Newness of Life. For the Performance of These the great
Lover of Mankind allots them some considerable time, and accordingly does not
presently inflict the punishments which he threatens, but expects and
waits for their amendment. And if that happens, He wholly Averteth his Wrath
and Indignation. Which directs me to another Answer to the Objection, and it is
this,

Suppose the Observation had some Truth in it, viz. That fatal Changes and
calamitous Accidents have not ever been seen to be the consequences of Comets,
who is there that cannot dive into the Reason of it? Which is no other than
this, That the Divine Goodness and Philanthropy, and Man's timely Repentance
and Conversion prevent the inflicting of those Calamities which were portended
by the appearing of the Heavenly Prodigies. God sends not those Evils which he
Threatened. That is all that can be gathered. How idly and incoherently then do
they discourse who deny all Presage of Comets, because they do not presently
feel the Effects of them? Nay, how impiously and blasphemously do they talk who
assert it Ridiculous that God should intend these to be Monitors of Repentance,
and yet not let us see the Fatal Events produced by them?

And thus I think the first part of the Objection is pretty well cleared: and
Men may sometimes look for the Effects of Comets, and not epsy them, not
because Comets are not by God's Appointment Threatening and Presaging, but
because the Infinite Compassion of Heaven deferreth or averteth the impendent
Judgments. Which agrees with what was maintained before, viz. That Comets are
not Presages wholly of Evil, but they are likewise Collaterally and Remotely
Tokens of Mercy to Mankind, i. e. if they Repent: otherwise they denounce
nothing but Vengeance.

These Bodies then do not Necessarily and Vnalterably signify Evil, but
Conditionally, i. e. if it shall seem good to God, and if the Inhabitants of
the Earth do not repent of their sins. And indeed it was rightly said by a
celebrated Jewish Doctor, R. Kimchi in Jon.
All the Evils that God threatens to Men, are threatened with this condition,
If they do not repent. So that Comets speak not the absolute and inevitable
Futurity of such Events, but let the Persons know to whom they are showed what
they are to expect, and what shall certainly happen unless God be pleased, for
Reasons and Inducements best known to himself, to interpose between the Sign
and the Events. The great and excessive Drought in 1681. may be reasonably
looked upon as the Effect of the Comet in 1680. And we may remember what was
the consequent of that unusual dryness of the Earth, viz. The price of Hay in a
Months time, or a little more, was risen from 15 s. a Load to 40 s. and we were
in expectation of more dismal Effects of that Drought. But the price of the
aforesaid commodity fell in few months to its ordinary Rate, and we were
delivered from our other Fears. Thus the God of Heaven showed us what we
deserved, and then was pleased to remove it.

Thus it is possible some expected Events may be frustrated, and yet Comets in
their own Nature, and by God's Appointment, are ominous and prognostic.

And as for the latter part of the Objection, viz. That it is observed
sometimes that God sends Calamities where Comets have not been the Forerunners,
and therefore it is likely no Calamities are caused or signified by them.

I have these two things to answer:

First, it does not follow that, because Comets foresignifie Wars, Pestilence,
Famine and the Death of Princes, therefore a Comet must necessarily appear as
often as Famine or Plague approach, or whenever Wars and Deaths of Princes
allarm the World; for it depends wholly on God's free Will and Pleasure,
whether there shall be any Signs or no: and as to the Time of exhibiting them,
that also is at God's disposal. Besides, the Argument is fallacious, for though
every Plague, or War, or Dearth be not ushered in with a Comet, yet it does not
follow thence that none are, or may be.

Secondly, Though all the great and public Calamities that happen be not
presaged by Comets, (as I readily grant) yet they may be, and usually, if not
always, are by some other Forerunners and Signs, if not in the Heavens, yet in
the Air, or Earth, or Waters; for there are other Omens beside those above.

This then does not in the least disanul what I assert, that some great and
extraordinary Events (and such are supposed to be rare as Comets themselves
are) are presignified and procured by those Bodies, and that at what time
soever they appear, future Perils and Distresses, of one kind or other, are
threatened to the World, and though they are not seen or felt in one part of it,
yet they may be in another.

And under this Head likewise, and by virtue of what has been said here, the
frivolous Objection of those Men is removed, who deny all Significancy of
Comets, because they are not such Signs as directly and positively point at
particular Evils and Events, because we cannot learn from them what certain
Evil will befall the World. Hence they are styled by the Objectours Useless and
Fallacious Signs, and it is unbecoming God's Wisdom (say they) to set up such
in the World.

Thus they irreverently and wickedly teach men to despise God's Works. And
(which is the more to be lamented) such Language falls from the Pens of great
Pretenders to Divinity and Philosophy.

Fourthly, It is Objected that some Comets travel many Countries, and pass
over the Heads of diverse People, as particularly the Dreadful Comet in 1680.
was seen not only all over Europe, but in the most remote parts of the World:
How then can it be known what particular place it was designed for? Who can
tell where its Influence is to light? Is there any Reason why we of this Island
should be concerned? Many things may be said to silence this Cavil:

1. If a Comet be universal (as is supposed in the Objection) then its
Influence is such likewise, and then we are certain that we, as well as other
Countries, are concerned But,

2. Suppose we cannot tell to what place a Comet has a special Respect, and at
which Nation it does as it were level its malign Rays, yet the Appearance it
self ought to make us careful, and to provide against such Events as may
happen, because we may be (for ought we know) particularly concerned. And this
is the whole design of this Treatise. Yet let it be remembered,

3. That though a Comet travells through several Countries, and shows its
flaming Train among many People, yet they are not all equally under its
Influence. For though it may be seen by several Countries, yet it is not
directly and vertically placed over them all, but darts its Beams
Perpendicularly on one or some only. And whereas some curiously observe which
way these blazing Lights cast their Rays and spread their Train, I look on it
as the product of vulgar Error and Mistake, (though I know too that some of
the Learned are pleased with it) for this sort of Bodies always turn their
Faces to the Sun, and their Tails from it: so that there can be no ground to
make any Judgment of their looking toward this or that Country or Kingdom.
But it is reasonable to observe how high they mount, and whether they hang
perpendicularly over our Heads; for the farther they climb in our Hemisphere,
the more powerful are their Rays, and their Influence the more pregnant. This
too is to be considered that the longer Time they stay with us, and the oftener
they appear, the greater undoubtedly is the Presage which we may expect from
them. And we are to consider the Magnitude of a Comet as well as the time of
its Duration; for the greater it is, the Effects of it are proportionably so
too, and they continue the longer. All these things must be attended to, and
then we shall easily be induced to grant that the Influence of Comets is not
alike as to all Countries and People. To instance in the Comet in 1680.
whatever Influence and Aspect it had on other Regions and Inhabitants, We of
this Island may be convinced from the Premises that it nearly concerned us:
for its apparent Greatness, height of Ascension, and Continuance are so many
Demonstrations of it. How large must it needs be when, being situated not far
from the Horizon, it almost reached with its Tail to the Zenith, or Mid-heaven?
How great think you was it when it was seen to extend it self in length about
50, nay, sometimes 60 Degrees of our Hemisphere? And the time of its stay also
was very considerable, and made it the more portentous and terrible: for it
appeared two whole months together, unless when the Clouds hindered it from
being seen; and it was three months visible in one place or other, which is the
utmost and longest Duration generally of a Comet. I have read but of two that
attained to this, viz. That Sword-Comet which hung over Jerusalem, and that
which was seen in the beginning of Nero's Reign, which lasted six months, if
Seneca may be credited ( Not. Qu. l. 7. c. 21.) though Pliny, who lived at that
time, tells us, ( Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.) that Fourscore days is the longest
space of time any Comet continues, which wants a hundred days of six months.

It is certain that the extraordinary Continuance and Duration of that late
terrible spectacle, signified that the Events which were to ensue it should
continue long. And the last which appeared, viz. in the Year 1682. made a
considerable stay, and tarried many weeks with us, and though its Magnitude was
not to be compared with that of the former, yet its Aspect and Influence are to
be accounted the more significant, because it visited us with such quick
returns, i. e. not only in the Evenings, but in the mornings.

4. I add, that even all those Countries and Nations which Comets successively
visit, may successively, and in due time, feel the effects of them. The
Influence may reach every one of them at last: for there is at the same time a
circular and periodical Motion in Bodies Politic as well as Natural: and
Countries by Sympathy communicate Evils to one another, particularly we may
gather that that astonishing Comet in 1680. which was visible to all Europe,
and other parts of the World, shall be of universal Influence, and many Nations
shall share in the Revolutions and Occurrences which it shall produce. Common
Artists take occasion to speak of the Signs it passed through, and there they
are full of roving Conjectures and Uncertainties; but we may safely infer this
from its passing through so Many, viz. Seven Signs and an half, that it is
probable a very considerable part of the World is concerned in the Effects and
Consequences of it. General Distresses and Troubles shall be complained of,
there shall happen Catholic and spreading Calamities, and (which is always to
be implied, if God or Man do not interpose, the one by infinite Clemency and
Forbearance, or the other by Repentance and Amendment) Evils of a very vast
Circumference shall environ the World.

A Fifth Objection is plausibly raised from 10. Ier. 2. Thus faith the Lord,
Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven,
for the Heathen are dismayed at them. Whence it may be inferred that it is
wicked and Paganish to imagine any Signs or Tokens in the Heavens, and that it
is the guise only of the deluded Gentile World to be afraid of them, and
therefore the Presage of Comets is hereby cashiered.

I Reply,

1. It is Nonsense to argue from this place that there are no Signs in the
Heavens, when the very Text supposes and grants it, expressly calling them the
Signs of Heaven.

2. These Signs are the ordinary Heavenly Bodies, called in the Holy Style the
Host of Heaven, the Sun, Moon and Stars; and to these may be adjoined the
extraordinary Bodies which are seen in the Heavens, as Comets. Now God commands
his own People not to be dismayed at any of these, as the Heathens were wont to
be, who believed these Heavenly Bodies to be alive, and that they governed all
things here below by their great Power: they thought that all their affairs
depended wholly on these, and therefore they were put into great Disorders by
such Notions, and were struck with strange Affrightment and Astonishment. Their
fearing of them put them upon worshipping them as Gods, and as if they had
Divine Power. Thus the Heathens thought and practiced, but God's Chosen People
are forbid the superstitious reverencing and worshipping of these. And not
only an Idolatrous Fear is disallowed them but any other that is unbecoming
and disorderly: they must not be troubled and cast down, dismayed and dejected
at any unusual Appearance in the Heavens, so as to distrust God's Providence,
and act things unworthy of their Holy Profession. The Heavenly Bodies are
Signs, and some of them very terrible ones, but they must by no means fright
good men out of their Duty, or into a disesteem of God's governing the World.
Queen Elizabeth's Iacia est alea, was very brave and becoming upon occasion of
one of her Courtiers dissuading her from looking on a Comet which appeared when
the lay at Richmond. But she commanded the Windows to be set open, and uttered
those gallant words, Iacta est alea, The Die is cast (says she) by the Divine
Hand; as we cannot disappoint, so neither ought we to be unchristianly afraid
of it.

Comets being Signs, they must be taken notice of, for they were set up for
that end, or rather not they, but the Hand and Voice of God in them are to be
observed and dreaded. Most apposite to which purpose is that which I have read
in the Life of Charles the Great. Eginhardus in vit. Car. Mag.
A vast and dreadful Comet shone in the close of this great Monarch's Reign:
Upon the rising of which new Light in the Heavens, he asked what it foretold?
Imagining (what indeed happened, and is often foresignified by such
Apparitions) that his Death was near at hand. Eginardus, with whom he held
conference at that time, (a great Philosopher and his Secretary, who writ this
Prince's Life) answered him more like a Divine than a Philosopher, in those
words of Scripture which I just now descanted upon, Be not dismayed at the
Signs of Heaven. To which the Emperor replied, that he was not dismayed at
such kind of Signs, but feared and reverenced the Powerful Cause and Divine
Framer of them, who being incensed with Anger against a People or Prince, is
wont by these to admonish them of his Wrath, and to call them to Repentance
that they may avoid it. And this is the sum of all that I have said concerning
the Presages of Comets.

Sixthly, and Lastly, It is objected that if Comets be significative and
portentous, then there is as much Reason to believe that the other Heavenly
Bodies, as the Planets and the fixed Luminaries, and their several Motions and
Aspects are so too, and by this means we open a door to all the superstitious
Observations, and groundless Prognostications of Judiciary Astrology, whereby
some men pretend to divine the greatest Events that shall happen, and to
foretell the Fate of Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Having delivered my Sentiments freely and impartially concerning those great
and glaring Lights and their Presages, which I undertook chiefly to treat of,
it remains now that in Answer to this Objection, I do with the same freedom
present you with my thoughts concerning the Judiciary part of that Noble
Science of Astrology, and that I enquire whether there can be any real
Presaging from the ordinary Bodies of Heaven, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, and
what insight into futurities any man of Reading, Study and Observation may gain
by being acquainted with their Motions.

I know very well that it is the humor of Writers to oppose and flatly deny
all that their Adversaries say, and to run counter with every Proposition they
lay down, and for no other Reason oftentimes than because they are theirs. And
the main and only design of these Persons being this, to be victours; it is
not to be wondered at, that they behave themselves after this rate. But I
(having no other design than that Truth only may have the Victory) will not
tread in their steps. And indeed it is fond and absurd Custom, and such as is
unbecoming Rational Minds, to hold all or nothing of an Opinion about which the
Dispute is raised. I am sure if this had not been wilfully kept up, there had
been an end ever this of most of the Controversies that trouble the World. I
will endeavor therefore to silence and compose this Quarrel which I am now
entering upon by going another way to work, namely, by fairly granting
something, that I may more impregnably hold the rest.

How zealous are some in discarding the whole Host of Heaven from influencing
in the least on things here below, even the meanest Occurrences of Man's Life?
They think they are bound to run down all the orders of Heavenly Bodies at
once. The Sun (say they) which is the greatest Luminary, has no way to act but
by its Light and Heat, and its business is only with the Earth, Minerals,
Plants, and mere Animals. The Moon and the rest of the Planets are heavy, dull
things; they cannot do more than the Earth, that being as good a Planet as any
of them, and the Earth influenceth as much on them as they upon it. The fixed
Stars are too far off, besides that the Situation of them is ever the same. And
thus they are all incapable of doing any feats in this lower World wherein we
live. But I must declare for my part, that I look upon this as too high and
ranting. I am willing to grant that the Heavenly Bodies Act on Things and
Persons on Earth, and that they are likewise Signs: and yet this is no
prejudice to our foreestablished Doctrine. To prove this let us look into the
first Creation and Institution of the Heavenly Bodies: and there it is most
likely we shall find the true Ends and Uses of them. And these are no less than
five, according to the Authentic and Canonical Account which is given of them
in Genesis 1. 14. etc. I will not set them down in the order they are in there,
yet I will be exact in the enumerating of them.

The First End of them is to give Light upon the Earth, (v. 15.) that Men may
see how to dispatch their Affairs with Ease and Cheerfulness. An ineffable
Blessing certainly! and such as the wisest man takes particular notice of, when
he says, Truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to
behold the Sun, Eccl. 11. 7. Of this the Learned Jew speaks, Philo de Abrahamo.
(...) What were these glittering Lights set up for, unless it were for the
service of the Eyes, to see by them?

A Second Use of these Luminaries is to be for Seasons, (v. 14.) Those
Commentatours that interpret it of the Season of Weather, show that they attend
not to the genuine sense of the Original Word, (...). But the true meaning is,
That those Heavenly Luminaries were appointed for distinction of Times and
Seasons, whether they be for Natural, Civil or Religious Affairs Thus among the
Jews the Feasts of the New Mons, and Sabbaths, and other sacred Solemnities
depended on the Returns and Courses of these Bodies. And still the orderly
Service of God is kept up by observing the First Day of the Week, and other
Periods of Time, either expressed by the first Founder of the Christian
Religion, or laudably constituted by the Church.

Understand here also other Seasons and Opportunities, viz. of several
Professions and Employments in the Life of Man. Husbandmen learn hence to plow,
sow, plant, lop Trees, etc. according to the right Season; of which you may
read in Virgil's Georgicks, and Hesiod's (...). And as the Luminaries of
Heaven are useful in Husbandry, so are they no less in Navigation, to direct
Mariners to guide their Vessels with safety and Success. (...) (...); Philo de
Monarch.
What but the knowledge of the Periodical motions and revolutions of the Stars
opened and showed the way to Seamen in so many vast and spacious Seas? And not
only the Husbandman and Mariner, but the Masters of Medicks gratefully
acknowledge those Luminaries to be for Seasons. Hippocrates and Galen assert
the usefulness, nay, the necessity of Astrology in Physic. They acquaint us
that Diseases are rendered critical by such and such Returns of Planets, and
according to this they give directions at what Seasons to administer Medicines.
Marcilius Ficinus, that Noble Platonic Philosopher and Physician, wrote a
Piece de Medicina Astrologiae jungenda. Fernelius that Learned French
Physician, his Judgment and Practice in this case are well known. I question
not but the careful observing and due attending of the Times of the Heavenly
Aspects and Influences are very useful in Physic, though now that course be
laid aside generally by Practitioners.

A Third End of these Lights in the Heavens is to be for Days and Years. v. 14.
that is, by the constant Motion of these Bodies Time is measured and numbered,
by these Time is divided and distinguished into greater and lesser portions, as
Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours, etc. By these we keep an account of our
Actions, we call to mind, reckon, compute, forecast: we understand the duration
of Beings, the certain Intervalls and distances of things, the Ages and
Generations of the World, which is of singular Use in Man's Life.

Their Fourth Use is to divide the Day from the Night, v. 14. or (as it is said
afterward, v. 18.) to divide the Light from the Darkness, and to rule over the
Day and over the Night. These Heavenly Bodies by their Setting and Rising,
cause Light and Darkness, and consequently are the Authors of the successive
Returns of Day and Night to us. This is set them as an immovable and never
failing constitution, and therefore is styled the Covenant of the Day and
Night, Ier. 33. 20. and the Ordinance of Heaven, Ier. 31. 35, 36. And under
This Use of the Heavenly Bodies is comprehended their Warming and Chearing
Virtue, (especially of the Sun, which brings to us Day and This together, and
of which the great Observer of God's Works thus speaks, There is nothing bid
from the heat thereof,) and also their fructifying, generative and prolifick
Faculty, whereby they may justly be said to Rule, and bear sway in the World.

The Fifth and Last Use of these glorious Lights in the firmament of Heaven
(and which is the use of them wherein we are most concerned at present) is to
signify something to the World: Let them be for Signs, v. 14. And in the place
before commented upon they are called the Signs of Heaven. Which an
Astronomical Poet expresses thus, (...) Aratus.

(...). --


Here then may Business is to show how they are said to be for Signs, or What
it is that they signify to the World. Accordingly I assert that they signify
three forts of Occurrences, viz. Natural, Civil and Divine.

First, They give notice to us of Natural things, as Rain or Drought, Storms or
Calms, Heat or Cold, Winter or Summer, with the other Seasons of the Year, the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, Plenty or Scarcity of the Fruits of the Earth;
in short, the Change of Weather, and Alteration of the temper of the Elements.
These are signified by the Sun's Rising or Setting with such and such Stars or
Constellations, by the Access or Recess of the Planets to and form the Sun, and
among themselves. This, it seems, is a thing which was thought worthy to be
mentioned by a Divine Penman, for he bids the Rebellious Jews seek him that
makes the Seven Stars and Orion, Amos 5. 8.
i. e. God, who by the Appearing of these, and other Constellations at certain
times, gives notice of the different Seasons of the Year. And this was a way of
speaking which well became Amos the Herdsman, who had been used to keep his
Cattle, and watch in the Fields all Night, and there had leisure and
opportunity to observe how the several Seasons were ushered in by these Lamps
of Heaven. But hear what another inspired Searcher into the Heavenly Bodies
says of the great Creator, viz. that He makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades,
Job 9. 9.
and the Chambers of the South. That is, he makes the Year, the Parts of which
are signified and known by the rising of these Constellations; for Arcturus, or
the Bear's Tail, a Star of the first Magnitude in the Northern Hemisphere, is
said to arise in Autumn. Orion, a Southern Constellation, made up of many
splendent Stars, arises in Winter. It is called Nimbosus Orion by Virgil, and
is accordingly deemed by Astrologers to be the Cause of great Storms and
Tempests. Its name in Hebrew is Kesil, whence perhaps the Month Kisleu among
the Jews (which answers to November) had its denomination, this Constellation
rising in that Month. And by the bye let me shove in this Criticism, when we
read that the same word Kesil signifies a Fool, (as in Solomon's Proverbs and
other places) we need not wonder that a Constellation which causes Change of
Weather, gives name to a foolish, light, and unconstant Person. The Pleiades,
or Seven Stars, arise in the Spring. And Job makes mention of the Chambers of
the South, which perhaps are the Stars which arise in the Summer: and so the
four several Quarters of the Year are set down. Aratus and Hyginus, and other
Ancients, discourse of this kind of Prognostics. Of these Philo the Jew
speaks, (...). L. de mundi Opificio.
The Stars were made not only to enlighten the Earth, but to be signs of
future Accidents, i. e. (as he there explaineth himself) of different Seasons
of Weather. Which is his meaning in another Treatise, where he says, (...)
Lib. de Monarchia.
The Signs of all these things that you see upon Earth, are set up and erected
in the Heavens. And I am mistaken if the Learned Father speaks not of these
Prognostics when he tells us, (...) Basil. Hexa^mer.
The Observation of the Luminaries of Heaven is useful and even necessary for
Man's Life, unless People will beyond measure, and with an unlawful curiosity,
search into the Signs which those Bodies afford us.

Secondly, These Heavenly Bodies were created not only to signify Natural
things, but Humane and Civil Occurrences, and these either Private or Public,
the Concerns of Families or Kingdoms. All sorts of Actions and Events, whether
good, or evil, or indifferent, may (at one time or other) be partly discerned
from the Observation of the Natural and usual Motions of the Host of Heaven.
For though I cannot make out the dependence and affinity between them and
these, as of Effects and Causes, and though the Knowledge which is gained
thence is usually uncertain; yet I cannot assert with the boldness which I see
others do, that there are no Natural Effects following from such Positions and
Situations of the Stars, but I have reason to believe on the contrary, that
their various Motions and Aspects are in some measure Significant.

Let us consider then that the Seven Planets are always in one or other of the
Twelve Signs, or (which is the same thing) they are directly under some part of
the Zodiac, (which is divided into 12 parts in all,) or (to speak plainer yet)
the Wandering Stars move under some particular fixed ones, and the mutual
Habitude which those have to one another as they are placed under these (or, as
Artists speak, as they move through these Signs) causes several Aspects. And
these Aspects are either Right or Collateral.

A Right Aspect is when one Planet has a Relation to another in a Right Line.
And this is either Conjunction or Opposition. Conjunction is when two Planets
meet together in the same Sign of the Zodiac: Its mark is this,. Opposition
(marked thus,) is when Planets are in Diametrical or opposite Signs, viz. when
they are distant from one another half the Circle of the Heavens, i. e. Six
Signs, or 180 Degrees.

A Collateral Aspect is when Planets look on one another in Collateral and
Oblique Lines; and this is Threefold, namely, Sextile, when they are distant
from one another a Sixth part of the Zodiac, i. e. two Signs, or 60 Degrees.
Quadrate, when Planets are removed from one another 90 Degrees of the Zodiac,
or 3 Signs, which is a fourth part of the Circle. Trine, or Triangular, when
one Planet is distant from another a Third part of the Zodiac, which contains
40 Signs, or 120 Degrees. These Configurations, (...) Aspects (no less than
five in all) happen according to the different parts of the Zodiac which the
Planets are in, or move under. Hence arise the Dignities and Infirmities, the
Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets, for they are supposed to help or
hinder, to promote or indamage one another, according to their various
Situation, Aspects and Agreements with other Planets. And among the forenamed
Aspects, Opposition and Quadrate are reckoned as malign: the rest are thought
to be favorable and benign. And among these latter, Conjunction is the most
effectual of all the Radiations of the Planets, and Sextile is the weakest and
Faintest.

Now I propound it fairly and peaceably to any considerative Person, whether he
can imagine that the Heavens ring all these Changes to no purpose, and shift
their postures so often without some effect?

I might add, That the Planets in regard of their Motion are Direct, Retrograde
and Stationary; whence must arise different Sites and Postures of them, and
from these different Effects and Consequences. And particularly, as for the
Aspects and Phases of the Moon, there are more of them, and those likewise more
observable and lasting, than of all the other Stars. Mark how often this
Proteus changes Shapes, and according to its various Access unto and Recess
from the Sun, appears in diverse Figures and Countenances.

Let us recount the several Metamorphoses of this Fickle Creature.

When she is in Conjunction with the Sun, i. e. when she is exactly between us
and the Sun, her enlightened Part (which is more than half the Moon always, the
Sun exceeding her in magnitude) is toward the Sun altogether, insomuch that no
part of her is seen by us. This is New Mood, which lasts three days, all which
time it shines not to us. Soon after its Conjunction, viz. on the fourth day,
and when it is about 60 degrees distant from the Sun, it is Horned, and it sets
soon after Night comes. On the seventh or Eighth day a Moiety of her
appears, and she is called Bisect, or a Half Moon: she now rises about 10 a
Clock in the morning, and she is distant from the Sun about 90 Degrees.
Hitherto is her First Quarter.

Then tending to her Opposition to the Sun, she shows a little more than half
of her Enlightened Body, and on the 11th day is Bunched, being 120 degrees from
the Sun. Then on the 14th or 15th day it comes to its Opposition to the Sun,
viz. when it is 180 degrees distant from it, and when we are just between the
Sun and it. This is Full-Moon, and is called her Second Quarter.

These are the shapes she has in her Increase; and she has the very same in
her Decrease, according to her various Aspects to the Sun. She appears
Bunched on the 4th day after* Full-moon, Bisect on the 7th, Horned on the 11th,
till at last she comes to turn her self wholly to the Sun, and to show no Light
to us, and then it is New Mood. Only this difference is to be observed between
the Aspects of the Moon in her Increase, and those in her Decrease, that her
Horns are turned toward the West in the latter, but Eastward in the former,
because that that part of the Moon which is enlightened is always toward the
Sun.

These are the usual Transfigurations of the Moon; and what wise Man can think
that all these Changes and Shiftings throughout the whole Year, have no
Influence upon things below, and work not considerable Alterations and Changes
on the Bodies and Minds of Men? Their Operation as to Weather, and as to some
Inferior Animals is freely confessed by all, long Observation and Experience
having extorted that Acknowledgment. And there is as good ground to own their
Influence on the Tempers and Dispositions of Reasonable and Humane Creatures,
for the Returns of Madness and a Distempered Mind are observed by the exact
Practitioners in Medicks, to be according to the Revolutions of this Planet.
And what reason can be rendered why the sober and well-ordered Actions of Man's
Life, which are more Natural, and easy to be governed, receive not some
Impressions from the same Mover? Say not that the several Phases of the Moon,
though they seem to be different Apparitions, yet are but accidental Changes,
and the Moon is always the same, notwithstanding all her change of Apparel, and
consequently that no real Effects ought to be expected from only seeming
Revolutions.

This plausible Cavil is easily taken off by replying that the Moon in going
her monthly Circuit about the Earth, turns her self variously to the Sun, and
really changes her situation, and there are different Transmissions of the
Solar Rays from her, and we receive new Reflections and Refractions of Light
thence, And let it be considered both in respect of the Aspects of the Moon,
and those which are common to the other Planets (of which I spoke before) that
the greatest Effects in the World are produced by the frequent changing of a
few things. Though I am not of the Philosopher's Mind, who contends that Matter
and Motion solve All Phenomenon, yet thus far I agree with him, (and I have the
Suffrage of all Intelligent Men) that new Modifications, as change of Place,
Figure, Motion, and the like, effect most of the considerable things that
happen in the World. Upon which account it must needs be that the different
Situations, new Configurations, mutual Mixtures and repeated Vicissitudes of
the Heavenly Bodies prove some ways effectual and operative.

And as for Eclipses (which may be reckoned here) I cannot but say in behalf of
this part of Astrology, that these and the foresaid Aspects are in a Natural
way Signs of future things, and productive of considerable Events; and upon
long and faithful Observation, we may find out what kind of accidents happen
in the several quarters of the World where they are seen.

I conclude this Head with the memorable words of a foreign Divine, (a Person
of great Moderation and Judgment,) Hic ergo est usus verae Astrologiae, ut
multorum effectuum qui in terris fiunt causas quae in coelo sunt cognoscant;
aliquando etiam antequam fiunt, ipsos effectus in suis causis praevideat.
Zanchius de Astronom.
This is the use of true Astrology to understand from it the Causes which are
in the Heavens of many Effects that are on Earth; and sometimes to foresee
those Effects in their Causes before they come to pass.

Thirdly, The heavenly Bodies are Signs (as of Natural and Political Affairs,
so) of things Divine, and above Nature's Order. And as the two former are
signified by the Ordinary Motions of these Bodies, so the last are discovered
by the extraordinary and unusual aspect of them. When those great Luminaries
are disturbed and out of Order, then, and only then they, as well as those
extraordinary Bodies in Heaven which this discourse has designedly treated of,
are certain Indications of the exerting of some Divine Power, and the bringing
to pass some strange things in the World. For this I take to be an
unquestionable Maxim, that those Accidents which exceed the ordinary course of
Nature, and are above the usual Laws and Power of it, are the particular Finger
of God, and are for extraordinary ends and purposes. From whence I gather, that
the constant Courses of the Celestial Luminaries portend not evil and hurt to
Mankind; but they are the unnatural Motions, Alterations and Appearances of
them, which render them prodigious. As when the Sun has been extraordinarily
deficient, as at that darkness which was one of the Plagues of Egypt, when the
Sun and Moon have stood still, as when Ioshuah was taking vengeance on his
Enemies: when the Stars fought against the Host of Sisera: when the Sun went
back in King Hezekiah's days. Not only Poets but Historians take notice of,
and transmit to posterity the remarkable Obscuring of the Sun which was
observed almost that whole year in which Julius Caesar was unfortunately killed.

-- Solis quoque Ovid. Metamorph. l. 15.
tristis Imago
Lurida sollicitis praebebat lumina terris.
From Heaven a shadow only then was hurled
Of the Sun's Light, to scare the won dring World.
And another Poet thus, -- Caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit, Virgil.
Georg. l. 1.

Impiaque aeternam timuerunt secula noctem.
A rusty scum eclipsed Sol's glorious Light,
And th'impious Age dreaded an endless Night.


And we are told by a grave. Plutarch. in Jul. Caesar.
Historian too, that this presaged and accompanied that horrid Murder. The
Eclipse at Christ's Passion was a miraculous darkning of the Sun's Body; for
against the course of Nature it was obscured in Full-moon. Great Signs from
Heaven (as it was prophesied by our Savior) were the forerunners of
Ierusalem's Destruction, Luke 21. 11. There was an Example of an extraordinary
Defect in the Sun about an hundred years after, Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3.
says a Learned Father. Seventeen days darkness was the attendant of
Constantine's Death, who had his Eyes put out by his Mother Irene, if some
Historians may be believed. We have it from the Testimony of him who is
Infallible, and Truth it self, That there stall be signs in the Sun, and in the
Moon, and in the Stars, before his last coming, Luke 21. 25. The Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from
Heaven, and the powers of the Heaven shall be shaken, Mat. 24. 29. We see then
what it is that makes the ordinary Heavenly Bodies Prodigious and Presaging,
viz. Their being disordered, and going against their natural course. When they
are thus, they are of the nature of those extraordinary and preternatural
Lights which I have before discoursed of, whose very Appearance is Ominous.

By this we may know what notions to frame of the Aspects of the Stars, the
particular Phases of the Moon, and the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, before
spoken of. It is certain that these, although they may signify in General, and
cause several Events, yet contain not any thing in them, i. e. in their own
Nature, which is Boding and Unfortunate. Nor are they designed (as Comets are)
to be Signs of some remarkable Evils and Calamities. For I build on this
ground, that extraordinary Events are not foresignified by ordinary and natural
Accidents: but such are the Aspects of the Planets, and particularly the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter this year, so much talked of by the common
Prognosticatours. These are made and come to pass by the usual and Fixed Motion
of the Planets. They fall of themselves into these Figures. These are the
Natural Shiftings of the Stars. And (as a demonstration of it) these, like the
rising and setting of the Sun, and the entry of it into the Equinoctial and
Solstitial Points, and the Phenomenon of that nature are certainly discerned,
and may be foretold many hundred years before hand. And therefore they are not
in themselves portentous, they are no tokens of God's Wrath, there is nothing
signified of the Divine Displeasure by them.

But this cannot be said of Comets, because they are Preternatural Appearances,
and being such cannot possibly be foreknown by Art. I never read that any
Astrologer put out Ephemerides of them. Nor can the Shiftings of the Moon be
said to be Presaging, and in themselves Ominous, and that for the foresaid
Reason. For though I deny not her Influence on the Bodies and Minds of Men, and
as to her producing of Changes in the World, yet it is plain that she was not
set up in the Firmament to portend approaching Distresses by her various
Figures and Faces which she shows, for all these are Natural, and of course.
She is constant and unvariable in her Changes: they may be all known and told
long before. Besides, any man of common sense will grant me this, that what is
usual and frequent cannot be prodigious.

I might here say something of Eclipses, and it is this; I declare against the
Doctrine of those wellwillers to the Mathematics, who generally reckon these
as ominous.

From what has been said it may be gathered, that they are not to be judged as
such; for they are not contrary to the usual course of Nature: and what is not
so, cannot carry any ill Omen with it. If an Eclipse (particularly that of the
Sun) be portentous in it self, then every Night, which is no other than the
Interposition of the Earth between the Sun and us, is of that Nature also, and
consequently we have an unlucky time of it all our Lives. It was the Ignorance
of the Cause of Eclipses which first gave occasion to People to think they
presignified some Evil; and hereupon the foolish Pagans were mightily disturbed
at this Sight; and as for the Moon, they imagined she was in Labor, and
accordingly came with great Noise and Officiousness (no other than the
Midwifery of Pans and Kettles) to relieve the teeming Lady. But we know that
the Sun and Moon come naturally to this Situation and Posture; and the time of
their Eclipses may certainly be foreknown, for they depend on the determined
and unerring Motions of the Heavenly Bodies: they must happen at such times,
and no others. The Eclipse of the Sun can only be in Newmoon, i. e. when the
Sun and Moon are together in either of the two Points, Caput or Cauda Draconis,
for the Moon cuts or crosses the Ecliptic but in these two Nodes. The Moons
Eclipse is only when she is at the Full, viz. when the Earth is exactly
interposed between the Sun and her, which is called Opposition. If I were
purposely furnished, and had all the Implements of the Art about me, I could
Infallibly foretell and set down all the Eclipses that shall happen from this
day to the end of the World. The ordinary defections then of these Luminaries,
being Natural and foreknown Events, are not Prodigious and Fatal. And though
the common Astrologers reckon them among Presages, yet I am well satisfied that
they do it only to amuse the People, and to make themselves and their Art
more formidable.

Thus we see there is a vast difference between the ordinary Luminaries of
Heaven, and those that are extraordinary, as Comets. Though the former are not
divine Presages (unless when they are disordered, and extraordinarily
obscured,) yet the latter always are so in their own Nature, and by the
Appointment of Heaven.

I presume this is a satisfactory Answer to the Objection, and gives a true and
impartial account of the Nature of both sorts of Celestial Bodies. The ordinary
Luminaries may sometimes be put out of their Courses, to be Signs to the World
of what the great Ruler of it is acting; but Comets are the Only heavenly
Bodies which, as to their Make, and Original, and all other Considerations
whatsoever, discover themselves to be portentous. For as for the strange
Apparitions of Armies and Skirmishes seen in the Air, I rank them not among the
Bodies of Heaven, because they are placed in a lower Region. And as for those
Appearances which are called Parelia, and Paraselene's, i. e. Mock-Suns, and
Mock-Moons, Halo's, etc. they are only Reflections of the Clouds, and are not
real things, but mere Images.

You have heard then at large the Ends of God's creating the ordinary
Luminaries of Heaven. I have set down both the Natural and Instituted, the
Common and Extraordinary Uses of them. One common Use (and that is it wherein
Astrology is concerned chiefly) is to be Signs of Natural and Humane Actions of
all kinds, to Influence by their Motion and Aspects on this Inferior World.
They are deservedly styled the Host of Heaven not only because of their great
Multitude, and their exact Order, but for their Force and Power. Shall every
creeping Plant and Drug, every fading Herb and Flower, have their certain
Virtues, and proper Offices, and shall we deny the glorious and exalted Stars
of Heaven a peculiar Power to be serviceable to the World? Have we not equal
Reason to persuade us that every Planet has its* particular Property, and all
the Fixed Lights have their several faculties and distinct powers? I must needs
profess I am of that Wise Man's Opinion, Sir W. Raleigh's Essays.
who said, The Stars are of far greater Use than to yield an obscure Light, and
for men to gaze on them after the Sun is set. Yes certainly, God makes use of
the Ministry of the Heavenly Bodies in the Economy of the lower World. We are
surrounded with Stars, shut up within the Heavenly Circle. All things that
happen in this World have a near affinity with that other. So thought the great
Soul of Philosophy* Aristot. Meteor. l. 1.
(...). This inferior World is in a manner necessarily tied to the Motions of
the upper one, in so much that all its Powers are governed by it. And therefore
it is not to be denied that the glorious Lights of Heaven were constituted by
the first Framer of them, to act and influence upon humane Bodies as well as
others.

There is then a lawful Natural Knowledge of the Influence of the Stars, and
of the position of the Heavens, which is serviceable to it. Astrology is a part
of Natural Philosophy, which from the knowledge of Celestial Bodies
prognosticateth of Events in the Sublunary Bodies below: and consequently the
Actions of Men, who are partly made of those, depend in some manner on their
Influences. But Judiciary Astrology has heard ill, because by it some make a
Judgment of the Inclinations of Men's Wills, on which depend the chief Events of
Humane Life, and all the remarkable Affairs of States and Kingdoms. Wherefore
the great Question is, whether the Heavenly Bodies have an Influence on the
Mind and Thoughts, the Free Will and Determinations of Men? In satisfaction to
this main Demand I assert, That the Heavenly Bodies act upon the Bodies of Men,
and these influence upon their Minds. I do not say that the Celestial
Luminaries act immediately and directly on the Soul of Man; for after that
manner only they work on his Body: but this is it which I maintain, That the
Motions and Aspects of the Heavens incline the Mind and Will by Mediation of
the Sensitive Appetite, which is stirred by the constitution of the Body. For I
take it to be an indisputable Truth, that Bodies strong in humors, and weak in
Virtue or Grace, draw and incline the Mind and Affections: and therefore those
Creatures that are guided by their Natural and Sensual Appetites, as Brutes and
wicked Men, do most of all feel the force of the Heavenly Bodies. And for this
Reason the Astrologers of this degenerate Age, these dreggs of Time, have the
better of most of those who have been their Predecessors. Now they may come the
nearest to Certainty in their Prognostics. They may the more easily tell true,
because so few resist their own vicious Inclinations. One would think on this
score that Judiciary Astrology were now at its height and utmost culmination.
It must needs prove succesfull now or never, for the debauched Lives of Men
acquaint us, that they follow their own Natural Genius and pronity of Mind,
they are led wholly by their depraved Wills and Affections. Wicked and
dissolute Men, whom an inspired Writer calls Wandering Stars, Ep. Jude, 13. v.
know no other conduct but their extravagant Lusts, and those inbred
Inclinations and Propensions which they derive from their Fleshly Constitutions
and Bodily Tempers: and thus the Stars may be said to influence on the Natural
Inclinations of Men, and consequently such Acts as proceed from them: for they
act on the Body, and the Body works on the weak and ungoverned Mind, and so
Evil Actions are produced.

From what has been hitherto discoursed, we may in some part understand the
true Use of Astrology, and likewise the Abuse of it, which is no other than
this, viz. Attributing too little or too much to the Stars: We may frequently
see men running into these Extremes either of Defect or Excess. The Abuse of
Astrology on one hand is depriving the Heavenly Bodies of all Influence and
Operation on the Sons of Men: and this I have spoken of already. On the other
hand this Science is abused whilst too great a Power and too exorbitant a
Regency is ascribed to those Bodies. This is done when such an Agency and
Virtue is given to them by us, as is prejudicial and derogatory,

1. To God's universal Power and Government.

2. To the Agency of Man's Will: And,

3. To the Concurrence of other Causes.

In these Three the Judicious Reader will find the whole Abuse of Astrology (as
to this latter extreme of it) summed up. For they who immeasurably and proudly
brag of this Science, defend the Stars to be, as it were, Divine Agents, or
that they are instead of God: and they go so far as to destroy the native or
acquired Freedom of Man's Faculties: and they exclude all other Causes (but the
Stars) from having a share in men's Actions. On the Contrary, if we would avoid
the excess and Extravagancy of Astrology, if we would correct so wild a Folly
we must let God, Man's Will, and Joint Causes have their due place.

First, I say, Astrology is shame fully abused when Men attribute such a Power
to the Heavenly Bodies as to deny God's Government and Superintendency, or,
(which is all one) when they deprive God of his Sovereign Power and Dominion to
give it to the Stars. Some of the High-flown of this Faculty have been guilty
of excluding the Divine Providence and Concourse, whilst they have defended the
Influence or rather Efficiency of the Celestial Powers. This is a kin to that
Pagan Persuasion, That these Bodies have a certain Divinity in them, and that
they fatally and necessarily act upon us. Hence the Chaldeans and others
offered Sacrifice to the Stars, and expected all good or evil from them (which
is making them Gods.) The Epicureans held that every one had his proper Star,
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
as a peculiar Demon or* Numen. And not only the Gentiles but Jews polluted
themselves with the Worship of the Host of Heaven, Manasses being their chief
Perverter herein, 2 Chronicles. 33. 3. But if some who pretend to Astrological
Studies are not directly guilty of this, (as I cannot prove they are) yet they
act almost as profanely, whilst they extravagantly and impiously extol the
Power of those Bodies above, even so far as to deny God to be the principal
Moderatour and Disposer of all Affairs; and whilst they assert that
extraordinary and preternatural Events, and such as depend wholly on God's mere
Pleasure, and have no Relation at all to natural and common Causes, are the
Effects of the Motions and Aspects of the Stars, and might have been foretold
and prognosticated by them. A most Intolerable Arrogance and Blasphemy! For
though I have above granted (and am always ready to grant what is Reason and
good Sense) that God may and does make use even of natural Instruments in the
production of supernatural Effects, yet this is a thing that is exceeding rare;
and then also it is impossible that these Arbitrary Effects should be foretold
by any Knowledge that Men have of the Stars. But there are some supernatural
Effects and Productions which depend not in the least on second Causes, but are
wrought by God himself, without the assistence of Instruments or any Means,
nay, even in defiance of all Secondary Causes, as most of the Miracles of the
Old and New Testament, and these could never be prognosticated by the Stars.
And therefore the Insolency and Impiety of those is to be abhorred, Albumasar,
Pomponatius, Cardan, Vaninus.
who have told the World in Print, that the Judgment of God in the Deluge of
old, and all the Appearances of Angels afterward, Albertus Magnus, Lucas
Gauricus, Prelates. Petrus de Aliaco, Cusanus, Cardinals.
and the Prophesies and Wondrous Dispensations to the Jewish People were from
the particular Influence and Operation of the Stars at those Times; and that
all Christ's Actions, Life and Death, and consequently our Redemption, depended
on the Figure of the Heavens at his Nativity: in short, that Christianity
itself was beholding to the Constellations, that the Gospel was indebted to the
Aspects of the Stars, and that all things of Religion are from the Position of
the Heavens.

If the Reader pleases to cast his Eye on the Margent, he will see that this
cursed Doctrine was patronized not only by professed Atheists, but by great
Divines and Churchmen; but let not that offend him, for they were such as
belonged to that Church which is said by some to be the Nurse of Atheism and
Profaneness, witness the swarms of Atheists in Italy and the adjacent
Countries. But sober Reason as well as Religion will inform us, that the things
before named are above the power of Nature, and therefore out of the reach of
Astrology. This Art has nothing to do with supernatural Events, with the
Divine Economy, and God's immediate Will and Pleasure. And though in respect
of things of another Nature I grant the Heavenly Bodies to have an Influence,
yet this must be remembered, that they cannot Act without the Almighty's Order.
He tells the number of the Stars, Psalm. 147. 4.
and calls them all by their Names, i. e. He has the full Command and
Disposal of them. It is no Dream, but a Reality, that the Sun, Moon and Stars
come, and bow down, and make Obeisance to Him. Which indeed is after the rate
of the sober Philosophy of the Stoics, viz. That the First Cause is not tied
to the Stars. These are subject to the Prime and Omnipotent Being, who can
suspend their Influences whenever He pleases. This I suppose is the meaning
of what the Hebrew Doctors tell us God said to Abraham in Chaldaea, when he
studied Judiciary Astrology there, Abraham, egredere de Astrologia tua, nullum
enim est sidus Israeli: Trouble not thy self about the Stars, for there is not
one of them can be unlucky to Israel. And on this consideration it might be
made evident, that no man can be Positive in foretelling future Events by the
Stars.

Secondly, Astrology is abused and perverted by those who attribute such a
Power and Sovereignty to the Heavenly Bodies, as whereby they destroy the
liberty of man's Will, and introduce a kind of fatal Necessity, whereupon they
ground the certainty of their Prognostications. For these men fondly hold, that
we are all fatally tied to the Stars: whereas, Man being a free Agent, it is
folly to imagine that his Will can be constrained. This faculty remains
Arbitrary and Unconsined, and therefore no Artist can Divine what the Acts and
Exertments of it shall be. It is true that Reason and Wisdom have the Dominion
but in few Men. The Generality are led by their sensitive and brutish part,
which is immediately Subject to the Influence of the Heavens. But it is not
impossible, nay, it is easy by the aid of Divine Grace, and by a resolute
Resisting, to avoid their Operation upon us. Prayers and Endeavors frustrate
the Stars, for their Influence is not inevitable, so as to force any Man's
Will: and hereupon it is undeniably consequent, that voluntary Actions cannot
be Infallibly foretold. I have showed already that Supernatural Actions cannot
be predicted by the Stars: Now I believe it will as palpably appear, that Free
and voluntary ones cannot. As the things which depend on the mere Power and
Pleasure of God, so those that issue from the Freedom and Election of Man are
beyond the reach, and out of the ken of Astrological Predictions. Men's Wills
are the Planets that guide them, and make them Erratical. It is not in the
power of Astrologers to fix these, and to bring them within the sphere of their
Knowledge. We see and observe that their Conjectures are uncertain concerning
the change of Weather. How often may they be confuted in their Predictions of
Rain, Snow, Frost, Winds, etc? Some have writ down the weather quite contrary
to their Prognostics (as Buchanan dealt with his Almanac above fifty Years
together, and as the Earl of Mirandula has observed) and have found that what
they set down came nearest to the truth. If an Astrologer then fails so mnch
in telling the weather, how much more in undertaking to determine those Events
which depend on the Will and choice of Man? If he cannot exactly foretell the
Changes of the Clouds and Elements, how will he be able to acquaint us
beforehand with the Alterations in Families and Kingdoms, which are more
uncertain? It is by reason of such bold Pretenders and Undertakers, that
Astrology is rendered vile and scandalous, and the Professors of it looked upon
as Liars and Impostours. For what can be more like cheating, than for a man to
take upon him to determine certainly of future Contingencies, when the Objects
of his Predictions are every minute alterable by the interposal of free Agents,
who have power to interrupt the Causality of the Stars? For though men may be
thus and thus Disposed and Inclined, according to the different Constellations
and their Aspects, yet they are left free, and are not constrained and forced
to do this or that. And if this be true, the most sagacious Artist on Earth
cannot punctually determine their Actions, this being an impregnable
Proposition, That nothing can be certainly foretold by Man, which is in the
power of a free Agent.

Thirdly, Astrology is abused not only when the free Agency of God and Man are
infringed, but when the Concurrence of those other Causes which are requisite
in the life of Man is wholly neglected.

This then must be laid down as a necessary Proposition,

That the Tempers and Constitutions of Men, and consequently their Dispositions
and Actions, and all humane Affairs which are the issue of them, depend upon
several conjoined Causes.

It is true that we receive our Complexion and Temperature from the quality of
the Heavenly Bodies, but not from them only, but from other Causes and
Authors. I have granted once and again, that there is a great consent and
intercourse between the upper and lower World. Heaven and Earth are
confederate. Many things are derived to our Natures from above, many of our
Inclinations are received from thence, many Events and Accidents are depending
on the Astral Revolutions, but they do not derive their force from them alone.
There are other Causes besides the Prime Efficiency of God, and the free Agency
of Men, which powerfully influence on Humane Actions. Say then that the Stars
act on the Body of Man, and say that the Complexion of the Body swayeth the
Mind, (as is acknowledged,) yet this Complexion depends on the Temper of the
Parents, and the quality of their Seed; on the temper of the Air of that
Country which he was born in, and afterward lived in; on his Diet and Food he
constantly takes; on his Education and manner of Life. All these, and several
other things make a great difference in men: and the influence of the Stars may
be hindered by any of them, much more by all of them together. Though the
Heavens dispose to such and such Temperatures of Body, yet they are easily
changed and overruled by the Concurrence of these. To speak freely, the Stars
act, as all other natural Causes do, according to the Capacity and Disposition
of the matter they work upon. Now the Disposition of Inferior Bodies is very
different, and on that account they receive not the Heavenly Influences alike.
Just as we see the Effects of Diseases are according to the Diversities of Men's
Bodies, and therefore no certain Judgment can be made of the issue of one Man's
Distemper, from what is observed in another. For Example, a Physician sees such
and such Signs of Death in two persons who have high Fevers, but though the
Prognostics are equal in both, yet the Natural Temper of one may be stronger
than the others, and so be too hard for the Disease and overcome it: but it was
not possible for the Master of Medicks to foresee this. The Case is the same
here, and it is confirmed by Experience. All persons who were born under the
same Planets are not of the same condition and Fortune in the World, and on the
contrary, the Conditions and Fates of Men are alike (as when many thousands
fall in Battle in one day) though different Stars reigned at their Births: and
the Reason is, because all men are not alike capable of the Influence of
Heaven, for there may be wanting a Concurrence of several Causes (which I have
before named) to make them equal: and it is undeniably true, that the Heavens
are not the Integral Causes of Men's Conditions and Actions. I infer then
irrefragably, That no Astrologer can certainly foretell future Events which
depend upon so many Causes, whilst he is careful only to be acquainted with
one sort of them. And from all the premised Heads it is easy to conclude how
shallow and imperfect the Judgments of common Astrologers are, and what little
reason they have to be absolute and peremptory in their Predictions. For the
Actions of Men's Lives, and the different Events that happen to them, are
derived from several Springs and Originals, besides the Heavenly Bodies. A
Judgment cannot be made of a Man's Life from one of these only, but from all.
The Prime Source and Fountain of all is God, or the Divine Providence, which
Commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the Stars, Job 9. 7.
which can countermand the Ordinary course of Nature, and particularly that of
the Celestial Bodies. Or, the same infinite Power can change the Temper which
was received from the Stars, and cause his Grace to check and control the
Influence of their Aspects, so that it shall be out of the reach of any humane
Science, to make a steady Judgment of any Actions or Events that belong to such
Persons. And as for that other Spring of Men's Actions, their Wills, these being
Free and Arbitrary cannot be confined by Art; and whatever Actions depend on
voluntary choice and determination, cannot be foreknown, unless they be
revealed by him who is the only knower and Searcher of Hearts. It is His sole
Pretogative to foresee future Contingencies which depend on free Causes: Though
it is true the Devil has claimed This in all Ages, (witness the many ways of
Divination by Oracles, Auguries, etc.) and for this he has been consulted and
adored by the Gentile World. Besides, it is above humane Art to foretell
certainly future Contingencies, because the Actions of Men, and the Events
which follow them are not always, or for the most part according to their Wills
and Inclinations: for they may be swayed and overruled by Providence, they may
act against their purposes and Resolves. Not to mention this also, that
Hypocrisy often puts a veil and disguise on men's doings. Lastly, those other
associate Causes and Springs of Actions and Events in the Life of Man, as the
first Principle of Generation derived from the Parents, and the like, may prove
too strong for the Influence of the Heavens, and so make all Prognostics
uncertain.

But it will be said, that those who divine by the Stars are consulted
frequently, and it is known that they sometimes exactly foretell what shall
come to pass.

I answer, I am not unwilling to grant that they do so, and by virtue of their
Art. For I have intimated before, that I am none of those who cut down a whole
Art right or wrong, who admit of no Limitations and Cautions in the Subject
they treat of, and in the cause they undertake, a sort of men that spoil all
Sciences, and have done as much harm in Divinity as in any thing whatsoever. I
make no question but the Stars point out some Futurities to us, but it seldom
happens that we know what they are, because the persons who are truly skillful
and can direct us, are very few and scarce: because the Art is intricate, and
takes up much time, and requires a singular Honesty joined with an exquisite
Knowledge. For it is not every Well-willer to the Mathematics can set up for
Prognostics. An Astrologer must not only be skilled in the Starry
Revolutions, but ought to be a profound Philosopher, Politician, Historian,
Physician, Divine, and in a word, universally instructed; for he is to look
into, and be acquainted with other Causes and Springs of Actions besides those
above; he is to attend to diverse things, and not to pronounce rashly: Hear what
a wise Head utters to this purpose, 'H (...) Philo de Nomin. Mutat.
The Study of the Heavenly Bodies is not the employment of a rude and barren
Mind, but of one that is extremely ingenious and docile, and pregnant with the
most complete and accomplished Notions. An Astrologer must be a man of great
thoughtfulness and Study, of mighty Wisdom and Sagacity, of long Trial and
Experience, of exact and wary Observation, and in order to this latter he
should constantly reside in a place proper for his Employment, a plain champain
Country, a clear and uncloudy Sky, fit to promote the Observations of the
Heavens: and on this account I question whether the accurate notice of the
Stars can be attained to in Islands and such like places. When the Person is
rightly accomplished for his work, and when all things belonging to the Art
favor and befriend him, (which is very rare) his Astrological Judgments may
prove successful. But even then he cannot promise and assure any man of the
certainty and infallibility of what he says, but must desire People to be
contented with Likelihood and Probability. This is the true scale of Astrology,
and he that takes its height otherwise deceives the World.

I Answer again, It is no wonder that they seem sometimes to foretell aright
things to come, for this they may do merely by chance. It will happen so at
one time or other. But then how often do they feed those who consult them with
Lies? Though the Art be fallacious, yet it may hit sometimes, and so Events may
answer to the Predictions. Why may they not light on truth by chance? Of so
many things foretold some one will come to pass. But if the number of the
things which happen, and of those which do not, be compared, for one Truth you
will find a Thousand Falsehoods.

This also I have to Answer, That sometimes they are thought to foretell,
because they speak ambiguously; and fond People are prone to interpret in
favor of the Fortune Tellers. Thus Nostrodamus (who was Physician to three
Kings of France successively) his Prognostications are so obscure and
equivocal, that some of them have been thought to be fulfilled when they were
not, and that merely because they are so shaped, that they may be understood
and applied diverse ways. Moreover, there is Reason to believe, that they
sometimes foretell things from a Confederacy and Compact with Spirits. I am
confident I am not uncharitable in thinking that some of those who take upon
them to predict future Events by Judiciary Astrology, step beyond the bounds of
their Art, and hold Correspondence with Lucifer, that great fallen Star. By his
means they may shrewdly foretell (as some of them have done) the exact time and
manner of their own and others Deaths. As Suetonius, in the Life of Domitian,
tells of an Astrologer, who having foretold the Emperor's Fortune, which it
seems was not pleasing to him, and being asked by the Emperor what should be
his own, he said he was to be devoured by Dogs. To frustrate his Prediction the
Emperor ordered he should presently be killed and buried: but whilst they were
burying him a great storm arose, and made them relinquish the Corpse, and by
that means it was left to the Dogs, who came and tore it in pieces and devoured
it. Cardan foretold the Year and Day of his own Death. One warned Julius Caesar
of the Ides of March, which were approaching, and it is well known that they
proved fatal to him. Picus Mirandula, who by his Writings showed himself the
greatest Adversary that ever Astrology had, Sir Christoph. Heydon. Def. of Iud.
Astrol. p. 193.
(as one who was the greatest Patron, and learned Defender of Judiciary
Astrology, styleth him) was told by Lucius Bellantius, and two other
Astrologers, that he should die in the three and thirtieth Year of his Age, and
he did so. This might fall out by Chance, as I have said: or, as I am now
suggesting, by the Devil's help, for he is ready to assist in Predictions those
that too narrowly pry into such Mysteries, and thereby he promotes his Kingdom
and Interest. And that some Futurities of great moment may be discovered by his
Assistence is evident, because he is (as the sacred Writ calls him) the God
of this World, and rules in the Children of Disobedience, because he is
engaged in all the black Crimes men are guilty of, and stirs them up to the
commission of those horrid Villainies which are acted: he may in a manner be
said to do them, and therefore can tell that they are to be done. Or, he being
prosent at the Clubs and Consults of the Wicked, hears such and such things
from the Mouths of those who design to act them, Or, evil Spirits can guess
futurities by what is past or present. They can partly see the things to come
in those that have been already. These subtle Creatures ponder the Nature and
Effects of all things, and by their long continuance and experience are skilled
in the temper of the Elements, and of Men's Bodies, and the Inclinations
proceeding thence, insomuch that they can foresee Famine, Pestilence, and other
Diseases, Wars and Deaths. Or God may permit evil Spirits to foretell Events,
Suffering them thereby to seduce the Wicked, and to punish them, or for other
Reasons which are hid to us. From such Considerations as these it is not
unreasonable to gather. That the consulting of Ghosts and Familiar Spirits, in
plain terms, Devils, is too often palliated under the pretense of Astrology. I
have it from the Pen of Paracelsus, L. de Praesagiis.
(who some think was a competent Judge in this case,) That the Devil often
insinuates himself into Astrologers. Nor is it necessary that he should
formally and solemnly converse with them, (though it is probable he does so
with some:) it is enough for their purpose, and the Devil's too, that they
tacitly hold commerce with him: an implicit compact may suffice sometimes. And
thus the Demon, or evil Spirit, who actuateth them, keeps them in pay with
constant Intelligence, till at last he gives them the full Reward of their
serving him in the Regions of Darkness forever.

I hope I have by this time made it manifest, that future Events may be
predicted in some measure, or seem to be so, and yet that this is not to be
attributed to Astrological Skill. No: This Art, as it is managed; seldom
reaches so far. If it had light into the hands of Persons who were both
knowing and good, it might have come to some thing: but as it has been used,
or rather abused and perverted, no great matter can be expected from it. And to
offer yet a farther Conviction of this, and to prove that it is not in the
power of Astrology, as it is now framed, to foretell future Contingencies, nay,
not Natural Occurrences with any certainty, I will lead you to a clear
Apprehension of it by these following Steps:

1. The Hypotheses they commonly go upon, are not the same that we read of
heretofore.

2. They proceed upon seigned and precarious Principles.

3. And more particularly, Their Doctrine of Genitures is fond and groundless.

4. They go beyond the Rules of the wisest in the Art.

5. They pretend to tell others of their affairs, but in the mean time know not
their own.

In the First place, I tender this to be considered, That the Hypotheses which
the old Astrologers and the new ones proceed upon, are not the same, but differ
toto coelo, and therefore it is impossible that the Astrological Judgments made
from them should be true, or at least, if they be true on one side, they are
false on the other. Ricciolus in his Astronomia Reformata, has learnedly
showed the variety of Astronomical Hypotheses, and the uncertainty of them; and
from thence he moves for a Reformation in the Principles of Astronomy and
Astrology. That excellent Writer will inform us, that the ancient Astrology was
false and frivolous, because it was grounded on gross mistakes in Philosophy,
on palpable Errors concerning the Systeme of the World, as the Ptolemaick
Hypothesis, which is now laughed at. The Moderns will tell you that the fixed
Stars have altered their places, and do not set and rise at the same time they
did of old, but a Month later. For Example, the Dog Star arose about the middle
of July heretofore, but now in the middle of August. The fixed Stars of Scorpio
and Taurus have changed their Site. The Star in the Tail of the lester Bear,
called the Pole Star, has insensibly crept nearer the Pole. It was heretofore
the most Southerly Star in that Constellation, but is now the most Northerly.
Hackwell's Apol. l. 2. Sect. 4.
Hipparchus, a famous Pythagorean Philosopher, who lived in Egypt in the reign
of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, says it was 12 Degrees from the Pole in his days:
but now it is not above 3 or 4. And the Planets are altered as well as the
fixed Lights. The Entrance of the Sun into the Cardinal Points (a mighty
considerable thing in Astronomy, and whence the Judgments of Artists concerning
the Quarters of the Year take their measures) is determined by some otherwise
than it was heretofore. Nay, it is known that the Moderns do not agree about
the punctual Time of the Sun's Entrance, Copernicus and other Mathematicians
say the Sun is come nearer to the Earth than it was heretofore by vast
proportions; some say Ten Thousand Miles. The Center of the Sun was distant
from the Center of the Earth 24* Diameters of the Earth in Ptolemy's time: now
it is distant 18. The Sun's Apogaeum in Ptolemy's days was in the 5th Degree of
Gemini, now according to Tycho it is in the 6th Degree of Cancer. Some likewise
are of Opinion, that the Reason why so many Eclipses appear, is because the
Equinoxes are transposed, and remain not what they were at first. Now this I
say, If there, be not the same distance of the Earth from the Heavens that was
heretofore, and if the Stars are displaced, there will follow thence an
Increase or Abatement of their Influences: or, though they be not altered (as I
cannot tell whether my Authors fail me or no in their Accounts) yet if some
modern Artists have thought so, and have framed their Conclusions accordingly,
there must needs be some alteration in Judgments made thence. And yet these
Moderns (which is very strange) adhere to the Aphorisms of the Ancients in the
Judiciary part of Astrology. The old Hypotheses are exploded, and yet no new
Rules and Maxims are introduced. The antiquated Aphorisms must hold on still,
though the Heavens are not now conformable to the old Systeme of them. Who
would not think that the new discoveries in the Heavens must needs make some
Alteration in the Judgments made from them? Since many things concerning the
Stars are known and acknowledged now which former times were ignorant of, how
can it otherwise happen than that there should be sometimes different, if not
contrary Observations?

Secondly, their Art is founded, as on suspected Hypotheses, so upon false and
feigned Principles. As to Instance, they build upon the groundless Suppositions
of the Zodiac, that great and spacious Circle which contains the several
Roads and Inns which the Sun turns into in his traveling round the World.
Having named this, perhaps it will be expected I should declame against the
imaginary Signs in that Circle, for they confess themselves that there is not
the least Similitude of a Lion, a Scorpion, or a Crab in the Heavens. If it had
pleased the first Nomenclators, the Lion might have been a Jaccal, the Scorpion
a Crocodile, and the Crab a Whale. One of the Constellations in this Circle is
called Libra, but it is no more like a Balance than a pair of Bellows, nor so
much neither. But Libra is a Symbol of Justice, Ergo They that are born under
this Sign shall prove Just and Even Men. This it is to argue from arbitrary and
fictitious things, as if real Effects were like to be produced from Chimaera's.
Those that remonstrate against Judiciary Astrology, use to be very brisk here,
and fly with great Zeal at these Imaginary and feigned Signs in the Heavens.
But I have premised before, that I design not Conquest but Truth in this short
Essay. My work is not to run at all adventures against an Opinion, but to
strike at so much of it only as ought to be opposed. I hold therefore, That
though those Constellations have imaginary Names, yet they may be endued with a
real Influence. And the Reason why they call them by such Names, is because it
is likely those Figures from whence they are denominated, (as a Ram, a Bull,
etc.) express something of the Nature and Effects, the Power and Operation of
those Stars on the Body of Man. However, these Names and Figures were
appropriated to them to distinguish them from one another. Waving then these,
let us consider the Distribution of the Signs of the Zodiac, and here indeed
we shall find mere Fictions and Delusions. Take this convincing demonstration
of it: Astrologers teach, that the several Countries and Regions of the World
are under their particular and proper Signs, that they are all provided and
served with their different Configurations: and so their way is, when there are
Conjunctions, Eclipses, and the like in these Signs, to see what Countries and
Cities are liable to the Dominion of these Constellations. But you must note
that when the Astrologers made the Distribution of the Signs, there were but
three parts, or rather half of the World known, and the Regions of that known
World shared all the Signs among them; so that if any other parts should be
found out afterward, they were to shift for themselves, and be contented
without Signs. Now it happened that America was discovered since, and this is
as large as the other Three Parts of the World, and has not one Sign allotted
it. An Astrologer still proceeds as if there were no such place in Nature; for
if he should allow it any Signs then this new World must rob the old one of
half its Constellations, and by this means the ancient Rules of Astrology (on
which they still proceed) are baffled and cashiered. It is clear then that the
Dividing of these Signs was an idle and foolish Invention. Or, to couch the
matter in short thus, The old Division of the Signs among the Nations of the
Earth was either right or wrong. If it was right, then one half of the World
has engrossed all the Signs, which is as ridiculous and absurd as can be, and
the poor People of America, though they be a Moiety of the World, can have no
Prognostics made upon them. Or if the ancient way of Dividing the Signs was
wrong, then all the Astrological Judgments of Places of the World before Two
Hundred Years ago, were mere Shams: and as for the Modern Astrologers, if they
follow that Division, they are deluded, and if they make a new one, they
thereby disgrace and abuse the greatest Patrons of their Art, and they may as
well renounce their other Hypotheses and Principles as this, and so the whole
Fabric of Astrology will be in danger of tumbling down. The order of the
Regimen of the Twelve Signs, in respect of Man's Body, will be called in
question, viz. why the Head is governed by this Sign, and the Neck by that? why
such Members are under the Dominion of such particular Constellations, and not
others? And the Division of these Signs into Hot and Cold, Dry and Moist,
according to the Qualities of the Four Elements, or, which is the same, the
Division of them into Four Trigons, the Fiery Trigon ( Aries, Leo,
Sagittarius,) the Earthly (Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn,) the Aerial (Gemini,
Libra, Aquarius,) and the Watery (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces,) may be looked on as
groundless and Precarious.

Next, I am not satisfied about their Distribution of the Heavens into the
Twelve Houses, which they talk much of, and of which they make as much use in
the Erection of their Schemes. When they are to judge of the Events that
appertain to any Person they fly to these Houses presently, to see what
Planets, or other Stars, were situated in any of these at the Birth of him they
enquire about. The first House begins at the East-Horizon, and is to be numbered
according to the Series of the Signs Eastward. In Nativities it is called the
Horoscope, and the House of Life. It is also named the Ascendent, because the
Sun ascends there in this first House: and according to the quality of any
Man's Ascendent they tell you what his Fortunes shall be. This and the other
Eleven Houses with their Virtues and Properties, are represented in order in
the following Distich, Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Genitor, Nati, Valetudo,
Vxor, Mors, Pietas, Regnum, Benefactaque Carcer,


These Houses (say they) have their particular and distinct Relation to all
things that can happen to Man, and according to these the various Events of
Life and Death are to be Judged of. But what can be more imaginary and
fancyfull? It is a mere Arbitrary Invention that there should be just Twelve
Houses, and no more or less. And what is there in one of these Houses more than
in another that signifies these distinct Natures and Properties? What Reason
can be given why the first House should be the Horoscope, and why Judgment must
be made there of the Birth of the Child? And not only in this, but in every
one of these Houses there are many things wholly feigned, fabulous and
precarious. When you come to take an account of them from the Artist, you hear
nothing but a mere Jargon and unintelligible Gibberish. But this is plain
English, and easy to be understood, that from consulting of imaginary and
fictitious Houses nothing is to be expected but imaginary Predictions. And so
for the Planetary Hours, which are the 12 equal parts which Astrologers divide
the artificial Day and Night into, be it long or short. There are 6 Planetary
Hours constantly in a day before Noon, and 6 after; and in these a Planet is
said to reign or rule, and the Hours take their Denomination from the 7
Planets, beginning with Luna, and so proceeding to Saturn, and then beginning
again with Luna, etc. This, no less than the position of the Twelve Houses,
seems to be wholly Arbitrary, and founded on no solid Bottom; and I could
never find that the stoutest Champion that the Stars ever had, could keep his
ground here.

Thirdly, and more particularly, Their Doctrine of Genitures is fond and
ridiculous. But here first I will (according to the Method I always prescribed
my self) grant what is to be granted, viz. That as the Heavenly Bodies, which
are so great and vast, and always surround and incircle us, shed their
Influence and Efficacy continually upon us, so they do it especially at our
first entering into the World, when our Bodies are moist, soft and tender. Then
chiefly they receive Impressions from the Heavens, and so the Temperament is
partly derived from above, and if long custom of acting be added to the
Natural Temper and Complexion, here is some ground for Astrological Judgments
in a sober manner. But the common Doctrine of the Genethliaci, and their Boasts
and Undertakings are vain upon these following Accounts; because,

1. The Judgment concerning the Complexion and Inclination of Men should be
made not only from their Nativity, but from the Time of their Generation and
Conception, when the first Lineaments of their Temper were drawn, and the
Ground work of Nature was laid. If any thing be impressed on Men by the Stars,
it is rather done upon the Seed in Conception, than on the Foetus at the Birth:
and therefore the Judgment should rather be taken from that Principle, and from
the time of (...), when the Infant first of all moves and lives, than from
the hour of the Nativity. And yet I could never observe that these Diviners
trouble their Heads about this, which is the Foundation of all.

2. The Knowledge of the Efficacy of the Stars, as to the Nativity of Persons,
is very hard to come by, for the exact time of Birth is seldom known and set
down. Many can assign the Day or Night, the Forenoon or Afternoon, or perhaps
the Hour in any of these, but not one in a million directly knows the just
and precise time when he was born. And yet many of those who maintain the
Judgment of Genitures say, that the Day or Hour are not enough, but it is
necessary to know the true Minute of the Nativity, for on that depends the
exact Judgment of the Person and his Actions. Thus we see (say they) that the
little distance between the Birth of Twins causes a vast difference in their
respective Fortunes and course of Life, as in the Examples of Jacob and Esau,
Remus and Romulus, and others. These Twins, though they may be said to be born
together, yet because they came not into the World at the very same moment,
differed exceedingly in their conditions, and all circumstances of their Lives;
for every single minute the influence of the Heavens alters. So that
according to the concessions of Astrologers themselves there is no accurate
Judging from the Nativity. If the Clocks went false at the time of the
Midwifery, all is gone. The Hour (if that would serve) cannot be perfectly
told, much less the Quarter and Minute: and yet if there be any failing in the
least portion of Time, the Stars change their Influences. Nor can they salve
the matter (but rather give farther proof of their groundless Confidence) by
saying that if the just time of the Nativity be forgot, or not known, they can
by a Rule of Hermes (which Sir Christopher Heydon sets down in his Defense of
Judiciary Astrology, p. 170.) help themselves and supply the defect. But
others, who are not so punctual, say it suffices that they have a more general
account of the time of Birth. And these men see they must be forced to
acknowledge this, because it is impossible sometimes that the exact Minute of
the Nativity should be known, as when the Birth is retarded by some accident or
other. Nay, every Child is born by parts, he comes successively into the World,
so that there is a great Latitude in the time of Nativity. The Head may have
received its Impression from the heavenly Bodies before the Breast or the Belly
have theirs, and these before the Feet and lower Parts can come to have their
Doom.

Thus the several Regions and Members of the Body will be diversely affected by
the Stars. If Twins were not born under the same Constellation, because not
born in the same moment, but one after another, then for that Reason no one Man
is born under the same Constellation, for he comes not all at once into the
World.

Moreover, It is against the Nature of Astrology it self, to judge of the
course of Men's Lives from their Nativity, because that teaches that a
diversity of Aspects causes diverse Inclinations in humane Bodies. Now it is
known that the Aspects of the Planets vary much in one day in diverse Countries.
It is vain then to judge of Persons of diverse Countries and Regions from their
Nativities. Though many are born about the same time, yet the places being
different, there must be a diversity of Position of the Heavens, and what Star
arises in one place in such an instant, sets in another; therefore the
Judgments of Astrologers in this case are uncertain.

Farther, Though I cannot disprove what one has related, Valor. Max. l. 1. c.
8.
viz. that two persons born at the same time were observed afterward to be of
the same Genius, they were Philosophers of the same School and Sect, and died
both in the same Moment; and it is known, that as some Twins came into the
World, so they went out together, yet it is as evident also, that those who had
the same Stars at their Births, proved to be of different Qualities and Success
in their Lives; and on the contrary, they who were born under different Stars
met with the same Fortunes. An Example of this latter is given us by the great
Roman Pleader, and thus urged by him, as a full Eviction of the vanity of the
Genethliack Divination, Omnesne qui Cannensi pugna ceciderunt, Cicero. l. 2. de
Divinat.
uno Astro fuerunt? Exitus quidem omnium unus and idem fuit. In some Battle (as
suppose at Cannae) there fell at the same time, and by the same kind of Death,
Twenty Thousand Men. If this happened from the Stars, then they were all born
under the same Constellation; but none has the impudence to say so: and
therefore to argue from the Stars reigning at Men's Births to their future
adventures and success, is irrational. It is absurd to believe that all which
happens in the whole Life, depends on that moment in which the Child was
born, or that as the Stars stood affected at that time, so ever after he should
act.

Lastly, you may see how liable the Doctrine of Genitures is to Fraud and
Deceit, from the general Use that is made of it by those who undertake to erect
Astrological Schemes: For a Person and his Actions being once known, they
presently make some Star, House, Aspect or other, answer to his Actions, and
make those to be certain Arguments of these. Richard Cromwell his Nativity is
one of the meanest and poorest that ever I saw, Gadbury's Collectio Genitur
arum.
says a Student in this Art; there is not one Planet here essentially
dignified. Major General Lambert began his March 1659. Nov. 3. 10 h. 15. m.
toward the North, against General Monk. The Position of the Heavens was most
sad, says the same Person; the Moon was in a Watery Sign, therefore he had like
to have been drowned in Yorkshire, riding through a River toward his Army. But
you may take notice by the bye, (from the same hand) that those who are born
under Pisces, shall fall into a River some time or other, but not be drowned,
because forsooth Fishes swim. Cardinal Signs possessing the Angles of a
Nativity make the Person most eminent and famous in his Generation, says the
same Artist, (the greatest Actions of the World depending on the Cardinal
Points of the Heavens, viz. Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn.) Thus Tullius
Cicero, Gustavus Adolphus, late King of Sweden, Archbishop Laud and Oliver
Cromwell (are they not well suited by him?) had the Cardinal Points upon the
Angles of their Nativities. Peter Gassendus, poor Man, because he writ against
Judiciary Astrology, and checked and confuted the Art of Genitures, has all
things naught in his Nativity. His ill habit of Body, and worser (if this
Censor is to be credited) of Mind, is plainly to be seen in the Heavens. Never
was wretch so bespattered by Man of Art. What work would this man make with the
Nativity of the worthy Dr. Henry More, if he could get a sight of it? He would
read his Life and all his Writings in it at the first view. He would make the
Lord of his Ascendent plainly show him to be a Retired, Melancholic Collegian
all his days, a Philosopher, and particularly of the Platonic Sect, and (which
is as ugly a thing as can be in any Man's Geniture) a professed Adversary of
the Church of Rome, and all its Corruptions. Thus, but more grievously, he
should smart for writing against dear Urania, for daring to insert his
Confutation of Judiciary Astrology into the Mystery of Godliness, and for
Printing it lately by it self. But look you now, because Vincent Wing published
a piece against Gassendus, (wherein this excellent Person's Objections against
Astrology are pretended to be answered) Ibid.
and was himself a Well-willer and Brother Philomathemat. his Nativity has all
things good and laudable in it. But then again he tells us that William Lilly,
his Enemy, though Fellow Astrologer, had the Moon in Pisces, a Wet and Drinking
Sign, which made him a piece of a Good Fellow. But I am weary of such light and
ludicrous Stuff, and have more serious and weighty matter to set before the
Reader. Only from this it appears, that Astrological Observations and
Genethliacal Judgments are oftentimes the products of a capricious and
fancifull, and (as you see here) of a spightfull and malicious Brain. And for
this Reason, as well as some Others, (particularly because these Men have
undertaken to calculate the Nativity of Buildings, as well as of Humane Bodies,
of hard Stones no less than of soft Flesh,) the most Learned and Judicious
Astrologers have not asserted the Doctrine of Genitures, although in other
things they have defended Astrological Judgments.

Thus I have searched into those feigned Hypothese and fallacious Principles on
which a great part of Judiciary Astrology is founded. And though I do not think
the Whole Art is rendered altogether vain and useless by them, yet I assure my
self that there can be no true Predictions from any thing that is false in any
Art: and for that Reason the Common Astrologers ought not to be confident of
their Undertakings, and those that consult them may justly suspect their
performances.

Fourthly, These Pretenders to Astrology go beyond the wisest Patriarchs and
Founders of their Art: they exceed the limits of their Science, and the
Sentence is passed against them by their own Judges. I will name only two of
them, but they are the chiefest, and of the greatest Renown.

The first is Ptolemy, the Prince of Astrology, whose first and leading
Aphorism is this, Ptolem. Centiloq. Aph. 1.
That generals only can be foretold by this Art, and that those alone who are
Divinely inspired are able to predict particular Events. An Astrologer may tell
the Propension and Inclination of a Man from his Natural Temperament, and this
from the Stars; but he cannot from that general Inclination tell what
determinate Effects will ensue. He ought to content himself with a general
Judgment, and not to be definitive in special Cases, in particular and
individual Accidents. This is the Decision of the great Father of Astrologers.
What then becomes of their Horary Questions, which descend even to the most
particular and Personal Affairs? What Resolution is to be expected of the
Queries about the Marriage of such an individual Couple, the particular Events
of this Seaman's Voyage, that Counsellor's Cause, this Merchant's Adventure,
that Soldier's Engagement, the time of the Death of any of these, and (rather
than they will stand out) the retrieving of any Neighbor's Silver Spoon lost
or stolen?

Again, it is confessed by the same Master and Dictatour of Astrology, that the
Influence of the Stars is not Necessary and Unavoidable, but may be evaded by
Men's Industry and Care. Centiloq. ibid.
(...). A wise man (says he) is able to avert the Effects of the Stars when he
knows the Nature of them: and he adjoineth Socrates as an Example of this,
who, when an Astrologer had told him his Natural Inclinations, confessed them
true, but these (says he) are all conquered by Prudence and virtuous
Endeavors; my Soul has got the Mastery of my Body, Philosophy and Moral
Discipline have corrected my Natural Propensions. A wise Man has Dominion over
the Stars, he subdueth those Motions which come to him from thence, and they
are Fools only who are led by them.

The second great Judge and Rabbi of this Art, is that noted Florentine
Iunctinus, an Author that Judiciary Astrologers deal very much in, and
therefore I will allege four or five set Determinations of his, wherein the
vanity and (I may say) Nullity of the common and Irrational way of
Astrologizing are discovered and condemned. And what he says is the more
observable, because I take it out of that Treatise which is entitled, The
Defense of Astrologers. Those Astrologers (says he there) who will needs know
and predict all kinds of particulars are Fools. And in the same place, An
Astrologer can tell nothing certainly as to such things as concern Man's Will.
This is often repeated by him. Excellently again in the same Treatise, The
Significations of the Stars are not like the Commands and Edicts of Praetors,
(i. e. necessary and indispensable,) but are in Subjection to the Command and
Will of God. And what the Sense of all sober Astrologers is, we may learn from
those words of his, viz. Astrologers do not hold that the Heavens are wholly
and altogether the Cause of our Fortunes or Misfortunes, but that they act
only according to the Subject Matter, which accordingly as it is disposed,
does more or less receive the Celestial Influence.

It might be added that Iunctinus ingenuously confesses, That the Wonders and
Miracles of the Old and new Testament, being works brought to pass by God
himself, and not depending on second Causes, cannot be foretold by Astrology.
This is the sense of the two great Dictatours of Judiciary Astrology, and all
the sober of that Study acquiesce in it. Thus though the Hebrew Rabbis
(several of whom were notable Students and Proficients in Astrology, as Aben
Ezra in particular, the greatest Divine and Astrologer the Jews ever had,) say
Proverbially, (...) All things depend on the Stars, yet it is plain that they
do not think their Influence is necessary and inevitable, and such as carries
force and constraint along with it; for none are more for Free Will than the
Rabbis and the Jewish Doctors. And this Adage of theirs may be qualified with
that other which they make use of, viz. The Stars neither make a Man poor nor
rich; Alchish in 1. c. Job.
and with that known one already mentioned, (...) No Star shines with an evil
Aspect upon Israel, the felicity or infelicity of the Pious depend not on the
Host of Heaven. Those that are good need not dread being Planet-struck.

Fifthly, There cannot be a greater Proof of the Uncertainty and Vanity of
Astrological Judgments than this, That those Men who profess to tell others
what shall happen to them even in relation to their secretest and most
concealed affairs, yet in the mean time know not what shall befall themselves,
and are ignorant about their own concerns. These bold Diviners have not so much
skill as to read the Destiny of their own Families, and yet they will
undertake to tell others whether they shall be rich or poor, whether they shall
be longliv'd or no. Whilst they soar alott, and with a Mean Tekel pronounce the
fate of Kingdoms, they are blind about their own little Affairs, of which
without doubt they might have a better insight, than of the Intrigues that
relate to the Public; for it is far easier to dive into their own private
Fortunes at home, than those which relate to Princes and States, and great
Communities. I may take leave then to collect, that those who cannot foresee
the Evils which may befall themselves, are unable to foretell contingent Events
to others. And this is the Case of the Men I am speaking of, and it appears
from thence how groundless their Predictions are. Even the great Julius Caesar,
who had thoroughly studied this part of Astrology, and in the very time of War
and Business, used to set some hours apart for it, as he is brought in by the
Poet, speaking of himself: -- Media inter praelia semper
Stellarum Coelique plagis, Superisque vacari.
In midst of Battles and of bloody Wars
I could find leisure for the Heavens and Stars.


This great Proficient in Astrology, after all his Study, had not so well
conned the Alphabet of the Stars, as to spell out his own Destiny, nay, not to
read it after he had been taught it by Spurina.

If it shall be said here, That the Prophets of the Old and New Testament were
able to inform the World of future things of the highest Moment, and yet
oftentimes foresaw not what should befall themselves:

I Answer, That these Holy Persons were extraordinarily inspired by God for the
good of the World, and the great purpose of Religion in it. It was in order to
this that they were enabled to foretell Futurities: still they were like other
Men, as to their own private notices of things. But these Men who started the
Objection, pretend not to be extraordinarily assisted, they proceed according
to their Art: and if so, This would direct them as certainly to a knowledge of
their own Affairs, as to that of others, nay more certainly.

Many other things might be heaped up together, to evince the Uncertainty of
the Vulgar Prognostications of Astrologers, as namely, that if we consult
several of them, we shall be sure to hear our Doom in a different, nay contrary
manner: That those Astrologers who are subject to a bad Fate (though their
Skill may be good) are apt to err in their Judgments: (It is one of the
Astrological Aphorisms in Gadbury: A ticklish business indeed! We had need
first consult Mr. Astrologer's Nativity, before we desire him to search into
our own:) That this sort of Men generally are made up of vain Boastings, and
their Art is calculated for Pride and Ostentation. Any one that reads Cardan,
who was the chiefest of their Order, will find that he vaunted of more than he
did, or ever could do. But it happened that the Lies he tells in one place
are confuted by him (having forgotten them) in another, as concerning several
Cures of Diseases, his Familiar Spirit, and Astrological Achievements. And This
is the fault of all the Tribe, I mean of those who are guilty of Abusing the
Astrological Science, and there cannot be a greater Argument of their Folly and
Vanity.

On all these Considerations aforesaid, Decret. 2. pars. c. 26. Council. Tolet.
1.
the unlawful Use of Astrology has been condemned by Decrees, Lateran. Conc.
sub Jul. and Leone.
and Anathematized by Councils. It was prohibited by the Edicts of Constantine
the Great, The odosius, Justinian, Codex de Malefic. and Mathemat. leg. 2. Leg.
5, and 7.
and other Christian Emperors and Kings. Ars autem Mathematica Damnabilis est,
and interdicta omnino, And a Capital Punishment by the same imperial Law was
inflicted on those who consulted these Mathematici; for that was the Word then
for all kinds of Unlawful Diviners and Soothsayers, whether they practiced by
the Stars, or any other ways; not that Mathematics was Damnable, and that
every one who described a Circle, setched the Devil into it presently, but
because some of those who were conversant in Geometrick Figures, and other
Mathematical Studies, practiced also in Unwarrantable Divination, and thence
Mathematici became the Name of all that did so. Origin. l. contra Fatum.
The Ancient Fathers speak freely against these rash Astrologers, Greg. Nyss.
l. de Fato. Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. l. 6.
who tie the Actions of Men to the Stars, and pretend to foretell future
Contingencies and Events, that are Free. One of them especially, and he of as
great Learning as any, and (which is yet more) who in his Youth had been of the
Tribe of Diviners and Astrologers, being at length converted took occasion
often in his Writings to condemn the Folly and Impiety of their Practices;
though he was still willing to give Astrology its due, as when he said, In illa
perspicuitate corporum Coelestium non omnes omnino motus Animi latere:
Augustine. de Genesis l. 2. c. 21.
which is no other than what I have asserted, viz. That it is possible to
arrive to a Notice of some Motions and Inclinations of the Mind from the Astral
Influences on the Body. And thus it appears that the indirect and
unwarrantable course of Divining by the Heavenly Bodies was disallowed by the
Church, forbid by Councils and Synods, punished by the Imperial Constitutions,
confuted by the learned and most pious Fathers, it being an impious and
foolish Enterprise, directly against the Doctrine of Divine Providence, and the
Exercise of Christian Faith; it being the Mother of Superstition, the guide to
distrusting in God, and in some to downright Atheism. Nay, Picus Mirandula has
showed in several Citations, that even the great Philosophers and Wits among
the Pagans despised the Follies of Astrology and Prediction from the Stars. It
is the joint Testimony of Historians, Live. Tacitus. Valor. M. Dio.
that the Mathematici were often expelled the City of Rome, and even banished
out of Italy by the Emperors; though we are told indeed that they were
sometimes called back again, as Tacitus speaking of these Astrologers, says
they are a sort of Men quod in Civitate nostra and vetabitur semper and
retinebitur. Hist. l. 1. Thus among all wise and sober Persons whether
Christians or Gentiles, the common Prognosticatours have been odious and
execrable.

If my business lay in this sort of Studies, I would present the Reader with
the excellent Sense of those Authors who have with equal Solidity and
Acuteness, encountered this Imposture. Such were Sextus Empiricus of old, in his
Hypoiyp. Pyrrhon. Cicero, l. 2. de Divinat. Phavorinus in an Oration against
Astrologers, in A. Gellius, l. 14. Plotinus, l. 3. Ennead. 2. Marcilius
Ficinus, that Learned Platonic Philosopher and Astronomer, who writ Contra
Iudicia Astrologorum. John Picus, Count of Mirandula: Thomas Erastus, a
Physician and Philosopher: Causinus the Jesuit, De Domo Dei: The admirable
Gassendus* Chamber (public Lecturer of Astronomy in Oxford) his Treatise
against Judiciary Astrology: Barclay in his Argenis, where Nicopompus is
introduced, making an ingenious speech on this Subject. I could mention others,
and set before you the sum of their several Topics, but that it would seem to
savor something of the vanity of those I am confuting, who are wont to boast
of Authority, great Names and numerous Arguments. But waving these, let it
satisfy the Religious Enquirer, that the Astral Influences, in that Sense
which I have explained them, are disallowed by the Infallible Test of all
verity, the Holy Scriptures. When the Divine Law says, There shall not be
found among you any one that uses Divination, or more exactly, according to
the Original, in the plural, he that divineth Divinations, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. the
unlawful foretelling by the Stars is here forbid among other ways of Divining.
And to this Prohibition perhaps may allude that Jewish Saying, (though I know
it admits of another sense) The Law is not found among Astrologers and
Genethliacks. Sepher. Hammus.
This impious Art is reckoned among the Abominations of the Gentiles in that
forenamed place, Ier. 10. 2. Where the Israelites who were shortly to be
Captives among the Chaldeans are forbid, not only to learn their Idolatrous
Astrology, and worshipping the Heavenly Host, but even to attend to their
Divination by those ordinary Stars, which being natural and usual cannot be
ominous. This likewise is condemned in Isa. 47. 11, 12, 13. where, after God by
the Prophet had told the Chaldeans (who were hugely addicted to Astrology, and
first brought in the abuse of it) that Evil should come upon them, and they
should not know from whence it rises, (whereas they pretended to spy the Cause
of all Events in the Stars) and mischief should fall upon them, and they should
not be able to put it off: (whereas the guise of the great Stargazers was to
flatter those who consulted them with Promises and Assurance of happy
Occurrences) in an Ironical and upbraiding manner he adds, Let now the
Astrologers and Star-gazers and monthly Prognosticatours, stand up and save
thee from these things that shall come upon thee. In which bitter Sarcasm that
Astrology which ascribes all to the Stars is exploded, and their folly is laid
open who trust not in God, but in the Heavenly Bodies, or rather in those who
pretend to know by observing them when Kingdoms shall be saved or destroyed.

And thus I have largely set down the true Use of the Heavenly Bodies, and also
the too frequent Abuse of the Knowledge of them. I have endeavored rightly to
state the Controversy, and to distinguish between Art and Imposture, between
True Knowledge and Vain Pretenses. And if this were impartially done in all
Sciences, we should see an unspeakable advancement of all sorts of Learning,
and Truth would have an uncontrollable Dominion in the World. I have made it my
business to fix the true Limits and Boundaries of Astrology (a thing which I
saw was very much neglected.) It has also offended me to see how some Writers
treat all the Sons of Urania with Contempt and Derision, and affect jeering
rather than arguing: therefore I have been careful to carry my self
inoffensibly as to this. It becomes sober persons to dispute with Civility. It
is best to confute an Opinion without railing at them that hold it. In short, I
have been so just and equal as to give Astrology its due, and no more. It was
truly said by an observing Person, Est Astronomiae nobilis and gloriosa
Scientia, Johan. Sarisb. de Nug. Cur. l. 2. c. 19.
si Clientelam suam intra Moderationis metas cohibeat: quam si licentiore
vanitate excedat, non tam Philosophiae species quam Impietatis decipula est.
The Knowledge of the Stars is a noble and glorious Science, if it keeps its
Retainers within the bounds of Moderation; but if it once leaps over those, and
runs into Vanity and Extravagancy, it is no longer a part of Philosophy but
becomes a wicked Engine to entrap Mankind. Here is the right and the wrong side
of the Art. Take it in the former representation, and it is worthy of our
Thoughts and Studies, as without doubt it was of those who lived in the first
and best Times. It is not improbable that Adam delivered it to his Children.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 3.
Thus the Jewish Antiquary relates, he instructed Seth in it, and that Seth
left the Rudiments of it inscribed on two Pillars. Vossius de Scient. Mathemat.
A Learned Man tells us of a Book yet extant of Enoch concerning Astrology.
And the Jewish Historian in his Antiquities before quoted acquainteth us that
Abraham was skilled in this Art, and was the first that taught it to the
Egyptians, Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. C. 9.
a People rude and unlearned in that and all Sciences, till he came among them.
This was the good and lawful, the natural and useful Astrology, but it was
soon abused and corrupted, as Philosophy, Natural Magic, and other Studies
were. The Devil at last stepped in, and with Superstition and Lies depraved the
Practice of it. And now many pretend to do that by this Art which it is
utterly impossible to do, either by it, or any other. Especially the Masters
of Genethliacal Predictions are rash and daring, and deliver things false and
absurd, having no ground for their Principles and Conclusions. How often do
these Barchocabs, Sons of the Stars, prove Barcoziba's, Sons of a Lie and
Imposture? How frequently do those ignorant or inconsiderable People who
consult them, those who affect to have their Purses emptied, so their Heads may
be filled with pleasing Fancies, how frequently are they heard to complain of
these cheating Oracles? Nor do I speak this to disparage and blacken the whole
Science, for I know it is usual with the Professors of an Art to carry it
farther than is fitting and lawful. The common Astrologers undertake more than
they know they can give a fair account of: and they are not the only People
that do so. Some Physicians and Lawyers will put their Patients and Clients on
mad Adventures, and some that pretend to Divinity will assert any thing. It is
unreasonable therefore to condemn all, because Frauds and Cheats may be espied
in some. If some Astrologers attribute more to the Art than they should, that
is no disparagement to the Art it self. The abuse of the Doctrine of the Stars
must not make us discard the Science. Though most of Judiciary Astrology be
vain, yet all may not be so. Though I have offered Reasons which are able to
diminish Men's fond Opinions of that Study, and to take off the certainty which
some pretend to in their Astrological Judgments, nay, though all the Rules and
Aphorisms of Ptolemy and the rest of the Astrologers were vain and false, yet
there may be some Divination from the Heavenly Bodies, and that innocent and
lawful; but this is such a one as is not derogatory to Man's free acting: it
does no more impair the liberty of Men's Actions than the Prophecies in the Old
Testament of future things infringed the freedom of those who were to act
afterward according to those unerring Predictions. And this I will add, that
if God's Decrees and Concourse are reconcilable with Man's free Actions, so may
the Influence of the Stars be likewise. If the Abuse then of Astrology be taken
away, and it keeps it self within its due Limits (which I have set down) it
may be made serviceable to good and lawful ends, and may justly be recommended
to the World as the choicest Accomplishment of all Natural Philosophy.

I have been the longer on this Theme, because the right understanding of it is
necessary, not only for settling our Minds and Judgments about so celebrated a
Problem as this is, but principally for the full and complete answering of the
Last Objection which was levelled against the foregoing Discourse. It was
necessary to show the true difference between the Ordinary Luminaries of
Heaven, and those Strange and Unusual Lamps which are lighted and set up there
sometimes, and to make it evident, that the Prognostics which are made from
the Aspects and Configurations of the Stars, are nothing allied to those which
are made from the Appearance of Comets. In defiance then of all Cavils and
Objections, our Assertion stands unshaken and immovable, That these rare and
amazing Sights in the Heavens portend some strange and unusual thing to the
Inhabitants of the Earth. A Comet is the Prodromus of some notable Calamity,
and is sent on purpose to give notice and warning of it.

Take then the Conclusion of all (which will chiefly relate to our present
Condition and Circumstances in this Nation) in these following Particulars,

1. Let us remember that we have felt the Effects of Comets, and upon that
Consideration let us not be tempted to dis-believe what has been suggested in
this Discourse. It has been proved to us experimentally, that Comets are
denunciations of God's Anger, and that the Products of these Apparitions are
direful and fatal, if Fire and Pestilence, if bloody Conspiracies and
Intestine Divisions and Separations be any proofs. We have found that these
Monitors have not been sent in vain, that they were no Bruta Fulmina, no idle
and insignificant Flashes, but that they have really done Execution. And if we
are not convinced of this, but still remain incredulous and senseless, the wife
Disposer of all things may hereafter multiply these Prodigies, and cause two or
more of them to appear together, on purpose to upbraid our incredulity and
unbelief, and to force our assent for the future. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.
Aristoteles tradit and simul plures ( Cometas) cerni: nemini compertum alteri,
quod equidem sciam. Though a certain Philosopher reports concerning Comets,
that more than one of them have been seen at a time, yet I cannot find (says
the Natural Historian, who had made a Collection out of all Histories that were
extant) that any one has observed this besides himself. But who knows but
that we (who boggle at this Doctrine) may see a pair of them at once, as
Pharaoh's Dream (which was the Sign and Forerunner of a great Calamity that was
to ensue) was doubled, to render the belief of the thing more firm and certain?
I do the rather think this not to be improbable, because both our Sins and our
Insensibleness exceed those of former Ages, and therefore the Divine Hand may
show that to us which was never known before.

2. Although we do not yet perhaps feel the sensible Effects of the Comets
which appeared last, yet we have no Reason to be confident that we shall not
experience any. The God we have to do with is long-suffering and slow to
Wrath: He threatens before he strikes. Besides, a Comet may not visibly and
apparently opperate for a considerable time. The Evil which a Comet portendeth
seizes oftentimes by Degrees. It is a great mistake to imagine that it shall
Never come because it has not visited us already. Or, the Fatal Season of its
Operating may be just Entering, but not yet Accomplished; as Spurina replied to
Julius Caesar, who merrily said the Ides of March were Come, that they were not
yet Past.

3. When I speak of black Events which are the Consequents of Comets, it is to
be known that it is intolerable Folly and Presumption to Determine peremptorily
what particular ones they shall be. Many have Fondly and Rashly set down before
hand the Particular Events of such and such Comets, but they have thereby
rendered themselves obnoxious to the Censure of all sober Persons. Strange
Vicissitudes, Distractions, Perils and Mischiefs are the Attendants of these
Dreadful Spectacles, but it surpasses all Humane Knowledge to define
Particularly and absolutely of what Kind they shall be. Great Distresses for
Men's Sins and Miscarriages are threatened, but we know not certainly whether
Pestilence, or War, or Famine, or Which of the many other Judgments is to be
Our Allotment. All Comets are not Alike, but of Different, and it may be
Contrary Qualities, and consequently the Effects are so too. And though one
Comet may seem to be of the same Nature with another as to Bigness, Color,
Motion and Duration, yet it may be very unlike in Figure, Place, Time, and
other Circumstances. And perhaps there never were any two Comets of a like
Nature as to all things. There is therefore no judging of the particular
Effects of this or that Comet, because we saw such Events follow another of
that likeness. Indeed by our Undertaking to specify directly before hand the
individual Evils that shall come, we are so far from making a good use of these
Signs from Heaven, that we rather provoke the Divine Anger by our being so
daring and presumptuous. Only this may be done by us; we may with modesty
guess (but go no farther) that God will try us with those Evils which we have
not very lately experienced and groaned under, and this not only that we may
feel all kinds of Scourges for our Offenses, but that our new and unheard of
Debaucheries may be punished with fresh Calamities. We may (without limiting
and confining God's Hand) expect Famine and Scarcity after so great Plenty,
nay, not only a Famine of Bread, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. We may
look for Invasion from abroad, when we are so divided and distracted at home,
and that under so Gracious a Prince. And truly this seems to be the Universal
and Epidemick Plague designed for all Christendom. The Mohammedan Crescent may
in time grow to the Full. The Turkish Cymetar, though often Blunted, may be so
Edged once and again, as at last to do fatal Execution over all those spacious
Territories where Christianity is professed, and (which I am loath to add) where
the Professors of it dishonor the Religion it self by their Lives. To be
brief, the Age we live in has been already an Age of great and wonderful
Occurrences, and we may expect that the remainder of it will produce great and
tremendous Changes to the World: so that if Diogenes were alive, he might now
more eagerly desire than once he did to be buried with his Face downward, and
that for the same Reason which he then gave, viz. Because the World would in a
short time be turned upside down. But lest I should be mistaken, and some
should think I am Positive and Definitive in what I say,

4. That which I have asserted before must be called to mind here in the close
of all, viz. That though Comets are certain Signs of God's Displeasure, yet
they are not Necessary Causes of the Evils they threaten. Our Doom, I hope, is
not irreversible. Nay, it is certain that He who shows us the Tokens of his
Anger, can divert it when He pleases. How glad should I be if all the
Intimations I have given of approaching Evils should be frustrated! I shall
not, like Jonas, be angry because Nineveh is not destroyed.

Lastly, If all that has been said amounts not to a Demonstration, (as I do
not pretend it does, and above half the Subjects that are treated of in the
World, and that have evident Truth on their sides, never reached to That: If I
have not demonstrated) that Comets are Signs of impendent Evils, yet this ought
to be remembered, that no Man can be certain that they signify Nothing, and
that they stand for Ciphers in the Heavens. The rashest. Determiners have not
concluded that it is impossible they should be forerunners of Calamities, and
Messengers of Divine Vengeance. Now if they prove to be so (as the abundant
Reasons and Arguments above produced solicit us to believe) it will be a
heinous Offense if we take no notice of them. However it will be best for us to
look upon them as such, and then, if we are mistaken, it will be on the safest
side, and we shall err with the wisest and soberest Persons. At least it
becomes us to suspend our Judgments in a dubious Case. It is inconsistent with
the Wisdom and Piety of a Christian Philosopher peremptorily to deny what has
some show of Probability. Much less will it become him to make a Mock of that
which may be a serious Truth, and the greatest Reality in the World: as
Vespasian (they say) made himself merry with a Comet that appeared in his days?
for being told by one that it portended Ill to him, he jestingly said, that
that Star with long Hair concerned the Kings of Persia, who wore long shaggy
Hair, and not Bald Emperors, such as he was. Which is thus expressed by an
Historian: Xiphilinus Aurel. Victor.
(...). Although Dio relates that he spoke it of the King of Parthia, Sueton.
in Vespas. c. 23.
yet it is most probable that he reflected on the Persians, who were known by
their long Hair, and thence were called (...) by the Father of History.
Herodot. l. 6. c. 19.
Far be it from us, who are a Civilized People, and (which is yet higher) a
Nation professing Christianity to jest with Heaven, and exercise our Drollery
on those rare and stupendous Appearances which we have so great Reason to be
persuaded are the Almighty's Messengers, a sort of mute Prophets sent to
instruct us in our Duty, and to be forewarnings to us of the Wrath to come. Let
us rather be directed by these Heavenly Signs, as the Magi were of old by an
unusual Star that appeared to them, to seek our Savior. Let us prepare for
God's Judgments by Repentance and Amendment of Life, and by these excellent
Preparatives let us endeavor, if it be possible, to prevent them. Let us
abandon those Sins and Vices which we may justly believe are pointed at by
these Signs from Heaven. Those, those are the direful Prodigies which threaten
Christendom at this day. Those are as Ominous and Presaging as all the Glaring
Comets that have shaked their fiery Trains over our Heads.

Let us therefore, as we are desirous that God's Judgments may be averted, and
his Blessings conferred upon us, as we are willing that Christianity should
thrive and get ground in the World, as we tender the Welfare of the Church,
which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, as we hope to have the best and purest
Religion (derived from Christ and his Apostles) continued amongst us to all
succeeding Generations, and as we wish well to our Country, the most
flourishing and Happy Region under Heaven, let us break off our Sins by
Repentance, and a speedy Reformation of our Manners; which was the principal
thing Designed, and I hope will partly be Effected by this Discourse.

FINIS.

