AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Continuance
of the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, together with the Book of Rates, in
full force and power from the 25 of March 1645, until the 26 of March 1647.

Also for repealing and making void the Ordinances of Parliament, prohibiting
the importation of Currants.

Die Veneris 21 Febr. 1644.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, near Temple-Barre, 1644.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for continuance
of the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, together with the Book of Rates, in
full force and power from the 25 of March 1645, until the 26 of March 1647.
Also for repealing and making void the Ordinances of Parliament, prohibiting
the importation of Currants.
Die Veneris 21 February 1644.
WHereas there was passed an Ordinance by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance of Parliament concerning the Subsidy of
Tonnage and Poundage, to continue from the first day of July 1642, unto the
first ^^y of March then next ensuing, which (...) Ordinance, by a later of the
21 of January 1642. for the setting forth of several Ships and Fleets to Sea,
for the guarding of this Realm, and other his Majesty's Dominions, in these
times of imminent danger, and for carrying on the Affairs of the Navy, was
ordered to stand and continue in full force and power from the time of the said
Ordinance expiring, unto the 26 day of March 1644; and from thence by another
Ordinance of the 18 of September 1643, to continue unto the 25 of March 1645.
And whereas the said Lords and Commons have taken into their consideration the
necessity of the continuance of several Fleets of ships abroad at sea, for the
said service, and the same will require great sums of money, which cannot be
supplied and provided for, but out of the collections of duties arising on
Goods and Merchandise exported out of and imported into this Kingdom. Be it
therefore ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the said first
Ordinance, entitled An Ordinance of Parliament concerning the Subsidy of
Tonnage and Poundage, together with the Book of Rates lately agreed on by the
Commons House of Parliament, and by their Order published in print, and all and
every the Articles and Instructions in the said Ordinance and Book of Rates
specified and contained, shall stand and continue in full force and power from
the said 25 of March 1645 inclusive, for and until the 26 of March 1647
exclusive: and that the Commissioners and Collectors for the time being, or
such other Persons as shall be at any time hereafter nominated and appointed to
receive the said duties by both Houses of Parliament, are and shall be enabled
to receive all such sums of money which shall at any time hereafter be payable
or paid for Tonnage and Poundage, or advanced by way of Loan, or otherwise,
for and in respect of Goods and Merchandise exported out of, or imported into
the Port of London, and all other Ports within the Realm of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick, in such manner as the Duties of Tonnage and
Poundage have been formerly received by the late and now Commissioners and
Collectors of the Customs; which said Commissioners and Collectors, and such
other Persons hereafter to be appointed by both Houses of Parliament, as
aforesaid, their Deputy or Deputies, or any one of them, shall have full power
and authority to give allowance by way of defalcation, after the rate of 15 per
Cent. out of all such moneys as shall be advanced according to the said
Ordinance, and Book of Rates; all which moneys the said Commissioners and
Collectors, and such other Persons hereafter to be appointed as aforesaid,
their Deputy or Deputies, shall receive upon account, and shall from time to
time issue out the same, as they shall be authorized by Order of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, or by Order signed by five at the least of the Committee
of the Navy of the Commons House of Parliament, sitting the Committee, for the
use of the Navy and the Fleet now at Sea, or hereafter to be employed by
Authority of both Houses of Parliament, for the guarding of the Seas, and
defense of the Kingdom, and for other necessary charges for the managing the
Service aforesaid, whose Order from time to time shall be their sufficient
discharge. And for the better encouragement of the said Commissioners and
Collectors, the said Lords and Commons do ordain, That whatsoever Act or Acts
the said Commissioners and Collectors, or such other Persons to be appointed
as aforesaid, their Deputy or Deputies, or any one of them, shall do in the
execution of this Ordinance, and whatsoever moneys they shall receive and issue
out by virtue of the same, They, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators
shall be acquitted, discharged, and kept harmless from any other or further
trouble, question, or account whatsoever, then to the said Lords and Commons.
And they do further declare and promise, that when any Act of Parliament shall
be past for Tonnage and Poundage, provision shall be made by that Act, as well
for the indemnity of the Merchant advancing the said duties, and sums of
money according to the said Ordinance and Book of Rates, as for the security
and indemnity of the said Commissioners and Collectors, and such other Persons
to be appointed as aforesaid, in performance of the said Service, and of such
other Person and Persons who shall be employed therein. And it is likewise
ordained by the said Lords and Commons, and they do hereby enjoyne all
Merchants, as well Denizens as Aliens, to make due entries of all such goods and
merchandises as they shall export or import, from the day of the date hereof,
for, by, and during the continuance of this present Ordinance. And it is
further Ordered and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such goods
or other merchandise, whereof any the duties aforesaid, are or shall be due,
shall at any time hereafter be shipped or put into any Boat or Vessel, to the
intent to be carried into the parts beyond the Seas, or else be brought from
the parts beyond the Seas, into any Port, Place, or Creek of this Realm, or
other his Majesty's Dominions, by way of merchandise, and unshiped to be laid
on land, the Customs and other duties due by this Ordinance, or to be due for
the same, not paid, or the Collector thereof or his Deputy, with the consent
and agreement of the Comptroller and Surveyor there, or one of them at the
least not agreed with for the same, in the Custom House, according to the true
meaning of this Ordinance; That then from the first day of February 1644 all
the same Goods and Merchandise whatsoever shall be forfeited, the one half to
be employed to the use of the State, and the other moity to him or them who
will seize or sue for the same: And for that purpose, the said Lords and
Commons do require the Customers, Comptrollers, Surveyors, Searchers of the
said City of London, and all other the Ports respectively, that they do
carefully attend their several charges, and make due seizure as forfeited, of
all such goods and merchandise as shall not be entered according to the intent
of this Ordinance. And such Goods so seized by the said Officers, or any other
Person whatsoever, they are required from time to time to Register, with the
Officer appointed for that purpose in the Custom-House London: and to proceed
by way of Bill, plaint, or information in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
against such goods and persons so offending, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this Ordinance: And it is lastly ordained, That the Baron or Barons
of the said Court of Exchequer, and all other Officers of the said Court
respectively, for the time being, do, and shall, and are hereby authorized and
required to proceed to Judgment upon such Bill, Plaint, or Information
according to the course of that Court. And the said Baron or Barons, and
Officers of the said Court respectively, shall be hereby indempnified and saved
harmless for their so doing. Provided, that the Ordinance lately made for the
Regulating of the Rates of Tobacco, do stand in force without allowance of 15
per Cent. according to the true intent and meaning of the former Ordinance, any
thing in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided always, That
for the better encouragement of all Merchant Strangers and others, using the
Composition Trade of Dover, It is ordained, That the said Merchants Strangers
and others, using the said Composition Trade, shall not pay any Customs,
Subsidies or any other Imposition whatsoever, more then the 2.. per Cent. which
usually heretofore was by them paid for that Composition Trade, any Ordinance
to the contrary notwithstanding.

It is further ordained, That the several Ordinances of Parliament of the 26
of August 1642. and 19 January 1642. inhibiting the Importation of Currants, be
hereby Repealed and made void; And that it shall and may be lawful from the
date hereof, for all Merchants of the Levant Company, to Import in English
Bottomes, Currants as in former times, paying only such Customs and Duties as
are due, and payable by the now Book of Rates established by the Authority of
this present Parliament: Provided that one third part of the profit that shall
arise out of the Customs payable upon Currants, shall be appropriated to the
Garrison of Gloucester.

Io. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

