Dr. EDWARDS's SERMON AT THE Commencement AT CAMBRIDGE.

THE Eternal and Intrinsic Reasons OF GOOD and EVIL.

A SERMON PREACHED at the COMMENCEMENT AT CAMBRIDGE, On SUNDAY the 2d Day of
July, 1699.

By JOHN EDWARDS, D. D.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the University Press, for Edmund Ieffery, Bookseller in
Cambridge, 1699.

Imprimatur.

GUL. DAWES, Procan. JO. BEAUMONT, S. Theol. Profes. REGIUS. HUMP. GOWER, D.
Margaretae Professor. JO. BALDERSTON, Coll. Emman. Prefect.


PSALM cxix. cxlij. Thy Righteousness is an Everlasting Righteousness, and thy
Law is the Truth.


IT is not to be doubted that the Subject of this Psalm is the Moral Law, or
the Precepts of Just and Righteous Living, which are contained in the Ten
Commandments, and which we find interspersed in Moses's Writings, especially in
the Book of Deuteronomy. The Royal Prophet directing here his words to God,
calls these his Righteousness and his Law, and he adds that this Righteousness
is Everlasting, and that this Law is the Truth. The most easy and obvious
meaning of the former clause of which words is this, that this Divine Law which
he is speaking of, had its Existence from Everlasting, it was always what it
is now. Which is of the same import of what he says in the 160. v. of this
Psalm, Thy Word is True from the beginning, i. e. from Everlasting, for these
two are synonymous, as appears from Prove. 8. 23. The Rules and Measures of what
is Just and Right were determined and fixed from Eternity. And besides, they
are of Perpetual and Eternal Obligation, they are such Laws as shall never be
repealed: whence our Psalmist says in another place, All God's Commandments
are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever. Ps. 111. 7, 8. For what is Good or
Evil in its own nature, can at no time, or upon any account be altered. Which
brings me to the Interpretation of the latter Clause of the Words, Thy Law is
the Truth, i. e. these Rules of Moral Righteousness must needs be Immutable and
Perpetual, because they are no imaginary and precarious things, nor do they
depend upon humane Institution and Arbitrament; but they are Real and True in
themselves, they are Solid and Substantial, there being an Intrinsic Goodness
and Excellency in them. On this account they have Subsistence and Reality, and
therefore may properly and strictly be said to be, and to be True. Which is a
Notion that a Profound Man among the Gentiles had long since attained to; for
he tells us, that the Law of Nature or True Morality is (...). Socrat* apud
Platonem.
the finding of being.

This then is the Proposition that I will Entertain you with at present, that
the Reasons of Good and Evil are Eternal and Unchangeable; that there are such
things as Right and Wrong, without any Positive Law or Constitution; that these
had the start of all human Contracts and Customs; and, in short, that Religion
and Virtue are ingrafted in our very Nature, and are every ways suited to the
frame of Rational Creatures. This I will evince 1. From the Nature of God. 2.
From what we find in the Mind of Man. 3. From the Behavior and Actions of
Mankind. 4. From the Universal Consent of the World.

1. God's Nature or Mind is the Eternal Foundation of Goodness and
Righteousness, and therefore these cannot but be Real and Eternal. It is
certain that the Essential Bonity, which is in Men's Actions, is grounded on the
Chief Good, that which Plato frequently calls (...) De Leg. and alibi.
Goodness it self, and the Idea and Pattern of all Goodness. For whence could
Goodness be fetched, but from this Divine Source? It could neither be derived
from Angels nor Men, (and we cannot think of any rank of Beings else whence
there is a probability of its being derived) because they themselves are from
God, and therefore it would be unreasonable to think, that that which is Best
in them was not from Him. Yea, from Him alone it must necessarily be, in whose
Perfect Nature the Ideas and Platforms of it were from Eternal Ages: for as the
Ideas of Truth were eternally Existent in God's Understanding, so his Will was
pregnant and replenished with Goodness and Holiness. Which is a Notion that we
cannot but form of the Divine Being, because he being most Perfect, we cannot
possibly conceive of him without apprehensions of both these, viz. his
Understanding fraught with Truth, and his Will with Goodness. Now, from this
Eternal Fountain the Goodness and Righteousness of Men have their Original, and
consequently they cannot but be Real and True, and have an inward worth in them,
because whatever partakes of the Divine Nature and Perfection is really worthy
and excellent. It is then the holy Nature of the Divine Being that is the prime
Source, as well as Rule of human sanctity and righteousness. It is this on
which they depend, for it is the Pattern of them. Goodness in us is but a Copy
of that Original, that Essential and Immutable Goodness, which is in the
Supreme Good. This is the true Root of all Rectitude, Justice and
Righteousness. The Eternal Laws of Just and Good, which are in the Divine Mind,
are the Pillars on which the Moral Goodness of Rational Beings is founded.
Hence it is that the Laws of Good and Evil, of Just and Unjust among Men, are
in their own nature firm and solid, and never to be abolished, for they are
eternally Good, and grounded on the unchangeableness of the Supreme Being. The
Reasons of them did exist from Eternity in the Divine Nature, and they were
ever conformable to the upright Will of God, and for that Reason cannot be
otherwise. Thus it appears, that Moral Righteousness being originally founded
in the Being and Nature of God, must consequently be Immutable.

2. The Intrinsic and unchangeable Nature of it is demonstrated, not only from
our tracing it up to its First Head, but from its being seated by God in the
Mind of Man. For this is the very Image and Pourtraiture of God himself, and
consequently, seeing Truth and Goodness are Essential to the Divine Nature (as
was said before) these Excellencies are also inseparable from the Soul of Man.
And therefore from the Nature of human Souls, as such, it were easy to prove
that there were Innate Notions, not only of True and False, but of Good and
Evil, imprinted on them at their first make. And though we have not the use of
these Original Notions presently, or in our Infancy and Childhood (as some
urge) yet it is ridiculous to infer thence, that they are not in the Soul: for
on the same ground it might be proved, that a Man has no Rational Soul for
several years, because the Faculties of it do not actually exert themselves.
But we are sure that those Mental Impressions were in all Men from the
beginning, because they are the First Emanations of their natural frame, as
they are Reasonable Beings, and as their Souls resemble the Divinity. Hence it
follows, as a clear and incontestible Truth, that, though by the early Apostasy
of the First Man our human Nature is depraved, our Faculties are corrupted, and
we have an inward proclivity to what is vicious, so that it is the work of the
Holy Spirit to enable us to do any Good that can be acceptable to God: yet
there are remaining in us, as we are Human Creatures and Rational Agents,
Natural Principles and Sentiments of Morality. And therefore we may observe,
that One, who is an unquestionable Asserter of the original depravity of
Mankind, is yet very positive in this, that Quendam inesse humanae menti, and
quidem naturali instinctu, divinitatis Sensum, extra controversiam ponimus.
Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 3. Omnious inditum esse divinitus Religionis semen
experientia testatur. Ibid. c. 4.
there is in the Souls of Men a Sense of Divinity and Religion, and that even
by a Natural Instinct; and accordingly he spends a whole Chapter to prove the
existence of this Inbred Principle in the Minds of all Men. And truly, every
Man alive, that is attentive and unprejudiced, may feel this in him as soon as
he is arrived to the use of Reason, (for he cannot exspect it should actually
display it self till then) or whenever he has occasion given him to exercise
his thoughts concerning Moral and Divine things. To this the Great Apostle
refers in Romans 2. 14, 15. when he tells us, that the Gentiles who have not the
Law, (i. e. the written Law) do by nature (i. e. by virtue of these radical
notions of Moral Goodness in their minds) the things contained in the Law, they
are pushed on to it by this Natural Principle within them. Hence it is that
though they have not the Law, yet they are a Law unto themselves, because they
have this inward Law in their own minds, which instructs them what to do, as to
the great duties of Natural Religion. Therefore he adds, that they show the
work of the Law written in their hearts, namely in these Original Characters by
God's own hand. So that nothing could be said more plainly to Establish these
inward Signatures and Impresses of Goodness on the Soul.

And they were Engraven there for Great and Excellent Purposes in the life of
Man: whence we may further evince, that there are indeed such Inbred Principles
and Notions. There being so many ways of Delusion and Error in the World, such
a diversity of avocations from Religion and Goodness, and the Worship of the
Divine Being, and such Charming Temptations every where to a vicious Life; it
was requisite there should be such Inward Directors as these in Men's breasts.
There being such Impediments to Truth and Goodness as Passion, Prejudice,
Interest, Pleasures, and these continually operating upon us; it was necessary
there should be something within us to remind us of what is True and what is
Good, something within us that opposes it self to all the foresaid obstacles
and hindrances. There was a necessity that there should be a Divine Principle
in our Souls, which should be as it were a continual Fund to our Consciences,
always to supply and furnish them with Virtuous dictates. Amongst the most
rude and barbarous People it is This that keeps up some kind of Notion of
Honesty and Goodness. Yea, and among those that are Civilized, these would be
in danger of being lost, if there were not this Principle rooted in their
minds. All that is Just and Right would have been banished out of the World,
unless this prevalent Inmate had acted its part, and kept us from being wholly
bereft of them. We had long since been absorpt of Atheism and Profaness, if
this had not powerfully secured us. Were it not for this active Spark, the Fire
of Virtue would have been extinguished, and it would have been impossible to
preserve it in the midst of that Deluge of Vice, which has broken in upon us.
God took care therefore, that there should be ingrafted in the heart of every
Man, learned or illiterate, these Moral Impressions which I am speaking of,
which will not suffer Mankind to be wholly alienated from a sense of what is
Good and Virtuous. It may be attributed to this, that, notwithstanding the
General Depravation and Corruption, there is yet a Face of Religion in the
World. For it is an undoubted Truth, that This buoys up Goodness when it is
sinking, this supports it when it is falling, this keeps it alive when it is
even exspiring. So absolutely necessary was the implanting of these Notions in
Men's minds from their very birth. And then (which is the thing I have been
proving) these Innate Principles of Good and Evil thus implanted in us, are a
certain and unquestionable eviction of the Intrinsic Excellency of Moral
Religion, and of all Virtuous and Just Actions, which are but Transcripts and
Exemplifications of those Original Conceptions placed by God in the minds of
Men.

3. As the real and unchangeable nature of Moral Righteousness is proved from
its conformity to the Supreme and Eternal Good, and from the Images of Good,
which our minds are furnished with from our birth, so it may be evidenced from
the constant Behavior and Practice of Mankind afterward. This I will make
appear from these following particulars, 1. From Men's excusing their sins. 2.
From their desiring Secrecy when they commit them. 3. From the Regrets and
Remorses which they feel afterward. 4. From the Fear of Punishment which
haunts them. 5. From that Dislike and Hatred which even Bad men themselves have
of Vice.

First, the Intrinsic Excellency of Virtue is manifested from men's Excusing
their sins and vicious practices, and devolving them upon others. This was in
the World as soon as Sin it self. Adam would needs cast his Transgression and
Guilt upon his Relative, and she put it off to the Serpent. This has been the
practice of sinners ever since: though they know themselves to be really
Criminal, yet they endeavor to throw off their faults, and they use all sorts
of palliations and pretenses to clear themselves; and particularly they are
wont to usurp the Names and Titles of Virtue to conceal their evil deeds,
^ondly disguising these latter under a show and resemblance of the former. But
whilst they do so, they confess, that Virtue is Excellent and Laudable,
otherwise they would not emulate the likeness of it: and they acknowledge, that
Vice is in it self base and reproachful, and that the rational nature of Man is
averse to it, else they would not excuse it, and shift it off: nay, it is
certain they would own it, if it were Good and praise worthy. But they have
natural convictions of the contrary, which makes them strive to clear
themselves of it: and these evasions are a palpable proof that Vice is a thing
opposite to the reasonable frame of their Souls, and is of its own nature Evil,
and that there is a distinction between Just and Unjust, Right and Wrong,
founded in the nature of things.

Again, this also appears from men's desiring of Secrecy when they commit sins,
and after they have committed them. For though one reason of their sculking and
absconding is, because they would not be defeated in what they undertake, or be
detected when it is performed; yet this is another reason of their affecting of
privacy, namely, because they are ashamed to act those vile things in the Eyes
of the World. Vice is so ugly and deformed, that they would not have it seen:
and when it is, they blush and are confounded at their own evil doings. Which
is signified to us in that Expostulation Romans 6. 21. What profit had ye in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? This blushing argues an inward
turpitude in vicious actions: whereas Virtue, which is Good in it self, is
daring, and carries Confidence with it. If there were not a real blemish and
stain in unjust and lewd practices, why should men be ashamed of them? Why
should they be put out of countenance, and look like Malefactors? Why should
they fly to their Coverts, and run into corners, and fear a discovery? There
was an early Example of this in the first Sinners, they retired, and hid
themselves, Genesis 3. 8. On which an Ancient and Pious Father of the Christian
Church has these remarkable words, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. ad Pop. Antioch.
Why did Adam, after he had sinned, hide himself, seeing at that time there was
no written Law? The Reason was, because he had a natural inbred knowledge that
he had done ill, he being self-instructed in the knowledge of Virtue. And
thence arose in him that inward bashfulness and dejection of Soul after the
commission of Sin, and thence he fondly attempted to hide not only himself, but
his Crime from God. And it is observable that Cain refused to discover his
murdering of his Brother; when God demanded of him where he was, his surly
reply was, he knew not, Genesis 4. 9. Which concealing of Vice argues the
intrinsic Evil of it, for why else is it masked with privacy and retirement,
and kept from the knowledge of others as much as it is possible, yea even of
those sometimes that cannot hurt us? This is an argument that Virtue is good and
lovely, and that the contrary is vile and detestable, and that the mind of Man
naturally approves of Moral Goodness, and dislikes Vice and Immorality.

Further, the Regrets and Remorses of Sinners for their acting contrary to the
Divine Laws, are certain Testimonies of this Truth. Why do they call themselves
to an account, and arraign, and pass Sentence upon themselves for what they
have done? Why are they uneasy and dissatisfied, and find an unspeakable
Trouble in their minds? Is not this from Natural Conscience, and those inbred
impressions, which are in the Soul of every Man? Yes, without doubt, these
cause them to rebuke and chastise themselves, and that very severely, when they
offend against these inward dictates. Thence come those Vexations and Torments
which willful Transgressors feel in their breasts, yea though their faults be
kept secret, and none knows them but themselves. Notwithstanding this, they are
troubled and disquieted, and as the Satyrist well remarks of such men, Tacita
sudant praecordia culpa Iuv. Sat. 11.

But especially the more open and profligate Sinners have frequent experience
of these inward Inquietudes, Sweatings and Agonies, which render them a Plague
and Torment to themselves. Cain complained, that his iniquity (for so the
original word should be rendered) was greater than he could bear, Genesis 4. 13.
That is, the guilt of his heinous Sin became an insupportable burden to him. So
Judas, from the horror of his guilt, sunk into despair. And who sees not that
the usual effects of great and flagitious enormities are Pain and Torture of
mind, Deliquiums of Soul and Body, and the wasting and macerating of the flesh
and spirits, by continual restlesness and disturbance? The ground of it is
obvious, for Sin is a violent distorting of the natural and primitive temper of
Man, and therefore it cannot but create extreme anguish and perturbation. One
reason why men are displeased with themselves after the commission of what is
Immoral, is because they find they have acted contrary to their Native
Principle, because they have done something that is unsuitable to the rational
nature which they are endued with. It appears hence that Sin is naturally Evil,
and that it is an affront to our Reasons and Understandings to transgress the
Laws of Morality. Thus a Man's own mind establishes the Equity and Goodness of
these Laws, and convinces him that the Foundations of Moral Righteousness are
sure and stable.

Moreover, this may be made evident from the Fear of Punishment, which haunts
and possesses the minds of Evil men. Thus Cain, the first Murderer, was afraid
that every one that found him would slay him: he had a perpetual dread of the
fatal recompense, which was the merit of his villainy. And Natural Conscience
tells all other Sinners that they deserve Punishment: they know the Judgment of
God, that they who commit such things, are worthy of death, as the Apostle
speaks: and this knowledge unavoidably breeds Fear and Dread. Some would needs
persuade us that this Passion is raised by Politic Heads, by Wise Rulers and
Governors, merely to aw their dastard Subjects: but it is evident that this is
a falsity, because Princes and Rulers themselves are liable to these
impressions; nay, we know they actually have been under the force and
prevalency of such Principles. Belshazar the Great Babylonian Monarch fell into
fits of shaking and trembling, when the Handwriting on the Wall put him in
mind of his Profaness and Debauchery, and the just Deserts of both. King Herod
after the murder of John Baptist was restless in his mind, and had the terrible
sight of that Holy Man continually represented to his fancy, and Mat. 14. 2.
he thought he was risen from the dead, and was come to Torment him. Tiberius
the Emperor was not able to conceal the terrors and affrightments of his
Conscience, after all his unnatural Lusts and Cruelties. Nero after all his
prodigious villainies could not dissemble his horrors, and his being haunted
with Spirits, and tormented with Furies and Flames. Which plainly shows, that
this dread of mind is no Politic Invention, no Feigned Passion and
Representation, no idle Phantom or Mormo; but that it is a real thing, and
flows from the natural dictates of the Mind, and not these from Fear, as some
would suggest. Why should Men be afraid of the Divine Being, if they deserved
not his Displeasure? And how can they deserve it, unless they have done
something amiss, i. e. broken some Law, which they were obliged to keep? There
must then be some obligation on Man from Nature to observe such and such Laws:
for I speak even of those who have thrown off all Obligations but this. Their
being conscious to themselves that they have not acted as they ought, and that
thereby they are become guilty, creates this Timerousness and Dread in them,
and gives them an apprehension of the great Day of Doom.

In the next place I argue from that dislike and hatred, which even Bad men
themselves have of some Vices, and from that great Esteem which they have of
some Virtues. Pride is universally disrelish'd, and the very Persons who
cherish it in themselves, abhor it in others. Nothing is more generally
abominated than a Proud and Arrogant Man; and on the contrary, nothing is more
valued, loved, and caressed than one that is Humble and Meek. Even those very
Persons, whose practice is a remonstrance against Humility, have at the same
time an inward liking of this Virtue, yea and outwardly express their
approbation of it. The Avaritious and Sordid Niggard is scorned and laughed at
by every one: but the Liberal and Generous are applauded by all. Clean and
Chaste Discourse meets with an universal acceptance: but Obscenity and Ribaldry,
though dressed in the Garb of Wit, are generally nauseous and offensive, and the
Organ of Hearing is as 'twere disobliged, and even hurt by them; and oftentimes
the Hearer blushes, because the Speaker does not. A Liar is a Title of the
greatest reproach and infamy among men: a lying Tongue is not only one of those
things which Prove. 6. 17.
the Lord hates, but it is as (...). Plutarch. de Educat. Pueror.
odious to all Men: whereas a Plain and Open Speaking, without any
dissimulation or reserve, is a very graceful and amiable thing, and nothing is
more valued and commended in the World. Again, Oppression, Violence, Rapine,
Persecution, and especially if these proceed to Bloodshed and Slaughter, are
hated of all Persons, yea of those who practice these Vices most of all. Julius
Caesar had ever in his mouth that of Euripides, Sueton. in Iul. Caes.
If Right at all may be violated, it must be for the sake of a Crown; but in
other matters let us be exactly just. The greatest Invaders acknowledge Justice
to be good, and it is Interest only that warps their judgment. The Banditi and
Rapparees rob for mere Gain, and even Assassines and Ruffians must be well paid
to do their work; which shows there is no temptation in the Thing it self. A
Common Thief had rather find than take away another Man's goods; and whilst he
does the latter, he disapproves of it. Or say, that he approves of it in
himself, yet he detesteth it in all others. So Perfidiousness and Treachery
meet with a Catholic abhorrence; and those who reward these practices, yet
hate the things themselves, and the Actors of them are always odious in the
World, and sometimes signally punished by them who set them on work. But
Faithfulness, Sincerity, Honesty, Frankness and True-heartedness are beloved by
all Men. And it were easy to show in other Instances, that Vicious and Immoral
Actions are loathed even by Sinners themselves, and that they who dare not
practice Wisdom and Virtue, yet Neque enim unquam in tantum convalescet
nequitia, nunquam sic contra virtutes conjurabitur, ut non Sapientiaenomen
venerabile and sacrum maneat. Sen. Epist. 14.
praise and commend it, and are willing to see it thrive in the world. Thus
from the Behavior and deportment of Men, even those who are of the worst sort,
it is evident that Virtue is praiseworthy in its own Nature, and that there is
an inward Principle in all Men, that makes them pay respect to Goodness and
Honesty, and to disparage what is vicious and unlawful.

In the last place, I will prove the Laws of Moral Goodness to be Intrinsic
and Natural from their being universally received. For that of Tully is an
unquestionable Maxim, Consensio omnium gentium jus naturae putanda est.
When all People agree in a thing, we are to look upon it as the Law of Nature.
Now, it is evident that there is among all Men an Agreement, as to the main,
about the Notion of Good and Evil. Just and Right are every where, and among
all Persons the same, Tusc. Q. l. 1.
as Fire burns here and in Persia, (to use the words of the famous Ethic. l. 5.
c. 7.
Stagyrite.) We are told by Valerius Maximus, that the very Barbarous Scythians
took care of their Fathers Tombs, and religiously preserved them; whereupon he
makes this seasonable Remark, Prima and optima rerum Natura piet it is est
magistra* quae nullo vocis ministerio, nullo usu literarum indigens, prop^iis
ac tacitis viribus charitatem parentum pectoribus liberorum infundit. lib. 5.
c. 4. Solida virtus nascitur magis quam fingitur.
Nature, the first and the best of things, is the Mistress of Piety, so that we
need not be taught and instructed in it. And again in the ^^ne place, Solid
Virtue is born with us rather than made and fashioned. And indeed it must needs
be so, because the notices and impressions of Good and Evil on Men's minds are
Universal: and it is impossible they should be otherwise, because they are
Natural, for Nature universally spreads it self in every individual. Hence is
that Common Consent in all Men concerning the grand Points of Morality: they
are voted to be Reasonable and Just, by the whole Assembly of mankind
throughout the World.

I know this is opposed by the Learned Mr De Jure Not. and Gent. l. 1. c. 6, 7.
Seldom, and some others, especially of late, who hold that Universal Consent
is no argument to prove the Law of Nature. Or rather, they say, there is no
such thing as Universal Consent, there being so many various Opinions and
Practices in Morality and Religion. But I desire these following things may be
considered, which will fully answer the suggestions of those who oppose this
doctrine. First, I grant that God has judicially given over some People to a
reprobate sense, and that because they have given themselves over first to
their Lusts, and have wilfully shut their Eyes against the light. Hence it is
that they have in many things corrupted and distorted the Law of Nature, and
then it is no wonder, that they have been permitted to fall into the most
irrational practices, as that of Idolatry, and the like.

But I add next, that this Corruption is not in the First and General
Principles of Nature, but in some undue Inferences and Deductions thence. Thus
in the case of Polytheism or Idolatry, which is the adoring of False Gods, and
was ever a Catholic crime among the common sort of Heathens, there is the
General dictate of Natural Religion kept up, viz. the worshipping of a Deity,
though they are so ignorant and corrupted as to conclude this and the other
thing to be a God, though they are not. So there is no Man or Nation extant, who
think it lawful to hurt or injure any one: but there is some disagreement as
to the Particular Inferences, which may arise from these Premises; and in some
particular Instances, that may be thought by some to be hurtful and injurious,
which is not deemed so by others. And thus those Usages among Barbarous
Nations, which are so far different from ours, may be reconciled, as namely,
their eating the dead, in stead of burying them; and their dispatching their
old sick Parents out of the World, which they look upon as a Courtesy done to
them, and several the like practices. In which the first and general Principles
of Morality are not violated, but only some false Conclusions are drawn from
them. Notwithstanding which, the main and essential Laws of Good and Evil are
the same, and are owned to be so.

Again, with particular relation to Mr Selden's Objection (which a late Writer
has borrowed from him, and makes great use of) viz. That there is no Natural
and Universal Law of Morality, because the Gentiles are so vicious, and act so
contrary to the light of Reason; I answer, that when I assert the Law of Nature
to be Universal, I mean, that it prevails among all Men in the World that are
of sound minds, and who carefully attend to the dictates of Natural Conscience,
and who use their Understandings, and make Reflections, and exercise their
Faculties. But if there be some (and too many there are) who are stupid and
sottish, and attend not to the Inbred Notions of their minds, (whereby these
Notions are in a manner defaced, and almost extinguished) I am not to answer
for these. When I speak of Universal Consent, I understand it of those that
think and consider, and are not wont to debauch and distemper their Reasons, as
those Rude and Savage Gentiles do. Wherefore we are not at all concerned for
the Brasilians or Caribes, no nor for the Soldanians and Hotentots, with the
noise of whom our Ears are mightily grated of late. The strange behavior of
these People is no real reproach to Human Nature, nor any impeachment of the
General Laws of Morality, which all People agree in who rouse their inward
Principle, and give heed to it. And thence I gather that the Precepts of Virtue
are immovable and unalterable, for they are fixed and riveted into the very
Nature of mankind, or else there would not be an Universal Agreement about them.

I might go on to farther Proofs of the Intrinsic Nature of Good and Evil,
from those Absurd Consequences, which would follow from the contrary. First, if
there be no such thing, and if, notwitstanding what has been alleged, Virtue
and Vice are casual and contingent, then our Faculties were given us to cheat
and abuse us, and they are continually imposed upon, and that about their
proper Objects: which is a doctrine that would destroy even a Deity, and we
could say nothing to prove there is such a Being. Or, allowing a God, it would
be a reproach to his Goodness and Wisdom, to bestow such mental Powers upon us
as are constantly deceived, and to implant such Notions in the Souls of all Men
as are false and erroneous, and which have nothing real and solid in them.

Secondly, this also would be a Consequence from the premises, that we may live
and act as we please: for if there be no fixed Laws and Rules of Goodness and
Righteousness, then nothing can be said to be Lawful, and consequently nothing
can be said to be Unlawful: or what is Lawful to day, may be Unlawful to
morrow. For if there be not any Inward Reason of the Moral Laws enjoined us by
God, if they be not in themselves, and in their abstract nature Good; he may
prescribe us other Laws, and those contrary to these which we now have; and so
God may command us to hate him, and to hurt and mischief our neighbors. If
these things are not intrinsically evil, so that they can never be Good, they
may in time become our Duty.

Thirdly, this is another Consequence, that our Happiness would be precarious
and uncertain: for the Happiness of Rational Creatures depends on the Goodness
of their Actions. And by this means we should be wholly unacquainted with the
Great End of our lives, which is the thing that is to steer us in this World,
and to direct us in all we undertake. These are some of the egregious Blunders
and monstrous Absurdities which attend the contrary Opinion, and may serve to
confirm us in this weighty Point, that there is an Intrinsic Goodness in
Virtuous actions, and an Intrinsic Evil in Vicious ones, and that the Reasons
of both are congenite to our Rational Nature, and flow from it, and are ever
agreeable to it.

Thus I have Established the Doctrine which I undertook to discourse of. And it
was necessary to do it, because though the generality of mankind (as was said
before) do unanimously averr, that Goodness is not placed in the arbitrary
opinions of Men, but in nature it self; yet there have been of old, and are at
this day those who contradict and oppose it. The Ancient Scepticks were
infamous for this, who had learnt of their Master Pyrrho, that there is Laert.
in vit. Pyrrh.
no difference between Good and Evil by Nature, but only by Laws and Custom
Laertius acquaints us, that it was the positive opinion of one of that sort of
Men, that a Wise Man will not stick to commit Sacrilege, or Adultery, or to
Steal, whenever he has a fit opportunity; for (...), etc. Laert. in Aristip.
none of these (says he) have any Turpitude in them in their own nature, if we
can but lay aside the vulgar apprehension concerning them, which the rabble of
Fools and Ignorant People have taken up. Tully testifies concerning the
Epicureans, that they held Honest and Just to be Tusc. Q. lib. 5.
cassum quiddam, and inani vocis sono decoratum, a vain and frivolous thing,
set forth and commended to the World by a mere empty sound of words. This also
was the Sentiment of some that pretended to be Christians, as the Gnostics,
and especially Carpocrates, who was a Great Man with that party: he with much
earnestness avowed, that all (...). Theodoret. haeret. Fab. l. 1.
Moral actions are indifferent, and that all the Good or Evil that is said to
be in them, is founded not on truth, but fancy, as Theodoret bears witness
concerning him, and quotes Irenaeus for it.

But to come down lower, they have, it seems, a power in the Church of Rome to
change the nature of Vice and Virtue. It is agreed on by the the chiefest
Writers of that Communion, that the Pope has such a Plenitude of Power, that
he can dispense with Just and Right, and any Law of God, excepting only the
Articles of Faith. So says the Gloss upon the Canon Law, and Panormitan
approves of it. Bellarmine, their Great Champion, speaks home to the business,
Si autem Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur
Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra
conscientiam peccare. De Sum. Pontif. l. 4. c. 5.
If the Pope (says he) could err so far as to command the practice of Vice,
and to forbid the practice of Virtue, the Church in that case is obliged,
unless it would sin against Conscience, to believe Vice to be Good, and Virtue
to be Evil. Judge now whether the Reasons of Good and Evil be not taken away by
the Church of Rome, when it can alter the property of Virtue and Vice, and when
their People are bound in Conscience to take one for the other. Judge whether
they do not ascribe more to their Great Pontif than can be attributed to God
himself: for certainly it is so far from being in the power of any Man to alter
the Natural and Moral Law, and to take away the obligation of it, that it is
not within the verge of Divine Power it self. It is the decision of the Famous
Grotius (who is always very wary when he speaks concerning what God can do, as
indeed it does become us: yet it is the peremptory decision I say, of that
Great Man) in his Excellent Book of the Rights of Peace and War, Lib. 1. ^.
God himself cannot change this Law of Natural Goodness, he cannot make that
which is intrinsically evil to be no evil. And the Reason is, because then he
would not be God, for his Nature would be changed, which is a thing utterly
impossible, and the very supposition of it is to be abhorred.

The Great Gallick Philosopher, who discourses so admirably concerning the
Moral Virtues, was inclined to think, that they were not founded on immovable
Reasons: for in some places of his Epistles and in his Answers, where he holds
that Goodness as well as Truth eternally depended on the Divine Will and its
free determination, he seems to mean that God could have determined them
otherwise, if he had pleased: and so, that which is now Good, might have been
Evil. But this mistaken Notion of this Learned Man arose from his not
considering and remembering, that the Will of God is always the same as to its
real intrinsic nature, and therefore what it now is, it ever was, and can
never be otherwise, and consequently Goodness is unvariable, and that which is
Good now cannot be Evil at another time. Which if that Excellent Person had bore
in his mind, he would not have argued from God's Will in that manner which he
seems to do.

But I am sorry to find that in our own Nation likewise there are those who
oppose the Intrinsic Nature of Moral Goodness, and render it dubious and
arbitrary. Among these ought to be mentioned in the first place that known
Person, in whose State of Nature (which he lays down as the Foundation of his
whole System) nothing is virtuous or vicious, just or unjust; for he holds that
these arise only from Compact and Society. The Magistrate is Mr. Hobbes's God,
the Prince is the maker of Good and Evil, and he can unmake them when he
pleases. Which is said well enough for such a Philosopher as holds a Man is
nothing else but Body or Carkase.

Another De Legibus Naturae Disquisitio Philosoph.
Learned Writer (though a professed Enemy to the former) resolves all Moral
Philosophy into Geometrical and Mechanic Principles: which perhaps was
designed on purpose by that profound and sagacious Person to convince some in
an Age of Mathematics. He is followed and vouched by another, Demonstration of
the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature. And his Account of Platonic
Philosophy.
who undertakes to Improve him, and to thrust this Conceit on the World, that
Experimental Observation is the Standard of all Goodness and Morality: but I
believe you will agree with me in this, that this is spoken rather like a
Virtuoso than a Divine.

There is another, who in his Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, has
refined upon both the former Writers, and makes it his work to show that the
proof of Natural Laws or Dictates of Reason, can be drawn only from the use of
our Senses. He holds, that by the motion impressed on the Organs of our Senses,
God delineates the Ideas or Images of all Moral Actions on our minds. He thinks
there is no Notion of Moral Goodness or Evil but what is communicated to us by
these, and consequently it is not Innate. Though by the bye it is well worth our
observing, that he freely grants, that Chap. 2. 20.
Beasts derive not all their knowledge from their Senses, but are born with
peculiar appetites and inclinations, and have natural Instincts, or Impressions
stamped by God on their very natures. So unkind are these Philosophic Masters
to their own Species, as to grudge it the Prerogative and Excellency of a
Brute. They not only degrade mankind, but thrust them below the rank of
Irrational Beings. But if you would know the particular way how Moral
Sentiments are derived to us, they tell you, this is the method, and they admit
of no other; God makes external Causes operate on our bodily Organs, and by
this operation and motion, in a certain and determinate manner, we attain to a
notion of what is Vicious or Virtuous. It is by the influence of outward
objects, and them only, that all Principles of Morality come to be known to us.
But to disprove this, and at the same time to baffle the like Doctrine of
another late Author,

First, I ask, how can General Notions of Morality be produced by the External
Senses? Is there any cognation at all between Abstract Ideas of Goodness and
mere Bodily Objects? Can a Man imagine that Universal and Complex Apprehensions
can be the offspring of the particular matters of Corporeal Sense?

Secondly, if this Author and his Friends be in the right, then those Beings
that are destitute of Bodily Sense can have no Notion of Good and Evil.
Supposing Angels to be Incorporeal, Morality is a thing not known to them; nor
is it known to Separate Souls, nor Saints in Heaven, nay not to God himself;
because these are exempted from Bodily Senses, and consequently they are not
capable of understanding any Moral Propositions.

Thirdly, this Opinion, that Natural Motion produces Moral Goodness, is such a
confounding and jumbling together of Physics and Ethics, that none who have
clear and distinct conceptions of things will admit of it.

Fourthly and lastly, this Opinion makes all Morality contingent and uncertain,
for all Natural and Bodily Motion (on which he holds it depends) is so: at one
time or other it varies. External and Corporeal Causes are shifting and fickle:
Objects work on us differently, yea the operations of the same Objects are not
always the same; and therefore Moral Goodness, which is founded on these, is
no fixed thing, but is unsteady and floating: we know not where to have it,
according to this Author. These are the Reasons why I cannot approve of this
New Method, which he has taken to demonstrate the Truth of Morality, or rather
to cashier and defeat it. Which he chooses rather to do, than to acknowledge any
Inbred Principle in the Soul of Man.

I could have wished that Mr. Norris had not so contemptibly reflected on the
Inbred Notions and Characters of Truth and Goodness on Men's minds, as to
reproach them with the Title of Reflections on the Essay of Humane
Understanding.
mere Iargon and unintelligible Cant; especially seeing one that has larded
some of his Writings with so many unintelligible high-flown Strains, and
Platonic Gibberish, (and even in the present matter which is before us talks
of the presentialness of the Ideal World to our Souls, which is the Divine
Essence, wherein we see and understand all things) might have been more
favorable in his Censure.

Another late Ingenious Author will by no means hear of Natural and Congenite
Principles of Morality, but roundly tells us in these express words, that
Conference with ^ Theist. 2d Part p. 36, 37.
Men come to the knowledge of Moral Principles and Duties by Tradition: their
Fathers taught them them, and their Grandfathers their Fathers, and so up to
Adam the common Parent of all. And a little after he uses such language as
this, Moral Duties are conveyed to all the World as Spinning and Weaving, and
such like inventions. Whereby he confounds the Notions of Natural and Revealed
Religion, and yet it is observable that in those Dialogues he first distinctly
Discourses of Natural Religion, and then of Revealed. Whence it is evident that
he not only contradicts himself, but mightily gratifies the Theist, whom he
has to deal with, and pretends to confute: but he not only baulks one of the
greatest and strongest proofs we have of the Truth of Moral Notions and
Offices, but he ridicules all Morality, by setting it on no other bottom than
what the Trade of Weavers and Spinsters has. Thus we pull down that with our
own hands which we pretend to build up; and even whilst some among us are
confuting of Deism, they promote and advance it.

There is another Writer yet behind, who seems to show himself as backward to
own a Natural Principle of Religion, as any of the forenam'd ones; for he
sticks not to say, that Essay of Humane Understanding. Book 1. Chap. 2.
there are no Notions naturally imprinted on the mind; for then, says he,
Children and Idiots would have them. But it is certain he might as strongly
have argued, that there is no Reason or Prudence in mankind, because neither
Children nor Idiots are observed to exercise these. The Logic is every whit as
good. And in another place, conformably to his denial of all Practical
Principles in the mind of Man, he speaks very doubtfully of Virtue it self;
Essay, B. 1. c. 3. p. 23.
The name or sound of VIRTUE, says he, is hard to be understood, it is liable
to much Uncertainty in its signification: and the thing it stands for is much
contended about, and difficult to be known. And again, VIRTUES and SINS are
words of uncertain signification, and among different Men stand for different
things. p. 24. At another time he confesses, that Essay, B. 2. c. 28.
he makes the Law, whereby we judge of Virtue and Vice, to be nothing else but
the Consent of Private Men. And in the same place he is positive, that the
measure of what is every where called and esteemed Virtue and Vice, is
Approbation or Dislike, Praise or Blame. And again, Edition the First.
Nothing else but that which has the allowance of Public Esteem is Virtue.
Which words (though he attempts to correct them in a later Edition) I am somewhat
inclined to understand according to the plain and obvious meaning of them, and
the rather, because it is probable, that as in other very considerable Points,
so here he Symbolizes with the Philosopher of Malmsbury, in whose steps he
affects to tread, and borrows some of his Thoughts. For as he follows him in
his Opinion of the Necessity of only One Fundamental Article of Christian
Faith, and in his Notion of Thinking matter, and particularly in that of the
likelihood or possibility of the Materiality of Humane Souls, and of their
tendency (on that Principle) to Mortality, and in his Contempt of some parts of
the Holy Scripture, and in his avowed disbelief of the Resurrection of the same
Body, and in his ridiculing of the received Explication of Last Letter to the
Bishop of Worcester, page 361, 362, 363.
the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and in his general favoring of Skepticism
and Infidelity, and in his denial of Natural and Inbred Notions; so likewise he
seems to be an humble imitator of the foresaid Philosopher, in his belief of
the precarious and arbitrary nature of Morality: though it is true in a flourish
he pretends at another time, that Morality as well as Mathematics may be
demonstrated. Surely that Proposition aforementioned, viz. Nothing else but
that which has the allowance of public Esteem is Virtue, may pass for the
Leviathan Epitomized.

And here by the way I would observe this to you, that the Persons who speak
contemptibly of Revealed Religion or any part of it, are, if you look narrowly
into them, and their Writings, as deficient in their apprehensions and esteem
of that which is Natural and merely Moral, which yet they so much pretend to
cry up. Whilst they strike at the Principles of Faith, and the Fundamental
Articles and Mysteries of Christianity, they cut the Sinews and take away the
props of Morality it self, and discard the true Grounds and Reasons of it.
Which shows that their design and project is against Virtue in general, and
that their aim is to put all out of order, to transpose and ranverse what ever
has any respect to Religion, and to confound every thing belonging to it, and
thereby to expose Relgion it self, and to make sport for the Atheistical and
Scoffing part of the World.

The greater reason therefore is there that we should be settled in our minds
concerning these things, and that we should confirm and establish our selves
more and more in this necessary and important Truth, (which I have endeavored
to make good) that there are Eternal and Immutable Reasons of Good and Evil,
that there is in all Immoral Actions a repugnancy to a Rule of Right in our own
breasts, as well as in the mind of our Creator. This is the true account of
Moral Righteousness, namely, that it is built on the Nature of God, and of
Humane Souls, and the Universal Behavior of Mankind. So that, to speak
plainly, those that designedly set themselves against the Doctrine of Inbred
Principles of Good and Evil, detract from the Divinity it self, and from the
Essential Nature and Guise of Mankind. And we may assure our selves that such a
Persuasion is the most debauching Principle in the World, and that those who
wilfully and obstinately maintain it have a very ill design upon Mankind. Which
was the only ground of my so free and plain dealing with them, for it is in vain
to Palliate where we design to Cure.

It remains that in the last place I should show the Virtue and Efficacy, the
Influence and Usefulness of the Premises: which might be done in several
Particulars, but I will offer only this one Practical Inference from the whole.
Let the Doctrine discoursed of be a mighty Incentive to all Virtue and
Goodness. Seeing these are consonant to our Natural Principles and
dispositions, we have all the reason imaginable to comply with them. Why should
we contradict our own Propensions, and be Rebels to our Selves? As it is in
Natural Motion, not Crooked lines, but Right and Straight ones are aimed at: so
it is in Morals, Man's Reasonable Nature aims at that which is his Direct and
plain duty: and when he deviates from this Right path, he acts against his true
Primitive temper and genius. Let us consider then, that we ought to be
Virtuous, because our very Nature obliges us to it. We are invited to be Just
and Good by something that is within us, and by the intrinsic Beauty of
Goodness it self. We should prize Religion and a Holy Life, because they
commend themselves to us by their own inherent and abstract worth. Let us not
be backward in the practice of Virtue, seeing its own native excellency
encourages us to it. Those were Curious and Choice words of a Dio. Cass. ^ist.
Romans lib. 44.
Gentile Writer, This is one great help and advantage, says he, to Virtue, to
be made good, (...), by a Congenite Preparation: and such is the Inbred
Principle, that I have been speaking of, whereby we are naturally inclined to
live Virtuously. For though (as was said in the beginning of this Discourse) by
the Depravity derived from our First Progenitors, both our Understandings and
Wills are miserably shattered; yet these Original Impressions are not effaced,
because they are of the very Nature of Man as he is a Rational Creature.
Therefore these cannot be wholly expunged out of Men's hearts, they are the
Indelible Stamp of God on every Soul. And the more conformable any Man's life
and actions are to them, the more clear and bright is his apprehension and
judgment concerning the truth and reality, as well as the excellency of them.

Wherefore let us descend into our own breasts, and be acquainted with our
selves: and by that means we shall come to find in our minds a Stock of
Principles, which will very much endear Religion to us: for as it will hugely
please us to see a great part of our Religion born in us and bred up with us,
so it will be a powerful motive to us to exert those Virtues which are so
fitted to our Natures, and, as I may say, were Calculated for them. Wherefore
having this prevalent Incitement, let us not be cold and indifferent in the
practice of Righteousness and Holiness; let us manfully break through all
obstacles and impediments, and let us be vigorous and zealous in the ways of
Religion, even of that which God by an Insite Principle dictates to us: and the
rather, because this is so considerable a step to and a part of that Higher
Strain and Improvement, which we are chiefly to be concerned for, namely, the
Institution of the Blessed Jesus, our conformity to which is absolutely
necessary in order to our Salvation and Happiness. To conclude, let us be
steadfast and unmovable in our duty, seeing the Principles and Reasons of it
are such. And let it evidently appear in our lives, that the esteem and love we
have for Goodness and Virtue are not Passion, but Reason* not Imagination, but
Solid Judgment.

THE END.

