AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT;

For and concerning one Tenth part more of Customs and Subsidies, to be paid
according to this Ordinance;

For the Defense of the Towns and Ports of Plymouth, the Isle of St. Nicholas,
the Towns of Poole, and Lyme, and places near adjacent.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edward Husbands, November 20. 1643.

Die Mercurii, 15 Nov. 1643. AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, etc.
IN regard of the great necessity of the Town and Port of Plimmouth, and Island
of Saint Nicholas, and the Towns of Pool and Lyme, and places near adjacent;

Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That where
any Subsidy, Custom, or other duty, on the First day of November, in the year
of our Lord God, 1643. is or shall be laid or imposed by Authority, or
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, upon any Goods, VVares, or other
Merchandises, of what nature, kind, or quality soever, to be exported out of,
or imported into the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales; That their one
Tenth part more of the Rate of the Custom, Subsidy, or Duties now paid, or
according to the Book of Rates now, by such authority or Ordinance established,
be paid and answered, over and above the said Custom, Subsidy or Duty, from
and after the Fifteenth day of November, of and from all and every such Goods,
VVares, and other Merchandise so to be exported or imported, That is to say,
where Ten shillings now is paid, there hereafter shall be paid One shilling
more, and after that Rate for more or less, to continue till it be otherwise
Ordained by both Houses of Parliament; and to be received, collected and taken
by Nathan Wright, Francis Lenthall, and George Henly, of London, Merchants,
their Deputy and Deputies, and by them to be paid over to such Treasurer as
shall be appointed by both Houses of Parliament, to be employed for, in, and
about the Defense of the said Town and Port of Plymouth, and Jsland, and the
Towns of Pool and Lyme, and places near there or adjacent, by Order of both
Houses of Parliament, or such other persons to whom they shall give Authority
in that behalf: And the said Subsidy and Imposition to be paid, under such
penalty and seizures as are established by an Ordinance or Act now in being,
for other customs and Subsidies already established: And the collectors be
secured and saved harmless, by Authority of both Houses of Parliament, in what
they shall do in execution of the Premises: Provided always, That as touching
the Duty hereby imposed, there be no deduction or defalcation of 15. l. per.
Cent: And it is further Ordered, That the Customers, Comptrollers, and other
Officers whom it may concern in the Port of London, and other the out-Ports, Do
take particular notice of this Ordinance, who are to pass no Entry, until the
said Duty of one Tenth part over and above the present custom, be duly
satisfied, and paid to the said Collectors or their Deputies, and signified
under their hands in writing. And be it further Ordained by the authority
aforesaid, That there shall be allowed 4. d. per lib. out of every Twenty
shillings so paid for such collection.

FINIS.

