SERMONS On SPECIAL Occasions and Subjects, VIZ: An Answer to Pilate's
Question, What is Truth? Why Rulers and Judges are called Gods. That
Magistrates should be Exemplary in their Lives. How Ministers of the Gospel are
to Excel. That Decay of Trade is the Product of Vice. War Lawful and Necessary
on just Occasions. The Danger of Intestine Divisions. The Use and Abuse of
Apparel. That there are Mysteries in Christianity, etc.
By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. Sometime Fellow of St. John's College, in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, and John Wyat, at
the Rose, in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Earl of ORFORD, Viscount BARFLEUR, Baron of
SHINGEY, One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My LORD,
ALL true English men have their Eyes upon Your Lordship, as their Faithful
Patriot and Protector, as a Firm Lover of their Religion and Country; and they
all pay a profound Respect to that Illustrious Name, in which the Welfare of
the Nation is so much involved. We are every one of us sensible of those large
and manifest demonstrations which You have given us of Your Concern for the
Public Good in the late Happy Revolution. Your Heroic Enterprises, Your
constant Fatigues, Difficulties and Perils undergone for the Service of Your
Country, are the continual matter of our Admiration. We celebrate and applaud
Your never to be forgotten Engaging the French Navy; when their Admiral felt
the destructive force of your Martial Thunder, which You poured out so fast
upon him, and which produced a a Glorious Victory over the Insulting but Flying
Foe: the remembrance of which Great and Noble Achievement: Your Lordship bears
in Your Honorable Title. Which way so ever we look, whether at Sea or Land, we
find Your Lordship meriting in a most sig^al manner both of Church and State.
And Your near relation to ^his Grace the Duke of Bedford; whose Family has
been the Nursery of Patriots and Worthies, yea, and of Sufferers for the
Public Interest and Welfare, renders You a Person yet more Conspicuous in the
world. And lastly, That High Degree of Honor which Your Prince has advanced
You to, and that Eminent and Honorable Post Your Lordship is now in, make You
capable of being (what is so much desired by You) Beneficial not only to the
County You have a more particular Concern in, but to the whole Kingdom.

But I know Your Transcendent Modesty will scarcely suffer these things to be
said, and therefore I dare add no more. The design of this present Address to
Your Lordship, is, to express my Thankful and Dutiful Resentments of the
undeserved Favors cast upon me by Your Lordship, and to offer my sincere
Wishes and Prayers to Heaven for Your Health and Long Life, that You may live
in the favor of the Most High, and be blessed with His Divine Assistance, that
Success may crown all Your Worthy Undertakings; that You may continue to be
Happy in the Embraces of so Excellent and Accomplished a Lady as Heaven has
blessed You with; that You may be as instrumental in Preserving the Church and
State as You were in Restoring them, that You may long enjoy the Honor which
Your Merits have advanced You to, and the Happiness You have of possessing His
Majesty's Favor; and (in ^ word) that You may still be admired, honored and
loved by all his Subjects that are Wise and Religious.

And now, My Lord, permit me to beg an Extraordinary favor of You, but such as
I know Your Generosity will not disdain to grant, viz. that I may have the
honor to dedicate the following Papers to Your Lordship's Name: which as it
will give a Glory to them, so it will remain a Testimony (which is the thing I
design) of that Entire Service and Duty which I owe, and shall ever be owing to
Your Lordship. I have had Your Lordship in my eye ever since I have begun to be
a Writer, but I could not prevail with my self to make my Approaches of a
sudden to so Great a Personage; nor was I furnished with a Subject which was
suitable to Your Lordship's Genius. I forbore to trouble You with Criticisms
and Controversies, though of an important nature: but now when the Matters I
treat of are agreeable to so Noble and Exalted a Mind, I take the confidence to
make an Oblation of my Discourses to Your Lordship. And though You have
sometimes intimated Your averseness to see Your Name in Print, yet I presume to
prefix it to these Papers, which have the Sacred Writings (for which Your
Lordship has so great an Esteem) for their groundwork. On this account, I
hope they will not be unacceptable, notwithstanding their Meanness and
Faultiness otherwise. Finally, begging Your Lordship's Pardon for this Prolix
Trouble, I lay this Offering, with my self, at Your Lordship's Feet, and crave
the honor to be esteemed,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, Entire, and Devoted Servant, JOHN
EDWARDS.

THE PREFACE.
SEveral Years ago I was solicited by some of my Brethren of the Clergy, and
other Worthy Friends, who were pleased to entertain no ill opinion of some of
my Discourses which were delivered from the Pulpit, to make them more Public,
and to expose them to the General View: but I was at that time furnished with
such Reasons as would not permit me to give way to their importunity. But about
half a Year ago, being solicited afresh, I began to relent, and to comply with
such a Motion: For a Friend extorted these Papers from me by an Argument which
I was not able to resist, he assuring me, that Printed Sermons, or Practical
Discourses were called for by the generallity of Readers, and were in great
Esteem with them: which I looked upon as a Good Sign (I wish it were an
Infallible one) that they were intent upon Practice. I was heartily glad to
hear, that the World is in so good a temper, and thereupon I laid aside my
former Resolution, (for I had prepared Discourses of another nature for the
Press) and betook my self to the accommodating them with a Volume of Sermons,
whilst they were in so good a Vein, and relished matters of a Religious and
Practical nature. And I did this the rather, because having lately been
employed in asserting some of the Chief Articles of the Christian Faith, and in
animadverting on the Errors which are contrary to them, I was forced on that
account to be engaged in Cont^oversies and Debates: and therefore I take the
first Opportunity to let the world see, that I take no pleasure in Contests,
that I delight not in Insults and Philippicks, and that I prefer the Practical
part of our Holy Religion to the Disputes of it.

Having thus assigned the Occasion of my publishing these following Discourses,
I will in the next place give you a brief Account of them. In the first I have
endeavored to fix the Standards of Truth, and to show how they are to be
Applied, especially how the Scriptures (which are the Chief Standard and Rule)
are to be made use of in the searches and enquiries about Divine Truths. This
Discourse lays the Foundation for those which follow, for even the Sacred
Verities and Principles of our Religion have a tendency to Practice. The second
is of the Divine Authority of Rulers and Judges; wherein I have endeavonr'd to
Establish the Right and Jurisdiction of Civil Governors upon the sure basis of
Reason and Scripture, and thereon have grounded our Obedience to them, which is
an indispensable Law and Duty of the Christian Institution. But as we are to
obey Magistrates, so they are to do Homage to the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and to give proof of this Reverence and Submission by their Religious
and Holy Demeanor. Wherefore in the third place I have showed the absolute
Necessity of their being Exemplary in their lives, and of their surpassing
others in all Moral and Religious Actions. Next, I undertake to display the
Office of the Guides and Rulers of the Church, the Ministers of the Gospel, the
Public Instructors of Souls, and to show what Excellencies and Perfections
they ought to be Masters of, in order to their Edifying the Church of Christ.
Then, I descend to the more Particular Cases and Conditions of persons, and
show how necessary Religion and Virtue are to men of Traffic and Business in
the world, and that the Decay of Riches and Plenty in a Nation is to be
attributed to their Vicious Practices. Afterward, I represent to the Reader
that Extravagant Pride and Vanity of Apparel which are so conspicuous in this
Age, and with that Freedom which becomes a Dispenser of the Divine Oracles, I
set before the offenders the Sinfulness and Mischief of this Excess. Again, I
took occasion from the commencing of the late War to satisfy the Scrupulous
about the Lawfulness, yea and Necessity in some cases of going to War. And soon
after there was ground for another Discourse, viz. concerning the Causes of Ill
Success in Martial Affairs. And because it was requisite that whilst we were
engaging the Enemy abroad, there should be Peace at home, I impartially
represented the Mischievous and Pernicious Consequences of Intestine Broils and
Divisions in a Kingdom, and warmly Exhorted to Unity and Concord.

This is a brief View of Ten of the Sermons in this Volume: which are so mixed,
that there is no Degree or Quality of persons but will find themselves
concerned in the Subjects here treated of. Princes and Monarchs, Inferior
Rulers and Magistrates, Ecclesia^tical persons, and all others, whether public
or private, Civil or Military, Wealthy or Indigent, of the Manly or of the
Softer Sex, have their share in these Papers. As for the two last Sermons, they
had their birth from the two much prevailing Opinion of those men who deny,
that there are Mysteries in the Christian Religion. I strike only at that
General Doctrine, and wave all Set Reflections on Particular Persons or their
Attempts. The sum of my Undertaking here is this, I give a particular account
of the word Mystery as it is mentioned and understood in the New Testament:
more especially, I settle the true notion of that Term as it peculiarly
respects the present Case, and has reference to Christianity. I show upon what
Reasons and Grounds this doctrine of Mysteries is founded; I represent the
notorious Blemishes of the Contrary Opinion; and lastly, I intersperse such
proper Inferences as are the natural result of the respective Particulars.
Thus, though others have handled this Subject, I make it a Peculiar Province by
the particular way of my undertaking and managing it: which, whether it be done
aright, and to the satisfaction of the Learned and Pious, I leave to the Reader
to judge. But this only I am able to say, and that most sincerely, that I
designed what I have here written for the Vindication of the Cause of
Christianity, and for the Glory and Honor of its Divine Author. And this is
the Design of all my Writings, of what Subject soever I have already treated,
or shall hereafter treat.

Some perhaps may think I pour them in too fast upon the Reader, and don't keep
a due distance (such as they would have) between one book and another. I am so
Uncivil a Writer, that I will scarcely give the Reader time to breath. And
besides, it is a blemish to my Reputation, that I hereby give occasion to some
to censure me for being too Forward a man, and one that affects to appear often
in public view: and therefore they prudently advise to observe a Moderation,
and, according to the Rule of Husbandry, to lie Fallow some time. I thank these
Gentlemen for the care they pretend to have of the Reader and me: but I must
tell them, this good Advice of theirs belongs to those Novices, who want
Materials for a Scrible, though it be but a four-penny Cut; or those poor
starved souls that write for Bread, and clap all their Book, and sometimes more
than is in it, into the Title Page. Here the Counsel would be seasonable,
especially for the Readers Good, to be Temperate Writers. But if they will be
so Civil as not to rank me in the number of those forementioned persons, I
think I have enough to plead in behalf of the Frequency of my Writing. I could
support my self herein by very Good and Vnexceptionable Examples, half a douzen
of the Best Penmen we have at this day among us, two of the Learnedest Prelates
of our Church, who fail not every year to present the Learned with an Offering;
and their Teeming Thoughts are still designing to oblige the world in the same
manner. But waving Precedents, especially those which are too High for me, I
will justify my practice from the Reason and Equity of the Thing it self. I
hold it proper to offer s^me^ Truths to the world now, whilst I am able to
defend them against the Objections which some may think fit to make against
them, as I have in some part found it necessary to be done already: and I know
not why Truth may not be as Sharp as Error. Besides, some things are proper for
this Peculiar Age; and if they should be deferred, would prove Unseasonable. I
conceive our Skeptical Times require some such sort of Writings, as I have had
occasion to publish, more than any that were before, or perhaps ever will be.
Again, what I do is pursuant to my Character and Function, which exact a
Public Appearance, and an Open doing of good to mankind. For a Clergyman
should give an account of his Time to the World, as well as to God. Wherefore
being not engaged at present in the Employment of the Pulpit, I think my self
obliged in Conscience to ^^eak to the world from the Press, and to let my Pen
do the Office of my Tongue. And truly, why one should be a Crime, and not the
other, is unaccountable. Or rather, it is not much to be doubted, that those
men whom I have to do with at present, look upon both equally Culpable. Those
that blame my Intemperance in Writing, if I were in a public Station of the
Ministry, would find fault with my Preaching too much.

And Lastly, I desire to regulate my self and my undertakings by that Rule of
the Royal Preacher, Eccles. 9. 10. What thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy
Might: The Reason of which follows, For there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. This Present World is
the place of Action and Duty, and these are to be performed according to the
particular Capacities and Abilities bestowed upon us by our Great Benefactor.
The Proper Concern and Business of our Lives, which we design to discharge, we
must dispatch now, and that with our might and vigor. Accordingly I have taken
up a Resolution, by the Divine Aid, to do what Good I can with my Pen whilst I
can hold it, and make use of it. And surely this will not, this cannot be
offensive to any Good and Virtuous men: and to such I desire to give an account
of my Actions, and not to others. Wherefore I shall not be diverted by the
little Suggestions and seemingly prudential exceptions of the foresaid
Objections from a sedulous and continued applying my self to the forementioned
way of communicating my Thoughts to the world, which I hope will, through the
Blessing of the Highest, prove someways serviceable toward the advancing of
Truth and Piety in the minds and practices of men: though I am sufficiently
apprehensive how Mean and Unworthy my Labors are, and how much inferior to
those of my Reverend Brethren, and other Excellent Writers of this Age.

And, because I will be free and open with the Reader, I will give him his Bill
of Fare for the time to come. I design, God willing, to entertain him next with
a Large Discourse concerning the Different Dispensation of Religion, since the
beginning of the World to the Consummation of all things. It is a Work that I
have been designing for the Public a considerable time, but have not yet had
an Opportunity to send it abroad, by reason of some Other Treatises which were
called for. It is a Work, if I mistake not, that is exceeding necessary for the
right understanding the Books of the Holy Scripture, for apprehending the True
Scope and Design of them, for the discovering of the Grounds and Reasons of
God's Various Administrations to the World, and for the fully evincing of his
Peculiar Care of his Church in all Ages. I have also ventured to make a Modest
Enquiry into the Future State and Circumstances of the Church here on Earth;
but I have all along built my Assertions on the Discoveries which the Sacred
Writings have furnished me with; for it is certain, that the Great and
Wonderful things which are yet to come, and which are more Glorious than ever
yet appeared on the Stage, are predicted in the Inspired Volume, though the
Texts which speak of them have through prejudice and prepossession been
unhappily misinterpreted. This and some other Treatises, as an Impartial
Enquiry after Truth, and the Right Methods of finding it, etc. I intend as
Preliminary to a Body of Divinity: for that is the Undertaking I have been
accomplishing some years, and I have made some Progress in it. I purpose that
the Several Parts, of which it is composed, shall contain Particular and
Distinct Discourses on all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, on every one of
the Ten Commandments, on the seve^eral Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, and on
all the Virtues, Graces and Offices of Christianity, with all the Benefits and
Privileges of it. I intend a Large Supplement concerning the Five Points (as
they are commonly called) controverted between the Remonstrants and Calvinists:
as likewise concerning all those Opinions and Do^^rines which are debated
between the Romanists and the Reformed Churches.

This is the Provision which I have been making, and which I hope to finish,
unless it shall seem good to the All-wise Disposer, in whose hand my times are,
otherwise to determine concerning it and me. However, I cannot reasonably
expect the continuance of Health and the Prolonging of my days till I have
entirely published what I have thus prepared. But so far as I am able, I am
willing to make my own hands my Executors in part, and not to imitate those
Close-fisted persons, who whilst they are living distribute nothing of what God
has given them, but thrust all their good deeds to the other side of their
Graves. Or, if the Benign Deity should vouchsafe to add a greater number of
days to my Life, yet we Know not what evil shall be upon the earth: for truly,
when I place before me that Atheism, Debauchery and Profaneness, which are
observable in the Lives of the Worst, and the strange Indifferency and
Lukewarmness that reign in the Best, I Am inclined to think, that, though there
be a Period at present to the late Hostilities, yet we are in a very Dangerous
condition. Which is one principal reason of my making that Haste* which some, I
perceive, censure me for; it may be partly out of good will and pity toward
me, fearing lest I should Exhaust my self, and turn Bankrupt in a short time.
But I believe I have said enough to ease their fears as to that matter. And as
for others, whose Censure proceeds from a worser Principle, I let them know
once for all that I have devoted the residue of my Life to the Public Defense
and Advancement of Christianity, with all its Weighty Truths and Doctrines, and
all the Holy Duties and Practices that appertain to it. And I revere and adore
the Divine Bounty that has vouchsafed to entrust me with a small Stock, (such
as is suitable to my poor Abilities) to carry on so laudable a Design. I intend
it shall not lie dead, but be employed to the GLORY of the GREAT Eternal Donour.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. An Answer to Pilate's Question, What is Truth? A Sermon Preached
before King Charles the Second, at Newmarket. JOHN XVIII. 38. Pilate says unto
him, What is Truth? Page 1.

SERMON. II. Why Rulers and Judges are called Gods. A Sermon Preached before the
Judges, at the Assizes held at Cambridge. PSALM. LXXXII. 6, 7. I have said, Ye
are Gods: and all of you are the Children of the most High. But ye shall die
like Men, and fall like one of the Princes. Page 29^

SERMON. III. The Reasons why Magistrates ought to be Exemplary in their Lives. A
Sermon Preached at the Election of a Chief Magistrate, in a Corporation. EXODUS
XVIII. 25. And Moses chose able Men out of all Israel, and made them Heads over
the People P. 62.

SERMON. IV. How the Ministers of the Gospel are to Excel. A Sermon Preached
before the Clergy, at the Archdeacon of Ely's Visitation. 1 COR. XIV. 12.
Forasmuch as ye are zealous of Spiritual Gifts, seek that ye may excel to the
Edifying of the Church. P. 92.

SERMON. V. That Decay of Trade and Commerce, and consequently of Wealth, is the
Natural Product and Just Penalty of Vice in a Nation. A Sermon Preached at the
Proclaiming and Opening of a Great Fair. EZEKIEL. XXVII. 27. Thy Riches, and thy
Fairs, and thy Merchandise, thy Mariners, and thy Pilots, thy Calkers, and the
Occupiers of thy Merchandise, and all thy Men of War that are in thee, and in
all thy Company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall in the midst of the
Seas in the Day of thy Ruin P. 133

SERMON. VI. The Lawfulness and Necessity of Going to War, on Just Occasions. A
Sermon occasioned by the Proclaiming of the War against France. GENESIS XVIII. 14.
And when Abram heard that his Brother was taken Captive, be armed his trained
Servants, born in his own House, Three Hundred and Eighteen, and pursued them
unto Dan Page 160

SERMON. VII. The true Causes of the Ill Success of War. A Sermon Preached on a
Fast Day, appointed by Their Majesty's, for the Imploring God's Blessing on
their Forces by Sea and Land. JOSH. VII. 12. Therefore the Children of Israel
could not stand before their Enemies, but turned their Backs before their
enemies, because they were accursed: Neither will I be with you any more,
except you destroy the Accursed thing from amongst you Page 192

SERMON. VIII. The Extreme Danger of Intestine Divisions in a Kingdom. A Sermon
Preached before Sir John Ho^blon late Lord Mayor and Alderman, at Guild Hall
Chapel. MARK III. 24. And if a Kingdom be divided against it self, that
Kingdom cannot stand P. 225

SERMON. IX, X. The Use and Abuse of Apparel. In Two Sermons, occasioned by the
present Excess in that kind. 1 TIMOTHY II. 8, 9. I will that Women adorn
themselves in modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and Sobriety: Not with
broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array Page 257

SERMON. XI. Christianity Mysterious. A Sermon, showing the true Meaning and
Acception of the word Mystery in Scripture: and why the Christian Religion is
called a Mystery; occasioned by some late Socinian Writings, which Explode all
Christian Mysteries. 1 TIMOTHY III. 16. And without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness Page 328

SERMON. XII. Christianity Mysterious. A Sermon, showing that there are Mysteries
properly so called in the Christian Religion: With the true Reasons of it, and
the Natural Consequences from it. Preached before the University, at St.
Mary's, in Cambridge, June 29. 1697. and since much Enlarged. 1 TIMOTHY III. 16.
And without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness. P. 365

ERRATA.
Page 11. l. 14. r* Monstrous. p. 19. l. 27. r. of Truth. p. 92. l. ult. dele
were. p* 142. l. 4. r. thence. p. 171. l. 20. r. one. p. 176. l. 12. after
Blood inse^t a (...)-point. p. 178. l. 1. for on, r. to. p. 262. l. 2. r. there
for their, and their for the. p. 268. l. 1. dele were. l. 17. r. (...). p. 269.
l. ult. r. Muliebri. p. 271. l. 12. r. restrained. p. 278. l. 5. r. gorgeous.
p. 279. l. 2. r. exotic. p. 289. l. 18. r. supercilious. p. 304. l. 7. r.
altum. p. 322. l. 8. r. Viands. p. 345. l. 22. before which insert v. 9. p.
351. l. 5. r. things as the Spirits cleansing and. p. 380. l. 10. r. give it.
p. 389. l. 7. r. rarities. With other Faults in the Greek and Latin, which the
Reader is desired to correct.

An Answer to Pilate's Question, What is Truth?
A Sermon Preached before King Charles II. at Newmarket.
JOHN XVIII. 38. Pilate says unto him, What is Truth?
ONE Signal Circumstance of our Savior's Meritorious Passion, was That which
we daily rehearse in the Creed, That he Suffered under Pontius Pilate. And
truly from the Character which is given this Person, not only by the
Evangelists but Other Writers, he appears to have been a Fit Man for that
Execrable work of Condemning the Lord of Life. For who was more so than the
Covetous and Greedy Pilate, who attempted to Rob the Temple, and Sacrilegiously
to Rifle the Corban (as Josephus relates)? Who could be Fitter than He to
receive a Bribe from the Jews, and even against his Conscience to deliver up
the Messiah a Victim to their fury and malice? Who than He, who had inhumanly
mingled the Galileans Blood with their Sacrifices, was Fitter to be employed
when the Great Sacrifice of the World was to be offered, and when Jesus of
Galilee (from whom his followers were called Galileans) was to give his Blood
for the Redemption of Mankind? But though this Man was thus fitly Disposed and
Prepared for his Work, yet the Bloody Sentence against our Savior was not to
be pronounced by him without the Preamble of a Formal Arraignment and Trial.
And accordingly the Innocent Jesus was set to the Bar; and this Roman Governor
took the Bench: where (as you will find by the Context) this Judge was full of
his Interrogatories, and propounded several, and those not Inconsiderable
Questions. But among them all there was none certainly that was in it self more
Substantial and Useful than this, What is Truth?

And it was as Pertinent as it was Weighty: for it was justly occasioned by our
Lord's Plea and Protestation in Court, viz. That, notwithstanding the malicious
Jews had Accused him as an Impostor, yet to This end he was born, and for ^his
cause he came into the world, that he might (...) ^itness to the Truth, v. 37.
As if our Savior had said, Whereas Error and Falsehood have (...) a long time
in the World, and the (...) have miserably perverted the Law of Nature, and
great numbers of them have been spoiled through their Philosophy and vain
Deceit: And likewise among you Jews, the Meaning of God's Written Law is
depraved by the Corrupt Doctrines of the Superstitious Pharisees and Profane
Sadducees, (the former a sort of Hebrew Stoics, the later a kind of Jewish
Epicures and Atheists:) and you are divided into several Other Disagreeing
Sects and Schools, and go on daily to corrupt and stifle the True Notions of
Morality and Religion, and even utterly to take away the Key of Knowledge and
Truth: Whereas things are Thus, The Great Design of my Visiting mankind is of a
Contrary nature; namely, to lead them to Right Apprehensions of things, to
baffle all Error and Delusion, and to direct them most effectually into the way
of Truth. And every one that is of the Truth hears my voice, v. 37. that is,
Those who are Competent Judges and Sincere Lovers of Truth, will soon descry My
Doctrine to be fraught with the Highest and most Important Verities; and will
embrace it as the Greatest Blessing that was ever vouchsafed to the World.

Pilate hearing our Savior discourse of Truth, puts this Question to him in
the Text. It is Luther's Conjecture that he did it out of Kindness to our Lord;
for Pilate (says he Colloqu. Men^al.
) being a worldlywise man, and willing to rel^ase Christ* did as much as say to
him, What? will thou dispute concerning TRUTH in these Wicked. Times of the
World? TRUTH is here of no value: it is generally despised and rejected. You
must think of some Other way, for This will not do. Alas, What is TRUTH worth?
and what are you like to get by abetting it? But I rather think that Pilate
asked This Question in Contempt and Derision, I pray, Sir, What is the Right
Definition of Truth? Do you pretend to understand the Exact Notion of it? I
must tell you This, Friend, Men are as much Mistaken about This as Any thing in
the World; and I believe You are One of that number. You talk of Truth, but do
you know What it is? And as soon as he had started this Query he went off the
Bench.

By which it appears, that his Enquiry was not Serious; and that he Cared not
for a Reply to it. Otherwise, if he had been in Good Earnest, without doubt our
Savior would not have failed to return an Answer. For he was a Person
extremely Communicative, and used to satisfy all Material Questions to the
Full, yea above what was demanded: As when a Lawyer asked him, What was the
First Commandment, he told him moreover what was the Second, which was like
unto it. So when it was asked him, Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or no?
His Answer was more than Satisfactory; for he not only acquaints them that they
ought to pay Caesar his Tribute; but he adds also, that God's as well as Cesar's
Dues are to be discharged. It is not to be doubted, that He who was so Ready at
all times to Satisfy Men's Demands, would have returned an Answer to This of
Pilate, if this Great Man would have Stayed for it.

But though Pilate went away in Haste, I hope it will be worth our Time to
Stay, and Satisfy our selves about This Question of so unspeakable Use and
Value; a Question which is every ways Necessary in order to the Resolving of
the Scruples of the Conscientious, and Silencing the Cavils of the Atheistical
and Profane; a Question whereon the whole Frame and Constitution of Religion
depends; a Question of the Greatest Importance next to That, What shall we do
to be Saved? Or rather, it is of the Same rank with it; for (as the Apostle
has joined them together) God would have all Men to be Saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth.

But an Other Question then will arise, How shall we come to the Knowledge of
the Truth? Are we not on every side beset with Mistakes and False Notions? Was
not Error very Early in the World; and does it not bear Date from Adam? I have
not Examined whether that be True which One says, D^. Brown's Vulg. E^r. l. 1.
c. 2.
That there is but One Speech delivered before the Flood by Man, wherein there
is not an Erroneous Conception. But this is certain, that Mistake and Falsehood
entered into the World betimes; and that ever since a Night of Ignorance has
overspread our Minds, and our Judgments are involved in a Cloud of Obscurity
and Imperfection. In Cebes's Table, which represents Man's Life, Imposture
gives her Cup to all that come into the World. Error and Ignorance are the
Potion; and every one Drinks of it: but some more and some less. Hence it is
that Pretenses and Appearances of Reason cozen us; Imperfect Argumentations and
Superficial Discourses easily determine us. A Petty Inducement, a Weak
Likelihood, a Plausible Harangue, are enough to Turn the Scales with us, and
Weigh heavier sometimes than a Demonstration. Hence it is that Truth is so Rare
a thing in the World. We may justly complain as He of old, (...).
It is Difficult to find out True Reason. Or, we may cry out as Hermias the Old
Christian Philosopher did, (...).
Truth has abandoned, and taken its farewell of the World. How then shall we
hope to have this Question assoil'd, and to know, What is Truth?

Nay, We are in as bad Circumstances as before, and Pilate's Demand is as far
from being Answered as it was; for as the Sceptick doubts of all Truth, yea,
indeed, denies it; so on the other hand we see, that All Parties of Religion in
the World pretend that they are Masters and Possessors of it. Before there was
No Truth, and now All is Truth. If you ask, what it Truth? you shall not want
whole Herds of Men who will come and offer their Service to you, and with all
Officiousness will tell you, that they are able to Resolve you in such an Easy
Question as That is. Truth takes up its Residence with Us, say the Paga^
Worshipers: Our Numerous Deities and their Idols, have been vouched by Oracles
and Divinations, and all the ways that are requisite to make a Religion
Authentic. We are the Parents of Orthodox Faith, say the Jews, and all the
rest of the World are Bewildered and Lost, being destitute of a Pillar of Light
to lead them. Alas, they are inveloped in Egyptian Darkness, and must continue
to be so till they take Moses for their Only Guide to bring them out of it. But
then again, Neither Gentiles nor Jews are in the right, say the Followers of
Mahomet, who yet was the Son of a Pagan Father and a Jewish Mother. The Alcoran
is the True Charter of our Religion; and who can suspect it, since our Prophet
received it from the Angel Gabriel? We are the True Musselmen, i.e. Believers,
and all Others are downright Infidels and Miscreants. Nay, even among Those who
profess Christianity (for out of the Best and Purest Religion will arise the
Worst of Corruptions and Heresies) the Parties and Divisions, the Disputes and
Claims are not a few. Truth is but One, and yet they All think they Monopolize
it. Every Sect is Eager and Violent; and some of them Confine All Religion and
Salvation to their Own Way. Nay, they are for Persecuting all Parties but their
Own; like the Ottoman Princes, they must Strangle all their Brethren, otherwise
they think they cannot Reign safely. Ask the Different Parties, even from the
Highest to the Lowest, from the Old Gentleman that sits in the Porphyry Chair,
to the meanest Quaker or Muggletonian, and they will all tell you they are in
possession of the Truth. Every Persuasion has this of Popery in it, that the
Professors of it think themselves Infallible, and say they have an Unerring
Guide; and therefore they take the Chair, and Determine Peremptorily on their
Own Sides. Even whilst some cry, This is False, and others That; if you ask
them singly, they all say they are in the Right; and every one confidently
vouches that he is Proprietor of Truth. It seems by This, that Truth is Equally
divided among All Men; or rather indeed, that the Opinion of it is so. And
hence it is probable, that Skepticism and Indifferency in Religion have had
their Rise; for too Lavish Pretenses to Truth have made some question whether
there be Any. The Diverse Claims and Quarrels in Christianity have wonderfully
fostered Atheism. For whilst it has been observed that Divinity has every
where become Polemical; and that Men have thrown Bibles at one another Heads,
whilst it has been cried in their Ears that here is Truth, and there is Truth,
they have grown Perplexed and Distracted, and know not how to behave
themselves, and What Part to take. They hear that the Claim to Truth is
Universal; but then they know This, that All the Pretenses to it cannot be
True, and How, say they, if None of them should be so? Hereupon they renounce
Religion as a Faction, and in plain terms a Cheat, and consequently they Live
and Act in the World as they Please. If Truth be claimed by All the Professors
of Religion, and those Professors Contradict one another, Where shall we find
an Answer to This Interrogatory, What is Truth?

In way of Reply it is enough to say at present (for I shall answer a great
part of these Cavils afterward in the sequel of this Discourse) 1. These
Several Divisions and Parties evidently prove a True Religion: For it is
certain, that Rational Men would not Contend for Nothing. Unless there were
some Reality at the bottom, we cannot imagine that Persons of unprejudiced
Minds and sincere Intentions (as we must allow a great Part of them to be)
would thus seriously busy themselves, and be so mightily concerned. 2. Some
Men's fond and groundless Pretenses ought not to be equalled with the Just
Claims of others. As long as the World continues in this degenerate posture
where it is, there will ever be a great number of men who will be pretending to
Truth, even whilst they are maintaining those Doctrines which are directly
opposite to it: Therefore we are not to concern our selves for these
Pretenders, only so far as to slight them as Persons governed by Interest or
Passion, or to pity them as those who are misled by Ignorance or Prejudice. 3.
As for the generality of Disputes which are at this day on foot, Religion, and
particularly the Christian Religion (I mean the Essentials and Vitals of it,
which give it its denomination) are little, or not at all concerned in those
Quarrels, as will appear from what I shall suggest anon; and therefore I shall
say no more here. But (notwithstanding what has been objected) I will go on
with my present design, which is an Inquest after Truth: and I hope the attempt
will not prove vain and succesless.

That we may certainly find it out, those Two known, but too much neglected
Rules or Standards are to be made use of by us, viz. Reason and Scripture. By
Reason I mean the free and impartial use of our Understandings and Judgments
which God has naturally endued us with, and which we are obliged to improve
and cultivate by the aid of our Bodily Senses, by the Testimony of others, by
serious and steady Observation and well-grounded Experience, for these must be
assisting to Humane Reason to render it perfect and complete. If thu^ we would
apply our selves to a serious search after Truth, we should soon make our
selves Masters of it: For the Candle of the Lord (as Solomon very significantly
calls the Reason of Man) was set up in our Breasts by God, on purpose to
discover Truth to us.

But it must be acknowledged, that this Light has been much impaired by Man's
Degeneracy, so that it can scarcely be said to Shine out; i.e. perfectly to
display it self. It has been Clouded ever since the First Apostasy, and
obscured daily by the actual Prevalency of Vice. An undeniable Evidence whereof
were those swarms of monsterous Opinions among the Pagans, that gross
Superstition and Idolatry of the Gentile World, those prodigious Shapes and
Models of Religion which were invented by them. Oftentimes it happened, that
the Creature made and framed his Creator; they shaped out Deities* and the way
of Worshipping them according to their own Fancies and Imaginations; and a God
was even what they thought good to make him. Or, suppose Natures Light did
shine out to the full, yet it would not be Clear and Bright enough, to give us
a Prospect of those Divine and Supernatural Truths, which are to bring us to
Everlasting Happiness. For Nature and Reason cannot Dictate those things which
depend wholly on God's Free Grace and Pleasure: And such are the Doctrine of a
Savior and Redeemer, the Method of Man's Salvation, and all the Mysteries of
the Christian and Evangelical Dispensation. How was Nicodemus (a Noted Master
in Israel, and no mean Possessor of Reason) baffled with the Doctrine of
Regeneration? He might truly be said to go to Jesus by Night, who made his
Visit only by the dusky and obscure Light of Nature. Therefore, though Reason, or
rather the Understanding using its reasoning Faculty, be a laudable Guide in
Religion, yet it will not be a safe Conduct to Truth if it be alone. There must
of necessity be another Guide besides this, to lead us to the Discovery of
Heavenly Verities, and Propositions of Faith. There must be Divine Illumination
to assist us, to find out Divine and Spiritual Truths.

The Second Standard then of Truth is, the Infallible Word of God. Divine
Truths must be sought for, not from Man, but from God; not from Human Writings,
but an Unerring Word; not from those who are Finite and Ignorant, but from Him
who is Infinite, and knows all Things; not from the Sons of Men, but from Him
who is the only-begotten Son of God, the Revealer of his Father's Will: For [
No man has seen God at any time: the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him,] as the beloved Disciple bears witness,
John 1. 18. None is able to discover the Divine and Supernatural Mysteries
which our Religion is fraught with, but the Founder of them. U^ D^us
Cognos^atur, ex Deo fit. Prosper de Vocat. Gent. l. ^. c. 24.
We could never have arrived to those Transcendent Notions, unless we had been
taught them from Heaven. We were not skilled to appoint the Manner of Appeasing
the incensed Majesty of Heaven, and to prescribe the Way of Worship suitable to
that Economy. This would have been as if it should be left to some silly
Country Peasant, to assign the Way and Manner of Treating a Mighty King and
Monarch; Who would not expect in such a case a strange and uncouth, a rude and
ridiculous Way of Address and Courtship, and below the Greatness and Majesty of
a Prince? But it was requisite there should be a particular Divine Discovery, a
clearer Light, a surer Guide than that of Nature: For though God at sundry
times, and in diverse manners had Revealed himself to the past Generations of
Men, yet to make that Revelation complete, he spoke in the last days by his
Son, and by the Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the inspired Writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists. Christ therefore says, and that Emphatically, I am
the Truth, John 14. 6. The Gospel was the last and most corrected Edition of
the Doctrine of Truth; and we must never look for any other to come forth to the
End of the World. This is Truth more eminently so called, (...)
The Truth which came by Jesus Christ, as the Blessed Evangelist speaks. This
is the Christian Truth, Our singular Glory whereby We are distinguished from
all those who profess any other Religions whatsoever, whether of the
Unbelieving Jews, or the Idolatrous Gentiles, or the Deluded Saracens and
Turks, or downright Atheists, and others of a like Perverse Persuasion. These
all Err, especially the three first Ranks of Men, by not knowing or not
embracing the Scriptures; which are deservedly styled, Col. 1. 5. 2. Tim. 2. 15.
The Word of Truth, and are the only supreme Rule of Faith and Doctrine. We
then, who embrace this Christian Rule, are Blessed with that Institution which
is Pure and Undefiled, which is grounded on undoubted Revelation, which is
backed by a more sure Word of Prophecy, which has a divine Impress stamped
upon it. So that Our Religion as far surmounts all Others, as the Gold which
has passed the Refiners Fire, and has the Royal Stamp upon it, outbids the
common Ore, and shames its Dross and meaner Alloy.

You see then which are the unalterable Standards of Truth, viz. Reason and
Revelation, the Light of Nature and of Scripture. And I dare confidently aver,
that if our Enquiries and Determinations in Religion were faithfully managed by
these two, it were impossible to fail of Truth. If we would but act thus as Men
and Christians (and that is as we ought to do) we cannot miss of it: For it is
certainly the Purchase of all those who make a right Use of their Rational
Powers, and also help and direct those Powers by the Revelation of the Sacred
Spirit in the Holy Scriptures. By these two we may examine the Truth of the
Whole Christian Religion, and we shall find that it will abide the Test. By
these Standards of Truth we may examine the Doctrins of all Seducers that are
abroad in the World, and we shall find them to be False and Adulterate. If we
would sincerely follow these Rules, the great Diversity of Opinions and
Sentiments amongst us would soon be reconciled: If we would faithfully take
these Measures, i.e. always be Ruled and Conducted by Reason and Scripture, we
should easily agree upon what is to be believed and asserted in Religion; and
all our Disputes and Controversies would vanish.

Now, from what has been hitherto Discoursed, we may in some good measure be
able not only to return an Answer to Pilates Question, What is Truth? but to
another near a kin to it, viz. What is Error and Falsehood? All Propositions
which contradict the common Notices and first Principles in our Minds, and
which affront right Reason and the plain Deductions made from it, are to be
looked upon as False: And on the same account those Assertions which overthrow
the Verdict of our Senses; and much more those that imply Contradictions in
them, and consequently Impossibilities, cannot be True. And on These Grounds I
might show that the Divinity of some High-flown Enthusiasts, and the Doctrine of
the Roman Catholics concerning Transubstantiation, are justly to be impeached
of Falsehood.

Again, whatsoever Assertions in any Religion are repugnant to Divine
Revelation, to God's Will declared by some Positive Law, to such Discoveries as
are known to be immediately from Heaven, these must necessarily be False. And
on this Ground the Religion of the Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans must be voted
to be such, because they oppose an Infallible Revelation, and That confirmed by
unparallelled Miracles. And semblably in Christianity, all those Tenants of
several Sects, which bid defiance to any part of the Sacred Scripture, which is
left us by the Holy Ghost, as the generality of the Roman Opinions, the
Doctrins of Pelagians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Libertines,
Quakers, Hobbians, etc. are False and Erroneous.

Thus far then, by virtue of the Premises, we have advanced, that when there
are several Claims and Pretenses to Truth, and it is enquired, What Judge shall
decide the Controversy, the Answer must be, That Right Reason and Inspired
Scripture are the only Judges, they being the fixed Standards and Measures of
Truth.

But then here will lie the main Difficulty of all, that in the Questions and
Debates of Religion, Scripture is quoted with equal Vigor and Confidence on all
Sides; as if what the Jewish Rabbis say of Scripture, That it has Seventy-two
Faces, were the received Opinion of Christians. Nay, some of these seem to
acknowledge, by their strange way of Interpreting it, That it has not only
different, but contrary Aspects. When therefore there are Disputes about
Scripture-Interpretation, What must we do? How can we discern what is Truth by
Consulting of Scripture, when as that is Dubious and Uncertain? If contrary
Sects and Parties quote it, and plead it, how can it be a fixed Standard of
Truth? How is it an unerring Guide?

It might suffice to say in General, That it is no wonder that all Opinionists,
even the Wildest of them, make use of Scripture; yea, a great Part of the Turks
Alcoran is express Words of the Bible. It is no wonder, I say, since Scripture
was quoted by Satan himself, who, when he Tempted our Savior, misapplied it to
the vilest Purpose. But particularly, to satisfy this Great and Affrighting
Difficulty, we may inform our selves that in Religion there are Five Sorts of
Enquiries and Doctrines. Now, I will briefly show how Scripture is to be made
use of, and when it is fit to Apply it to any of these Particulars.

I. Some Points of our Religion are in themselves Mystical and Profound; and
the Sacred Writings having not Explained them, it cannot be expected that we
should ever do it. Such Difficult and Sublime Doctrines as the Mystery of the
Sacred Trinity (i.e. a Trinity of Divine Persons in the Unity of the Godhead)
the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in One Person, the Manner of the
Resurrection, and the like, are not to be thoroughly known by us as long as we
sojourn on Earth.

These are like the Book in the Revelation, Rev. 5. 3, 6.
which none is able to open in Heaven or in Earth, but the Lamb. And seeing he
is not pleased to Unfold them to us, we must Admire and Adore them, but not be
sollicitous to Comprehend them. We are to remember this, that some Things must
be believed on the mere Authority of the Speaker, and it argues Infidelity to
question the Truth of them, or so much as to be Inquisitive about them. The
Things are spoken by God, therefore we ought to give Credit to them: The Manner
and Circumstances of them are not discovered, therefore I Am obliged not to pry
into them. This was the Sense and Practice of the Primitive Christians, as we
may learn from Origin, who tells us, That the believing some Articles of Faith
on the bare Authority of the Scriptures, was objected to the Christians by the
Heathens: Their Complaint against them was, That they would neither give nor
receive a Reason of their Faith, but were wont to cry out, (...). Cont. Celf.
l. ^.
Examine not, but believe.

Here likewise I may rank some Insuperable Problems concerning the Divine
Decrees and Predestination, the Abstruseness of which forbids a curious and
close Enquiry. But This is most true, That Modesty is the most commendable
Virtue here. The^doret says well, (...). 4 Quaest. in Genes.
I think it Boldness to pronounce peremptorily concerning those Things of which
the Sacred Scripture delivers nothing plainly. God was not pleased to deliver
all things with equal Evidence; and why then should we undertake to make every
Thing Plain and Demonstrable? Or, why are we Angry if others think some things
are not so? Those Words which I meet with in one of St. Ierom's Epistles are
Admirable, and are worth the Observation of those, especially, who are Students
of Divinity. Nihil aliud ni^^ nugas tenemus, and f^nte veritatis amisso
opinionum titulos consectamur, cum quae Deus occulta nobis e^se vol^it, nimia
curiositate perscrutamur.
When we search (says he) with too much Nicety and Curiosity into those things
which God would not have us know, but has purposely concealed from us, we
catch only at Shadows, we entertain and busy our selves with Trifles, we quit
the Fountain Truth, and run after the fruitless Streams of mere Opinion and
Fancy. Let us fix this on our Minds, That there are some unsearchable
Mysteries, and it was designed by the All-Wise God that we should not be
acquainted with them. We may say here, as Not. Qu.
Seneca concerning the Nature of Comets, God only, whose sole Prerogative is to
have a perfect Knowledge of Truth, knows these things to be true, and the very
manner of them, though it be hid from us. When we peremptorily say this or that
concerning these obscure Matters, we may Err, and we cannot tell when we do;
but when we determine nothing precisely (above what is determined in Scripture)
we are sure we do not Err; and we are sure of this too, that we are not guilty
of Distorting and Misinterpreting the Word of God; which is a Fault very
frequent in these Cases.

To conclude this Particular, Let not weak Christians be troubled that there
are several Passages in the Bible which they cannot clearly understand. I
assure them, that they may be Ignorant of the full meaning and manner of them,
and yet their Salvation is not endangered thereby. And as to our Deportment
toward others, with respect to these Points, seeing we cannot perfectly
explain them, why should we be Angry at those who embrace a different
Persuasion concerning the manner of these things?

II. Many things in Religion are made difficult merely by Disputes and
Quarrels; and if the Holy Scriptures were Plainer than they are, yea never so
Plain, yet Wrangling Heads would fall a Disputing, and make way for Error by
that means. And here it is their way commonly to make use of one or two places
of Scripture, and to oppose them against a whole heap of other Texts. The old
Heretics (those Interfectores V^ritatis, as Tertullian calls them, those
Murderers and Assasines of Truth) frequently used this way. Proprium hoc est
omnium Haereticorum: Nam quia Pauca sunt quae in silva inveniri possunt, Pauca
adversus Plura defendunt. Tertull. adv. Praxeam.
A few Texts, yea sometimes a single one, shall serve to baffle a great number.
It might be showed in particular Instances, how Erroneous Doctrines are
grounded on some Men's attending to one or a very few Places of Scripture,
whil^t in the mean time they take no notice of several and diverse Texts which
look another way. Nay, not only a few Texts, but those also which are very dark
and obscure, difficult and knotty, are oftentimes weilded and managed against
very plain and direct Places of Scripture. This was observed by that Learned
Father Solenne est Haereticis alicujus (...) ancipitis (...) adversus exercitum
sententiarum Inst^^m^nti totiu^ (...) Tertull. de Pudiciti^.
whom I last mentioned; One Chapter (says he) in the Bible where some
Ambiguous Words are, is brought by them to Confront a numerous Company and Host
of Texts. But this is an Indirect Method; for it is most Just and Reasonable
that a few Places of Scripture should yield to many, obscure ones to the
plainer, doubtful to the certain; that Those should be judged and decided by
These, not vice versa; that so amidst this seeming Discord and Discrepancy, our
Belief may not be shaken, and that the Truth may not be endangered, and that
the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scriptures may not be thought to be
Inconsistent with its self, as that Excellent Person Utique aequum incerta de
certis, and obscura de manifestis praejudicari, ne inter discordiam certorum
and incertorum, manifestorum and obscurorum fides dissipetur, Veritas
periclitetur, ipsa Divinitas ut inconstans denotetur. Tertull. de Resurrectione.
says in another Place. It is an useful Rule therefore of St. Austin, Ad
obscuriores locutiones illustrandas de Manifestiori^us sumantur exempla, and
quaedam Certarum Sententiarum testimonia dubitationem de Incertis ^uferant. Aug
de D^^^rin. Christian^, l. 2. c. 9.
To explain obscure Places of Scripture, let us use the Assistance of those
that are plainer; and by the Certainty and Clearness of some, let the
Doubtfulness of others be taken away. This may be serviceable to us when we
read the Scriptures, and when we would be satisfied about some Controversies
which arise thence. But alas, this Holy Book is Ruffled and Entangled by wilful
Mistakes and Disputes, wherein it is common to Wrest the Words, and to Oppose
one part of them to another, instead of Adjusting the whole Matter by a fair
Reconcilement. To Instance, Nothing is Plainer in the Book of God than this,
That he has fully Decreed and Predetermined whatever shall come to pass; and
Nothing is more Plain in the said Holy Volume than this, That Man is a free
Agent, and is not Constrained and Compelled, but what he wills he wills
freely. All sober Persons agree in these, and therefore this ought to be a
Ground of mutual Concord and Reconciliation. But instead of this, some raise
Disputes still, and whereas we are agreed that both these are True and
Consistent, viz. God's Decree, and Man's Freedom, they will ask, How this can
be? And if you do not satisfy them as to this (which it is utterly Impossible
perhaps to do) they will show themselves very much displeased. Which argues
that they are of a quarrelsom Temper, and delight in Wrangling, and make use of
Scripture for that purpose in the most serious and weighty Doctrines.

III. It happens by the Luxuriancy of busy Brains, that many Enquiries in
Religion are Nice and Subtle, Overcurious and Trifling; and as for these, they
are below the Verdict of Holy Scripture. It began to be a matter of Wit to be a
Christian (as Eras^us.
One observes) about the days of Constantine the Great: So soon had they
learned to be Quaint in their Divinity, and that about the highest Points of
it. And other subtle Heads since that time (such were most of the Schoolmen)
have troubled the World with their Fruitless Speculations, their Foolish and
Unlearned Questions, their Fond and Sapless Notions. And these, and others
added to them, are called Truths by some Persons; but indeed, they are not
worthy of that great Name. A Man may be Ignorant of a thousand of them, and yet
not Impair his Knowledge. To make use of Holy Scripture here, is to be serious
in the midst of Trifles, and (which is worse) to Profane that Holy Book. The
same Judgment may be made of many (not to say most) of the Questions propounded
and handled by the Roman Casuists, which are of no moment or use at all, nay
they are very hurtful and pernicious, because they distract Men's Minds, instead
of directing them; and yet they are very warmly controverted, as if they were
the most serious and important Truths.

IV. There are some Propositions in our Religion which are Disputable and
Probable on both Sides: And in these doubtful Cases to hear Persons of
different Judgments cite the same Passages of Holy Writ, should not give
Offense to any. Because that Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound, I see no reason
why the Parties should prepare themselves for Battle, and Dispute with so much
Fierceness and Rage, as generally they do. I cannot sufficiently Admire and
Commend the excellent Candor and Moderation of the first Pious Reformers of Our
Church, who in such Articles as are Dubious and Disputable have not showed
themselves Stiff and Peremptory, Rigid and Magisterial, have not wound up the
Strings too high, lest they should mar the Harmony and Peace of the Church.
But where the Arguments are deemed to be Equal on both Sides, they have allowed
us an ingenuous Freedom, and permit us to make use of our own Judgments; and
yet at the same time severely and indispensably urge upon us all Articles that
are of the Foundation, and which are certainly known to be True. And this
brings me to the

Fifth and Last Rank of Principles in our Holy Religion; and they are
Fundamental and Necessary, and of the very Essence of Christianity: Of which
sort are the Doctrines of Man's Corruption and Degeneracy, of the Reparation
made by Christ the Redeemer, of Forgiveness and Justification by his Blood,
etc. with all those substantial Articles of Faith comprised in the Creed, which
goes under the Name of the Apostles. These are the Christian Verities, and
these are clear and manifest in God's Word, and have plain Evidence of
Scripture, and are agreed upon by all Sober and Considerate Persons who have
not renounced the Christian Profession. Here it is that we have the greatest
Use and Guidance of Scripture; and for that plain Direction which it gives us
in these, we are to Prize and Value it as the Richest Treasure, nay; as the
Only Treasure in the World: For from this Inspired Book alone we have these
Heavenly and Divine Doctrines; they were originally in no other Writings in the
World but these. Wherefore let us look upon these grand Truths as the main and
necessary Contents of the Bible, and as the Matters which we are indispensably
concerned in. As for those Texts which are Obscure and Difficult, or which
relate not to Faith or Manners, and consequently are not necessary to be known,
let us not be displeased that we cannot reach the meaning of them. Let it not
seem strange that Interpreters vary here, and cannot agree about the Sense of
these Places. St. Ierom upon the Place says thus, St. Augustine otherwise, and
St. Chrisostom varies from both; and it may be a fourth differs from these; and
a fifth comes and diffents from them all. This does not offend me in the least,
for where the Scripture speaks of things that are Abstruse, or speaks in an
obscure and dark manner, it is not strange that we have not a clear and plain
discovery of those Passages, and consequently that those Writers who have
treated of them differ in their Expositions. Let not this trouble us, for it
was God's Will there should be these Difficulties in Scripture, and he has not
made it necessary for us to have the certain sense and meaning of these Places.
But this should satisfy us, that whatever is necessary to Salvation is plainly
revealed, declared and written in the Old and New Testament; and that the
Knowledge of this alone is absolutely necessary.

This then is that which I say, that if Christian Men would read the Bible, to
learn thence these undoubted Principles* and their indispensable Duty, and not
to furnish themselves with Matter of Dispute, they would be the happiest People
under Heaven, and be no longer Scandalous to the greater (which is the
Unbelieving) Part of the World, by their Dissentions and Disagreements. O when
will that Blessed Day come when Rectified and Unbiassed Reason, and the plain
Arbitrament of Scripture shall decide the Controversies in Christendom! If
these were once admitted as Impartial Umpires, they would make short Work of
all the Quarrels about Religion, namely, by pronouncing Many of them to be vain
Janglings, and Most of them Unreasonable and Absurd; by assuring the Christian
World, That if they would lay aside Prejudice, and Interest, and
Vile-Affections, nothing would appear so Clear and Evident and Undisputable as
the Fundamental Doctrines abovenamed; and that all who name the Name of Christ
are obliged to Embrace and Profess these necessary and unquestionable Maxims,
and that they ought to be Wary and Modest in their Determinations concerning
other Propositions which are uncertain; and that in Matters which are
Indifferent and Circumstantial, it is Reasonable that they should either
conform themselves to the Practice of the Church they live in, or mutually
agree to bear with one another.

Where then is there any place left for Uncharitable Disputes, and Unchristian
Animosities? No where certainly, but where mere Wilfulness and Perverseness
reign. For are not the Rules and Standards of Truth Easy and Intelligible? Have
we not the Eternal Laws of Reason, the immediate Directions of Nature, and the
Convictions of our own Minds; and moreover have we not the Infallible Oracles
and Inspired Writings to rectify our Mistakes? Have we not Heavenly and Divine
Knowledge to Exalt our Natural Notions? Has not the Divine Goodness blessed us
with abundant Discoveries, both from the Law of Nature and the Positive Laws of
Christ Jesus, but more especially from the Latter, that complete Body of Divine
Laws, that Authentic Volume of Religion, that Inestimable Treasury of true
Wisdom and Knowledge? So that if we will sincerely make use of these Helps which
God has given us, we shall have no occasion to renew this Demand, What is
Truth?

Now to the God of Truth, and Father of Lights; and to his Son Christ Jesus,
who is the Way and the Truth; and to the Holy Spirit of Truth and Grace be
ascribed everlasting Honor and Glory.

Amen.
Why Rulers and Judges are called Gods.
A Sermon Preached before the Judges at the Assizes held at Cambridge.
PSALM LXXXII. 6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are the Children
of the most High. But ye shall die like Men, and fall like one of the Princes.
THIS Psalm may not unfitly be styled the Judges or Magistrates Psalm, for of
them it speaks, and for them it was Penned, that they might understand their
Duty, and not be ignorant of their Dignity; that they might know how to
discharge their Office (which is briefly summed up in the third and fourth
Verses) and that they might be assured likewise that Heaven it self has
vouched their Function, and authorized their Profession; that they might be
Ascertained that those of their Eminent Rank and Quality are under the peculiar
Influence of Providence, that they are God's Charge, and that they are
themselves Gods. [I have said, Ye are Gods.]

In which Words, and the following ones which I have read to you, we may take
notice of these Two General Parts, viz. a Concession, and a Correction. 1st. An
honorable Concession of the Magistrates Eminency and high Degree, [I have
said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are the Children of the most High.] 2dly.
Here is adjoined a Correction, or a severe Commination for the Abuse of their
Place and Dignity, [But ye shall die like Men, and fall like one of the
Princes.] Or, if you will thus: Here is the Dignity of the Magistrates Office,
[I have said, Ye are Gods:] And here is the Infirmity of their Persons, [Ye
shall die like Men.] In the former of these you may observe, 1. The Migistrates
eminent Quality, Ye are Gods. 2. Their Authority and Divine Institution, I have
said, Ye are Gods.

I begin with the First, viz. The Magistrates Eminency; they are Gods. Rulers
and Governors, Public Ministers and Dispensers of Law and Justice among the
People are deservedly called Gods. Great and Excellent Things have the Name of
God added to them in the Style of Holy Scripture (of which there are abundant
Instances): And here the Name of God is not only Adjoined but Attributed to
these Great and Excellent Persons. Not only Kings and Supreme Rulers, but
Subordinate Magistrates are Gods, for in the very front of this Psalm, wherein
my Text is, it is said, That [God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty,
he Judges among the Gods] i.e. the Judges and Magistrates who sat in the
Consistory, the Jewish Sanhedrim. The Gods then here are not the Sovereign
Powers; so that the Title is competible both to these and to Inferior
Magistrates. And accordingly my Discourse at present will have reference both
to the King as Supreme, and unto Governors as unto them who are sent and
appointed by Him. Some Passages will more properly belong to Crowned Heads, but
yet in a due proportion may be applied unto you, and by you who have the Honor
to be the King's Immediate Vicegerents. And because you bear that High and
Noble Character, let it not be thought strange if I seem sometimes to treat you
in the Style of Majesty. I shall not endeavor to gain your Attention by
Flattery, but seeing the Relation you bear to the Highest Power, and the worthy
Office you hold under it entitle you to the Name of Gods, I think it will be
Impossible (and consequently a vain attempt) to fix a more Honorable Title
upon you, and therefore I shall make it my Business to descant upon That.

You cannot but observe that in the Sacred Writ this Epithet is frequently
fastened on Magistrates and Governors. Moses was to be to Aaron instead of a God
(Exodus 4. 16.) that is, a Judge or Prince, say the Chaldee Paraphrase, and
Arabic Version: Though I rather think there is another meaning of those words,
viz. That he was to be an Interpreter from God to Aaron, as he is said to be a
God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 1. and therefore I will not insist upon that Place.
The 22d. of Exodus ver. 28. is clear and without Dispute, [Thou shall not revile
the Gods, nor curse the Rulers of thy People.] One is Exegetical of the other.
A Ruler and a God are Synonymous Terms, and signify the same Person. In
Iotham's Parable it is said, That Wine cheareth God and Man, Judge. 9. 13. which
words, though the worthy Mr. Calvin would have understood of Appeasing God by
Sacrifice, wherein Wine was commonly used; and some Interpret them in another
way, yet this seems to me to be the plainest and most obvious Sense of the
Words, viz. That the moderate and lawful Use of Wine is serviceable to the
refreshing and chearing of the Hearts of both High and Low, Kings and their
Subjects, Magistrates and others that are of an Inferior Quality, briefly
expressed here by God and Man. You may gather from Psalm cxxxviii. that it was
no unusual thing to denote the Office of Kings and Rulers by the Title of Gods;
for in ver. 1. the Psalmist thus speaks, [Before the Gods will I sing Praise
unto Thee;] and after he had stired Them up to join in the same Chorus with
himself, he adds, ver. 4. [All the Kings of the Earth shall praise Thee.] The
Gods and the Kings of the Earth are the same. If you pass to the New Testament
you will read in 2 These. 2. 4. That the Man of Sin exalts himself above all
that is called God, i.e. (it is very probable) Magistrates and Civil Powers: he
pretends he has a power of disposing of Kingdoms and Empires, and of Reigning
over the Kings of the Earth. And this way of Speaking is usual with Profane
Nations, as well as Jews and Christians. I could show you, if I had leisure,
that the Gentile World signified their Apprehensions concerning Magistrates and
Rulers, very conformably to the Style and Language of the Holy Scripture; they
represented Governors as Gods: Both their Orators and Poets mention them as
Divine Persons, and above the reach of Humanity. Yea, it is observable that
when the Hor. Hieroglyph.
Egyptians Pourtrayed their Gods and Kings, the Heads of both were encompassed
with Wreaths of Serpents, which, according to their Hieroglyphics, were
Symbols of Divinity, as well as Sovereignty.

It remains now that I show you in what Sense the Civil Powers are called Gods,
and why even the Sacred Writ honors them with That Title. It is Blasphemy to
assert that they are (...), really Gods by nature, i.e. Omnipotent and
Independent Beings; for so there is no other God but One, who is therefore
called The God of Gods, to distinguish Him from All Nominal Gods, and
particularly Magistrates, who are called so for these Three Reasons chiefly,
viz. because, First, They are Gods by Deputation; they are God's Vicegerents
and Delegates; they are His immediate Ministers and Deputies; they are in the
Place of the King of Kings; they Personate and Represent Him here on Earth, and
therefore may justly bear His Name. This is according to what King Iehosaphat
gave in Charge to his Judges, in 2 Chronicles. xix. 6. [Ye judge not for Man, but
for the Lord;] i.e. Ye do not so much Appear and Act in the Place of Man, as in
God's Stead; you do not Personate the King so much as the Great God of Heaven.
Secondly, They are Gods by a kind of Participation: They Share in some sort
with the Almighty. Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet: God has devolved
His Power on them, and has made them as it were Derivative Deities, by that
Impress of Authority and Greatness which he has stamped upon them, and by
appointing them His Viceroys and Vicars here on Earth. Thirdly, Magistrates are
Gods by way of Analogy and Resemblance. Every Man, as he is Man, is the Image
and Glory of God (if the Determination of the Great Apostle be valid) Much more
is the Ruler the Image and Glorious Representation of the Deity; and that,

First, (More Generally) because of his Superiority and Eminence above Others.
A Great King and Monarch may be said on This Account to make some Approaches to
the Supreme Being of the World. His Acting in so Large and Capacious a Sphere,
is some mean Resemblance of the Divine Dominion. The vast Influence which
Rulers have over the People, and the Great Circumference they describe, may
entitle them to a kind of Deity.

Secondly, More Particularly, The God of Heaven, and Those whom he has
appointed to Rule on Earth, Resemble one another in their Actions and
Employments, viz. in Ruling and Governing All for the Good of the Community, in
making and appointing Laws to That End, in distributing of Punishments and
Rewards, and in executing of Justice and Judgment in the World. Therefore,
says (...). Quaest. 51. in Exo^.
Theoderet, Judges are called Gods, because they imitate God as they are
entrusted with the Office of Judging. And Quet. Resp. 142. ad Orthodox.
Justin Martyr before him had Words to the same purpose. The Pagan Jove was
Celebrated for his Thunder. But it is a Truth, without any Fiction, That a
Magistrate is an Earthly God, as to his Severity in Punishing obstinate
Offenders: And he is a God in Mercifulness and Compassion when there is
occasion for it; for God himself is Love. One of the Antiochus's (Successors of
Alexander the Great) had the Title of Theos given him, because of his singular
Acts of Kindness to several People, especially to the Meletians, whom he
relieved and rescued from the Tyranny they were under. It is God-like to show
Mercy, to help, defend, and deliver Men in their Distresses. In this therefore
Rulers are concerned to make the nearest Approach to Divinity that they can.
God himself is Genesis 15 1. Psalm. 3. 3. Ps. 28. 7. Ps. 33. 20. Prove. 30. 5. Psalm.
47. 9.
frequently termed a Shield, and Magistrates, in their Proportion, are to be
such, and accordingly are styled the Shields of the Earth. Thus Earthly Rulers
Imitate God, and are deservedly styled Gods, Arist^t. Eth. l. 6. c. 1.
(...), because of the Eminency of their Virtue, as the Ancient Philosopher
said well. Thus Good Magistrates have the Character of Divinity upon them: They
have the Signature and Mark of Heaven. They are called in my Text, The Children
of the most High. This Resemblance and Likeness to their Father, gives them
most deservedly That Denomination. Now they are truly God's Image, and bear his
Superscription. They are the Admirable Words of Plutarch. (...). Ad Princ.
Ineruditum.
A Ruler (says he) is the Image of God, who Governs all things. A Magistrate
needs no Statuary to make an Image of God, for by no other Workmanship and Art
than that of Virtue and Goodness he can make Himself Such, a Piece of so much
Worth and Excellency that it shall be most Acceptable to God, and Worthy of Him.

This Doctrine Thus Illustrated may be Applied both to Magistrates and People.
First, To the People, who by Virtue of what has been said, are obliged to
Consider and Weigh well the Dignity of the Persons who are Set over them, and
to Behave themselves Accordingly, i.e. willingly to Acknowledge their Authority
and Superiority, to Respect and Reverence them, to pay them that Civil Worship
which is due to them, and cheerfully to Obey their Lawful Commands. Governors
are Gods, therefore to Speak Evil of them is a kind of Blasphemy. They are the
Images of God, and so he that Disrespects and Despises them, Abuses God in
Effigy. To do Violence to Them, is to Assault the Deity, to Combat against
Heaven, and Fight against God himself. Here then is a Solid Basis for
Obedience, God has Deputed Magistrates, and made them his Representatives, and
Communicated his Authority and Power to them, and by being Good they do more
signally Resemble Him: Whence it is Rational to Infer, That the wilful Contempt
of Human Authority is Affronting of God, and despising even the Majesty of
Heaven. It is the Peoples Duty then to Study and Practice Obedience, and more
especially to Thank God for Good Magistrates, who are sent from Heaven, and are
the peculiar Gift of God. Magistracy deserves a Double Veneration, when it is
in Conjunction with Holiness.

Secondly, The Magistrate no less than the People, is concerned in This Text,
and in This Discourse. He may see here at once his Eminency and his Duty, what
God has made him, and what He expects of him. Let the Masters of Heraldry
range all their Titles of Honor, it is certain there cannot be a greater and
more Honorable one than This of Gods. But as it carries Honor with it, so it
bespeaks a Behavior becoming That Honor. If any Magistrate should be so Vain
as to Rely on the Title of God, and Vaunt of That, and yet in the mean time
Neglect his Duty, he may remember that Heathen Idols are called Gods, Psalm.
xcvi. 5. and Satan is called the God of this World, 2 Cor. iv. 4. Rulers must
Deport themselves like Gods, else they fondly lay Claim to that Name; They must
remember that the Name they bear puts them in mind whose Deputies they are. It
is a high Compliment which Pliny passes upon Trajan in the Close of his
Panegyric, viz. That nothing Greater or Better could be wished to the
Commonwealth, than that the Gods would Imitate the Emperor. It is a Truth,
without any strain of Rhetoric, that no greater Felicity can be wished to
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, than that the Gods, so styled in my Text, would
endeavor to Imitate the King of Kings. It will be a Shame and a great
Solecism, if Those who are in God's Stead discover Nothing of God or Divinity
in their Lives and Actions; if Those who bear the Name of God partake not of
the God-like Nature, but rather of that which is Diabolick. Remember that as
you are Deputed by God, so you must Resemble Him. You are the Children of the
most High, you are his Offspring more Signally; be mindful of your Heavenly
Extraction, and commit nothing Unworthy of it. You that are Governors must use
your Power for God; for it is reasonable that He who is the Original of your
Power should also be the End of it. Think not that the Title given you here is
an Idle and Empty Thing. The Gods which the Psalmist speaks of must not be like
the Heathen Gods and Idols, who (as he says) Have eyes, but see not: ears, but
hear not: hands, but handle not. We have too many of such Gods as These in This
Nation. How many Magistrates sit with their Arms across, and Study to do
Nothing? How many Gallio's are there of this Age which Care for none of those
Things which are the Proper Work of their Place? The Hebrew Netzib.
word which signifies a Statue, and a Tomb, signifies also a President, a
Governor. How many are there that bear this Latter Chacter, who are too near
of Kin to the Former? Though they are appointed to be Public Dispencers of
Justice, yet they are not Sollicitous to Discharge that Office, but rather give
the Neighborhood to understand that they are mere Senseless Statues, and Empty
Sepulchers. But certainly it is very unbecoming a Christain Magistrate, to be
Idle and Unactive in his Place, to be Careless and Unconcerned, and sleep away
his time, as if the People of his Province were as Inconsiderable as the Frogs,
over whom (as the Fable tells us) Jupiter appointed a Log to be their King and
Governor. To be dull and heavy in an Employment that calls for Activity is
Inexcusable, and very Reproachful. Bibulus, who was I. Cesar's Fellow-Consul,
but did nothing in his Office, was left out in the Roman Dates, which otherwise
always made mention of both the Consuls. An Idle and Useless Magistrate renders
himself Ridiculous and Contemptible; he is of no Value, and therefore is
reckoned as a mere Cipher in the Public Accounts. Matters of great moment call
for his Care and Inspection; how then can he be Unconcerned and Unactive? His
Affairs are Great and Weighty, and he has no leisure to Trifle, after the rate
of that Loitering Emperor who spent his time in Catching and Killing of Flies.
He is made for the Safety and Welfare of the People, and therefore it is not
enough that he ^its quiet, and does no harm; but it is required that he do
Good. Seeing Rulers are allied to Divinity, they must be Vigorous and moving;
they are to Live and Act as Gods, they are engaged to show forth the God-like
Virtues which are supposed to be in them. They must Resemble the Deity in
Holiness and Purity; unless they would approve themselves to be such Gods as
Homer and other Poets are wont to make, that is, Drunken, Adulterous,
Contentious, and Debauched Gods: Which indeed is no more than could be expected
from that sort of Writers; for it is no wonder that they who advanced Men and
Mortal Creatures to the Quality of Gods, thrust down these Latter to the
Condition of the Worst Sort of the Former. But these Things become not those
Persons who are styled Gods in the Holy Scripture, and are to Represent the God
of all Purity. They should be reminded of this, That they are to Walk worthy of
a Name that is so Sacred, of a Title that is so Honorable. And so much for the
First Remark on the Words, viz. The Dignity and Eminency of the Magistrates
Calling, Ye are Gods.

Proceed we in the next Place to the (...) of this Eminency, to the Fountain of
this Honor and Dignity, I have said, viz. That ye are Gods. Had they been
called so by Men, it might have been construed as Flattery: As we read that it
was the Proud and Insolent Humor of Great Ones, not only to give this Title to
themseves, but to be Ambitious to have it Attributed to them by Others, and to
be told by their Parasites, as our First Parents by the Serpent, That they
shall be as Gods. But here Magistrates are called Gods by God Himself. Behold
then the Divine Institution, the Sacred Appointment of Magistracy! The Tenure
they hold by is the Highest and Best, viz. in Chief, from the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords. Earthly Governors are Invested with their Authority from the
God of Heaven. I, even I have said, Ye are Gods. First, Nature says it,
whereof God is the Author: Secondly, The Sacred Writ says as much, whereof God
the Holy Ghost is the Inditer: Thirdly, The Strange Events and Occurrences in
the World, whereof God is the Cause and Procurer, say, and proclaim aloud that
Magistrates and Governors are God's Ordinance.

First, Nature says it, whereof God is the Author and Founder, Magistracy
bears an Ancient Date, and had the same Horoscope with the Creation. It began
Primo Adami, it commenced on the Calends of the World. The Light of Nature,
with which we were born, dictates Superiority and Inferiority: And it may be
observed, that the Man who is Rebellious against this Sentiment, at the same
time acknowledges the Truth of it; for he Claims a Preeminence to Brutes, and a
Power over them, and this Right was Founded in the Primitive Laws of his
Creation. He has likewise Power and Sovereignty over himself, and that Part of
him which is Brutish, his Lower Faculties and Sensual Appetites. And this
Empire is wholly Managed by the Laws of Reason and Rectified Understanding. It
is confessed by all Mankind, that there is yet a farther Dominion; for they
have and acknowledge a Power over one another, as Masters over their Servants,
and Fathers over their Children: For all Children, as soon as they are Born,
are under a Paternal Sovereignty; so that to be Subject is as Natural as to be
a Man. And now, since the World is increased, the same Law of Reason and Nature
dictates Subjection and Obedience to the Civil Parent, the Father of our
Country, and to all those that are Deputed by him. For the Power of a King over
his People, and so of Lower Magistrates over their peculiar Charge, is every
way as Rational and Accountable as the foresaid Authority of Fathers over their
Children. Whilst the World was yet in its Minority, it had these Guardians and
Tutors; and even to this Day, when it is above Five Thousand Years old, it
stands still in need of them. For certainly the very Necessities of Mankind are
sufficient to vouch the Constitution of Magistracy. We came into the World
under a State of Government, and we cannot subsist without it. Our Natural
Condition and Frame require such a Dispensation as this. To this there is the
United Suffrage and Consent of all Nations, which shows it to be a Law of
Nature.

I might add that God has Condescended to the Weakness, and Complied with the
Infirmities of our Nature, in appointing such Vicegerents as are of a
resembling Temper with us, Men of like Passions with our selves. The Gods are
come down to us, but in the likeness of Men. The Luster of the Divine Majesty
would have dazzled and confounded our weak Sight: That Glorious Sun could have
no sooner been seen, but we should have been blinded. But when we cannot bear
that Sun it self, we may behold its derivative Beauty in God's Deputies, the
Magistrates. In their Purple and Bright Robes we may safely view the
Reflections of the Heavenly Majesty and Brightness: And thus by a Necessary
Constitution of Heaven, fitted to our Natures, and by the Suggestions of
Natural Instinct and Right Reason, we are brought to acknowledge the
Reasonableness and Necessity of a Government in the World. Accordingly we find
the Beginning and Rise of it referred to This very Principle by the Great
Masters of the Imperial Laws, in their Books of Lib. 1. Tit. 2. viz. De Origin
Juris Civi^is and omnium Magistratuum.
Digests.

Nor are we to Imagine (as some have fondly done) That Grace banishes Nature,
that Reason and the Conduct of it are not Obligatory under the Gospel. This is
a groundless Surmise, because it is certain, that he who swerves, from the
Dictates of Nature declines God's Law, this being a Divine Law; and we may
rationally gather any thing to be from God, if it be Evident by and Consonant
to the Light of Nature, which is Prove. xx. 27.
the ^andle of the Lord. In a word, Natural Reason is so far from being
abolished by the Laws of Jesus Christ, that it is Confirmed and Authorized by
them, they being the Upshot of all Good Laws, and the Consummation of the Best
Reason. Hence it appears that what is said by Right Reason is said by God, for
that is the Voice of God; I have said, Ye are Gods.

Secondly, The Sacred Scripture says it, whereof God the Holy Ghost is the
Inditer. The Law strictly charges Men not to Revile the Gods, nor speak Evil of
the Ruler of the People, Exodus xxii. 28. Besides, that the Judges or Rulers of
the Sanedrim are called Gods by the Psalmist, in the Person of God, the Divine
Approbation is farther evidenced from the first Verse of this Psalm, where we
are told, That God stands in the Congregation of the Gods; the Great God
presides over them, and Authorizes their Office and Employment, so far as they
discharge it lawfully. This Divine Authority of our Superiors is for ever
Established by that Royal Patent, Prove. viii. 15, 16. By me (i.e. by the
Eternal and Essential Wisdom) Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me
Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of earth. This unexceptionably
makes them to be the Ordinance and Institution of God himself: And the New
Testament abets and confirms the Old, for in John x. 34. our Savior refers to
the very Words of the Psalmist, saying, Is it not written in your Law, I have
said, Ye are Gods? The known Practice of Christ, and his exemplary Subjection
to the Powers then in being, may be concluded to be Authentic in this case,
and to prove the Divine Commission both of Superior and Subordinate
Magistrates. But to wave that at present, if you peruse the Epistles of those
Great Apostles St. Paul and St. Peter, you will find the Regal and
Magistratical Office fully Asserted, and set up to its utmost height. Let
every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God;
The Powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans xiii. 1. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors as unto those that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. ii.
13. Thus, whether they be Dii Majorum or Minorum Gentium, the Gods of an higher
or an inferior Rank, whether they be those that have the Supreme Authority, or
whether they be Deputed Officers and Rulers, they are All to be Reverenced,
Honored, and Obeyed; and there is the Command of God for it.

But a severe Enquirer into these forementioned Texts will arrest me, it may
be, with with this Objection; The Apostles seem to Clash, and to Contradict one
another; for the former asserts, That the Powers which be, are Ordained of God;
but the latter tells us plainly, That they are the Ordinance of Man. These are
two different Things, yea Repugnant, to be the Ordinance of God, and to be the
Ordinance of Man.

I have no time now to offer to you the several Glosses of the Learned on that
Passage of St. Peter; nor am I at leisure to acquaint you with the sundry
Criticisms upon the word (...), and to tell you how variously it is rendered.
But adhering at present to our own Translation, I will in few words dispatch
the Difficulty, and show you that Magistracy may be the Ordinance of Men as
well as of God, and these are not Repugnant to one another. It is not unfitly
styled an Humane Ordinance, 1. In respect of the Object and Matter about which
it is conversant, viz. Humane Society, the Affairs of Mankind. The Higher
Powers are set over Men, and Transact those things which are Civil and Humane.
2. In regard of the Subject in which it is seated, it may have this
Denomination; These Gods are really of the same Nature and Make with our
selves. 3. In respect of the End, it is justly called an Humane Ordinance; for
it is appointed for the Good and Preservation of Mankind, for the well ordering
and governing the Societies of Men in the World. Now, all this is consistent
with what St. Paul says, viz. That Magistracy is the Ordinance of God; for
though the Particular Form and Manner of Government be not fixed by God or
Nature, by a Divine or Natural Law, but by a Positive One (otherwise there
would be but One Lawful Form of Government) yet this is certain that Government
in the General is the Direct and Express Appointment of God himself. Thus it is
evident that the Powers are the Ordinance of Man, and yet it is as true that
they are Ordained of God, they are Constituted and Authorized by Him, and they
are ratified by his Written and Revealed Will. Thence we are assured that
Divinity is Incircled in the compass of a Crown, and that Rulers are Invested
with their Authority from the Supreme Sovereign of the World. Among
Pythagoras's Scholars, if their Master said it, it was enough, it was
Authentic and Unquestionable. Much more surely with the Disciples of Christ
Jesus must that be held Indisputable, which God has said in his Holy Word, I
have said, Ye are Gods. We have not only the Suffrage of Reason (of which I
spoke before) but the Infallible Dictates of the Heavenly Oracles. The Reason
of the Thing it self, and the Will of the Supreme Majesty of Heaven concur
here: And what Proof more Convincing can be desired and expected than Divine
Testimony superadded to Natural Light? But,

Thirdly, As these, so likewise the Strange Events and Occurrences in the
World, whereof God is the Cause and Procurer, proclaim aloud this Truth, That
Magistrates and Governors are God's Ordinance. There have not been wanting
Wonderful Signs to confirm this. Government and Order have had a Blessing
entailed upon them by Providence. When Magistrates have faithfully discharged
their Duties, some signal and open Manifestations of God's Favor have
acquinted us that he is pleased with them. When Phineas (whom we must look upon
as a Public Minister of Justice) stood up and Executed Judgment upon that Pair
of Infamous Sinners (whose Contagion else might have spread it self through the
whole Land) the Plague presently ceased, and the Divine Vengeance was appeased.
But when bold and hardened Sinners have openly affronted Magistracy, and
Mutinied against their Governors, they have but ill succeeded in such
Expeditions. Thus when those three Notorious Conspirators opened their Mouths
against Moses and Aaron, the Earth (in a resembling sort) opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up, and all that appertained to them, Number. xvi. 30, 32. These
Rebels found their Punishment in their Sin, and their Destruction in their
Disobedience. Opposing of Government, as it is a Curse in it self, so
Judicially it is followed with one from Heaven. Not only Reason and Nature
detest it, but the Divine Nemesis. It is the Inscription on the Scottish Coin
(as the Emblem, I suppose of their Thistle,) Nemo me impune lacesset; None
shall provoke me, and be unpunished. It may justly indeed be the Magistrates
Motto, for none ever Affronted them, but received the Reward of their Folly,
for the King of Kings will not suffer his Vicegerents to be exposed to Contempt
and Injuries. As they are Approved of and Countenanced by him, so their
Opposers shall be Baffled and Punished. And thus when Nature, and Necessity,
and the Holy Writ, and Providence all join in one Sound, it is the Voice of God.

This Doctrine thus Established, concerns both the Magistrate and the People.
First the People, for as before they were invited to Obedience, from the
Consideration of the Dignity and Eminency of their Superiors, so here they are
called to the same Duty by this Thought, That Magistracy is of Divine
Institution, Rulers are Constituted by God. God Himself has said of them, They
are Gods. Both their Name and Office are Reverend and Honorable, and therefore
you are bound to pay them your utmost Regards and Respects. You are lead to
this Duty by the Light of Nature, as I have showed: And therefore he that
despises Authority, at the same time acts against Reason, and abandons his
Understanding. And you are conducted to it also by a Divine Warrant, as you
have heard, and therefore you cannot be excused from the Performance of it.

In the next place, this Doctrine does more nearly concern the Persons who are
in Place and Dignity. They should be Instructed from what I have tendered,

First, To acknowledge their Original and Founder, the God of Gods, the
Absolute Lord and Sovereign Controller of the World. Let not their Title,
though it be Great and Honorable, make them forget that there is a GOD who
Rules in the Earth, and that all Earthly Gods must do Obeisance and Homage to
him. He is to be feared above all Gods, Psalm. xcvi. 4. The contrary Temper and
Practice have prevailed too much in the World, of which we have abundant
Instances: The first Gods among the Heathens were Kings, and Princes, and Great
Men. Nimrod, the first Monarch and Sovereign, was the first that was Deified
among them. Idolatry commenced in Monarchy: The Greatness and Power of their
Kings extorted Worship from their Subjects, who admired and feared them:
Lordship and Dominion entailed Divinity upon them. It is well known that most
of the Pagan Kings of old (to make themselves more Venerable to their Subjects)
used to derive their Pedigree from some God, and at last some of them would
needs be taken for Real Gods. Thus Alexander the Great, and some of the Roman
^mperors would have Altars and Images Consecrated to them. Julius Caesar began
it, and after him the Worst and Vilest Emperors affected Divine Honor, as
Nero, Caligula, Domitian, and others, and would publicly be styled Etiam
Principibus and Regibus; non ut magnis and electis viris (sicut fas est) sed ut
Diis adulatio falsa blanditur. Minut* E^lix.
Gods. The Jewish Rabble applauding King Herod, cried out, The voice of God. So
Tacitus tell us of Nero, and Suetonius of Claudi^s, that their Voices were said
to be Celestial and Divine. Julian joined the Effigies of the Heathen Gods with
his own Statues, that they might pay Reverence to the Gods and Him together.
Our Lord God the Pope has been a Compliment sometimes to the Bishop of Rome.
And you may read in the Second Council of Lateran, that he is styled another
God on Earth. But this Language is unsufferable: Though the Higher Powers are
Gods, yet they are to remember that they must not Profanely Usurp that Title:
They are to consider that there is a God above them, a Great and Mighty God,
who regards not persons, Deuteronomy. x. 17. He is Independent and Uncontrollable,
and none else is: They abuse their Reason, and mistake their Office, if they
imagine themselves to be Gods in that sense. It was a very Notable Saying of
King Henry VIII. who, at Sir Thomas More's first coming to his Service at
Court, gave him this Godly Lesson, First look unto God, and then after that
unto me: An Advice well becoming a Prince, and which shows that he had some
Sense of that Great Truth which I am now pressing, That Reges in ip^os imperium
est Jovis. Sen. Trag.
the Great God of Heaven is above all the Gods and Kings of the Earth: That
Omne s^b ^egno gr^viore regnum ^st. la^ ^
there is a Greater King whom all Kings are under; Therefore they are to stand
in Awe of him, and be afraid of Offending him, and Rebelling against him; for
there are Rebellious Rulers as well as Subjects, Isai. i. 23. Thy Princes are
rebellious, viz. against the King of Kings.

Secondly, They may be reminded from the Premises not only to acknowledge God's
Sovereignty, but to expect his Blessing and Protection. If by Devout Prayers
they Address themselves to him, he will assuredly Inspire them with that
Understanding and Wisdom which are proportionable to the Greatness of their
Employment; he will vouchsafe them his Aid and Assistance; he will be their
Guardian and Defender; and those that rudely touch them shall not do it with
Impunity. Be encouraged hence against all Hardships and Oppositions, but rather
let the Consideration of Difficulties excite and inflame you, and let your
Magnanimity be as great as your Danger. If whilst you act for God and Religion
you suffer from the Tongues of Men, remember that it is a Princely thing to do
well, and hear ill; and resolve to bear Reproach with as much Content as some
Men their Praises and Applause. Moving in so great a Sphere, and with such a
Luster and Influence, it is no wonder that you raise many Envious Exhalations,
which cast a Cloud upon you, and labor to Obscure your Name. David had his
Shimei; Governors have their Railers and Detractors. Some observe Failings and
Declensions in the Heavenly Bodies: The Fixed Stars twinkle and nod sometimes,
or the Silly People think they do so, and will not be persuaded to the
contrary. 1. Cor. ix 26.
Necessity is laid upon me, says St. Paul, and woe unto me if I preach not the
Gospel; and yet ^oe unto us if we do, for it is certain that some will mistake
us, and censure us. You may as easily and as truly apply it to the Civil
Magistrates discharge of their Office: That they govern well is necessary and
indispensable; but whilst they do so, they must look for Reproaches and
Affronts, they must provide to suffer, for they know not how Unkind the World
may be to them, and what Outrages they will commit upon them. We read that the
Roman Commonwealth proved Ungrateful to the Friends and Patriots of their
Country, the very Restorers and Preservers of their Welfare, as Camillus,
Publius, Cornelius, Scipio, and others. We are told how Unhandsomly the
Athenian Republic dealt with Themistocles and Aristides, Pericles and Phocion,
and others. Merit was a way to Ruin and Banishment; and the Ostracism let them
understand that a Public Person must not Deserve too well. But this may
encourage and animate all great Rulers and Governors who discharge a good
Conscience, that Heaven has a special Regard and Eye to them, and will
certainly Recompense them for the hard Usage and ill Returns they meet with.

Thirdly, Since they are Gods, and appointed by the Almighty, they ought to
think themselves charged with a great Necessity of Living and Acting well. They
are set in an Eminent Place, and all Men stand gazing at them. Rulers that are
Vicious, like Vzziah, carry their 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 19.
Leprosy in their Foreheads, their Crimes are exposed to every ones View, and
it is a wonder if some do not Imitate them; as Men usually do the Actions, and
even the Imperfections of their Superiors. Their Care then must be to Cherish
Virtue in themselves, and to Patronize it in others, both by their Authority
and Example. The Interest of Religion and of the Church (among other Matters,
yea and above them) is their Province: Of the Church, I say, for which the
World was chiefly made, and Commonwealths first Instituted, and Civil Societies
have ever since been maintained. Be persuaded that the promoting of Religion
and God's Honor is the proper Task of the Magistrate, as well as the Minister.
And now especially, in a declining Age, when Religion is rendered Ridiculous,
and Virtue is grown Unfashionable, and a Strict and Circumspect Walking is
counted too Demure: Now, (I say) you are more especially obliged to Befriend
the Cause of Religion, and to take her part when she has so many Enemies and
Opposers. This is that which will administer the most Comfortable Reflections
to you when you come to leave the World: For he that says, Ye are Gods, says
likewise, That ye shall die. And this Conducts me to the Second General Part of
the Text, of which I will speak but a few words, and so put a Period to my
Discourse.

After the Honorable Concession follows a Peremptory Correction. I have
already considered the Dignity and Prerogative of the Magistrates Office; I am
now to Conclude with the Infirmity of their Persons, their Obnoxiousness to
Death and Dissolution, Ye shall die like Men, and fall like one of the Princes.
It is supposed in these words that they must die as to their Place and Office;
And then what Anguish and Regret must needs overwhelm their Minds, when they
look back on any of those Unlawful and Unjust things which were done by them? A
Magistrate that has any Sense of the High Character he bears, knows this, That
he has an Account to make to Himself when he leaves his Place: And how Dismal
and Deplorable will it be, if upon recounting his past Carriage he be forced to
say of himself as the Historian of Caligula Hactenus quasi de Principe, reliqua
u^ de Monst^o n^r^. ^anda sunt. Sueton.
Though some things were done by me which were not unbecoming a Man in Place, yet
for the most part my Behavior was more like that of a Monster, than of a
Magistrate. With what Terrors will such a Person be filled, when he considers
that he is in part Guilty of all the Debauchery and Profaneness, all the
Disorders and Enormities which he might and ought to have prevented, but did
not? This is a thing which deserves your most serious Thoughts.

Again, this Clause may be looked upon as a Threatening for the Abuse of their
Places; They shall die, they shall not go Unpunished here and hereafter, if
they Discharge not their Public Trust with Sincerity and Faitfulness. They
shall not only die as Men (as you shall hear in the next Particular) but as
Offenders. Death shall transmit them to an Impartial and Severe Judgment.
Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, who sit on the Bench and Judge others,
must appear themselves before the Last and Dreadful Tribunal, and there render
an Account of their Behavior, and Answer for all that they have done.
Government and Great Offices will not Privilege them from this. The Title of
Gods will not avail them, but will rather aggravate and inhanse their Misery;
for how intolerable will it be to enter into the Portion of Evil Demons and
Damned Spirits, after they have born the Name of Gods here upon Earth?

Lastly, To confine my self to the bare words of the Text, the Psalmist here
humbles the Magistrate after he had Exalted him; and at the same time he
teaches him how to Deport himself, whilst he is in Place and Dignity: He must
then think of the Fate and Mortality which are common to him with the meanest
Persons. It was rightly said by Lord Bacon. Essay 19.
One of your Order, All Precepts concerning Kings and Magistrates are in effect
comprehended in these two Remembrances, Remember that you are Gods, and
Remember that you are Men: The one Bridles their Will, the other their Power.
The Text presents you with both these Considerations; and now I am concluding
all with the latter of them, viz. the Memento that they are Men. Magistrates
are of a different Make and Composure: Look on one side, and they are Gods; but
look on them on the other, and they are Mortal Men. Ye shall die like Men, like
Adam (so it is according to the Original) like the First Parent of Mankind, and
as the whole Race of Adam ever since; for ye are no better than your Fathers.
That of Pliny in his Panegyric to Trajan, is almost the only Passage in it
that is void of Flattery; Ut caeterorum hominum, ita Principum, eorum etiam qui
Dii sibi videntur, aevum omne and breve and fragile est.
Princes (says he) though they seem to themselves (and others too) to be Gods,
yet they are as short-lived as other Men. Here indeed we must be Plain with the
Greatest Men; though they are such, yet Death will despoil them of this
Character, and strip them of all the Badges and Ensigns of Authority, and will
make them equal with others in the Grave.

This Part of my Text puts me in mind of two or three remarkable Passages that
are upon Ancient Record; The Crier at Rome used to follow the Chariot of the
Triumphant, and cry to him after this Fashion, Remember that Thou art Mortal.
Be mindful of this in the midst of these Triumphal Ovations, that you must
leave the World, as goodly and Glorious as your Procession is now. And Philip
the Famous King of Macedon, after a great Victory that he had obtained over the
Athenians, ordered a Youth to come to him every Morning, and to refresh his
Memory after the same manner, i.e. to tell him that he was but a Man. And with
Pagan let me mix Christian Story; The Grecian Emperors on the day of their
Coronation, used to have several Marble-Stones of diverse Colors presented to
them, to make Choice of which sort of them they thought fit to have their
Sepulchral Monuments made of.

So here, by the Psalmist, the Magistrates Dignity and Mortality are remembered
together. Here is their Solemn Inauguration, I have said, Ye are Gods; and then
their Funerals, Ye shall die like Men. It is good to mix these together; and
accordingly in the midst of your Glories and Honors I have presumed to remind
you of your Leaving of them. This latter Consideration, if effectually managed,
is able to Instruct you in your Whole Duty, and the best Discharge of it. For
though it is the Epicure's Catch, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
die, yet Solomon's Argument runs quite counter to it, Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go, Eccl. ix. 10. If it
becomes an Emperor to die standing (as one of them said) surely it will not be
Unbecoming a Christian Magistrate to do so, I m^an, to expire in the Faithful
Performance of his Office, in the actual doing of his Duty. Others of a meaner
Quality steal into their Coffins, and silently descend into their Graves, and
are not much observed; but you will be watched when you go off the Stage, when
you leave the World, and it will be asked in the Neighborhood what you did
when you were in it, and how you managed your Stewardship. Live then so, that
when you come to die, you may with Pericles, a Famed Statesman of Athens,
rejoice that no Citizen ever wore a Mourning Habit on your account. Live so,
that when God shall remove you from your Places by Death, you may (in another
Sense than our Psalmist intended) die like Men, Bravely and Honorably, that ye
may fall like one of the Princes, with Credit and Renown, and that after your
Departure you may live and flourish in the Memories and Hearts of all Good Men,
who will never suffer your Good Actions to be Buried with you.

The Reasons why Magistrates ought to be Exemplary in their Lives.
A Sermon Preached at the Election of the Chief Magistrate in a Corporation.
EXODUS XVIII. 25. And Moses chose able Men out of all Israel, and made them
Heads over the People.
WE find that Supremacy and Government have been made matter of Chance with
some People; thus one Regilianus was promoted to Kingship merely because of his
Name. The Sidonian Servants agreed among themselves to make him King, who the
next morning should first see the Sun. Darius's Horse made his Master King of
Persia by his Neighing. But it is certain, that so Great a Concern should not
depend upon mere Casualty, but ought to be determined with the most serious
Deliberation imaginable. And so as for Subordinate Rulers and Governors, the
Designation of them ought not to be Accidental and Fortuitous, but is to be
managed with Consultation and Choice; for every one is not fit for such a
Place, every one is not duly Capacitated and Qualified for a Public Office and
Trust. This is the first thing we take notice of here, That Moses chose Men out
of all Israel to be Heads and Rulers.

And this Choice was conformable to his Father-in-Law Iethro's Advice, ver. 21.
Thou shall provide out of all the People able men, such as fear God, men of
Truth, hating Covetousness; and place such over them to be Rulers. The first
and leading Qualification of an Able Magistrate is, That he fears God. He must
be one that is Eminent for Religion and Piety; which ought to be seen and
observed not only in his Profession, but Practice. Next, he ought to be a Man
of Truth, i.e. void of all Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, one that is Faithful
and Upright in his Dealings, and therefore the Septuagint render it Just or
Righteous. For he is not fit to be a Ruler whose Life is stained with Acts of
Injustice and Dishonesty. Moreover, none should be preferred to Magistracy and
Government, but such as hate Covetousness, such as are of a Free and Generous
Spirit, and Detest all Base and Sordid Actions, such as Scorn to Pervert
Justice by taking of Gifts and Bribes, such as have been taken notice of for
their great Inclinations to Charity, for their readiness to Relieve the
Distressed, and for their Condescending to the Poor and Needy, thereby showing
that they hate Pride and Haughtiness, which gives an Account of the Seventy's
(...).
Version, or Gloss rather. These are the Qualifications of a Magistrate; but
the First of them is the Chief, and governs the rest. He that fears God will
approve himself to be a Man of Truth and Sincerity, Faithfulness and
Uprightness. Religion and Piety will make him Just and Honest toward Men:
These will inspire him with Charity, Generosity and Condescension, and will not
suffer him to pervert Judgment and Justice. In short, the Fear of God will make
him Eminent in his Life and Actions, singular for Virtue and Goodness, and
cause him to do all things worthily, and as becomes a Migistrate. This is the
Character which Rulers must bear, according to Iethro's Advice to Moses: And
the Text acquaints us that this latter made his choice agreeably to it, for he
chose able Men out of all Israel, and made them Heads over the People, and
Rulers of thousands, etc. that is, he conveniently placed them in several
Quarters, to decide Controversies among the People, to distribute Justice, to
give every one their Right, to take care of the Public Welfare, and to
discharge all the Parts of a Good Magistrate.

The General Proposition then which I will entertain you with at present, is
this, That a Ruler must be a Man of an exemplary Life and Conversation; he
being placed above others, must Excel them in the Eminency of his Deportment
and Actions. This is clear from the Choice which is here made, and from the
Character which is here given. There is a great deal more required in a
Governor, than in an Inferior Person. He may be Good in a low and mean Place,
who can scarcely be reckoned so in a high one: So that it may be said of such a
one, after he is advanced to Government, as Tacitus said of Galba, Omnium
consensu cap^x imperii, nisi imper^sset.
He might have been thought by all Men to be capable of Ruling, if he had not
actually been preferred to that Station. For this is unquestionable, That that
Person may make a tolerably Good Subject or Citizen, who yet may not be fit to
be a Chief Governor: The Reason is, because such a one must Surpass others;
wherefore what is sufficient and fitting in the former, is not so in the
latter. It was one of the Laws of the Twelve Tables among the Romans, That Is
ordo vitio vacato; cae^^ris specimen esto. Ci^. de Leg. l. 3.
the Order of the Senators should be free from Vice, and be an Example to
others. The same may be pronounced in General concerning the high Degree and
Order of Magistracy; It must not be spotted with the common Defilements of the
World, it ought to be a Pattern to the rest of Mankind. It is required of
Superiors and Rulers, that they be as Noted for their Moral and Divine
Excellencies, as for their Authority and Dignity. They must strive to outshine
others in Virtue and Goodness, and to be really the Best Men in the place they
live in.

The Reasonableness of which will appear from the Consideration of these
following Particulars;

First, A Magistrate is obliged to be Exemplary in his Life, because so great
numbers of Men have their Eyes fixed upon him; and that, 1. To find Fault with
him; 2. To Imitate him, and do as he does. I begin with the first: Men's Eyes
are fixed upon you that are Magistrates, to see what Faults they can find in
you, to discover your Imperfections and Miscarriages. The Great Luminaries of
Heaven are never Eclipsed, but we take notice of them; yea, some of the Lesser
Lights and Petty Stars (which seem so to us because they are so high) cannot
withdraw their light, cannot be overrun with Scum, but some Body will obsrve
it. When there was but a Spot in I^piter's Belt, the Vertuoso's who were
inclined to Astronomy, presently found it out: Nay, it seems they found it out
before there was any such thing; for a Philos. Trans^ct.
while after they retracted their Observation, and acknowledged it to be a
Mistake. The Application of this is very profitable; You that are Governors,
that act in a Sphere above oaths, that are in comparison of the meaner People,
Heavenly Bodies, Eminent Lights placed on high, you will be taken notice of
when your Lives are blemished with Vice, and spotted with foul Misdeeds. Yea,
sometimes there will be those that will pretend to espy Faults, whether there
be any or no. Plutarch speaks well, (...).
The Vices of Great Men (says he) cannot be concealed: Their Crimes are
Perspicuous as well as Themselves. Even the least Offenses of Eminent Persons
are as it were Calumniated, and made greater than they are. And he goes on to
show that the Particular Failings of Men in Place are objected to them, as
Cimox's Drinking, Scipio's Sleeping, Lucullus's Costly Suppers. The same Author
has these Excellent Words in another Treatise, (...) Vit. O^at^r.
Little Transgressions, when seen in Princes and Governors Lives, are accounted
Great, because of that Opinion which the Vulgar have of Magistracy and
Authority, viz. That it is a Great thing, and ought to be exempted from all
Error and Vice. So another tells us, That (...). Eu^ipid.
all Men pry into the Faults of Princes, and acquaint themselves with their
Miscarriages. It was freely spoken by Seneca to the Emperor Nero, Tibi non
magis quam Soli latere contigit, etc. (...)
You can be no more hid (says he) than the Sun it self: You are surrounded
with a redundant Blaze and Luster, upon which every one is continually gazing.
Thus you see this is a received Notion and Truth, that all Men cast their Eyes
upon Magistrates, to Criticize upon their Actions: It concerns them therefore
to be very Exact and Circumspect. I may say to them, as Mecoenas told the
Emperor Augustus, (...). D^o Ca^^. Hist. Romans l. 5^.
You must live as if the whole World were the Theater you acted on; and it is
impossible that the least Fault you commit can be kept secret. All Men are wont
most readily to busy themselves about the Actions of their Governors. Seeing
there is so narrow a Watch upon you, it cannot but excite you to act warily and
wisely. If the Gods (for so Magistrates are called) offend and do amiss, there
are some will scarcely allow them the Character of Men. Which Consideration
alone should cause you to walk with great Circumspection, to make straight
Paths for your Feet, and to lead very Exemplary Lives.

Again, as some Persons fix their Eyes upon you to Espy your Failings, so
others do it to Imitate you. And upon this Consideration also you are engaged
to be very Exact in your Lives. The Ruler's Example mightily influences on the
People: Q^od exemplo ^it, id etiam jure fieri putant. Cic. Epist. 3. lib. 4.
That is thought sufficient to legitimate and justify any Action. And Tully
quotes Plato for this very purpose, Quales in Republica Principes ess^nt, tales
reliquos s^l^re esse Cive^.
Such as the Great Ones are, such are those that are under them. A Good King
may see himself copied out in his Subjects, and so generally may an Evil one.
What manner of Man the Ruler of the City is, such are all they that dwell
therein, says the wise Son of Sirach, Ecclus. x. 2. And that of Philo the Jew,
gives us a brief Representation of this matter, (...). In Vita Mo^is.
Those that are Mean and Obscure, are very ambitious of Emulating the Eminent.
All the Wise Men among the Pagans had this Apprehension, which I will show you
in some notable Passages of theirs. That is an admirable one which I meet with
in Pliny's Panegyric, Vita Principis cens^ra est, eaque perpetua: ad hanc
dirigin^ur, ad hanc convertimur: nec tam Imperio nobis opus est quam Exemplo.
The Life of a Prince, says he, if he be Virtuous, is a perpetual curb to
Vice. Men turn to this, and are directed by it, and it is not so much his
Command as his Example that they are led by. Herodian, speaking of the Emperor
Antoninus, tells us, That (...). Lib. 1.
Subjects and Inferiors are always wont to live in a zealous Affectation of
their Governors Opinions and Sentiments. (...)
The Generality of Men, says Isocrates, are wont to square their Lives and
Manners according to what they behold in their Superiors. Such another saying
is that of Xenophon, (...). Cyr. Inst. l. 8.
As those are that Rule, such for the most part are those who are under their
Rule. (...) l. 3. c. 20.
It was long since observed concerning the Ethiopians, who are Men of a big
size, that they always chose him to be their King who was the biggest Man among
them. They would have a King like themselves: And so it is as usual for
Subjects to make themselves like their King: They count it honorable to do any
thing that he does.

Let me represent this to you in some few Particulars, The Sicilian Tyrant,
Dionysius, being Purblind, thereupon all his Servants feigned an Imperfection
of Sight, and when they were in his Presence, stumbled as they went: Yea, the
very Waiters and Attendants at his Table made as if they could not well see the
Dishes and Chargers, says Deipnosoph. l. 4.
Athenaeus, that they might seem to be as Short-sighted as their Master. The
Courtiers of King Alexander the Great counterfeited wry Necks, because their
Sovereign bore his Head a little sideling. Diodorus the Sicilian relates of the
Ethiopians of old, that if their King was Lame, or Halted, or was disabled in
any part of his Body, his Courtiers presently disabled the same Part or Member.
And (...). Geograph. l. 17.
Strabo confirms this in express Words. And as it is thus in respect of Bodily
Infirmities and Blemishes, so it happens likewise in regard of all other things
that come under Imitation. When Julius Caesar pretended to be a Skilful Mason
and Engineer, there were great numbers that were ambitious to Excel that way.
Our King Edward the Third being a Valiant Prince, and delighting in Arms, we
read that Martial Men were very numerous, and that they endeavored to exceed
one another in Warlike Enterprises. The very Fashions or Recreations of Great
Ones have been greedily embraced by the People. All the Italian Ladies affected
an Amber-colour'd Hair when Poppaea's (which was of that Color) was so admired
by Nero, and extolled by him in Songs and Catches; then they all strove to dye
their Locks of that hew. The Roman Historians acquaint us, that Augustus Caesar
loved Poetry, and accordingly every one gave his mind to Versifying in his
days. When Nero played on his Instrument up and down the great Towns, Minstrels
and Fiddlers were all in Fashion. When Commodus the Emperor turned Fencer and
Gladiator, that Exercise grew to be the Mode.

But I will show you that as to all Moral Actions chiefly, i.e. all Vices and
Virtues, a Magistrates Example is of wonderful Influence. These two things then
I will particularly enlarge upon, First, That if a Ruler be Vicious and Wicked,
the People will follow his Steps: And, Secondly, (on the contrary) If the Ruler
be a Man of Virtue and Singular Worth, they will Imitate him in that.

First, I say, if the Ruler be Vicious, the People will follow his Vices.
Abimelech having Usurped the Jewish Government, had a Party that stuck to him,
and followed him in all his Wild and Outrageous Actions, by virtue of those
Charming Words, What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done,
Judge. ix. 48. When Jeroboam set up Golden Calves, his Subjects soon fell down
and Worshipped them; for what Religion the King was of, that they would be of
too. It is Recorded of Vriah the Priest, That he did according to all that King
Ahaz commanded him, 2 Kings xvi. 16. If he disputed not the Lawfulness of any
thing the King said, it is not to be questioned but that he Imitated what he
did. There are such People in all Ages; they follow the Prince even in his very
Vices and Impieties. This was observed by one that was a King himself, Prove.
xxix. 12. If a Ruler hearkens to lies, all his Servants are wicked, they will
lie too; and whatever other Vices he is guilty of, they will certainly imitate
him. Justin the Historian has these Remarkable Words, speaking of one of the
Ptolomee's, King of Egypt, Luxuriae se t^adiderat, Regisque mores omni^ se^uta
regia. I^aque non amici tantum p^aefectique verum etiam omnis exerci^us, etc.
He gave himself up to Riot and Luxury, and then all his Court did so too:
Wherefore not only his Friends and Favorites, his Great Captains and
Commanders, but all his Army addicted themselves to Idleness and Debauchery.
There was an Universal Licentiousness among all those that observed the King's
Behavior. It was his Example that Debauched them: By minding what he did, they
all became Loofe and Extravagant, Wanton and Effeminate. And Lib. 36.
Livy observes the very same of Antiochus King of Syria, and so does Antiochi
coecam and amentem luxuriam exercitus imitatus. Lib. 9. c. 1.
Valerius Maximus; His whole Army, says he, followed him in his Blind and
Sottish way of Living. Alexander the Great's Excessive Intemperance made that
Vice received in all Greece; Tippling became the Fashion of the Country; to be
a Grecian and a Drunkard were all one. When Pope Leo lived, who loved the Stage
and Actors, all Rome swarmed with Mimicks and Players. I might mention several
other Instances to prove how prone Men are to imitate the Failings and Defects
of their Superiors. Gregory Nazianzen, in the Oration which he made at the
Funeral of Basil the Great, acquaints us that some Persons affected even the
Infirmities of that Great Man, thinking that those had some worth in them, or
at least that they were wholly to be excused because they were found in him.
Nay, the Imitation of Superiors went further yet, for we are told that when the
Emperor Otho killed himself, many of his Subjects dispatched themselves out of
Compassion and Kindness to him. They would Imitate their Prince not only living
but dying.

And thus you see how Reasonable it is (which is the thing I am urging) that
Magistrates and Rulers should behave themselves in a very exact manner. To
prosecute this yet farther, I will show you that when Magistrates are Vicious
and Wicked, there is, 1st. danger of a greater Contagion; 2dly. Of an heavier
Punishment than ordinary.

That there is a Contagion I have proved already; but it is as easy to prove
that this is propagated by Magistrates more than by any other sort of Men. The
Sins of Private Men, and such as are in a mean and ordinary Condition, Infect
those only who immediately converse with them; but when Great and Eminent
Persons Sin, they must needs scatter the Infection to a very wide
Circumference, because they are known to all, and their Crimes become
Catholic. It was Excellently said of Tully, Pernisiosius de Repub. merentur
vitiosi Principe^, quod non solum vitia concipiunt ipsi, sed ea infundun^ in
civitatem* neque solum obsunt quod illi ipsi corrumpuntur, sed etiam quod
corrumpunt, plusque exemplo quam peccato nocent. Lib. 3, de Legib.
Vicious Rulers deserve worse of the Commonwealth than others, because they not
only themselves conceive Vices, but infuse them into the Commonalty; They are
hurtful to the Public not only because they themselves are Corrupted, but also
because they Corrupt others, and do more harm by their Example, than by the
Fault it self. Why? Because their Example is enough to make Error Authentic,
and their single Practice is able to justify a Crime: for meaner Persons think
it cannot but be Virtuous to Imitate them, and they conclude that to be Good
which they see them do. Plutarch said rightly, (...), etc.
When Wickedness is added to Power, Madness is added to the Motions of the
Soul; for Wickedness receiving a quick Course from Power and Authority, drives
forth the Affections into Act; Anger passes into Slaughter, Lust into Adultery,
Covetousness into Oppression. But this is not all, Authority makes others
worse, as well as themselves; for the Multitude are encouraged in their Vicious
Practices, by observing the Faults of those in Place; they think they have from
their Example a Patent for Vice, and a Protection for their most Notorious
Crimes. Hae^ est conditio Principum ut quicquid faciunt, praecipere videantur.
Quintil, 8. Declam.
The Actions of Governors pass for Edicts and Laws. Inferior Persons stand
waiting to see what their Superiors do, and they imagine that they cannot do
amiss, as long as they take them for their Pattern. Thus we see what Influence
the Vicious Behavior of Rulers has: Their Faults are like Diseases which
seize upon some Principal part, and so endanger all the rest. Upon this account
they must needs do more harm than others.

In the next place this must be remembered, that the Sins of Governors are not
only more than ordinarily Infections, but the Punishments and Judgments which
attend them are far heavier than those which befall Private Persons. God is used
to proportion Punishment unto Sin; and look where there is an inequality of the
latter, there likewise is a difference as to the former. Now, among other
Circumstances, Sin is made Greater in respect of the Person that commits it.
The Greater he is, the more Heinous and Scandalous is his Fault. Nathan in his
Impeachment of David lets him know that he had given great occasion to the
Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel xii. 14. And without doubt he gave
great occasion of Offense to others (even the Friends of God and of Religion:)
not only the Amorites but the Israelites might be tempted to Blaspheme God's
Name, and to Practice Vice with great Freedom, when they beheld the Flagitious
Deeds which David was Guilty of. A Magistrate's Sin is Great, because it is a
Magistrate's; that very Consideration aggravates it. And thence we may
reasonably infer, that the Penalty of it shall be proportionable. Accordingly
the Sacred History informs us, that generally such a Person is doubly Punished,
namely in himself and in others. Pharaoh was not only personally Plagued, but
all his People suffered for his sake. David numbered the People, and thereby
derived upon himself the Wrath of God, and upon them likewise a very terrible
Infliction. King Hezekiah brought Vengeance on himself and his Subjects, by his
evil Demeanor. The Text says expressly (2 Chronicles. xxxii. 25.) That Hezekiah
rendered not again according to the Benefit done unto him; for his heart was
lifted up: therefore there was Wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Israel. These
suffered for what he did. The Confusion of Egypt was the attendant of the
foolishness (i.e. the Sinfulness) of their Princes, Isa. xix. 11. And you may
hear God speaking thus in Zech. x. 3. Mine anger was kindled against the
Shepherds, and I punished the Goats, i.e. God punished both Rulers and People,
but these for the sake of them. Yea, a Nation is sometimes punished because of
a Wicked King, even when he is dead, as appears from Ier. xv. 4. Israel was
Plagued for Manasses's Sins, after he had left the World. So Pernicious and
Destructive are the Miscarriages of Superiors. The Community is endamag'd by
their Disorders. Their Follies bring down Judgments on a whole Nation. All the
Members suffer for what the Head does. And this happens so from the Nature of
the thing it self, as well as by the just Judgment of God. By Sardanapalus's
Luxury the Assyrian Monarchy was removed to the Medes. By Xerxes's Riot and
Prodigality the Persian Empire was Ruined. And many other Instances there are
of the like Nature. From whence you may gather how Reasonable it is that a
Ruler should endeavor to be free from Vice, and to lead a very Religious and
Pious Life: For if he does otherwise, the People stand ready to follow his
Steps, and so there will be an Universal Corruption, and the Judgments of God
will overtake both Rulers and People.

But, Secondly, Those in High Places are engaged to be Exemplary in their
Lives, and to show forth all Virtues and Graces, because when Men behold these
in them, they are inclined to Imitate them. I have showed before that they are
apt to resemble them in their Vicious Practices: Now I will briefly let you
see, that if they have Examples of another Nature set before them, they will be
inclined to follow them.

As there is no Evil so Pernicious as a Wicked Ruler, because (as I have showed
under the foregoing Head) his Personal Faults soon become National, and his
worst Actions are drawn into Example, so there is no Good in the World so
Universally Beneficial as a Godly Ruler, because most Men will be moved to
Transcribe his Good and Virtuous Actions, and so there will be an effectual and
speedy Reformation of the Public. There are Examples in Holy Scripture which
might be produced here: For as Jeroboam, a Bad King, corrupted the People by
his Evil Life as well as Laws, and thereby made all Israel sin, so we read that
David, Asa, Josiah, Hezekiah, Good Kings, promoted God's Worship and a Holy
Life by their own Practice. Plutarch in the Life of Alcibiades, a Person of
Wealth and Quality in Athens, tells us how he refused to learn to play on the
Flute, and inveighed against that Instrument (as it was then in use) whereupon
it soon wore out of Fashion, and at last was looked upon as a Sordid and
Unbecoming sort of Diversion by the Athenian Gentlemen. Livy acquaints us that
Romulus, who at first was very Extravagant and Irreligious, afterward grew
Sober and Staid: And when he did so, all the Romans changed with him, and
became like him. The Custom of Immoderate and Excessive Attire, Feasting and
Household Stuff had prevailed long at Rome, and could not be Repressed by Laws;
but as soon as Vespasian was Emperor, it went off of it self. Tacitus observes
the Cause of it to be their desire of Emulating their Prince, and conforming
themselves to his Example. This did more than Fear and Penalty. Herodian
observes of Antoninus, Surnamed the Philosopher, that he was the first Emperor
that signally Established Wisdom and good Manners by his own Life and Actions;
whereby it came to pass, that that Age yielded a great Company of Wife and
Grave Men. You may read in a very good Author, that the Senate of Rome's
Acclamation to Severus the Emperor was after this manner, (...). Xiphili^.
All Persons do all things well, because you Rule well. This perhaps may be
said in Flattery to that Prince, but it is undoubtedly true, that if he were a
Good Ruler, the generality of his Subjects would find the happy Influence of it
in the Goodness of their own Lives. Never was there such a Time of Converts, as
when Constantine the Great turned Christian; and afterward when he was
Baptized, Nicephor. l. 7. c. 34.
Twelve thousand Men, besides Women and Children, received the Christian Faith
that Year, and were admitted to Baptism. Ammianus observes of the Emperor
Valentinian, that he being a very Chaste Prince both at Home and Abroad, and
giving way to no Obscene and Lascivious Words or Actions, This was the Bridle
of the Court, and it proved the best way to keep them in good Order. To come
nearer, when King Lucius, a British King, embraced the Faith of the Gospel, and
was Baptized, great numbers of his Subjects received the same Faith, and
flocked to the Baptismal Waters; and so Paganism and Idolatry decayed daily.
And afterward, when Heathenism returned into this Land, by the Invasion which
the Saxons made, it by degrees wore off again by the powerful Example of their
Kings: When King Ethelbert and King Sebert embraced the Christian Religion and
were Baptized, the Nation was in a short time Christianiz'd. Thus it is evident
what great Obligations lie upon Rulers and Governors to be Good and Righteous;
for their Examples teach Goodness most powerfully and effectually.

There are other Considerations (besides these which I have mentioned and
insisted upon) to convince you of this Truth, That a Magistrate ought to be a
Man of an Exemplary Life, and to surpass others in all laudable Endowments and
Actions. I might mention this, that he cannot with any confidence govern
others, unless he have a Government over himself, and looks narrowly into his
own Life and Manners. He cannot with Boldness call upon others to obey those
Laws which he breaks himself. One of the Ancients expresses it thus; (...),
etc. Plut. (...).
It is not for him that is falling, to set others upright; it is not for him
that has no command over himself, to command others. It must be looked to in
the first place that the Rule be straight, and lie right and orderly if you
intend to bring those things to a rectitude which it is applied to. So must a
Prince first rightly settle his Command and Empire over himself, and direct his
own Manners in order to a right governing of others. This latter cannot be done
as it should be without the former: Though it is true it is done after some
sort where the other is wanting. Thus Plutarch Remarks of Sylla, that he would
be frequently prescribing Laws to the Romans of Sobriety and Chastity, whilst
himself was a Stranger to them both, and indulged himself in all Intemperance
and Leudness. Domitian made severe Laws against Adultery, whilst he lived in
Incest with his Niece. Justinian the Emperor, that caused the Imperial Laws to
be compiled (the Rules of the highest Justice) suffered all sorts of Injustice
to be unpunished, ^aith Evagrius; though I know others dissent from him in
this. But most certainly, it is with inward shame and regret that any Ruler
requires Obedience to the Laws, and yet is Lawless himself. He cannot do it
with a clear and Manlike Spirit, his Con^cience must needs buffet him; and if
there be any spark of Ingenuity yet remaining, he cannot but labor under great
Unea^ine^s and Reluctance.

The next Consideration is this, That Magistrates are to Punish others, and
upon that account are obliged to be Blameless and Upright themselves. It was
said of Cato the Censor, that the Strictness of his own Life, made him a Bold,
Severe and Rigid Animadverter on others. And so every Governor may with
Confidence and Authority restrain and correct Vice in others, when he permits*
it not in himself. But how can he punish Offenses that commits them? With what
Face can he be actually Guilty of that which he Animadverts upon, and severely
Chastises in others? For this Reason a Ruler should be exceeding wary in his
Life and Manners.

Again, by his effectual Influencing on others it will come to pass, that their
Actions will be interpreted his. Their Good Deeds will be reckoned so, because
they were the Effect of his Authority. And how joyful a Reflection must this
needs be, that the Virtuous Acts of so many Persons are esteemed as his own?
But then on the other side, the Evil Actions and Enormities of Men shall be
attributed to him, if he made them Bad by his Example. This must needs lie very
heavy on his Mind, and therefore it follows hence, that those who preside over
others are hugely concerned to look to their Lives.

Moreover, this might be added in the last place, that the Devil, the Malicious
Spirit of Darkness, chiefly designs and endeavors the Corrupting of Governors,
and those in high Places. Fight neither against small nor great, but against
the King, against Rulers and Potentates, is the Maxim of that Infernal
Politician. We read ( Acts xiii. 8.) that Elymas the Sorcerer sought to turn
away Sergius Paulus the Deputy (the Great Man of the Country) from the Faith.
If he could pervert him, he knew he should gain others fast enough. That which
was Nero's Bloody wish, That all the People of Rome had but one Neck, that he
might cut it off at one blow; the same in some kind is Satan's constant
Endeavor, viz. in the Person of the Head and Governor to destroy all the
People, whilst by his wicked Example he Debauches all that are under him. A
Magistrate for this reason ought to be very observant of his Actions, thereby
to Defeat and Baffle the Designs of the Prince of Darkness. These are the
Reasons of that Proposition which I founded on the Words of the Text.

Now I will offer some seasonable Inferences from what has been said.

First, Let those in Authority check and reprove themselves if they find that
their Lives are Evil, and that (instead of being Examples of Goodness and
Holiness) they have taught others by their Practice to act Wickedly and
Profanely. When it was the Fashion heretofore to make Gods, some Great Men
would needs Practice this upon themselves; and then they thought they had a
License to do what they pleased: And too many, though not of Pagan Principles,
are seen to Imitate them too much, whilst being of the number of those whom the
Scripture calls Gods, they take Liberty to act that which is unworthy of Men:
And whereas they should Punish Vice, they are themselves Examples of it. But
this is a very Gross and Abominable Miscarriage, and therefore you that are
Magistrates ought seriously to consider of it. You must not imagine that your
Authority cancels your Obligations to Virtue, and that your Greatness compounds
for your Wickedness. Reckon not that you have an Advantage above others to do
Ill, and go unpunished. Think of this, that your Quality does not Annihilate or
Extenuate your Faults, but hugely Aggravates and Inhanses them. There is an
evil that I have seen under the Sun, says Solomon, an error that proceeds
from the Ruler; and it is his Fault, (as he adds) that folly is set in great
dignity, as you read Eccl. x. 5, 6. Thus this Great Monarch takes notice of and
reproves the Evil Behavior of Crowned Heads, and of Subordinate Governors; and
therefore you must not imagine that your Place gives you leave to do what you
will. But rather persuade your selves of this, that the thing which should
Exalt Palaces above Cottages, and Magistrates above the Common People, is the
Transcendency of their Virtues.

Secondly then, As you are desirous to do any good in your Places, be careful
that your Lives be Virtuous and Exemplary. The Advice of one of the Ancient
Moralists to a Person in Authority, shall be mine to you, (...). ^ Orat.
Set your selves Patterns to others in Sobriety, and all other commendable
Qualities, knowing that the Manners of the whole City are conformable to the
Behavior of those that are in Authority. Remember that your Actions are all
taken notice of, and therefore they ought to be such as should be Imitated.
Take heed that you Soil not your Worthy Endowments and Good Actions with others
that are Blameable; as it is said that Julius Caesar stained his Valor and Great
Learning with Prodigality and Lasciviousness: His Successor Augustus Tainted
his Liberality and Clemency with Impatience and Envy: Vespasian Clouded his
Good Nature and Prowess with Avarice: And Trajan Sullied his Justice and
Affability with his Cruelty to the Christians: And (to give an Instance at
Home) our King Henry VII. Eclipsed his Wisdom by his Covetousness. Let your
Virtues be entire, let there be nothing seen to Obscure them. Shine forth with
a perfect Light, and remember that others shine with a Light borrowed from you:
Therefore if you substract your Rays, you leave them in Darkness. Great Men
generally endure not any Rivals, they cannot brook Competitors and Equals. Let
it be seen that you cannot suffer Rivals in Virtue and Goodness. Strive to
surpass others in Sobriety, Justice, Mercy, Piety and Religion. Endeavor to
Excel your Inferiors in Sanctity, as well as in Authority and Dignity. Be not
only above their Conditions and Stations in the World, but above the Qualities
of their Minds, and the Actions of their Lives.

Thirdly, Not only Rulers but the whole Community are concerned in this Text,
and in the Doctrine I have treated of. We are all bound to Bless God for Good
Rulers and Able Magistrates. This is a signal Favor and Blessing to a Nation.
Rulers are like Heavenly Bodies, which cause Good or Evil Times, says the Lord
Verulam. Whether we speak of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Governors, it is most
true: Whether we apply it to those that are concerned in the Temporal or
Spiritual Affairs, it holds good. Next to a Good Magistrate there is not a
greater Blessing under Heaven than a Good Minister. But of the former I speak
at present: There is nothing more profitable, desirable and excellent than a
Worthy Goververnor: And on the contrary, what can be more pestilent and
destructive than Bad ones? They are indeed Rulers of Sodom, according to the
Sacred Style, Isa. i. 10. and then it is no wonder that we read in the same
place that their People are People of Gomorrah. How great reason therefore have
you to thank God for Religious Governors! The Wise Man tells us, That when the
Righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when the Wicked bears
rule, the people mourn, Prove. xxix. 2.

Thus I have spoken to Magistrates and People; I will now, in few Words,
Address my self particularly to the Person who this Day is to be Chosen, and
afterward Inaugurated into the Office of Chief Magistrate of this Corporation,
as a fit Person to be (...) with so high a Concern: And therefore let me remind
you of your proper Duty in these present Circumstances. D^vid prayed, Psalm. 51.
12.
That God would uphold him with his free Spirit; in which Petition he refers to
the Great Place and Dignity he was advanced to, he desires such an Heroical and
Princely Temper as befitted that high Station. May this Generous and Noble
Spirit inspire you, and cause you to do nothing that is Vile and Mean, unworthy
of your Place, and unbecoming your Station. May this powerfully stir you up to
act vigorously for God and Religion, and prompt you to exercise Justice with
due severity. It is not to be denied that England may vie with any Nation in
the World for Good and Wholesome Laws, but the grand Complaint (and which is too
true) is, that they are seldom executed by Inferior Magistrates. I hope, Sir,
you will cause this Complaint to cease, and that you will not bear the Sword in
vain, but remember to draw it, and make Offenders feel the edge of it. If, like
Phineas, you stand up, and execute Judgment, our Plagues will cease, God's
Judgments will be averted, and his Blessings derived on this Town. This Town
indeed is your peculiar Province, your particular Care: the Privileges and
Immunities, the Peace and Welfare of which are most sacredly to be preserved by
you. One of the Roman Emperors made it his Boast, that when he came first to
Rule he found the City of Rome built with Brick, but he left it made of Marble.
Assure your self, Sir, that to leave a Town better in Manners than you found
it, is a truer Monument of your Care of the Place, and will be more lasting
than Marble or Brass. When you look upon your outward Habiliments, and the
Badges of your Office, remember that they teach you to do something more than
other Men. For, do you think that you are to differ from others in Honor, and
not in those things likewise which are of an higher Nature? Why does the
Topping Mace lead the Van when you come into Public? What serves the Venerable
Scarlet or Fur for? What do your Worshipful Appellations and Titles signify? To
what purpose is your Solemn Equipage and Retinue? Are all your Ensigns of
Authority, and Badges of Honor mere Pageantry? Do not these tell you that as
you are Distinguished from other Persons, so you ought to Excel and Surpass
them? When therefore you shall actually take upon you the Government of this
Ancient and Renowned Corporation, see that you first outdo your self, and then
make others outstrip their former Actions, that it may be said with truth,
That this Place is visibly Amended and Reformed by your being Mayor.

To shut up all, take care to discharge your Duty, and be not Afraid. Do what
God, what your Prince, and what the Laws command you, and that will be
sufficient Protection to you. And, bear this ever in your Mind, that it is a
Virtuous and Exemplary Life, and that only, which can create you a firm Respect
and Esteem. Your Place may (and that justly) cause Admiration and Reverence,
but it is Goodness alone which will purchase you True Honor, for this is the
Recompense only of Real Deserts.

How the Ministers of the Gospel are to Excel.
A Sermon Preached before the Clergy at the Archdeacon of Ely's Visitation.
1 COR. XIV. 12. Forasmuch as ye are Zealous of Spiritual Gifts, seek that ye
may Excel to the Edifying of the Church.
THE Gifts of God to the Sons of Men are of a very Remarkable Variety and
Diversity: Some are of the Highest Degree and Greatest Magnitude; such are the
Saving Virtues and Graces which adorn the Minds, and appear in the Lives of all
Holy Men: The second and middle sort are those Common Graces which are freely
conferred both on Good and Bad, for the Service and Benefit of the Church; of
which Rank were the Gift of Tongues, of Healing, of Prophesying, and such like
Miraculous Donations which were necessary for the first Founding and
Propagating of Christianity in the world. And with These may be Ranked all the
goodly Indowments of Men's Souls all the fair Accomplishments of Nature, an^ ^he
noble Acquirements which by Art an^ ^^dustry they have enriched their Faculties
with. The third and last degree of God's Gifts (which by Vulgar Minds are
reckoned as the Greatest, but really are the Meanest of all) are those Good
things which belong to the Body and Outward State of Man: Such are Health,
Riches, and Honor, and all other things of resembling Quality. These (alas)
are poor and sorry Acquisitions if compared with the more Noble Accomplishments
of the Better Part of Man. And yet both These and They may be strangely abused
and perverted by the Owners of them, contrary to the design of the Donor, and
the excellent ends for which they were bestowed. Thus (to Instance) many make
their Wealth and Great Revenues subservient only to their Rambling Lusts: and
Pride and Ostentation have stained the Spiritual Endowments of others.

Of this latter our Apostle has given a sufficient Demonstration in this
Epistle. Here you may read how the Church of Corinth (a Church planted by the
Ministry of St. Paul himself, and Eminent for all Spiritual Gifts) either not
knowing, or not minding the Right Use of such an excellent Treasure ( viz. that
the meanest of them were intended for the Good and Benefit of the Christian
Community, and that all of them were some ways useful to that End) vainly
disparaged Some of them, and unwisely set the Greatest Value on Others, which
really were not in themselves serviceable to the Highest and Noblest Purposes.
Pride and Applause, Vain Glory and Affectation made them prefer Tongues before
Prophesying, i.e. their own Private Credit and Reputation before the Common
Good and Edification of their Brethren. This is the occasion of the Apostle's
Admirable Discourse concerning Spiritual Gifts, which begins at the Twelfth
Chapter: Where first of all he acquaints them with the wonderful Diversity and
Disparity of God's Gifts; and then endeavors to convince them that the Meanest
of them are not to be disregarded, since all of them issue from one and the
same Spirit, and acknowledge the same Author and Donor. And as the Original of
them all is alike, so also is the Intent and Design of them, which is no other
than the Common and Universal Good. From such Premises as these he Infers, that
it is gross Folly for any to be Proud of their Gifts, and to Insult over their
Brethren on the account of what they have received; and that it is as
unreasonable to Envy those that are Possessors of the Choicest Gifts, as it is
to despise those that are Owners of the Meanest. This is the main Scope of the
12th Chapter.

And now, because Ambition, and desire of Excelling and Outstripping one
another, have possessed their Minds, he persuades them in the last Verse of
that Chapter to a Virtuous Zeal and Holy Emulation, [(...)] Covet earnestly the
better Gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way] a Superlative
Method of Outvying others, and even of Outdoing your selves, and that is no
other than Charity, that Great and Noble Grace which will render you Eminent
and Useful in the World, which will set off all your other Gifts and
Endowments, and direct you how to manage them for the best Advantages. This
Sovereign and Superintending Grace will most successfully guide all the
Inferior ones, and put them upon their proper Work and Employment, and conduct
them most prosperously to their right End. This Grace the Apostle admirably
deciphers in the Thirteenth Chapter, and in the beginning of the Fourteenth he
shuts up that part of his Discourse with a Persuasive to so Incomparable a
Virtue, [ Follow after Charity,] pursue it with the greatest Eagerness and
Vigor, and give not over till you have perfectly attained it. Be careful above
all things to Excel in This, which makes all your other Seize beneficial
both to your selves and others. Strive then to surpass one another in the
Improvement of this Evangelical Grace; for this is an Harmless Contention, this
is an Innocent and Holy Emulation, and most suitable to the Christian Spirit,
and the Genius of the Gospel. Follow after Charity, and desire spiritual Gifts.
Join the one and the other, and you are safe.

And then immediately our Apostle (having thus cautioned all with Charity)
takes occasion again to speak of those Spiritual Gifts which he had insisted on
before. There was it seems a Great Mistake about them, and therefore he thinks
good to Rectify their Judgments thoroughly in the point; and this he does by
telling them, that though the Gift of Tongues was in great request among them,
(for This Reason it is likely, because the Ap^stles were most eminently endued
with That, the Holy Ghost descending on them in the shape of Cloven Tongues)
yet the Gift of Pr^phe^ying ( i.e. of Understanding and Interpreting God's
Will) was clearly the more Valuable and Desirable Accomplishment; and, amongst
All the Spiritual Gifts conferred on the Christian Church, deserved to be
ranked in the first place. For though Variety of Tongues might seem more
Admirable, and make a greater Noise, and create more Wonder and Astonishment,
yet certainly if they sought not rather to be Admired for their Gifts than to
be Beneficial by them, they could not but give the Precedence to Prophecy, that
being the more Useful Gift, and that which conduces most to our greatest
Concern, and our highest Interest, the Edification of the Church of Christ. It
is better to do Good, than to appear Great. Tongues have their Use, but in
Subordination to Prophesying. That is most Excellent which is most Advantageous
and Edifying.

This is the Scope of the Apostle's Discourse in this Chapter, whereof my Text
is a part, and indeed the Sum of the whole. (...).
What is Useful to many, and Profitable to the Church, that the Apostle here
sets down for a Rule to go by, says St. Chrysostom on the Place. Whatsoever
Gifts ye seek to Excel in, do it (ye Corinthians) with this main design (which
is the Worthiest and Noblest in the World) to advance the Building of the
Church of Christ; forasmuch as ye are desirous of Spiritual Gifts, seeing ye
are such great Zealots for Spirits; (for so it is in the (...).
Original) since your Ambition hurries you to things of that Exalted Quality,
study (I beseech you) to improve them for the real Benefit of the Christian
Community, Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. God has a
Church to erect, and calls for our Service therein. Who would not bring the
Best things to the Best Work? Who would not be furnished with the Greatest
Skill for so Difficult an Employment? They that heartily love the Church, and
sincerely tender the Good of its Members, never think they can prepare
themselves enough for its Service, and are ever studying to do More, making the
Apostle's Words their Motto, (Who is sufficient for these things)? Here it is
that they spend their best Affections; and their highest Aims and Enterprises
center in This. They are Impatient till they can bring with them Gold and
Silver and Precious Stones for so Glorious and Edifice. They are ambitious to
Excel, not that they may thereby derive a Glory and Applause upon themselves,
but for the solid Good of their Christian Brethren. So that the Text is no
other than the Dictate of Christian Charity, prescribing to us the way of Using
those Gifts Well, which are so subject to be abused. Charity esteems it better
to be Profitable to Men's Souls, than to purchase their Acclamations and
Applause; it teaches us to prize the Salvation of Men more than our own Glory.

But it is high time to lead you to the Particular and Distinct Consideration
of the two things here mentioned, 1. The Operation or Means in order to a Noble
End, Seek that ye may excel. 2. The End it self, to the edifying of the Church.
I begin with the latter first, for in Practical Discourse the End does not
unjustly challenge the first Place. And indeed, true Wisdom instructs its
Followers to propound a Right End to themselves, and then to make Choice of
such Means as are proper for that End. We are liable to miscarry in both of
These; for sometimes we Aim right, but shoot awry, our Actions bearing no
proportion to the Goodness of our Intentions: At other times we are in a right
Course, but propound a wrong End; so that Good Performances are marred by Ill
Purposes. Now, the Apostle here meets with both these Defects, and labors
their amendment, propounding to us the End together with the Means; the best
End, the Church of God, and the edifying thereof; the best Means, seek that ye
may Excel. Every Action is designed to some Purpose, and according to this we
aim either Right or Wrong; we either deport our selves laudably, or hugely
miscarry in our Lives. It will concern us therefore to fix our selves Aright at
first, and to propound to our selves such an End as we may not be ashamed to
own in the whole Course of our Actions. And such certainly is the Church of
God, which is most deservedly the Scope of all our Enterprises, Prayers and
Wishes. This baffles all sneaking Designs and Projects; this bravely leads us
out of our selves, and carries us directly to the Supreme Good, and there
stints and determines all our Passions and Desires. We at once become Lovers of
God and of his Church, the one absolutely Influencing upon the other; the Glory
of the Almighty and the Good of Souls being so twisted together, that it will
be found a thing wholly impossible to divide them. For the Church being that
Society of Holy Men wherein God is more peculiarly acknowledged and glorified,
it must needs be that whilst we tender the Welfare of that Society, we likewise
more signally advance God's Glory. Our Love, if it be true and real, will
reflect from God to his Church; and through the Church it will ascend to God
again.

The Edifying or Building of the Church, which is the thing here designed,
principally belongs to Christ Jesus himself. It looks like a Paradox, but is
certainly true that the 1 Cor. iii. 11.
Foundation and Ephesians. ii. 20.
Chief Cornerstone in the Building are the Chief Architect also. On this Rock,
says he to St. Peter, I will build my Church. This Glorious Fabric is raised
by Christ's own hand. Yet this Work in some measure belongs to all Holy and
Exemplary Christians; they are useful and necessary for the promoting of this
Structure. But more especially the Guides and Rulers of the Church, the
Ministers of the Gospel, the Dispensers of God's Holy Word are employed in this
Work; they are in a peculiar manner appointed, and set apart on purpose to be
Artificers and Builders in the Erecting of the Christian Church; they are
particularly designed for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, i.e. his Church, Ephesians. iv. 12.

First, Our great Care must be to lay the Foundation; and what that is our
Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. iii. 11. Other foundation can no man lay than that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, i.e. the Meritorious Undertaking of the
Son of God, Christ Jesus the Blessed. There is no Salvation but by a lively and
effectual Faith in the Blood of this Lamb of God. This is the same with the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. ii. 20. which St. Paul tells the
Ephesians they are built upon, viz. the Doctrine of the Redemption and Salvation
by Christ, delivered by these Inspired Men, and which they received from Christ
himself, who in the same place is called the Chief Cornerstone. This is the
Great Fundamental Point of the Christian Institution, this is the main Truth on
which all Christianity is founded, and therefore we must be very Faithful in
the Asserting and Vindicating of this. The whole Fabric of our Religion sinks,
and that irrecoverably, without this firm and steady Basis. And all the other
Principles and Rudiments of Christianity, which are also justly styled the
Foundation, Heb. vi. 1. are our proper Concern: We are indispensably obliged to
instruct our Charge in all those Divine Truths of the Gospel which the Writings
of the Evangelists and Apostles furnish us with.

And having laid the Foundation with singular Care and Skill (as knowing that
it is this which Supports the Fabric) we must proceed to erect our
Superstructure, to build upwards as well as downwards. And accordingly all the
Holy Doctrines and Rules conducing to Christian Knowledge and Practice are to
be produced, and made use of. We must remember the Apostle's Advice, to build
upon the Foundation nothing but Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, 1 Cor. iii.
12. Such Sound and Orthodox Conclusions as are of real Worth and Value; and not
Wood, Hay, and Stubble, i.e. unnecessary and useless Doctrins or Inferences,
muchless such as apparently Confront the Faith of the Gospel, and Foster Lewd
and Wicked Practices. Colloqu. Mensal.
The Pope (as Luther expresses it) is for Building up the Church, ex
Accidentibus, of Outward things of little value; but we (says he) Build it ex
Substantia, we urge those Doctrines which are Substantial, we press those
Practices which are of Moment, which are Essential to Religion, and have real
Worth and Excellency in them. Thus we should behave our selves, remembering that
the Superstructure ought to be suitable to the Foundation; this being Solid and
Substantial, that must be so too. Briefly, this Excellent Metaphor of Edifying
or Building (which our Apostle seems much to delight in, as we may gather from
his Romans xv. 20. 1 Cor. iii. 10. Gal. ii 18. Ephesians. ii. 22. Col. ii. 7.
frequent using of it) imports no less than an Impartial delivering and
teaching the whole Mystery of Godliness, whether it consists in Fundamentals,
or in such Important and Necessary Matters as are to be grounded on them, all
that our Hearers are to know, and all that they are to do, the Whole Will of
God, and the Whole Duty of Man. In a word, to enlighten Men's Minds, to reform
their Lives, to convert Sinners from the Errors of their Ways, to confirm and
strengthen Converts in the ways of Truth and Righteousness, by any Holy Arts
and Methods to further the real Good of Christ's Flock, by any good Means to
promote the Churches Welfare is to Build it up. This is the Divine
Architecture, this is the Art of Spiritual Building. So that if we hearken to
this Proposal, we shall assuredly advance the Good of the World, and at the
same time promote our own Bliss and Happiness. In seeking the Churches Good we
shall not fail of a Blessing; and that Charity which raises our Hearts to
endeavor the Welfare of the Church Militant will at last Exalt us to the
Glories and Consummation of the Church Triumphant, when they that be wise shall
shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

I proceed now to the next thing propounded, viz. the Means in order to this
Noble End which I have been speaking of, and that is expressed in those words,
Seek that ye may excel. Take care to fit your selves for this Grand Employment
of building up the Church, which is the House of God, 1 Timothy iii. 15. 1 Pet.
iv. 17. Passionately desire and endeavor that you may be eminently and
abundantly Capacitated for this mighty Work. This is the Import of the Word
(...) here used, which signifies both to Excel and to Abound. Be ambitious of
the Choicest Gifts, and strive to possess them in the highest degree. We of the
Sacred Function are not to content our selves with mean and low Seize in
Religion, but to aspire to the Greatest and Noblest Improvements, (...).
Chryson.
to a great Plenty and Abundance of Gifts and Graces; as a Learned and Pious
Father Paraphrases on this Place. We must strive to be Masters of all those
Excellent Qualifications which tend to Edification, and to arrive to what
Perfection we can in them. In short, seeing the Edifying of the Church is the
proper Office of an Evangelical Minister, he must make it his great Business to
pursue this effectually, and to Excel in it by such Means and Methods as these,

First, Prayer: Which seems to be here suggested in the word Seek. This
Excelling and this Edifying must be sought at the Hands of God by humble and
earnest Addresses. If Bezaleel and Aholiab were Exodus xxxi. 3, etc.
filled with the Spirit of God, to excel in all manner of Cunning Workmanship,
for the adorning of the Mosaic Tabernacle, surely then it is from that Holy
Spirit that the Apostles and their Successors are endued with eminent Abilities
for the Service of the Spiritual and Mystical Tabernacle. And if we are
convinced of this, we cannot but see it necessary to apply our selves to this
Sacred Author and Donor of all those Gifts, whereby we may be made capable of
serving the Church of God. You know whose words those are, ^ Cor. iii. 10.
According to the Grace of God which is given to me, as a wise Master Builder I
have laid the foundation. And if it be by Divine Grace and Bounty, then we know
whose work it may properly be said to be; and therefore in the foregoing Verse
he tells them they are God's Building; it is from Him that they make any
progress in Christian Knowledge and Goodness, in Faith and Holiness. To this
Great Operator and Architect we are therefore to repair, and to implore his Aid
and Assistance. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it. We are not able to effect any thing in this great and weighty Undertaking
without his Presence and Blessing; at least, we can do nothing successfully
without his special Concurrence and Guidance. Wherefore, according to Justin
Martyr's Pious Advice, we must (...). Dialog. cum Tryph.
above all things pray that the Gates of Light may be opened to us, that we may
have a Spiritual and Divine Understanding, whereby we may be taught to teach
others. Building up of others, as well as of our selves, in the most holy
Faith, must be joined with Praying in the Holy Ghost, Jude ver. 20, 22, 23. We
may observe that St. Paul is frequent in Prayer, that he may be assisted in his
Ministerial Employment, and he is often requesting others to pray for him, that
his Labors in the Gospel may prove really Advantageous and Successful. This is
that which We also are concerned in, if we expect any Blessing on our
Enterprises. We must remind those who are the peculiar Charge of our Ministry
to solicit Heaven in our behalf; and we must with singular Importunity and
Earnestness beg the Divine Aid our selves. If thus with the devout
Supplications of others we join our own fervent Petitions, we shall certainly
Prosper, we shall derive the Grace and Blessing of Heaven upon us in the
Performances and Offices belonging to our Calling.

Secondly, To this first Method of Edifying and Excelling, we must add that
Apostolical Direction to Timothy, and in him to all the Spiritual Instructors
in the Church, Give attendance to Reading, 1 Timothy, iv. 13. Diligently peruse the
Law and the Prophets, be conversant in the Writings of the Sacred Volume.
Though Timothy was an Inspired Person, yet he is commanded to read the
Scriptures, and to give attendance to them; which is the same with that of St.
Peter (where (...).
the same Greek word is used, and therefore might have been rendered as it is
here) To take heed to, viz. the more sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. i. 19. The
word denotes great Attention and Application of Mind, and obliges us to be very
Careful and Diligent in consulting these Sacred Oracles. Nor are Other Books
excluded here, nay, they are partly meant, as Historians, Moralists, Poets,
Orators, and other Humane Authors. For it is likely the Apostle's Advice here
was in conformity to his own Practice, who reckoned his Books and Parchments
(which some think to be the same, because the Ancient Books were made of Skins
or Parchments, and rolled upon a Cilinder, as our Maps are) as necessary to him
as his Cloak in Winter, 2 Timothy iv. 13. What these Books were I have no
Catalogue to tell me, but I know of some others that he dealt in, as those
three Poets, Epimenides, Aratus and Menander, the quoting of which he thought
not unworthy of an Inspired Apostle And he was not only Skilled in the Greek
Poets and other Good Greek Authors, that wrote in Prose (for if he was Curious
to read the former, it is not to be questioned but that he was acquainted with
the latter) but he had Knowledge in Hebrew Writers: For he sat at the Feet of
Rabbi Gamaliel, who was a Famous Doctor of the Law, Nephew of the Celebrated
Hillel, and Prince of the Sanhedrim; by whom this his Scholar was created a
Member and an Elder of that Renowned Council; as the Learned Mr. Seldom
affirms, who was Antiquary sufficient to make it good. This Great Apostle tells
us himself, that he was Gal. i. 14.
Exceedingly zealous of the Traditions of his Fathers; he had a mighty desire
to be acquainted with the Ancient Doctrines and Customs of the Hebrews, and
accordingly he searched into the Talmudick Writings; and there it was that he
found the express Names of two of the Egyptian Magicians, viz. Iannes and
Iambres, and has left them upon Record in 2 Timothy iii. 8. From these Hints we
may guess what other Authors he was versed in, and how he came by his Polite
Learning, and by that which was Severe, and how exactly he was fitted to be a
Doctor of the Gentiles and the Jews both: Which is abundantly demonstrated from
his Profound Epistles, which speak him a Master of Logic and Oratory, of
Reason and Eloquence.

Nor was it thought in the succeeding Ages of the Christian Church that this
sort of Accomplishments was unworthy of the Evangelical Ministers; nay, it was
reckoned to be of great Use and Advantage. Whence it was that Julian the
Apostate, by a Decree, forbad Christians the Reading of Heathen Authors, giving
this reason for it, that they by the studying of these Writers, would know how
to Wound the Pagans with their own Weapons. And on other Accounts it might be
showed, that Profane Writers are serviceable among Christians. There is no
sober Man will give heed to that strange Illusion of St. Ierom, who dreamt that
an Angel Scourged him for Reading Tully's Orations, and other good Latin
Authors, as if to be a Ciceronian and a Christian were inconsistent. It is
enough to say that it was a Dream, and that his composed Thoughts, when he was
awake and thoroughly sensible, corrected such Extravagant Fancies, and
represented to him how useful some of the Gentile Writings are, and that a Man
cannot understand the Original Texts of the Old and New Testament, without some
Skill and insight into them. How requisite the Poets and Philosophers Writings
are to a Christian Divine, is showed by Cont. Faust* I. 13. c. 15.
St. Augustine, and other Ancient Fathers, who particularly represent to us the
Usefulness of this sort of Learning in Sacred Studies.

But our Chief Converse should be with the Bible: This we should constantly
look into, and be always perusing. Why do you not spend all your time, in which
you are not employed in the Service of the Church, in reading this Book
especially? said a very Pious Ambros. Offic. 1. 20.
Bishop, treating of the Office of a Clergyman. Concerning Basil and Gregory
Nazianzen we are told by Eccles Hist. I. 2. c. 9.
Rufinus, that for Thirteen Years together they laid aside all Books that
treated of Secular Matters, and applied themselves wholly to the Reading of the
Volumes of the Sacred Scripture. This most truly may be said, that though we
are not to neglect other Writings; yet these are indispensably Necessary, and
we must lay aside all other Books rather than not find time to read These. And
the Reason is plain, because no Man can pretend to Theological Studies, who
has not acquainted himself with the Sacred Text. For see how it is in Other
Arts and Faculties; there are Books proper and peculiar to them, and without
which there is an utter despair of attaining any Skill in them.

Thus to offer one Example only, the Civil Law is gained by Reading the Digests
or Pandects (of which the Institutions are an Abstract) compiled out of the
Immense Volumes of the Roman Lawyers, some of which were Writ before our
Savior's Time, and others afterward; and they are no other than the Sayings,
Responses and Decisions of the Chief of the Learned in the Law; by reading the
Code, which is made up of the Rescripts, Decrees and Constitutions of the Roman
Emperors and their Wise Council, from Adrian to Justinian. (So that this Volume
differs from the Pandects, as among us the Statute Law or Acts of Parliament
differ from the Common Law, i. e. the Judgment of Lawyers, called Reports.
Wherefore the Pandects must give way to the Code, this being more Valid than
they, as the Commands of Princes are of greater Force than the Dictates of
Lawyers): Moreover by reading the Authenticks or Novels, called so because they
were New Laws added to the other: Lastly, by looking into the Feuds, i.e. the
Customs and Services for the Lands held by Vassals of their Lords, which last
Volume of the Imperial Laws was not added till about the Year 1150. under the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. There is an utter Despair, I say, of gaining any
competent Knowledge in this Excellent sort of Learning, unless a Man peruses
these Books, and the Commentators on them. And so in the Study of Physic, no
Man can arrive to any Perfection in it, unless he be conversant with the
Particular Authors, whether Ancient or Modern, that are Famous in the Faculty.
And the same may be said of all other Arts and Sciences.

But this is in a special manner true in Divinity, the Knowledge of which no
Man can possibly reach, without a diligent and constant Perusal of the Books
which Constitute the Holy Canon, the Writings of the Old and New Testament; for
both are necessary, as we see plainly in the Quotations out of the former which
we meet with in the latter. There are Four and twenty Books of the one cited or
referred to in the other, and out of Genesis and Exodus.
some of them there are above Forty; out of Psalms and Isaiah.
others above Sixty Passages alleged and made use of. The Bible then is a
Volume of absolute Necessity, and cannot be out of the Hands of one that is
devoted to the Ministry. For this cause it was heretofore ordered, that this
Sacred Book should be read at Bishops and Priests Tables even at Dinner; and
still there is a perpetual Obligation on those of the Sacred Function, to give
themselves daily to the Study of the Scriptures, the Divine Writings of Moses
and the Prophets, and the Books of the Evangelists and Apostles. And there is
good reason for it, because they must Build (which is the thing we are now
speaking of) by a Rule; and the Scripture is that Rule. But it is impossible we
should make use of it to this Purpose, unless we be very well acquainted with
it. We cannot Regulate our own or other Men's Actions by this Canon, we cannot
Skilfully apply this Rule, this Square, if we be not very conversant with it,
and have a knowledge of its Excellent Doctrines and Precepts. These are the
Writings that have this Peculiar and Matchless Character, That they are able to
make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy iii. 15. for (as it follows) All Scripture
(i.e. all Holy Scripture, which he had mentioned in the Verse before) is given
by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God (the Minister
of the Gospel) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, may be
enabled to perform all the Parts of his Duty, more especially those which
appertain to his Sacred Calling.

Besides, on other accounts the Scriptures are to be admired, and to have the
preference to all other Books whatsoever. The Great Admirers of Homer tell us,
That they find all things in his Poems; what is Excellent in any Art or
Profession is to be met with there. But upon better grounds I could make it
appear, that the Writings I am speaking of deserve that Character and
Testimony. There is no Man of clear Reason but is fully persuaded that there is
more Undoubted Antiquity, more Excellent History, more profound Reason, more
delightful Eloquence, more Choice Learning of all sorts in the Bible, than in
any other Writings extant in the whole World. There need then no Elaborate
Perswasives to read this Sacred Volume, which is the best under Heaven, not
only in respect of Divine but Humane Literature (and that of all kinds)
contained in it. Even as to this latter, there is none can be said to be an
Accomplished Scholar, if he be not acquainted with this Book.

Next to the Infallible Records of both Testaments, the First and Antientest
Fathers of the Church call for our Esteem and Enquiry. Antiquity in Monuments
is Venerable; in Religion it should be much more so. Prescription corroborates
the Civil Rights and Tenures; I see not why it should not fortify the
Ecclesiastical. Luther and Calvin are Great Names, and will ever be so in the
True Christian Church; but yet they ought in some respects to Veil to those
Greater and Earlier Lights of the Church, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Iren^^us,
Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Cyprian, and others of the Ancients, from
whom we learn what Defections there were from the Truth, what were the Errors,
and Heresies, and Corrupt Practices of the First Ages of Christianity, and how
the Virgin Purity and Simplicity of the Church were almost defaced by them.
Especially from those that were the Learned Apologists in those Times, and
afterward, who Asserted Christianity against the Jews on one hand, and the
Pagans on the other, we may in a great measure discover what is Orthodox and
Authentic, and what is of a different Nature. And it is reasonable to infer
hence, that the Church at this day should for the most part be Defended and
Vindicated by the Writings of those who were its First Defenders, they being so
Great Judges of the Primitive Doctrine and Practice.

Thirdly, To Reading I must necessarily adjoin Meditation; both which performed
by due Turns, is properly Studying. And certainly this is of singular Use: we
cannot more effectually fit our selves for our Great and Important Work that we
are called to, than by serious, and sober Reflections on our Minds, by Sifting
and Examining our Notions, and observing what Conformity they bear to our
Unprejudiced Faculties; by being intimately acquainted with our Thoughts, and
exercising our selves to a familiarity with Rational and Solid Principles, and
by causing them to bring their utmost Aids to Support and Maintain the Articles
of Christianity. Our Reading will be of little use without this; for it is by
Pondering on the things that we have Read, and by Comparing them among
themselves, that we are able to digest our Notions, and to arrive to the true
Understanding of Matters propounded to us. The Royal Psalmist's Experiment
concerning himself is worthy of our Observation, I have more understanding,
says he, than all my Teachers; for thy Testimonies are my Meditation, Psalm.
cxix* 99. I find a mighty Increase and advance in Divine Knowledge, because I
use my self to a serious Contemplation on those Heavenly and Sublime Truths,
and thereby I am capable of penetrating into the profound Nature of them, and
to discern those wonderful things in them which are hid from others. We may
take notice, that after many seasonable Instructions and Precepts given by St.
Paul to Timothy, his Faithful Assistant in the Work of the Gospel, he adjoins
this, which is of as great use as any of the rest, Meditate upon these things,
1 Timothy iv. 15. And so again, after several Pious Admonitions and Exhortations,
he adds, Consider what I say, 2 Timothy ii. 7. Which Advice reaches all of
Timothy's Character, and is as much as if he had said, Revolve these things
often in your Minds, and let this Charge which I leave with you be continually
in your Thoughts. Accustom your selves to Thinking, and know that it is the
part of a Christian, as well as of a Man: but especially it is an indispensable
Qualification in a Public Instructor, in one that is to Amend and Rectify the
Sentiments of Mankind. If therefore we are desirous to attain to any
Improvement and Excellency in our Ministry, we must not herd with the Crowd,
but retire from it, and hold converse with our own Minds, and thereby Teach and
Instruct our selves, and so we shall be fit to do the same to others: Which is
the next thing I shall treat of.

Fourthly, Another way whereby we are to Edify the Church, and Excel in it, is
the Office of Preaching, or (as the Apostle styles it) Prophesying. He gives
this the Precedence to all the other Gifts which he mentions either in this or
the Twelfth Chapter of this Epistle. Covet earnestly spiritual Gifts, but
rather that ye may Prophesy. This is that Endowment which, according to him,
makes most for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, and
for the Edifying of the Body of Christ. which Character shows it to be this
Gift which I Am now to speak of. This is a Complicate Office, and contains many
Excellent things in it; as first, the Informing of Men's Judgments, and setting*
them into Right Apprehensions concerning things in Religion. The Leading
Requisite, as I conceive, in a Preacher, is Orthodoxy. He is to be one that
owns those Principles and Articles of Faith which have been always professed by
the Universal Church. Let us not assume the Title of Protestants, and yet
reject some of the Great Heads of Divinity which are acknowledged by all Sober
Persons of the Reformation. Let us not say we are of the Church of England, and
yet deny some of the Chief Doctrines contained in her Articles. Let us not
profess our selves to be Ministers of the Word, and yet renounce those Truths
which are formally contained in it, or are according to it: For either Express
words of Scripture, or Natural and Plain Consequences from it, are to be the
Standards of that Doctrine which we deliver.

It is required of us not only to Establish Truth, but to Detect and Confute
Falsehood and Heresy, therein following the Example of those Great Men,
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Augustine, Theodoret. And truly this is become necessary
in this Extravagant Age, where so many Wild Notions are entertained, and so
many Old Errors revived. The Christian Structure cannot but be exposed to great
Hazards and Dangers, when its Foundations are Undermined by some, and its
Superstructure has continual Batteries made against it by others. In such
Circumstances how Careful and Watchful should we be? How Vigorously and
Concernedly should we act? Like those Builders at the Restoration of the Jews,
with a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword in the other. We must be in a Defensive
and Offensive Posture at once, securing and maintaining the Apostolical Faith,
and grappling with the Opposers of it at the same time. But yet I must insert
this Caution, That we ought carefully to avoid all Unnecessary Disputes, for
nothing is more unbecoming a Preacher of the Gospel, and nothing does more
hinder the Success of his Ministry. Accordingly we may observe, That the
Doctrines which minister questions, are opposed to Godly edifying, ^ Tim. l. 4.
We shall effect but little in our Employment if we indulge Controversies, and
delight in Quarrels, and promote Intricacies and Perplexities in Religion. Our
task is to avoid these with all care, and to entertain our Hearers with the
Necessary Doctrines of Christianity, such as depend not on the fallible
Deductions of Men, but are fixed and unmovable, founded on the Holy Oracles,
and delivered by Christ Jesus and his Apostles.

Again, a Minister and Guide of Souls is not only to rectify Men's Judgments,
and to settle them in the Necessary Articles of Religion, but further it is
required of him, that he take care of their Lives and Manners. For though
(...). (...). Epist. l. 4.
True Notions of Religion and Godliness are to lead the way, yet to make a Man
Absolute and Complete there must be Uprightness of Life. Nay indeed, unless
this latter be looked after, the former will soon decay. By Unholiness and
Wickedness we see oftentimes that Men Hazard their Principles. If the Practice
be Debauched, if the Life be Impure, if the Manners be depraved, there will be
a Corruption in the Judgment. Therefore, we that are Dispensers of the Word,
ought to be as concerned for Practical Religion, as for Truth of Doctrine. We
ought not only to Instruct our Hearers in Right Principles, but with all
freedom to reprove their Sins and Vices, and pathetically to Exhort and
Persuade them to all Virtue and Goodness, remembering always, that a Holy and
Exemplary Conversation is the True Edifying of the Church; yea, it is the very
Top-stone of the Building. It is not mere Speculation or bare Discourse that
will atchieve this great Work. This is as if a Man should undertake to Build a
House by Contriving it in his Head, or by Talking of it. It is the utmost
Perfection of a Christian, to Live according to his Excellent Principles. And
consequently it is the chief Business of a Preacher to beat down all
Immorality, Wickedness and Profaneness, and to set up and promote whatever is
Virtuous and Laudable, and especially to advance the Evangelical Virtues and
Graces, and such Duties as are more especially commanded by Christ and his
Apostles in the New Testament. And this very thing shows the Excellency of our
Office, when it is rightly discharged; for the Worthiness and Esteem of
Employments are according to the Usefulness of them. Thus, to instance in other
Faculties, he is the Best La^yer that most successfully directs Men to the
Securing of their Estates and Properties; and he is the Best Physician that
saves Men's Lives. So it is here, he is the Best Divine, he is the Best Preacher
that reforms Men's Manners, and effectually shows them how to save their Souls.
The True Preaching is to answer to Prophesying in the Primitive Church, which
is the thing more particularly designed in the Text, by Excelling to
Edification; and this you find was esteemed by the Apostle as the Best and most
Valuable Gift, because it was most Advantageous to the Church: He that
Prophesies, says he, speaks to men to Edification, and Exhortation, and
Comfort, 1 Cor. xiv. 3. This is the proper Task of the Evangelical Preacher,
viz. not only to Build Men up by Instructing them in their Holy Faith, but by
Powerful Exhortations to the Practice of all Christian Virtues to make them
Better, and to enable them to feel the Comfort and Satisfaction of a Religious
Life.

In Order to this, his Instructions and Exhortations must be Plain and
Intelligible, and easy to be comprehended. We read of some Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
Heretics of old, that were wont to use a great deal of Hebrew in their
Religious Worship, and in their Discourses to the People, thereby to Astonish
and Amaze the Vulgar. But he that would Preach so as to Edify, must not use any
such Arts; he must not soar above the Capacities of those that hear him. Or, if
any one will needs call this Building, it is like that of Babel, where they
understood not one another. We justly Condemn the Papists for Praying in an
unknown Tongue; but let me be so free as to say, that to Preach in a Style
which is not understood by the People, is every whit as unlawful, and as
absurd, Therefore thou, O Man of God, flee these things, and let the Great
Apostle be thy Example, Who 1 Cor. xiv. 19.
would rather speak five words to be understood, and to Edify others, than
utter ten thousand which could not have that effect upon them. The 2. Kings iv.
34.
Prophet shrunk himself into the proportion of the Child he meant to revive:
And so must Spiritual Instructers and Public Exhorters to Virtue deal with
those they intend to recover out of their Sins wherein they are dead, they must
adapt themselves to their Measures, they must suit themselves to their mean
Understandings, and condescend to their Weaknesses, and often Inculcate the
same Divine Lessons, therein having regard to the Forgetfulness as well as the
Ignorance and Shallowness of their Common Hearers.

And as for the Mode of delivering our Doctrines, whether by Book, or without,
that is of the meanest Consideration, and no Intelligent Person will be very
solicitous about it, so it be Grave and Proper. Certainly it is not Necessary
we should commit every Sermon to our Memories: Such perpetual Conning is too
like a School-Boy's Task, methinks; as if our Auditors were Pedagogues, and we
stood in continual Fear of the Ferula, if we should not have all our Lesson by
Heart. Much less is Preaching a needless Mustering up of Authors, an unmerciful
haling of the Fathers out of their Graves to no purpose, a rude claiming
Acquaintance with Greek and Latin Writers, for the sake of a Sentence or two
out of them. It is not pleasing the People with Little and Trifling things, or
astonishing them with too Great and High ones. Nor is it yet any thing made up
of an Affected Tone or Gesture, or any thing of that sort. But (as I
represented it) it is a sober informing of Men's Judgments, and establishing
them in the Grand Points of Religion; it is a plain and bold rebuking of Vice,
and a warm Exhortation to Virtue; it is an affectionate Application of Truth to
the Hearts and Lives of the Hearers. This is Preaching, and thus the Church of
Christ is built up; thus this Great Pile is raised, and reaches with its utmost
Top even to Heaven, where it is Triumphant.

Fifthly, In the next place I must not forget to add, that we are to mind those
things also which respect the Discipline and Order, the Unity and Peace of the
Church. To this purpose its Solemn Censures were Instituted by Christ and his
Apostles; that if there should happen any Dilapidations in the Building of the
Church, it might by these be speedily Repaired, that Persons of Unholy and
Disordered Lives might be debarred Communion with so Holy a Society. And the
Laws of Decency were prudently designed to extirpate all Confusion and
Distraction, and to render the Church and all its Services Beautiful and
Venerable. The Apostle concerning his Converts of Colosse, professes, that he
rejoiced in beholding their Order, Col. ii. 5. A Military word, and signifies
the orderly disposal of Soldiers in an Army. Such should be the Regular
Marshalling of the Church Militant. It is requisite for its Security and
Welfare, that all keep their proper Ranks and Stations, and that a Decorum be
every where observed. We find that Circumstances as well as Substantials are to
be looked after; the Apostle in the Eleventh Chapter of this Epistle controuls
the Solecisms of their External Behavior in the Service of God. He checks
their Rudeness and Irreverence, and gives Rules for the outward Deportment and
Carriage in Praying and Prophesying. It is fit that some care should be taken
of Religion's Outside, that she have a comely Equipage. Decent and Fitting
Circumstances are the Wall about the Spiritual Building; they are the Hedge
about the Field of the Church, which contributes much to her Preservation and
Welfare. It is such a Fence to her as the Bark is to the Tree, which, when it
is utterly neglected, the Fruit, and sometimes the Tree it self, is endangered.
Even those things which are but Accessory and Accidental to Devotion, are of
great use; and the Devotion and Worship themselves would not be long kept up
without these.

But let us remember that they are but Circumstances and Appendages, and that
the things which we are chiefly to be concerned for in Religion are of an
higher Nature, and that the Mind is principally to be employed here. The main
care in God's Worship must be, that it be Spiritual and Sincere, that the Heart
be rightly disposed; for this is the Sacrifice which he chiefly requires and
regards. All must be so done in his Service, that the Simplicity of
Christianity be not abated, that Real and Internal Religion be not diminished,
and that the Visible Face of it be never without the Vitals and Spirit of it.
Let Religion outwardly appear as comely and beautiful as the Rules of Christian
Edification will allow, but by no means let her exceed in Ornament and Bravery;
for she will soon vanish when she grows Pompous, and runs into External Show
and Pageantry.

With Decency and Comeliness are generally coupled Unity and Concord; and these
we are to be concerned for likewise. It is the Harmony and Uniformity of the
Parts of a Building that makes it both Beautiful and Useful. Without this it
would not be a well-ordered Edifice, but a confused Heap. And it is certain,
that by our love of Peace and Unity, we shall successfully contribute toward
the Building of the Church: For there is History enough to convince us, that
the Ancient Heretics and Schismatics betrayed the Faith when they destroyed
the Unity of the Church. At the same time that they made a Breach in her Walls,
they undermined her Foundations. It behooves us of the Clergy, then to maintain
mutual Amity and Agreement both among our selves and others. It is high time to
banish all Dissension, to put a Period to all our Animosities and Vain
Janglings, to dote no longer on Fruitless Disputes, but to pursue the One thing
Necessary, and to embrace our Religion with an Entire Affection, and to commend
it to the World by our Practicing of it.

And so I pass to the last thing which I intended to Name, Seek that ye may
Excel in a Holy Life. St. Paul in his Visitation Sermon to the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus, enjoins them to take heed to themselves, as well as to all
the Flock, Acts xxviii. 28. And he commands Timothy to be an Example of the
Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity, 1 Timothy iv. 12. And more briefly, ver. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and
to thy Doctrine, i.e. to thy Life, as well as to thy Preaching. And he charges
Titus, That in all things he show himself a Pattern of good Works, Tit. ii. 7.
As there is a Special Designation to the Office of the Ministry, so there must
be a Special Holiness accompanying it. There must be a Consecration of their
Lives, as well as of their Persons. As their Function Exalts them above others
in Dignity, so they should surpass them in all Laudable Actions; according to
those words used by our Church in her Canons, Can. 75.
They must have always in mind that they ought to Excel others in Purity of
Life, and should be Examples to the People to live well and Christianly. Let
not that which was part of the Pharisees Character be fastened on them, Matthew.
xxiii 3.
They say, but do not, they Preach well, but Live not accordingly. Let not that
which the Apostle says of Seducers and False Teachers be applied to them, Tit
i. 6.
They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him. If they be Guilty
of this latter, they pull all down that they have Built, they render all their
Instructions, Admonitions, Reproofs and Exhortations ineffectual, they obstruct
the Truth in or by their Unrighteousness (for so Romans i. 18. may be read
according to the sense of the word (...);) they hinder the Force and Virtue of
the Truth on themselves, and the Propagation of it to others by an Impious
Life, yea, they take a course to Ruin Religion it self. Thence it was the usual
Speech and Maxim of the Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond, The Exemplary Virtue of
the Clergy must restore this Church. It is that must commend us to the Hearts
and Consciences of Men, it is that must powerfully Influence upon them, and
teach them to be Religious in good Earnest. A Minister cannot choose a more
efficacious way of prevailing with others to be God, than by letting them see
that he is so himself. But on the contrary, it is no marvel that the Sheep
wander, if the Shepherd strays. Every ones Eyes are upon their Guides; all Men
are looking up to these Stars, these Torches of the World: If they burn dim, it
will be observed, and, which is worse, it will be Imitated. It is observed by a
Traveller of good Repute, that Atheism thrives in Italy, because they see so
much of the Cheats and Juggles of many of the Priests, and that Interest is all
their Religion. Wherefore let it be known by our Exemplary Lives, that we are
not inclined to gratify Atheists, and to promote Irreligion in the World:
Especially, let it be seen that we act not out of Worldly Designs, that we make
not the Ministry a Secular Calling, but that our Principles are Sincere, and
that we do all for the Glory of our Great Master. In brief, one of our
Character should, like John the Baptist, be John v. 35.
a Burning and a Shining Light; Burning in his own Breast with entire Flames of
Goodness and Devotion, with pure Intentions of Honoring God, and Promoting
Religion; and Shining in his Life and Actions by an Uniform Practice of Piety,
by an Holiness that is conspicuous and resplendent.

Indeed, some of us are apt to entertain this False Apprehension, That the
things beforementioned, viz. Right Opinions, Preaching of True Doctrine,
Conformity to the Church's Order and Discipline are sufficient, though they be
abstracted from Holiness. Thence some labor to be accounted Orthodox, and yet
mind not their Lives: They teach others what they are to do, but are regardless
of their own Actions. They are hot for Ceremonies, but cool and indifferent in
the Practice of Religion. But nothing can be more unreasonable and absurd, for
the things before-named are in order to a Holy Life. The proper tendency of the
Articles of Faith is to Obedience. The Exercise of Discipline, and the keeping
up of Decency and Order, were originally designed to beget and nourish Religion
and Virtue. Let us therefore Correct our Conceptions concerning these Matters,
and persuade our selves that a Vicious Life is as contrary to God and Religion
as Erroneous Doctrines; that to break one of the Commandments, is as bad or
worse than to deny an Article of the Creed; that Drunkenness, Swearing,
Uncleanness, are as black Crimes as Schism. Yea, let us be convinced, that by
Profaneness and Wickedness the Comeliness of our Worship is rendered Deformed, our
most Decent Rites become Sordid, our White Garments are Stained and Polluted.
Let us fix upon our Minds that of the Devout Abbot of Claraval, What will our
Canonical Ordination profit us if we live Vncanonically? To be sound in the
Faith, to Preach it to others, to be Peaceable and Orderly, and to observe the
Ecclesiastical Rules and Laws are of no worth and value if our Lives be Impure
and Irregular. Wherefore (to sum up all in a few words) let him that earnestly
contends for the Faith, for the Order and Discipline of the Ancient Christians,
think himself obliged also to live the Life of a Primitive Saint.

You see your Calling, Brethren; you see what is your Office, your Work, your
Employment; and you cannot but see that it is of Singular Weight and
Consequence, and such as is not easily to be performed. The Fable goes of
Amphion, that he did but play on his Lute, and the Stones presently came
together of their own accord, and raised the Walls of Thebes. There is more to
be done in the Building that I have been Discoursing of, in the Erecting of the
Walls of the Spiritual Jerusalem. It is a Work of great Difficulty, and
requires exceeding great Skill and Pains. It is the Office of the Person, whose
Character I have been giving you, to teach and live well, to be acquainted with
the True Notions of things, and to frame his Words and Practice suitably to
them; to maintain the Ancient Orthodox Faith, and to be Tit i. 9.
able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the Gainsayers; to keep
the Old Heresies from reviving, and to stifle the Modern Follies and Fancies;
dexterously to reclaim the Erring World, manfully to confront the Disorders of
a degenerate Age; to confound the Atheist, and vanquish all his Absurd
Reasonings against his Maker; and to Exalt the Best Religion, and cause it to
Prosper and Flourish in the World; finally, to bear up the Pillars of
Christianity by Pure Doctrine, Strict Discipline, and Stricter Example and
Conversation; and to let the People see in him, as in a Mirror, what they are
to do, and how to Order their Lives.

Who now is not ready to infer, that so Weighty a Function, requires such 2 Timothy
ii. 15.
Workmen that need not to be ashamed? Every Block will not make a Mercury, a
Messenger of God, an Ambassador of Christ. His Character is Great and Worthy,
and has an indelible Honor annexed to it, and therefore is not to be the
Portion of the Meanest and most Abject Souls, and the Untowardest Bodies, as
oftentimes it is contrived. It is not a Service for the Illiterate and
Pr^phane, the Dunce and the Debauched; for these are wholly unfit for so Sacred
and Excellent a Charge as I have described. I leave with you the remarkable
Words of that Pious Father, St. Chrysostom, concerning those of his Clergy,
whom he found to be Vicious Livers, and accordingly deprived of the Exercise,
of their Office, and the Privileges that attended it, (...). Theodoret. Eccl.
(...). l. 5. c. 28.
They ought not, says he, to enjoy the Honor of Priests, and at the same time
not to emulate the Life of True Priests. To conclude then, let the Greatness
and Dignity of our Task be ever in our Thoughts, and let them excite us to the
utmost Diligence and Care. Let our Desires, Wishes, Prayers, Endeavors, tend
to the effectual Promoting of this Great Work which I have in part set before
you. Especially, let us not forget the most Eminent part of our Office, which
is to Instruct by a Godly Conversation, for this is a sure way to Amend the
World, and to make it Better.

That Decay of Trade and Commerce, and Consequently of Wealth, is the Natural
Product and Just Penalty of Vice in a Nation.
A Sermon Preached at the Proclaiming and Opening of a Great Fair.
EZEKIEL XXVII. 27. Thy Riches and thy Fairs and thy Merchandise, thy Mariners
and thy Pilots, thy Calkers, and the Occupiers of thy Merchandise, and in all
thy Men of War that are in thee, and in all thy company, which is in the midst
of thee, shall fall into the midst of the Seas in the day of thy ruin.
IF some of you, upon the reading of these words, shall put the same Question
to me that the Ethiopian Eunuch did to Philip, Of whom speaks the Prophet
this? you may soon have this Demand assoiled by consulting the Context and
Neighboring Verses. There you will see is foretold the Ruin of Tire, a City in
Syrophoenicia, one of the three Provinces of Syria. There is described the
Overthrow of that Great and Famous City, so noted for Trading and
Merchandising, as being indeed the Great Empory of the World. This whole
Chapter, wherein my Text is, is no other than a Passionate Lamentation of the
Destruction of that Place. You will find this expressed according to the usual
Skill and Art of Orators, who are wont to comply with that Maxim, that
Contraries being set one against another are the more advantageously displayed
and illustrated. The Riches of Tire inhanse her Ruin, and her Ruin discovers
her former Riches and Greatness. Accordingly this Chapter consists of these two
Principal Parts, 1st. A Description of the former Bravery and Glory of that
City, (from the beginning of the Chapter to the 26th ver.) 2dly. Its
unavoidable Ruin and Destruction, with the sad Allarm it gives to other Nations
and Neighboring Countries (from the 26th ver. to the End of the Chapter.)

I begin with the First Division of the Chapter, which compriseth in it the
Former Splendour and Grandeur of Tire: And there these Five Topics are
remarkable.

1st. Her Fit and Convenient Situation, at once both Lovely and Useful, ver. 3,
4. She was environed with the Waters, and all the Compass of that Great City
was but as one Main Port. Like a Promontory it stood into the Sea, and so was
Commodious for Resort unto from diverse Countries. But besides the Natural
Commodiousness of its Situation, here is,

2dly, Described her Naval Force (in the five next Verses.) The sum of all that
is said there is This, That she was famed for Excellent Shipping, that the
Vessels she sent Abroad for Trafick were bravely Adorned, that their Tackle was
Rich and Costly, their Sails being not of plain Canvas, but of fine Linen
Embroidered, as if with that Finery and Gayety they would seem to Court the
Winds, and make them pliable and favorable to the Passengers.

3dly. You read in the two next Verses of the Military Glory of Tire, her
Strength and Ability to grapple with a considerable Enemy. The Strongest and
Stoutest Nations came thither, and hung up their Arms as in a Garrison: They
were Trained and Tutored here, and were in Pay under these Noble Tyrians. The
Persians, Lydians, and Moors were all glad to be Listed and Entertained
Soldiers under them. The a Gone ed, cubiius.
Gammadims (or, according to the Vulgar Latin, the Pygmeys) were in their
Towers: The meaning of which probably is this, that the Tallest of these
Foreign Soldiers, or of the Martial Tyrians and Phoenicians themselves seemed
to be of a very Low Stature, when they were beheld out of those High Towers.
Or, they might be called Gammadim, Elbow-Men, because they were Strong and
Robust in those Joints, their Arms and other Limbs were well set.

4thly, Their Negotiation, Merchandise and Trafick with other Nations, and
consequently their Wealth and Riches are most excellently deciphered from the
11th Verse even to the 25th. So large is the Description of that Admirable
Mart, that Catholic Fair, to which all Countries resorted, and kept up a
General Trade and Commerce. As their Soldiers so their Chapmen came from far
Countries. All People, whether of the Isles or the Continent, flocked hither to
vend or exchange the Wares which are reckoned up in this Chapter. We read that
Hieram, a former King of this Place, and of all Phoenicia, was a Merchandizer
by Sea, 1 Kings ix. 27, 28. So that we need not wonder at what is said here,
that the Merchants were Princes. And that all that Country was Famous for this
way of Trafick is attested by Lib. 5 p. 217.
Diodore of Sicily, and by In Homer. Odys. O.
Eustathius, and others.

But from the Huge Bill of Trade which you meet with here I might take occasion
by the by to enter this Caution, that we are not to imagine that Trafick and
Commerce are Unlawful, and that Merchandising is in it self Blameable and
Vicious. No; it was appointed for very Useful and indeed Necessary Purposes of
Man's Life. If it lie under any Abuses, these ought to be corrected, and not
the Thing it self to be condemned. Our Savior whipped the Buyers and Sellers,
but it was because he found them in the Temple, which was not a fit place for
them, and because (as we are told by the Seldom de Dis Sir. Syntag. 2.
Learned) those that sold Doves were reckoned by the Jews as Infamous Persons,
in the same Rank with Gamesters, Panders, and Thieves. Tire is threatened here
to be Punished, not for her Merchandise and Fairs, but for her Abusing them.
And so much for the Fourth Topic remarkable in the Description of the
Flourishing State of Tire.

Another Particular remains, which is the 5th and last, viz. the Renown which
that Great City had gained among all Nations, the General Applause which it had
purchased, ver. 25. Tyrus was not only Rich and Happy at Home, but grew Famous
and Eminent Abroad, and nothing now could be added to her Glory.

But Sin and Vice deform and discredit any Place, and fit it for Ruin. And so
now I am to pass (but loath I am to do it) from the former Felicity of Tire, to
her present Misery and Destruction; (and this is enlarged upon from the 25th
Verse to the End of the Chapter.) Her Overthrow is represented in an Excellent
Metaphor, in v. 26. [ Thy Rowers have brought thee into great Waters, the East
Wind has broken thee in the midst of the Seas.] Tire, that was so brave and
stately a Ship, richly Laden and well appointed, is now miserably Cast away.
Thy Rowers, that is, thy Rulers and Great Ones, have brought thee to this
Condition, and now leave thee to suffer Shipwreck. Both they and thou must
perish, and sink into the Deep. The East Wind has broken thee, that Wind being
most Tempestuous and Dangerous in that Country: Or Nebuchadnezzar, that
Blustering Prince, is here meant, who lay East from Tire, and came thence and
destroyed it. And this Metaphor of a Broken Ship is fitly continued in the next
Verse, the Words which I have chosen to entertain you with. I might observe to
you here, that this is no Unusual Similitude, and that the Poets and Orators
are much in love with it. It would savor too much of School to repeat Horace
his Ode 14.
Verses, wherein he Elegantly compares Rome to a Vessel on the Main. And if you
consider that these Tyrians were Situated on the Mediterranean, and so were in
the constant sight of the Sea, and daily beheld their own and others Ships
riding on the Waves, you will not then deny that This Comparison and Allegory
are most fitly here applied. And I might further Embellish this, by observing
to you that in the Old Coin of the Tyrians there was a Ship stamped; and their
common Brag was, that they were the First Inventors of Shipping, the First
Authors of Navigation. Tibul. lib. 1. Eleg. 8.
Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus. So appositely and elegantly is she
compared to a Ship, and her Magistrates to Pilots, and her Riches and Costly
Wares to the Lading and Cargo. [ Thy Riches and thy Fairs and thy Merchandise
(for which thou were so much celebrated) thy Mariners and thy Pilots (those
that sat at the Helm, and were thy Governors and Rulers; or, in the most
obvious Sense, thy Famous Mariners and Skilful Masters of Ships) and thy
Calkers (that is, all Inferior Persons subservient to the making, building, or
mending of thy Ships, the Skilful Carpenters and Shipwrights employed in the
repairing of thy Vessels) and the Occupiers of thy Merchandise (i.e. all thy
Chapmen, and Fellow-Traders and Merchants) and all thy Men of War that are in
thee and in all thy Company (these are not Men of War in the Naval sense, but
they are Soldiers and Warriors on Land) all these shall fall into the midst of
the Seas in the day of thy Ruin]; i.e. they shall utterly perish, and sink like
a laden Vessel to the bottom of the Deep. The Babylonians shall come and Invade
them, and lay them wast. And it follows in the 28th Verse, The Suburbs shall
shake at the sound of the cry of thy Pilots, which most elegantly and
Poetically expresses the Horrid Noise and Outcry of the perishing Tyrians (as
indeed the Style of the Prophet in this Chapter is not inferior to the best of
Poets.) The three ensuing Verses relate the Resentment which other Nations that
traded with them shall have of their Ruin, which is summed up in those few
words (comprehending all that had been said in the Antithesis throughout the
Chapter concerning their Preceding Glory and Present Misery) v. 32. What City
is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the Sea? What City was like
Tyrus once for its Riches and Commerce, for its Military Force, Fame and
Renown? And what City like Tyrus now for its sudden but inevitable Calamity?
She sat like a Lady, abounding in Bravery and Luxury, encircled with all manner
of Earthly Felicity, but now she is robbed of all her Gayety, stripped of her
Glory, and clothed with nothing but Shame. The Fairs are over, the Wares are
rifled and carried away, and her End is most Miserable and Deplorable; which
you will find enlarged upon to the close of the Chapter.

It is high time now, after this Brief Descant on the whole Chapter, to confine
my self and my Discourse to the Words which I first read unto you: On which we
may ground these two Propositions, 1. That all Warlike Provision shall prove
Successless, all Weapons Useless and Insignificant in the hands of a Sinful
People. All thy Men of War shall fall into the midst of the Sea. 2. Decrease of
Wealth and Riches, Decay of Trade and Merchandising, and consequently Scarcity
and Penury are the Judgments which a Sinful Nation may expect. This Proposition
is derived from the Front and the Close of the Text, Thy Riches, thy Fairs, and
thy Merchandise shall fall into the midst of the Sea in the day of thy Ruin.
Thy Domestic and Foreign Trade, thy Commerce at Home and Abroad shall Decay
and Die. This is the Proposition which I intend to insist upon, as most
suitable to our present purpose, and the Occasion of our Meeting here. That we
may not find the Real Experiment of This Observation in the Land of our
Nativity is the design of what I am to deliver to you this day. And to that end
let us earnestly supplicate and implore the God of Heaven, that it may make
such an Impression on our Hearts and Lives, that we may never Actually feel and
suffer what I am to treat of.

This is the main thing, I say, which I observe in the Text, that the Decay of
Trade and Trafick, and consequently Poverty and Scarcity are one kind of
Judgments which, amongst others, are inflicted on a Sinful Nation. Thus it was
with Tire, the Famous Tire, the Make and Situation of which place seemed to
render it altogether Impregnable. It was built on a Rock, and there had its
(...) Tyrus: (...) rupes.
Name in the Hebrew; and it is likely the Prophet Zachary alludes to this in
his 9th Chap. (...) built her self, (...) a strong Hold.
v. 3. Tire was not only surrounded and guarded by the Sea, the Waves whereof
stood up as in a Body to protect and defend it, but the Garrisons and Redoubts
which they had erected within made the place almost Unconquerable. Thus both
the Natural and Artificial Structure of it concurred to let in Riches and
Prosperity, and to keep out Want and Distress, and by both to make them Happy.
Yet behold! when by the Abuse of their Plenty and Prosperity they grew Loose
and Wanton, and unworthily provoked Him who was the Donour of those earthly
Blessings, then Poverty like an Armed Man broke in upon them, and they were not
able to withstand his Assaults. First, Tire was Besieged by Nebuchadnezzer, and
that in a short time after this Prophesy; and though it held out Thirteen Years
(as Antiqu. Jud. l. 11. And Cont. Apion. l. 1.
Josephus relates) yet at last it was taken, and laid wast: This Judgment, the
effect of which lasted about Isai. xxiii. 17.
Seventy Years (the time of the Jewish Captivity, and the very same time that
Theirs was) made them not Better, for the Prophet Isaiah says concerning this
City, Isai. xxiii. 17.
She shall turn to her hire, and commit fornication with all the Kingdoms of
the World. Therefore most justly did God visit them a second time, viz. Diodor.
Sic. l. 17. Plutarch vit. Alex. M. Curtius l. 4.
in the days of Alexander the Great, who made way through the Sea to them, and
by unspeakable Labor and Toil, by a Bridge of Stones which he had amassed
together in the Deep, he reached them at last, and miserably confounded them.
Thus in a sense more Literal than perhaps you imagined, all their Men of War
did fall into the midst of the Sea. Some think the Destruction of Tire by the
Macedonians was foretold in Isaiah 23. 1. where by the Land of Chittim is meant
Macedonia, others say Cilicia, whence Alexander came to them. This Great
Warrior killed Arrianus.
Seven or eight thousand in the Siege, which lasted Seven Months; and after the
Siege, when the Fury of the Slaughter was over, Diodorus. Curtius.
Two Thousand of the Inhabitants were Hanged up and Crucified, and Thirteen
thousand were made Captives and Slaves. Thus Tyre's Riches and Fairs and
Merchandise fell into the midst of the Sea, were utterly consumed and
destroyed, in the day of her Ruin; and she felt the Fatal Doom and Judgment of
Babylon, Rev. xviii. 11. No man buyeth their Merchandise any more.

I will give you a Brief Account of the Proposition in these Three Particulars;
First, Sometimes in the Nature of the thing it self it so happens that Poverty
and Scarcity, and Decrease of Trading are the Products of Sin. Some Vices there
are which of themselves stop the Course of all Trafick, and drag Penury and
Want along with them, and unavoidably plunge Men into a Necessitous Condition.
Is it not evident that Prodigality and Luxury, Revelling and Rioting, Pride and
Idleness, Whoredom and Adultery by their own proper Efficacy and malign
Influence blast the fairest Estates, and throw Men into the most Lamentable and
Miserable Circumstances? as I shall have occasion to show you more largely
anon. Secondly, That a Sinful and Rebellious Nation should be despoiled of its
Riches and Plenty, happens not only in the nature of the thing it self, but by
the Just Judgment of God upon Sinners. And you will confess this to be
Rational, if you consider the Grounds why God is pleased to bless a People or
Person with the Affluence of Wealth and Worldly Goods, viz. that they may use
them to the setting forth of his Praise and Glory, that they may make them
conduce to the designs of Virtue and Religion, that they may by Them serve
their Maker with a cheerful and contented Spirit, that they may be encouraged
to do Good and to communicate, and that they may by the enjoyment of the Good
things of this World lay up for themselves a Treasure in another, even in the
Mansions of Eternal Glory. To such worthy purposes as these does the God of
Heaven bestow Earthly Riches and Plenty. If then we frustrate all these noble
Designs, and by the worldly Blessings conferred upon us dishonor our Great
Benefactor, and make our Wealth and Abundance administer only to the promoting
of Wickedness and Vice; if thus we pervert the Intentions of the Donor, it is
but just that we should be deprived of them, and left in a Poor and Forlorn
Condition. Now you may expect to hear the Almighty say, [ I will take away my
Corn and my Wine, my Wool and my Flax, Hos. ii. 9.] Mine they are, and to my
Glory they ought to have been employed; but since they are not, I will strip
the Possessors of them, and leave nothing but Want and Penury in their room. It
is the Blessing of the Lord that makes Rich, and if we will not study to gain
that Blessing by consecrating our selves and services unto Him, it is no wonder
that we lie under the Curse of Poverty and Necessity. If we will not faithfully
serve God, he will not suffer us to be serviceable to our Selves. If we forget
and despise Him, he will give us over to a neglect of our own Concerns and
Interest. Thirdly, God inflicts This Judgment on a Wicked and Impenitent Land,
because it is the Basis and Groundwork of many Other Calamities. If Trafick and
Commerce, if Plenty and Provision fail, a whole Train of Evils will soon
follow. So that this is a Curse which is big with many more, and those as
Dreadful as it self: and therefore this is a most proper Punishment for an
Ungrateful and Disobedient People.

Having thus given you a short Account of the Remark which I made upon the
words, I am to show you now of what Great Use it may be in our Lives and
Conversations, which is the chief thing I intended.

1. This informs you what is the Great Interest of a Nation, what is most
Advantageous and Profitable to a People, even with reference to the things of
This Life. Godliness is their greatest Gain, it having the Promise of This Life
as well as of that to Come. The Poets feign, and fancifully tell us, that their
God wooed in Gold, and descended in such a Glistering Shower. Certain it is, and
out of the reach of all Fiction, that with God and Religion we shall be blessed
likewise with such a Portion of Riches as shall be most serviceable to our best
Ends. God oftentimes showrs down Wealth with a plentiful Hand on his Friends
and Favorites. You see then the true way and Method of Prospering in the
World. If you fear God and keep his Commandments, you shall be recompensed with
the good things of this Life. A Person or Nation that sincerely endeavors to
purchase True Wisdom (which consists in Righteousness and Holiness) shall find
that Prove. iii. 16.
in her left hand are Riches and Honors.

2. Thank God that you have so long enjoyed the Blessings of Plenty and
Trafick: Bless his Holy Name that you are not deprived of these Earthly
Benefits and Favors, notwithstanding the Forfeiture you have made of them by
your repeated Provocations, by your multiplied Enormities, and Rebellions
against God. Yet,

3. You are invited from what has been said to observe God's Hand lifted up
against you. Though he has not utterly Impoverished this Nation, yet it cannot
escape your Notice that he has brought it Low, and by many Passages and signal
Acts of Providence has designed to Humble it. Let us acknowledge the Tokens of
his Wrath and Vengeance, and tremble at the various Instances of his
Displeasure. Look back and forget not how God has dealt with you heretofore;
he has held the point of the Sword to your Breasts; he has blown upon you
with Infectious and Pestilential Vapors; he has singed and scorched you by a
Dreadful Fire. Especially call to mind this last, and remember how the Great
Metropolis of this Nation, the Royal Chamber, the Universal Exchange for
Trafick, was by a most astonishing Conflagration laid in Ashes in four days. I
mention this the rather because I look upon it as one of the Greatest and
Notablest Instances of God's consuming the Riches and Merchandise of a People
in the day of their Ruin that ever happened.

4. Be reminded by all this to hearken to the Rod, and who has appointed it,
to call your Sins to remembrance, and to amend your Lives for the future. For
This, this alone will either prevent the like Judgments and Calamities
hereafter, or it will shield you from the Evil of them. This will guard you
against your Enemies Swords, this will be a Preservative and Antidote against
the Pestilence, this will be your Skreen against the Flames: In brief, this
will succeed and prosper all your Secular Enterprises, secure and increase your
Incomes, restore and establish a Free Trade and Commerce, crown you with Plenty
and Abundance, and drive away Distress and Indigence from your Doors. As you
are desirous then to avoid the Judgment which my Text tells you of, as you
consult your Profit and Advantage in this World, as you are willing to buy and
sell, and get gain, as you wish for Earthly Happiness and Success, as you
desire to Thrive in all your Negotiations and Traficks, be careful that you
addict not your selves to any known Vice, that you shun all the Paths of Sin
and Wickedness, but especially let me request you to renounce those Lusts which
do more immediately and forcibly call down this Punishment which is foretold in
the Text, and which it is likely were the Cause of the Decay of Tyre's Riches
and Merchandise.

First then, Sloth and Idleness, the immediate Source of all Poverty, must be
banished and discarded. He that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that
is a great waster, says the Great Master of Oeconomicks and Politics, Prove.
xviii. 9. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the
diligent makes rich, says the same Inspired Author, Prove. x. 4. Which is
expressed in other words in Chap. xiii. ver. 4. The soul of the sluggard
desires, and has nothing, but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. The
meaning is that Poverty is the Fruit of Idleness, but God will give a Blessing
to Industry and Diligence, and Families and Kingdoms thrive by this means.

Secondly, the usual Companion of Idleness is Pride, and that likewise must be
discountenanced if ever you hope to prosper in your Worldly Affairs. The
Tyrians were a very Proud and Haughty People, as appears from Ezekiel. xxvii. 3.
Thou say, I am of perfect beauty. And in the next Chapter it is recorded not
only of the Prince of Tyrus, that his heart was lifted up, and he said he was a
God, and sat in the seat of God; but of the People it is said, Their heart was
lifted up because of their Riches, ver. 25. And they were not only conceited of
their Beauty, Preferment and Riches, but their Extravagant Vanity and Pride of
Apparel may be guessed from their Fantastic and Gaudy Trimming of their Ships,
which this Chapter mentions. They that were so Wanton and Profuse in decking
their Vessels, were questionless as Lavish in adorning themselves. And perhaps
Tire was more than ordinarily proud of its Purple, for which it was so famous,
for on this shore were gathered those Shell-fishes the liquor whereof made that
Noble Color wherewith the Robes of Emperors and Senators were died. I have
heard some say, that this sort of Pride is a Friend to Trade by the New
Fashions and Modes it daily invents: but I can assure them on good Grounds that
in the close it rather causes the decay of Trafick, and is the readiest way to
introduce Misery and Beggary; for Pride of Habit is the Mother of Idleness,
Luxury and Wantonness, and these are usually maintained and upheld by Fraud,
Deceit, Lying, and Theft, which are all destructive things. Do we not daily see
(and may we not lament it?) that many to indulge and satisfy their Pride,
neglect their Lawful and Honest Callings, and by that course expose themselves
and Families to Ruin and Destruction? May we not see others (and we need not go
far to spy them) who are so lavish in their Garb and Apparel, that it is to be
thought their almost starved Bellies cry shame of their Pride?

Thirdly, Intemperance and Excess in Eating and Drinking are Sins which in
their own nature prove the Overthrow of the Wealthiest and most Thriving
People. Before Babylon was taken by Cyrus it is observed by the Historian, that
(...). Xenophon.
they spent whole Nights in Drinking and Debauchery. Where this Vice prevails
and gets the mastery, all Serious Employment is laid aside, and Gratifying the
Wanton Appetite is the only Business and Dispatch. Now no other Penalty can be
imagined to be the result of This than what the Wise Man has awarded, Prove.
xxiii. 21. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty. How often is the
indulging of Superfluities punished with the Want of Necessaries? Excessive
Provision makes way for None at all. May it not too frequently be observed in
Great Cities, that the Dining Room empties the Shop; the Overloaded Board
impoverisheth the Counter, and the Table devours all the House?

Fourthly, The inseparable attendant of Luxury is Lewdness and Uncleanness; and
I wish the lamentable Experience of this Age did not too notoriously verify
what I am to suggest to them, That Tob. iv. 13.
in Lewdness is Decay and great Want; for Lawdness is the Mother of Famine. Or
hear what a more Authentic Writer says, Prove. vi. 26.
By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of Bread. The Lowest
and Vilest Condition is the just Reward of so Abominable a Sin. If you would
then consult your Temporal Good, and advance even your Secular Welfare, you are
concerned to use all Holy Arts to guard your selves against this Vice, and the
rather because it is now grown so Fashionable, and in this degenerate Age of
ours brought into Repute and Credit.

Fifthly, Persuade your selves that all Injustice and Extortion (although they
may seem to be Thriving and Profitable for a time) shall at last redound to
your greatest Loss and Damage even in this World. Wherever these are
practiced, they will certainly end in the Ruin of the Persons, Families or
Nations that are guilty of them. You read that this was part of the Complaint
against Tire, That by the multitude of her Merchandise she filled the midst of
her with Violence, Ezekiel. xxviii. 16. As they were Great Traders, so they were
Great Oppressors, and by being the former they learnt to be the latter, that
is, they found they had great Opportunities of Defrauding and Exacting, and
they made use of them. But my Text tells you what was the direful Issue of
this, it ended at last in the Destruction of all Trade and Commerce, and in the
Ruin of the whole Nation. Thus it was with the Israelites, when they swallowed
up the Poor, and made the needy of the Land to fail; The Prophet Chap. viii.
ver. 4, 8.
Amos lets them know, That the Land shall tremble for this, and every one shall
mourn that dwells therein, and it shall rise up wholly as a Flood, and it
shall be cast out and drowned, as by the Flood of Egypt; alluding to the River
Nile, which used to ascend with Violence, and overflow the Fields of that
Country. Remember the Aphorism of that Infallible Writer whom I have so often
cited, Prove. xxii. 16.
He that oppresses the poor to increase his Riches, shall surely come to want.
Assure your selves that all your Revenues and Incomes which are gained by the
Cries of Widows and Fatherless Children, will never prosper. But rather expect
that for your being Hard-hearted to the Poor, and denying them what is due to
their Necessitous Condition, you shall one day come to Poverty your selves; or
if you escape, your Posterity shall bear your Punishment.

Again, as Oppression toward Man, so Impiety toward God will bring a Curse
upon your Estate. Never think to Thrive by that Trade and Trafick which
Entrench upon God's Holy Day and Worship. Let me tell you, by Profaning the
Christian Sabbath, you set your selves back for the whole Week. It is just with
God to Curse you in your* Six Days labors, when you will not devote your
selves to him on the Seventh, which he has Blessed and Hallowed to himself. If
your rob God of his Due, he may justly permit others to purloin from you. If
you be neglectful of God's House, why should you look that he will prosper you
in yours? If you will not find Time for God, how can you hope to have any
Successful to your selves? If your cry be like that of the profane and wordly
Israelites, Amos viii. 5. When will the New Moons and Sabbaths be over, that we
may set forth Corn and Wheat, that we may buy and sell, and get gain? Never
hope by that Buying and Selling to be real Gainers. In short, if you wholly
slight the Things of Heaven, you must not expect to prosper in your Earthly
ones.

Lastly, Covetousness and Love of the World (which yet perhaps you can hardly
imagine) do oftentimes prove the Bane of Worldly Increase and Profit. Some
Avaritious Persons are like those foolish Animals which love to steal Money,
only to Hide it. Their Ambition is to Hoard up great Treasures, and make their
Gold and Silver as useless as they were in the Mines. He is as truly Poor, that
has Much, and Uses it not, as he that has Nothing. His Blessing is turned
into and absolute Curse, and the more he Possesses the less he Enjoys.
Besides, how often does it happen that the Covetous and Ravenous Desires of
Worldly Men are blasted by the just Judgment of God? As our Savior observes of
the Sodomites, Luke xvii. 28, 29.
They bought, they sold, and then it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and
destroyed them all. They were over-eager and busy about their Earthly Affairs,
they were wholly swallowed up of the World, and then no wonder that the Divine
Vengeance baffled their Designs and Enterprises.

And thus you see what Sins they are which either in their own Nature, or by
the just Hand of God, undermine the Temporal Welfare and Prosperity of a
Nation. You see what Vices are likely to Impoverish and Exhaust a People: and I
doubt not but most of these were instrumental in the Destruction of Tire. The
Design of this Discourse is, that they may not be so of England. That Place and
This run parallel in many things; I pray God they may not also in their Ruin.
England is seated in the Waters, and embraced in the Arms of the Sea, as Tire
was, for she was an Isle before Alexander the Great's time, who with almost
incredible Labor joined it to the Continent, that he might the more easily
come at it and conquer it. Tire was celebrated for its Delightful and Happy
Soil, in so much that the Inhabitants of it are said to be in Eden the Garden
of God, in Paradise, as the LXX render it, Ezekiel. xxviii. 13. And this Country
of ours on the same account has been taken of old for the Fortunate Islands.
It is divided from the World, as being a more Noble and Worthy Part: It seems
to thrust the rest from her, as if she were a World within her self. That
Ancient flourishing City seated on the Phoenician Sea, was deservedly reckoned
the Greatest Mart and Empory of that part of the Universe: Thither were brought
the Riches of all Asia, Europe and Africa. In this also Britain resembles her,
and was justly styled by Charles the Great the Storehouse and Granary of the
Western World. The Great City of this our Isle may be called the Mart of
Nations, as Tire is, Isai. xxiii. 3. It may deserve that High Character which
is given in ver. 8.
the same place, The Crowning City, whose Merchants are Princes, whose
Trafickers are the Honorable of the Earth.

Thus you resemble Tire, but O may ye never do so in her Desolation and Final
Calamity! The Tyrians heaped up all their Vast Stock, and amassed together
their Prodigious Riches and Treasures for the Babylonians. O that We may not by
our Crying Sins and Provocations call in as Merciless Enemies to seize on us,
and devour us! Let us remember that after so many Mercies and Deliverances
vouchsafed to us, our Destruction must needs be exceeding Great. Let us read
and tremble at our Savior's words in Matthew. xi. 21, 22. Woe unto thee
Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which were done in
you had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sidon at the day of Judgment than for you. And we of this Nation are like
those other People whom our Savior mentions in that place; like Capernaum we
have been exalted unto Heaven by the Enjoyment of the Gospel, and the abundant
affluence of all other Blessings, and therefore we may expect to be brought
down to Hell for our shameful Unthankfulness and Impenitence. Our Sins are far
greater than those of Tire and Sidon, than those of Capernaum and Bethsaida.
Yea, Sodom was burnt to Ashes for the very Sins that reign amongst us, namely,
Pride and Fullness of Bread, Idleness, and Oppression, and Uncleanness. But
these are more Heinous in us, than they were in them, because our Mercies have
been far Greater. What therefore remains now but that we find our Punishment to
be far more Grievous and Intolerable? Though we are yet a Nation, yet know this
that the Judgments of God will certainly visit us, unless we reform our Lives:
And know withal, that they will be the Heavier the longer they are deferred.
Nineveh was destroyed Forty Years after its Repreive. About the same space of
Time, or longer, stood Jerusalem in a flourishing Condition after Christ's
Passion and Ascension. But when that time was expired, the City was Besieged by
the Roman Armies, and utterly Sacked and Demolished.

To shut up all, with some Allusion to the Metaphor which we find in our
Poetic Prophet here (for I shall not refuse to make use of it, seeing it is
here offered to me by the Holy Ghost, who is pleased to use it; and I could
also observe that it is usual with the Ancient Ignat. Epist. ad Philip. Hilar.
Can. 7. in Matthew. Chry. (...). Hom. passim. Ambro^. ^. 3. de Virgin. Epiphan.
(...). 61.
Fathers to compare the Church to a Ship: Wherefore suffer me to glance at it
briefly, and so to conclude.) Let us implore the Divine Goodness, to preserve
in Safety this Great and Rich Vessel wherein we of this Church and Nation are
Embarked, and to be our Convoy through all Dangers and Hostilities, to Carry us
safe through all Storms and Tempests; and, when ever these rise and threaten a
Shipwreck, to Instruct us how to Unburden our Vessel of whatever may prove
Destructive and Fatal to us, and to save our selves by throwing it over Board.
When we have done this, i.e. cast away our Sins, let us, like the Disciples in
the Gospel, take Christ into the Ship with us: Let us believe his Word, obey
his Commandments, submit to His Will, and abandon our Own. And thus having the
Holy Jesus for our Master, Conduct, and Pilot, we cannot fail by his Guidance
and Merits, to arrive at the Safe Port even of Temporal Felicity and Repose
here, and of Eternal and Endless Happiness hereafter.

The Lawfulness and Necessity of going to War, on just Occasions.
A Sermon Occasioned by the Proclaiming of the War against France.
GENESIS XIV. 14. And when Abram heard that his Brother was taken Captive, he
armed his trained Servants, born in his own House, three hundred and eighteen,
and pursued them unto Dan.
WE read in the beginning of this Chapter, that four Assyrian Kings, or Petty
Princes, having in an Hostile manner Invaded some parts of Palestine, fought
with the five Kings or Governors that were particularly concerned in those
Places, and in a pitched Battle defeated them, and put to flight the remaining
part of the Army. In the heat of their Conquest they came to Sodom and
plundered it, and carried away all the Goods and Provisions of that City: And
more especially it is recorded, that Lot, Abraham's Nephew, was taken Prisoner
by them, and all his Goods made a Booty. The Tidings of which being brought to
Abraham, he presently resolved to rescue his Nephew in a like violent and
hostile manner as he was taken away. For he had Trained Men of his own, such as
he had Disciplined in Feats of Arms, in order to their being capable of
defending themselves, and assaulting their Enemies if there should be occasion.
It appears from this place that this Holy Patriarch had brought up his
Household to handle their Arms, that if he and they should be Invaded by Sons
of Violence, they might be able, and have Skill too to Secure themselves, and
to Annoy the unjust Aggressors. These Trained, these Instructed Men he now
actually Arms, and puts them upon Service; and he took Others to assist him in
this Expedition, viz. some of the Natives of that Country, as may be gathered
from ver. 24. He marched himself at the Head of these Forces, and overtook the
Enemy, and vigorously engaged them, and overthrew them, and brought back those
that were taken Captive, and among the rest his Kinsman, and regained all the
Booty and Prey which had been taken from them.

And that you may know that this was a Lawful Act, and a Laudable Enterprise,
you find this Renowned Warrior at his return from the Battle entertained by the
Priest of the most High God. The Famous Melchisedech, King of Salem, went out
to meet this Conqueror, and showed his Approbation of what he had done by a
double Testimony; First, as a King he nobly Regail'd him, he brought forth
Bread and Wine, ver. 18. He generously and liberally Treated him and his
Trained Soldiers after the Fatigues of War, thereby showing how well he
resented that Brave Military Action. And then secondly, as he was a Priest, he
Blessed him, ver. 19. And it is observable that the Blessing has peculiar
respect to that Warlike Expedition, and the Success of it: Blessed be the most
high God, who has delivered thine Enemies into thy hand, ver. 20. Whence it is
manifest that when Abraham and his Confederates returned from the Victory over
the Four Eastern Kings that had Sacked Sodom, the Fact was approved of by God's
High Priest. And moreover, the Legitimacy and Goodness of it may be concluded
from the Behavior of the Generous Patriarch himself, who (as it is expressly
recorded) gave Melchisedech Tithes of all, v. 20. He presented him with the
Tenths of the Spoils which he took in that War; hereby assuring us of the
Lawfulness of War on just Occasions. For it is certain he would not have
offered to God and the High Priest the Tenths of what he had taken in the Fight
and Pursuit, if that Enterprise had not been justifiable (as on the other hand
God's Priest would not have accepted of that Present, if it had not been so.)
So then, from this Remarkable Example of the Holy Patriarch, the Father of the
Faithful, and from the Circumstances of it, which commend it to us, I will
offer this Proposition to you, and insist upon it, That on just occasions it is
Lawful, and even Necessary to go to War.

We read nothing of any Military Exploits before the Flood; Scripture is
altogether silent as to that, though we cannot thence conclude there were no
Wars in those days: But we are informed that afterward there were; and the
first Instance is that which I have mentioned, viz. of the Kings of the East
Warring with the Kings or Rulers of the Five Cities in Canaan. And the first
Good Man we read of that Exercised in Military Fears, and Trained up his Family
to them was Abraham, the Friend of God. The Peaceable Abraham, who meekly
yielded to his Nephew Lot, saying, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between
thee and me, and between my Herdsmen and thy Herdsmen, Genesis xiii. 8. and
accordingly let him take his Choice of what Ground he pleased for Pasturage:
This Condescending Man, who was of so Excellent a Temper, and receded from his
Right, though he was the Elder, yet when this very same Kinsman of his was
taken Prisoner, and his Goods and Substance carried away by Force, he thought
this was a good and sufficient occasion for taking up of Arms, and he let the
World see that Peaceableness is not inconsistent with a Just Quarrel; he Armed
his Household, and with them and Auxiliaries whom he had in the Neighborhood,
he followed after the Invaders, and rescued Lot out of their Hands, after a
Bloody Encounter. The Holy Patriarch and Father of the Faithful was a Warrior.

So Jacob, his Grandson, who was a Meek and Patient Man (of which there are
several Proofs in the History of his Life) tells us himself, That he took a
portion of land out of the hand of the Ammorites with his sword and with his
bow, Genesis xlviii. 22. He speaks of the Land which Abraham had purchased of
Hamor the Father of Shechem for a Hundred Pieces of Silver, designing it for a
Burial Place, and accordingly both he and Isaac lay buried there; but
afterward, when this Patriarch had occasion to remove to some part of Canaan,
which was at a considerable distance from this piece of Ground, some
Shechemites (of the Race of the Amorites) seized on it, and detained it from
the right Owner, viz. Jacob. But the Good Man would not suffer them quietly to
possess and enjoy it; he made use of his Instruments of War, his Sword and his
Bow, to reduce the wrongful Possessors, and he regained his Right by Violence;
and it is probable sent some to their Graves for their unjust withholding from
him this place of Sepulture This shows that Acts of Violence, and even open War
it self undertaken on good grounds, are not unlawful.

And this further appears from the known Examples of Moses, Iosuah, and some of
the Judges, who even by God's Appointment were Men of War, and actually engaged
in Battles. In the Book of Job, who is thought to have lived about Moses's
time, there is an admirable Description given of the War-Horse, and that by the
Almighty himself, Chap. xxxix. ver. 19, 20, etc. which intimates, yea more than
intimates the Usefulness of that Noble Creature (if there be Occasion) in
Affairs of War. We know that God prescribed the Jews certain Laws concerning
their Battles, Deuteronomy. xx. 10, 15. and therefore the Practice of them was not
displeasing to him. Captains renowned for their Martial Exploits are taken
notice of, and mentioned with Honor in the Sacred Records, as Iephthah,
Gideon, Ioab, Abner, and others of King David's Worthies: Yea, Warlike Women
are* mentioned with Praise in those Inspired Books, and in other Jewish
Writings, as Deborah, Iael, Judith. The Wars of the Israelites are called the
Wars of the Lord, a very High and Honorable Title, Numb. xxi. 14. xxxi. 3. And
the Vengeance of the Lord, 1 Samuel xviii. 7. xxv. 8.

It is very observable what is said of King David, 2 Samuel 1. 18. He had them
teach the Children of Judah the use of the Bow; he ordered his Commanders and
Officers to discipline his Subjects, and instruct them in the Arts of War. I
know some would have us understand here by the Bow King David's Lamentation on
the Death of Saul and Jonathan, occasioned by the Philistin Archers: For this
reason, say they, the Funeral Song it self is called the Bow. Or, others think
it may have that Denomination with respect to the Bow of Jonathan, which turned
not back from the blood of the slain, as the Elegy it self says, ver. 22. But
I do not see any Reason at all for such an interpretation: If we examine it, we
shall find it to be precarious and groundless; and therefore I will adhere to
the plain and obvious Meaning of the Words, which is this, David hearing of
Saul and Ionathan's Death, lamented them, and gave Order that the Young Men of
Judah should learn the use of the Bow, that they might be avenged on the
Philistines who had slain so many of the Israelites by their Skilful and Valiant
managing of that Weavon. Wherefore the Wise Prince would have his Subjects (for
now they are such) to be as expert in Archery as their Enemies; he would have
them to handle their Arms with Skill and Dexterity, especially the Bow and
Arrows, which were most in use at that time (as they were indeed among all
other Nations of the World, and even among our Ancestors in this Country; nay,
the Act for Shooting is not repealed at this day) and therefore the Bow or
Shooting is put here for the Whole Military Exercise. David, like a Faithful
Friend, laments and mourns for the Deceased, but, like a Prudent King (for so
we must look upon him now) takes care of the Living, and provides for the
Safety of the People, by bringing them up to Martial Exercises. Multitudes
without Skill are useless, nay, they may do themselves harm, as the Eastern
Armies were sometimes destroyed by their Numbers. Therefore it was wisely taken
care of that this Jewish People should be taught their Military Postures, that
they should know the Word of Command, that they should be instructed to handle
their Weapons aright (for this is implied in the use of the Bow): And this
supposes the Lawfulness of the Military Employment, yea, that it is in some
Cases Necessary, as well as Lawful.

I might mention in the last place the Practice of the Jews after their Return
from the Captivity; we read that one half of them wrought in the work (i.e.
Building the Temple) and the other half held the Spears, the Shields, the Bow,
and the Habergeons, Neh. iv. 16. And at other times some of the same People
wrought with one of their hands in the work, and with the other held a weapon,
ver. 17. The Sword was thought to be as useful as the Trowel; The former was
necessary to defend and promote the latter. And thus it was the Sense and
Persuasion of all the Holy and Wise Men that lived in the time of the Law, and
before it, that it was Lawful by Military Force to resist the Enemy; and the
most Religious and Pious Persons practiced according to this Persuasion, they
used Force and Violence as proper Means for their Preservation, though they had
the Almighty to assist and back them, and that in an immediate manner sometimes.

Nor is it, or ought it to be otherwise under the Gospel; for even under this
Dispensation the Calling, of a Soldier is not in it sel^ sinful; otherwise this
Employment and the Persons that belong to it, seeing they are so often
mentioned in the New Testament, would at one time or other have met with a
Rebuke; but on the contrary, it is observable that there are very great and
signal Commendations of that particular Rank of Men. There are at least Four
Centurions or Roman Captains spoken of in the Evangelical Writings, and all of
them are mentioned with a particular, but just Elogy. The first was he that
humbly besought our Savior to heal his Sick Servant; and his Words and
Behavior are such, that our Lord was filled with Wonder at them, and at the
same time added this Testimonial, Verily I have not found so great Faith, no
not in all Israel, Matthew. viii. 10. He did not Reprove and Condemn this
Military Man when he heard him say, ver. 9. I am a Man under Authority, having
Soldiers under me: I pay Obedience to an Higher Officer, and so am under
Command my self; but I have likewise those that are under my Authority, who as
soon as I give the Word of Command, fail not to Obey it without the least
delay. Our Savior did not bid him lay down his Commission, and quit a
Soldier's Life as Unlawful: No, he rather allowed of it, and approved of his
Faithful Managing of it. And at the same time he plainly saw what the Noble
Captain meant by thus displaying his Military Office and Authority, viz. that
he thereby intended to Magnify the Supreme Authority which Christ had over all
Persons and Things, and that therefore he was Able to Cure his Paralytick
Servant, who then lay at the point of Death. This strong and firm Belief, and
this open Acknowledgment of the Divine Power which resided in JESUS, are
deservedly Applauded by Him, and he declares he had not found such a Faith and
Confession among his own People and Countrymen, as he met with in this Roman
Soldier, who was a Proselyte of the Gate, a Convert from Paganism to the
Acknowledgment of the True God, for otherwise he would not have built the Jews
a Synagogue, Luke vii. 5.

The next Centurion is he that acted the Sherifs part at the Execution of our
Blessed Savior, concerning whom it is particularly recorded, that upon seeing
the Strange and Prodigious things which happened at that time, he glorified
God, saying certainly this was a Righteous Man, Luke 23. 47. or (as in other
Evangelists) truly this was the Son of God, Mat. 27. 54. So willing and ready
was the Evangelist to tell posterity what were the Convictions and
Acknowledgment of this military Person, with relation to our Savior. An other
Centurion is mentioned in the 10th. Chapter of the Acts; he was an Italian
Captain of the Soldiers that belonged to the Garrison at Caesarea, and became a
Proselyte: For which cause he is styled a devout Man, v. 2. and he had devout
Soldiers under him, v. 7. The Character of this Man of Arms is very remarkable,
He was one that feared God with all his House, who gave much Alms to the
People, and prayed to God always, v. 2. Nor does this suffice, his Character is
touched upon again, v. 22. where it is said, he was a just Man, and one that
feared God, and was of good report among all the Nation of the Jews. And this
was he that was so signally honored with a Vision in order to his Conversion
to Christianity. But we do not find that he was warned in his Vision to throw
up his Centurious place, to relinguish his Employment of a Soldier. Nor did St.
Peter afterward reprove him for being of that Order of Men, or advise him to
quit that Post. But we are sure that he preached Christ to him, and that
thereupon he embraced the Faith, and was admitted into the Society of the
Faithful by Baptism. Some Ecclesiastical Historians mention the Centurion at
Christ's Passion (of whom before) as a true Convert to Christianity, and I do
not see any reason to disbelieve it: But St. Luke, an Infallible Writer, puts
it beyond all doubt that this Centurion we are now speaking of, was a Baptized
Convert. This is much for the honor of Military Men, that the first Persons
among the Gentiles that were brought over to the Christian Faith were of that
Rank, that Soldiers were the First Fruits of the Gospel among those that had
been Pagans.

An other Centurion to be named on the present occasion is own Julius, a
Centurion of Augustus's Band, Acts xxvii. 1. whose singular Kindness toward
the Apostle, who was his Prisoner in his Voyage toward Rome, is expressly
recorded, viz. that when some advised to kill St. Paul, left he should escape
in the Shipwreck, this Centurion being willing to save him, kept them from
their purpose. v. 43. Thus the sacred Writers thought fit to take notice of the
Faith, the Convictions, the Prayers and Alms, and the extraordinary Humanity of
those of that Profession whom I am discoursing of, but they never disparage or
disapprove of the Profession and Calling it self, but rather, whilst they so
often mention the Persons with Commendation, they tacitly approve of their
Employment.

If Wars were unlawful in the time of Christianity, then those Soldiers, who
came to John Baptist, and ask't him what they were to do, Luke iii. 14. would
certainly have been advised to lay down their Arms, and leave off the Military
Life, as Ad Marcel, Epist. 5.
St. Augustine very well notes upon that passage: But that Holy Preacher and
Reformer, instead of this, counseled them to do violence to no Man, or
(according to the Greek more exactly) to shake or terrify no Man (for nothing
more scares and strikes Terror into People than the Violence of Soldiers) to
extort from no Man Money or Goods by forcible means, thence the Title in the
Pandects de Concussione: Neither to accuse any falsely, viz. in order to Plunder
them and bereave them of their Goods, but to be content with their Wages, with
their Pay. This implies that Soldiers behaving themselves well, should be
Encouraged and should not be defrauded of their Allowance. They cannot bear the
toil and fatigue of Battle without due Maintenance. They must Eat as well as
Fight, yea the same Lacham.
Hebrew Word signifies both. And when they have their (...) (which is a Latin
word Greciz'd, of which sort there are several besides this in the New
Testament) when they are paid their just Debentures, they ought to be content,
and not murmr and mutiny. Thus the Gospel has legitimated the Military
Employment, and besides, it has regulated it.

But some make use of those Words of Christ, Mat. xxvi. 52. Put up again thy
Sword into its place, as a Prohibition against all Fighting. To which may be
answered, that this is a singular Instance, and therefore thence cannot be
inferred or proved the general Duty of a Christian. Christ would not let his
Disciples fight at that time: They must lay down their Weapons when he was a to
lay down his Life. When there was a Necessity of his being delivered up to the
Jews, there was no Resistance to be made. This was an extraordinary Case, and
it does not follow hence that at no time we may Fight. Again, it is implied in
that forecited Text that the Apostles sometimes were Swordmen. Put up thy
Sword supposes Peter had a Sword, and wore it. And indeed we are told by
Joseph, the Jewish Historian, that some parts of Judea were infested with
Highway-Men and Robbers, so that it was necessary for Travelers to go Armed,
that they might defend themselves. Or if any shall insist on that former place,
we may urge an other, Luke xxii. 36. He that has no Sword, let him sell his
Garment, and buy one: Where our Savior himself pronounces a Sword to be more
necessary than Apparel, and that even to the Apostles. Though it is true these
Words of Christ may be understood in an other Sense; He either upbraids them
for their carnal Fear and Distrust, and so speaks Ironically, or he has a
Spiritual meaning, and bids them provide Weapons of an other sort, as Faith and
Patience.

That the using of Military Force is lawful seems very clear from St. Paul's
practice, Acts xxiii. 17, 23. He having notice of the Jews Confederacy against
him, informed the Chief Captain of it, and accepted of the help of his Armed
Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, to guard and defend him in his Journey against
those that lay in wait for him, and if occasion should be, to fall upon them.
This shows what the Apostle's sentiment was in the Case.

Moreover, he lets us know that this Force resides chiefly in the Magistrate,
he bears not the Sword in vain, Romans xiii. 4. Where by the Sword is meant
undoubtedly the Judicial and Hostile Sword, the Power to punish Criminals, and
with Arms to repulse the Enemy. In short, by the Sword is meant all Coercive
Power: This the Magistrate is entrusted with, to animadvert upon Offenders, and
to resist the violence of unjust and cruel Invaders.

I could add that the Apostle reckons it as a remarkable act and effort of
Faith that the Holy Warriors of old waxed valiant in Fight, Heb. xi. 34.
thereby acquainting us that Warlike Enterprises are not unbecoming the best
Men, and that the good Success of them is even the result of an Active Faith.
We read that the Christians fought in the Roman Emperors Armies; witness more
especially the Thundering Legion under Antoninus. It was the judgment of an
eminent and pious Writer of the Primitive Church (...), Greg Naz. Apolog. Orat.
that a just Laudable War is more eligible than a Peace which separates us from
God. And lastly, I will adjoin the Words of Our own Church, in one of her
Articles, viz. that Artic. 37.
it is lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons, and serve in the Wars.

But to the Authority of the Old and New Testament, and the Practice of the
Primitive Christians, and later Times, let us add the Reasonableness and Equity
of the thing it self. The Lawfulness of War appears from this, that it is
necessary sometimes in order to the recovery of our Right, and in order to our
Safety and Peace. It will be granted, I suppose, that Religion and Conscience
allow the use of Means that are proper to their End, supposing that End to be
Good. And therefore seeing it is impossible in some Cases to attain to what is
our Right and Due, and to secure our Safety and Repose (which are good and
lawful Ends) without military Execution, and taking up of Arms, it is not to be
doubted that these are such Means as Religion and Conscience will allow of.
When Peace cannot be purchased without War, then in such a Case the best
Leagues and Confederacies are made (as the Eastern Covenants of old) with
Blood, Swords drawn on one side may keep those on the other in the Scabbard.
Hostile actions prove often times the Parents of a lasting Tranquillity. And
truly sometimes it happens that this latter cannot be obtained without the
former. At certain times the public Maladies are of that nature that
Preparations of Steel are found to be the most proper Medicines and Remedies.
There is no possibility of curing them without these Chalybeats.

I would not be mistaken here, I am not designing a Laudatory Oration upon War:
The very Name and^ Sound of it are dreadful, much more the Thing it self. Every
Battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and Garments rolled in Blood,
Isa. ix. 5. When Hostilities are come to the height, there is nothing but
Disorder and Distraction, the Laws cease, and the Judge has his Quietus given
him by the Man of Arms; Widows and Orphans Tears are mingled with the Blood of
the Slain: Cruelty, Ravage and Rapine prevail every where; Slaughter is
rampant, and the Earth it self (the place of Sepulture) is buried with Dead
Bodies. War and Harvest are expressed in the Sacred Idiom by the Katzir. Exodus
xxiii. 16. Isa^. x^ii (...).
same Term, to let us be apprehensive of the Cognation between them. Men are
reaped and mowed down, Swords are turned into Sithes and Sickles. And, in a
word, it cannot be denied that War is one of the most Direful and Destructive
Judgments that God is wont to inflict.

But that which I offer is this, that not withstanding War is so Dreadful and
Dangerous a thing, yet there is a Lawful Use of it sometimes, and on certain
Reasons and Grounds it becomes Necessary, and on that consideration Good and
Laudable. War is not to be Praised for it self, but yet it has, according as
it is managed, an appendent Convenience and Usefulness. We see that some things
have a Secondary Goodness and Excellency in them, though they cannot boast of an
Original and Primary one, as Physic and Surgery, and all Harsh and
Troublesome Applications which are required in some Diseases. These are
necessary in order to Bodily Health, or the Recovery of it, and therefore are
good and desirable. War is of this Nature, it is not Primarily Good, or to be
wished for, but as it has a Tendency on a Great Good, it is on that account
desirable and eligible. And though it be difficult and hazardous, yet so are
Cutting, Cauterizing, and Amputation, which yet we know in some Cases are
indispensable. And there are other Enterprises that are very Perilous, which
Men willingly venture upon, as Navigation and Sea-Voyages, and Merchandising
into Foreign Countries, which are liable to as great Hardships and Dangers as
War.

Besides, by God's particular Providence War is made serviceable to Good
Purposes; for when by Peace and Plenty Nations are grown Wanton and Luxurious,
Idle and Careless, the Martial Trumpet and Drum rouse them, and give them a
sensible apprehension of Want and Scarcity, Difficulties and Perils, and make
them abandon their Sloth and Drowsiness, and betake themselves to such wise and
manly Methods as may best secure their Safety. Thus Polyb. 1. 6.
it was the Judgment of one of the Scipio's, that Carthage was not to be
Demolished and Destroyed, that thereby the Romans might be kept in Exercise and
Breath.

But the main Reason of the Lawfulness of War depends on the Principle of
Self-Preservation. The standing Law of Nature bids us guard our selves from
Injuries; it allows us when we are unjustly Invaded and Assaulted, to make
Resistance. It pushes us on to assert our Civil and Natural Rights, and to
defend our Country against all Violent Aggressors. And therefore that Kingdom
is happy which is furnished with Valiant and Brave Men, that are willing and
able to appear in its Defense, when it is Injured by Unjust Neighbors: As on
the contrary, it is reckoned among the Calamities and Curses of a Nation, that
God will take away from them the Man of War, and the Captain of fifty, Isai.
iii. 2, 3. i.e. Persons of such Valor and Spirit as are requisite for the
Security of their Country. And lastly, Sovereignty, Laws and Arms were designed
for the same End, and thence it is evident that they are alike useful to
Mankind. When People first United into a Body and Society, they made certain
Laws and Constitutions; and Magistrates were appointed by them to be the
Preservers of those Laws, and at the same time they Voted Arms, or Coercive
Power to be necessary, both for Asserting the Governors and the Laws, and
indeed the Whole Community.

From what has been thus briefly Suggested it may be Concluded, that it is
Lawful, even in the Times of the Gospel, to make use of Warlike Provisions on
Just and Necessary Occasions. All that we have to do is to satisfy our selves
as to the Cause we Fight for; for the War is Just when the Cause is so.
Therefore Numa, that Religious King of the Old Romans, knowing that an Unjust
War was not like to be Successful, instituted a College of Priests, on whose
Arbitrament the Decision of War should depend: These Feciales, (as they were
called) inquired into the Nature of the Quarrel, and after great Deliberation
pronounced the War Just before the Romans fought. In this we are to imitate
them; we ought in the first place to be satisfied concerning the Lawfulness of
what we do, and that our Cause is Good. And we may assure our selves that it is
so when the War is undertaken for the Defense of our Country, our Religion, our
Lives, our Laws; for the subduing or weakening of a Powerful Enemy, who
encroaches upon others Territories, and in time may Invade ours; for the
Defense and Support of those Neighboring Kindoms or States that stand in need
of and implore our Aid, and would in all probability be swallowed up by the
Potent Adversary without our timely Assistance. This is a Just and Honest
Cause, and this is ours at present, and consequently we may Lawfully engage in
it. We have a Warrant from Nature and Reason to justify our Arms.

It cannot be denied that some of the Ancient Christian Fathers seem to Condemn
all going to War. Justin Martyr in his Apology and in his Dialogue with Trypho,
utters Words to this purpose. But Tertullian is more direct and positive in
this Matter; he will not allow Christians either to make War, or serve in it,
as might be proved from several express Places in his De Idololat. cap. 19. De
Coron. Milit. cap. 11
Writings; and in one place I remember he has this fanciful Passage, Omnem
postea m^litem Dominus in Perto exa mando discinxit. De Cor. Mil. Cap. 11.
Our Lord (says he) when he disarmed Peter, did the same to every Soldier. He
has taken away their Swords, and they cannot Fight. But this was a Mistake and
Failing of this Good Father, when he inclined to the Vanities of Montanism: For
before he was of another Opinion, as appears from what he said in his Navigamus
and nos vobisc^m, mi^^^amus, etc. A^^ (...).
Defense he made for the Christians. Some Origin, Cyprian, Titus Bostre^^^^^
Jer^^^.
other Writers of the Church seem to hold that it is not Lawful for a Christian
to be a Soldier, and to bear Arms; but their favoring of such a Notion as this
proceeded from their mistaking of that Prophesy in Isai. ii. 4. They shall beat
their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks. Nation shall
not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall any learn War any more: And
other Predictions there are which speak to the same purpose. Whence they
inferred, that all Warlike Preparations are inconsistent with our Savior's
Coming into the World, and with his Evangelical Kingdom. Whereas the True
Meaning of such Prophetic Passages is this, That the Principles of the Gospel,
if attended to, inspire Men with Peace and Amity, and that Outward Wars and
Hostilities shall in time actually cease; that as there was this Cessation in
part at the time when our Saviou^ came into the World, so there shall be a more
Remarkable and Complete one before the Consummation of all things, when the
Church of Christ on Earth shall enjoy a profound and entire Repose.

And this I add further (which may give us a brief Account of the whole Case of
taking up of Arms under the Gospel) Our Savior without doubt intended in his
Sermon on the Mount, and more especially in that part of it which is the close
of the Fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, that his Followers should be more exact
than the Jews, and accordingly he propounds there a Higher Pitch of Religion
than they were capable of. He would have Christians be of such a Temper that no
Swearing, no Going to Law, no Fighting should be used by them. He would have
them deny themselves, and be much Better than others, and refuse Oaths, and
Suits of Law, and War, on slight Occasions, and never be engaged in any of
them, but on Necessary and Unavoidable Grounds; and more especially not in the
last of them, viz. War, till they have tried all Mild and Peaceable Ways, and
have found them ineffectual. And perhaps this is all that some of those
forementioned Writers meant and design'd^^ though they seem to speak otherwise,
and thereby have given occasion to some since to interpret Scripture after that
manner.

Thus Socinus, though he seems to qualify and restrain this Doctrine in his
Epistle to Arcissevius, yet in Epist. 1. ad Dudithium.
another place he speaks in a general way, and seems to condemn all going to
War. As he tells us the Magistrate has no Authority to inflict Death on any
Man, so according to this same Casuist he cannot wage War against an Enemy. And
Smal^^ cont. F^an^z. Disp 6. Wolzogen Comment^ in Ma^^h 5.
others of the Racovian way, pronounce it unlawful to undertake any War,
whether Defensive or Offensive. No Wars, says Instruct. ad (...) lection. N.
T. cap. 10. (...).
Wolzogen, are lawful and permitted to Christians, no not for the Defense of
our Religion. Herein (as in several other things) some Anabaptists are the
Disciples of Socinus, and vote all War to be Unchristian. And we know there is
another Noted Sect of Men that inveigh against the Carnal Weapon, and pretend
great Aversness to Fighting. But I hope I have sufficiently proved that there
is no Ground for this Conceit, and that to defend our Rights Civil and
Religious, is according to the Dictates of Unbiased Reason, and the Practice
of all Sober and Wise Men, and the Allowance of our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles. All these are ample Proofs and Confirmations of this Doctrine: And
therefore if we attend to these, we shall see no reason to listen to the fond
Suggestions of Enthusiatick Heads: But on the contrary, we shall be convinced
that as long as Men carry the Evil nature in them, there will be Wars in the
World, and consequently it will be necessary to make Provision against them,
and to secure our safety even by violent Methods, if we are compelled to it.

That which we are next concerned in is to understand our selves aright, and to
know how to behave our selves when there is occasion to take the Field. When
you are called to Fight, forget not these things,

1st. Go with great Caution and Circumspection. The Errors of War are Dangerous
and Desperate, and perhaps we shall not Err any more. Wherefore it is requisite
to use all the prudent Methods we can, to muster up our Wit and Skill, and by
no means to deceive our selves. (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 3.
A generous and wise Man (as One of the Ancients said rightly) will not despise
the strength of his very Enemy. He will apply himself to a perfect knowledge of
the State and Condition of those he is to combat with, and will let nothing
escape his Observation that may enlighten him in so weighty a Concern. We
should be mindful of what a Great and Expert Warrior long since said, It is a
shameful thing in Military Affairs to excuse our selves by saying we thought
not.

2dly. Fight with Courage and Resolution: To which you have Incentives
sufficient. If Honor be a Spur, you have that to prick you on, for it is well
known without any profound skill in Heraldry that all Titles of Honor are
derived from the Sword and from Martial Affairs. If the Welfare of your
Country, and of those that are Dearest to you in it has any force and
prevalence with it, you are not destitute of that. And if you look to an other
World, you have yet greater Motives to show your selves Valiant and Courageous.
The Famous Titus, when he was haranguing his Soldiers just before they
assaulted Jerusalem, told them that Joseph. De Bello Jud^ Iib. 7. chap. 1.
the Souls of them that die in War are received up presently into the Pure
Ether, and thence transmitted to the Stars; but the Souls of those that die in
Peace by Diseases and Sicknesses are detained in the Bowels of the Earth, and
are forgotten. And Mahomet, who was also a Man of Arms, animated his Followers
by instilling this into their Minds, that those who expire in Battle,
especially against the Christians, are immediately dispach'd to Paradise. But
though you justly despise such empty Deceits as these, yet by a sure Word of
Prophesy you are ascertained of a Better and Glorious Life after this, and that
if you fall in Battle, it is your Corporeal Part only that dies, but that of
you which is Spiritual and Divine shall Survive, and at last shall be reunited
to your Bodies, and both shall enjoy a Glorious Eternity. There are other
Considerations might be offered to you, as you are Men, and as you are
Christians: But I will not insist upon them, lest it be interpreted that I
question your Valor, or that I think you need Incitements to increase it, like
the Blood of Mulberries spread before Elephants to raise their Choler, and make
them Fight with greater fury.

3 dly. Look up to God, and be sensible that all your Military Provisions
signify nothing without him. The most exquisite Humane Prudence and the Highest
degree of Valor (which are the two things I have already mentioned) will avail
little without the Divine Assistance and Heavenly Conduct. Which was the sense
of the very Pagan World, for no War was undertaken by them of old till they
consulted their Oracle, and made Addresses to their Numens. But this was much
more the sense and hearty persuasion of the People of the True God. Their Ark,
which was the Symbol of the Divine Presence, always accompanied the Army when
they went out to Battle against any Nation. That Royal Warrior, who bears so
great a part in the Writings of the Old Testament, most freely acknowledges
that it was God that taught his hands to War, and his fingers to Fight, Psalm.
xviii. 34. cxliii. 1. and therefore we find him constantly imploring His aid
and strength. Self-Confidence has lost many a Battle: Presuming on their
Forces, or on their Success in the beginning of the Fight has proved fatal to
Armed Men. And therefore if we are desirous to Prosper in our Warlike
undertakings we cannot more effectually compass it than by confiding in the
Lord of Hosts, and relying with an unshaken Faith on his Presence and Blessing.

4thly. Let our Wars be designed to Good and Laudable Ends, and especially to
God's Glory. Indeed there is too just occasion given to some to preach up the
Unlawfulness of War, when they behold the base and irreligious Designs men
generally pursue in taking up of Arms. Their Wars and Fightings are intended to
gratify their Lusts, and avaritious Desires, which St. James takes notice of
Chap. iv. ver. 1, 2, 3. They Fight to satiate their greedy thirsting after
Blood and Slaughter, in order to the obtaining what their Ambition and
intemperate affectation of Greatness and Dominion prompt them to. On this
account War is generally a set and solemn Violation of the sixth Commandment;
it is no other than Murdering by wholesale; and Soldiers usually are Homicides
in Pay. These Men (as it is excellently expressed, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 26.) stand
upon their Swords, they con^ide in and brag of their Cruelty and Bloodshed, and
glory in their Ability to do Mischief in the World. Such War is not only
Inhumane, but Devilish; and as it proceeded from, so it tends to the Infernal
Pit: And therefore it is the just Doom of those that foster this Practice to go
down to Hell with their Weapons of War, Ezekiel. xxxii. 27. We must be careful
therefore to War with Good and Lawful Intentions, with a sincere aim at the
real welfare and tranquillity of the Public: For (as the Great Plato long since
determined it) De Legib. (...).
No War is to be undertaken for it self, but only for Peace sake. The Shakings
of War are in order to a firm Settlement. This Blood-letting is for the Health
of the Body Politic. Therefore this is that we must design, in conjunction
always with the Advancement of Religion, without which the secular Concerns of
the Public cannot long thrive. But the ultimate End of all is the Divine
Honor and Glory, which therefore we ought to have chiefly in our thoughts. It
was not unusual with the Old Gentiles to lodge their Arms in their Temples; and
it has been a Custom even in some Christian Countries to hang up the Armor of
Great and Eminent Warriors in the Places set apart for Religion, as if they did
devote them to God. We may most effectually do this by dedicating our Arms to
God's Honor, and not to sinister and unworthy Ends. Hereby we may turn all our
Warlike Expeditions into Crusades, and whenever we Fight, engage in a Holy War.
We are told that the Ancient Romans in a great distress made use of the Weapons
which were deposited in their Temples, and fought with them, and attributed the
Success to the Holiness of their Arms. But this we are sure of, that if Kindoms
did hallow their Weapons by Religion and Virtuous Designs, they would thrive
and prosper in their martial Attempts, and meet the Foe with good Success.

5thly. It is not enough to have a Good Cause and Right Ends, unless our Lives
be Good and Holy. We must always remember that our Sins are our greatest
Enemies, and therefore it is our Interest to vanquish these first, which must
be done by putting on the Spiritual Armor. A Good Soldier must be a Religious
Man. To which purpose I will offer a Criticism to you; You may observe that to
prepare or make War is expressed in the Style of Scripture by Consecrating of
War, Ier. vi. 4. and again in Mic. iii. 5. Which Hebraism may remind us now of
Consecrating or Sanctifying our Wars, namely by unfeigned Holiness and
Righteousness. Let us not profane our Warlike Weapons by an Irreligious and
Wicked Life. But let us remember that the Contrary will bring down a Blessing
from Heaven upon us; besides, that in its own Nature and genuine Efficacy it
will prove Advantageous to us; for a Good Conscience, together with a firm
Trust in the Almighty, will inspire us with the greatest Courage and
Resolution, and give the most undaunted Boldness and Valor to our Spirits. Or,
if we meet not with Success, this Comfortable Principle within us will not
suffer us to be dejected, but will rather Cheer us, as the Roman Senate did
their General when he was flying Home after he was defeated by Hannibal; they
met him, and heartned him, and gave him this Commendation, That he did not
despair of the Safety of the Commonwealth after so great a Defeat.

Lastly. If you be Victorious, know how to demean your selves. Ascribe your
Success to him who is the Grand Arbiter and Disposer of War, and to whom belong
the Issues of it. Herein you may take that Holy and Warlike Prince for your
Pattern, who not only acknowledges that it was the Supreme Lord of Heaven and
Earth that had girded him with strength unto the Battle, but that it was he who
had subdued under him those that rose up against him. It was he that gave him
the necks of his Enemies, that he might destroy those that hated him, Psalm.
xviii. 39, 40. Or, let us use such humble and thankful Language as is suggested
to us in Psalm. xliv. 3. We got not the Victory by our own Sword, neither did
our own Arm save us; but Thy right hand, and Thine arm, and the light of Thy
countenance, because Thou had a favor unto us. To this Almighty Sovereign
and Lord of Hosts be all Glory and Honor now and unto Eternal Ages. Amen.

The True Causes of the Ill Success of War.
A Sermon Preached on a Fast^^ Day appointed by Their Majesty's for the
imploring God's Blessing on their Forces by Sea and Land.
JOSHUA VII. 12. Therefore the Children of Israel could not stand before their
Enemies, but turned their backs before their Enemies, because they were
accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed
from amongst you.
GOD had chosen out a People from the rest of the World, whom he intended to
discover his Will to in a more singular Manner, and on whom he purposed to
confer Mercies of an extraordinary nature: These he preserved in Egypt,
conducted through the Wilderness, and brought at last into the promised Land.
But behold, they were unmindful of this mavelous Goodness of God toward them,
and took not care to observe those strict Commands which he had given them,
particularly That of utterly destroying every accursed thing in the Cities
which they took. They were more signally guilty of this when Jericho was taken
by them, and therefore God punished this gross Violation of his Command, by
suffering them to be Defeated in their next Enterprise. When they went against
the Men of Ai, some of them were smitten and fell before them, others not being
able to endure the Shock shamefully fled away. This, with the Reason of it, is
represented to us by God himself in the Text, Therefore the Children of Israel
could not stand before their Enemies, but turned their backs before them,
because they sinned about the Accursed thing. The hiding and detaining of the
Golden Wedge and the Babylonish Garment, became their General Crime, and were
the Cause of their unexpected Defeat. And withal here is added what they may
expect for the future, namely nothing but Defeats and Overthrows; Neither will
I be with you any more, except ye destroy the Accursed from amongst you, i.e.
unless you destroy your Sins which make you Accursed, and for the future
strictly keep the Command which I gave concerning the Utter Destroying of
whatever belongs to those Cursed Nations: Unless you do this, I will never
assist you to overcome your Enemies, but they shall continually vanquish you,
and prevail against you.

From the whole take this Observation, that the Sins of a People are like to
hinder their Success in War, and to cause them to turn their Backs, and sly
before their Enemies. Besides the Instance in this Chapter there are sundry
others which we meet with in other places of the sacred History. I will begin
with that in Judge. ii. 11. etc. The Children of Israel did evil in the sight of
the Lord, and served Baalim, and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers,
and followed other Gods, and provoked the Lord to anger: And they forsook the
Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. These were their heinous Sins: Now observe
the Effect of them, which follows in the next Verse, The anger of the Lord was
hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of spoilers that
spoiled them, and he sold them into the hand of their enemies, so that they
could not any longer stand before their enemies. This refers unto the Time
between (...)'s Death and God's raising up of the Judges: Then it was that
their Enemies prevailed against them in Battle, and miserably Overthrew and
Destroyed them; which is here ascribed to their Idolatry and other Crying Sins,
which provoked God to deliver them as a Prey to their Enemies. And even in the
Days of the Judges the same Cause had the same Effect, the Children of Israel
did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord strengthened Eglon the
King of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the
Lord: And he gathered unto him the Children of Ammon, and Amalek and went and
smote Israel, Judge. iii. 12, 13. Markit, the Sin of Israel was the Strength of
Eglon; Moab and Ammon prevailed against God's People because they walked not as
such, because they acted Sinfully and Wickedly. And at several other times it
is particularly recorded in this Book, that when the Israelites did evil in the
sight of the Lord, then he gave them into the Hands of their Enemies, who
prevailed over them and grievously oppressed them. To this refer the Psalmist's
Words, in Psalm. lxxviii. 56. etc. They tempted and provoked the most high God,
and kept not his Testimonies. They provoked him to anger with their high
places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven Images. When God heard this
he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel; he delivered his strength into
Captivity, and his Glory into the Enemies hand: He gave his People over also
unto the Sword. So God by his Prophet acquaints us that they rebelled and vexed
his Holy Spirit: Therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought
against them, Isa. lxiii. 10. I will only add that notable Instance in 2 Chronicles.
xxiv. 23, 24. It came to pass that the Host of Syria came up against him, (viz.
King Ioash) and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes
of the People from among the People, and sent all the spoil of them to the King
of Damascus. For the Army of the Syrians came with a small company of Men, and
the Lord delivered a very great host into their Hand. The Syrians were but few,
and the Israelites were many, yet These were defeated by Them; and if you would
know the Reason of it, the next Words will inform you, because they had
forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. For this it was that God forsook them,
and gave them up to their Enemies, to be destroyed by them. All this which I
have produced is an undeniable proof of what I asserted, that Sin hinders
Success in War, this is the cause of Armies being discomfited. All warlike
Provisions prove Successless, all Force and Artillery become useless, and
unable to repulse the Enemy, when a Nation by their Sins fight against God.

This must needs be so if you consider either the Nature of the Thing it self,
or the just Judgment of God. First, it is so in the Thing it self. Immorality
and Vice do naturally impede the Success of War, and give a check to the
Military proceedings of any People. Especially there are some Vices which more
visibly hinder the Thriving of Warlike Undertakings and Exploits. Debauchery
takes away the steady use of Men's Reasons, and renders them incapable of
minding and attending to their Safety. The Amalekites after their Success at
Ziklag lay spread all over the Ground, eating and drinking, 1 Samuel 30. 16. And
this was it which exposed them to the Enemy, who (as we read in the next
Verses) took the advantage of their Debauchery, and slew them all except a few,
who it is likely were those that retained some measure of Sobriety. Belshazar
was set upon in the Night of his Pleasure (as it is called Isa. xxi. 4.) i.e.
in the time of his Feasting and Revelling, which was in the Night. Then it was
that Cyrus and Darius took Babylon, viz. when the Chaldean Nobles were in the
height of their disordered Mirth, Dan. v. 1, 30. which we may find confirmed
by Xenophon in the Lib. 7.
Life of Cyrus. Our Chronicles tell us that the English Army, upon occasion of
King Harold's birth Day, had been Drinking and Revelling all Night before they
came to Fight with the Normans, which was one great Reason of their losing the
Day, and being Conquered. Intemperance and Sottishness have been pernicious and
fatal to Men of Arms: These darken and cloud their Minds so that they are not
able to see into the Projects and Designs of their Enemies, nor to apprehend
what is most proper to be done on emergent occasions: These are the cause of
their neglecting the fit Seasons and Opportunities of action, which being lost,
they are so too.

Again, Incontinence and Luxury, and Love of Pleasure weaken and enervate Men's
Bodies, and cramp those Hands that should War, and those Fingers that should
Fight. Hence it was that Xerxes's Prodigious great Army of above a Million of
Men proved ineffectual to the purposes he had formed. Their Delicacy and
Luxurious way of living spoilt all their military Conduct. They were more eager
to Fight with their Teeth than with their Hands and Weapons: They were not so
much for devouring the Enemy as their Viands. They wished work for their Knives
rather than their Swords; they thirsted after Wine more than Blood. Who could
expect but that their Softness and Dalliances should unfit them for harsh
Encounters? In a word, Being sunk into Sensuality they hated to venture their
Lives, and being filled with Guilt they dared not. And when we remember that in
the Princes of Asia's Armies there were Troops of Women and Eunuchs, and
useless Persons, designed only for Pleasure and Diversion, we need not wonder
that they were so often Defeated, and that their vast Numbers fled away in
disorder. Especially it is requisite in Military Officers that they be Masters
of great Continence and Moderation: For, as Tully well observes, (...) enim
potest ex^^citum is continere Imperator qui se (...) non (...). Pro Lege M^nil.
He that in this point is not able to govern himself, cannot rule an Army.
Wherefore for this excellent Virtue we find some of the greatest Commanders (
Agesilaus, Fabritius, Scipio the African, etc.) commended by Plutarch, Valerius
Maximus, and others. Though Caesar made his Vaunt that he won Battles with
Perfumed Soldiers, yet you shall rarely hear that Commanders do so. For
Effeminacy exhausts their Spirits, dries up their Marrow, and shrinks their
Nerves. An Armed Venus among the Romans was but an Image, a Fiction; but in
reality it is known that Lewdness is destructive to the Camp. In short, no
Debauched or Effeminate Man can be a Good Soldier. For he can never do the
things that are required of a Man of Arms, and he can never undergo the
Hardships which that Life is subject to; and consequently he is wholly unfit
for Warlike Service.

There are other Vices also which hinder the Prospering of Military
Undertakings. (...) was a fit Epithet bestowed on Mars by the Ancient Poet, as
much as if he had styled him a Changling, a Fickle and Slippery Deity. And it
seems some of his Votaries do too much imitate him, else there would not have
been that Complaint of old, That Nulla fides pietasque viris, etc.
there is no Faith nor Honesty to be found in them. Deceit and Treachery have
made many Armies Unsuccessful. The Faithless and Persidious, whilst they have
seemed to take up Arms for their Country, have really betrayed it, holding
secret Correspondence with the Enemy, and promoting that Cause which they
pretend to fight against. It is not incredible that We have had some ground to
complain on this account: If we had not been betrayed at Sea and at Land in
some of our Engagements, it is probable our Fleet and our Armies would have
given a better account of themselves. And

Ambition or Avarice are always the Sins that soment this Treachery: The Love
of Honor, or the Desire of Gain, have prompted these Armed Men to listen to
the Profers of their Enemies, and falsely deliver up the whole Forces to them
for their own Private Advantage. Or else they Protract and Husband the War (as
they are pleased to speak) only to make themselves Rich and Wealthy. Yea, and
in the heat of the Battle, or immediately after it, Covetousness, Rapine, and a
Greedy Desire of Booty, have proved destructive to Armed Forces. When, with
Achan, their Minds are intent upon Stealing and Hoarding, when the Gold, and
the Silver, and the Goodly Garments are chiefly thought of, the Concern of the
Battle is forgot, and even when Victory was inclining toward them, it on a
sudden left them, and went to the other side.

Lastly, when we go to meet the Enemy with Prejudice, Grudgings, Animosites,
yea downright Hatred among our selves, Nihil praestare majus Fortuna potest
quam hostium discordiam. Tacit. de morib. German.
we cannot expect that our Military Expeditions will be Blessed with Success.
When Israel was to go forth against Iabin and Sisera, it was a sad reflection
to take notice that they could not agree among themselves: Judge. v. 15, 16.
For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts, there were great
searchings of heart, and it was from the extraordinary Hand of God that these
did not prove their Overthrow at that time. Thus you see some Sins directly
obstruct the Good Success of War; as, on the contrary, some Virtues, as
Temperance and Sobriety, Continence and Chastity, Truth and Faithfulness,
Self-denial and Contentment, Mutual Peace and Concord do in their own nature
promote it.

Secondly, It is so not only upon Human Consideration, but by the Just Judgment
of God, by the Divine Conduct and Providence. Our Sins fight against Him, and
he sends Wars, and Ill Success with them, to Punish us for those Sins. When the
Israelites provoked God by their Idolatry and other such abominable Offenses,
he alarmed them with the Noise of War and Battle: When they chose new Gods,
then was War in the gates, Judge. v. 8. Since they were for introducing Heathen
Deities, it was ^it that Mars should be one of them. Seeing they would have
Strange Gods, they must grapple with Strange Nations, and be severely treated
by them. Amongst the Judgments and Curses which God denounces against an
Impenitent and Profligate People, This you will find to be one, in Deuteronomy.
xxviii. 25. The Lord shall cause them to be smitten before their enemies, they
shall go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them. That this
was a Judgment purposely designed against them for their Sins may be further
learnt from Lev. xxvi. 23, etc where God expressly tells that People, That if
they will not be reformed, but will walk contrary to him, he will bring a Sword
upon them, that shall avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. The Covenant was that
he would be their God, and they should be his People, i.e. that they should
serve and obey him, and do whatever he commanded them: So that every Sin is a
Breach of the Covenant; and where God sends the Sword, i.e. War, with the
dreadful Effects of it, there he has some quarrel of his Covenant to revenge,
there some Sin or other is to be Punished. The Eastern People always used Blood
in making a Covenant. Here you see God will send a Bloody Sword to avenge the
Breach of his. War and Bloodshed shall be the Penalty of Men's dealing falsely in
Religion, and prevaricating with God. This then is according to what he had
Threatened against Sinners; so that if This did not come to pass, God could not
be Faithful to his Word. Besides, he is obliged by virtue of his Pure and Holy
Nature to show his Dislike of Sin; which he can no ways better do, than by
severely Animadverting upon it. On this account an Army of Profane and Wicked
Men, who have no Sense of Religion, but defy it, and blasphemously declame
against it, cannot expect their Arms should prosper; their Guilt must needs
weigh down their Swords, or rebate the Edge of them. The Divine Vengeance may
justly blast all their Warlike Attempts at Land, and make their Enterprises at
Sea like those of Caligula, who made a show of a Descent upon Britain, but took
up at the Shore, and caufed his Army to gather Cockle-Shells, and so returned
with the Mock-spoils of the Ocean. Or, which is far worse, the Incensed Majesty
of Heaven may turn their Martial Weapons and Forces against themselves.

Are these things so, then,

Is It. Let us Tremble at the Thoughts of the Condition we are in at present. A
potent Enemy is lifting up his Warlike Weapons against us, and we at the same
time Fight against God by our daily and repeated Sins. What can we think will
be the Issue of this? If the Children of Israel turned their Backs before their
Enemies because of the accursed Thing, how can we imagine we shall stand before
ours, when we cherish such a Multitude of accursed Things amongst us? Was
Israel defeated because of one single Achan? May not we then fear that we shall
be so, having so many Achans in our Camp? What Peace can we look for so long as
the Whoredoms and Debaucheries, the Profane Swearings and Cursings of this
Nation are so many? So long as Pride and Luxury, Irreligion and even Atheism
prevail in the midst of us? And as no Peace, so no Auspicious War can be
expected as long as these are countenanced and maintained: For these most
Exorbitant and Flagitious Vices make the greatest Warriors Successless. Let us
not then flatter our selves, and boast of our present Safety, and confide in
our Strength and Forces, and the great Preparations we have made. Let not us of
this Island brag that we, like Populous No, Nahum. 3. 8.
have the Waters round about us, and that our Rampart is the Sea, and our Wall
(i.e. our Defense) is from the Sea. Let us remember what it was that spoiled
King Iehoshaphat's Design at Sea, and broke all his Ships in pieces, viz. his
Joining himself with one who did very wickedly, 2 Chronicles. 20. Much more then if
the Generality of a Nation join together to do very wickedly, may not they
expect that their Ships will be shattered and broken, that their Naval Force
will be brought to ruin? And though through the Divine Goodness and Forbearance
they may seem to prosper for a time, yet it will be Bitterness in the latter
End. Although we have had Unexpected Success of late, and God has appeared for
us in an Extraordinary manner, yet let us not make us such an Image of Victory
as was at Athens, without wings: Let us not fancy that it has taken up its
Seat with us, and will not fly from us. Or, let us not imagine we have Mars in
Fetters, as the Lacedaemonians represented and pourtrayed him; that we have so
chained up War that it is wholly at our disposal, and that it cannot hurt us.
Let such vain Confidences disappear, and let us know that we are in the Hands
of God, and that Peace and War, Victory and Overthrow, and all the Comfortable
or Dismal issues of either are wholly from Him. Presume not of Victory because
you are Strong and Valiant, because the Force and the Courage of England have
been tried, and are well known to the World. Let not this make you Confident
that you shall prevail against your Enemies. I must tell you that if England
were a thousand times Stronger and Valianter than it is, the Sins, the Crying
Sins which are in the midst of it are able to Weaken and Dispirit it. It could
never be believed that the adversary and enemy should enter into the Gates of
Jerusalem, as the Prophet speaks, Lam. iv. 12. That City was of almost
incredible Strength; it was so admirably Fenced and Fortified that there are in
the Old Testament several elegant Allusions to this very thing. Yet this place
which was so Strong, and in the Opinion not only of themselves, but of
strangers, Invincible and Impregnable, was taken, and fack'd and burnt with
Fire; yea, even a second time it met with the same fate.

May we learn then not to Vaunt of our Strength, but rather to be sensible of
our Weakness, viz. of our Sins, which Enfeeble and Disable us. By reason of
these it is that the People in the midst of us are Women, as it was said of
Nineve, Nahum. iii. 13. And then will follow what is there added, The Gates of
the Land shall be set wide open to our Enemies, i.e. we shall be subdued and
conquered by them. Our Vices will blunt all our Weapons, our Sins will
discomfit our Forces on Land, and sink our Ships at Sea, We abound with those
ill Practices which (as I have showed you) do naturally produce ill Success in
War, as the nourishing of Discord and Animosities, Covetousness and Ambition,
Treachery and Perfidiousness, Luxury and Wantonness, Drunkenness and
Sottishness, Lust and Uncleanness, and all manner of Debauchery and
Profaneness. These with the Guilt of them on Men's minds do emasculate their
Spirits, and render them Cowards and Poultrons. To these may be imputed the ill
Conduct of Affairs, to these Men may ascribe their Miscarriages in War: This is
the true Source of those cross Events and Disappointments which they meet with.
The Oaths, the Horrid Oaths which you frequently hear out of the Mouths of
profane Wretches do England more harm than so many Cannons discharged by the
Enemy against us. As many Debauched and Dissolute Livers as there are in this
Nation, so many Plagues are there to the Kingdom, so many Traitors to the
King, so many Enemies in the Camp, so many Fireships among the Navy, so many
Hindrances to the good Success of War, which otherwise we might look for. It is
certainly an Unhappy War where those who are employed in Military Action are
led by the Evil Spirit, and follow his Dictates in their Lives and Practices.
Such cannot reasonably think to be Prospered by God in their Enterprises of
War. Or, if God shall be so Merciful and Indulgent as to pass by their
Enormities, and to bless their Martial Endeavors, yet, if afterward they be
not exceeding Sensible of God's Extraordinary Goodness to them, but persist in
their former evil Courses, their Success will prove a Curse instead of a
Blessing: Their Laurels will be blasted, their Victories and Triumphal
Rejoycings will soon be turned into Mourning and Lamentation; and those Enemies
whom they at present seem to prevail against shall increase in Number and
Strength, and overrun them, and destroy them with a great Destruction. You may
take this for an undeniable Truth, that those who are out of God's way, cannot
but make false Steps. You must not expect that they should Thrive any
considerable time; nothing will long Prosper under their Conduct. Let this
check your Fond Presumption, and teach you to stand in awe, and not to sin
against God with that high hand you formerly did. Which brings me to the next
Inference from the Premises;

2. Remove the Cause of all your Fears and Dangers, that is, renounce your
Sins, which either in themselves or through the Judgment of God do not only
procure Wars, but make them Unsuccessful and Fatal to us. That you may fight
your Foes victoriously, see that you combat your Sins, that you grapple with
your Vices. This is a War that is fought without Noise, a War that makes no
Widows nor Orphans, a War that is always crowned with Victory and Peace. That
you may not, like the Israelites in the Text, turn your backs before your
enemies, you must take care to put away the Accursed thing, the Cursed
Uncleanness, the Cursed Oaths, the Cursed Intemperance and Drunkenness, the
Cursed Uncharitableness, Enmity and Malice which are amongst us. These are all
Execrable things, and every one of them are able to blunt our Swords, to damp
our Powder, to stifle our Cannon, and to render all our Martial Provisions
useless and ineffectual. Think you heard God speak to You as he did to Joshua,
or rather to the Whole People, O Israel, O England, thou can not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the Accursed thing from among you, Verse 13th
of this Chapter. All Sin is Accursed; lay This aside, and then go forth against
your Enemies, and Prosper. You may read in Judges x. 16, 17. That the Children
of Israel put away the strange Gods from among them, as a Necessary
Introduction and Preparative for undertaking a Successful War against their
Enemies, who were at that time gathered together, and encamped against them.
And this was done in Obedience to that Excellent Rule which was given them in
Deuteronomy. xxiii. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine enmemies, then keep
thee from every wicked thing; then be sure to be watchful over your selves,
that you indulge not any sort of Wickedness; for Vice at Home will spoil your
Forces Abroad. Here I might pertinently remind you to remove more particularly
those Sins which are wont to be the Immediate Causes and Procurers of War,
those Lusts that War in your Members (James iv. 1.) those Insatiable Desires
and Wishes which breed in Men a strong Inclination to Quarrel with others; such
are Ambition, Anger, Cruelty, Revenge, Pride, Desire of Glory, Una and ea vetus
causa bellandi cupido divitia um and impe^^i. Salust.
Covetousness, Thirsting after Command and Greatness, and sometimes Luxury and
Prodigality, which reduce Men to Streights and Wants, whereupon they are
necessitated as 'twere to Fight that they may Eat, (as the Lacham, comedere:
pugnare.
same word among the Hebrews signifies both;) in brief, a being Dissatisfied
with our present State and Condition. These are the Load-stones that draw Steel
to them; these are the grand Procurers of War and Fighting, of Blood and
Slaughter in the World, and we are particularly concerned to root out these
Vices.

Especially I might remind you not to addict your selves to the Sins of those
Persons whom you Fight against. How absurd and unaccountable is it (think you)
that when we have Proclaimed War against a Neighboring Nation, and even whilst
we are Fighting them, and hope to get the better of them, yet we are in the
mean time Conquered by their Vices? We treat them as Loathed Enemies, and yet
are in love with their Follies, and dote upon their Vanities and Excesses. Let
me tell you, we must take another course before we can look for Success and
Victory. If we would have This declare it self on our side, and even fling it
self into our Arms, we must make sure of the Conquest over the Disorders and
Vices of those we take up Arms against. Briefly, we must examine our Lives and
Manners, and whatever we discern to be amiss in us must be forsaken. We must
first vanquish all our Lusts, and then we may with some confidence engage the
Adversary. We may hope for Success against our Bodily Enemies, when we have
subdued our Spiritual ones. What you read of Jonas may be a good Emblem to us
in this present Affair. He was in Rebellion against God, and was become a Great
Sinner in his sight, and for his sake (as himself says) a Great Tempest arose
at Sea, and exceedingly endangered the Ship wherein he was. There was no way to
allay this Tempest and save the Ship, but by taking up Jonas, and casting him
forth into the Sea; then the Sea ceased from her raging. It is Sin that raises
the Tempests of War among us: They are Sinners, especially such as lie fast
asleep (as Jonas did) that endanger the Common Vessel wherein we are Embarked.
We shall all sink and be cast away, unless the Troublesome Jonas be thrown
overboard, unless Sin be cast out. But,

3. It is not enough to cast away your Sins, to abstain from those Vices which
you formerly committed, but you must betake your selves to the serious Practice
of all Holiness. The first thing you are to do is to give your selves unto
Prayer. This is a proper Duty at this time, and is commended to us by the
Examples of Exodus xvii. 2. 1 Samuel vii. 9. 2 Chronicles. xiv. 11. 2 Chronicles. xx. 6. 2
Kings xix. 5.
Moses, Samuel, King Asa, Iehosaphat and Hezekiah, whose Prayers on this
occasion are recorded. Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered, was the
usual Form of Prayer or Collect which the Israelites used in their Marches
against their Enemies. And we read that there were 2 Chronicles. xii. 14.
Priests among them that waited on the War, Persons set apart on purpose to go
forth with their Armies, and Pray with them upon any Expedition. Yea, that you
may see that this is a part even of Natural Religion, the Pagans invoked their
Gods in a special manner when they went forth to Battle: Thus it is
particularly recorded of Cyrus, that Xenoph. de Expedit. Cyri. lib. 6.
he very earnestly implored their help in his Wars. But the Greeks and Romans
were the most noted for this; and therefore both Apolog cap. 40.
Tertullian and Institut. l. 2 c. 1.
Lactantius make mention of the special Addresses made to the Gods by those
People in time of War. Scipio (that Great Thunderbolt of War) was an Example of
this among the Romans, as Lib.^ 9. cap. 27.
Livy testifies: He endeavored to render the Gods favorable and propitious to
him in Battle, by his importunate Supplications to them; and there are other
Notable Instances not only in this Historian, but in Vale^ius Maximus, Velleius
(...), etc.
Others. They generally acknowledged that their Help was in the Divine Power,
and that it was necessary to have the Gods on their side, if they hoped for
Success in Battle. The very Proclaiming of War among the Old Romans, was in a
Religious and Devout manner: It was accompanied with a solemn invoking of their
Gods, and with Ceremonies of Divine Worship. The Herald was a kind of Priest.
It might be observed that the Prince of Poets throughout his whole Iliads,
makes his Commanders invoke Jupiter before they undertook any Warlike
Enterprise; yea, there is not any single Person but craves his Aid immediately
before he ingages his particular Adversary. Hereby this Ancient Sage would give
the World to understand that Praying and Fighting were not to be separated.

Shall the Christian World then fall short of Pagans in this Religious
Practice? Shall we not with most ardent zeal beseech the Almighty to bless our
Arms with Success? Do the Turks begin their March, and make their Onset in
Battle with a loud Cry of Allah, Allah, Allah, i.e. they thrice repeat the Name
of God: And shall not Christians devoutly Supplicate their Jehovah Sabbath,
their Lord of Hosts, their Sacred and Undivided Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost? Yes; this we find to have been the constant Course and Practice of the
Servants of God in all Ages. Nobiscum was the Word used among the Christians of
old in their Military Clamor: When they were to engage the Enemy they all out
of a sense of the Necessity of God's Presence with them (according to that of
the Apostle, Romans viii. 31. (...) 2 Juliani.
If God be for us, who can be against us?) unanimously cried out, God with us,
and for us; for that is the meaning of Nobiscum, as you will find it Vege^. l.
3. c. 5. Theophan.
Interpreted. There were solemn Prayers on the occasion of War in all the
Ancient Churches of the Christians: and so it should be now. The Gates of our
Temples, like those of Ianus's, must stand open in these times of War. Whilst
so many among us are belching out Oaths and Curses, do you strive to call down
a Blessing by your devout Petitions and Addresses at the Throne of Grace. Drown
the Noise of their Profane Swearing and Blasphemy by your Louder and Sacred
Cries in the Ears of God. Let your Supplications be as prevalent and successful
as those of the Christians of old, who were styled the Thundering Legion, who
procured Relief to themselves, and a Defeat to their Enemies, by their Urgent
and Incessant Cries to Heaven. See then that you be very warm in your
Addresses, urge and solicit the Divine Goodness by your continued
Applications. God may be pleased to give that to our Prayers which he denies to
our Courage; we may prevail more by our Humble Petitions than by our Valorous
Enterprises.

And with Prayer join all other Acts of Religious Worship, devote your selves
wholly to the Service of God, and never think your selves Safe whilst you
abandon that. Plutarch tells us in the Life of Numa, that when Word was brought
him that the Enemy was near at hand, his answer was, I fear them not: Let them
come at their peril, for I am Sacrificing unto the God's. He thought himself
Safe in that Religious Employment, and reckoned it his best Protection against
his Enemies. Shall not we, who are to offer Spiritual Sacrifices by Jesus
Christ, esteem those as our greatest Safety and Security in time of War and
Slaughter?

And let us be daily employed not only in all Holy Exercises of Devotion, but
let us live in the constant Practice of those Religious Duties which respect
our Selves and our Brethren, as well as God. We must think it to be our present
Concern to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily. Those more especially that
are in Authority ought at this time to discharge their Great and weighty Office
with all Faithfulness. It is requisite that these Persons give some remarkable
Proof of their hearty Desire and Endeavor to Amend their own Lives, and of
those that are committed to their Charge. If it would please God to stir up the
Hearts of the Great Ones of the Land to do some Eminent thing in the sight of
the whole Nation for the reforming of themselves and the rest of the Kingdom,
if they would no longer Conniv^ at the Crying Sins amongst us by letting them
go Unpunished, but would from henceforth severely check (as they might easily
do with great Success) the Profaning of the Christian and Evangelical Sabbath,
the Impious Swearing and Cursing, the Wild Intemperance and Debauchery, the
Excessive Pride and Luxury, the Impudent Lewdness and Wantonness which reign
among us, if (I say) they would curb and chastise these Enormities, and thereby
testify their utter Abhorrence of them, we might then entertain good hopes that
God will go forth with our Armies, and remove this great Judgment of War by a
happy Victory on our Side. The Lord of Lords and King of Kings inspire their
Hearts with full resolutions to do these things Effectually and Speedily, that
the whole Nation may partake of the Blessed Fruit of it.

And this is in some sort the General Concern of you All: For here you may
observe in the Instance which is before us, that the People of Israel executed
Judgment on Achan: They brought out this grievous Offender and his Family, and
first stoned them, and then burnt them: They also brought forth the Accursed
things which had been stolen and ^id, and dealt with them as things Devoted and
Cursed, i.e. they utterly destroyed and consumed them with Fire, and therein
exactly obeyed the Order and Command that God had given. When they had done
this they went against the King of Ai and his People, and Jos. 8. 22.
smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape. Let us learn hence
our indispensable Duty at this time: We must reform our selves and others: The
Magistrates are obliged more especially to punish Sin wherever they find it,
and we are All of us obliged to act according to what God has enjoined us; and
then we shall be a Victorious People. Never look to thrive and prosper in
Battle till you leave off Fighting with God, till you resolve to obey his
Commandments, and to conform your Lives to the Laws which he prescribes you.
This is the very thing which was inculcated by Joshua when he was taking his
farewell of the Israelites, and going the way of all Flesh; he lets them know
that if they will keep and do all that is written in the Book of the Law of
Moses, so that they turn not aside therefrom, to the right Hand or to the left,
but that they cleave unto the Lord their God, then one Man of them should chase
a Thousand, and the Lord their God should Fight for them, Jos. xxiii. 6, 8, 10.
then they should see the happy Success of their Arms. We who own the Honorable
Name of Christians have a Written Book of Laws, viz. Those which were given us
by Christ Jesus our Blessed Lord. If we turn not aside from these, but
carefully endeavor to keep and do* all that is contained in them, God will
reward our Obedience by enabling us to chase our Enemies, though they be never
so Numerous. If we may credit Ecclesiastical History there appeared to
Constantine the Great in his Expedition against Maxentius a Cross, an
Auspicious, Sign, in the Heavens with this Inscription on it, (...) In or by
this overcome. The Cross without Doubt was the Emblem of Christianity, which is
the Holy Institution of a Crucified Savior. By this you shall Conquer, by
conscientiously Observing the Rules of this most Holy Religion, by Living and
Acting according to the Prescriptions of the Gospel you shall vanquish your
most implacable Foes.

You see then your Duty and your Interest: You must abandon your Sins and
cleave unto God with full purpose of Heart, otherwise you can never prosper.
The very Heathens had this Notion that the only way to be Conquerors was to
have the Divine Presence with them: Accordingly when ever they went to War (as
well as in other dangers and difficulties) they constantly packed up their
Gods, and carried them with them, thinking that they were never safe without
them, and especially that they could not prosper in Battle unless their Gods
went with them. Upon this persuasion the Trojans thought themselves Secure
whilst they had the Image of Pallas with them: And the City is said to have
been destroyed as soon as that was gone. Upon the same Ground it was the usual
Custom of the Pagans to call forth the Gods of the Place before they besieged
it, they persuading themselves that as long as They were there, it was in vain
to assault it, for They would defend them from all Danger. Upon the like
apprehension some of the Heathens used to tie up their God's, and fasten them
with Chains, that they might not go away and leave them, as several Writers
Witness. All this shows that they were persuaded of this, that God's being with
them was the Foundation of Success and Prosperity. Let us much more, who
acknowledge the only True God, fix this upon our Minds that his Presence is
absolutely necessary in order to Success and victory. There is never any Good
Fighting without his Assistance. And it is as certain that we can never have
This as long as we continue in our Sins. We cannot with any reason expect the
Blessing of God to be with us till we amend our Lives. Indeed it is a high
piece of Impudence and Effrontery to imagine the contrary. A Vicious and wicked
Life will certainly quash and frustrate all our Warlike Enterprises. I hope the
serious Consideration of this will make you improve the Time of Fasting and
Humiliation which is set apart Monthly by our Church to the great and worthy
Designs of it, namely the Abhorring of your former evil Ways, and the speedy
Reforming of your Lives. We are apt to trust too much to the Goodness of our
Cause, in the mean time looking not to our Sins, nor taking care to Remove that
which provokes God. But let us remember this, that it is not enough to have a
Good Cause, unless our Lives be Good also. There is a necessity of our being
Religious and Righteous in order to being blessed in the Enterprises of War.
Let every one of you then begin to amend and reform himself, and by this means
you will promote a General Reformation. If one Achan brought a Curse on the
whole people of Israel, then one Holy Penitent who has been a Great Sinner,
but becomes as Eminent for his Repentance, may bring a Blessing on the whole
Community. Not only the Family to which such a Person belongs, not only the
City or Town he lives in, but the whole Nation may fare the better for him. If
but a few of you will be brought to a sight of your Sins and a reformation of
your Ways, I hope even that will derive a Blessing on the whole Kingdom. Or, if
you will but come to this, to be Ashamed of what is past, and heartily to
Intend and Purpose to amend your Ways for the future, even this may be accepted
of God, and our Forces both at Land and Sea may feel the happy Effect of it.

You see, my Brethren, what is the Design of This Discourse: It is no other
than This, to put you into the way of being Victorious. That which I have said
does indeed more immediately concern Those who personally and actually engage
in the Wars at this time. They must leave their Sins behind them, their
Profane and Blasphemous Swearing, their Love of Drunkenness and Uncleanness,
and the rest of their Sins which they formerly indulged themselves in. If I had
an opportunity of speaking in the Ears of These Men, I should be very Plain
with them, and let them understand how they endanger both themselves and us by
the Cherishing those Vile and Abominable Vices. I should very warmly urge upon
them their Present Duty, and most affectionately beseech them that they would
not destroy both themselves and us, and the whole Nation, by continuing in the
Love or Practice of those Crying Sins. Can those Forces prosper which are led
forth against the Enemy with Oaths and Curses in their mouths? Will not this
almost spoil the Word of Command? Can Men of Profaneness and Debauchery
successfully defend a Reformed Religion? The God of Heaven, who has the Hearts
of all Men at his disposal, and can change and turn them as he pleases, reform
and reclaim this sort of Persons, and enable them to engage in the Service of
their King and Country, and (which is above these) of their Religion, with a
hearty renouncing of their former evil Ways, and with a hatred of their past
Miscarriages, that God may be pleased to cover their Heads in the Day of
Battle, and to make them the happy Instruments of conveying Victory and Peace,
Safety and Prosperity to the Whole Kingdom.

But you that hear me this day, you that are at Home as well as they that are
in the Camp, you that are on Land as well as those that are Abroad at Sea, are
nearly concerned in This Discourse. You that are not engaged in Battle, are to
abandon and forsake your Sins no less than those who are actually concerned in
the Wars. This is evident from the forenamed place, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 9. When the
Host goes forth against thy enemy, then keep thee from every wi^ked thing. It
is a Text that we should constantly bear in our Minds whilst the War continues.
Our Host is now going forth against the Enemy; see that you observe this
Injunction; dare not to act those Sins which you have heretofore been addicted
to. Whilst the Host is gone to fight with the Adversary, do you grapple with
your Sins, endeavor to subdue and conquer them, and bring them under. Keep
your selves now, now especially from every wicked thing. Let him that Swore
swear no more, let him that Cheated and Defrauded, him that Injured and
Oppressed his Neighbor, be no longer guilty of those Crimes. Let him that
lived in Drunkenness or Lewdness leave off those Wicked Courses: And whatever
other Sin any Person was given to, let him do so no more, but let him practice
the contrary Virtues and Graces. This must be done if you hope to hear any good
Tidings from our Forces and Fleets. According as you behave your selves here,
you must expect your Success will be there. There is nothing more certain than
this, That the Sins and Disorders of a People at Home are oftentimes punished
and revenged Abroad, in the Field, or on the Sea. Therefore take heed what you
do; sin not wilfully against God, especially at such a Juncture as this. If you
would subdue your Enemies, you must make God your Friend; and this you cannot
do unless you renounce your Lusts, and leave off the Practice of Vice. Observe
it, before God would send Gideon against the Midianites (i.e. to fight them) he
caused him to purge the Land of Idolatry, as you may read in Judges vi. 25, 26.
Baal's Altars were plucked down, and the Worship of the True God was set up. If
Baal stands, Israel falls; if Idolatry be maintained, the Midianites will get
the better; but whilst the Israelites draw their Swords, and hew down Baal,
they do but whet them, and sharpen their Edge against their Enemy. You see then
how greatly you are concerned to amend your Lives, and to renounce your former
Sins, for those are your Idols. Unless you do this you cannot reasonably expect
that God will will give a Blessing to our Military Undertakings, that he will
stem the Raging Torrent of France, and curb the Fury of the Ottoman Forces.
Moses's words are remarkable, O that they were wise, that they would consider
their latter End, and thereby be stirred up to amend their doings: How should
one chase a Thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight? Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29, 30.
As much as to say, a Religious and Penitent people are a Wise people, and such
will prove Victorious in a most wonderful manner. That you may be the latter,
be careful to be the former: That your Arms may be blessed with Conquest, lay
down your Sins, forsake every beloved Vice. To conclude all with the Psalmist's
words, Through God we shall do valiantly, but then we must vanquish our Lusts:
He it is that shall tread down our Enemies, but not unless we do so to our
Vices, unless we heartily bewail our Sins, and the Sins of the Nation, and
sincerely resolve from henceforth to abandon our Wicked Ways, and to reform our
Lives, and to live more like Christians and Protestants than we have hitherto
done.

The Extreme Danger of Intestine Divisions in a Kingdom.
A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Guild Hall Chapel.
MARK III. 24. And if a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot
stand.
IF you consult the Matthew. ix. 23. Luke xi, 14.
Other Evangelists, you will find that the Malicious Cavils of the Jews against
the Miraculous Cure which our Savior had wrought upon a Dumb Man, were the
occasion of These Words. For when the Pharisees saw that the Devil, who
possessed this poor Wretch, was ejected, they blasphemously cried out against
our Blessed Lord, saying, He casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils, he holds Correspondence with that Arch Fiend, he is in League and
Confederacy with the Chief of those Apostate Spirits, and by this means it is
that he does these great Feats. In answer to which blasphemous Cavil our
Savior lets them know how Incredible and Absurd a thing this is which they
allege. Mark ii 23.
How can Satan (says he) cast out Satan? Is it any ways likely that one Fiend
will dispossess another? For (as he adds) Chap* iii* 26*
if Satanrise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but has an
end. It is impossible that that Hellish Empire should last long if he goes thus
to Work. For see, as it is in Oeconomicks, Chap. iii. 25.
If a House (says he) be divided against it self, that House cannot stand: And
in Politics, If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot
stand; so fares it in the present case, Luke xi. 13.
If Satan be divided against himself, how shall his Kingdom stand? How shall
his Designs and Endeavors against Christ and his Kingdom be carried on? If he
and his Agents be at Variance among themselves and combat one another, the
Kingdom of Darkness will soon be shattered and broken. Thus you see how the
Words are brought in here, namely by way of Similitude and Illustration.

But I shall wave this Consideration of them at present, and take them in their
Absolute capacity and meaning; that is, as they are an excellent Maxim or
Aphorism, or a most Useful Observation in Government, and the ordering of
Public Societies and Communities. Being thus considered they are resolved into
this Proposition, that there is not a more infallible Crisis of the Ruin and
Downfall of a Kingdom than their Divisions and Breaches among themselves. I say,
not a more infallible one, for of all the Signs and Forerunners of a Nations
Ruin, this proves the most Certain and Unquestionable, this proves the most
Unerring and Fatal Omen, When you see Intestine Quarrels, Contentions and
Digladiations grow high in a Nation, and when you observe a general aversness
in Men to Peace and Reconcilement, then conclude that an Universal Devastation
is hastening on. It is a Memorable Parable which you meet with in the Prophecy
of Jeremiah, where under the Representation of Bottles filled with Wine the
Ruinous Estate of the Jews is foretold. Jer. xiii. 13, 14.
I will fill all the Inhabitants of the Land, says the Lord, with Drunkenness:
And I will dash them one against another; I will not pity nor spare, nor have
mercy, but destroy them. A Spirit of Drunkenness shall possess them, they shall
experience the worst sort of Intoxication, they shall be drunk, but not with
Wine (as another there Prophet expresses it) they shall Reel and Stagger, they
shall be Dissettled and Divided, they shall (like the Clubs of Debauched Men)
be filled with Noise and Clamor, they shall Quarrel and Fight with one
another; there shall be no Harmony, no Concord and Agreement. Thus the
Inhabitants of a Land are filled with Drunkenness: And this is always the
certain sign of their being dashed one against another, of their being Ruined
and Destroyed. When Unity, which is the true Sobriety of a Nation, is once
lost, Destruction is the inevitable close of it.

Give me leave to refresh your Memories with a few Instances to this purpose
out of History both Sacred and Profane, Foreign as well as Domestic. And God
knows I have no other design in so doing but This, that We of These Nations,
We of this Island especially may not be made an Instance our selves, and become
the Subject of future Histories. Take the Four Great Monarchies of the World,
and there you will find the Truth of this exemplified and confirmed. The
Division of the First Universal Empire, by reason of the Babylonians, Assyrians
and Medes mutually striving among themselves, and breaking in upon one another,
procured their Dissolution, and the accomplishment of that Prediction in the
Prophetical Writings, (...) xxi. 9. ^er. li. 8.
Babylon is fallen; which had reference to the Ruin of that Monarchy by the
Medes and Persians, viz. when Belshazar the last King of Babylon was slain, and
Darius the Mede and Cyrus the Persian took the Kingdom. It is true, this
Monarchy lasted thrice as long as any that succeeded it, but the reason was
because there was not so much Division in the World at first. And if we look
into the next, viz. the Medo-Persian Empire, mixed and various in its very Make,
which is expressed in Daniel by Dan. vii. 5.
Three Ribs, we shall find that its Different and Disagreeing Temper
contributed to its Downfall, and that in a short time. But this is more evident
and visible in the following, that is, the Greek Monarchy, which was whole and
entire all the time of Alexander the Great (the First Founder of it) but
afterward being divided among his Captains (who are meant by the Chap. viii. 8.
four horns of the Ram in Daniel) they and those that succeeded them by their
constant Jarrings and ambitious Encroachings upon one another Allotments,
thereby rendered all those spacious Countries fit for the Roman Conquest; and at
last their Divisions caused the actual Translation of the Empire to the Romans.
And so the Fourth and last Monarchy was set up, which soon began to have the
same Fate with the others, viz. when it came to be split into Two, the Eastern
and the Western Empire; which Division is meant by the Dan. ii. 34.
Feet of Iron and Clay in Nebuchadnezar's Dream, materials of a different and
contrary Nature, which were not able to fasten and cement together for any
considerable time. When the Empire was thus divided, it lasted not long, for
that part of it which was in the West, was extinct in Augustulus; and the other
Moiety in the East decayed in the Emperor Heraclius's Reign, when the Saracens
revolted from him, and flocked to Mahomet; and it had its period in Constantine
the Fifth; for as for what remains in Germany in the House of Austria at this
day, it is a mere Title and a Shadow.

But I will be more Particular: The Sacred History assigns This very thing
which I am now speaking of as the reason of the Confusion and Destruction of
the Ancient Egyptian Dynasty; for we read in the Burden of Egypt (Isai. xix.)
i.e. the Prophetic Denuntiation against it, That the Egyptians were set
against the Egyptians, and they fought every one against his Brother, and every
one against his Neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom, ver.
2. And this is further expressed in ver. 14. The Lord has mingled a perverse
spirit in the midst thereof; which points at the Cause and Source of their
mutual Distractions: These proceeded from a Spirit of Perversenesses (as it is
in the Hebrew) a Spirit of Giddiness, as the ^ Latin well explains it. Being
acted by this, they crossed and plagued one another; their Counsels, Designs
and Undertakings were contrary. Being intoxicated with this Vertiginous Spirit
they staggered like a drunken man, as it follows in that forementioned Verse.
This weakening of one another by their mutual Oppositions gave occasion to
Psammiticus, who was then King but of one Province, to encroach upon the rest,
and to engross the whole Dominion of Egypt to himself, by help of (...)
Foreign Force which he called to his Assistance. Or, as we are more fully to
understand the Words, their Wars and Dissentions among themselves made way for
the Assyrian Invasion (of which you read in Isai. xx. 4.) which proved very
Fatal and Mischievous to them.

The Sacred Records acquaint us that the unhappy Dividing of Israel into two
Kingdoms, which before was One and Entire, so enfeebled that People that at
length it ended in their Ruin. For from the Ten Tribes being Separated and Rent
from the other Two, proceeded all their Civil Wars and Distractions at Home:
And this also made way for the Conquests by the Chaldean Kings, and was at last
the occasion of their Foreign Captivity. This is confessed by their own Learned
Antiquary and Historian, who particularly Remarks, that this Defection from
Rehoboam, and dividing the Kingdom, were Joseph. Antiqu. l. 9. c. 14.
the beginning and first cause of all the Evils that be^el them, and of their
final Overthrow. Afterward, among the same People the Factions and Contentions
of the Priests, Fighting and Scu^fling for the Highpriests place, brought in
the Kings of Syria upon them. And long after this, what was it but the
Intestine Divisions, Sects and Parties in the same Nation which occasioned the
demolishing of their City by Titus Vespasian? Their own Civil Broils and
Discords made way for his Forces. The Tumults of the Zealots (those Jewish
Banditi's) and other Seditous Persons amongst them in the time of the Siege
(who, as a Dr. Hammond
Learned Writer thinks, are meant by the Locusts in the Ninth of the
Revelation, in which Chapter he conceives their Outrages and Villainies are set
forth) did those People more harm and mischief than all the Roman Army. This
likewise is taken notice of by their Own Historian, who tells us that the
Romans beheld with Joy these Domestic Broils in Jerusalem, Joseph. de bello
Jud. l. 5. c. 2.
reckoning the Dissension of their Enemies to be the most advantageous and
profitable thing that could have happened, and crying out, That it was from a
Divine Hand that their Enemies were turned against themselves. Therefore the
Emperor's Son (as the same Author informs us) observing these deadly Feuds
among them, told his Soldiers, when he perceived them to be very eager of
falling upon the Jews, That he delayed a while to do this, that thereby their
Dissentions might be increased and grow more raging, and by that means they
might fall by their own hands, and be consumed by their implacable Quarrels
among one another: Whereas, if he should break in upon them presently, this
would be a cause of their Agreement, and move them to join together against the
Common Foe. Therefore, to pacify his Soldiers, he reminded them that God knew
what was better for them than themselves did, and had so ordered the present
Affair, that the Jews should be delivered up to them without labor, and that
Victory should be given them without undergoing any great Fatigue and Danger.
Whilst their Enemies Perished by their own hands, and were Ruined by the
greatest of Evils, viz. Their Homebred Sedition, they should only be Spectators
of their Mischiefs, but not be forced to fight with those Men who greedily
sought after Death, and were grown mad with intestine Slaughter and Bloodshed.
Thus Josephus represents Titus speaking to his Soldiers. It is true, at last
(as the same Historian goes on to observe,) when it was too late, all their
Discords ceased, all the Seditious Parties began to unite in one: When the War
grew hotter, and the Romans approached nearer to them, then they began to
bewail their former Madness, and to say to one another, we have hitherto showed
our fortitude and va^our against our selves only: By our own groundless
Quarrels we have weakn'd our selves and strengthened our Enemies: We have been
all this while by our Animosities within encouraging those that are without: To
this the Roman Army may ascribe its Success. (That this or the like Language
may never be heard in England, is the design and aim of this present
Discourse.)

To pass from Judea to Greece, it is manifest that the Inhabitants of this
Country, after they had expelled their Foreign Foes, and put Xerxes to Flight,
at last overthrew themselves by Domestic Iarrs. This is the Remark which
Justin the Historian makes of them, Grae^iae civitates dum imperare singulae
cupiunt, imperium omnes perdiderunt. lib. 8.
Whilst every free City strived for the Mastery, they all lost it. For by their
Quarrels among themselves, and contending which should be Uppermost they gave
occasion to Philip King of Macedon to subdue them all. And afterward, when the
Grecian Empire came once to be Divided into parts, (which was signified by the
Leopards various Spots, and the Four-headed Beast spoken of in Dan. 7. 6.
Daniel) it drew toward its Decay, and in the End dwindled into nothing. When
not only the Empire it self, but the Persons who presided over it were divided,
it could not long stand. It cannot be denied that particularly the Kingdom of
Syria (which was part of the Greek Conquests) was lost to the Romans by their
Civil Discords and Quarrels, Antiochus, Triphon, Demetriu^, etc.
many Persons contending at one time for the Supreme Rule. Nothing is more
evident than that the Vast Government of the Grecians fell by the mutual
Animosities of Alexanders Successors: They made not an end of falling out, and
Fighting one another, till the Roman Empire swallowed them all up.

To pass from Jews and Pagans even to Christians it may be observed in
Ecclesiastical History that when the Primitive Christians began to be
Quarrelsom and Contentious, and to Persecute one another, God sent amongst them
the Hottest Persecution, under Dioclesian, which lasted Ten Years. When there
were mutual Envyings and Revilings amongst us, says Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. ^.
Eusebius, when the Rulers of the Church fell out with one another, when the
Pastors of the Flock fostered Strife and Contention among themselves, studying
nothing but Emulation, Enmity and Hatred, then according to Jeremy, the Lord
covered the Daughter of Sion with a cloud in his Anger. So that Good Father.
And in other Places he tells us that their Uncharita. charitable Accusing of
one another, and Dissenting among themselves invited the Pagans to fall upon
them; the Divisions of Believers were justly rewarded with Bloodshed and
Slaughter from In^idels. And after the Roman Empire became Christian, one cause
of its declining was the Division of it by Constantine the Great, viz. when he
Translated the Imperial Seat into Greece, whereby in a short time the Eagles
Head was divided, and its Body by degrees Impaired and Shattered. Whilst the
Government was One and Entire, it was Stable and Firm, but as soon as it came
to be Parted, it lost its pristine Vigor, and grew Weak and Feeble. It was
upon this Division of the Empire that those Northern Nations the Goths
(distinguished into Vise Goths and Ostro Goths) the Hunns, Vandals,
Longobards, and Others (whose very Names are as Barbarous as Themselves were)
left their Cold and Barren Countries, and crossed the Rhine and Danube to
settle themselves in warmer Habitations.

But (which is yet more to our purpose) when these Barbarous Nations, like a
General Deluge, overran the fairest Realms of Europe, the Frayes and
Dissentions of Christians made way for them. That which chiefly Encouraged and
Promoted the incursion of these Barbarians was the Disagreeings and Animosities
in the Church. Socrates Particularly observes this, that at the same time that
the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy persecuted other Dissenting Christians, the
Goths and Longobards invaded Italy. The fourth Century had abounded with
Schism and Faction (as well as Heresies:) And behold, as the Effect as well as
Recompense of these, the fifth Century labored under an other sort of Plagues,
viz. the Irruption of those Savages, partly Pagans and partly Arians, who
miserably Persecuted the Orthodox Christians in Italy, Spain, France, and other
Countries. The Church might justly ascribe this to their own Home-Divisions.
Those Dreadful things, it is probable, had never come to pass, if the
Christians had not been Shattered and Distracted among themselves, if they had
not swarmed with Various Opinions, and filled every place with Disputes and
Controversies; if they had not mangled and corrupted many Heads of the
Christian Faith, if their Bishops had not been Haughty and Proud, and not only
despised and vilified their Inferior Brethren, but likewise had Jarr'd with one
another; in short, if both Governors and People had not been given to Tearing
and Rending amongst themselves, and if a Spirit of Division had not possessed
them beyond all Exorcism. Thus it happened to the Church in the fifth Century.

Again, to touch upon an other Coast of History, when in Arabia Felix and
Syria, and the adjoining Countries, several Sects and Parties of Christians had
sprung up, as Melchites, Maronites, Eutychians, Nestorians, Monothelites, etc.
then in that very Arabia (but no longer to be called the Happy) appeared the
Grand Impostor Mahomet. He and his Successors got up, and gained Ground not
only there but in other Places by the many Disputes and Parties which were
among the Christians. And whilst the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch and
Constantinople unchristianly contended about Priority, and such like Points,
the Turks came and decided the Controversy. This is now known to be a Great
Truth, and not to be doubted of, that the Mohammedan Empire arose from the
Contentions in the East, when the Churches were torn asunder with the Arian and
Manichean Doctrines. For this Dissension bred in many Men an hatred of the
Christian Religion, and of the very Name of it; and then any Opinion or
Doctrine, especially if grateful to the Flesh, could not but be easily
entertained and embraced. Is it not fad to consider that the Vilest Cheat in
the World, That of Mahometism was fostered and set forward by the Differences
of those who were of the Christian Religion? And afterward it was no wonder
that when the Greek Church was divided within it self (into Armeni^ns,
Georgians, Iacobites etc.) it was oppressed by the Turks and Saracens, and
quite overrun by them. Their own Divisions armed these People against them,
their Quarrels among themselves put Weapons into the Hands of their Enemies,
and helped them to Vanquish them. To make this Reflection the more Authentic, I
will give it you as it is represented in Against the peril of Idolatry. Part 2.
one of the Homilies of our Church: Where after it was observed that the
Dissension of the Eastern and Western Christians was very much promoted by the
Quarrel about Images, the Conclusion is this So that when the Saracens first,
and afterward the Turks invaded the Christians, the one part of Christendom
would not help the other. By reason whereof at last the Noble Empire of Greece,
and the City Imperial Constantinople was lost, and came into the Hands of the
Infidels. And immediately after, Thus a Sea of Mischiefs was brought in, a
horrible Schism between the East and the West Church, an hatred between one
Christian and another, Councels against Councels, Church against Church,
Christians against Christians, Princes against Princes, at last the tearing in
sunder of Christendom, and the Empire in two Pieces, till the Infidels,
Saracens and Turks, common Enemies to both parts, have most cruelly Vanquished,
Destroyed and Subdued the one part, and have won a great Piece of the other
Empire, and put the whole in dreadful Fear and most horrible Danger.

Still in pursuance of the Argument I am upon, I might remind you that the
Discord of Christians was it which lost Jerusalem, after it had been held by
them Successively a long time, after it had cost them so much Blood in their
several Expeditions and Crusades. The Saracens strength in the Holy Land
accrued by the Misunderstandings of the Princes of Europe, when the Holy War
was turned into Civil Dissentions.

And as Turcism arose and increased by the Dissentions of Christians, so it is
easy to prove that Popery had the same Rise and Advance; for there is abundant
History to make it clear that by Divisions in Doctrine and Practice in the
Church in the first Ages those Corruptions first crept in. Especially by reason
of the Dissension among Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes the Papal
Religion arrived to what it is: For whenever These fell out with one another,
the Popes stood ready to make advantage of it, and they always thereby
increased and advanced their own Power and Authority, and consequently the
Papal Cause.

I might leave Christendom, and travel as far as China, and show you that vast
and spacious Kingdom, which above 4000 Years together enjoyed an uninterrupted
Peace, and knew not so much as the Use of Arms to defend their Country, which
no People in the World can say besides them. At last the occasion of putting a
Period to this long Tranquillity was Isaac. Voss. de artib. Sinarum,
the Discords of this Kingdom among themselves, the Divisions and Inflammations
within their own Bowels, and the Civil Wars occasioned by Usurpers of the
Throne: Which were followed with the irruption of the Scythians and Asiatick
Tartars upon them, who in those unhappy Circumstances got the better of them,
and after a long and bloody War possessed that Kingdom (the wealthiest and most
populous in the whole World that we know of,) and to this Day are Masters of
it. And now when we are traveling, we may visit the Famous Country of the
Abyssines or Ethiopia, a large Kingdom in Africa, but lately shrunk into a
lesser Compass, and almost Ludol^ Hist. Abyss*
laid wast by the Natives of the Place, some of them having turned
State-Rebels, and others (set on by the Jesuits) fighting on a Religious
Account.

But I will not wander so far, but come home to our selves, and prosecute the
Argument with relation to this Land of our Nativity. They were the Civil Wars
of the Ancient Britains which tempted Julius Caesar to invade this Island at
first. This was the Rise of the Romans coming hither, and this was the occasion
of the Britains being conquered. It is evident from the most Credible
Historians, that our Ancestors, a very warlike and valiant People, were
vanquished rather by the Perfidiousness of their own Androgeus, and the
Quarrels of others among themselves than by the valor and force of the
Invaders: For they tell us that Julius Caesar was invited over by that
Androgeus, who at that time quarreled with Cassibelan and other Great Men; and
so Caesar fought and overcame, and made this Island tributary to Rome. Though
it is true, this was not presently Effected, but after several Assaults: For
the Britains, who were not inferior to the Roman Legions in Valor, repulsed
them at first, and Caesar fled from Britain. Of this Juncture of Affairs
Tacitus speaks, acquainting us that the Britains fell into Factions and
Parties, and could not agree among themselves to resist the common Danger: Ita
dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. Tac. in vit. Agricolae.
So whilst they fought divided, they were jointly defeated. And in succeeding
Ages there never was any great Enemy entered this Kingdom but when there were
Schisms and Distractions at home. Whether other Nations were invited over
hither, or invaded us, it was always occasioned by Dissension among our selves.

There different People successively took the Opportunity of overrunning our
Country when our Bickrings and Digladiations were great in our own Bowels. It
was this which gave occasion to the Saxons to invade this Land, or (if you will
rather) to our Ancestors to call them in; for the Picts, who were the Old
Barbarous Britains, were divided from the rest of the Nation, and held
Confederacy with the Scots. Therefore Gildas expressly shows that one cause
of the fatal Council of sending for the Saxons to come and assist them, was
their Disagreement and Contention among themselves: The Southern and Northern
Inhabitants were at odds, which moved Vortigern the Head of the Natives at that
time to send for those Saxons, who came over and miserably requited the
Britains for the care they showed to them, and the kind Entertainment they gave
them, and with many and long Battles made this Land a place of Slaughter,
Ravage and Bloodshed. And afterward, these very Saxons (who seemed to have
made amends for all their violence and mischief by the ardent Zeal which they
showed to the Christian Faith as soon as 'twas Preached among them, by their
building of Churches and Religious Houses, by their extraordinary Devotion, and
by their care to propagate and spread the Christian Religion) these Noble
Converts, who flourished under their Heptarchy so long a time, were ruined at
length by their Intestine Broils and Wars, as our Cambden Brit^n.
Learned Antiquary observes. And if you consult our Chronicles you will find
that nothing gave the Danes and Normans more advantage against our Predecessors
than their Divisions and Quarrels among themselves. In brief, the former State
of things in this Nation, immediately foregoing the several devastations by
Foreign Invasion, has in This (as well as in some other Circumstances) too
near an Alliance and Correspondence with our Present Times. I pray God avert
the Omen.

And let us endeavor (for now I am coming to turn my History into Application)
let us, I say, endeavor to avert it by the most Proper Means we can use, that
is, by studying Peace and Unity, and by promoting Love and Goodwill among one
another. This is the Practical Inference which we are to make from the
Premises. And certainly, if ever there was need of Preaching and Practicing
this duly, there is now more especially. We have been, and are at this Day a
People divided against our selves, and therefore it is a wonderful Prodigy that
we have not had our final Downfall before this. But now we cannot reasonably
expect to stand any longer, if we continue in our Divisions, and persist in our
mutual Antipathies. Let us then in this our Day know the things which belong to
our Peace, before they be hid from our Eyes, and that for ever. Let us agree as
Members of the same Community, and banish all Dissentions and Animosities. I
know this has been a very Common and Trite Subject: But assure your selves
that at this time it is the most Proper and Suitable one that a Preacher can
entertain you with: For on the speedy Practice of this depends all your Safety,
all your Security, all your* Welfare and Happiness in this World. If you
neglect this, you plunge your selves into Ruin; but if you are so wise as to
attend to it, you contribute toward the Establishment of the Nation, toward
the lasting Prosperity of the Public. Amphion is said (in a Poetic rant) to
have built the Walls of Thebes by help of his Music: But it is no Fiction, but
a solid Truth that Harmony and Concord are the best means of building up the
Walls of our Jerusalem, and of incompassing it with more firm and durable ones
than those of Brass, which the Famed Friar (as it is said) vainly boast'd he
would environ England with. Let us then cast away all unbecoming disgusts and
grudgings at one another: And though we are an Island, and divided from the
rest of the World, let us not be Dissevered and Divided from our selves. Let us
love as Brethren, and acknowledge none to be our Enemies but such as we know
are Implacable Enemies to our Religion, that is, those who have a design to Rob
us of that which is dearer to us than our Lives. And to urge this Effectually
upon you, I will offer these following Considerations to you,

1st. Consider the Scandal of our Divisions. It is a Reproach to our Religion,
as we are Christians, that we nourish so many Feuds and Disturbances among us.
For the Blessed Author and Founder of our Religion pronounced the Peacemakers
blessed, and made Love and Peace the honorable Badges of our Profession; and
we find that all the excellent Principles of the Gospel lead to these, and that
Christianity it self inculcates nothing more than the Practice of them. But
not only thus in general, as we are Christians, but in a more Especial manner
as we are Protestants, we are under a strict Obligation of mutual Amity and
Agreement. There are two things (among others) which the Church of Rome glories
in, first that they perfectly agree among themselves; secondly that we (on the
contrary) are divided, and break out into passionate Heats and Contests. That
there is too much of Truth in this their Boasting we cannot den^^ though with
reference to the former part it must be said (and that with equal Truth) that
they have their Divisions and Parties no less than we (as I could easily prove
if I were at leisure to do it:) but it is granted that as to the Main they are
at Unity among themselves, that is, they perfectly agree to oppose the
Protestant Cause: They consult together with one consent, and are confederate
against it. This is the Great Prop and Preservative of the Church of Rome, this
buoys up the whole Papal Interest, viz. their Agreement among themselves, their
being all of a Piece, viz. with relation to us. And is it not a shame that we
should learn of them how to behave our selves? Do not our own Reason,
Necessity, and the Cause it self require that we maintain an entire Concord?
Must we go to the Roman Catholics to be taught our Duty in this Point? This is
very Scandalous, and I cannot mention it without a peculiar Disdain and Regret,
nor can you hear it without Blushes. If we had been as Unanimous for the
Protestant Religion as they are for the Roman, we should long since have
baffled their Cause, and defeated their Designs against us. But alas herein we
are defective, and with shame we may publish it to the World. Do they agree
together against us, and shall not we do so against them? Can they friendly
Unite to do us Mischief, and shall not we as amicably Agree to hinder that
Mischief? Let us not suffer our selves to be outdone by them here. If they show
themselves such Fierce Disturbers of our Peace both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
let us be as Forward and Zealous in promoting Peace in our Church and State, a
Religious and a Politic Peace. Let us agree as Christians, who are but a small
Number in the World (a Sixth part of it, as is computed:) And let us agree as
Protestants, whose Numbers are yet sewer, and therefore we are obliged to
adhere to one another, and to maintain a firm League among our selves. In
short, let us not by our Quarrels and Dissentions scandalize Christianity, or
(more particularly) the Reformed Religion, which is the Choicest part of it.

2dly. Consider the Vnseasonableness of our Divisions. Though by the late
Change of Affairs, and the Happy Revolution in this Nation God has vouchsafed
us such a Deliverance as is next to a Miracle; such a Deliverance as the
present Age ought to stand astonished at, and which future Ages will scarcely
believe, by reason of the strange surprising and unheard of Circumstances which
attended it, especially this one (which is most remarkable) that whereas such
Great (...). Xenoph.
Alterations in Kingdoms and Commonwealths are generally accompanied with
Bloodshed, this had nothing of that Nature, but was effected wholly by gentle
and free Compliances. Yet what great Numbers of Men among us show themselves
Discontented, and therein Unthankful for that Amazing Blessing conferred on this
Nation? All the Return they make for God's singular Mercy and unparellel'd
Kindness to us is Murmuring and Repining. They complain of their present
Condition, and are for going back into Egypt, though (blessed be God) they are
not in a Wilderness, but in a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. This is the
base Jewish temper of some Persons; When God's wonderful Providence invites
them to Thankfulness, and to join in one Common Affection, as they are
Fellow Christians and Fellow-Protestants, at this time especially when we are
of necessity engaged against a Foreign Adversary, they (notwithstanding this)
are unwilling to listen to this Invitation, and obstinately keep up their
former Antipathies, yea add greater and fiercer ones to them. France lifts up
its Bloody Weapons against us; and shall we at such a time Fight with one
another? Sons of Belial are conspiring against the Life of our Prince: Our
Laws, our Liberties, our Religion, as well as our Country are threatened with an
Invasion; and shall we in this juncture divide our selves into several Parties,
and distinguish one another by Scandalous Names and Titles? Our Divisions
before argued gross Folly and Indiscretion: But now they can pass for nothing
less then Madness and Frenzy. Wherefore in the present Cirstances, if ever, let
us think our selves concerned to Unite. And since God has hitherto kept us
from being destroyed by our Enemies, let us not destroy one another by our
Inbred Oppositions. Let this rather be our Endeavor, to quash all the Attempts
of our Adversaries for the future by an Entire Conjunction and Coalition among
our selves.

3dly. Consider how, by the contrary Practice, you gratisy your Enemies. We may
Imagine we here them say of Us as the Romans under Tiberius said of the Germans
(against whose Empire and Liberty these were plotting) when they saw them fall
out among themselves, Duret gentibus si non amor nostri, saltem odium ^ui* Tac^
If we cannot, say they, get this People to love us, we wish they may cherish a
perpetual hatred and division among themselves, which latter will be every ways
as Successful to us as the former. The design of our Enemies is to have us
divided from one another; that they may all unite in our Ruin. Their business
has been to set us at odds, with a respect wholly to their own unspeakable
Advantage: For it is certain that whilst we devour one another, we shall become
a Prey to them. Any considerate Man may see that it is the studied Practice of
those that are Agents for the Church of Rome to sow the Seeds of Discord in
Protestant Countries, and more especially in this of ours. They have a long
time made it their Work, and at this Day they pursue it with more than ordinary
Vigor, to ruffle and embroil us, that they may thereby smooth the Way to
Popery, and extirpate that Religion which they are pleased to call the Northern
Heresy. They carry on the same design that Julian the Apostate of old did, who
was the Subtilest Enemy the Christians ever had: It is particularly Ammian^
Marcel. lib. 22.
observed of him that he made it his Work to impede their mutual Agreement, and
he did all he could to set them at Variance. This is that which our Adversaries
of Rome have labored to effect ever since the Reformation, and we find that
they have been too Successful in it. Let us learn to defeat this Politic
Design by being Entire and Unanimous, which they so much dread and tremble at.
Let us never be so Sottish as to side with our Professed Enemies: But since we
are convinced that it is their main Study and Employment to raise Dissension
among us, and then to increase it, let us be Masters of so much Christian
Wisdom and Policy as wholly to prevent all Breaches, or else with all speed to
close them up.

4thly. Consider the Extreme Danger of our Divisions. What can we expect but
Confusion, and even an utter Extinction if we are thus miserably Disjoined? We
shall unavoidably bring down all mischiefs upon us if we take no care to cure
our Convulsions and Distractions within us. It has been observed that England
has ever been so Strong and Long-lived an Animal that it could never be
dispatched but by it self. If we do not pull down our ^ine with our own Hands,
we need not fear the Attempts of others. We can never Perish unless we are
Felons of our selves. O that this Nation were so wise as to understand this! O
that they were so Prudent as to consider that if ever the Papal Beast breaks in
upon us, so as to do us any great Harm, it must be occasioned by our own
Discords and Dissentions! Our Divisions at home will make us feel the Mischief
of Invasion from abroad. Nay, let it be remembered that a Kingdom divided
against it self, although it be assaulted by no Foreign Foe, cannot stand, but
shall be brought to Confusion. If we bite and devour one another, we shall be
consumed one of another: Not unlike the Dragons Teeth Cadmus is said to have
sown, which grew up into an Army combating one another. By our own unnatural
Heats we not only prepare our selves to be ruined by Others, but we may be
undone this way by our Own Hands.

Sit down then, and seriously represent to your selves the Danger you are in.
Fix this on your Minds as an unquestionable Truth, that we may despair of the
Safety and Welfare of this Nation so long as we are divided into Disagreeing
Parties, so long as we love to keep up our Quarrels. Though we may think we
have shut out Popery, yet these will open the Door for it, and let it in again.
This very thing was the Ground of the Learned and Pious Usher's fearful
Apprehensions and prophetic Intimations concerning the return of the Roman
Religion into these Kingdoms, and the miserable State they were like to fall
into on that Account, as you may read in his Life. We may on the same Ground
fear the same dismal Events at this time. If we continue our divisions, the
Great Italian Pontif will step in, and turn Moderator, and put an End to our
Disputes: The Romans will come, and take away both our Place and Nation: And we
shall then wish (but in vain) that we had attended to the Dictates of peaceable
Men, and that we had laid aside all our Differences. So for Tyranny and
Slavery, though we imagine that they are shut out, yet let me tell you, whilst
we disagree among our selves, and retain Bitterness and Rancour toward one
another in our Minds, and carry on Different, yea contrary Designs, we are
making way for the Common Foe to enter, who (if he gets footing here) will
reduce us and our Posterity to the utmost Servitude and Bondage, and that
without all hopes of Remedy.

These are the Considerations which I thought fit to tender to you. And now
perhaps it may be expected (before I put an end to this Discourse) that I
should set before you the Particular Methods of Peace in this unhappy Day of
Dissension. If you would permit me to be free with you, I could, methinks,
entertain good hopes of being an Universal Reconciler, of making Dissenting
Parties understand one another aright (the want of which has been the Source
of all their Controversies) and so of Accommodating the Differences between
them, and of creating a firm Love and Respect to one another. I could, I think,
suggest such Healing, such Balsamic Principles, as would assuredly Cure and
Consolidate all our Wounds, if they be taken in hand in time, and not suffered
to grow Inveterate. But seeing I cannot at present so Particularly and Fully
pursue this great Work as I would, (and perhaps some here are not able to bear
it now) the only Direction I will propound, the only Expedient I will leave
with you is this, That you would not suffer your Differences in some lesser
Matters of Religion, to hinder your Uniting in the Great and Common Concern of
the Nation. This one thing alone, if duly thought of and practiced, will make
our British State Impregnable, and enable us to defy all our Enemies. Many
among us are to foolish as to think that they must not join with those that are
of a different Persuasion from themselves; because they disagree in some Points
of Religion, therefore they must not unite in the Common Cause of the Nation;
or, at least, they find they cannot prevail with themselves to do it Unanimously
and Cheerfully. This very thing may prove our Ruin, and therefore I thought my
self obliged to take Notice of it; and I hope I need not use many Words to
convince you of the Folly and Unreasonableness of it. Let me be plain with you,
an Invasion will make no Difference between a Conformist and a Dissenter; a
Foreign Enemy will not distinguish between Churches and Meeting Houses;
Assassines and Cutthroats will not ask whether we be of this or that
Communion: And therefore let all of both Persuasions jointly agree to withstand
the Violence and Ravage which are designed against us all indifferently. This
is the Course we must take, unless we would have the Enemies roar in our
Congregations, and set up their Ensigns for signs, viz. of Victory. And to this
purpose let us remember that we are All of us Embarked in the same Vessel, we
Espouse the same Common Interest, we profess the same Holy Religion, and we are
Candidates of the same Eternal Happiness. Wherefore let us twist all our
Interests together: Let us in this Critical Season make no distinction between
the different Denominations of Sober Protestants that are among us. When we are
to engage the Public Enemy, let us make no nice Detachments, but go with All
our Forces. Let us freely mingle with all that abhor the designs of Rome and
France. Let there be a Free, an Universal Commerce, without any Stop, any
Imbargo. In short, let us take all Persons into our Embraces that love the
Reformed Religion and their Country.

As for our Disagreement in some Religious Matters, that should not hinder us
from joining together, for there are several Points relating to Religion in
which we shall never all concur (and truly I am of Opinion it was not intended
we should) till that Blessed Time predicted in Rev. xi. 15. be accomplished.
Phil. iii. 16.
Nevertheless, as the Apostle speaks, whereunto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same Things. I will be bold to say,
if the fourteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans were read over once and
again with serious and hearty Prayer, it would end all our disputes about
Indifferent matters in Religion, and put a period to all our Divisions about
them. Contesting Parties would thence effectually learn to lay aside Censuring
and Judging one another, and to sacrifice their Private Opinions and
Sentiments, yea their greatest Heats and Passions, to the Common Good and
Edification. Let this be conscientiously Practiced by us, and then we cannot
miscarry. Let us not contend with Fierceness and Eagerness for any thing but
the Indispensable Concerns of Religion and a Holy Life. Lay aside your nice
Criticisms, stand not upon Punctilio's, be not religiously Pedantick or Morose.
Away with fond Disputes which engender nothing but Strife: And let us in good
earnest study the plain way of Salvation by Jesus Christ; let us mind the
Unquestionable and Practical matters of Christianity, where there is sure
Footing, and a firm Basis to build upon. Let us mind these in good earnest, and
then our varying from some of our Brethren in lesser Concerns of Religion, in
some Points of Discipline, or Circumstances of Worship, will not hinder our
friendly Conjunction with them in those Public Enterprises which are for the
Safety of us all, and for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, which I
hope we all (without any reserve or hesitation) center in.

This therefore is the thing which I humbly offer, that the Interests of all
Parties may become One in this present Juncture, that all Hands may be employed
in this Great Work, that there may be an Universal Concurrence in the Cause
which we have undertaken. And this is the Way to unite us more intimately among
our selves for the future, and to lay the Foundation of a Profound and Lasting
Peace: For when we join together against the Common Adversary, surely we shall
learn to be friendly among one another. The reason of this, I think, is as
clear and certain as any Demonstration, and therefore there is no need of
urging it. Let us with united Hearts and Hands endeavor to stem the Fury of
the Great Oppressors and Ravagers of Christendom, and not so much as think of
any of our Particular Differences so long as this General Concern requires our
Thoughts and Assistance.

Suffer me to speak to you in a very plain and familiar way: Suppose some great
City or Town were on Fire, do you apprehend that that would be a fit time for
the Inhabitants, who are concerned in that Calamity, to come forth and busy
themselves only in renewing their former Grudges, and repeating the little
Contests which had heretofore been among the Neighborhood, whilst in the mean
time they are unmindful of using the proper means for ^^opping the Raging
Flames, and hindering their furious Advance toward their Dwellings? Just such
is the Folly and Stupidity of those Persons who stand contending and wrangling
with one another, and revive their former Debates at a time when there is a
General Conflagration in the World, at a time when we are threatened by the
Great Boutefeues the Tremendous Firebrands abroad at a time when there is so
great a Number of Incendiaries at home, striving to put us all into a
Combustion, at a time when our Divisions are like to prove most Successful to
our Enemies.

Let us then all be Exhorted this Day to Christian Agreement. Let us henceforth
become perfect Unisons, and let no Jarring be found amongst us. Let us wear off
our former Roughnesses, and become Smooth, even and gentle, heartily complying
with one another, breathing nothing but Love and Peace, that thereby we may be
a Happy and a Prosperous Nation, and that Glory may dwell in our Land. Though
the Ancient Britains (as Tacitus truly observed of them) were given to Faction
and making of Parties, yet let it not be said that the same Genius yet
possesses this Nation. Let us show that we have the true Spirits of English Men
by being more Manly and Generous. Let us detest and avoid those ill Men who are
forward rather to lay open the Maladies of the Church and State than to apply a
Cure; who are more desirous to increase our Diseases than to make use of a
Remedy: Who would continually raise Commotions and Distractions amongst us, and
put us all into Flames: A most mischievous sort of Men, that are born to
Trouble, Plague and Embarass their Country; who, if you will give them Footing,
(as he of old required) will shake the Earth, and move the World out of its
place: A generation of Men that would involve three Kingdoms in Blood and
Slaughter merely to indulge their groundless Humor, and to satisfy their own
Lusts and Bigotry. Let us show our selves to be of an other Temper by
endeavoring to Correspond with one another both in our Sentiments and
Affections: And where we cannot wholly agree in the former, let us perfectly
accord in the latter. And let us know this assuredly that we can reasonably
expect nothing but Confusion till we be all touched with the same Magnetism of
Love and Charity, and so point the same Way, and turn to the same Coast, and
till we conspire in one General and Unanimous pursuance of the same Cause. Then
(and not before that time) the Catholic Interest and Benefit of these Kingdoms
will, through the Blessing of the Almighty, be advanced; then this Island may
enjoy many Halcyon Days, and be Crowned with an undisturbed Quiet and Repose.

What need I say more? Having spoken to Wise and Understanding Persons, I think
I have said enough: And therefore I have only this now in the Close to desire
of you, that you would seriously Reflect upon what I have offered to you
already, and that you would put it in Practice before it be too late. It is
high time now to turn our Spears into Pruninghooks, and burn the Chariots in
the Fire: It is high time to do this whether we consult our Duty or our Safety.
Therefore let me beseech you to betake your ^elves to this Work: Agree in the
unquestionable and general Maxims of Peace: And particularly agree to defend
your Religion and your Country against the Attempts of Rome: Agree to defeat
the Projects and withstand the force of the Great Apollyon abroad; Agree to
ba^fle the Designs of all those who any ways promote or favor the Interest of
that Unwearied and Merciless Disturber of the Peace of Christendom: In brief,
Agree to keep those Horrid Dangers and Mischiefs at a distance from you which
were so near you of late: Which you can never do unless you be at Peace among
your selves.

I request you then by all that is Sacred, Religious and Venerable to compose
your selves into a quiet Posture, to purge out your sower Ferments, to forget
your former Animosities and Oppositions. I most Passionately beg of you that
you would not repeat your former Iustings and Tiltings against one another,
that you would think no more of your unkind Reflections and Rallyings, that you
would Cancel your Philippicks and Invectives, and burn all your Pasquils. Now,
if ever, be prevailed with to bestow your Pardons and Indulgences on one
another; for this will be the best Iubilee for procuring our Peace. Now, if
ever, forget not to pull down your Rams of Battery, to cease your Cannonading
one another, to give check to your former Hostilities, and to lay aside all
your Warlike Weapons. If you must needs Strive, Strive and Contend for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, strive to assert and maintain the Necessary
and Fundamental Articles of Christianity, which of late are so much Corrupted
and Perverted: Strive to excel and surpass one another in real Acts of Religion
and Holiness: Strive who shall be most Exemplary and Eminent in Virtue and
Piety. In a Word, Strive to transcribe the Excellent Institution of the Blessed
Jesus into your Lives and Manners, and to be Doers of the Word (of this
particularly which has been delivered to you at present) and not Hearers only,
deceiving your own selves.

And now that all our Animosities may be laid aside, our Divisions healed, and
Union among our selves (which I have been pressing you unto) may be promoted
and effected, let us make our Addresses to the God of Peace in that excellent
Form of Prayer composed by my Lords the Bishops, for one of our late Fasts.

O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ our only Savior, the Prince of
Peace, look down in much Pity and Compassion upon this Church and Nation, stir
up, we beseech thee, every Soul among us, to cast forth the accursed thing, to
root out of our Hearts all Pride, and all Wrath and Bitterness, all unjust
Prejudice and causeless Jealousy, all Hatred and Malice, and desire of
Revenge, and whatsoever may hinder us from discerning the things that belong
unto our Peace. And by the power of thy holy Spirit do thou dispose all our
Hearts to such meekness of Wisdom, lowliness of Mind, Patience, Gentleness, and
long-suffering, and forbearance of one another in Love, and such Honor and
Reverence of those whom thou have set over us, as becomes the Sons of Peace,
that so the God of Peace may be with us. Give us grace, O Lord, seriously to
lay to heart the great Dangers we are in, by our unhappy Divisions, and the
great Obligations which lie upon us to godly Union and Concord: That as there
is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all; so we may henceforth be all
of one Heart and of one Soul, united in one holy Bond of Truth and Peace, of
Faith and Charity, and may with one mind and one mouth glorify thee, O Lord;
who with thy Father and holy Spirit, live and reignest, o^^ God, world
without end. Amen.

The Use and Abuse of APPAREL.
In Two Sermons, occasioned by the present Excess in that kind.
1 TIMOTHY II. 8, 9. I will that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
Shame-facedness and Sobriety: Not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly Array.
IF you impartially view the general Practice of this Age, you cannot but look
upon these Words as one of the most Seasonable Portions of Scripture, that can
be offered to your Consideration. For, among the many Follies and Vices, which
prevail amongst us; the indulging of an Extravagant Way of Attire, is not the
least. Wherefore, I reckon it part of my Office and Function, to chastise this
Reigning Excess; and in order to the Reforming of it (if I may be so happy, as
to Influence upon any of you, by this Discourse) I will undertake these Three
Things;

I. To show the True and Proper Use of Apparel. II. To discover the Abuse of
it, and to let you see how it becomes Unlawful, and Vicious, and unworthy of
sober and modest Christians. III. To make some Practical Deductions from these
Things, and to dissuade you from that Excess, which is now grown so Common, by
setting before you the Evils and Mischiefs of it, which you will find to be so
great and so many, that I hope you will be prevailed with to abandon that undue
Practice.
There is a fourfold Use or Design of Apparel. The First, whereof is to hide,
and shroud our Nakedness: For though in the State of Innocence, when the Image
of God shined bright in the Soul of Man, the very Nakedness of his Body was
Beauty; nor needed he any other Covering than his Original Integrity and
Righteousness; with God had adorned him; yet, when he offended against Heaven,
and defaced the Image of his Maker, and became a guilty Creature, he was
ashamed of the Nakedness of his Body, and accordingly made himself a Garment of
Fig Leaves, 3 Genesis 7. Afterward God himself was pleased to instruct him, how
to make a more substantial and solid sort of Clothing, viz. Coats of Skins, v.
21. i.e. of the Skins or Hides of Beasts. And ever afterward, among the
Civilized Nations of the World, Garments have been in use for the same End that
they were at first; that is, for Modesty sake. About the Middle of the
Fourteenth Century, there arose an Heretical sort of People, called Adamites,
who gained that Name, because they imitated Adam's Nakedness in Paradise; for
they contended, that since the Restoration wrought by Christ, the Pristine
Nakedness should be resumed; and Men and Women being now reduced to the
Primitive State of Innocence, ought to go without Clothing. But this silly
Sect, who divested themselves of Sobriety and Reason, before they stripped
themselves of their Apparel, were justly exploded by wise and sober Men, and
their Practice voted to be unlawful, because the Fall has left a great
Depravity in Men; and the best of them are not perfectly healed of it: So that
we now have the like Reason to be ashamed of our Nakedness, that our first
Parents had to be of theirs, and consequently we have need of a Covering, as
they had.

Secondly, Garments are for Distinction sake. Different Habits are not only for
the differencing of the Sexes (and therefore the Old Testament makes the
promiscuous Use of Men and Women's Apparel unlawful) but for making a
Discrimination between the Qualities or Ranks of Persons. Accordingly in all
Ages, (except the very first, when there were but few People in the World, and
there was not such an occasion for discriminating of Persons from one another)
the Qualities of Men were distinguished by their respective Garbs. Not only
Kings and Queens were differenced from their Subjects by their Royal Apparel, 6
Est. 8. but there were Vestures proper and peculiar to other Orders and
Dignities, Offices and Degrees of Men, 1 Samuel 18. 4. 1 Job 20. 4 Lam. 5. 15
Luke 22. 16. 19. Joseph refused not to wear Pharaoh's Ring, that he put upon
his Hand, nor to be aray'd in Vestures of fine Linen, and to wear a Gold Chain
about his Neck, 41 Genesis 42. Mordecai and Daniel were clothed with rich and
stately Ornaments, suitable to the Degree they were advanced to, 8 Esth. 15. 5
Dan. 29. We read of precious Clothes, or, according to the Hebrew, Clothes of
Freedom, 27 Ezekiel. 20. i.e. such Garments as became free and ingenuous Men, such
as those of the better Quality were clothed with. Among the old Romans, the
Rank of Persons was known by their Habits: The Purple Embroidered Vesture, with
large Studs, like broad Nail's Heads (thence called Laticlavia) was used only
by the Senators and Noblemen. Diverse kinds of Shoes were worn at Rome,
according to the different Quality of the Inhabitants: And the like Distinction
of Garbs has been among All Nations. When our Savior tells us, That they who
wear soft Raiment are in Kings Houses, 11 Mat. 8. he does not condemn the Use
of rich and goodly Attire (which are meant by Soft Raiment) but he intimates
this Distinction, which I am now speaking of: And so it is as much as if he had
said, By their Habit you may know them to be Courtiers. He allows Men to be
attired according to their Place and Degree: Christianity does not disrobe Men
of their Distinctive Garments: For this was one Design of Apparel, viz. To
discriminate between Persons of an higher, and a lower Degree. Yea, we read,
that the immediate Ministers of Religion among the Jews, were according to
God's Command distinguished from the People, by a peculiar Manner of Garb:
Which was imitated by others afterward, and would, it is likely, have been
practiced by the Apostles; and first Ecclesiastical Persons in the Christian
Church, if their Conspicuousness of the Clothing would not have made them too
much known to their Enemies, and so would have been unsuitable to those Times
of Persecution.

Thirdly, Garments are for Defense and Protection: Those Primitive Ones of
Skins (not dressed, but raw, it is likely) served for this Purpose also; for
they were so worn, that they were not only cool in Summer, but warm in Winter
(for it is not to be doubted, that the Year had its Vicissitudes then.) I say
it is probable, these Skins were a Cool sort of Garment, viz. when they wore
the plain and smooth side next them, and they were warm when the other side,
i.e. the Wool or Hair were worn inwards. It is certain, that one principal Use
of Clothes has been to shelter Persons from the Injury and Inclemency of the
Weather: For which Reason it becomes a great Act of Charity, to cloth the Poor
and Naked; and therefore is so often mentioned in Scripture. And hence we read,
that upon the Death of that Religious Woman Dorcas, her pious Female Friends
displayed the Ensigns of her Charity (as well as good House-wifery) viz. The
Coats and Garments which she made whilst she was with them, 9 Acts 29. For
this, without doubt, relates to the good Works and Alms Deeds, which she did,
v. 36. Such is generally the frail Constitution of our Bodies, that they want
some Defense; and therefore Apparel is useful to this Purpose: This not only
keeps out the Cold, but keeps in the Heat, the inward Warmth, and vital Heat.
And even in excessive hot Climates, some sort of Raiment is requisite to be a
Guard from the Scorching Sun. Thus on the Account of Necessity, as well as
Modesty and Distinction, Clothing is serviceable to us.

Fourthly, It is for Decency and Ornament: Though this be not one of the chief
Ends and Uses of it, yet it may be reckoned among the rest; as it is by those
who compiled our Homilies. If we consider (say Homilies against the Excess of
Apparel*
they) the End and Purpose whereunto Almighty God has ordained his Creatures,
we shall easily perceive, that he allows us Apparel, not only for Necessity's
sake, but also for an honest Comeliness. It may be observed, that there are
Extremes in this Matter of Apparel; some are too effeminate and delicate in
their Attire, others are too neglectful and sordid. Pastillos Rufillus olet,
Gorgonius hircum. The one is too much Perfumed, the other is Rank and Fetid:
These are faulty in a different Manner, but one is as blameable as the other.
There is a Middle Way between these two, and that is most eligible, viz. a
Graceful and Comely Attire, that is neither Lavish nor Loathsome. An utter
neglect of Apparel is certainly very culpable; especially to place Religion in
it, and to think (as some Monks and Retired Devotionists do) it is acceptable
to God to put on a coarse Habit, or to go in rags and tatters, to be patched
and clouted, and to wear old and torn Garments; nay, to be nasty and sordid, to
be unclean and filthy in their Clothing, is intolerably ridiculous. Reason and
Religion forbid this, and more especially Christianity, which dictates Purity,
not only of Soul but Body. In this double Sense, the Spouse of Christ may be
said, to be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, 19. Rev. 8. There can be no
doubt, tha^ a Neatness or Comeliness of Attire, is allowable and commendable,
if we consider, that there is a lawful Use of the Creatures, not only for the
Supply of our Necessities, but likewise for Ornament and Decency, according to
that Degree and Order wherein God has placed us in the World. There are (as
you may observe) several Things created that are not absolutely necessary in
the Life of Man, and yet you cannot deny, that they were designed for some use,
God having made nothing in vain. God has given not only Bread to strengthen
Man's Heart, but Wine to make it glad, and Oil to make his Face to shine, 104
Psalm. 15. to add an Ornament and Luster to his Countenance, as well as to
gratify the Sense of Smelling with its sweet Odor. And the like Bounty and
Indulgence he has showed to Mankind, with Respect to their Raiment. He has
bestowed several Things to administer to Beauty and Comeliness, to the
Gracefulness of their Clothing; as Gold, Silver, Pearls, Diamonds, and other
precious Stones, fine Linen, Silk, etc.

Indeed, the World it self has its Name among the Greeks from its Ornate and
Comely Make, its beautiful and rich Dress: Wherever we look, it is gay and
trim, and shows a Bravery worthy of its Maker. The Heavens are decked and
garnished with the Stars, as with so many glittering and sparkling Gems,
besides that great flaming Ruby the Sun, Which out-shines them all. The Sea is
embelish'd with the richest Pearls: The Earth is furnished and enriched with
its precious Stones and Minerals. Who can sufficiently admire the Gaiety of its
Herbs and Plants? Their very Leaves have a peculiar Trimming; they are with
great Curiosity notch'd indented, engrail'd, scallopp'd, laced, fringed,
adorned with most elegant Figures: But especially, the Bravery of Flowers
invites and gluts our Sight: The Richness of their Native Clothing is
wonderful and amazing: In respect of which our Savior tells us, That even
Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these. Among Brutes there
are many that are remarkable for their Gorgeous Trappings, wherewith Nature
has set them forth, especially several of the Feathered Animals are noted for
the Variety of Colors, in which they are dressed.

And if God thus decketh the Irrational, and even Inanimate Creatures, surely
he has not forgot Man. No: In making him such he has sufficiently adorned and
beautified him; for his Soul is the brightest Image of the Deity, and the
admirable Structure of his Body has all the Marks of Divine Art and Wisdom
upon it: And must this Rich Jewel be sordidly used? May not this Choicest
Creature be decently arrayed? If God has given it this Natural Decking, shall
an Artificial one be unlawful? If you may adorn your Houses, and deck your
Chambers, and trim up your Closets, why may not you do so to your selves? For
here I may say as our Savior in another Case, 6 Mark 26.
Are not ye much better than they? The Scripture Records acquaint us, that
there were some innocent Ornaments used heretofore, and that by the Religious
and Virtuous. It is St. In 35 Genesis 4.
Austin's Observation upon Abraham's presenting Rebecca with Earrings (for so
he understands the Word Nesem) and Bracelets, and her accepting of them, that
it is lawful to use these and the like Ornaments; for otherwise, the Holy
Patriarch would not have sent them to her, and she being a virtuous Maid would
not have received them, and worn them, as we read she did, for his sake. And
from other Places of the Old Testament, we may infer, That these were the most
universal and innocent Piece of Finery, and that of all Ornaments they were the
most Ancient. Joseph, who was the Beloved of his Father, was distinguished from
the Rest of his Brethren, by a better sort of Apparel, a Coat of many Colors,
37 Genesis 3. a Garment wrought or embroidered with sundry sorts of Figures,
either of Flowers or Fruit, or both, and these set out with different Colors.

Nor do the Laws of the Christian Religion prohibit the Use of decent
Ornaments, if there be no Inordinacy in the procuring or wearing of them. I
could observe to you, that our Savior himself refused not to use the Borders
and Fringes, which were at that time in Fashion among the Jews, and even among
the Pharisees: He wore these at the Bottom of his Garment; as we may gather
from 6 Mark 56. where we read, that they besought him in behalf of the
Diseased, that they were brought to him, That they might touch, if it were but
the Border of his Garment. And in 8 Luke 44. we read, that a Woman came and
touched the Border of his Garment. (...) is the Word, and it properly signifies
a Fringe, as Beza Notes upon the Place; and this is the very Word that is used
in 23 Mat. 5. where our Savior blames the Pharisees, for enlarging the Borders
of their Garments; but though he checked them for their Superstition in so
doing, yet he complied with the Garb so far, as it was harmless and lawful. The
Apostle asserts, that there is a (...), a Decorum, a Comeliness to be observed
by Christians in their Dress, 1 Cor. 11. 13. A Bishop must be (...), Ornatus,
according to the vulgar Latin, 1 Timothy 3. 2. He must not be sordid and squalid;
but he must do things even as to his outward Deportment and Habit, which become
his Place and Function. Christianity is not altogether neglectful of the
outward Mien and Attire: There is a Decency which may be lawfully observed in
our External Clothing; for this may be used not only as a Cover for our
Nakedness, and a Shelter from the Cold, and as a Badge of Distinction (as you
have heard before) but likewise for Comeliness and Ornament.

But is not this repugnant to the Prohibition of St. Paul in the Text, That
Women should not adorn themselves with Gold or Pearls, or costly Array? 1 Timothy
2. 9. And what is said to one Sex is said to another; for if the wearing of
Gold or Pearls be unlawful in Women, it is so in Men. And is not what I have
said contradictory to that parallel Place of St. Peter, 1 Epist. Chap. 3. Ver.
4. Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and
of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel: Which seems to disallow of;
yea, wholly to condemn the wearing of all Ornamental Attire.

It is true, the Quakers have understood this and the foregoing Text, thus,
and accordingly have cried out against all Ornaments of Gold and Silver, or of
any other Nature: Yea, they have pretended, that by Virtue of these Texts, they
are authorized to leave neither Lace nor Ribband upon their Clothes, but to
wear plain Garments, without Welt or Guard; though (to convince the World, that
they did not believe themselves, when they made this Comment on these Texts)
they have lately contradicted this in their Practice. This was, it seems an old
Conceit, and prevailed among the Montanists: Whence it was that De Idololatria.
De Cultu mulierum.
Tertullian was infected with this Enthusiastic Notion: He holds, that it is
unlawful for a Christian to be adorned with Purple or Gold, or to wear any
other Things of the like Nature. This was the Result of misinterpreting these
Places of Scripture, which (if we examine the true Meaning of them) will be
found to give no Allowance to the casting off of all Ornaments: Nay, my Text
plainly disallows it; for, I will, ^aith the Apostle, that Women adorn
themselves; and he tells us further how they may be adorned, (...), in habitu
ornato, vulgar Latin an Attire, that has some Decency and Comeliness in it,
for so the Word (...) imports. Here, then they are not only forbid to be sordid
in their Apparel, but here is a License given them to adorn themselves. The
next Words therefore cannot denote the utter Unlawfulness of adorning
themselves with Gold and Pearls, and the like.

But what then is the true Sense of these Words, That Women must not adorn
themselves with broided, or braided Hair (for so it should be read, and the
other was the Mistake of the Printer, which ought to be corrected in our
Bibles) nor with Gold or Pearls, or costly Array? I answer, the Apostle here (as
is very usual in other Places of Scripture) seems to speak in an absolute
Manner, though what he says is to be understood (as he meant it) in a limited
one. Thus it is our Savior's Injunction, or Prohibition rather, When thou
make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, neither
thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, 14 Luke 12. where Christ seems to condemn
all Feasts, unless those where the Poor are invited; and consequently, no man
is permitted to entertain any at his Table but these: But who sees not, that
the Words are not to be taken absolutely, but in a restrain and comparative
Sense? Christ does not forbid us to invite our Friends and Relatives, but he
would teach us this Lesson, that we must rather do Good to the Poor and Needy,
and such as can never recompense us, then show our Kindness and Friendship to
those that are Rich, and able to do us the like Office of Friendship. We may
lawfully entertain our Friends and Neighbors, though they be not poor; for
Christ himself was present at such a Feast; by the same Token, that when they
wanted Wine, he was pleased to supply them with it by a Miracle: But we are to
prefer Charity toward the Poor, before our Feasting of our Friends. Our
Entertainments, which are merely for Friendship and Society, must give way to
necessary and indispensable Acts of Piety and Charity. So here, in the Case
before us, the Adorning of the Body with comely Apparel must yield to a higher
and nobler Adorning, viz. That of the Soul, with Modesty and Sobriety, which
are here mentioned; yea, we must wholly neglect the one in comparison of the
other: And so, that other Text, viz. of St. Peter is to be understood; not as
if all outward Adorning were sinful, for you see, that putting on of Apparel
(in that place) is mentioned no less then wearing of Gold; and consequently all
Apparel should be forbidden here, as well as wearing of Gold, if the Apostle's
Words were to be understood absolutely.

Therefore it is evident, that we must take them in a Comparative Sense, as
that Place in St. Luke, before mentioned, and as that other, in 6 Mat. 19. Lay
not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth. Not that it is sinful to lay up in
store against a Time of Need; not that it is unlawful to treasure up Earthly
Riches; but the Meaning is, we must not look upon Riches as our best and only
Treasure, and set our Hearts upon them. It is like that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6. 17. Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they trust not in
uncertain Riches; that they rely not so upon these, as to omit trusting in God.
You may have Wealth; that is not forbid, but you are forbid to be so Careful
and Solicitous about it, as to neglect the True Riches: Nay, you are commanded
in these Words, to neglect the former in respect of the latter. So here, you
may put on Apparel, you may adorn your outward Man: but then you must be
careful above all to deck your Souls. Your chief and principal Ornament must be
(as it follows in that place) the hidden man of the heart, the ornament of a
meek and quiet spirit. This must be your great and main Concern: and the other
kind of Adorning must be esteemed as nothing in respect of this. This is the
plain meaning of the Apostle. He does not in a rude manner ri^le and rend
asunder all the Ornamental Attire of that Sex, he does not tell us that all
Bodily Decking, is vicious under the Gospel, and unworthy of Christian Men and
Women, but he only prefers the Spiritual Adorning before it, and warns us to
avoid all Excess in the former.

But do you encourage us, you will say, to conform our selves to the vain guise
of the World, and to comply with every Idle Fashion and Dress that comes up? Do
you intend by this Discourse (at the entrance of which you undertook to
chastise, and, if it were possible to reform the Abuse of Apparel) to justify
the Scandalous Excess, which is now generally practiced? I answer, there is an
Innocent, and there is also a Vicious Complying with the customs of the place
we live in, and with the persons we converse with as to this matter, which we
are now speaking of. The former we may safely submit to, because what is
innocent is blameless. Thus I observed before, that our Savior condescended to
the Garb of his Countrymen. And in other things he showed himself no Morose
and Refractory person: he disdained not the use of the Odoriferous Ointment,
which was then much in use at all Great Entertainments, Mark 14. 3. Luke 7. 38.
John 2. 12. 3. And he would not have used that language to the Person whose
Guest he was at that time, Mine head with Oil thou did not anoint, if he had
not thought it lawful to use it, Luke 7. 46. He also conformed to the Jewish
custom of Discumbiture, i.e. lying with their bodies stretched out upon beds at
their feasts and times of solemn Eating, though it was not the Ancient and
Primitive posture at meals, but arose first from Effeminacy and Luxury, but was
now by a long custom grown into a laudable, at least an innocent practice, and
was complied with as such by our Savior himself, and his Apostles, and the
most religious People of that Country.

This teaches us what our behavior should be in respect of Indifferent Modes
of Apparel, and such are in themselves harmless; though they are not of any
Ancient standing, but are lately brought up. Nay, though they are used by
others to pride and wantonness, yet if they be in themselves innocent, and we
are resolved to use them innocently, I cannot see how they become unlawful. To
instance in Borrowed Hair, which is now so much in use: it is not to be
doubted, that it is a very Vicious sort of Attire in too many persons, because
they had no sufficient occasion to part with their own hair, and consequently
no need of wearing another's: but vanity and pride moved them to do it, and
these are the principles which make them still retain this practice. But as
this sort of Covering for the head may be used, and is by some, it is innocent
and useful, and the ends of wearing it are good and lawful. If our forefathers
had known the way of making it, I question not but they would have used it. One
Age invents what another knew not, as Printing, Guns, and several other things:
Shall therefore these be unlawful because they were not known before? They used
Caps one upon another heretofore: but Hair to supply the defect of hair is most
proper. Every Age produces new Habits, which at first seem strange and uncouth,
because persons are not used to them. Some weak and scrupulous persons think
that every New Fashion or Mode of Apparel, that was not heard of in our
forefathers days, is unlawful: but this is a great mistake, and if they pursue
it, they must run back to the primitive Coats of Skins, which at first were
worn raw and undressed, before the Fellmongers and Tanners Trades began to peep
out. These were the first Apparel of our Forefathers, yea, and of the softer
Sex.

These things I say, that we may have a right apprehension concerning this
matter, and that we may not conceit that no Attire is commendable but what can
plead Antiquity: as if it were absolutely necessary that there should be now
(as in former times) in every considerable family a Standing Wardrobe. And
these things I say, that we may have a true and just notion concerning the
Ornamental part of Clothing; that with that wise and pious Father Nolo ut de
Ornament is auri vel vestis praeproperam habeas in prohibendo sententiam.
August. Tom. 2. Epist. 37, ad Possid.
we may not be too hasty in censuring and condemning of it, seeing we do not
find it condemned by the Scripture, or by virtue of any Arguments that can be
brought thence. But though the thing it self be lawful, and may by the conduct
of Prudence be harmlesly made use of, yet it is certain, that nothing has been
and is at this day more Abused. And therefore, that you may not mistake me, and
from what I have said be encouraged to follow the wild practice of this
Degenerate Age, which is scandalous for its Extravagancy in Attire, I will now
in the next place proceed (and it is high time to do so, lest you should draw
false Inferences from what I have said) to show you wherein this Excess does
consist, and in what respects persons may be truly said to behave themselves
Vitiously in this matter. As I have asserted the Lawful and Innocent use of
Decent and Graceful Apparel, so now I will discover the gross Abuses which
generally accompany the wearing of Apparel. I will distinctly mention the
particular Extravagancies and Inordinacies, which render the Habits of persons
unlawful, and which were never more Visible and Conspicuous than in these
Licentious Times.

1. To be Curious and Solicitous about Apparel, and to Affect New Modes of
Dressing are a very evil disposition of mind, and unbecoming the Sobriety of a
Christian. There were a kind of Ornaments used by the Jewish Dames, which are
called, Batte hanephesh, houses of the soul, Isa. 3. 20. What particular
species of Finery these were, is difficult to tell, but these terms may be
fitly applied to all the other kinds of female habiliments, which are mentioned
in that Chapter, and so to all the other sorts of Garniture, which are in
fashion at this day: they are generally houses and receptacles of the Soul,
they that wear them set their hearts upon them, and by this means they become
sinful and unlawful. This is the fault of the greatest number of the Fine
people of this Age: it may be plainly discerned, that their minds are set upon
their Georgeous Attire; their great delight and pleasure is in Genteel and
Fashionable Apparel. All their thoughts are to be Neat and Spruce, to be Polite
and Trim: nay, they are not content with ordinary Gaiety, but they must be
Superfine: they strive to be Exquisite, and care for none but a Studied Dress.
The Changing of Fashions so frequently as is done among some persons, is
generally the effect of this Vanity: for they who are thus disposed affect
Novelties, and are taken with every light and vain, every idle and fantastic
thing, so it be new. It Is said of Nero and Heliogabalus, that they never wore
the same Garment twice. Those whose Purses will not suffer them to arrive to
this, yet are well-willers to the practice, and would be imitating it as near
as they can. There are some of no extraordinary figure that think a Good Suit
is antiquated before half of a Summer is expired: and there are others that
reckon the Months of the Year by their Change of Raiment. Heretofore this very
rank of persons were wont to leave off their Clothes because they were worn
out, but now they do it merely because they are out of fashion.

Where this vain humor prevails, it causes them to look after Foreign and
Exatick Modes of Finery. What was the Jews fault of old, is theirs now, they
please themselves in the children of Strangers, Isa. 2. 6. They affect and ape
their Manners, which has of late been very Ominous, and had like to have
proved destructive. They, like those whom the Prophet Zephaniah reproves, love
to be clothed with strange apparel, Chapter 1. v. 8. What is domestic pleases
not; but their minds run after Outlandish and far-fetched Dresses. And indeed
generally they are taken with These most of all: and even whilst they are at
War with a Country, they are in a League with their Fashions. Or if they cannot
be supplied fast enough from abroad, they then set their own Inventions on
work, or are very earnest with others at home to befriend them in that kind.
And truly, they cannot Oblige them more than by presenting them with some
New-invented Garbs, and such as were never known before. All this shows how
Solicitous they are about their Attire and Array, how mightily concerned they
are for their Tricking and Bravery. Which is a perfect contradicting and
confronting our Savior's Counsel, Take no thought what ye shall put on, Mat.
6. 25. And again, Why take ye thought for Raiment? v. 28. and further, Take no
thought, saying, wherewithal shall we be clothed? v. 31. As much as ^o say,
Let not your Adoring (though it be in it self decen^ (...) lawful) be the chief
thing which takes up your minds, let it not be the grand business you concern
your selves in, and busy your thoughts about: for this is unworthy of a
Rational Creature, and much more of those that profess the Strictest Religion:
it is the mark of a Beau rather than a Christian.

2. Another Instance of the Inordinacy of Apparel, is, when it is unsuitable to
the Condition of the persons that wear it. Thus, though an Extravagant Finery
be unlawful in both Sexes, yet it is much more so in a man. For him to be
fantastic and effeminate in Attire is unpardonable. It is next to
Sardanapalus's Spinning among women. Art thou not ashamed, when Nature has
made thee a Man, to make they self a Woman? Stobae. Sermon. 161.
said the Grave Philosopher to a young Gentleman who he saw finely tricked up,
and dressed in too gay and light an habit. And Seneca justly takes notice of
this as an inexcusable folly in some of the Manly Sex, that they were of such
an effeminate temper and genius, That Quis est iseorum qui non malit
Rempublicam turbari quam comam? qui non solicitior sit de capitis sui decore
quam de sal^te? qui non comptior esse malit quam honestior? De Brevit. vitae.
cap. 12.
they would rather have the Commonwealth out of order than their Hair: they
were more solicitous about trimming and sprucing up their Heads than they were
of their own Health, or of the Safety of the Public: they were more careful to
be Fine than to be Honest and Virtuous. This the Moralist upbraids them with as
a reproach to their Masculine nature, and a very defacing of their Manhood.
Again, Apparel becomes unlawful by being unsuitable to the Years of those who
wear it: for there is a Decorum belonging to Age as well as Sex. Those Garments
are unfitting for Men of years, which were not unbecoming them when they were
youthful. And so how unseemly is it for Matrons not to be clad according to
their Age, but to affect the florid dressings and polishings of those of green
years? Of the aged women more especially the Apostle requires, that they be
(...).
in habit (for so we may render it) as becomes holiness, Tit. 2. 3. Though
Excess in Habit be very blameable in Youth, yet it is much worse in those of
declining years, because it is supposed, that they should by this time be
brought to a Sense of the World's Vanity, and should be apprehensive, that they
are more nearly approaching to the Grave, and therefore should be dressing
their Souls for eternity. Wherefore the famous Presbyter of Carthage Aetates
requietas jam, and in portum modestiae subduct as splendour and dignitas cultus
avocant, and severitatem appetitionibus inquietant, compensantibus s^. habitus
irritamento pro frigore aetatis. Tertull. de cult. faem. cap. 9.
rebukes these persons very smartly, because the Excess is more inexcusable in
them than in any others.

Moreover, then the Attire may deservedly be condemned as Inordinate, when it
is not according to the Station and Office, the Calling and Employment of the
person. Thus when a Magistrate wears the Habit of a mean Citizen, or much more,
if out of Avarice and baseness of Spirit he delights to appear in sordid
raiment, wholly unanswerable to the dignity of his Place, he offends in a very
visible manner. And on the other hand (which is the more general and common
fault) if those that are of a low degree assume the garb and habit which are
proper to those that are in an Eminent Station, they act very irregularly and
vitiously. For, to use the words of the Poet, Martial.
Non quicunque capit saturatas murice vestes. Every one (for that is the
meaning of his quicunque) is not to wear Purple and Scarlet, to put on the
Vesture and Garb of such as are in High places. And so when Servants presume to
be dressed after the rate of their Masters and Mistresses, it is a very
scandalous Enormity, and not to be tolerated in a Civil, much less in a
Christian Commonwealth. For, as has been said before, Garments are for
Distinction: but this promiscuous and levelling use of them takes it away, and
brings in disorder and confusion. This is, as Seneca speaks, perversa vestis,
an untoward cross Attire, such a Habit as is no ways befitting. Therefore we
may entertain it as a True Proposition, that that manner of Clothing is
faulty, and justly blameable, which is unbecoming the Place or Station wherein
persons are set.

And so is that, in the next place, which is not according to their Estates and
Abilities; that Dress which exceeds the proportion of their Incomes. We need
not doubt, that that Apparel which is too Chargeable and Costly is unlawful.
Whence it was, that the forementioned Moralist checks the Roman Ladies, and
other Women of his time for their Prodigality of this nature; he complains how
intolerably Expensive their perforated Ears were, (for as he wittily
remonstrates against them) there were seen dangling at them whole Islands and
Towns. And the Ancient Fathers of the Church were as smart against the
Christian Women, that were guilty of this Profuse Vanity. Saitus and insulas
tener^ cervix fert, etc. De Hab. mul. cap. 9.
Their tender Necks carry whole Woods and Islands, says Tertullian, and their
wasteful Pride swells the Debt-Book. Vno filo villarum insunt pretia. In Vita
Pauli Eremitae.
On one string of Pearl hang the Prices of Manors and Lordships, says St.
Jerome. And this is the fault, yea (which is the Aggravation of it) the Common
fault of this present Age. The Luxury of Apparel is such, that they are
inclined to lay out the greatest portion of their Revenues in the supplying of
this: they are prone to waste and consume their Estates in changing of
Fashions; and they would (if they might be permitted) weae whole Kingdoms on
their backs. And even others, who are of a mean sort, and cannot afford in any
point to be Lavish, yet here show how willing they are to be so. They will not
let their Purse be their Director, but vainly aspire to the Ornaments of the
Rich and Wealthy. This is the Epidemick folly of these Times, which runs
counter to all Reason, Modesty and Decorum, and is an Extravagance, which was
never known in former Ages to have climbed to that height, which it is now
arrived to. Such persons must be plainly told, that their Raiment must not
surpass their ability, that it does not become those who can scarcely find
bread for their mouths to hang Gold in their ears. This certainly is part of
that costly array which is forbid by the Apostle in the Text. To conclude this
Head, every ones Attire should be according to their Condition: and this
Condition (as you have heard) respects either the Sex, or the Age, or the
Calling, or lastly, the Estate and Fortune of persons. Whatever Habit is
disagreeable to these is not an Ornament, but a Blemish, a Deformity, a
Disgrace.

3. That Habit is justly to be censured and condemned, which is a Badge of
Pride. Thus in the third Chapter of Isaiah, where the Finery of the Jewish
Women is disallowed of and threatened; it is said, The daughters of Sion are
haughty, their inward Pride and Elation of mind were discovered by their
outward Garb and Guise, by their delicate Trappings and Accoutrements, by their
setting themselves forth with all that Spruce Tackle and Trimming. This Vanity
argues their Pride and Haughtiness on a threefold account.

First, Some use this Profuse Adorning to make a show of their Wealth and
Ability. They would have the world make an estimate of the greatness of their
Fortunes by the bravery of their Habit. By these Gorgeous Ensigns they cail men
to take notice of, and admire their Plentiful Revenues, and applaud them for
their Prosperity. We need not be backward in asserting, that if their
Appareling themselves proceeds merely from this Ostentation, it is to be
condemned.

Secondly, The Pride of Apparel is discovered in its being purposely designed
to gain Respect and Honor; and that they and their Garniture may be Reverenced
by those that see it. For this sort of Pride is quite starved and stifled if
there be no Spectators. But then by these I mean Themselves as well as Others:
and accordingly there are too many that make this division of their Time, viz.
they employ the Morning in looking on Themselves, and the rest of the day in
being seen of others. And thence they first become their own Admirers and
Adorers, and then persuade themselves, that others pay the same Respect to them
because of their Rich Pageantry, wherewith they outshine them. For they are so
foolish as to imagine, that their Splendid Dress gives a real worth and
excellency to them, and that they are to be preferred before others, because
they surpass them in their Goodly Array. It is not to be doubted that this is
Pride, and one of the worst kinds of it. Can a Rational Person be proud of that
which was the effect of the Primitive Apostasy? Sin brought in Shame, and Shame
introduced Clothing: so that to take a Pride in this is to glory in our shame.
Wherefore the Advice of the Wise Jew should take place here, Boast not of thy
clothing and raiment, Eccles. 11. 4. Besides, the Beasts generally supply us
with our Raiment; and one would think there is little reason to be proud of the
Cast Suits of the very basest Creatures, as a Bishop Hall 's Occasional Meditat*
Worthy Person expresses it. Who can deny that Necessity and Defect have been
the original of some of the most Fashionable Habits? The Roman Senate could not
have voted Julius Caesar an higher Favor, than the wearing of the Laurel
perpetually, but he promoted it himself, because being Bald he was glad of such
a Covering. The Turkish Turbant commenced from Mahomet's Scald Head. And some
tell us, that a certain Habit, which was in such repute in Queen Elizabeth's
day, was first brought up to hide an Excrescence which blemished her fair Neck.
And if we should search into the rise of some of the most Modish Habits among
our Women at this day, perhaps we should find them to be of a more scandalous
nature, and it would appear, that some French Prostitutes have given birth to
our most Celebrated Fashions, and that our Dames are but the humble Imitators
of the Worst of their Sex.

Or, to speak more generally, can that person be proud of Clothes who considers
what they cover? As the Philosopher of old, told the people that stood gazing
on the Stately and Sumptuous Tomb of Mausolus, All this Pompous Fabric which
you ^ee, contains nothing in it but Dust; so it may be said of the Goodliest
and Richest Vestures, They are a Covering only for Dust and Ashes, they contain
in them Corruptible Materials designed for the Grave and Putrefaction. If
notwithstanding this, they can value themselves for their Dress and Garb, for
their precious and gaudy Equipments, and can admire the Beauty of a Painted
Sepulcher; especially if they do not only think themselves to be really better
than others, because of their Handsome Trimming, but despise and scorn those
that are meanly clad, this may be justly be called Folly as well as Pride.

It might be added in the third Place, that the Haughtiness of those who are
Extravagant in their Garb is seen in this, that hereby they confound that Order
which God has set, they take away that Distinction of persons, and of their
qualities which is appointed in the world, and they are for making all alike.
This Vain Inordinacy is an argument of their Lofty and Ambitious Spirit, it
shows that they affect Grandeur, and would be as high as the Greatest; for the
Levelling Equality, which they they are now for, is to make way for that. Thus
their Habit is a certain indication of Pride.

And yet here I must adjoyn this (that I may not be partial in what I say)
There may be Pride (as Plato told Diogenes) under Mean Apparel. The Cynicks
generally took a pride in their cropped and circumcised Hair: and so the Stoics
shaved their heads close, and valued themselves upon it. And and at this day
perhaps some may be proud of their Unborrow'd Hair, because a contrary practice
is so much in use. There may be those that refuse to comply with the Habits
that are in Vogue, merely out of a Superstitious Singularity. And consequently,
their keeping the Old Fashion may be a mark of their Pride; for this Vice acts
its part in Different and seemingly Contrary Shapes.

But that which I mentioned before is its most usual guise; that is, it affects
a Flaunting and Gorgeous Attire, it struts in its Rich Caparisons, it makes a
goodly show in its Delicate Vestures, in its Elegant and Polished Array.
Ornaments become vicious, though not so in themselves, by being spotted with
Pride and Vanity, and a Haughty Mind. The man with a gold ring, in goodly
apparel, is not condemned by St. James, for wearing that Garb, but his being
overprized by others, as well as by himself, for his Gay Clothing is the thing
that is condemned, Iam. 2. 2, 3. If a woman were as 'twere clothed with the
Sun, (to borrow that expression) were all shining and bright, were most richly
decked according to her place and quality, yet if she had (with the
Apocalyptick woman) the moon under her feet, if she had a mean and low opinion
of this Changeable World, if she were of great Humility and Condescension, and
were attired with the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, she would be so far
from incurring our censure, that she would desire the highest praises that we
can heap upon her, especially in such an Age as this, when Bravery of Habit is
generally the product as well as the sign of a Proud Mind. And this is it which
renders it both Unbecoming and Sinful.

There are Other Particulars behind, with the Reflections on the whole, but I
have not time now to pursue them. Only let me dismiss you with this one
Request, That you would seriously recollect what has been said, and examine,
and judge of your selves by it. I have set you the Right Measures (as I
conceive) which relate to Apparel and Ornaments; and I pray God direct you in
your practice, that you may do nothing unworthy of your Profession and high
Calling. The Sum of all that has been said at present, is this, If you be
Overcareful and Sollicitous about your Bodily Att^re and Ornaments; or if you
delight in that Garb, which is disagreeable to your Condition and quality; or
if you make your Dress subservient to Pride and Haughtiness, and a Contempt of
others, you may certainly conclude, that you are guilty of a very great and
heinous Offense, which requires speedy Repentance and Reformation.

The Use and Abuse of APPAREL.
1 TIMOTHY II. 8, 9. I will that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
Shame-facedness and Sobriety: Not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly Array.
AFTER I had in a former Discourse on these Words showed what is the true Use
and Design of Apparel, and had established the right meaning of the Apostle's
Words, and had asserted the Lawfulness of a Comely and Decent Habit, I
proceeded in the next place to lay open the Common Fault and Miscarriage of
These Times, viz. that Inordinacy and Excess which render the Attire and Garb
of most persons unlawful. This I did in three Particulars; and now I will
mention two more.

The First whereof is this, viz. That Apparel is Vicious, that Adorning is
Sinful which administers any ways to Wantonness and Lewdness. Lust is too
frequently the root of Excess in Attire. There is an Immodest Habit, which is
designed by those that wear it to be an Invitation to Unchaste practices. There
was of old the Attire of an Harlot, Prove. 7. 10. We read, that Tamar, who
prostituted her self to whoredom, was known by this Apparel, viz. a Genesis 38. 14.
Veil, for there was a Harlot's Veil, as well as that used by Genesis 24. 65.
Brides and Honest Women. Among the Ancient Greeks the Prostitutes were
distinguished from other women by their Garments: the Law was, that (...). Suid.
they should wear Florid Vests. Whence that of Clement of Alexandria, (...)
Paedag. l. 3. c 2
As a Fugitive is known by his Marks, so a Strumpet by her Flowered Habit.
Among the Romans also Tertull* de Pallio. Valor. Max. lib. 5. c. 2.
there was a Distinction between women of ill fame, and those that were Modest
as to their Dress, particularly as to the wearing of their Hair and
Head-Attire. The Hair, which I may call a Natural Apparel, was heretofore not
only made use of to Pride (whence Aristoph. in Nubib.
(...) is as much as Superbire, because they took a pride in Nourishing their
hair, and in artificially dressing and adorning it) but it became serviceable
to Wanton purposes, it was made an Incentive to Lewdness. It is probable, that
the Fair Absalom let his Hair grow to a great length before he cut it, not only
because of his Vow as a Nazarite(as a Dr. Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr.
Learned Writer thinks) but out of Pride and Wantonness, to render himself the
more acceptable and grateful to the Hebrew Ladies, and to win the Hearts of the
vainly disposed Females. And these again were not behind hand in the same ill
arts and designs, for (as we are informed by the Prophet Isaiah (Chapter 3. v. 24.)
they were much concerned for their Maasheh Miksheh, their (...) 70. Crispans
crinis, vulgar Latin. Opus calamistri, Pagnin. Crinium dispositio aequalis, Ar.
Montan. Coma b^ne composit^, ut opus solidum refer^t. Cocc.
Well-set Hair, set so fast and made up so firmly that it resembled some solid
piece of workmanship of massy gold.

This Wanton Curiosity and Effeminacy have been the Excess of all Ages, for it
may be as truly said of them as of Samson, that their Strength is in their
Locks, they found these a very powerful and charming Allective: and the Vain
Amorists were wont to extol these to the Skies, yea to place them there, whence
Berenice's Hair was made an Asterism. They were wont to spend a great deal of
time (as both Greek and Latin Writers relate) in beautifying and garnishing
this Excrementitious Ornament, and they used much Art in changing its Color.
To which our Savior perhaps alludes, Mat. 5. 36. Thou can not make one Hair
white or black. But afterward their great care was to die their hair Red or
Yellow. Tertullian tells us, that to this end the women used to color their
hair with Saffron. And, with reference to this usage, St. Jerome forbids them,
Ne capillos inrufes, and ei aliquid de gehennae ignibus aspergas. De cultu
Mulier.
to paint their Hair red, and give it the color of Hell fire. This was
practiced even by the Christian women, and that not because our Savior and the
Virgin Mary had hair enclining to red or yellow, as I remember Eccles. Hist. l.
2. c. 23.
Nicephorus relates, but (as we may gather from the Pious Fathers, who smartly
reproved this usage) because it was the Mode of the Times, and because that
Color was then esteemed as Alluring and Tempting. The short is, neither this
nor any other Artificial Ornament relating to the Dress and Attire of Persons,
which any ways conduces to Effeminacy and Lust is to be approved of: for we are
to remember, that Garments were for Modesty sake at first: and it is certain,
that they still ought to be used to that purpose, and therefore all Immodesty
and Lasciviousness in Apparel are to be shunned, and a Wanton Garb is to be
reckoned unlawful.

In the next and last place, so is that which is any ways prejudicial to
Religion and Devotion, and the concerns of them. And first, that Habit must
needs prove such which is unsuitable to the time and place of Divine Worship.
It is the undue practice of this Age, that they never more exceed in their Gay
Deckings than when they are to appear in God's Presence. Upon This Day
especially they muster up all their Bravery, and show themselves in all their
Change of Raiment, which they think is some part of the Observing of the Lord's
day. It is true, this is a Holy Festival, and therefore a Decent Habit becomes
it: but it is contrary to the pious design of this Solemnity, to come into
God's House to show your Finery, and to display all your Gaiety, to invite
Spectators, and to distract your own and others thoughts. This is not to be
allowed of in the Congregations of the Faithful. And if St. Paul were permitted
to descend from the Mansions above, and to speak to you from this place, he
would certainly reprove you, as he did his Corinthians, for your Indecent
Behavior and Garb in the Public Assemblies, 1 Cor. 11. 4, etc. where he uses
this Particular Argument to engage the women not to appear with Uncovered heads
in the time of Divine Worship, viz. because of the Angels. As much as to say,
Those Glorious Messengers, those Ministering Spirits, which are generally
present at the Solemn Meetings of the Christian Worshippers, take notice of
their outward carriage and deportment, and particularly of their Garments and
Dress. And do you believe this (as you needs must if you give credit to the
Apostle) and yet can you with your Staring Attire outface the very Angels, yea,
and the Infernal Spirits too, for some of this sort may perhaps be tempted to
come hither, and behold a Sight so agreeable to them.

I appeal to those of you that have not lost all sense of good and evil,
whether you can think and really persuade your selves, that such an Extravagant
Furniture as some of you are set up with, is fitting for this Place where you
now are, and to the Sacred business you are employed about. Can any of you that
are sober and considerate, serious and religious, think that this is a Garb
agreeable to this occasion? Do you look like those that are offering your
Petitions to the Almighty, and come hither to attend to his Voice? Is it
acceptable to look Heaven in the face with a Spotted visage? Can you persuade
your selves, that this Vanity and Pride become True Worshippers? I know what
some of your Consciences dictate to you upon this Appeal which I make to you.
They tell you, and that plainly and loudly, that this posture which some of you
are in is no ways suitable to the present Work you come hither to be engaged
in. Your Natural Reasons inform you, that you are not fit to Pray, and to Hear
the Word of God, i.e. with any fervency and devotion. Your own hearts tell some
of you, that you look more like Revellers than Devotionists, that you are
fitter for the Theater than a Temple, that a Playhouse becomes you far better
than a Church, and that a Comedy would be a more acceptable entertainment than
a Sermon. But I hope that some of you, who attend to what I say, will find the
benefit of this latter, and will from this instant, date your serious
Reflections on your former miscarriages in this kind that I have been speaking
of, that you will be thoroughly convinced, that there is a great difference
between God's House and your own, that that which may be tolerated in the
latter is wholly unbecoming the former, that you ought to show that Gravity,
Seriousness and Composedness of Spirit here, which are not always required of
you in another place. And from a sense of this, I hope you will be induced to
be more Cautious in your Habit on this Solemn day than on another. Let me
desire you, that you would not come hither with all your Pageantry, Show not
your Pride here, where you ought to be most Humble. Or, if I cannot prevail
with you so far, if you must needs come with all your Towering Gallentry, let
me persuade you to bring with you at the same time, that modest Veil or
Covering, to put over some part of it, which the 1 Cor. 11. 6.
Apostle advised his Corinthians to make use of in the time of Religious
Worship in the Public Assemblies.

And further, I would Caution you, that upon days of Fasting and Humiliation
you would wholly lay aside your Gaudy Dress. It is fitting at such a time you
should lour your Topsails, and strike your Flags. I do not wish you to turn
them into sackcloth and ashes: that may favor of the Old Testament
Dispensation too much: but I only wish you to leave off your Superfluous
Ornaments at such a season: and methinks there should be no need of urging this
upon you, seeing it is absurd for Mourners to put on Gay and Gorgeous Apparel.
In this time of War and Public Disturbance these are very unfitting and
unsuitable. One would think you intended to ridicule our Martial Affairs with
your Mock-Head-Pieces. Some of you perhaps may entertain these things with a
Smile, and when you leave this Place improve it into something more; but; let
me tell you, you have little reason to behave your selves thus; and you must
needs acknowledge it your selves, when you consider, that you are obliged to
come hither (on such serious and important Occasions) to Humble your selves
before God, and consequently to behave your selves Reverently and Modestly, and
to abandon all lightness and vanity in your Attire: yea, that Garb which is
lawful or tolerable at some other times is not to be allowed of now.

Again, that Attiring and Decking must needs be prejudicial to Religion which
take up too much of your Time. If you rightly understand what Christianity is,
you cannot but know that you have a great deal of Business upon your hands:
there is abundance of Work to be dispatched by you, and you have but a little
(some of you especially but a very little) time to dispatch it in: wherefore
Excess and Pride of Apparel, which are always accompanied with great (...)
moliuntur, dum comuntur, annus est. Ter.
loss of Time, and are known to be great wasters of your precious Hours, are an
unsufferable impediment to Religion. I am satisfied, that there is none here of
a sober and stayed mind, but will relish what I have said, and therefore I need
not enlarge on this Particular.

Moreover, there is nothing takes, the mind off from Serious Thoughts so much
as the Vanity of Attire. Those that are addicted to this, trouble not their
heads with the Concerns of an higher nature. The Great Work of Dressing is
their Main Employment. To be Gay, Modish and Trim, to be Fine, Brave and
Splendid, is that which engrosses all their Care and Solicitude: and thereby
they are rendered unfit for the Service of God, and all Religious Exercise. They
banish the thoughts of their present Duty, and of Death and Judgment to come,
of another World after this. Thus you see on what accounts the Habit which
persons wear may be a hindrance to Religion and Piety. And when it is so, we
are sure that it becomes Sinful and Unlawful. Though it may seem to adorn the
body, it is the blemish of the Soul, and the deformity of the whole man.

And now, having more generally displayed the nature of that Excess, which I
undertook to give you an account of, and having showed the Unlawfulness of it,
I now desire you to make some Reflections upon what I have said. For it is
certain, that we live in an Age that is egregiously Criminal as to this very
thing. Most of the Ornamental part of men and women's Apparel is at this day
unlawful, i. e. either as it proceeds from Vain Curiosity and Affectation of
Novelty, or as it is a Badge of Pride and Vainglory, or as it administers to
Lust and Wantonness, or as it exceeds the Condition and Quality of those that
wear it. As to this last especially, the Disorder among us is unsufferable, and
utterly disagreeable to the laws of Reason, Prudence and Religion. These things
I plainly and impartially set before you: and let me not be accounted your
Enemy because I tell you the truth; and that with great freedom and sincerity.
And herein I follow the example of the Greatest Lights in the Christian Church.
The two Chief Apostles thought it part of their Ministerial Office to rebuke
their female Converts for the Immodesty and Vanity of their Head-Attire, in my
Text, and in 1 Pet. 3. 3. And we shall find that the Pious Fathers and Bishops
of the Christian Church afterward esteemed it their indispensable duty to take
notice of the like disorder, and to reprimand it with great severity. Paedagog.
l. 3. cap. 2. and 11.
Clement of Alexandria with much ardency inveighs against the Gaiety and Vain
Adorning used by the women in his time. Tertullian in two of his Treatises
pursues the same subject, in the De habitu muliebri.
former dissuading the women from Rich and Gorgeous Apparel; in the De cultu
faeminarum, l. 1. c. 8. l. 2. c. 13.
latter declaming against False Hair and Painting, and such like wanton usages,
which show (as he says) that Displicet illis nimirum Plastica Dei: redarguunt,
reprehendunt Artificem omnium. -- Divino operi Satan^ ingeni^ superducere qu^m
scelestum est ^
they were displeased with God's Workmanship, and endeavored to mend it, but
it was in a very ill way, for they made use of the Arts and Inventions of the
Evil Spirit. From St. Cyprian's Discourse of the Discipline and Habits of
Virgins, it appears, that some of the Christian women were very immodest and
profuse in their Attire in those days; but that Holy Bishop reprehends them
with a Gravity and austerity, which became his Sacred Function. Homil, 4. in 1 Timothy Ad Olymp. Epist. 2.
St. Chrysostom was a sharp Reprover of the extravagant Garb and antic Dresses
of that Sex. And those Religious Fathers, Basil the Great, and St. Austin
remonstrated against the same Excess. The like did St. Ierom, who particularly
animadverts on the High Toppings of their Head-Attire. For it seems they were
then guilty of the rampant folly of this Age: they did (as he words it)
Turritum verticem struere, Build and rear up their heads in the shape of High
Turrets and Pinnacles. It was the fashion to erect here a stately Pile of
Ornaments: to which, that of Sat. 6.
Iuvenal refers, Tot adhuc compagibus altem
Aedificat caput. --
for he speaks it of the Women of those days. These are called, Turrita capita,
by Festus and Varro. This Mounting Headgear is called by Lucan, Turrita corona,
because of its Soaring-Altitude; and the ground it is built upon is styled by
him, Turrita frons.

This is the Daring Pride which reigns among our very ordinary Women at this
day. All their Rigging is nothing worth without this wagging Topmast. They
think themselves highly advanced by this Climbing Fore-top: and in defiance of
our Savior's words, endeavor as it were to add a cubit to their stature. With
their Exalted Heads they do as 'twere attempt a Superiority over Mankind. Nay,
these Babel-builders seem with their Lofty Towers to threaten the Skies, and
even to defy Lib. 2. Epist. 18, viz. ad Demet^^adem. Et Epist. ad ^arcellam.
Heaven itself. But we must not suffer them to go uncontrolled, if we will
imitate the Religious Writers and Preachers of the first Christian Ages (some
of whom were Martyrs and Confessors) yea, if we will follow the example of our
own Pious Reformers in this Nation, who with great plainness and freedom
rebuked this Vice in their time, as the Against Excess of Apparel.
Homilies on this subject testify, and particularly that passage in one of
them, The proud and haughty Stomachs of the daughters of England are so
maintained with diverse disguised sorts of costly apparel, that there is left no
difference between an honest Matron and a common Strumpet. If this was truly
and honestly spoken, and commanded to be published in those times, surely it
may with as much truth, honesty and faithfulness be proclaimed in ours. Nay,
indeed, I do not see how a Preacher can be faithful, unless he discharges this
part. He must openly declare his dislike of this Indecent Garb, he must give a
check to this Ranting and Gaudy Attire.

And it would be well for England, if the Magistrates would give it another
check, if the Civil (as well as the Spiritual) Powers would show their
abhorrence of it. And herein truly they would imitate the practice of the
Ancientest Lawgivers and Wisest Governors. We are Suidas in vocabulo (...).
informed, that there were Officers appointed heretofore at Athens, to oversee
the Apparel of the people, that it might be modest, grave and comely, and where
they found a default to punish the offenders: and more especially, they had a
sort of Overseers who took care of the Attire of Women. There was a Sumptuary
Law made by Numa Pompilius, to reform the Excess in Garments, which was among
the Old Romans. And among these people afterward it was ordered, that all
persons and their qualities should be distinguished by their Habits. Our
Ancestors likewise did not forget to retrench the Vanity and Disorder, which
they observed in Clothing: thus in King Edward the Third's time an Act was
made, to appoint every degree of persons the Vesture they should wear: and
Great and Eminent persons only were: permitted to wear Gold, Silver, Silk,
Furs, etc. King Edward the Fourth corrected the extravagancy of the people,
assigning a particular sort of Habit to every rank and order, yea, determining
the very fashion of their Shoes. And as there were Laws and Statues of this
nature before the Reformation, so there have been Homilies since published by
Royal Authority against the same Excess. And Queen Elizabeth, who was wont to
be Gorgeous and Splendid in her Dress her self, took care in her 23d year to
repress by Proclamation this growing Vanity in those of a lower degree.

It is high time now to undertake it again, seeing it of so great a Growth. And
what though herein we tread in the Steps of the present Pope? Our being
Protestants will not excuse us from imitating him, yea, it rather pushes us on
to do some Greater and more Eminent thing of this sort, to compel all persons
to use a modest and decent way of Araying themselves, and more especially to
restrain and regulate that Sumptuousness of Habit, which those of a lower
degree (and consequently the greatest numbers of persons) are guilty of. For,
though it is true, they had notorious exorbitancies heretofore in this Nation,
as to the matter of Apparel, yet they were not Universal, as they are now.
Those of the middle and of the inferior rank are the greatest Transgressors at
this day: for they are run even into that height of Bravery, which is
allowable only in those of the highest degree. Heretofore it was said, Mat. 11.
8.
They that wear soft Clothing (or as it expressed in Luke 7. 25.
another Evangelist) they that are gorgeously apparelled are in Kings houses:
but now the Excess is such, that they are to be found almost in every house. It
was said of Tire, Ezekiel.
Her merchants are Kings, but it may as truly be pronounced of England, that
her Ordinary men and women are Kings and Queens, they appear in the Garb of
such persons. Nay, the Apparel which heretofore was thought fit for Crowned
Heads and Princes is now despised by the Vulgar. This is a very deplorable
consideration, and may justify the most severe Reproof that can be given of
these disorders among us. Wherefore I hope I shall not be thought to be Rigid
and Censorious in what I have suggested to you. I hope you will bear with my
Freedom, which is now become so Seasonable and so Necessary, when we see that
the Inordinacy, which I have been discoursing of, is come to so great an
height.

What then is your proper duty in such circumstances? How are you to behave
your selves? The Answer is obvious, viz. It is your Concern to detest and avoid
the Epidemick Vanity and Excess of this Age. For though there is a lawful and
harmless use of Ornaments (as I have before asserted and made good) and this is
freely granted to those who are capable of it, yet it is evident, that the use
of them is generally perverted, and they are made by most persons serviceable
(as you have heard) to Vanity, Wantonness and Pride. As among the Latins, the
word cultus is both worship and ornament, so in our English practice Decking is
too much Prized and even Adored. Too many, like the Israelites, make a God an
Idol of their Earrings; they deifie, they idolize their Finery and Golden
Habiliments. Wherefore seeing there is this great Abuse of them, you ought to
be very Cautious how you use them. One of the Worthies of the Primitive Church
has well expressed himself thus, (...). Clem. Alex* Paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
The wearing of Gold, and the using of Soft Raiment are not wholly to be laid
aside: but this we must do, we must bridle the Affections which are void of
Reason, lest they carry us away to an Effeminate and Luxurious way of living.
His meaning is, we should look to our Minds whilst we attire our Bodies: we
must moderate and suppress our inward desires and inclinations, whilst we
cloth our outward man. And then we shall not affect curiosity and vanity in
our Raiment; we shall not set our hearts on any sort of Attire, but we shall
reckon it a thing wholly Indifferent. We shall learn in this matter to deny our
selves, and not to make use of all our Liberty, and to go to the Utmost of what
we think to be lawful. Endeavor by all means to arrive to this, and to be
p^rswaded, that in the case of Apparel Feltham's Resolves.
Good is better than the Best, as One Phrases it, that a moderate kind of Array
is to be preferred before that which is Rich and Gaudy. Remember that you have
solemnly engaged to forsake the Vanities of this wicked world; and you cannot
but know that Indecent Attire, Superfluity and Excess in Habit are of that
number.

Wherefore if you cannot reach the Perfection, which Gregory Nazianzen says
his Sister Gorgonia was Mistress of, viz. (...) Fun. Orat. in Gorgon.
to esteem a Plain Habit, and the Neglect of Ornaments to be your Beauty, yet
know, that Ornaments must always be used sparingly, and that sometimes ( viz.
when Public Distresses and Common Calamities are our allotment) they must not
be used at all. The Ladies of Carthage cut off their Hair, in a great
necessity, to serve instead of Cords and such like Tackle, for Engines of War.
Yea, we have Ancienter and more Authentic Examples than this in the Sacred
Records. The Israelites did the like for Religion, which these women did for
their Country; for we read, that they offered their Bracelets and Earrings and
Jewels of Gold for the use of the Tabernacle, Exodus 35. 22. And at another time
the women offered their Looking-glasses for the same service: they bestowed
their Mirrors of polished Brass, to make a Laver for the Temple, Exodus 38. 8.
As before their Ornaments served to Religion, so now their Speculums, wherein
they used to behold their Finery, are made use of to the same purpose. The sum
is, your Gaiety must always vail to your Devotion: you must look upon that as a
mean and inconsiderable thing in respect of this: and you must with all care
and resolution shun a Vanity which has nothing at all to commend it, but is
attended with many and great Evils.

To this purpose, let me offer these following particulars to your
consideration.

1. This is a Childish and Foolish Vice, especially in a Man, and argues great
Weakness and Shallowness of judgment. For it is here as it is in Heraldry,
those Scutcheons and Coats of Armoury that have the most Colors are generally
the less Honorable. According to the true and impartial estimate of things, a
great Variety and Profuseness of Ornaments are badges of Disgrace and
Dishonor, and they proclaim the Emptiness and Vanity of those that wear them
and delight in them. Such persons for the most part (for I do not speak
Universally, because here and there a Man of a Brave mind may be incident to
some particular Vanity) such, I say, are most commonly men of little or no
worth: herein resembling Tulips, and some others of the finest and most
beautiful Flowers, which are very useless and unprofitable Vegetables in the
life of man. Wherefore, to prize our selves or others for our Outside, for our
Dress is a sign of a weak and light mind: it is an argument of a vulgar and
common Spirit. Thus Herod Agrippa (whom you read of Acts 12.) was called and
esteemed as a God by the silly people for the brave Shining Suit which he wore,
says Antiqu. l. 19. c. 7.
Joseph the Jew. They are the words of a Judicious Man, Judge Hale's Letter to
one of his Sons,
The Vanity of loving fine Clothes and new Fashions, and valuing our selves by
them, is (says he) one of the most Childish pieces of folly that can be. Or,
if there be any exception against this Citation, as if it were taken from one
who had some inclination to the other Excess (as I find he is partly charged)
then hear what is said by another, a Noble and a Gallant Person, the Great and
Learned Sir W. Raleigh, whose testimony is unexceptionable, because he was
conversant with Courts and Bravery, and bore a great part of this himself. Yet
this is his brief determination in the case, Advice to his Son.
No man is esteemed for Gay Garments but by Fools and Women. This may seem to
be somewhat sharp and severe, but you cannot disallow it, if you remember, that
it was the result of his deliberate and studied thoughts. He was sensible (and
the more because of the Experiment he had made himself) that Light and Vain
Apparel does most commonly show the Soul to be such, that much Ornament is too
frequently an indication that the Heart is pleased with Painted Vanities, that
the person can entertain himself with Butter-flies, and that he can fall in
love with the gaudy tinctures of a Peacock's Tail.

2. This is an Excess that is Troublesome, as well as Foolish. A Good man would
find himself over-burden'd under the Pomp of Apparel: he would think himself
clogged with the multiplicity of Attire. A modest and sober woman would esteem
it a very Irksom Employment, to bear about her all the Ornamental Implements of
the vainer sort of that Sex. She would count it more than Atlas's work, to
sustain such a Weight. This was the sense of the Sober and Wise Men of old, as
we may gather from what Clement of Alexandria says on this occasion, Paedagog.
l. 2. c. 12.
I cannot but wonder, says he, that they are not tired, whilst they carry such
a Burden. And Tertullian has words to the same purpose concerning the Monilium
pondera, vestium taedia. (...). 1. 1. c. 4. Hae sunt vires ambitionis tantarum
usurarum substantia^ uno and muliebri corpusculo bajulare. De hab. mul. c. 9.
Ponderous and Tedious Ornaments of his time, which he styles De cultu faem.
cap. 9.
Impediments. And it appears from what Seneca says in one of his Epistles,
that this was the usual Quae sine dubio talia divinavit futura, qualia nunc
sunt, qui primos appellavit Impedimenta. Epist. 87.
Name they had in his days, and that very justly. Conformably to which it was
said of a Great Lady, that Ornata gemmis ingentibus, ita ut ornamentorum onere
laboraret. Trebel. Pol. de Zenobia.
She labored under the load of her Finery. In short, it is not to be
questioned, that there are some Fashionable parts of Attire, which are in
themselves a Torment; and would be really thought to be so by them that wear
them if they were compelled to it. Then we should hear them complain and cry
out against their now applauded Array, and it would fit as uneasily on them as
the Tunica molesta.

3. This Extravagance is the nurse of Idleness. For it is not a Working Habit
which they wear, but calculated only for Holidays and Festivals. Besides, their
perpetual Pranking and Decking themselves, and minding those things which
appertain to it take up their Time, and they scarce have leisure for any
serious business. And further, this Pride which they nourish will not suffer
them to bestir themselves, and set about any laborious employment. We read
therefore that Pride and abundance of Idleness met together in Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.
49. Thus their immoderate love of Delicate Clothing is an advancer of Sloth
and Laziness.

4. It is usually attended with Luxury. Their Eating and Drinking are
answerable to their Garments. The Dining Room and the Dressing-Chamber hold
correspondence with one another. It is true, we may observe that it is not
always thus; there are some Fashion-mongers who half starve themselves to feed
their Pride: they flaunt it in Clothes, but are very poor Eaters, not that they
are not willing to indulge their Palates, but only because their Incomes will
not afford it. They cannot purchase provision for their backs and bellies both.
That they may be lavish in their Garb, it is necessary that they cut themselves
short of their Food, and fare very meanly. But generally it is otherwise, the
Table bears Proportion to the Attire: the Feeding is as high and sumptuous as
the Clothing. Thus Pride and Fullness of bread are companions, Ezekiel. 16. 49.
And (as it is represented in the Parable) the being clothed in purple and fine
linen, and faring deliciously every day go together, Luke 16. 19. That Wanton
Woman who wore the Richest Pearls at her ears, drank them at last.

5. This Exorbitancy in Apparel is attended with Immodesty and Lewdness. For as
Vain Attire arises oftentimes from Wantonness (according to what was said
before) so it begets it. The natural Bashfulness and Reservedness of the Sex
are put off when this is put on. Blushing, the Loveliest color in the world,
disappears when these Gay Varieties show themselves, Now they apparently
endanger themselves. and hazard their chastity. Nay, they wilfully expose it,
by making their Habit the fuel of Temptation, and an Incentive to Lust. They
generally trim themselves, that they may be more Saleable. Dinah went out to
see the daughters of the land, Genesis 34. 1. that is, says Antiqu. l. 1. c. 19.
Josephus, upon some great Festival day she went to see the Finery of the women
of that Country. And I may add, it is as likely that she went to show her Own:
and we read what was the dismal Event of it. She that is extravagantly Dressed
does thereby tell Spectators what her inclinations are. Her hanging out those
Flags is a sign that she is ready to Surrender. Or take it in the plain
language of our Against Excess of Apparel.
Homily, What other thing do thou by this means but provoke others to tempt
thee, to deceive thy soul by the bait of thy Pomp and Pride? What else do
thou but set out thy Pride, and make of the indecent apparel of thy body the
Devil's Net, to catch the souls of them that behold thee? In brief, a Woman by
the Immoderate Delicacy and Gaudiness of her Habit shows, that she is fitted
for all vile and lewd Purposes. Iuvenal. Sat. 6.
Nil non permittit mulier sibi, turpe putat nil
Cum virides gemmas collo circum dedit, and cum
Auribus extensis magnos commisit elenchos.


6. Vanity in Apparel is the great bane of Justice and Charity. There are many
that lay others Revenues on their backs, and run into Debt to cloth themselves
in a gaudy dress. These men and women wear not their Own Clothes, as proud as
they are of them: but are fine and gay at others charges, yea of poor and mean
Tradesmen sometimes, which is is an intolerable piece of Injustice. It is by
their Profuseness that they put themselves out of a capacity of satisfying
their Creditors, and doing many other just and honest acts which are necessary
to be done. But their Expensive Pride is much more an hindrance to Relieving
the poor: for they cannot afford to be Lavish on themselves and Liberal to the
necessitous. And if some of them cannot or will not pay for their Bravery, how
can it be expected, that those who are in Want should partake of their Alms? If
they refuse to be Just, what hope is there that they will be Charitable? Here
we might lament how the Extravagancy of some persons Finery is a hindrance to
their acts of Beneficence. What they superfluously and vainly lay out on their
Attire might serve to supply some necessitous people's Nakedness. How many a
poor Orphan or Widow might be clothed, how many a poor Creature in the
Hospitals might be relieved, if the superfluous bravery of some persons did not
make them incapable of doing such a generous act? In a word, how many good
deeds of Charity and Hospitality (which are so acceptable to God and man, and
for which some amongst you are so Eminent and Renowned) I say, how many of
these noble acts are daily lost in this Great City, upon this very account,
viz. because they expend that on their Vain Decking which would afford
necessary Covering for the poor? But, to proceed,

(...) and lastly, Let me dissuade you from this Vice, by the consideration of
the Fatal Consequences of it. In the third Chapter of Isaiah, where the
Superfluous Attire of the Sex, and those Ornaments that were abused by Pride
and Wantonness are particularly enumerated, there is also added the Punishment
which shall be inflicted on those proud daughters of Sion; such a Punishment as
answers to their Sin, And it shall come to pass that instead of sweet smell,
there shall be stink; and instead of a Girdle, a rent; and instead of well-set
hair, baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth; and burning
instead of beauty, V. 24. And because this Pride of Apparel was Epidemical, it
was to be avenged by a General Plague and De^olation, v. 17. and afterward, v.
25, 26. It is observable, that Ierusalem's approaching Misery was set forth by
a Girdle hid in the ground and marred, Ier. 13. 6, 7. which fore-signified the
decay of their Finery (for the Girdle was a Signal part of it, and therefore
you find it mentioned in the fore-nam'd Chapter of Isaiah, where the whole
Wardrobe of the Sex is reckoned up:) I say it fore-signified the utter decay of
their Affected and Vain Bravery, viz. by the Captivity which was drawing near.
Among the Judgments denounced against Judah, in Zeph. 1. this is one, that God
will punish all such as are clothed with strange apparel, v. 8. He will
severely animadvert on those vain persons, who out of their greedy desire of
new modes of Attire, seek after those that are brought: from foreign Countries.
And we find it not only thus in general, but there are Particular Judgments
inflicted on individual persons for this Sin which I have been dissuading you
from. Immediately before the mentioning of the singular vengeance of God upon
Iezebel, viz. how Iehu's horses trod her under foot, and how the dogs devoured
her carkase, it is taken notice of, that she painted her face, and tired her
head, 2 Kings 9. 30. i.e. she was addicted to that Vain Excess which I have
been reproving, and you hear what was the End of her, you read what was the
recompense of her Pride as well as of her other notorious enormities. In the
New Testament we have Herod a remarkable Example of God's Judgment in the like
kind. He was proud of his Bright Apparel and his Gay Oration, both which caused
him to be adored by the Vulgar who saw and heard him: and for this his profane
Insolence he was struck by an Angel from heaven, and died miserably.

Though there are no Instances of this sort in these our days (we being under
another Economy of Divine Providence) yet still the Justice of God is the
same; and though it be not visibly and presently executed on the Sons and
Daughters of Pride, yet it is always due to them, and it now conveys a real
Curse along with it, and shall be consummated in Eternal Vengeance. Their
Immodest Habit, with all the Vices that are retainers to it (of which I have
particularly spoken) will procure them a very severe Punishment. They, like the
Beasts of old crowned with Garlands, are gay and trim, but it is in order to
their being Sacrificed. They are Aray'd and Bedecked, that they may fall a
Splendid Victim to the Divine Justice. I request you to ponder this in your
thoughts, that you may not be convinced of the Truth of it by an Experiment in
your selves. Whatever apprehensions you have had of this matter heretofore, I
wish you may for the future conceive aright of it. And this you cannot do,
unless you be really persuaded of the intrinsic Evil of the thing, and
likewise of the Certainty of that Judgment which will follow it. It is a
commonly received notion among the generality of persons, that the Variety of
Fashions, and the Excess of Vain Apparel, which are now so usual in this
Nation, contribute much toward the advantage and welfare of it: For hereby, say
they, the poor are set on work, many families are maintained, thousands daily
get their livelihood, and consequently this Vanity of Attire is for the good of
the Commonwealth. If this be good Arguing, then it is equally for the Public
Good to be Drunk, and to be arrant Gluttons, and to indulge all manner of
Debauchery: For hereby the Wine-Merchants and Vintners, all that sell or dress
the choicest Vineyards are enriched, and under these a great many poor and
indigent Folks are maintained and provided for: and therefore we may conclude,
that Intemperance and Sottishness are Public Benefits to the World, as well as
the Inordinacy of Apparel. But how can we with any Reason defend this latter,
when it has been proved (and all that have their Eyes open cannot but see it)
that this Excess brings with it Idleness, Luxury, Lewdness, and is an Enemy to
Justice and Charity (the two great Props of a Nation) and therefore must needs
be disadvantageous to the Commonwealth? Hence it will follow (notwithstanding
these Men's false Reasonings) that this Pride of Apparel is the nurse of
Poverty. And there are abundant Instances to prove this. Too rich and gorgeous
an Habit has brought many a one to a Mourning Dress. Their Costly Array has
reduced them to Rags, to want and penury. And let me tell you, this will be the
Public Fate, if you do not speedily prevent it. Our Expensive Vanity in
Attire, with the Pride and Wantonness and other disorders, which are its
constant retinue, will be our Ruin.

This may seem to be an Harsh way of treating you from the Pulpit: but I assure
you, it is such as your Condition calls for, and therefore think not these
Reproofs and Menaces to be unseasonable. Though I must needs say, I had not
dealt thus with you, but that I saw no other person would undertake this work.
Or, if any has attempted it, it is evident that their Undertaking has proved
successless. Wherefore it was requisite to urge this matter afresh, and freely
to set before you your Fault and your Danger, that you may seriously reform the
one, and happily avoid the other. This is the grand design of my present
Enterprise, and I hope it will not be altogether void of success. To which end
I will conclude with an Exhortatory Address to those who are most concerned in
this Discourse, because they are generally the most Criminal.

Let it be your chief study to deck your selves with those Ornaments that
embelish the Soul, and adorn the Life and Conversation. Put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle is pleased to express it, Romans 13. 14. Put on
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-susering: and
above all these put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness, which is as
it were the rich gridle that ties all your spiritual Attire together. Col. 3.
12. More especially, be exhorted in the same Apostle's Words, to adorn your
selves with shamefacedness and sobriety; and in the language of another
Apostle, Let your adorning be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
Which Words (as I told you before) do not exclude all Ornaments of the Body. If
they exceed not Christian Modesty and Gravity, and offend not against the other
Rules before laid down; and (in a word) if they are not unbecoming women
professing godliness (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 2. 10.) you may lawfully
use them. But then you must be sure that you do not by means of these, or in
the use of them forget and neglect the Inward and Spiritual Adorning. Nay, you
must be Chiefly concerned for this latter: for this is the sole Ornament of the
Spouse of Christ, who gave himself for his Church, that he might sancti^ie and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to
himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 25. etc. This is the Beauty
and Finery which you are to be solicitons about: and let the Care which others
take in beautifying and garnishing the Bodies remind you of a much Greater
Concernedness, which you ought to show for your Immortal Spirits.

It was a Specimen of a great Devotion and Religion in that Good Father, who
one time observing a Harlot, and minding how curiously she had tricked up her
self, and how elaborately she had made her self fine, stepped aside and retired
into his own breast, and there sharply chid himself, because he had never taken
half so much care in adorning his Soul, for the entertaining of the Holy Jesus,
as that vile Curtezan had done in trimming of her body for the pleasing of her
lewd guests. Thus we may make the Vanity and and Sinfulness of others
administer to our Pious Thoughts and Reflections. Let him who beholds the
utmost gallantry and splendour of the most Polished Creature, presently turn his
eyes inward, and look upon his Naked Soul, and blush at his neglect of it. How
nice and exact are Vain persons in accoutring and furbishing themselves? And
that their Bodies may not be disproportionable to their Apparel, what cost are
they at to repair and beautify those houses of clay? What little Arts and
Methods do they use to set off themselves? They are not ashamed to borrow the
Beauty which they boast of from a Drug or a Dark Spot. Some of them are at the
trouble every day of putting on a New Complexion.

But be not you of the number of these Gaudy Fools: let your principal design
be to beautify your Minds, in adorning of which you cannot spend too much
time, or take too much pains. To this purpose, think seriously of the
Excellency and Worth of your Souls, remember that this is your Better Part, and
therefore you ought to be solicitous above all things to have this adorned with
Divine Virtues and Graces. And consider likewise, that these are the only True
and Valuable Ornaments, these alone deserve that Name, because they have an
intrinsic worth in themselves, and convey an inward and substantial Excellency
to those that have them: and (which is the highest commendation of them) they 1
Pe^. 3. 4.
are in the sight of God of great price, as the Apostle informs us. These Rich
Jewels and Diamonds carry a commanding Luster and Splendour along with them, and
even sparkle in the ^yes of Heaven. These therefore must be esteemed by you as
the True Christian (...), as the Genuine Bravery, which outshines, and at the
same time darkens and sullies all the most exquisite Embelishments of Art. And
therefore these are to be infinitely preferred in your wishes, desires and
affections before them. Lastly, These will fit you for those Shining Robes of
Glory, those Garments of Light and Everlasting Happiness, which you shall be
clothed with in the highest Heavens.

Christianity Mysterious. A Sermon, showing the true Meaning and Acception of
the Word Mystery in Scripture: And why the Christian Religion is called a
Mystery.
Occasioned by some late Socinian Writings, which explode all Christian
Mysteries.
1 TIMOTHY III. 16. And without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness.
THAT there are Fathomless Depths in the Gospel which none can arrive to the
full knowledge of, that there Profound Abysses in the Christian Religion which
utterly surpass our conceptions, and are above the comprehension of all Humane
Reason, be it never so exalted, is a Truth as bright and manifest, as
perspicuous and illustrious as the Writings of the New Testament can possibly
make it. Here the kingdom of heaven is compared to an hidden treasure, Mat. 13.
44. Here we read of hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 7. of the wisdom of God in a
Mystery, in the same Verse, of the deep things of God, v. 10. of things hard to
be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. of things which have not entered into the heart of
man, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Finally, if a Mystery be a Religious Secret (as will appear
afterward) then there are many Mystical things in the Gospel, and Christianity
it self is a Mystery, and a Great one, as the Apostle here assures us.

The Reasons of which Denomination, if we particularly enquire into, I conceive
this Account may be given of it. It is styled so upon this double ground, 1. In
way of Comparison. 2. On a Positive and Absolute consideration. As to the
former, I will prove that the Christian Religion is a Mystery, as it may be
compared with, or distinguished from Other Mysteries, viz. Jewish, Pagan,
Heretical, or Antichristian.

First, It is styled a Mystery in opposition to the Jewish Rites and
Observances, which it is well known were Mystical and Obscure. The Holy of
Holies it self was dark, and received no Light at all into it. The Ark was
viel'd from the eyes of the people. All the Mosaic Ceremonies were Mysterious
in that they signified something else; they pointed at some Greater and Hidden
thing. Wherefore it is no improbable and groundless thought that our Apostle,
who in his Epistle to the Hebrews, so often compares Christianity with, and
opposes it to the Iudaick Rites, has an eye to them here, and denominates
Christianity from them, telling us, that it is a Mystery, not such as was under
the Mosaic Pedagogy, but a Mystery of a peculiar and a higher nature.

Besides, there were Other sorts of Mysteries among the Jews; thus, though the
Cabala was afterward made up into a Body, which is now the Talmudick System,
yet even in St. Paul's days, and long before, the Dark and Intricate Conceits,
the Mysterious Criticisms about Words and Letters contained in it, and
constantly transmitted by Tradition, were much in vogue. So the Gematrian Art,
whereby they pretended to show the Numbers and Years included in certain words
in Scripture, was in use among the Jewish Rabbis betimes. And further, it is
not to be doubted, that the Hebrew Doctors began before the Apostle's time to
turn the Old Testament into Allegories, and to offer Mystical Interpretations
of the Bible, excluding the Literal one, or much to the prejudice of it. To all
these perhaps the Apostle might allude, when he pronounces Christianity to be a
Mystery, such a one as consists not of Curiosities and Niceties, much less of
Misrepresentations of Scripture, but is in it self both Weighty and True.

Secondly, It is a Mystery in opposition to, and defiance of the Healthen
Profane S^perstitions, which likewise were Obscure, Abstruse and Intricate.
The Pagans in imitation of the Jews (for they aped them in many things) built
their Temples, but especially one part of them, Dark: they had Sphinxes and
Puzzling Pourtraitures belonging to them. They hid many of their Rites and
Usages from the people, lest they should be profaned (as they thought) by
being exposed. Several of the Roman Observances, which related to Religion,
were known to the Priests only, and were forbid to be discovered, unless upon
some extraordinary occasion, to any others. The Gentile Worshippers generally
delighted in Groves and Dark Recesses: and indeed some of their Superstitious,
Ceremonies were so lewd and seandalous, that they on that account forbore to
make them common, and to bring them to the light. These therefore are justly
called, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 39.
Meretricious Mysteries by one of the Fathers, and by another, (...). Theod.
Qu. 28. in Deuteronomy.
the Mysteries of Demons, and by the former of these Writers, Ibid.
the Dark Inventions of Demons. Concerning the Druid's Caesar informs us, that
they thought it was absolutely unlawful to commit to (...) sa^ esse existimant
ea quae de sacris docent, literis m^n^^^ De ^ello Gall. 1. 6.
writing, or any ways to divulge to the Profane their Mysterious doctrines.
Those that were initiated into the Pagan Secrets, were obliged by a solemn Oath
not to discover them. Therefore Herodotus professes, that (...), etc. Lib. 2.
he was not free to tell the Egyptian Mysteries, relating to their Gods, which
had been communicated to him by some of their Priests, on condition that he
should not reveal them to the Vulgar. It is not unlikely, that our Apostle, who
in so many places alludes to Heathen Customs and Usages (as the Races among the
Grecian Youth, their Wrestling and Fen^ing, and other Olympic Exercises) has
reference here to the Celebrated Mysteries among the Pagan Nations. And it is
observable that some of these were wont to be signally styled by them (...),
Great Mysteries. The Solemnities of the Syrian Goddess are called (...) by De
Dea Syria.
Lucian: and so other Feasts among them were eminently called (...). Th^^yd.
lib. 2. Pausan. Bae^ti^.
the Great ones, and others the Lesser. Which induced a very (...).
Learned Critic to think, that here is in the Text an allusion to those
Gentile Mysteries. And so it is, as if the Apostle had said, There were Solemn
Rites and Observances among the Pagans, which (as some of you know) were wont
to be called Great; but let me tell you, the Mystery of Christianity far
surpasses them all, and therefore deservedly challenges that Title.

And further, the very Morality of the Pagans was wrapped up in Mysteries. The
Ancient Druids and Gymnosophists used this way of Teaching. And it is well
known, that the Egyptians delighted to express their conceptions in
Hieroglyphics. The Greeks more especially affected to muffle up their Ethics
in Fables, Allegories, and Emblems. Particularly Pythagoras and his followers
were much pleased with Numbers and Symbols. And in a word, all the Ancient way
of Moralizing was by Symbolical Representations, Parables and Mysteries. But
the Apostle lets us know, that these Abstruse modes of Instruction are seldom
used under the Gospel, that Christianity is a Mystery of another kind and way.

Thirdly, This is called so in opposition to some of the fond Inventions of
Heretics and Seducers in the Church. Thus Simon the Sorcerer, the Ringleader
of that Order, had his particular Mysteries, which he had the confidence to
call in a Canting way, (...). Lib. 1. Tom. 2.
the Mysteries of Life, and of most perfect knowledge, as Epiphanius relates.
Who also tells us, (...). Ibid.
That he invented New Names and Titles of things, which were dark and obscure,
and yet none could be saved, unless they learned these new-coyn'd Mysteries. So
the followers of Basilides and Carpocrates, and other Heretics of the First
Times pretended to a profound and abstruse sort of knowledge, and such as the
Vulgar were strangers to: and they gave themselves the Title of Gnostics, from
their insight into these High and Mysterious matters. They bragged (as the
forenam'd Author says) that they aspired to that which was (...).
more sublime, and more worthy of being known, than what other Men aimed at.
The Aeones of the Valentinians, and their (...), which they expressed in
strange and barbarous appellations, were cried up as (...). Irenaeus adv.
Haeres. lib. I.
Great and Wonderful, and Unutterable Mysteries, and such (...) Epiph^^. adv.
Haeres. lib. I. Tom. 2.
Sublimities as are not to be perceived by sight or expressed by words. The
Mysteries of the Ophitae are particularly mentioned and related by Lib. 1. Tom.
3.
Epiphanius. The (...). lib. ^. Tom. 1.
Sabellians pretended to some Secret Doctrines which their party had received
concerning the Nature and Person of Christ. lbid.
Manes and his followers the Manicheans boasted of their peculiar Mysteries.
And it was the constant genius and humor of several others of the succeeding
Heretics to amuse men with Vain and Strange Terms, to darken the notion of
things, to render the doctrines of Christianity obscure, to cast a Mist before
men's eyes, by making use of a wild, uncouth and unintelligible Iargon. Several
of them affected Mysteries in Letters, Names, and Numbers, and thereby studied
to confound men's minds with Perplexed and Abstruse Notions. They pretended to,
and boasted of particular Choice Secrets, which were appropriated to
themselves, and hid from all others, for they were to be communicated only to
the Wise and the Celestial (as they called them,) but those that were Animal
and Carnal were not able to penetrate into them. In contra-distinction to
these, the Apostle, who foresaw these Mysterious Cheats and Impostures in the
Church, and who in 1 Timothy 6. 4. and in other places of his Epistles plainly
foretold them, is pleased to call the Christian doctrines a Mystery, to
signify that they are such of a singular kind and nature.

In the last place, Christianity in its Purity and Simplicity is most justly
styled a Mystery, in opposition to that which is called by the same Holy
Penman, the Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Conformably to which style we
read of Mystery, Babylon the Great, Rev. 17. 5. by which questionless is meant
the Church of Rome, or the Corrupt and Idolatrous part of it at least. Yea, we
are informed, that this very word MYSTERY is found inlay'd in plain and legible
Characters within the Roman Pontif's Triple Crown. Indeed the Main of the Roman
Religion is Mystery and Disguise. They pretend one thing, and really are
another. They seem to have cast off Pagan Idolatry, but yet they too apparently
symbolize with it in a great part of their Worship. Heretofore they paid
Adoration to Venus, and now to the Virgin Mary: of old they prayed to False
Gods, and now to Saints and Angels; before they fell down to an Idol, and now
to the Cross. Thus they have given the Idolatry of Old Heathen Rome a little
finer Turn: otherwise it is the same that it was. They boast of their Miracles,
but they are not other than 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Lying wonders, a sort of Religious Legerdemain or Juggling. They at some times
pretend to greater Strictness, Mortification and Austerity than others, but
none are generally more Loose and Licentious. Thus there is a False and
Counterfeit Show of things in the Papal Constitution, there is an horrid
Mystery of Iniquity, called, The Mystery of the Woman and of the Beast, Rev. 5.
7. In contra-distinction, to which the Apostle, who by a Prophetic spirit
foresaw what would come to pass, gives the name of Mystery to the True
Primitive Christianity, this being indeed such, but of quite another nature
than the Superstitious and Corrupt Religion of the Roman Church.

But I am to give a farther and more positive account of this matter; wherein I
will clearly and distinctly assign the true acception and meaning of the word
Mystery in the Writings of the New Testament, which has of late been very much
mistaken and grossly perverted, merely to maintain an Opinion, which some
persons think serviceable to the Cause they have espoused. Christianity is
entitled, a Mystery, not only Comparatively, or in a way of Opposition to
other things (as I have showed already) but Absolutely and Positively, because
it is really so in it self. Take this in these two Particulars; it is called a
Mystery by the Apostle, because, 1. It was so. 2. Because it is so now.

First, I say, it is justly styled a Mystery in regard of what it was
heretofore. The doctrine of Christianity was hid, and shut up a long time: and
to this the following Texts refer, and therefore ought to be applied.
Christianity is said to be a Mystery which was kept secret since the world
began, Romans 16. 25. for it is evident, that by Mystery here is not only meant
the Calling of the Gentiles (as some imagine) which indeed was Mysterious, and
kept secret till Christ's Coming, but the way of the Salvation of men, in
general, by Christ Jesus, which is the grand thing contained in the Gospel.
That this is here to be understood may be gathered from the preceding words of
the Apostle, my Gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, which are synonymous
with the Mystery; and from the subsequent words, made known to all nations for
the obedience of faith, where the great end or design of Christianity is
expressed, viz. that men may be brought to yield obedience to the divine
Commandments by believing the Gospel, for in this very form of words the
Apostle had before in this Epistle told them what was the design of his
Apostleship, and of his preaching the Gospel, it was for obedience to the faith
among all nations, Romans 1. 5. This Faith and this Preaching of it, says he,
were a Mystery heretofore; in all those past perpetual ages, (...) (which we
render since the world began) men had but a very dark Notion of these things:
in all those preceding Dispensations they were scarcely thought of, for though
it is true, there were constantly, through all the several Models and
Administrations of Religion some Intimations of this, and Tendencies, as it
were toward it, yet the notices that could be gathered thence were but mean
and obscure, and they were at the best but faint glimmerings of that Glorious
Light, which was afterward to break forth.

Of this the Apostle speaks again, Ephesians. 3. 3, 4, 5. where the Gospel is called,
the Mystery, and the Mystery of Christ, which in other ages was not made known
unto the sons of men. And in ver. 9. he calls it, the Mystery which from the
beginning of the world had been hid in God. For though the word Mystery in this
place also has a more particular and special respect to that fore-nam'd Secret
of the Conversion of the Gentiles (as appears from the 3, 4, 5 and 6 Verses of
this Chapter) yet it is not wholly restrained to this, but comprehends in it
the whole Gospel Dispensation, the Doctrine of Salvation and Redemption by
Jesus Christ, which he calls preaching the unsearchable riches of Christ, v. 8.
And then immediately in the next verse he calls it a Mystery, a hidden, secret,
unsearchable Mystery; that is, it was so with respect to the former Times, it
had been hid (...) from ages (as it is in the Greek) and that in God, namely
according to his Eternal Decree and Purpose. But because the Apostle applies it
to the wonderful Converting and Reclaiming of the Pagan world, therefore some
hence conclude, that it is not meant of the doctrine of the Gospel and of
Christianity it self. But they are mean Arguers that talk thus, and they
discover themselves to be no Genuine Sons of Reason, for every one knows that
Particulars are not inconsistent with Generals, and that one excludes not the
others. And besides, they show that they are not acquainted with the
Comprehensive Sense of Scripture, and have not studied the Sacred Style, which
is of a wonderful Latitude, and at the same time contains in it both a Singular
and a Common, a Special and a General, a Restrained and a Larger Meaning.

There is another Text that confirms this, Col. 1. 26. where the Evangelical
Dispensation is called a Mystery, which has been hid from ages and from
generations. They palpably misinterpret these words, who apply them wholly to
the admitting of the Gentiles into the Church, for the word mystery refers to
the dispensation of God, i. e. the Evangelical Preaching, and the fulfilling of
his word, viz. by the Ministry of the Gospel, in the immediately foregoing
verse. These, says the Apostle, are a Mystery, because the things which are
now preached and proposed in the Gospel were hid from those that lived in the
former ages. And though it is added, that God has made known to his Saints the
riches of the glory of this mystery, yet this is spoken Comparatively, and not
Absolutely, for these riches are the unsearchable riches of Christ, as we heard
before, that is, they still remain in a great measure hidden and unknown to us.

Thus in these three places it is evident* that the Evangelical Doctrine is
called a Mystery chiefly in respect of the Jews and Gentiles of former ages. It
was concealed from the one under Types and Shadows and Mystical Rites: it was
kept secret from the other by their adhering only to Natural and Philosophical
Principles. In short, the first knew little of it, the second knew nothing;
therefore it is deservedly called a Mystery. And there are no other Texts but
these can be produced where the word mystery is mentioned, with relation to
what Christianity was heretofore. It is true, when our Savior arrived, it was
revealed, and in some manner laid open; but yet not so as that it ceases to be
a Mystery.

Which is the next thing I propounded, viz. that Christianity is still a
Mystery. In this respect, and not with reference to what it was before, it has
this denomination in these Texts of the New Testament, which I shall now
produce, and briefly glance upon. First, our Savior himself calls the Grand
Doctrines of the Gospel, the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13. 11.
where not the Parables (as some fancy) in which those Evangelical Truths were
couched, but the Truths themselves are meant: for if it were otherwise, Christ
would have called them Parables, and not Mysteries: but we find that he calls
them by this latter name, and that in plain contradistinction to Parables, as
may be observed not only in this v. 11. but in 10 and 13. And this is more
plain from the Parallel places in Mark 4. 11. and Luke 8. 10. Those therefore
that confound Parables and Mysteries here have not learned to distinguish of
things aright, they make no difference between Comparisons or Dark
Representations of Spiritual things, and the Things that are Compared and
Represented. Parables are the former, but the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven are the latter. And the reason why many of the Substantial Truths of the
Gospel, or the kingdom of heaven (for in the style of the New Testament these
are the same) are thus denominated, is, because of the great Obscurity and
Difficulty which attend them.

Again, not only our Savior but the Great Apostle uses this language, when he
speaks of the Great Matters of Religion: these are said by him to be the wisdom
of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. not only because they were hidden from former
ages, and from the Princes of this world, v. 8. (both Jewish and Pagan Rulers)
but because they are in themselves Mysterious and Obscure, as the Apostle
explains himself in v. 9. by applying that passage, Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God has
prepared for them that love him. It is no wonder, says he, that they are
ignorant of these Great things, viz. the Method of Redemption and Salvation by
Christ's Undertaking for us, and all the Benefits and Privileges that attend
these (for these are the things which God has prepared and provided in the
Gospel:) it is no wonder that these are not fully known and perceived, because
they are Mysteries, they surpass all humane understanding, they are not to be
comprehended by our weak and shal^ow intellects; though, it is true, the
knowledge of these Great Articles of the Christian Faith, so far as it is
conducible to Salvation is imparted to all true Believers, as it follows, God
has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, v. 10. And these things are said in
several other places of the New Testament to be revealed; which is not to be
understood as if they were so revealed, that we can fully comprehend them, and
see thoroughly into the nature of them, but they are so revealed and discovered,
that we have some knowledge of them, and as much as is requisite (and no Wise
man would desire more:) but more is unknown than is known. Hence we may
understand that Paradox of the Apostle, to know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. The Undertakings of Christ wherein he showed his
transcendent Love to us may be known, and yet they pass knowledge, they far
exceed the utmost conceptions we can form of them.

Next I might add, that the Apostles are called the stewards of the mysteries
of God, 1. Cor. 4. 1. where all Commentators of Note understand by the
Mysteries of God, the Dispensation of the Word as well as of the Sacraments,
and other things belonging to the Evangelical Ministry. Indeed, the whole
Administration of Christianity is meant here: this is a Mystery, yea, even now
it is so, for the Apostle actually applies this Appellation of Stewards of the
Mysteries of God to himself and the Ministers of Christ. Christianity then is a
Mystery: there are several things in it of that exalted and elevated nature,
that humane understandings cannot possibly comprehend them: some doctrines lie
under perpetual Obscurity, they will by no means undergo a scrupulous
examination, they will not bear a strict and severe scrutiny managed by mere
Reason.

Again, the Apostle makes mention of the mystery of his (i. e. Gods) will, Ephesians.
1. which, as the Context plainly shows, is meant of the Wise, but Mysterious
Method of Man's Salvation contained in the Gospel as it is now preached, for
there is not any one word or syllable in the foregoing or following verses,
that seems to restrain it to what it was before, viz. before Christ's Coming.

And again, in chap. 6. of this Epistle, v. 19. we read of the mystery of the
Gospel, where it is simply and irrespectively spoken (that is, without any
regard to former Times and Ages) of Christianity, or the Gospel it self, and
the true nature of it. And that the Apostle refers not to what was past, but
speaks of the Gospel as it was at that time when he preached it, is plain from
this that he immediately adds, that for this very Mystery of the Gospel he was
then an Ambassador in bonds, v. 20. But it may be Objected, how could the
Gospel be Mysterious and Abstruse in it self, when the Apostle in the same
place would have the Ephesians pray for him, that he might make it known? The
Answer is plain from what we observed before upon Ephesians. 3. 19. Though it be
Mysterious and Dark, and may be said to surpass knowledge, yet it is in some
degree to be known, and consequently may be made known, i.e. so far as the
things are capable of it. The Truth and Certainty of all the doctrines of the
Gospel may be discovered, yea and demonstrated to the minds of those who are
fitted and prepared for it: but still the Efficacy of sundry Evangelical Truths
is kept secret from some persons for a time, and some of them are of that
quality, that they will ever surmount and baffle the utmost efforrs of our
Intellectual Powers.

In another place, Col. 2. 2. the Apostle mentions the mystery of God and of
the Father (or rather it should be rendered, even of the Father) and of Christ,
that is, the Gospel or the Christian Religion, wherein God the First Person in
the Glorious Trinity is declared to be the Father of Christ, and Christ the
Second Person is declared to be the Eternal Son of God, and God himself. These
and the like Fundamental Principles of Christianity are Dark and Mysterious;
and because of these Sublime Truths Christianity it self has the name of
Mystery given to it. If there were no other place in the New Testament but
this, where the word mystery is found, it could not create wonder, that the
Socinians, even for the sake of this alone, contend that Christianity is not
simply and absolutely called a Mystery in Scripture, for here the Godhead of
Christ as well as of the Father is asserted, for the word God is attributed to
both Persons ( God even the Father and Christ being the same with God, who is
both Father and Christ) and consequently if they deny Christ to be very God,
(as they do) they must deny the Father to be so too.

I proceed to another Text in the same Epistle, Col. 4. 3. whence it is
manifest, that in the style and idiom of the New Testament the Gospel or
Christianity has the name of a Mystery, for the Apostle expressly calls it the
mystery of Christ (the same with the mystery of the Gospel, in the place before
mentioned) and he requests the Prayers of the Colossians for him, that God
would open unto him a door of utterance to speak this Mystery of Christ, i.e.
freely and openly to preach the Gospel, as appears further from what follows
next, for which I am in bonds, that is, a Sufferer, a Prisoner for my preaching
the Tru^hs of the Gospel. So that it is impo^sible (whatever is suggested to
the contrary) to understand the word here any otherwise than of the do^trine of
the Gospel, as it was then preached by this Apostle: this is Mysterious and
Hidden, and in many things Inexplicable.

So again, in 1 Timothy 3. 9. by the mystery of the faith, which the Ministers and
Officers of the Church are exhorted to hold, i.e. to defend and maintain, must
needs be meant the Evangelical Truths and Doctrines. The holding the mystery of
the faith, is the same here with holding fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy
1. 13. that is, the Articles of the Christian Faith, the doctrines of the
Gospel.

And lastly, in that Text, on which I found the present Discourse, Religion is
called, the Mystery of Godliness: for immediately after the Apostle had made
mention of the Truth, which is held forth as on a Pillar in the Christian
Church, he assigns some of the greatest and fairest branches of it; and in
order to that acquaints us (that we may the better know the true nature of
them) that they are a Mystery, and that not with relation to the ages and
generations before the Gospel, but to the present Mysteriousness of this Sacred
Institution; for by consulting the Context you will find that the words are
spoken Absolutely and Entirely, without any respect to the past times of the
world under Judaism or Gentilism. They represent to us the condition of
Christianity as it is at this day, and as it is in it self considered. And so
this and all the other Texts that I last mentioned, are a baffle to what some
late Advocates of Socinianism pretend to prove, viz. that in the New Testament
the word Mystery is always used to signify something that is intelligible and
clear in it self, and in its own nature, but clouded with figurative and
mystical words; but never to denote a thing that is dark and unconceivable in
it self. The contrary is plain and evident from the forecited Texts, and every
unprejudiced man that duly scans them must needs acknowledge, that Christianity
is there called a Mystery, not in regard of what it was, but what it is.

It is true, there are some other Texts in the New Testament, where the word
Mystery is mentioned, but it has there no relation at all to the present
Matter, viz. the Gospel or Christianity in it self considered. Thus in Romans 11.
25. the General and Final Conversion of the Jews in the last ages of the world
is called a Mystery. In 1 Cor. 13. 2. mysteries is a general word for all
matters of knowledge that are abstruse and dark, and it refers more
particularly to the knowledge of future things, for to know all mysteries seems
to be explicatory of the foregoing phrase, (...) to have a gift of Prophesying,
that is, foretelling and declaring things to come, as (...) is taken in the
preceding chapter, v. 10. In 1 Cor. 14. 2. mysteries is a large and extensive
term, and used by the Apostle to signify those divine doctrines which are
mysterious and difficult, but it is not particularly applied by him, and
therefore I have not made use of it. In 1 Cor. 15. 51. it is restrained to a
particular Truth, which was unknown to the Corinthians at that time, but St.
Paul reveals it to them, behold, says he, I show you a mystery, viz. this,
that we shall not all sleep, those that are alive at at Christ's Coming shall
not die, after the manner of all other men, but we shall all be changed, they
shall undergo such an alteration, that their corruptible state shall be changed
into that which is incorruptible and immortal. The Conjugal State is said to be
a mystery, ^ph. 5. 32. because it shadows forth the Union of Christ and the
Church: as the Sacraments were styled Mysteries by the Ancient Writers of the
Church, because they were a Representation of so great a thing as Christ's
Body. Mystery is applied in the Revelation, chap. 1. v. 20. and chap. 17. v. 7.
to particular Visions and Revelations, which had a mystical and spiritual
meaning in them. In Rev. 10. 7. the mystery of God is said to be finished, or
fulfilled, for (...) here is as much as (...), and it is meant of the Glorious
and Flourishing state of the Christian Church in the last times of the world,
which has been kept as a Mystery from the generality of men, but when the
Seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, then (as we are there assured) that Mystery
shall actually be accomplished and fulfilled. But none of these Texts refer to
our present Matter, as any Understanding Reader may perceive; only I thought
fit to produce them, that they might not be misinterpreted.

And now I have produced every individual place of Scripture, where the word
Mystery occurs, and I have faithfully and impartially set them before the
Considerate in their true and proper light, that they may have a view of the
right and genuine meaning of them, and not misunderstand and misapply the word
(as some have done) to the great prejudice of Truth; but that more especially
they may be convinced of this, that Mystery, as it is applied in the Sacred
Writ to the Christian Doctrines, expresses the Nature of them, and lets us know
that Christianity has this Title given it, because it is a Real Mystery in it
self.

Wherefore (after I have thus cleared the way) I will offer this Proposition,
and make it good, that the Sublime Truths of the Christian Religion still
retain, and ever shall the nature of a Mystery. This in general is evident from
that idea and notion which we have of a Mystery (which we learn from the
Original denotation of the (...) a (...) res abscondita: vel a (...) occludere.
word, whether we borrow it from the Hebrew, or Greek) viz. that it is some
Hidden Secret thing, some thing Shut up: for such are the Chief Doctrines and
Truths of the Gospel; they are in a great measure hid, and as it were locked up
from us. Many of the Articles of our Christian Faith are covered with great
Darkness: a Veil is cast over them, and we are not able to penetrate into them.
Thus Christianity is a Mystery.

But particularly and distinctly to demonstrate this, I will insist upon these
two Heads, 1 Christianity is an incomprehensible Mystery in a special manner to
some. 2. In a more extensive way of speaking, it is so to all.

I begin with the first, Christianity is in a special and singular way a
Mystery to some persons, and ever will be. Those whom I here mean are all such
as (according to the Apostle's Emphatick style) 1 John 5. 15.
lie in their wickedness, continue in their state of Degeneracy and Corruption,
and have felt nothing of the Divine Birth and Renovation, which are the sole
gift of the Holy Spirit. These, as long as they remain in this wretched state,
are 1 John 2. 9.
in darkness (as the same Inspired Writer speaks) that is, they have no
Effectual and Saving Knowledge of the divine Truths of the Gospel, they
understand nothing of them to any purpose: for these cannot be thus known but
by Divine Illumination, by a Supernatural discovery from above, which they
wilfully debar themselves of. Thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, says our Blessed Lord, Mat. 11.
33. Therefore to the former of these the Fundamental doctrines of the Gospel
concerning the Redemption of mankind by the Blood of Jesus, and much more the
doctrines of Regeneration, Faith, Self-denial, Mortification, etc. are no other
than Mysteries, yea insignificant Iargon to them. We hear the same Infallible
Master speaking at another time thus, It is given (it is a Particular Donation;
a Special Grant) unto you (my Disciples) to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of Heaven, but to them (i.e. the whole Multitude, who are not Enlightened) it is
not given, Mat. 13. 11. There are such representations of those Heavenly and
Divine things made by the Holy Spirit in the hearts of the Regenerate as are
not to be found in others. Which is according to those other Sayings of our
Savior, The Spirit of Truth the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him (i.e. in a Saving way) but ye know him, Joh. 14. 17. O
righteous Father, the world has not known thee. Joh. 17. 25. They are in the
dark, and all thy Sacred Truths are Riddles to them.

And this is the Apostolical doctrine, The Natural man receives not (discerns
not, entertains not) the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The Natural
or Animal man here meant, says an Ancient Father of the Church, is (...).
Chrysostom. in loc.
he that lives according to the flesh, and has not his mind yet enlightened by
the Spirit. But he adds this to the Character, That (...)
he is one that has only that inbred and humane knowledge, which the Creator
furnishes all men's minds with. And so other Ancient Writers interpret the
words, as we shall hear afterward. According to the Learned In locum.
Grotius, (...) is not the same with (...), not one that is governed by the
affections of his fleshly part, but he that is lead only by the light of Humane
Reason, he that has no other light but that of Nature. This Interpretation of
this Learned Writer is the more considerable, because the persons I Am concerned
with at present have so great an esteem and veneration (and that not unjustly)
for him, and boast that he is theirs. It appears they are mistaken, for now he
is ours, whilst he directly and expressly avows the Apostle's Natural or Animal
Man to be one that is wholly conducted by the light of Natural Reason and
Humane Wisdom. Such a one, having no Supernatural guidance and direction,
cannot (as long as he is such) attain to a Right Knowledge of the things of
God, because they are foolishness unto him, as the Apostle here subjoyns. Nay,
he adds further, he cannot know them, there is no Possibility of the thing.
That the Natural man should rightly perceive the things of the Spirit of God,
implies as evident a Contradiction as to say, a Blind man should be able to see
things visible. So a Dr. Iackson, Vol. 1. Sent. 3. Book 4.
Judicious Divine of our Church expresses himself concerning this matter. The
ground of the Apostle's Assertion follows, which is very remarkable: These
things (says he) of the Spirit of God cannot be known by a Natural man, because
they are Spiritually discerned. Spiritual things are discovered and known in a
peculiar way, and such as is proper to Good and Holy men only. These persons
have an inward sense and conviction of the Reality of the things, and they know
the true Value and Worth of them. They know them so as to make them their own
proper Concern, they know them so as to feel an influence from them on their
hearts, affections and lives. Thus a Religious person knows and discovers these
things in an other manner than Natural and Unregenerate men do.

It is true, the knowledge of both these is alike as to some sort of
discoveries relating to Holy things. Thus not only the Grammatical, Critical,
Rhetorical, Historical, and Philosophical part of the Bible may be understood
by the one as well as the other (for the Worst men may have as great an insight
into these as the Best) but even the Theological part of this Inspired Book, so
far as is meant by it the mere Speculative and Notional discovery of Divine
Truths, may be equally known by both. But to know the Truths contained in this
Sacred Volume so as to be bettered by them, is from Supernatural Light alone:
and this is it which distinguishes the Spiritual from the Natural man. This
latter falls short of the other in this, that he has not attained to that
Spiritual discerning of Evangelical truths which the Apostle speaks of, and
without which it is utterly impossible to have such a knowledge of them as will
be effectual to Salvation and Happiness. I will add only one Text more, 2 Cor.
4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost in whom the God of
this world (i.e. Satan) has blinded the minds of them who believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
shine unto them. Here it is implied, that the Gospel is hid from some persons,
yea, and we are told from whom, viz. such as (according to the foregoing style
of the Apostle) are Natural men, those that live in their sins, and suffer
their minds to be blinded and perverted, to be corrupted and debauched by the
Diabolick Spirit, the Prince and Ruler of this lower world. To such the Gospel
and the Truths of it are mere Darkness. Thus it abundantly appears from the
Sacred Writ (whence we are to fetch our discoveries concerning these things)
that the Proposition which I laid down is an impregnable and unshaken Truth,
viz. that Christianity retains still the nature of a Mystery, and that more
especially as so some persons.

The Reason is plain, because Natural Strength is not sufficient of it self to
discover these Divine Truths. Unless the Soul be illuminated by the Holy
Spirit, these remain unintelligible, and wholly ineffectual and useless as to
any Saving virtue and efficacy. This I take to be the meaning of our Savior's
words, John 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Unless (as the Apostle speaks) he be renewed in the spirit of his mind, and
that by the power of the Holy Ghost, he cannot understand aright the Truths of
the Gospel, which is called frequently the kingdom of God, and of heaven: he
cannot see, he cannot enter into (as it is expressed in v. 5.) those divine
things. This is that which our Savior avers, Mat. 11. 27. Neither knows any
man the Father but the Son, and he to whosoever the Son will reveal him, viz.
by an Inward and Effectual Discovery, for they had the Outward Revelation then.
When the Apostle St. Peter acknowledged Christ to be the Son of the living God,
our Savior told him, that flesh and blood had not revealed this to him, but
his Father who is in heaven, Mat. 16. 17. It was not the work of Nature, but of
the Spirit of God the Father that had effectually wrought this Knowledge in
him. This sort of Light is peculiarly from the Father of lights: this Singular
Wisdom is from above: and accordingly (as some interpret that place, John 3.
13.) the knowledge of these Heavenly and Spiritual things is called ascending
up to heaven. From thence is derived that Insight into the things of God, which
no Natural man has attained to. For in this Degenerate State of mankind the
Great Points of our Religion are under a Seal, and locked up from us, and are
never to be disclosed till a Divine Light opens our eyes. We must of necessity
remain Blind till that Eye Salve, Rev. 3. 18. be effectually applied. And it
can be applied only by the Holy Spirit, whose proper work it is to dispel that
spiritual darkness, whereby the mind is indisposed to understand and discern
divine matters aright.

This is variously expressed in the Holy Writings, viz. by such terms as these,
shining in our hearts, to give the light of knowledge, 2 Cor. 4. 6. giving us
an understanding to know, 1 John 5. 20. enlightening the eyes of our
understanding, Ephesians. 1. 18. an Unction from the Holy One, 1 John. 2. 20. Which
cannot be better paraphrased and explained than in the words of an Eminent
Prelate of our Church, Bishop Pearson on the Creed. p. 327, 328.
The same Spirit which reveals the Object of Faith generally to the Universal
Church, does also illuminate the understanding of such as believe, that they
may receive the Truth: For Faith is the gift of God, not only in the Object,
but also in the Act. And afterward in the Close he has these words, We affirm
not only the Revelation of the Will of God, but also the Illumination of the
Soul of Man to be part of the office of the Holy Spirit of God, against the Old
and New Palagians. So that Judicious Writer. It is this Holy Instructor that
disposes the mind to receive the light of Divine Truth by curing it of its
Natural Darkness and Ignorance, and by preparing the heart to receive its Rays.
There is required a Special Grace of the Holy Ghost to enlighten the Soul, and
to make due impressions upon it. The ^aculty of the Understanding must be
puri^ied, and so made fit to apprehend Spiritual objects. This is part of the
Renewed Nature and Regenerate Principle; and consequently where this is not,
the Great Doctrines of Christianity are Hidden Secrets and Unknown Mysteries.

From what has been said, I will only draw these Two Corollaries.

1. It is no wonder that the Followers of Socinus will not acknowledge
Christianity to be a Mystery, for they hold Small. de Iustificat. disp. 4. And
cont. Frantz. disp. 12. And the Trinitarian Scheme of Religion, p. 21, 24, 26.
there is no necessity of ^ Supernatural Light, no need of Illumination from
the Spirit, in order to the due apprehending and understanding of the Divine
Truths of the Gospel. There is, they say, in all men that natural ability,
whereby they are capable of discerning all Spiritual and Heavenly matters in a
spiritual way. They are enabled by virtue of an Inbred Power in their minds
(abstract from what is Supernatural) to perceive and believe, as they ought,
all the Evangelical doctrines propounded to them. De Scripturar. Interpret.
Wolzogen ridicules the Internal and Supernatural Illumination I have been
speaking of. De usu Rationis in Theolog. p. 9.
Velthusius, an Author that is much applauded by some of Socinus's follwers,
tells us plainly, That the knowledge of a regenerate and unregenerate man,
concerning the things and mysteries of faith, differs not from the light of
Reason. I appeal to the Intelligent, whether this be not an approach to an
Heresy long since condemned in the Christian Church. It is well known, that it
was the Pelagian Error to assert, that men can attain to a perfect knowledge of
their duty and an ability to perform it by mere Natural Reason, by the bare
help of that light which Nature gives them. And in this (as well as some other
Points) the Socinians symbolize with those Ancient Heretics. They cry up
Reason as the Only thing in Religion: this with them, like the Archaeus among
the Chemists, does all feats, produces all operations. Though these men Mr.
(...) Exceptions examined. p. 44, 45.
seem to be great Abhorrers of those who talk of the Light within them, yet it
is evident, that they allow of the very same Principle and Practice: they equal
the Light of Reason to the Holy Scripture, and say it will serve instead of
this, and that it is as good as Scripture, because all men may be Saved by it.
Therefore this they urge as the One thing Necessary in Religion, and assure
their Proselytes, that this alone is sufficient to conduct them to Eternal
Happiness. Which is not unlike the Attempt of those late Jesuits, who would
teach the people of China and Siam the way to Heaven by the Mathematics. These
men whom I am speaking of pretend to effect every thing in Christianity, and to
climb Heaven it self by mere Natural Strength and Humane Accomplishments: as
appears from the express words of the De Proph. Christi munere. cap. 6.
Racovian Catechism, That there is no need of the inward gift of the Holy
Spirit, that we may believe the Gospel: no, not at all. They have another way
of Believing, viz. by a strength of their own, by the natural conduct and
improvement of their Faculties. And if True Faith, then such a Knowledge as
accompanies Salvation is to be acquired after the same manner, and no other;
for a man need not be beholding to the Holy Spirit for it. It is no wonder,
that those who talk thus find no Mysteries in Christianity.

2. This gives an account of that Scarcity of true Divine Knowledge and
Religion, which is observable in the world. There are Secrets in the Christian
Faith which are known but by a few, and therefore True Christians must needs be
Rare. There is indeed an Equivocal sort of Christians in the world, who boldly
assume the Name, but are strangers to the Thing it self: they boast of that
Honorable Title, but are regardless of the True Import of it, and (to use the
Apostle's words) though they think they know something, they know nothing as
they ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. These are very Numerous, and every place
swarms with them; but the number of those who have a Practical Knowledge and
Sense of Gospel Truths is very mean and low. The Multitude of those who derive
their denomination from Christ have not attained to this Accomplishment; and
the reason is, because it is by their own default hidden from them, they are
unwilling to receive the Divine Supernatural Light into their minds. Let us
implore the assistance of the Holy Spirit, the Great and Heavenly Mystagogue,
the Effectual Interpreter of Divine Secrets, and who alone can discover them to
us, that he would vouchsafe to enlighten and irradiate our souls in such a
manner as shall be really beneficial to us. Let us beg the aid of the Spirit of
Truth, to lead us into the Advantageous Knowledge of all Evangelical Truths,
and to enable us to feel them as well as know them. Thus much of the First
Branch of the Proposition founded on the words.

Christianity Mysterious. A Sermon, showing that there are Mysteries properly
so called in the Christian Religion: With the True Reasons of it, and the
Natural Consequences from it.
Preached before the University, at St. Mary's in Cambridge, June 29. 1697. And
since much Enlarged.
1 TIMOTHY III. 16. And without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness.
HAving in a former Discourse showed, that Christianity is a Mystery to some
more especially, now I will pass to the Second thing I undertook, viz. to prove
that it is such, even in a general way, unto every one. There are several Great
Truths in the Gospel which the Spiritual Man can no more arrive to a full
knowledge of than the Natural man can. With relation and respect even to All
persons whomsoever the sublime Truths of the Christian Religion still retain,
and ever shall the nature of a Mystery. And I choose the rather to treat on
this Subject, because I verily believe it is of that nature and influence, that
if it were duly entertained, it would be serviceable to put an end to all the
Disputes and Cavils against the Doctrine of the Trinity, and other Important
Points that relate to it. There would be no farther Contest about these if the
abovesaid Proposition did but take place in men's minds. This must needs be so,
at least in the nature of the thing it self, because when it shall appear, that
there are Fathomless Secrets in Christianity, and that they were designed to be
so, yea, and to be so to all as well as to some, this cannot but supersede all
Controversies about (...). This with ingenuous and rational Spirits solves all
Difficulties, this with religious and pious minds answers all Doubts, and fully
satisfies all Scruples. This therefor is the thing which I will evince, that
^here are such Secrets as these in our Reli^^on, that there are many things in
this Holy Institution which we have but a Dark and Imperfect notice of, and it
is impossible for us to attain to any other: and these are properly styled
Mysteries.

That one Text alone, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. is sufficient to prove this, We know in
part, says the Apostle, which refers to the knowledge mentioned in the
foregoing verse, by which (as it is agreed by all) is to be understood the
knowledge of Divine and Evangelical matters: and then it follows by way of
natural consequence, We prophecy in part, for our instructing of others must
be answerable to our own knowledge, which is but in part. He superadds, Now we
see through a glass, that is, either as men looking through a Perspective on an
Object a great way off, and therefore made Obscure by its great Distance from
the eye; or, as persons beholding themselves in a Glass or Mirror, which manner
of expression St. James uses to signify a Slight View, 1 Iam. 23. (and so
(...) may be the same with (...).) But this Apostle thinks not this sufficient
to set forth the Meanness and Deficiency of our Knowledge of Sacred matters,
but he adds another Emphatick expression, (...) in a riddle, i.e. in a very
Obscure, dark and intricate manner, and therefore our Translators render it [
darkly.] The sum of what the Apostle says, is this, that we have but a Partial
discovery of some Divine Truths, our Sight of them is very Imperfect: there are
certain Points of Christianity which are not within the sphere of our
Capacities, but are in themselves Aenigmatical and Abstruse.

And these passages are the more considerable, if we call to mind the peculiar
quality of the Person, who writes thus: It was that Apostle who was famous for
his Knowledge, he, who among all the Apostles was the only man that was brought
up a Scholar, for we read that he was educated in the School of Gamaliel, a
Celebrated Hebrew Doctor and Professor, and thence was stocked with all the
Jewish Literature. And he that was well skilled in the Heathen Poets (as his
Quotations in the New Testament let us know) was questionless not defective in
other parts of Humane Learning, which he had the advantage of furnishing
himself within his own Native City, that of Tarsus, which was at that time a
famous University. And these Excellencies joined with his own Natural Parts and
Endowments, which, (as we may gather from his Acute Reasonings and Arguings on
all occasions) were of the highest pitch, could not but render him a very
Accomplished Person, such as was able to discern and judge of things in the
best manner, and to know and comprehend whatever was to be known and
comprehended of them. But we are to remember this further, that his knowledge
in Divine and Sacred things was as eminent, for even as to these he had those
Helps which other Christians had not, yea, which the rest of the Apostles were
not honored with, for he tells, Gal. 1. 11, 12. That the Gospel which was
preached of him was not after man, for he neither received it of man, neither
was he taught it but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. He was in an
Extraordinary and unparalleled manner called to the Office by Christ himself
then in heaven: he had Immed^ate declarations of God's will by Visions and
Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. 1. yea, by abundance of Revelations, v. 7. for he had
the matchless dignity and privilege to be caught up to the third heaven, into
paradise (as he otherwise expresses it) the Seat of the Divine Majesty, and the
place of the Blessed; and there he heard those unspeakable words (those
Doctrines and Truths) which it is not possible for a man to utter, i. e. fully,
v. 4. Then were displayed before him those Mysteries and Profound Doctrines
which his Writings every where abound with; several of which are not so much as
mentioned in the Writings of the other Apostles* which plainly shows, that he
far excelled them in Spiritual Knowledge, and in the understanding of some of
the Main Heads of the Christian Religion.

And yet, behold! this Apostle who was thus blessed with all manner of
Intellectual Accomplishments, and was possessor of all the Knowledge that
Nature or Art and his own happy Genius could furnish him with, and (which is
unspeakably much more) all that Knowledge that God himself vouchsafed to infuse
into him, and inspire him with: Behold! this very Apostle is the man who uses
here this humble and mean language, We know in part, we see through a glass
darkly. When he says we, he means himself as well as other Christians; nay, it
appears that he chiefly and principally intends himself, for he changes the
plural into the singular, v. 12. Now I know in part, as much as to say,
notwithstanding all my advantages of Knowing much more than others, I
acknowledge my self to be but a Smatterer, a Novice: I own my self to have but
a mean and imperfect insight into the High and Mystical Points of the Gospel:
and if they were not such, I should not have so short and partial a knowledge
of them. This is an unanswerable place of Scripture, to prove that there are
Mysteries in Christianity, such Divine Truths which no quickness of thoughts,
no sharpness and sagacity of mind can wholly reach. And therefore if St. Paul
be in the right, we know who have taken the wrong part. If Plato could say of
the Rites of Sacrificing and Divine Worship, (...) (...) Epinom.
It is impossible for our mortal nature to have any knowledge of these things,
surely then our conceptions concerning the Sublime Points of Christianity
(which is the Noblest and Highest Dispensation of Religion) must needs be weak
and shallow. (...). Ex^sit. Fide^.
Divine matters are not clear and manifest of themselves to men, said one of
the Greek Sages, quoted by Justin Martyr. To the same purpose Clement of
Alexandria cites, that eminent passage of Plato in his Timaeus, (...).
The only way to learn Truth is to be taught it of God himself, or of those
that are from God. Those are notable words of Iamblicus, a Platonic
Philosopher, (...), etc. De vita Pythag.
It is not easy to know what things God is pleased with, unless we have
conversed with those who have heard them from God, or we have heard God
himself, or we have attained to that knowledge by some Divine Art. These are
the apprehensions of Improved Heathens concerning Religious matters: and shall
not those who have attained to clearer notions believe the same, with a more
special relation to the doctrines of the Gospel? As these things were not at
first found out by Man, so they cannot be comprehended by him. As they were not
discovered by humane skill and art, so they can never be fully known and
explained by them. Thus they are universally a Mystery.

It is true, (and I am very forward to grant it) that the Christian Religion is
stocked even with Natural Principles, such as are in themselves manifest. Even
that Model of Religion, which is made up wholly of the Law of Nature, (and
therefore is called Natural Religion) is here entirely received. All Rational
and Moral dictates are incorporated into this Institution. Here are Admirable
Notions which carry with them an Intrinsic Evidence, as an undeniable
demonstration of their Worth and Excellency: here are Reason and Morality at
their Height. It was excellently said of an Ancient Writer of the Church,
Absit ut hoc in nobis Deus oderit, in quo reliquis ^nimanti^us excellentiores
creavit. Augustine. Epist. 222.
Far ^e it that God should hate in us that very thing wherein he has created
us more excellent than other creatures. So we may say, Far be it that
Christianity should disallow that very thing in us, which distinguishes our
nature from that of Brutes, and gives us a Preference to them. Some of the
Mahometans have a conceit, that Idiots and Madmen are Inspired persons, that
those who have so little of Man, have the more of God. But this is an idle
fancy, and unworthy of our Humane Nature, as well as of the Supreme Being it
self, who was the Author of it. The Best Brains are fittest for Religion, and
even for the Best Religion, Christianity. It is admirably showed by a The
Honorable Robert Boil, in his (...)
Worthy Person, that the Christian Religion suits even with a Philosophic
Genius. I question not but it may be made evident from Strict Reason that the
Main System of the Christian Theology is uniform and harmonious in it self, and
conformable to all the Divine Attributes and Perfections, that the Coming of
Christ in the flesh was requisite in order to the Redemption of lost Man, that
his Undertatakings were the most Rational Expedient for the restoring of
mankind, that they were the most Proper and Suitable Method to reduce lapsed
creatures, and raise them up again after their fall, and that Christ's Divinity
was no more impaired by being joined to the Humane Nature, than the Soul of Man
is by its Union with the Body. These and several things of this kind I could
make clear and evident, and thereby show that Christianity is consonant to the
most sober Reflections we can make on things, that it is agreeable to the most
solid and natural Reasonings we can form. For we are not to imagine (as some
Enthusiastic Spirits do) that Divine Revelation contradicts the principles of
Reason: this being a certain Truth, that it is impossible to know that any
Revelation, i. e. any Revealed doctrine is from God, unless we be first
Reasonably satisfied that it is from him. Besides, Reason is from God as well
as Revelation, and therefore if we receive the latter, we must on the very same
ground attend to the former, because that is from God no less than this.
Wherefore those who oppose one to the other make ^od contradict himself,
because he is the A^thor of both.

And here I cannot but take notice of the Injustice of some late Penmen, who
represent the Asserters of the Trinity, and of such like Points of Faith as
persons that are Enemies to Reason, and such as will by no ^^ans admit of a
Rational Religion. This they craftily urge and aggravate, to blacken the Cause
which they have set themselves against: but there is nothing of Truth in the
accusation, but (as they manage it) a great deal of Falsehood and Wrong. For we
give unto Reason the things that are Reason's, we assert the use and necessity
of it in Religion, yea in the Christian Religion, and we are able and ready to
defend and maintain a considerable part of it by Rational Principles. We most
freely profess with Justin the Philosopher and Martyr, That (...). Apolog. 1.
whatever was well said by any of the Philosophers, Poets and Historians is to
be found in the Christian Writings of the Bible. We declare, that the Christian
Institution commends and enforces all the Maxims of Morality, and the Natural
Religion of mankind, and the Common Dictates of Reason. Those therefore are
very Injurious to us and to Truth itself, who labor (as we see they do) to
fill Men's heads with other apprehensions.

But though it be thus in the general, yet there are Particular Doubts and
Difficulties relating to this Holy Institution: there are some certain Points
which are in themselves Mysterious, Incomprehensible and Inconceivable, and
will not submit to the nicer Scrutinies of Humane Reason. The ^ery Deity it
self (which is the very foundation of all Christianity) is a (...), and the
greatest of all Mysteries. Whence it was the acknowledgment of (...)* a very
Wise and Good Man, God is Great, and we know him not, Job 36. 26. We cannot
fully understand his Nature and Attributes, yea we are capable of knowing but
very little of them. Which is fitly expressed by that of the Apostle, He
dwells in the light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 16. This
inaccessible Splendour admits not of a full view. The more we gaze upon this
Glorious Sun, the more we are dazzled, and almost blinded. In some case De Deo
etiam vera (...) p^riculosum est. Cyprian. in (...).
it is unsafe and perilous, says a Pious Father, to speak what is True of
God. -- Me^^us scitur nesciendo. Augustine. l. 11. de Ord.
^^e is best known by a modest (...), ^^ith another. (...)* Clem. Alex. S^rom.
l. 4.
We know not wh^^ he is, but only what he is not, says a Third. And it is
observable, that Socinus himself in the first Chapter of his Prae^^ctions
sti^^y cont^nds (though upon no solid grounds at all) that the Existence of God
is not discoverable by the light of Nature and Reason: how then can he and his
^ollowers imagine that the Divine Nature and Essence are to be comprehended by
huma^e thoughts? If we cannot, according to him, discover that God is, how
shall we understand what he is? There are several unutterable Abstrusities and
Difficulties in the notion of an Eternal Self-subsisting Being. We cannot
penetrate into the Omniscience and Omnipresence of God: we have not adequate
conceptions of his Immutability, his Justice, his Faithfulness: and none of his
Perfections and Excellencies are thoroughly understood by us. So that according
to the way of Arguing, which some men use, viz. that Nothing must be received
in Religion but what is exactly according to plain Reason, they may renounce
the Deity it self, for in the notions we have of the Nature and Attributes of
God there are some things above our Reason.

The Manner how Three real Subsistencies are united in One Essence or Substance
of the Godhead is not comprehensible, but the Holy Scripture puts it beyond all
doubt that it is so. There are many Principles and Propositions in Christianity
which are far above our weak capacities. There are several things in the
Conduct of our Redemption and Salvation, the exact knowledge of which is hidden
from us: at least the Modes and Circumstances belonging to them are not to be
comprehended, though we are sure of the General Truth. There are sundry
Difficult things occur concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, but we
have no reason to disbelieve the Doctrine it self. (...). (...).
I know, says St. Chrysostom, that the Son was begotten of the Father, but how
I know not. I know he was born of a Virgin, but I cannot tell the Manner of it:
for we acknowledge the production of Both Natures, and yet the Manner of both
we are not able to declare. So as to the Union of the Divine and Humane Natures
in Christ's Person, we have not an accountable idea of it, though the thing it
self is agreeable to Reason. We cannot answer all the doubts concerning
Christ's Satisfaction, but upon incontestable grounds we may be convinced of
the Truth of it. The Resurrection of the same Body at the last day is an
unquestionable Article of the Christian Faith: but if we be asked how a dead
body crumbled into dust, and perhaps dissipated by the winds into several
quarters, or how a body converted into the substance of other creatures, after
innumerable introductions of new shapes, preserves its proper Identity and
Individuation; if we be asked, I say, How this can be? The Answer in brief can
(...) no other than this, We cannot tell. But it will be said, This is an
unbecoming Answer for any man that pretends to Knowledge and Understanding in
the matters of Religion. I reply, This is no ways unbecoming, but to pretend to
give Reasons and Accounts, when we are not able to do it, is very unbecoming
and absurd. And many other Points of Christianity are hid from our Natural
Reason, and are Inscrutable Secrets. Our Religion has many Mazes and
Labyrinths in it which we cannot extricate our selves out of. The Gospel not
only was, but is a Mystery: it is so now, and will continue so to the end of
the world.

If we enquire into the Reasons of this, so far as we are able to judge, there
may be this Account given of it:

1. That which Solomon suggests to us ought to have the preference to all other
Reasons that can be assigned, It is the glory of God, says he, to conceal a
thing, Prove. 25. 2. The Supreme Being is pleased to hide the knowledge of
several things from men, because this redounds to the Honor and Glory of the
Divine Majesty. Hereby the Sovereignty of the Great Disposer of all things is
displayed to mankind: hereby his Transcendent Nature, which infinitely
^urpasses that of all Created beings, is proclaimed to the world. This was the
sense of another Wise and Holy man, who speaking of the Almighty, says, He
gives not account of any of his matters, Job 33. 13. Though sometimes, yea,
frequently he vouchsafes to render a Reason of what he says, as well as of
what he does, yet in many cases he thinks fit to deal with us otherwise, and
not to answer, or account for all his matters, as the Original has it. Though
we demand a Reason, he is not obliged to give, because (as it is rightly
suggested by the same Pious Observer) God is greater than man, v. 12. He is
infinitely exalted above the nature of mortal men, and therefore it is
unsufferable boldness to search into his Divine Secrets, and to promise our
selves a full comprehension of them. For these things are concealed from us on
purpose to give us an assurance of the Infinite Nature and Wisdom of our Maker.
We hence are effectually taught, that God is not like one of us, that his
Essence and Properties are of an immense and unsearchable nature, not to be
comprehended by us. Even concerning Visible and Natural things, One of the
Ancients ^peaks thus, (...). Chryso^^* ^om. 12. ad Pop. Antioch.
If any of them surpass your understanding, and you cannot find out the reason
of them, then for that very reason glorify the Creator, because his
Transcendent Wisdom showed in these things exceeds your apprehension. Much more
then may we, nay ought we to pronounce the same concerning Divine and Heavenly
matters: the Transcendent Nature of them discovers a Wisdom much more so. This
is a convictive proof to sober and thoughtful minds, that God is Great and Wise
above what humane intellects can conceive. This then is a sufficient account
(if there were no other) of the Unsearchableness of the Divine Nature, and
those things that immediately depend upon it, and flow from it.

2. It is God's pleasure to render Divine Truths more Venerable by their
Obscurity. We might say, and that truly, with a Learned Christian Philosopher,
That the (...). Synes.
Darkness of these Sacred things, and our ignorance concerning them are useful
to preserve and uphold the Reverence and Majesty of them. If the sacred
doctrines of the Gospel were to be prostituted to the capricious reasonings of
vain men, if we could exactly fathom all the depths of Divinity, we should not
have that superlative Admiration and Regard for them which they deserve: and we
plainly see, that those who pretend to lay them open, do in reality undervalue
them, and lower the Excellency of them. We have reason therefore (...) think,
that it was designed by Heaven, that the Abstruseness of Divine matters should
inhanse our Esteem of them, and render them in our apprehension (what they are
in themselves) August, Great and Venerable. And consequently, we must not
reject the doctrines conveyed to us in the Holy Scripture, because they are
thus Obscure, and exalted above our natural light, but we are rather to admire
and reverence them because they are so, i. e. because they are of so high and
transcendent a nature.

3. This likewise might be added, that it is the divine will and pleasure, that
not only our Estimation and Reverence, but our Diligence and Sedulity should be
excited by this means. For though we cannot reach to a full knowledge of these
Profound matters, and though we are forbid a bold and saucy prying into them,
yet there is always something gained by a Humble and Modest Searching into
them, and by an industrious and careful Enquiry into the Holy Oracles, where
these infallible dictates are. For as there are Plain and Obvious Truths in the
Sacred Writings, so there are others that are Abstruse and Perplexed, to check
our Negligence and Oscitancy, our carelessness end unconcernedness, and to rouse
our Industry, and encourage our pains and study: for those portions of
Scripture wherein these Truths are contained, will abundantly employ these, and
recompense our labor. Even on this account it was fitting that there should be
some Mysteries in our Holy Religion.

4. The Chief and Grand Reason to be assigned of this matter (and which I will
more amply insist upon) is this, that the very Nature of the things themselves,
which we are treating of, renders them Mysterious and Difficult. For things of
an Infinite and Transcendent nature are above the reach of finite
understandings. Such is God, such is the Sacred Trinity, and such are those
Doctrines which I mentioned before, which immediately relate to the Godhead it
self and its Attributes, or the Divine Persons subsisting in the Godhead, or
more particularly Christ Jesus, and his Blessed Undertakings for us, which are
the proper matter of the Gospel, the knowledge of which depends wholly on the
Will of God; for no mortal man could have any notice of them, unless God
himself had been pleased to discover them. And now when they are discovered,
they are of that high and soaring nature, that no humane creature can reach
them: they are of that towering pitch, that they are above all finite
intellect. More especially the nature of the Sacred Trinity is such, that it is
above being described: which we are not to be dissatisfied with, for if the
Holy Trinity were not abstruse and mysterious, it would not be what it is, and
what it cannot otherwise be. Therefore he that expects this doctrine should be
Clear, fancies an Impossibility, both as to the Trinity it self, and as to us.
For this Infinite and Perfect Trin-Vnity is in its own nature unsearchable, and
in respect of our finite and imperfect Understanding is much more so. Wherefore
those Propositions which belong to this Infinite Subject must needs be dark and
intricate, and cannot be otherwise. How can we imagine we should be able to
grasp these things which considered in themselves are of so elevated a nature?
It is certain we cannot with reason imagine or expect this.

And we may be convinced of it from this one Consideration (which I will
somewhat enlarge upon) viz. that many things of a meaner and lower degree, such
as the Common Works of Nature, and the Phenomenon of the Visible and Sensible
World have raised great Disputes, and after all the exactest enquiries into
them, remain still hidden and obscure: How then can we expect that Divine and
Supernatural things should be void of all Obscurity? An Acute Naturalist
speaking of things of the former sort, tells us, Nobis rimari illa and
conjecturare in occulto tantum licet. -- Neque enim omnia Deus humanis oculis
not a fecit. Quota pars operis tanti nostris oculis committitur? Senec. Not.
Quest. Lib. 7.
That he pretends not to Science, but contents himself with bare guessing; for
God (says he) has not laid open all things to humane sight and perception:
there is a considerable part of this great Work, which the Wise Maker of all
things has thought good to hide from our Eyes. Thus this Great Philosopher
ingenuously owns his Ignorance, and at the same time the Wise Disposal of
Heaven. That Noted and Trite Problem of the Divisibility of Matter or Quality
has posed all the Learned heads in the world: and yet upon this one Property
of Matter depends the whole System of Geometry, and all the Mathematick Arts
and Sciences, which (above all others) boast of their Certainty and
Demonstration. It is not to this very day unanimously agreed what the True
Scheme of the world is, and whether the Sun or the Earth be the Center of the
Universe. If we consider it well, it is a manifest Argument of our shallow
Understanding and Sense, that we cannot tell whereabouts we are, and which part
of the World is our Situation. It is another proof of our Ignorance, yea of the
defectibility of our Senses, that we dispute whether the Earth moves or no. A
great many Learned and Wise Men of late, and some professed Mathematicians (not
the worst Judges in the case) hold it does: and yet ten thousand of Considerate
heads before this never thought of it. And our Senses tell us no such thing,
but the contrary, viz. that the Earth stands Still, and is Immovable. This is
certain that the Sense and Feeling of all men in the world are mistaken, and
about their Proper Object, and that Continually (which is somewhat hard to
digest) or else the Earth is not moved, is not a Planet, has no diurnal
Revolution.

That the doctrine of the Earth is Obscure and Difficult, we have a Remarkable
Proof in the late Theorists, and others that have appeared on the stage. They
have been pleased to thrust very Harsh and Incredible things upon us; and (to
speak freely) there are some of them that are so far from explaining and giving
a rational account of the Ph^nomena of the Earth, that they have rendered this
doctrine more obscure and perplexed than ever it was: besides that, they have
entrenched upon the Mosaic Verity, and have abandoned that Account of the
Creation, and particularly of the Earth, which the Inspired Writer has
delivered. This is certain, that seeing they run a tilt against one another,
they cannot all of them be in the right about their notions of the Earth; and
it is a question whether any of them have light upon the Truth, excepting what
One of them has delivered as matter of Fact, and built upon Clear Experiment
and Observation, which we owe to his Indefatigable Industry and Great Sagacity.
In brief, it must be acknowledged, that they are very Ingenious and Learned
Conjectures, but some of their respective Hypothesis and Solutions are loaded
with such Difficulties (for on that account it is that I mention these things)
they are loaded (I say) and oppressed with such Difficulties as are able to
stifle and choke not only the restif and hide-bound Faith of a Socinian, but
the ordinary belief and assent of a Plain Philosopher, be he never so Credulous.

Then if we come to Particulars belonging to this Terrestrial Globe, with what
Perplexities are we beset? Are not only the Old but the New Opinions concerning
them every day quarreled with, and their Celebrated Authors and Founders
turned out of the Schools? And what is the Reason? Because of the Uncertainty,
Difficulty and Mystery in every thing. How unsearchable are the most common and
obvious Operations of Nature? Who can by any Material Cause solve the Cohesion
of parts in bodies? Who can assign the True Principle of Gravity, or the Cause
of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea, or of the Attraction of the Lodestone,
or of several other things of that nature? To instance more particularly in a
Plant, tell me, if you can, the Pedigree of this poor Vegetable: blazon the
Coat of its Seminal Form. Say, wherein consists the Life and Death of this sort
of beings. Show me exactly how a few Seeds buried in the Earth, and entombed
with clods, have so flourishing a Resurrection. Give an account of the whole
series and progress of their Motion, the gradual and successive process of
Vegetation in the root, fibers, pith, stalks, branches, blossoms, flowers,
leaves, fruit, and by what Rules they direct their course so methodically. How
is it that they stop at such a Stature and just Proportion? What causes the
Diversity of their Shape and Figure? of their Color and Smell? what produces
the excellent variety of their Qualities and Virtues? There is no man upon
earth (whatever pretenses he may make) is able thoroughly to resolve himself or
others about all or any of these Queries.

If I should pass to the Mineral Regions, there a Mr. Boil, Not. Hist. p. 13.
Celebrated Vertuoso tell us, it is acknowledged by a Great Naturalist, That it
is impossible for one man to understand thoroughly the nature of Antimony: and
how then shall he know all the rest of the Subterraneous World? And then, in
the Animal Kingdom, there are yet more Puzzling Enquiries: the Remarkable
Rarieties in the contexture of a despicable Insect are enough to entertain a
Man's study all his days, (if he had nothing else to do) and at last he would
have cause to complain that he has found out but little. For, as a Judge Hale,
of Humilit^.
Judicious Enquirer tells us, Never was the man yet in the world that could
give an accurate account of the nature of a Fly, or a Worm in its full
comprehension. It has passed for current doctrine, that Insects are frequently
begot of Putrified matter, as well as by Univocal Generation; but Malpig^i,
(...), Lewenh^ek, ^^ammerdam, Dr. Li^^er, Mr. Ray.
several late Vertuoso's of the First Rate pour in upon us abundance of
Experiments, to prove that there is not the most Minute Animal that is by
Equivocal Production. Cochenile has been thought to belong to Plants, but an
Inquisitive N. Har^soeker, Essay on Dioptricks.
Author of late has discarded that Vulgar Notion, and tells us, it is not a
Plant, but a Living Creature, it is not a Grain, but a kind of Insect, for thus
his Microscope has taught him to determine. In many other Instances it might
be proved, that most of our late Learning in Natural Philosophy has been to
show, that what has been formerly said, is false.

And as for Our selves (who are Perfecter Creatures) we are Walking Problems,
we are Talking Wonders, we carry about with us, even in our Bodies, a
Complication of Mysteries. But if we speak of the Incorporeal part of us, then
we are environed with much greater Darkness and Wonders. It is an undeniable
demonstration of our Ignorance and Weak Conceptions, that we know so little of
our Souls, the things by which we know all that we know. A man's Mind is the
Nihil est interi^s Mente. Cic.
Inmost thing he has: nothing is so Near to him, and Intimate with him; and
yet the many disputes and contests of Learned Writers about its Nature, and
Functions, and the manner and method of its Operations acquaint us how obscure
and uncertain men's notions are concerning it. Especially we are yet to seek how
a being that is wholly Bodiless is able to lay hold on Matter, to actuate and
inform it. No man can tell how the Soul causes Motion by Thought, or how by the
same way it is able to put a stop to bodily motion. We experience this to be
true, but it will puzzle us to give an account of the Manner of it. It is no
more to be explained and apprehended how the Humane Mind can think or will the
Animal Spirits into Action, than that a man should by his Thoughts or Will
command the Winds to blow, or the Flames to burn; for the Spirits of the body,
being Material, are no more capable in themselves of being thus actuated by the
Soul than the others are. And lastly, though we know we have a Soul, and are as
certain of it as any thing in nature, yet it has been long controverted where
it is, in what part of the body it is placed. Though it be sufficiently
demonstrated, that there is such a being as the Rational Soul, and that it is
really distinct from Matter, and that this latter is incapable of Cogitation
(as was never more nervously proved than of late by a Great and Eminent Person
of our Church, against one that shows himself inclined to believe that Matter
can Think) though, I say, it is evident, that there is such a Distinct Being as
is the Sovereign Empress of all our Functions and actions, yet it is not
certainly known where her Throne is. For some give her the whole body for her
seat, others believe she circulates in the Blood, and others assign her the
Heart as her particular Chair of State. And though, it is true, the most
Piercing Philosophers of late have confined her to the Brain, yet they are not
agreed in what part of it her Residence is. Many other Instances (indeed almost
as many as there are Phaenom^na in the world) of the Uncertainty of Natural
Speculations might be produced. A great part of that which passes for Knowledge
is ingenious Guessing and Surmise. And yet, notwithstanding the Scruples and
Difficulties which attend all these things which I have mentioned, the Things
themselves are readily owned and assented to.

So that these several Particulars, which I have named, are clear
demonstrations of these two things; First, That Propositions may be True, and
consequently, that we may give our Assent to them, though the matter of them
surpasses our Reason, yea, though it is not only hard but impossible to explain
it, and to give an account of the Manner of it. Secondly, The foresaid Examples
plainly show, that some things even in Nature may be above Reason, and yet not
^ontrary to it, for if they were the latter, no man would yield assent to them,
but wholly reject them as inconsistent and impossible. But even the very
persons with whom our business is at present, profess their ready assent to the
truth and reality of all these things, though they know not how to explain
them, and solve the right manner of them. Hence it follows, that we ought not
to disbelieve a thing merely because it surmounts our Reason, and that we are
not to infer from a thing's being above Reason, that it is contrary to it, for
after this rate we must discard all Natural Philosophy, and believe nothing of
the most ordinary Occurrences in Nature. And what hinders now, that we should
not make the like Deductions with reference to those Higher matters, which I
before mentioned? May we not on much better grounds make these two Inferences,
viz. that we ought not to disbelieve those things because they exceed our
Reason; and that though they do so, yet it follows not thence, that they are
repugnant to Reason? Such Inferences as these are very good and valid, because
of the difficult and recondite nature of these Spiritual and Divine matters,
which far outdoeth that of Bodily and Sensible things. And we shall find that
this is the way of Reasoning, which one of the Ancientest and Learnedest of the
Primitive Writers of the Christian Church made use of against the Heretics and
Seducers of his and the immediately foregoing times. Irenaeus adv. Haeres. l.
2. cap. 47.
He argues from the Obscurity in matters of Sense to those that are Spiritual
and of a Sublime Nature.

Thus then, in imitation of that Great Man, we may solidly argue, with relation
to the foregoing disquisitions in Philosophy, If in things of an inferior
nature there be such Obscurities and Difficulties (which yet are no impediments
to our Assent) how much more then in Higher things may we expect there should
be Great Difficulties, and amazing Obscurities? If Natural Knowledge be so
Cloudy, is there not reason to believe the Divine and Heavenly to be much more
so? If we are not able to find out the True System of the Material World, how
can we apprehend the unspeakable nature of the Spiritual one? If there be
Mysteries in Philosophy, surely there are Greater ones in the Gospel. If the
nature of a Grovelling Plant confounds us, how shall we be able to solve all the
difficult Problems in Christianity? If a man cannot attain all his life time to
the knowledge of a single Mineral, is it probable that he can in a much less
time know fully the Secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven? If he cannot give an
account of a sorry Insect, how shall he be able to unravel the Mysteries of our
Faith? If we cannot tell with all our reason and argumentation how the Soul is
united to, and acts upon the Body, how is i^ possible to tell the manner of the
Son of God's being joined to the Humane nature? or how could it be expected we
should give an account of the Unity of the Three Persons in the Godhead, or of
other the like surprising doctrines in our Religion? If we have so mean a
discovery of what is within us, and so near to us, and is the Best part of us,
yea, is Our selves, it is no wonder that we cannot arrive to a full knowledge of
the things that are without us, and are remote from us, and which are not of
the same Limited nature with Our selves, but are Boundless and Infinite. If it
was the Opinion of a Great Philosophic Wit, that the Material World is
indefinitely extended, that the Compass of the Universe is beyond all that we
can imagine, that it is impossible to frame a conception of the limits and
bounds of it, then may we not with more reason hold the Intellectual World to
be a boundless Expanse, such as we cannot possibly reach to the Extremity of,
an endless, unlimited, and as it were infinite System? Especially if we speak
of the Divine and Supernatural things belonging to it, we must be forced to own
this Truth, and to confess, that what we know of them is the least part of what
is kept from our knowledge, and that we cannot possibly with the greatest art
and wit attain to a greater insight. For if there be Apocrypha in Nature (as
has been showed) it is not strange that there are Mysteries in Divinity, which
it is impossible (whatever some pretend) to solve, by reason of their Profound
and Immense nature. These will not admit of an accurate Inquisition, and
therefore all our knowledge concerning them is defective, and must needs be so.
We are presently beyond our depth, we are soon plunged when we venture into
this Fathomless Ocean. The Reason is, because the Mind of man can have no
perfect knowledge of what is of so Transcendent a nature: especially it cannot
attain to a complete notion and perception of what is Infinite.

This alone were sufficient to decide the Dispute between the Anti-Trinitarians
and us. If they would put the whole Controversy upon this issue, it would soon
have a period. I wish they would well consider of it, and show themselves (what
they so vaunt themselves to be) Masters of True Reason. For then they would see
how unreasonable it is, that their thoughts and expressions concerning the
Infinite God should be according to the nature of Finite beings. They would see
how absurd it is to undertake to measure the Creator by the Creature, and to
apply the Properties of Natural things to what is Supernatural, as they deal in
the doctrine about the Holy Trinity. They would find that what is true of the
former, is not necessarily so of the latter, and consequently, that they ought
not to ^rgue from the nature of a finite and created being to that of God. They
would be convinced, That the Scripture (to use the words of a Dr. H^n. More, in
his Mystery of Godliness, Book 10. Chap. 6.
Man of free Thoughts, and of a very Philosophical and Rational Genius, who
professes that the Scripture) declares nothing concerning the Divinity of
Christ and the Holy Trinity, that is impossible, contradictious, or more
unintelligible than things that men ordinarily assent to, who are free
Philosophers, and admit nothing upon force or superstition, but upon Reason.
They would not pretend to such a penetration of mind as to dive into the exact
nature of the Deity, they would be sensible of the unmeasurable disproportion
between their weak capacities, and what is Infinite and Immense. In sum, they
would confess, that they have not right conceptions concerning the nature of
those Sublime Verities, which I have been speaking of, whilst they contend,
that there is nothing Mysterious and Hidden in them: nay, they would
acknowledge, that they have very wrong and perverse notions of these things,
and such as are no ways agreeable to their nature. And now to shut up this Head
of my Discourse, we are to remember, that the Truth and Reality of Things are
firm and unshaken, and we cannot think to dissettle them, but our business is to
adjust our notions to the Things.. He that finds fault with them for their
Obscurity and Difficulty cavils at the nature of the Things themselves, which
is the most irrational act imaginable, for the Nature of Beings is stable and
settled, and we cannot alter it, and therefore to require that it should be
altered, is absurd and ridiculous.

Lastly, I argue not only from the quality of the things themselves, but from
the present state we are in, which is capable of no other than an Imperfect
knowledge of these Divine Secrets. This Accounr of the matter is suggested to
us by the Apostle, for he makes a plain distinction between knowing now in
part, and seeing then (i. e. hereafter) face to face, and knowing even as we
are known, 1 Cor, 13. 12. One he compares to the state of a Child, who is of
weak understanding and capacity, and the other to that of a Man, who is of ripe
judgment and apprehension. The former is our allotment in this world:
Evangelical and Divine Truths (for of these the Apostle speaks in that place)
are known by us here only in part: and no otherwise shall they, or can they be
known as long as we inhabit in these dark Vehicles of Earth. I speak not this
to disparage the Christian Knowledge, for it must be granted, that there are
many Plain and Clear Propositions, both as to the matter and manner of the
things contained in them, which the Writings of the New Testament furnish us
with: and all the Practical Truths of Christianity are easy to be known, and
are represented to us by Christ and his Apostles in a very intelligible manner.
And as to the knowledge of those very Doctrines, which I have been speaking of,
all True Christians have such a measure of it, as makes them sufficiently
capable of understanding their Religion, and of discharging their Duty, of
knowing so much as concerns them to know, so much as is requisite to Salvation.
But that which I assert, and am proving, is this, that these last sort of
Truths are mixed in us, whilst we take up our residence on this earthly stage,
with much Ignorance and Darkness. We comprehend not the full meaning of them,
because this is not suitable to our present condition, which we are now placed
in. Thence it is, that there are some Secrets mentioned in the Holy Scriptures,
which our understandings tremble at, and are afraid to approach unto. Be the
mind of man never so Ambitious, and greedy of knowledge, it cannot grasp them,
for they are too Big: it cannot reach them, they are too High: it cannot fathom
them, they are too deep: it cannot discern them, they are too Remote: in a
word, they surpass humane abilities at their highest pitch in this state of
Mortality.

But it shall be otherwise afterward, as the Apostle informs us, When that
which is perfect is come (when we shall be translated to Heaven, a state of
Perfection) then that which is in part shall be done away, v. 10. Then we shall
no longer be in the dark, then the imperfection of our understanding shall
cease, because our natures shall be exalted. Then those Amazing Truths, which
pose us now, shall be fully resolved, i. e. so far as is fit for us, for even
in Heaven our Nature will still be but Finite, and therefore our knowledge will
be so too. But by the change of our vile bodies for heavenly ones (though still
they are the same, but otherwise qualified) which will no ways impede, but
promote the operations of our Souls, and by being taken into the more Immediate
Presence of the Holy Trinity, and stated in the Frui^ion of perfect Glory, we
shall have our minds exalted, and our understandings widened to such a degree,
that we shall exactly and fully know every thing that is to be known by us.
Though the intrinsic nature of the things, that we shall know, shall be the
same that it is now (for there can be no alteration as to that) yet our
faculties shall not be the same as to the degree of their capacity, and the
manner of their perception. When this gross Veil of flesh shall be drawn aside,
when the Soul is rid of this Terrestrial Clog, and is stripped of these Deficient
Organs, we shall have a more clear and refined apprehension of all Truths; and
approaching nearer to the Great Objects themselves, we shall attain to a more
distinct view of them, and a fuller insight into them, than now at this
distance from them we are capable of. In that Separate state we shall, by
reason of an intimate Communion with the Supreme Being, and a close Conjunction
of the Soul with him, be able to comprehend all the Hard Points of Religion, to
unravel all Difficulties, to untie all Knots, to assoil all Controversies.
Then, and not before, we shall be furnished with this ability. Wherefore those
men make not a due distinction between this life and that to come, who talk
against Mysteries in our Religion: they are forgetful of the Present Scene of
things, and the Dispensation they are under: they discourse as if they thought
themselves advanced to the Celestial Regions already. But this very thing
shows their mistake, and that they are on this side of that place, for they
betray the weakness and uncertainty of their Knowledge. These persons
indiscreetly antedate the Last day, anticipate the Future World, and confront
the revealed Purpose of Heaven; for it was not designed by the Supreme Being,
that we should here below have a full insight into those Divine Recesses: this
is reserved for another State.

Thus much of the Reasons, so far as we can apprehend, why Christianity is a
Mystery, that is, why some of the most weighty and momentous doctrines of it
are in some part hid from all men's understandings.

What I have said administers to us this double Reflection, 1. From the
premises we may discover the vanity and falsity of the Socinian Notion, that
there are no Mysteries in the Christian Religion. 2. We may gather what is our
Proper Duty and Concern in the Case before us.

First, I say, this discovers and detects, and at the same baffles the false
apprehension of those men, who cry down all Mysteries in Christianity, and tell
us, that all is levelled to the meanest capacities. Notwithstanding those
Remarkable Attestations to the Contrary Truth from the plain words of our
Savior and his Apostles, yet they perversely oppose and deny it, and magnify
Reason as the only Measure of Truth, and Rule of Faith (whatever their We never
pretended that Humane Reason is the Measure of Truth, as Mr. Edwards and Mr.
Norris charge us. The Agreement of the Uni^ari^n^, etc. p. 11.
late Pretenses are) and nothing will serve them in Religion but Logic and
downright Demonstration. I have observed it in the Modern Writings of this sort
of men (and of one also that is a late Friend of theirs) that they seldom or
never finish a Discourse, though it be about Religion, without bringing in of
Geometrical terms, especially Angles and Triangles. These Gentlemen under a
pretext of Mathematics would subvert Christianity, and demonstrate us out of
the Articles of our Faith, and make a Triangle baffle the Trinity. This is the
grand Source of their present Delusion, and of that disturbance which they make
in the World, viz. their laboring to exclude all Mysteries from Christianity.
It arises wholly from this, that they will not give credit to any thing in
Religion, but what is entirely Clear and Evident, and commensurate to exact
Reason. This is perfectly according to that Description, which one of the
Fathers of the Primitive Church gives of St. Paul's Natural man, (...).
Theophylact. in loc.
He is one (says he) that attributes all to the Reasonings of his Soul, and
thinks not that he stands in need of help from Above; neither will be receive
any thing by Faith, but counts all foolishness which cannot be made out by
Demonstration. And an Ancient Critic defines him thus, (...). ^uid. in
vocabul, (...)*
He is one who turns all over to Humane Reason, and admits not of the operation
of the Spirit, i. e. any thing that is Supernatural in Religion. This is the
brief, but full Character of a Disciple of Socinus, (so far as we are concerned
in him upon the present occasion) but certainly it ill becomes a Christian man;
for I have proved already, that such a spirit and genius are against the plain
determination of Christ and his Apostles, against the very nature of the things
themselves, and unsuitable to the present state we are in. Such a one forgets
to distinguish between Philosophy and Christianity. The Professors of the
former, act not amiss in squaring all their opinions and sentiments by Strict
Reason: but the Adherers to the latter, who are eminently styled Believers,
must yield their assent to things, which they cannot by Reason comprehend.
Otherwise they confound the natures of things, and take away the Distinction
between Reason and Faith, which is much more absurd and unaccountable than what
Scenkius in his Medical Observations fancies, that it is possible for a man to
receive the Visible Species through his Nostrils, or in plainer terms, that a
man may See with his Nose; for here is only a substituting of one Bodily Sense
for another, but in the other case there is a mistaking of one Mental Operation
for another, viz. Reason for Faith. This is the Absurdity of those of the
Racovian way, and we ought carefully to avoid it. We are to believe
Christianity to be a Reasonable Service (as the Apostle deservedly styles it:)
but it may be truly said of those men, that they make Christianity more
reasonable than it is: that is, they make it submit wholly to Humane and
Natural Reason, and this is the ground of their exploding all Mysteries.

Secondly, Seeing a great part of the Christian Religion is a Mystery, and
designed to be such, we are concerned to Behave our selves accordingly, that
is, never to be so bold and rash, as to demand a Positive and Punctual Account
of things of this high and abstruse nature. Boni Grammatici est quaedam
ignorare. Varro.
It is required in a Good Grammarian, said One who was as skilful in that Art
as any man, that he be ignorant of some things. The same may be said of a Good
Divine; to be ignorant of some Mysteries, and not to search too earnestly into
them is a good qualification in one of that Profession, and indeed in all
persons that study Christianity. This is a Learned kind of Ignorance, and we
are not to be ashamed of it. It is not necessary we should have a clear
understanding of Theological Secrets, because the Holy Writ is silent about
them: but yet we ought to hold and believe the things themselves, because the
same Infallible Word asserts them. Those that go any further, show indeed, that
they are very Prying and Inquisitive, but let them beware of handling the Word
of God deceitfully, and making Truth uphold Falsehood. As that Egyptian (in De
Curiositate.
Plutarch) answered the men, who asked him, What it was that he carried so
close Covered? Therefore it is covered, said he, that you should not know what
it is, and therefore your asking was in vain: So it is here, these Divine
things are purposely hid from us, and wrapped up in Obscurity, that we may not
with too eager a Curiosity search into them, and busy our heads about them.
Let every one of us think that spoken to us, which the Good Christian said to
the Philosopher, at the Council of Nice, (...). Gelas. Cyzicen.
Ask not, How? Be not inquisitive concerning the Manner of Sacred and Heavenly
things, for this is hid from us. A Learned and Pious Chrysostom. Hom. in S. Johan.
Writer of the Primitive Church, tells us, That it is enough for us to know,
that in Christ's Person, the Divine Nature was so joined by an ineffable kind
of Tie with the Humane Nature, that the same Hypostasis contains in it two
distinct Natures: but how that Union is made, it is not necessary to know, nor
is it fit to search: only let us believe and hold what is written. And the same
Excellent Person in another Hom. 1. in S. Matthew.
place (and indeed in several places of his Writings) exceedingly blames the
rashness and curiosity of those that pry into Divine Mysteries, and dispute
and wrangle, and raise vain questions about them, and ask why and how such
things are. It was excellently said by another Brave Man, of a true primitive
temper, ^^^dor. Pelus. Epist. l. 2.
This question, How? can have no place in the things of God, whose only Will is
sufficient, and is to be greatly admired of all. And with these Ancient Writers
agrees the Great Modern Reformer, Luther. Colloq. Mensal. Cap. 2.
This word [Why] (says he) has misled and destroyed many souls: it is too
high for us to search into.

When we come to insist too busily on these demands, Why or How God says or
does this or that? we show that we are loath to submit our Reason to Faith, and
to give assent to God's Word, though we cannot clearly conceive it. Which
argues a very Unchristian temper, for the Gospel has propounded many things to
us which are Mystical, which neither our thoughts can fully apprehend, nor our
words express. But this should not hinder us from believing and embracing them,
for though they are Mysterious, yet it is plain and manifest, that they are
asserted in the Sacred Writings. It was prudently and Christianly advised and
determined by St. Augustine, in such Points as these, which I have been of
speaking, and especially the Trinity (which that Pious Father particularly
mentions) Nos ergo, ^ratres, fide praecedente, quae sanat oculum cordis nostri,
quod intelligimus sine obscuritate capiamas; quod non intellig^mus sine
dubi^atione credamus. In S. Johan* Tr. 39.
Let us, says he, by that previous Faith, which helps the eyesight of the
mind, clearly embrace what we understand, and firmly believe what we understand
not. The Reason of which Advice and Resolution is this, that some things that
are above the reach of our Understandings may be, and ought to be the matter of
our Belief. Which is founded on this, that the object of Faith is of a much
larger Extent than that of Reason, and therefore we may give assent to some
Propositions, which we cannot explain and clear up by the light of Reason.

And besides, every Thinking Man ought to revolve this in his mind, that Faith
is of an higher nature than Reason, and accordingly was designed to bear Sway
over it, and to control it. To this purpose it is to be considered, that there
are these Three Faculties or Operations in Men, Sense, and Reason, and Faith,
and they gradually rise one higher than the other. Sense is common to us with
Brutes, and takes notice only of Corporeal and External Objects, but Reason is
proper to us as we are Men, and is bestowed upon us to correct the mistakes of
Sense; thus by Sense we cannot perceive the Motion of the Sun and Stars, they so
cousen our sight that we cannot apprehend when they move, yea, they seem to
stand immovable: wherefore we must consult with something else than Sense, and
that is Reason, which tells us, that either those Heavenly Bodies, or the
Ground we stand upon move very swiftly: our Reason, not our Eyes, must give us
an account of this. Thus it is plain, that Reason controuls Sense, and
consequently is a higher and superior faculty. But then comes Faith, and claims
a Superiority over them both; for as Reason was given by God to correct Sense,
so this Function was added to give a check to Reason, as being Higher and
Nobler than that. This is the Order of these Operations in Man, and it is by
Divine appointment, and therefore no man of sober thoughts can find fault with
it. If we are free to acknowledge, that Reason is a Curb to Sense (and we
cannot deny it) then we should be as forward to own, that Faith is the same to
Reason, and that we ought to make use of the one to check and bridle the other,
when Sacred and Supernatural things are under our consideration. Here then, as
is fitting, let us strenuously exert our Faith, and not judge of the Divine
Being and the Truths revealed by him according to humane measures, according to
what we find and perceive in one another, still remembering that they are
Mysteries.

As for the Contrary Sentiment, there are these three Great things that
disparage it, 1. It argues Pride and Arrogant Stiffness. 2. It is an undeniable
proof of gross Prejudice and Partiality. 3. It unavoidably introduces
Indifferency in Religion. I will distinctly insist upon this Triple Charge, and
then leave the Judicious to judge of my performance.

First, It is a great argument of a Proud and Haughty Spirit. For it must needs
proceed from this Principle, that the men of that persuasion will by no means
acknowledge their Short-sightedness, and the Shallowness of their
Intellectuals. They cannot brook such Condescension as this, and therefore they
scorn to own any Mysteries. If any Difficult Truths are propounded to them,
they have learnt of a Great Conqueror to cut the knot, instead of untying it:
they violently null the proposition, and so make it no Mystery, as we see they
do in the Articles of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, and
the like. For they pretend to manage all by mere force of Reason, and reject
all propositions and doctrines which they think come not up to this height.
They take it very ill, if you allow them not a Catholic and Unbounded
Knowledge of every thing, whether finite or infinite, and of the particular
Manner and minutest Circumstances that appertain to them. They disdain that
there should be any thing in nature which they are not able to comprehend, they
deem it an unsufferable disgrace to their understandings, that any thing should
be above the reach of them, that there should be any Point of Speculation so
deep and abstruse, that they cannot penetrate to the very bottom of it: they
scorn to have it said, that there are any Mysteries and Darknesses in Religion,
when their minds are so bright, and their intellects are so shining. What is
this but Pride? What is this but being over-conceited of their natural
Faculties, and having too great an opinion of their own Rational Capacities?
what is this but an immodest and extravagant magnifying of these Powers? Yea,
what is it but a kind of aspiring to Divinity, and attributing to themselves an
Infinite and Immense nature, an extraordinary and more than humane Wisdom?
Zophar gives us the true Character and Pedigree of this sort of persons, Job
11. 12. Vain man would be wise (this Empty Hollow Creature would fain be
thought to be full of Knowledge) though he be born like a wild asses colt,
though he be by nature ignorant and rude: he has such an opinion and esteem of
his Parts and Acquirements, he is of such Arrogance and Elation of Mind, that
he thinks it below him to acknowledge any Abstrusities in Religion. He takes
part with the Conceited Sect of the Stoics, among whom it was a Maxim, (...)
(...). in Zenone.
That it became not a Wise man to wonder at any of those things which to others
seem to be Paradoxes. Nay, he is so much of this Vaunting humor, that he will
not be persuaded, that there is any thing Wonderful and Amazing, even in
Religion it self. St. Paul styles Christianity a Mystery, but he being
intoxicated with Pride and Self-conceit directly contradicts him, and says it
is not mysterious.

But those who attend to the Apostle's Advice, Romans 12. 3.
Not to think of themselves more highly than they ought to think, but to think
soberly, have other thoughts and apprehensions, and are most willing to
acknowledge the shallowness of their own Judgments, and the depth of Divine
Truth. We have Instances on Record of those Humble Souls, who, though of
singular sagacity and improvements, proclaimed the Unsearchableness of the
Divine Wisdom, and the Exalted Truths that belong to it. The Ancient Inspired
Arabian expresses it thus, Job 28. 1^, etc.
Man knows not the price of it, (i. e. as I apprehend, he cannot come up
fully to the Purchase, or, which is the same, the Attainment of it, for we
purchase things by price) neither is it found in the land of the living: the
depth says, it is not in me; and the sea says, it is not in me. Whence then
comes Wisdom, and where is the place of Understanding? Seeing it is hid from
the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air, i. e. those
that are most quick-sighted, for Naturalists observe, that the eyes of Birds
generally excel those of other Animals. But he concludes, God understands the
ways thereof, and he knows the place thereof, that is, he has reserved the
perfect knowledge of these Divine and Supernatural things to Himself. This was
the humble sense of another Great and Wise Man, the Royal Psalmist, concerning
whom it is worth our observing, that after he had asserted and maintained the
doctrine of God's Omniscience and All-seeing Providence, he adds, Psalm. 139. 6.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it:
which is as much as if he had said, though it is impossible for me to apprehend
the infinite and boundless knowledge of the Eternal God, the Sovereign Disposer
of all things, though I cannot tell how he sees and foresees all things
whatsoever, yet I heartily own this Universal Sight and Prescience of his, and
I verily believe it to be a certain and unshaken Truth. It is Humility which
furnishes a man with such persuasion and language as this, and it is this which
causes him to believe and assert, that there are Mysteries in his Holy Faith,
which far transcend his thoughts and conceptions. This is that Wisdom, which
according to another Divine and Inspired Sage, Eccl. 7. 24.
is far off and exceeding deep, and therefore (as it follows) who can find it
out?

To which irrefragable Testimonies permit me to adjoyn that of an Apocryphal
Writer (and the rather because I will take occasion thence to offer a
Conjecture on that dark place) Eccl. 6. 22.
Wisdom is according to her Name, and she is not manifest unto many. What is
the meaning of that, according to her Name? What Title has Wisdom that imports
any such matter, viz. that she is not manifest? Some Critics think it refers
to the Hebrew word for Wisdom, Chocmah, others to the Arabic Algnalam, but
what they propound seems to be very much strained, and does not reach the
purpose. And how can it seeing they forget that this Book was writ in Greek,
and that the Title of it is (...)? We must therefore repair to the Greek for a
solution, but we must first confer with the Hebrew, where we meet with the Verb
Saphah or Tsaphah, which signifies to hide or cover, and thence it is probable
(...) is derived: and this it is likely is the Name that is here meant, because
though the language in which this book was originally drawn up was Hebrew, (as
appears from the Prologue of it) yet it was soon translated into Greek, because
the Jews at that time spoke Greek generally, and had their Bible and Service in
Greek: and accordingly this place has reference to the name of Wisdom in that
tongue, wherein there are many words derived from the Hebrew: and hence it is,
that the denomination of Wisdom imports something hid and mysterious, and
therefore she is according to her Name. The Jewish Doctors had a sense of this,
as appears from their Proverbial Saying, When Elias comes, he will untie all
knots, i. e. solve all Difficult and Abstruse Points; of which there are not a
few in Religion. There are sundry things hid from our understandings here,
which shall not be cleared till the last day. Now, if the Wisest persons spoke
thus concerning the things of Religion (which is the Wisdom of God) under those
Dispensations of old, is there not much more reason to say the like of the
Divine Wisdom under the Economy of the Gospel, when doctrines of an higher
nature are published to the world, such as far surpass all humane comprehension?

But there is a generation of men among us that will not stoop to this, they
will not own themselves to be in a state of Weakness, Childhood, and Minority
in this life, though the Great Apostle (as we have heard) expressly did, when he
so far owned the deficiency of his Understanding, as to say, he knew in part,
and spoke, and understood, and thought as a Child. And all the Great and all
the Wise men in the world have been ready to say the same, yea, even with
reference to matters of a lower nature. The Learned in the Law confess they
have their Perplexed and Knotty Cases, Statesmen their Arcana, Physicians their
Opprobious Maladies, Anatomists their Unknown Ductus's, Astronomers their
Eccentrical Motions which they cannot reduce into regular and exact Order,
Mathematicians their Insoluble Problems. And, in brief, most Professions and
Sciences labor under some insuperable Difficulties and Intricacies: and this
is freely acknowledged by the most Skilful in those Arts. But here is a sort of
men that will not own any such thing in Divinity, although it be conversant
about Objects that are infinitely Higher and Greater. Notwithstanding this,
they think it is below a man of Parts to own any thing to be Inexplicable: they
profess that it becomes not a man of Sense and Reason to admit of this, yea,
that it is an unsufferable affront to Humane Nature to believe such a thing.
They think it a sufficient ground to cashier a doctrine in Religion because it
is attended with Obscurity. In short, they think it unreasonable to yield
assent to a Proposition on the account of its being revealed in Scripture,
merely because they are not able to conceive the Manner of it. Thus their Pride
makes them Infidels, and they bid adieu to Modesty and the Faith together.

Secondly, Another Great Disparagement and Inexcusable Blemish of these men's
Persuasion is, that it argues wilful Prejudice and Partiality. I will make this
evident from these two Considerations; First, Though they deny not that there are
Mysteries in the Divine Providence, yet they altogether renounce them in the
Articles before mentioned: Secondly, Though they grant there may and ought to
be a Government and Restraint on the Imaginations, Will and Affections of men,
yet at the same time they perversely disapprove of the like restraint on the
Understanding and Reasoning Faculty. Both these are Instances of their
egregrious Prepossession and Partiality.

1. They profess themselves to be satisfied about the Divine Conduct in the
Governing of the Universe, though many Difficulties, and those very Great and
Insuperable, accompany it. They acquiesce in the unerring Wisdom of the Supreme
Ruler of all things, and they pretend not to judge of his actions, but most
willingly grant them to be just and wise and good, notwithstanding they cannot
give an Account of them, notwithstanding they acknowledge them to be
Unsearchable and Incomprehensible. None of them have ever ventured to question
God's Wisdom, because there are some Events and Occurrences in the world, which
no man can possibly give a Reason of. We do not hear them say, that these are
contrary to Reason, and that they are Contradictory, although at the same time
they yield that they have no knowledge of them, they are out of their sight,
and they can render no particular account of them. Nor do we hear them cry out
to have these Intricate Events made out by Reason, they don't peremtorily
demand to have the Causes of them laid open, or else they will throw up the
doctrine of Providence: No, they very patiently and contentedly resolve all
into the Infinite and Unsearchable Wisdom of the Absolute Governor of the
World, and into the Ignorance and Weakness of humane understandings. God has
not thought fit to reveal those Secrets, and therefore they are content to be
ignorant of them: yea, they submissively admire, revere and adore that Infinite
Wisdom, which they vote to be Mysterious and Unaccountble.

And why then do they not act thus with with reference to the Mysterious
Articles of the Christian Faith, and the Great, but Abstruse Verities of the
Gospel? Seeing they deny not the Providence of God, because of some harsh and
difficult passages in it, why should they reject those Doctrines because there
are some things in them hard to be understood? Seeing they quarrel not with the
Divine Government, though many things in it are mysterious and dark, and far
above their understandings, why do they find fault with those Points of the
Christian Belief, (which were delivered to us by the same All-wise Governor of
the world) because there are certain Mysteries in them? If the Infinite Wisdom
and the Absolute Power and Sovereignty of the Supreme Being render his Actions
unaccountable, why should not these make his Words, his Sayings, his Dictates
about divine things to be of the same nature? If the methods of God's ruling
the world be Inscrutable, why should we undertake to fathom the depths and
secrets of those Truths which he has declared to the world? If God Job 9. 10.
does great things past finding out, why may not he be allowed to speak such?
If the Romans 11. 33.
Judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, is there not
cause to believe, that God's Nature and Essence are so too? If the Socinians
are not concerned to answer the Difficulties about the former, what is the
reason that they startle at the latter? If they acknowledge that God acts many
things which are above their understandings, why should they not own him to be
what they cannot comprehend? If they cannot know what he does, why should they
expect to know what he is? Are the Works of God's Providence unsearchable, and
is not He himself so? Are there several things done above their apprehensions,
and shall they deny the Author of them to be above them? Is God to be trusted
and relied upon beyond their knowledge and understanding, and is he not barely
to be believed, though he delivers some things which are above their
capacities? Is the doctrine of Providence, though in sundry things
Unaccountable, embraced and professed by them, and is not the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity to be entertained, though it contains in it such things of which
we are not able to give an account? Is it an unquestionable Truth that there is
a Divine Management of all mundane affairs, though the particular
administrations of it are inexplicable? and is it not as reasonable to assert,
that there are Three Persons in the Deity, though we cannot explain and unfold
the Manner of it? I challenge those that make the boldest pretenses to Reason
and Good Sense, to show the Difference between these. All unprejudiced and
impartial minds must grant the Case to be the same, for surely God's Essence is
as infinite and incomprehensible as his Providence, and therefore if it be a
rational and sufficient Answer to all the Objections and Scruples against
Providence to say, that they believe God is Wise and Good and Just, though they
are not able to comprehend the secret methods of his Wisdom, Justice and
Goodness, then it ought to be as good and satisfactory an Answer to all
Difficulties of the Trinity, to say they firmly assent to that doctrine, though
they cannot understand the Manner of it.

But the persons I am speaking of will not submit to this, and therefore they
demonstrate how Partial they are, when they quarrel with the foresaid Article,
and other doctrines of the Gospel, for no other reason but this, that they are
Mysterious and Unaccountable, they are raised above the reach of their
understandings. I appeal now to the severest Judges of Reason, whether these
men can justly lay claim to any such thing whilst they thus behave themselves,
whilst they declare that even in Religious and Divine Matters (for such
certainly is that of Providence) it is reasonable to believe and embrace more
than we can understand and comprehend, and yet renounce the doctrine of the
Trinity, and some other substantial Points of Christianity for their being in
some measure Incomprehensible. What can this be but Perverseness and Crosness?
What is it but acting contrary to themselves? And then who will give heed to
men of this crossgrain'd temper? Who will regard such vain people that are
inconsistent with themselves, and clash with their own Concessions? They
frankly subscribe to Divine Providence, though it has many Mysteries,
Obscurities, Difficulties, Intrigues in it which no mortal man can unfold: and
yet they discard some of the chief Evangelical Truths, because they cannot
explain them by Reason. Thus they run counter to their own Principles and
Practice, and are Self-condemned persons, and proclaim to all mankind that they
are corrupted with Prejudice and Partiality.

2. They give open and undeniable proofs of this, by granting that it is
convenient, yea, necessary to regulate and limit the tendencies of the Will and
Affections, and yet with the same breath they pronounce it unfitting and
unreasonable to use any restraint, or set any bounds, or prescribe any rules to
the Intellectual faculty. They own it to be the indispensable Character of a
Good and Religious Man to exercise a discipline on his Imagination and his
Passions, they hold it to be a main part of Christian Philosophy to be severe
and rigorous here. For some things which seem reasonable and plausible are
forbidden us by the Evangelical Laws, and many harsh and difficult things are
enjoined us; but we are to satisfy our selves with this, that God's Will ought
to be the Standard of ours, and therefore we ought to resign our selves to the
Divine Conduct. And these men allow of this as just and rational, and advise
that our Natural desires and propensions should give way to our Savior's
Commands, he being our Great Lawgiver and Master. And why then do they show
themselves Partial in denying it reasonable to submit the Intellectual part of
the Mind to the doctrines and dictates of the Gospel? Is there not as much
reason to take care of this Faculty, to look to the management of it, to keep
it within its due bounds, as there is to deal thus with the Elective Power of
the Soul? If they are content to surrender this to the Divine Will, why are
they against subjecting the other to the Divine Ligh^ and Discoveries? If it be
commend^ble to curb and moderate the Concupiscible or ^rascible part, why not
also to regulate and govern the Perceptive? If the Will must be checked, why
must the Intellect be left uncontrollable? If they measure the Goodness of the
former Power in them by the Laws and Rules of Christ, what is the reason that
they measure not the Rectitude of the latter by the discoveries of Divine Truth
made by the same Author in the Writings of the New Testament? Seeing they deem
it proper and necessary for humane minds to vail the first to the express
Injunctions of the Gospel, why do they not think it as requisite to submit the
second to the infallible dictates of the Holy Spirit in Scripture? why do they
not abandon their own weak sentiments about the highest Concerns of
Christianity? why do they not renounce their private surmises, their shallow
arguings, their sophistical ratiocinations, and give them up to be corrected by
the light of Divine Revelation? why are they not sensible of the deficiency and
indigence of their Minds, of the narrowness and contractedness of their
understandings, and why do they not at the same time adore the Divine
Perfection? why do they not inure their understandings to the dictates of
Inspiration, and believe what is Unintelligible? Particularly in the doctrine
of the Trinity; why do they lean to their own understandings? why do they
prescribe to Heaven, and set up their own weak Conceptions as the Standard of
Divine Truth? In a word, why do they not make their mere Natural Notions and
Principles truckle to Revealed Truth, and bring their Reason into subjection to
the Eternal (...)?

If they come here with their old cry and cavils, that the Article of the
Trinity, and some others that appertain to it are contrary to Reason, and are a
perfect Contradiction, and are Impossibilities, (as their language is) we may
for ever silence them with this, that they cannot with any show of Reason talk
after this rate, because they cannot pronounce that to be Contrary to Reason,
the Nature of which they are ignorant of: what they cannot reach with their
Reason, they cannot say is Repugnant to it. Nor can they doom this or that to be
Contradictory, when they know nothing of the Manner of it. And so for the
Impossibility of a thing, it is rash folly to determine it cannot be when they
are unacquainted with the Transcendent Nature of it, when the Mode of its
existence is hid from them. This I think is very plain, and it is as pertinent
to the matter in hand, I having proved that the doctrine of the Trinity, and
such like Articles of Christianity are hidden Mysteries. Therefore let not
these men think to amuse and banter us (as they would needs do) with ^alking of
Contradictions, Impossibilities, etc. which are Terms that are nothing to the
purpose.

But this I request of them, that they would be Serious, and vouchsafe to
reflect on what I have suggested under this Head, for the Article of the
Trinity would be a very clear and bright Truth to them, if they would but
entertain this one thing in their thoughts, that they are obliged as much to
keep a discipline over their Understandings as over their Wills, that the
Intellectual Powers, as well as the other Faculties of the mind, are to be in
subjection. It is mentioned as part of Man's Depravity and alienation from his
first Make, that Eccl. 7. 29.
he seeks out many Inventions, i. e. (as the Hebrew word signifies) curious
Excogitations, quaint Arguings, fanciful Reasonings. These, especially in
matters of Religion, are greedily sought out and pursued by Vain men: but where
the true force and virtue of Religion prevail, there they 2 Cor. 10. 5.
cast down imaginations ((...) reasonings) and every high thing (every proud
Conceit) that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought, i. e. every corrupt notion and conception which usurps
upon Faith. This is the Conduct of our Minds which the Apostles teaches us; we
must quit our false Argumentations and Debates about the the Great Mysteries of
our Religion, we must not dare to be wise above what is written, above or
beyond what Divine Revelation has taught us, but we must resolve all our
doubts and scruples by appealing to Divine Authority and the Veracity of God.

It may be the Sagacious Gentlemen we have to do with at present, will grant
that some Vulgar heads (among whom perhaps they will reckon the foresaid
Apostle) have favored the restraining and limiting of the Intellectual Powers
as well as the other Faculties of the mind, but will this pass current (they
may say) with those that are voted for Men of Sense and Wit, will it be
admitted by Men of Keen Apprehensions, men of Judgment and Philosophy? Yes,
most surely, if they will be pleased to take the Learned Lord Verulam, and the
Great Des Carts into that number. The former of whom has left these
remarkable words, D^ A^gment. Scient. l. 9.
Gods Sovereignty reaches to the whole man, extending it self no less to his
Reason than his Will: so that it well becomes man to deny himself universally,
and yield up all to God. Wherefore as we are bound to obey the Law of God,
notwithstanding the reluctance of our Will, so are we also to believe his Word,
though against the reluctance of our Reason. The latter expresses himself thus,
(and though some may think it is spoken in Politic Compliance, yet it is more
than they can prove, and it is certain, that they are in themselves words of
truth and soberness, and worthy of so Great a Man,) Philosop. Princip. Par. 1.
page 7.
We must, says he, always and chiefly remember this, that God the Author of
things is Infinite, and we altogether finite: so that when God reveals any
thing concerning himself or other things which surpasses the natural strength
of our wit, such as the Mysteries of the Incarnation or Trinity, we are not to
refuse to give our Assent to them, though we do not clearly understand them.
And again, in the Close of this First Part of his Philosophical Principles he
has left us this Excellent Memorandum, This is to be fixed on our memories as
a Principal Rule, that whatever things are revealed unto us by God are to be
believed by us as the most certain of all. And though perhaps the most clear
and evident light of Reason should seem to suggest to us some other thing,
notwithstanding this we are to give credit to the sole Authority of God rather
than to our own judgment.

Thus these Mighty Genius's of Philosophy give their Suffrage to our Greater
Apostle, and declare to the world how rational it is to keep the Reasoning as
well as the Elective part in subjection. And indeed seeing it is the same Soul
that affects, wills, and understands, and these Faculties are not really
different from the Soul it self, it follows, that if the Soul in one capacity
may be checked and regulated, then it may be so in another: and if we are
obliged to chastise the extravagancy of the Will and Appetites, we may and
ought to correct the disorder of the Understanding. The Socinians grant the
former, but deny the latter, though without any ground, for there is the same
reason for the one, that there is for the other. Which shows that they despise
the Parity of Reason, that they attend not to the Consequence of their
Propositions, that they argue not alike in thin^^ that are alike, that they
vary in Cases that are of the same nature, that they deal not fairly and
ingeniously, that they contradict themselves, that they are froward and
perverse, and are resolved to (...) and Partiality have the (...)

Thirdly, There is yet another Great Disparagement and Blemish lies upon this
Sentiment, and this Behavior; for as they are the offspring of Pride and
Insolence, of Partiality and Perverseness, so they are the nurse of
Indifferency and Skepticism in Religion. Whilst persons acquiesce in Divine
Revelation, they are upon safe and firm ground, but when they quit this, and
undertake to measure Christianity by the Principles of Natural and Common
Reason, they have no sure footing, but they waver and fluctuate, they start
queries about all things, and utterly overthrow all Certainty in Religious and
Divine matters. For when Overcurious and Wrangling heads come to argue about
those High Points of Christianity, which I have before mentioned, and make them
the matter of a Formal Dispute, and encounter them with mere dint of Reason,
they soon persuade themselves that they are Victors in such an Engagement, and
then they carry their Conquests further, and range and fly about, and make it
their work to unsettle Religion, and bring all the Concerns of it into
question. They teach men to doubt of all the Propositions which they before
received, and especially to dispute about every part of Christianity. For they
infuse this notion into men's heads, that they must not admit of the doctrine of
the Trinity, and such received Articles of Faith, because they are against
Reason. and Reason with them is their own Prejudice and Dislike, which prompt
them to use a sort of Argumentations against these Truths. But they are able to
use the like Reasonings against all other Articles of Christianity, and when
there is occasion they will not fail to do it; for they seem to begin with
those ^^ore Difficult and Abstruse Points, and to bring people off from them
(because they think they cannot easily maintain them) that they may make way for
shaking the Plainer ones afterward. I must needs profess, I have more Charity
than to think that this is a formed design of the generality of those that
profess the Socinian way, for I believe there are some well disposed persons
among them. But I am inclined to believe, that there is such a Project carried
on by some ill-minded and perverse men, who take this opportunity to render
Religion Doubtful and Disputable, and by degrees to represent it as an
Indifferent and Un^ertain thing. By this course, which they are at this day
taking, the most Sacred and Venerable Truths will be slighted* nay, they are
already slighted and actually disregarded by this race of men, as (...) of the
Artributes of God, Christ's (...), the Rising of the same bodies, the
S^b^i^tence and Perception of Separate Souls, the Torments of Hell, etc. And
sundry other substantial Verities, as the Existence of Good and Evil Angels,
the Universal Providence of God in the world, the Miracles of our Savior, the
Truth of the Christian Religion, and many more such doctrines are either
doubted of, or denied by Deists or Atheists, and that on the Socinian
Principles, (that is the thing observable at present) I say, upon the Socinian
Principles, viz. because there are some Difficulties that attend the notions
and apprehensions of these things, and because they are not on all accounts
adjusted to the model of men's ordinary Reasonings: therefore they are unwilling
to admit of them on that very account.

But for the same reason all the Main Doctrines of the Gospel will be doubted
of, the weightest Articles of our Religion will be voted to be but Arbitrary
Hypotheses, and Christianity it self will be thought to be no other; as we find
in the Writings both of our Foreign and Domestic Adversaries Christianity is
laid in the same Scales with Judaism and Turcism, and some parts of it (nay the
Weightiest) are determined to be lighter than any in the other two. This
naturally follows from their arrogantly presuming upon the Strength of their
Understandings and Reasons in the things of God, from their peremptory
resolving to entertain nothing in Religion, but what is commensurate to Natural
Principles, from their opposing and denying a Doctrine which is plainly and
expressly asserted in Scripture, merely because they cannot define the exact
Manner of the thing that is asserted. This, I say, is the Consequence of
founding all Religion upon Natural Reason and Argument. We must throw up a
great part of that which is Revealed, merely to gratify the Deists and
Racovians. Nay, this will not suffice, for it is to be suspected, that those
who strike at Revealed Religion bear no kindness (whatever they pretend) to the
Natural. It is likely that those who bid defiance to the former will do the
same in time to the latter: for we cannot imagine but that those bold men who
disregard the Immediate Discoveries of Heaven to mankind, and represent them as
altogether Incredible by intelligent and inquisitive minds, will also vilify
the more Mediate and Common Dictates of Nature: those that slight the
Extraordinary Voice of God cannot be supposed to attend to the Ordinary one:
those that refuse to hear him speaking in the Holy Writ will not be obsequious
to his dictates in their own breasts.

Thus you see how dangerous and pernicious an Opinion our Adversaries maintain
and promote: we see how they feed the humor of this Skeptical Age, and work
upon unstable and wavering minds, and wheedle them out of their Religion by
plausible insinuations and pretenses of Humane Reason: by this means they
directly lead them to defame, libel and blaspheme Christianity and all the
Mysteries of it, and they make use of their Reason to make void their Faith.

But now all this may be prevented and hindered by a humble and Christian
submission to the Sacred Oracles, by a free resigning our selves to the Faith
of the Gospel, and by giving credit to it; Articles, because they are delivered
and attested by God himself in the Infallible Writings; which even Reason it
self dictates to be the best Method we can take to establish and confirm us in
our Religion, and to assure us of the Truth of all its doctrines, be they never
so perplexed and mysterious.

Nor does this introduce a Blind Credulity, and such an Implicit Faith as some
of the Romanists defend, for when we resign up our judgments to Divine
Revelation, we are not debarred from examining and searching into, and
satisfying our selves about the Truth of the things we speak of, but only of
the Mode of them. Which makes it a quite different thing from the practice of
the Roman Proselytes, who are bid to swallow down whatever is dictated to them,
and that upon the bare Authority and Warrant of the Church. But here is no such
crude Method prescribed, we are to Acts 17. 11.
search the Scriptures, whether these things be so, and we are to make use of
Reason to show and convince us how fitting it is, that we should believe what
is revealed by the Spirit of God. For seeing since the Revolt and Original
Depravation of Man, we stand in need of Revelation to direct us, right Reason
tells us, that it is unsafe to rely on the bare suggestions of our own minds in
the great matters of Religion. This acquaints us, that though we are not
capable of answering all difficulties in those Points, yet we are obliged to
give credit to the doctrines themselves, because they are founded on Scripture,
which was divinely inspired. This Principle in us assures us, that though we
cannot fully explain these things by Reason, yet we have reason to believe the
Holy Writ, which is the Rule and Measure of our Faith, yea, notwithstanding
those Points seem to thwart the natural principles of Reason. Thus far we have
Reason on our side.

And then for Scripture, that is wholly and entirely ours. Those Grand
Articles, which our Antagonists renounce are found there. Particularly to
instance in that Great and Celebrated Doctrine which I have so often mentioned,
one would think it might suffice, that this is so directly, so plainly, so
frequently asserted in the New Testament: where we find Three expressly named,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom the Divinity is ascribed, and therefore we
believe these Three to be One God. But how these three distinct Hypostases are
one Entire, Indivisible Essence, is an ineffable and incomprehensible Mystery.
Yet, though we cannot conceive the Manner of this, yet the Thing it self is
clearly and plainly revealed in Scripture, and consequently the Socinians have
no cause to brag, that theirs is an History or the Unitarians, p. 9.
Accountable and Reasonable Faith, when it absolutely opposes and contradicts
the Holy Oracles of the Bible.

This is the true state of the matter, and so it was thought to be by that
Learned Writer, whom I before quoted, who has the repute, even among these men
of a Person of Great Reason and Sense; speaking of them, he Dr. More, History
of Godliness, Book 10. Chap. 6.
thus expresses himself, Their Opinion I look upon as fundamentally repugnant
to Christianity it self, if the New Testament be the foundation of
Christianity, for I know nothing more express than That ( viz. the Trinity) in
those Writings. And therefore the denying of the Trinity is the denying of the
Authority of the New Testament. Or, if they will pretend they can interpret
things there so as to evade this doctrine, by the same reason I think they may
evade any, and so still the Sacred Writ shall stand for a Cipher, and signify
nothing, which tends mainly to the enervating of our Faith. These are very
Weighty words, and the more to be considered by our Adversaries, because they
come from One of a Large Compass of Mind, and a great Asserter of Reason in
Religion, which is a thing that these Gentlemen pretend much to. The sum of
what he says is this, that if the Scripture be true, the doctrine of the
Trinity is so too: if Divine Revelation in the books of the New Testament is to
be believed, then this also must be embraced. And on this very account it has
been embraced by all religious and pious minds that have had a reverence for
the Holy Scriptures. As it was the Faith once delivered to the Saints, so it
has ever since been the steady belief of all the Martyrs and Confessors of
Jesus, and all the True Professors of Christianity, and it has with invincible
force in all ages of the Church born down all opposition that has been made
against it. And I question not but those violent Efforts and Insults which have
been, and are made against it in this present Age will prove vain and
successless. Though we have seen the rain descend, and the floods come, and the
winds blow, and beat upon it, yet it shall never fall, because it is founded
upon a rock, the same Rock on which the Church of Christ is built, viz. the
Confession and Testimony of the Inspired Apostles, the Truth and Authority of
the Scriptures, the Veracity of God, and the Certainty of Divine Revelation.
And all the other Sacred Mysteries of our Religion have the very same stable
foundation, and therefore are Impregnable.

Let this then satisfy us, that these Doctrines are sufficiently revealed,
though they are not fully known. I say they are sufficiently revealed, because
the Book of God assure us that these things are so: but they are not fully
known, because we are not able to discover the Arguments on which they are
founded; we discern not the foot on which they stand: God has been pleased to
hide this from us. But then this is to be said, It is not reasonable to
renounce our belief of that which is plain and evident, because it is mixed
with something which is dark and intricate. It was an Excellent Caution and
Rule of the Great St. Augustine, De do^o Perserv. Sanct. Cap. 14.
Nunquid ideo negandum quod apertum est, quia comprehendi non potest quod
occultum est? The Truth of a Doctrine may be evident and perspicuous (and that
is sufficient to command our Assent) though the Nature of it is not. The Modes
and Circumstances appertaining to Divine things are not to be accounted for: at
least, if we cannot clear them up, we have no reason to quit the Grand Truths
themselves. These are not to be abandoned because they are not according to our
ordinary level, because we are not able to render a punctual account of them,
because we cannot perfectly Gauge them, and sound them to the very bottom; in a
word, because they are not subject to the Tribunal of Reason. But if we have
any regard to the Sacred and Infallible Volume, we cannot but entertain these
Divine Doctrines, and firmly believe them, and heartily approve of them; for
when we find any thing (though it is impossible to explain and unfold it)
vouched by Scripture, we need desire no more. Whence we may judge of Socinus
and Smalcius, the De Christo S^rvat.
former of whom declares concerning the Satisfaction of Christ, and the Hom. 8.
in 1 Johan.
latter concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, that they would not
believe these doctrines, though the Scripture should expressly assert them.
These are strange passages in Writers that bear the Name of Christians, and
seem to own the New Testament (as well as the Old) where every thing is
Authentic, and worthy of all acceptance, and depends not on the arbitrament
of our shallow Reasons. Here to doubt is In^idelity, to be scrupulous is an
affront to Heaven, to dispute is an injury to the Deity.

To conclude, It appears from the whole that the Disciples of Socinus are the
most foolish and senseless pretenders to Reason in the whole world, because they
make it their business to argue against the God of Reason and the Spirit of
Truth. But if they will call their Anti-Scriptural Notions by the name of
Reason, who can help it? Only this we are sure of (and it is all I will add at
present) no truly Rational and Sober man will be pleased with that Reason which
rejects what God has revealed, which vilifies the Discoveries that come from
Heaven, which contradicts the Bible, and gives the Lie to Him who is the
Original Truth, the Eternal Reason, the Source of all Understanding, and Light
and Knowledge it self.

FINIS.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. John Edwards, and printed for Jonathan
Robinson, and John Wyat.
AN Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a Probable Resolution of them. In Two
Vol. 8o

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament; with a continued Illustration of several difficult Texts
throughout the whole Work. In Three Vol. 8o

Some Thoughts concerning the several Causes and Occasions of Atheism,
especially in the present Age; with some brief Reflections on Socinianism, and
on a late Book, Entitled, The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in
the Scriptures. 8o Price 1s. 6 d.

A Demonstration of the Existence and Providence of God from the Contemplation
of the visible Structure of the Greater and the Lesser World. In Two Parts. The
first showing the Excellent Contrivance of the Heavens, Earth, Sea, etc. The
Second, the wonderful Formation of the Body of Man. 8o Price 4 s.

Socinianism Unmasked: A Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of a late
Writer's Opinion concerning the Necessity of only One Article of Christian
Faith, and of his other Assertions in his late Book, Entitled, The
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures, and in his
Vindication of it; with a brief Reply to another (Professed) Socinian Writer.
8o Pr. 1s. 6d.

The Socinian Creed: Or, a brief Account of the professed Tenants and Doctrines
of the Foreign and English Socinians; wherein is showed the Tendency of them to
Irreligion and Atheism: With proper Antidotes against them. 8o Price 3 s.

A brief Vindication of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith; as
also of the Clergy, Universities, and Public Schools from Mr. Lock's
Reflections upon them. With some Animadversions on two other late Pamphlets,
viz. of Mr. Bold, and a Nameless Socinian Writer. 8o Price 1s. 6d.

Brief Remarks upon Mr. Whiston's New Theory of the Earth; and upon another
Gentleman's Objections against some Passages in a Discourse of the Existence
and Providence of God, relating to the Copernican Hypothesis. 8o Price 6 d.

Several Sermons Preached on Special Occasions. Price 5 s.

BOOKS printed for Jonathan Robinson, and John Wyat.
A Practical Exposition on the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer. In Two
Vol. In 4o

The Vanity of the World; with other Sermons. In 8o

Sermons or Discourses on several Scriptures. In Four Vol. In 8o

The Almost Christian discovered; in some Sermons, on Acts 26. 28. All these
written by the Right Reverend Father in God, Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop
of Londonderry.

Bishop Usher's Life and Letters. By Dr. Parr. In Fol.

-- 's Body of Divinity: Or, the Sum and Substance of the Christian Religion.
Fol.

-- 's 22 Sermons on several Subjects. Fol.

Iosephus's History of the Jews. Fol.

Dr. Bates's Harmony of the Divine Attributes. 8o Fourth Edition, 1697.

Charron of Wisdom. In Three Books.

All Dr. Anthony Walker 's Works, viz.

The Sinfulness and Danger of delaying Repentance.

The Virtuous Woman: Or, the Life of the Countess of Warwick.

The Virtuous Wife: Or, the Life of Mrs. Eliz. Walker.

His Sermons of Water-drinking, Preached at Tunbridge-wells, etc.

The worthy Communicant. A Treatise showing the due Order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Seventeenth Edition. By Jeremiah Dyke.
Newly reprinted 1697.

The Poor Doubting Christian drawn unto Christ. By Thomas Hooker.

Ovid's Metamorphosis, in English Verse. By George Sandys.

Aesop's Fables in Prose, with Cuts.

Solitude improved by Divine Meditation. By Nathaniel Ranew, late Rector of
Felsted, in Essex.

Practical Discourses concerning Death and Heaven. By Nathaniel Ranew.

Correction, Instruction: Or, a Treatise of Afflictions. By Tho. Case.

The Principles of Christian Religion; with a brief Method of the Doctrine
thereof. By Bishop Usher.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ. In 2 Sermons. By W. Bridge.

Brinsley's Posing of the Parts reprinted, 1697.

Sir Simon D'ew's Journal of all Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments. Fol.

Bacon's Historical and Political Account of the Government of England. Fol.

BOOKS lately Printed and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Fourth Volume of the Works of Dr. Thomas Goodwin. In Fol.

Mr. Clark's Survey of the Bible: Or, an Analytical Account of the H.
Scriptures. 4o

Ten Sermons Preached on several Occasions. By William Bates, D. D.

A Discourse concerning Natural and Revealed Religion, Evidencing the Truth and
Certainty of both. By the Considerations (for the most part) not yet touched by
Any. By S. N.

The Altogether Christian his Duty Explained and Enforced, in some Sermons on
Acts 26. v. 28, 29. Together with the Causes why there are so few, who are
Altogether Christians. By John Foxcroft, M. A. formerly of Clare-Hall, in
Cambridge, now Rector of Wifordby, in Leicestershire.

The Character and Blessings of a Prudent and Virtuous Wife; with other
Particulars relating to the Marriage State, practically considered, in a
Discourse on Prove. 19. 14.

The Beauty of Magistracy; with other Observations concerning Government,
Represented in an Assize Sermon, Preached in St. Mary's Church, in Leicester,
Mar. 26. 1697. Both by the same Author.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by John Wyat, at the Rose, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
FAmily Devotions, for Sunday Evenings throughout the Year. In Four Volumes,
each containing Thirteen Practical Discourses; with suitable Prayers for the
Four Quarters of the Year. The Second Edition. Price 10s.

The Excellent Woman, described by her true Characters, and their opposites:
Being a Just and Instructive Representation of the Virtues and Vices of the
Sex, and Illustrated with the most remarkable Instances in Ancient and Modern
History. In Two Parts. Done out of French. Price 4 s. 6 d.

Consolations to a Friend upon the Death of his Excellent and Pious Consort:
Applicable also to a Resentment of the Death of other dear Relations and
Friends. Price 1s.

Family Prayers for every Day in the Week; containing a short Summary of
Christian Religion. The 2 Edition. Price 2d. Those that will give them away
shall have them at 10 s. per Hundred. All these by Mr. Theophilus Dorrington.

A Vindication of the Truth of Christian Religion, against the Objections of
all Modern Opposers. Written in French by James Abbudy, D. D. rendered into
English by Henry Lussan, M. A. In 2 Vol. 8o Price 10s.


