Nov. 18. 91.
Imprimatur,

Gabr. Quadring, Procan. Io. Beaumont* Io. Mountagu. Io. Spencer.


AN ENQUIRY INTO Four Remarkable TEXTS OF THE New Testament Which contain Some
DIFFICULTY in them: WITH A Probable Resolution Of them.

By John Edwards B. D. sometime Fellow of St John's College in Cambridge.

1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part, and we prophecy in part.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by I. Hayes, Printer to the University; for W. Graves
Bookseller there. 1692.

The TEXTS Enquired into and Resolved are,
S. Matthew. II. 23.

He shall be called a Nazarene.

1 Corinthians. XI. 14.

Does not even Nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair it is a
shame unto him?

1 Corinthians. XV. 29.

Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at
all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?

1 S. Peter III. 19, 20.

By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison: who sometime
were disobedient, etc.

THE PREFACE.
THat there are Obscurities and Difficulties in Holy Writ is acknowledged by
all persons that are conversant in this Sacred Volume. And truly, if we
consider things aright, we shall find that this is not unworthy either of God
or of his Holy Word. Not of God himself who endited the Sacred Scriptures, for
he has most Wisely ordered that there should be some things Obscure and
Mysterious in them, to create a becoming Reverence, and to let us know that
these Writings are not penned after an ordinary manner. These Clouds and
Darkness are suitable to the Majesty of Heaven, they are proper to beget in us
Humility, and Mean Thoughts of our selves, to convince us of the Shallowness of
our intellects, to show us how Short-sighted we are, to give check to our
Presumption, to quash our towering Conceits of our knowledge, to supersede our
Vain Boasting, to repel our Vaunting Pride and Insolence. They are serviceable
also to rebuke our Sloth and Negligence, to provoke our Care and Study, and to
excite our utmost Diligence. Thus it has pleased God to exercise the
Understandings of men, and to make trial of their Industry by these Difficult
passages which occur in Scripture. If all places were easy, this Book would
be liable to Contempt, and there would be no room left for our Diligent Search
and Enquiry. But now at every reading of it we still find something to employ
our understandings ^^resh, and to improve (...) most i^quisitive faculties.
Here our minds may be perpetually busied, here is enough to entertain our
greatest leisure and most earnest study. Here are many Mysteries to be
unfolded, many Depths to be fathomed, many Abstrusities (both in the things and
in the words that convey the notice of them to our minds) to be discovered: so
that to the Greatest Student and most Ambitious Enquirer, that will happen
which the Son of Sirach says in another case, When a man has done, then he
begins. Here are not only Foords and Shallows which we may easily wade
through, but here are unpassable Depths and Abysses. It has seemed good to the
Wise Governor of the world that there should be in the Holy Scripture Some
things hard to be un^derstood (as St Peter particularly pronounces of S Paul's
Epistles,) that ^ereby the Excellency of these Sacred Writings might appear,
that by this means it might be seen of what Universal use they are: far those
places which are plain and clear are fitted to ordinary capacities, and those
other portions which are deep and intricate are the proper entertainment of the
Learned, and thus the Whole Book is calculated for the general benefit of all.
(...). Hom. 36. in 1. ad Corinth.
St Chrysostom ^ath summed it up thus very briefly, All passages in Scripture
are not plain and perspicuous lest we should be Lazy, nor are all obscure lest
we should Despond. This Excellent Tempering of the Sacred Writ is a high
commendation of it, and is no other then the Wise Contrivance of Heav^n.

And as this Obscurity of some parts of Scripture is not unworthy of God
himself, so neither is it any disparagement to his Sacred Word. For we must
know that this Difficulty happens from the very nature of the things themselves
which are here recorded. It cannot be otherwise but that some portions of
Scripture must be dark and obscure, and consequently must labor under
Different and Contrary Expositions, because they were written so long ago, and
contain in them so many Old Customs and Usages, so many Relations concerning
Different People, so many and various Idioms of Tongues, such div^rsity of
Ancient Expressions, Laws, and Manners of all Nations in the world. It is
unreasonable to expect that we should exactly understand all these. It is not
to be wondered at that these occasion Do^bts, Difficulties, Mistakes. And it is
certain that the being ignorant of some of these is no blemish either to the
Sacred Writings, or to the persons who read and study the^. Suppose I do not
know what the house of Asuppim is, 1 Chronicles. 26. 15. or what kind of trees the
Almug or Algum-trees are, 1 Kings 10. 12. 1 Chronicles. 20. 8. or who are meant by
the Gammadim, Ezekiel. 27. 11. What though I am not so well skilled in the Jewish
Modes and Fashions, as to tell what kind of Womens-Ornament the houses of the
soul are, in Isai. 3. 20. or what particular Idols or Pagan Deities Gad and
Meni are, Isai. 65. 11. or which of the Heathen Gods is meant by Chiun or
Remphan, Amos 5. 26. Acts 7. 43. Some of the Learnedest Expositors and Critics
have confessed their ignorance as to these pla^es of Scripture: particularly
upon the last of them our Profound Antiquary has these despairing words, Me
tam caecutire sentic ^t nihil omnino videam. Seldom de D^s Sir. Syntag. 2. c.
14.
For my part I perceive my blindness to be such that I can see nothing at all.
and to the same purpose this Admirable Person speaks concerning several other
passages in Scripture, as of Nishroc, Nergal, and other Idols mentioned there,
the origin and meaning of which Names are hid from us. Many other Reasons
might be alleged of the real or seeming Difficulty of some places, namely the
Sublimity of the Matter, the Ambiguity and Different Significations of the
Words, the Inadvertency of Expositors, and sometimes their unskilfulness, and
oftentimes their Willful Designing to pervert the words, in order to the
maintaining some opinions or practices which they adhere to. But no man of a
sedate mind and reason can think that the Scriptures themselves are disparaged
by these Difficulties and Mistakes, for they are not arguments of the
Scriptures Imperfection, but of Man's. Besides, these Obscurities which are
accompanied with the various ways of rendering some Expressions, and determining
the Sense, are no proof of the Imperfection of this Holy Book, because in
matters of Faith and Manners, which are the Main things we are concerned in,
and for which the Bible was chiefly writ, these Writings are plain and
intelligible. All Necessary and Fundamental Points of Religion are set down
here in such expressions as are suitable to the capacities of the most simple
and vulgar. God has graciously condescended to the infirmities of the meanest
and most unlearned, by speaking to them in these Writings after the manner of
Men, and by propounding the greatest Mysteries in a Familiar style and way. The
Scripture, so far as it relates to our belief and Practice, is very easy and
plain, yea much plainer then the Glosses and Comments upon it oftentimes are.
In a word, most of the places of Scripture call not for an Interpreter, but a
Practiser, As for other passages, which are Obscure and Intricate (but which
are very few in respect of those that are plain,) they were designed (as has
been already suggested) to employ our more inquisitive and elaborate thoughts,
and to whet our industry in the studying of this Holy Volume; that at last,
when we have the happiness of retrieving the lost sense of the words, and
restoring them to their genuine meaning, we may the more prize our acquest
which has cost us some pains. Or, if after all our attempts we cannot reach
the true meaning, we have reason to entertain reverend thoughts of those
Difficult Texts of Scripture, and to persuade ourselves that they are worthy of
the Divine Enditer, though our weak minds cannot comprehend them. If Humane
Authors delight to darken their writings sometimes, and it is accounted no
blemish, surely we may conclude that the Mysteries of the Sacred and Inspired
Style are rather an inhansment then a diminution of its Excellency. Shall we
not think it fit to deal as fairly with the Sacred Code ^s Socrates did with
Heraclitus's writings, that is, not only pronounce so much as we understand of
them to be Excellent and Admirable, but believe also that what we do not
understand is so too? It is certainly an undeniable truth, that neither the
Wisdom of God nor the Credit of this Inspired Book are empaired by any
Difficulties we find in it. Therefore when the men of the Roman persuasion make
use of these Hard places in the Bible to disparage and discredit it, and to
render the Scriptures useless as to the common people, questionless they take a
wrong course: first they complain that these Writings are Obscure, and then
they make them more so by locking them up from the sight of the people; whereas
they should rather expose them to light, and indeavo^r to remove the obscurity
by expounding them.

This is that which I have done in this Critical Essay which I here venture
into the world: of which it may be expected I should give some brief Account;
therefore take it thus, In my first Attempt, viz. on those words, [ He shall be
called a Nazarene,] I reject (but not without showing my Reasons) the most
generally received Interpretations, and offer another, namely that by a
Nazarene is meant one of the city Nazareth, an Inhabitant of that place: and by
the Prophets that foretold this, I understand some Inspired persons who
predicted that our Savior should dwell and converse at Nazareth: and this
their Prediction was delivered from one to another till it came to St Matthew,
who here sets it down in writing. Therefore let it not startle the Reader that
I say in my Discourse on these words, There was such a Report or Tradition in
this Evangelist's days: for though this is but a Conjecture, yet it is a very
Probable one, I showing that the Apostles St Paul and St Jude made use of the
like Reports and Traditions, and inserted them into their Writings. Wherefore
it is not unlikely that the Evangelist here refers to a Tradition which was at
that time concerning Christ's being a Nazarene, i. e. that he should be one of
the city Nazareth. But because this is only Probable, I advance farther, and
prove that this was not only spoken by some Uncertain and Unknown Prophets, and
so conveyed to the Jews, but that it was likewise foretold by those very
Prophets who were the Penmen of the Holy Scripture: and accordingly I proceed
to prove that these Writers directly predicted Christ's being related to the
place called Nazareth, and his having his denomination thence, (for he was
brought up there, Luke 4. 16. and therefore it is called his Country, 23 v.)
and lastly I make it evident that this was actually fulfilled and accomplished
in the plain and obvious meaning of the words, viz. that he was called a
Nazarene, i e. One of Nazareth: he was reproached for being an Inhabitant of
that place, and that not only by the Gentiles, but by the very Jews, for the
Galilaeans, of whom the people of Nazareth were a part, were of Pagan
extraction, as the Samaritans were: they were both of them looked upon by the
grand body of the Jews as no Jews properly, a kind of barbarous people in
comparison of themselves and other inhabitants of Judea.

In my Exposition of the Second Text, which is this, Does not nature it ^elf
teach you, that if a man has long hair, it is a shame to him? I take the words
(...) and (...) in the largest extent, i. e. I consider the former, as it
signifies Custom, and the Law of Natural Reason, and the Distinction of the
Sexes; and the latter, as it denotes both the Length and the Decking of the
hair, and accordingly I make it my business first to prove, that if a Man
either indulgeth an Immoderate Length of hair, or is sollicitous about the
Composing and Adorning of it, he acts contrary to the Custom of the soberest
part of mankind, whether they be Jews, Egyptians, Arabians, Grecians, Romans,
etc. (all whose practice in t^is case I have represented from those Authors who
treat of the manners of those people.) If it shall be objected, that there was
a Different and Contrary Custom as to these things, I grant it, and yet this is
no prejudice to what I maintain, for the Apostle without doubt means the Custom
and Usage of the better and wiser part of mankind, and not of the worst. Then,
in the next place, I demonstrate this to be disagreeable to the laws and rules
of Reason, which I explain in several Particulars. Afterward, I show it to be
against the established Law of the Sexes, whereby one of them is distinguished
from the other. So that taking the words in this Latitude, the meaning of the
Apostle in them is this, That a Christian man should not do things repugnant to
any of these three Rules, viz. Laudable Custom, Reason, and the Law which is
proper to each Sex; and that he that wears his hair of an Immoderate Length, or
after the guise of Women, offends against all these Rules. If any one object
against the Latitude of this Exposition, I answer, that I take this for an
allowed Verity, that when we meet with words in any place of Scripture which
have different senses, and those senses are not inconsistent with one another,
we may lawfully take them all into the meaning of the Text; and that is it
which I do here, and thereby render the meaning of the words full and entire.
However, take the words which way you will, and if you pitch upon any
Particular Sense, I hope I have suggested that which will give light to it.

I here adjoyn something concerning the Custom of Covering and Uncovering the
head among the different People and Nations of the world. The sum of what I
say is, that the Eastern people went ^lways with their heads covered, and the
Greeks were always ^^covered, but the Romans took a middle way, for they
thought they were bound as to this matter to distnguish between the times of
Worship and of Common Conversation, and that the behavior which was used in
the one ought to be different from that of the other. Accordingly they always
covered their heads in the time of Worshipping: from whence (as well as from
what is recorded of them) we may gather that their practice was contrary when
they were about their ordinary business, that is, that they were Uncovered. But
from the Jews covering their heads when they worshipped, we cannot infer that
they did not do so at other times, and the reason is because they made no
distinction at all between one time and the other as to this behavior. Only, I
desire the Reader (that he may not misinterpret me) to distinguish between the
Ancient Romans and those that came after them, for as to this usage (as well as
to some others) these two exceedingly differed from one another: uea, the
Latter Romans were strangely inclined to shift their customs, and differed from
Themselves as well as the Old Romans, as I have showed. This I thought fit to
mention here, lest any man should mistake me and the Truth it self. I have
added something likewise concerning the custom of the Other Sex, and there
you will find that there is no Variation at all: the Women of all Nations
generally covered their heads when they were abroad, and the Apostle is not
willing they should lay aside so Landable and Catholic an usage.

In my Third Undertaking, which is an interpretation of those so much
controverted words; What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? I recite
the various opinions of Authors concerning the meaning of this place* not that
I delight to muster up whole Armies of Writers, some Ancient and some Modern,
some at home, others abroad, but because the present affair requires it. There
being several Expositions of these words, it was necessary to acquaint you with
them before I offered that which I conceive to be the true and genuine sense of
the Apostle. Accordingly, after I have rejected the interpretations of Others
on the place, and have all along given you the Reasons why I do so, I at last
expose my own sentiments in a plain and easy interpretation, such as every one
may see is the genuine import of the words, viz. that to be baptized for the
dead, is no other then to be baptized because of the dead, or for the sake of
the dead, i. e. of those Holy Martyrs who laid down their lives for Christ and
his Blessed Cause. The courage and bravery which these showed at their death
did effectually invite great numbers of Infidels, who took notice of their
Christian behavior, to lay aside their false and idolatrous religion, and to
embrace the Faith of Christ, and to desire to be admitted members of the Church
by Baptism. By reason of the admirable carriage of those dying Martyrs, there
were Converts daily gained to Christianity: many Jews and Pagans were stirred
up to own the same Holy Religion which they saw them defend so undauntedly.
This made them eager of being baptized. This I take to be the plain meaning of
their being baptized for the dead, i. e. they were baptized, and became
Christians for the sake and on the account of those deceased Saints who they
saw attested the truth of Christianity with their blood. How probable this
Interpretation is, yea how preferable to all others, I hope I have convinced
the Reader in the Discourse it self, to which I remit him.

In my Last Effort, where I undertake to show who are the spirits in prison to
whom Christ preached, I do (as before) enumerate the several Glosses which have
been made upon the words. Some have fetsh'd the sense of them from Heaven,
others from Hell, and some from a Middle place (as they fancy) between both:
and many others have presented us with their Conjectures on this Text. But when
I have discovered the invalidity of them, I proceed to let you see what Other
more true account may be given of the words. And that is this, Christ by his
Spirit in his Apostles and Ministers preached the Gospel to Sinners (and to
whom else should be preach it?) to Unconverted and Unregenerate persons,
whether Jews or Gentiles: and hereby many of them were converted to the faith,
and were saved. This is the plain sense of this Text, which has been so
differently handled by Protestants and Papists: and this interpretation (as I
think I have made it evident, but the Reader is to judge) is conformable to the
scope of the Context, suitable to the Phrase and Language both of the Old and
New Testament, and most agreeable to the Thing it self which is here
represented by the Apostle. For there could not be a more Easy, and yet a more
Significant expression to set forth the state of men in their fins then This of
the spirits in prison. Those persons are, in a Religious and Spiritual way of
speaking (which is the constant style of the Holy Ghost in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles) Prisoners and Bondmen shut up in a miserable Durance:
they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and
iron, as the Psalmist describes Poor Captives, Psalm. 107. 10. This is a plain
and obvious Metaphor, and at the very first propounding of it we are able to
apprehend its meaning. Poor distressed souls that are under the bondage of sin
and vice, are spirits in prison, but the Blessed Jesus comes and preaches to
them by the Ministry of his Apostles and servants, and thereby brings them out
of darkness, and the shadow of death, and breaks their bonds in Sunder, as the
same Divine Poet speaks in that place. Certainly then S^ Peter (who had been a
Acts chains, 12. 16.
Prisoner and bound with and knew the hardships and misery of this sort of men)
could not have made choice of any Similitude, could not have used any
Expression whereby it was possible to give us a more Compendious Character, a
more Lively and Natural Idea of the Deplorable Condition of Unconverted
Sinners, then this here does. Which makes it somewhat strange that such
multitudes of Expositors and Comment ators have not taken notice of it, but
have rather chosen to give us some farfetched and strained interpretations of
these words.

This is the short Account which I thought good to premise before the following
Exercitations. In the whole I hope I have faithfully discharged my task: this I
am sure of, that I have not wilfully made any false steps. I have been very
fair, and have used no violence upon the words, as it is the too common
practice of Critics. They are people that rack their Fanci^s and the Texts
together, they stretch and serve the words, they ^eaze and worry, they torment
and most unmercifully force and drag a Text to their side. You may observe it,
an arrant Critic is a Resolate sort of man generally, he is very Earnest in
his work, though in never so light a matter, and pusheth it on to the ^tmost
extremity. I could mention several Professors of Critisism who are guilty of
this miscarriage, who make it their business to force their may. You shall see
them set downbefore a Text, and raise their Batteries against it, and play
their Cannon and Mortars upon it. If this will not do, they come with greater
force, and make a fresh assault with stronger Detachments from Poets, Orators,
Historians, Philosophers etc. and fall on with greater fury, thinking by this
means to bring it to a Parley, and then a Surrender: or rather, by their furious
attacks we may guess they intend no other thing then to take it by Storm. And
truly in this Imaginary Romantic Adventure they think they have done it, they
persuade themselves they have taken possession of the Fort, and so the
Campaigne is at an end, and there is a period to their doughty attempts. But I
hate these Vi^olent courses, this besieging of a Chapter and Verse. this
investing of a Place of Scripture. I abhor the common practice of ra^aging and
preying upon the Bible: I do not like the Bombarding of Scripture, I approve
not of the Storming of a Text, and taking it by force. It is a very unchristian
and unbecoming employment to extort a sense from any place of Holy Writ, and by
little Critical arts and fetches to bring over the words to a compliance with
us, i. e. to the meaning which we design. Indeed this (however it may be
represented as a Mighty Work) is easily done by the aides of a Ready Invention,
a Luxuriant Pen, and a show of some Reason and Argument, espeoially if these be
backed with a strong Desire of venting some New Notion in the world. But then I
do not think that the man believes the thing himself after all his flippant.
Rhetoric and strained Logic: which methinks should make him very uneasy and
much dissatisfied, for how can one offer that to others to be believed, which
he gives no credit to himself* For my part, I love first to satisfy my self
about any Point, before I design to expose it to others judgments: and this I
have done in the Present Undertaking, otherwise I should think I had dealt very
uncivilly (to say no worse) with the world. I have offered that upon These
Texts which I conceived to be most Credible, which I found to have the warranty
of Reason or some Good Probability. I am not conscious of any unhandsome and
unjust dealing with the words which I have made the subject of my Discourses. I
have not set any of the Texts upon the Rack, I have not put them to the Torture
to confess what they never intended. I have let them speak freely and
unconstrainedly: and then you may expect no other then Truth and Realities. If
Others have different conceptions concerning these places of Scripture, I am
not offended in the least. I have offered the Reasons of my assertions: let
them show theirs, and then perhaps there will be no disagreement. However, my
purpose is to be Friendly and Peaceable, and I desire to treat all Writers with
a due respect and deference, though I cannot comply with them in every thing
that they assert.

To conclude, let all our Enquiries and Disputes about these Scripture
Difficulties, be unfeignedly designed and referred to the Glory of the Supreme
Eternal Being, to the advancement of our knowledge in the Inspired Writings, to
the enlightening our minds in the True Religion, to the edification of the
Church, and the advantage of the Christian world.

The first TEXT Enquired into. viz. S. Matthew II. 23. He shall be called a
Nazarene.
THOUGH the Practical part of Christian Theology be infinitely more noble, more
excellent, more useful then either the mere Speculative or Polemical parts of
it; though the Easiest and Plainest matters of our Religion be of the greatest
importance to us; and consequently though those places of Holy Scripture which
are most Intelligible and Practical, and contain in them the necessary duties
relating to Faith and Manners be our chiefest concern, yet it is certain that
the other parts of this Holy Book, even those which are Obscure and
Controverted, are not unworthy of our thoughts and studies, Yea, These carrying
some Difficulty with them, may on that very account justly call for our more
serious disquisitions, and challenge our more intent enquiries. Questionless
the explaining the Difficult passages of Holy Writ is not only a very
Entertaining and Delightful undertaking, but such a one as will prove
extremely Advantageous to the Christian Church, if it be performed aright. By
this means we shall first be brought to admire and adore, and then to apprehend
the profound Mysteries of the Bible; we shall learn by degrees to fathom its
Vast Depths, we shall be invited to search yet Farther into its hidden
Treasures and so at last to arrive to Greater and Larger Measures of that
Divine Knowledge, which, next unto the Practice of Religion, is the most worthy
accomplishment of a Christian m^ns life. For these reasons I will attempt to
make an Enquiry into, and then to offer the Resolution of some Obscure and
Difficult Texts which we meet with in the Writings of the New Testament.

I Begin first with this Notable passage in the Evangelist S* Matthew, with
which he closes his second Chapter, He shall be called a Nazarene. There were
two ways of interpreting this of old: First, Adv. Marcion. l. 4.
Tertullian and Demonstr. Evang. l. 7. c. 1.
Ensebius, and some other Ancient Fathers thought it was an allusion to the
Nazarites, a Religious and separate rank of persons among the Jews spoken of in
the Old Testament. And more particularly, St Ierom on the place tells us that
Nazarenus Sanct^^ interpretatur: Sanctam autem Dominum futurum omnis
Seriptur^commemerat.
a Nazarine he^e is to be interpreted a Holy person, and that it is mentioned
through out all the Writings of the Old Testament that the Messiah, our Lord
Christ, was to be such, and consequently that it might well and truly be said
that the Prophets foretold concerning him, that he should be called a Nazarene,
i. e. a Holy Nazarite. The second way of interpreting these words among the
Ancients was this, that they have reference to those places where Christ is
called Netzer, a Branch, as in Isai. 11. 1. and 60. 21. yea, St Ierom himself,
who seemed to have fixed on the former way of Interpretation, is inclined to
think that this Prophecy Illud quod in Evangelio Matth^^i omnes quaerunt
Ecclesiastici, and non inveniunt ubiscriptum sit [ quoniam Nazarenus vocabitur]
eruditi Hebraecrum de h^c loco assumptum putant. Hieron. Comment. in Esai. cap.
11. v. 1. and again, Possu^us and aliter dicere quod etiam iisdem verbis juxta
Hebraicam veritatem in Es^ia scriptum sit [ Exiet yirga de radice etc.]
Comment. in Matt^. cap. 2. v. 23.
was taken out of the first verse of the Eleventh chapter of Isaiah, and such
like place that speak of the Branch. These were the Two Opinions of old
concerning this Text, and they have been taken up by Modern Expositors both of
the Church of Rome and of the Reformed persuasion. Among these latter are
Grotius and Hammond (to name no more,) the first whereof merits that Title
which the Greeks gave Alexander Aphrodisaeus, the Antientest Commentator on
Aristotle, viz, (...), the Interpreter, by way of Eminency. For certainly no
man has excelled him in giving the Literal sense and interpretation of
Scripture. For this he is Incomparable, and speaks more Good Sense in one line
then some others in a dozen long Periods. The second of these Modern Expositors
is our Countryman, one of the Greatest Divines and Critics of this last Age, a
person of equal Learning and Piety, and therefore worthy to be (what he most
Eminently was) a Son, or rather one of the Fathers of the Church of England.
The former of these Excellent Writers refers (...). to the word Nazar
seperavit, whence the Nazarites are styled, and so Christ (says he) was
foretold in the Old Testament to be an Abstinent Mortified person, a True
Nazarite. The second refers the word Nazarene to that sacred and venerable
title of (...) the Branch often applied to the Messiah, and thinks that our
Evangelist speaks of this here.

But I cannot Subscribe to either of these Excellent Persons in what they offer
concerning the meaning of this word Nazarene. It is my persuasion that neither
of these references were intended by the Evangelist, and my reason is this,
because they are nothing at all to the purpose. Mark how the words are brought
in, He came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene. Is it not
plain to any common understanding that Nazarene refers to Nazareth, and that
Christ should be called the former because he divelt in the latter? Certainly
there can be nothing more evident then this, and therefore it is impertinent
here to talk of his being Netzer the Branch spoken of in the Old Testament, or
of his being a Nazarite, which is no where said of him. Or, if he were a
Nazarite in any sense (as Nazar may fignife a Holy Separate person, as our
Learned Lightfoot, and before him Beza and Heinsius have observed on this
place) yet this is nothing to the purpose, because that word has no reference
at all to the city Nazareth, which is he^e spoken of. I have therefore
sometimes wondered that very Learned men have contented themselves with these
impertinent Notions, and that they could prevail with themselves to think that
either of these were the true meaning of the place. Can any man reconcile this
to sense that the places in the Old Testament which foretell of Christ as the
Branch, or as a Nazarite, (if there were any such thing) were fullfilled in his
dwelling in a town called Nazareth? Can any man of any accuracy of reason see
the Accomplishment of the one in the other, or find any Affinity between these?
But now if we take [ a Nazarene] for one of the city Nazareth, or one that
dwelt at Nazareth, the words are plain and easily understood, and any one may
see the Fulfilling of the Prophecy here spoken of. This then is that which I
offer as my sentiment concerning this Controverted Text, viz. that neither
Christ being called Netzar, not his being in any sense a Nazarite are so much
as to be thought of in this place, because they are wholly impertinent and
foreign here: but the true, genuine, and unforced meaning of the place is, that
it was foretold of old by the Prophets that our Savior Should be called a
Nazarene, i. e. a man of Nazareth, and accordingly when he came and dwelt in
the city called Nazareth, that which was thus spoken by the Prophets was
fulfilled. Here is no straining of the words, here is no need of far fetched
Criticisms, but the sense of the Text is facile and obvious, and he that runs
may read it and understand it.

But you will ask, where is it foretold that he shall be called a Nazarene, i.
e. one of Nazareth? Here then is the greatest Difficulty (if it may be called
so) to prove that this was Prophesied concerning Christ Or rather, there are
these two things to be proved before I can hope to gain the Readers assent to
what I have offered: First I must make it appear that this was foretold by the
Prophets, viz. that Christ should be called a Nazarene, i. e. a man of
Nazareth; and Secondly I am obliged to show that he actually was called so.
Both these are very Evident, in so much that I cannot but wonder again that
Expositors have overlooked a thing which is so plain and obvious. First, it was
foretold that our Savior should bear the Name of a Nazarene, and that first as
it is a Name referring to a Place, and secondly as it is a Name of Reproach,
taken from his inhabiting in such a place.

First, it was foretold as a Name derived from a Place, as it denotes our
Savior to be one of Nazareth. But you will ask, where does any Prophet say
that he shall be an Inhabitant of Nazareth? I answer, This is not the very
thing which the Text asserts: and the observing of it will lead us to the right
understanding of the words. It is not said it was spoken by one particular
Prophet, but by the Prophets: by whom may be understood not only those that
were the Penmen of the S. Scripture (of whom afterward) but others of a like
Prophetic spirit, who used to foretell the Coming of the Messiah, and
particularly to assign the Place of his general Abode, as well as that of his
Birth and Crucifixion. And therefore though we find not in the Sacred Writings
these express terms [ He shall be called a Nazarene,] i. e. he shall be, and be
called One of Nazareth, yet St Matthew's words are true, that this was spoken
by the Prophets, for it was the General Saying among them, when the Jews
enquired of them where the Messias's habitation should be the greatest part of
his life, that it should be at Nazareth, a Town in Galilee. This was a Received
Report among the Jews, and passed for a Prophetic Saying, and thence the
Evangelist makes use of it, and applies it here very appositely when he was
relating how Joseph being warned of God turned aside into the parts of Galilee,
and came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth. This, says he, was spoken of
long before by the Prophets, by the Holy Men that discoursed of the Messia his
Coming, and we have received it from them. For without doubt they had many
things delivered to them from the mouths of Prophetic persons, which were
transmitted from age to age. Thus we find St Jude quotes Enochs Prophecy, which
he had only by Tradition, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints, v. 14. And St Paul makes mention of the Egyptian Sorcerers Iannes and
Iambres, 2 Timothy 3. 8, whose Names are not found in Exodus, but were taken out
of the Traditions of the Jews. In like manner our Evangelist quotes that here
which was reported to have been said by certain Prophets of old, whose
Predictions were delivered from one to another. It is not improbable that St
Matthew had by Tradition such a Prophecy as in express syllables foretold that
our Savior should be called a Nazarene, i. e. he should have his Name from
Nazareth, the place where he was to dwell, for it is very likely that This, no
less then the Place of his Nativity, Bethlehem, was predicted by some Inspired
and Prophetic men.

The next thing I am to prove is that this Prophetic Rumor which prevailed
among the Jews was actually fulfilled, i. e. that our Blessed Master was called
a Nazarene, or one of Nazareth, as that Name has reference to the place of his
Habitation. It cannot escape our observation that it is particularly recorded,
and that sundry times, not only in the four Gospels but in the Acts of the
Apostles, that Christ was called Jesus of Nazareth, and that this was a Name
given him by all sorts of persons. He was called so by the Multitude, Luke 18.
37, and more Expressly and Emphatically in Mat. 21. 11. This (say they) is Jesus
the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee: he had this Name given him by his Friends
and Followers, by his Apostles and Disciples, as you read in Luke 24. 19. John
1. 45. Acts 2. 22 and 4. 10 and I0. 38. and 26. 9. The same Name was attributed
to him by his professed Enemies, Mark 14. 67. John 18. 5. Acts 6. 14. and more
especially by Pilate his Judge, who fixed this Title on the Cross, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews, John (...) and as for the other Titles set over him,
mentioned by the rest of the Evanglists, they were but Abbreviatures of this.
Observe farther that the Angels of heaven called him by this Name, Mark 16^^6.
and so did the Devils, Mark 1. 23. Luke 4. 34. Lastly, he is thus Named by
Himself, Acts 22. 8. where we find that even from Heaven he was pleased to own
this Title, I am Jesus of Nazareth, says he to the surious Saul's Now, is not
this very remarkable, and much to our present purpose, that his being of
Nazareth constantly gave the Denomination to him? He has his Name from no
other place, unless it be from Galil^e, Mat. 21. 12. and Nazareth was part of
that Galilee, so that in a manner it was the Same Name. He shall be called a
Nazarene, said the Prophers; and behold, he was So, In Nazareth he was bred up,
and thence he had his Name: which you see is most particularly and signally
taken notice of in the Evangelical Writings: as it were to tell us that the
Prophecy concerning this Name of Christ was really fulfilled.

We have now passed the Boine, we have overcome that Great Difficulty (for so
it was thought by some, and looked upon as insuperable) viz. the proving that
Christ's being called a Na^arene (i. e. one of Nazareth) was in that very
notion and sense both fore^old and fulfilled. Let us now proceed to Vanquish
this seeming. Difficulty by Other Arguments. Secondly then, we are to consider
this Name as it is a Name of Reproach, and so I shall show that it was foretold
by the Prophets, even the very Prophets who were Penmen of the Old Testament
that our Lord should be called by this Name, and likewise that he was so called
in way of Reproach. The first of these is to be proved only in a general way
from the Old Testament, where it is often declared that Holy and Righteous
persons shall meet with Reproachful words from the mouths of wicked men, that
it is their usual lot in this world to suffer in their Names and Reputations,
to be scoffed at and defamed by that sort of people, and to be represented as
persons loathed and forsaken by the Divine Numen. More particularly of our
Savior it is said that he shall be a Despised and Contemptible person in the
eyes of men. I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the
People. All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they
shake the head, etc. Psalm. 22. 6, 7. And again, For thy sake I have born
reproach, shame has covered my face, Psalm. 69. 7. The reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen upon me, v. 9. They that sit in the gate speak
against me, v. 12. It is universally granted that David was a Type of Christ,
and what he here says is spoken also of Him whose Representative he was. This
no man who is acquainted with the Bible, and the genius of it, will so much as
think of denying; yea, he will acknowledge that that whole 22^ Psalm is more
especially and peculiarly applicable to our Savior, and it is certain that he
rehearsed either all or part of it when he hung on the Cross. Of this Despised
Jesus speaks that Evangelicall Prophet, His visage was marr^ed more then any
man, and his form more than the Sons of men, Isai. 52. 14. He has no form nor
comeliness: and when they Shall see him, there is no beauty that they should
desire him. He is Despised and rejected of men: they hide as it were their
faces from him: he is despised, and they esteem him not, chapter 53. v. 2, 3. Thus
it was plainly foretold that Christ our Redeemer should be despised and
reproached, and spoken against, in which General Predictions this Particular
one is included, viz. that he should be despised and defamed because of the
meannesse of the Place of his habitation: he shall be called a Nazarene, he
shall be reproached and vilified by reason of his Education and Abode in that
Town. Although the Prophesies which I have alleged are spoken generally and at
large, yet this is clear and undeniable that if the Title of Nazarene was used
by Christ's Enemies as a mark of their despising and rejecting him (which I
shall make good anon,) then even this Particular Name was implied and contained
in the General Prediction concerning him. Or, take it thus, though these
Individual words here set down by the Evangelist [ He shall be called a
Nazarene] are no where found in the Writings of the Prophets, yet the Sense and
Meaning of them are there, which is sufficient: as in Acts 10. 42. St Peter
alleges This as testified by all the Prophets, that through Christ's name
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of Sins: and yet among all
the Prophets there is not one extant that has these words, which he here
delivers. He speaks not the very words, but the sense of the Prophets: and so
does St Matthew here, he tells us that it was spoken of by the Prophets that
Christ shall be called a Nazarene, which very words though they do not occur
in any Prophetic Writer of the Old Testament, yet the meaning and Import of
them is to be found in those Writings, as I have showed: for there we read that
Christ, as well as his Followers, shall be despised and rejected, defamed and
reproached, which is the true sense and meaning of these words [ He shall be
called a Nazarene.] Thus the written Word of God attests that he was to be
called by this Name. But perhaps the Prophesies which were by Tradition spoke
expressly of this Appellation, and foresignisied to the Jews that this
individual Title of Nazarene should be made use of, and applied to the Messiah
when he came into the world; to which also it is likely St Matthew here refers,
as has been said before.

The next thing to be proved is that this Prophecy was actually fulfilled, And
here first more generally (taking this Name for a Name of Reproach and
Ignominy) we can prove that it was fully accomplished in that our Savior was
actually reproached, miscalled, defamed, when he was here upon earth. They
traduced his Birth and Parentage; they derided him for his supposed Fathers
Trade, and perhaps his Own, as if it were some great blemish, some unpardonable
crime to be of an Honest Calling. His Life was accused of Debauchery and
Profaneness, he was aspersed as a Glutton and a Wine-bibber, he was reproached
as a wilful Violatour of the Sabbath; yea, whatsoever he said or did was
matter of their Obloquy and Slander. All ranks of men conspired to revile the
Blessed Jesus. He was mocked at by the Sanhedrim, by their Great Doctors and
Rabbis, men of Beard and Gravity: he was also shouted at by the Giddy
Multitude, by the Common Rabble, and baser sort of People. The Priests fiercely
cried out against him, and treated him as ignominiously as they used to do the
Scapegoat when it was to be packed away into the wilderness. The Laity
endeavored to surpass their Instructers, and doubled their spite against the
Holy Jesus. Nay, his own Relations disgraced and abused him, some of his
Kindred looked upon him as no other then a Distracted and Phrentick person, and
accordingly they came in have from Nazareth to lay hold on him, and confine
him. He is not only besides himself, but he is Possessed, if you will believe the
Pharisees: he does all his Miracles by Art Magic, by a Confederacy with the
Prince of Devils and Apostate Spirits. In the Jewish Consistory he is impeached
of Blasphemy; in the Civil Court, of Sedition and Treason: and lastly, when he
hung upon the Cross, they charged him with Despair and utter Distrust of God.
Thus from his first entrance into the world till his going out of it, he was
the constant subject of men's Slanders and Reproaches. This Prophecy therefore
in the Text was in the general fulfilled, in that he was thus egregiously
reproached and traduced. This Prediction [ He shall be called a Nazarene] is
made good, for he was called by all those Names which signify Disgrace and
Reproach, and This is one of them.

Besides, it was accomplished in a general way, in as much as Christ's
Disciples and Followers were treated after the same manner: for what was done
unto them is interpreted to be done unto Christ Himself. This I suppose will
not be denied, and therefore we are only briefly to recount the ill usage in
this kind which they met with. In the Evangelical History we are informed that
the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus were a despised sort of men, that they were
most unworthily aspersed and vilified, that they were laden with all Obloquies
and slanders. St Paul speaking of himself and his fellow Apostles, acquaints
us, that they were reviled and defamed, made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13. And those that succeeded these
First Worthies of the Church sared no better. It was considently reported by
their Enemies that they worshipped, an Asses head, whence they had the Name ^f
Asinarii. It was said that they met together before the Sun rose to murder
their own infants, and that they then crammed themselves with their warm flesh,
and glutted themselves with their reeking blood: and that when this was done,
these Canibals, these Devourers of their own kind proceeded to acts of
Filthiness and Incest; yea, and that at all other times they lived in the
practice of the most Flagitious sins, the most Execrable villainies. From the
writings of the Pagans, and of those that Apologized for the Christians, we are
ascertained that all manner of Falsities were invented by the Enemies of
Christianity, and thrown upon the Professors of it. These poor vile abject
Creatures stood exposed to the shock of their injurious tongues, and received
all the filth which their Exulcerated minds could vomit forth upon them. To
give you an example of the Highest Improvement of these men's Malicious
Reviling, they had the impodence and effrontery to fasten upon the Christians
even the Commission of those villainies which they acted themselves: thus when
Nero had set Rome on fire, he laid the fact upon these Innocents, as both
Tacitus and Suetonius cell us. It came to this at last, that the very Name of
Christian, without any addition whatsoever, was a sufficient Reproach. When
they called any man a Christian, it was as much as to say he was a Criminal of
the Highest Nature. Thus in general the Prophecy here mentioned by the
Evangelist is accomplished, the Christians, and in them Christ himself, were
despised and rejected; they had all the Names and Marks of Reproach fastened
upon them. Though they were aggrandized by the most Honorable Titles given
them by God, yet they were debased and vilified by the Worst of Apellations
conferred upon them by men. In this large sense the Prophecy is true, they were
called Nazarenes; they, as well as our Lord himself, the Great and Noble
Institutour of Christianity, were loaded with Contumelies and Reproaches.

But more particularly, we are to prove the Accomplishment of this Prophecy, by
showing you that this individual Name of Nazarene, or one of Nazareth, was used
as a Reproachful Appellative toward Christ and toward his Followers. We must
know then that though Nazareth be called a City in this place of St Matthew,
yet all agree that it was a Mean and Poor one, and rather deserved (if we look
upon it in it self) to be called a Village. Which is no unusual thing in
Scripture, where we find places that have the Name of Cities are also called
Villages, as in Ios. 19. 7. 1 Chronicles. 4. 32. And in the New Testament, Small
Towns or Villages are sometimes styled (...), Mat. 9. 35. Mark 1. 38. Of
Bethlehem we may Particularly observe that it is called (...) a City, in Luke 2.
4. but (...) a Village, in John 7. 42. We meet with the like in other Authors:
So Bethsura is called a City by Antiqu. Iud. l. 12. c. 14.
Josephus, and in the same place (...) a Village or Town. Thus Nazareth, though
it have the name of a City, yet it was but a mean Town, or rather a Village:
whence it was said in a Proverbial way, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? John 1. 46. It was, as appears by this Common Saying, a sorry
Contemptible place, and yielded no inhabitant of any Note and Worth, unless
you will reckon Mecanicks and Poor Tradesmen to be such. A Nazarene, a man of
Nazareth, was generally a Despised person among them. Hence it may be
reasonably inferred that those who had a mind to disgrace and defame our
Savior Christ, used to reproach him with a Title taken from this poor little
Town, and to call him a N^zarene, a man that belonged to that little Village,
and consequently was some pi^ifull fellow. But this, you will say, is
Conje^ture only. I deny it, and give this reason for it, viz. because it is
plainly grounded on Scripture. For we read in Acts 24. 5. that ^ Paul was
accused by that Sp^uce Orator Tertallus, for being a Ringleader of the sect of
the Nazarens, i, e. of the Christians, who were called so from Christ Jesus of
Nazareth their first Founder and Master. He being bred in that so^ry Town, was
in way of contumely called a Nazarene by those that disliked his doctrine and
institutions. And from Him his followers derived that Name, and had it
frequently given them by those that hated their way of Religion, especially
when they solemnly undertook to accuse them before Great Ones, as Ter^ullus did
the Apostle her^ before Filix. That Christ and those who professed Christianity
were usually branded with the name of Galil^ans (they being of that Country for
the most part) is evident from L^ke 23. ^ Acts 2. 7. yea, the Name lasted till
some hundreds of years after Christ, as may be gathered from Julian the
Apostate's crying out, (when he was struct by an unseen hand,) O Galilaean thou
have vanquished me, meaning without doubt the Blessed Ies^^, who was now seated
at the ^ight hand of God in heaven. Not only ^ Paul is called a (...). In
Philopatr.
Bald Pate Galil^^^^ by Lucian, but all the Primitive Christians were generally
stigmatized with the title of Galilaeans by Julian, P^rp^yrius, and other
enemies of the Christian Religion. Now, this must be said with truth, that when
they called Christ a Galilaean, and when they gave his followers that name, it
was the same as if they had called them Naz^rens, because Nazareth was so noted
a place in Galilee. But, which is yet closer to our present business, the
Primitive Christians were more particularly and ^mphatically styled Nazarens
from that Town of this Name in Galilee, where Jesus was brought up and dwelt
the greatest part of his life. This is with great evidence restified and
confirmed by Epipha^i^s, who not only tells us that there was a ^ort of
Heretics called Nazarenes, out that the Orthodox Christians also bore that
name, Heass^res (...) that these were commonly known by the name of (...), etc.
Adv. H^res. l. 1. Hares. 29.
Nazarenes, and that they had no other Noted Name among their Adversaries and
Opposers. Yea, at this day the Jews call the Christians (...) Notzerim, as we
are informed by (...) on Acts 24. 5. and there is no body I believe, will think
that (...) falsifies, when he says the (...) at this day style the Christians
Nazarenes. Grot. in Acts 24. 5. It is undeniable then that both Christ and his
followers bore the name of Nazarens, and thus was fulfilled than which was
spoken by the Prophets, ( i. e. either generally by those that were W^iters of
the Old Testament, or particularly and expressly by some Other Propheets that
were of great note among the Jews* and whose Sayings were delivered down to
posterity) viz. that Christ should be called a Nazarene. He was really and
truly called so. Among other Ignominious Names This very Particular one of
Nazarene, i. e. a man of (...), was frequently given him. For this word (...)
here, and in Mark (...) and other places (what ever some have fancied of it) is
as much as (...), one of Nazareth. The former word is but an Abreviature of
this latter, which is no unusual thing in the style and language of Scripture,
as those who are conversant in the Hebrew and Greek Text know very well. Indeed
the last Syllable eth in Nazareth is but a bare termination, and this (as all
Gramma^ians will confess) is Thence it is sometimes Nazara, as well as
Nazareth, according to that of Iuvencus, lib. 1. -- ubi Nazara felix.
Variable, and consequently the Adjective from this Substantive may be (...),
or (...) (as it is in Mark ^. 24. and (...) 4. 34) as well as (...) the eth
being not of the Essence of the word. The Text then may be either rendered thus,
He shall be called a Nazare^^, or a Nazarene (as we find it translated) or a
Nazarethite. It is not material which of these words we use: only it is to be
remembered that we are to understand by it One of Nazareth, one of that Small
contemptible Village, one that was under valued and despised because of his
rise and habitation there. Such was our Blessed Lord and Savior, He was
scorned and contemned as a poor silly Villager. But our Inspired Author assures
us that it was foretold by the Prophets that he should be despised and
reproached, and spoken against; in which General Predictions is included the
sense and meaning of this Particular one. He shall be called a Nazarene: for
this call^ing him a Nazarene or one of Nazareth, is an evident token of their
(...) him, and is a dow^^ight ^eproaching and speaking against him.

Thus I have given you my thoughts concerning this Text of Scripture, and have
attempted to offer to you the Plain and Genuine meaning of it: (...) far as I
can judge; it is impertinent and incoherent, it is (...) and ridiculous, to
Interpret it in either of the senses mentioned in the beginnig of this
Discourse. If we do so, the Connection of the words is Illogicall, Irrational
and Absurd. This is my present appreh^^sion of this place* and if I be
mistaken, let it be remembered that I have been offering a Notion about a
Controverted Text, not deciding a Point of Faith, and consequently there is no
great danger in the mistake.

The Second TEXT Enquired into, viz. 1 Corinthians. XI. 14. Does not even nature it
self teach you, that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him?
IN this Chapter the Apostle treats of these two things, First, of the Decent
Habit of men and women in their public meetings, from the beginning to the
17th v. Secondly, of the Right Administration of the Lords Supper, to the end
of the Chapter. Under the first head he reproves the Corinthians because the
Men among them covered their heads, and the Women uncovered theirs when they
prayed or prophesied. And here let us see in what manner the Apostle reproves
and re^utes this practice. First, before he comes directly to it, he premiseth
and s^^leth the Grand Order or Constitution which is appointed by God, viz.
that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and
the head of Christ is God, v. 3. That is, Christ as he is Mediator is
subordinate to God the Father, and man is next in dignity to Christ, and the
woman to the man. Christ Jesus is the Head to whom the Man is immediately
subject, and ought to be Governed by: and though Christ be the Head of the
Woman also, yet it is Viro medi^^te veluticapite subordinato. Estius in loc.
with the interposition of Man, who is as it were her Subordinate Head. This is
the true series of the man's Superiority over the Woman, which St Paul lays as
the foundation of his Reproof in this Chapter. Christ is subject to his Father,
as he is man, and as he is the Minister of man's Redemption: the Man is subject
to Christ, and the Woman to the Man. Upon this foundation he raises This
superstructure afterward, that a Man ought to uncover his head, and a Woman to
Cover hers in the Congregation, that the former may not dishonor Christ, no^
the latter her Husband: for by one the man shows his ^reedom and Dominion, by
the other the Woman testifies her subjection, And here the Apostle lays open
the Disorder and Faultiness of the Christian Corinthians as to this
particular. He complains that that Divine Order before mentioned was not
strictly observed by them: for whereas the Woman ought to be subordinate to the
Man as her Head and Governor, they used a Custom which was contrary to it. It
was This, the Women among them after the Heathenish way laid aside their Veils
in public and religious Assemblies, and appeared with their naked heads: and
the men took the women's Veils, and covered their heads and faces with them. The
Un^itness and Unreasonableness of which practice (besides that it was a Pagan
usage, especially among the Priests and Pr^estesses) the Apostle declares in
those words, (v. 4) Every man praying or prophesying with his head covered
dishonours his head, i. e. he dishonours Christ. He acknowledges by this
Covering that Christ is not set by God over him as Chief Govenour, that he is
not Supreme on earth: and consequently he detracts from his own True Worth and
Eminency, and disgraces his Sex, as if not Christ but some other were his Head.
To be Uncovered is a ^ign of his Superiority, but a Covering on the head is a
token of Subjection: therefore it is against the Dignity of his Sex and of
Christ likewise, whom he should represent, as a Man, thus to be Covered. And as
for the Other sex, Every woman, says the Apostle, v. 5. that prays or
prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head, i. e. her Husband,
or her Own Head by showing it openly naked. The meaning is, she does that which
is contrary to Divine Order and Natural Modesty, for by putting on her Veil she
ought to acknowledge her Inferiority and Subjection to her husband; but she
throwing that aside acts in opposition to it, and at the same time she appears
in an Immodest guise in the place of Solemn Worship. It follows in the same
verse, For that (i. e. having her head uncovered) is even all one as if she
were shaven, which is most Inde^orous and Shameful. Baldness or Shaving is
Unnatural, and therefore Hateful in a Woman, for she should rather no^rish her
hair; of which afterward. This may give some Light to that in Deuteronomy. 21. 11,
12. When thou see among the Captives a beautiful woman, and have a desire to
her, that thou ^ouldest have her to thy wi^e, then thou shall (...) her home to
thy house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails, or ^ather;
according to the Hebrew, make her nails, and let them grow. The Design is to
make the captive Maid Deformed, that the person who was taken with her might
have the heat of his affection abated toward her. In order to this she must
^ot only let her nails grow, but shave her head, which is a S^ame and
Deformity, contrary to the (...) the Comely Adorning of the head, of which I
shall speak anon. And it is added, v. 3. She shall put off the raiment of her
captivity, i. e. the Hansome Attire she was in when she was taken captive, and
she must put on Mournful Sordid Apparel a full month, as you read in the next
words. All which shows that she was to be kept up in the man's house (who took
her in war) in a Neglectfull, yea Deformed plight, and that shaving her head
was part of that Deformity: and consequently that this is Uncomely and
Disgraceful, yea Loathsome and Unsufferable in that Sex. Therefore our Apostle
subjoins, v. ^. If the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn, i. e. for
her to be without a Veil, without a Covering on her head, is no less Unseemly,
yea Detestable, then if she were shorn: she may as well be without any hair at
all. But (as he goes on in the same verse) if it be a shame to be shorn or
shaven (as most certain it is, seeing the having of long hair is her Glory, as
you read afterward) let her be covered. Thus much for the Woman. As for the
Man, he ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the Image and glory
of God: but the woman is the glory of the man; v. 7. Which is another Argument
to prove the aforesaid Order or Constitution, viz. that Man is more immediately
and properly the Image of God, the representation of the Divine Excellency, and
therefore must be Uncovered. In comparison of the Woman he is the Glory of God,
and that primarily, but the Woman is but the Image and Glory of the Man. Again,
the Apostle argues from the O^iginal of Man, v. 8. For the man is not of the
woman, but the woman of the man, i. e. Man has this Prerogative to be
immediately from God, but the Woman was from Man. He argues also from the End
as well as the Origin of Man, v. 9. Neither was the man created for the woman,
but the woman for the man; as much as to say, the woman was made to be a Meet
Help, to be Administering and Subservient to Man: consequently she is not
superior to him, but she is to behave her self Submissively, and therefore to
cover her head, which is a sign of that Submission. The Apostle pleads for this
behavior as due also in respect of the Angels, v. 10. For this cause the woman
ought to have power on her head because of the Angels; the explication of which
I shall remit to another place. But although this was the rate of St Paul's
Divinity, yet in the two next verses he does a little moderate his discourse,
and qualify what he had said in the 8th and 9th verses, to which this ought to
be annexed. Because he might seem to have been somewhat too Harsh to the Women,
he prudently and cautiously mitigates and tempers his former Argument here,
that it may not redound to the disparagement of the Sex. Nevertheless (says
he,) neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man in
the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman:
but all things of God, v. 11, 12. Having thus salv'd his harsh doctrine, he
proceeds to a new Topic, namely the Natural Congruity and Decency of the thing
it self which he had been urging. And here he appeals to Themselves, and their
Own Judgment concerning the matter he is speaking of, and reproving them for,
viz. Men's praying with their heads covered, and Women, with theirs uncovered.
Judge in your selves (faith he:) Is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered? v. 13. It is so Reasonable a thing which I speak of, and now require
of you, that I submit it to the Natural sentiments and decision of your own
minds. And here the words of the Text are brought in, Does not Nature it self
teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a shame to him? But (on the
contrary, v. 15.) if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her.

By this short Descant on this part of the Chapter you may perceive the Design
and Scope of the words which I am now to treat of, Concerning men or women's
wearing their Hair. Expo^itors have exceedingly varied in their endeavors to
Join these words with the former: many things very much Strained and Misapplied
are said by them; But upon a deliberate view of the whole, I take This to be
the True and Natural Coherence of the words; They are brought in here by the
Apostle as a Reason of the Precept he gave them, viz. that Women must be Ve^led
or Covered, and Men Uncovered when they pray. To persuade and convince them of
the Reasonableness of this Command he appeals to Nature, and tells them that
This teaches them that very thing which he enjoins them: and This disalloweth
of that which he forbids them. As if he had said, your selves may in your own
minds and consciences judge of the Decency of Men's uncovering their heads when
they pray, and of the contrary Indecency of this practice in Women. I have
showed you that these are founded on the Appointment of Heaven, the Order of
our Universal Governor, the Principles of Nature, the Law of Reason, and the
Distinction which ought to be between the Sexes. This is no ^nfrequent thing
that your duty is commended to you even by the dictates of your Reasonable
Nature. Several things which may be urged upon you are of this fort, the very
Natural Light which you are endued with, suggests the observance of them. As
now, because I am speaking of Covering or Uncovering the head, I will instance
in a thing which is nearly related to it, viz. the Manner of wearing the hair
of the head, What is commendable in Men, and what in Women as to this matter*
Here the very Light of Nature shines upon you, and directs you what to do. If
you will consult your selves, and the Natural suggestions of your minds, you
shall plainly discover what is your duty. Even nature it self teaches you,
that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him: but if a woman have long
hair, it is a glory to her.

But all persons that have Commented and Treated on these words do not so
easily agree about the meaning of them: Yea, there is a very great Disagreement
among them. And the reason is, because they give different senses of these two
Principal words, [ Nature] and that other which we translate [ to have long
hair.] The only Difficulty therefore lying in these two words, I will enquire
1. What is meant by Nature. 2. What is meant by having long hair, or rather
what the Greek word, which is here so rendered, truly signifies.

First, let us enquire what is meant by Nature. Nature here teaches us
something, but we cannot tell what that is which it teaches, unless we know
what Nature is. And in order to that, we must acquaint our selves how this word
[ Nature] is taken. It sometimes signifies the Natural and Inbred Corruption of
mankind. Thus we are said to be by Nature the Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. i.
e. by our Common Degeneracy and Apostasy in Adam we are liable to the wrath of
God. And so generally in the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers the word is
taken, it denotes the Corrupt Nature of man, the original Depravation of the
sons of men. But seeing the Apostle here speaks of something which is Good and
Laudable that Nature teaches, thence we may infer that This is not, and cannot
be the meaning of the word in this place. There are Three other significations
of it, and one or more of them must undeniably be understood here.

First, it is taken for the Law of Nature in General, Natural Light or
Knowledge, the Inward dictates of Reason in a man's breast. Thus the Gentiles
do by nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. i. e. they have a
Rational Principle in them which prompts them to do those things. This has its
name both in Greek and Latin from its (...): Natu^^, a nase^^do.
being born with a man, it is the Innate and Congenite property of the Rational
soul of man. And because God is the God of Nature, and it is He that has
planted in our minds Reasons of Good and Evil, therefore this becomes a Divine
Law, and is set up in men's hearts as such. What is dictated by Right Reason or
the Law of Nature may be said to be dictated by God Himself. Therefore St
Chrysostom on this place faith, that (...). Homil. in 1 Cor. 11.
when Nature is said to teach us, the Apostle does as good as say, God teaches
for it is He that has contrived and framed Nature.

Secondly, It is taken for that Particular Law or Dictate of Nature which
teaches a Difference of Sexes: as in Romans 1. 26, 27. Their women did change
their natural use into that which is against nature: likewise the men left the
natural use of the women. Here it is evident that (...) and (...) and (...)
signify the Discrimination of the Sex, and what is suitable or disagreeable to
this Discrimination. Nature here must needs signify the Distinction of Sex, i.
e. the Particular Law of Nature concerning that Distinction, and not the Law of
Nature in General; for though other sins, as Fornication and Adultery, are
against the Laws of Nature and Reason as well as This, yet This is against the
Law of the Sex, and the Distinction of man and woman, which is a Particular and
Individual Law of Nature, and wholly different from those others. You will also
find This to be the signification of the word (...) in Lexicons and Glossaries
from very Good Authors, as Thacydides, Josephus, Philo, etc. Salmasius proves
(...) to be Sexus: and answerably to this meaning of the word (...) and (...)
are understood in Diodorus Siculus, Josephus and others.

Thirdly, the word (...) may be rendered Castom: and this unquestionably is
sometimes the meaning of the word in Good Greek Authors. The Verb (...) is as
much as solet, and thence the Verbal Nown (...), which is derived thence,
signifies Custom. But this is not the proper and genuine signification, but is
only a Derivative sense, because what is Natural is usual and common; and
again, what we Use our selves to does as it were become Natural to us; thence
Custom is said to be a second Nature, yea, a (...).
Long and Inveterate Custom is stronger then Nature it self. So that according
to this threefold acception of the word, there is a threefold Opinion
concerning the meaning of the Text. 1. Some hold that it is a Law of Natural
Reason that a man should not have Long Hair, i. e such hair as women have. So
Vorstius and Poimenander (two Belgic Divines) understand the words, and their
Countryman Grotius is not wholly averse to it, for he is willing to grant that
it is a Custom founded on Natural dictates. Does not Nature it self teach you,
that etc. i. e. Does not the Jnbred and Natural Light in your minds dictate
this to you? 2. Others say the Text speaks of that Particular Law of Nature
which teaches there must be a Difference between Sexes. So Sa^masius and
Revius interpret the place. Does not Nature it self teach you, that etc. i. e.
the Sex, the Difference of Sex, the Distinction of man and woman teaches you
this, it being the Law of Nature to put difference between man and woman as to
Clothes, and Wearing the hair. 3. Some hold that it is Custom only which
teaches this. Thus Calvin, Grotius, Hammond understand the words: but it is
not well agreed among them whether it was a Particular or a General Custom,
whether it was a Custom among all Nations, or some only. Thus far we have
considered the First Principal word in the Text.

The Other word [(...)] which is rendered here [ to have long hair] is variously
taken also: which is the other reason why this place is so difficult to be
understood. The word [(...)] is as much as [ gloriari, superbire] in very
sufficient Authors; but because it is evident that That cannot be the meanning
here, I will pass it by. The other two significations of the word are pertinent
in this place. (...) signifies either barely to Nourish the hair, and let it
grow at length, or to Bind it up in a neat manner, to dress, trim and adorn it.
These are the two noted significations of this Greek word. Accordingly I will
consider the Apostles words 1. as they may be meant of Long Hair: 2. as they
may be understood of Hair that is Tied up, Trimmed and Adorned.

First, taking [(...)] for [ having long hair,] let us enquire in the First
place whether C^stom teaches us that we ought not to wear such hair; Secondly,
let us see whether Natural Reason teaches this: and Thirdly, what the
Distinction of Sexes dictates in this case.

I. If Custom be meant by (...) here, let us examine what Custom there is for
Long Hair, and that first among the Jews, secondly among the Gentiles. First,
what was the Custom of the Jews? Among them the Divine Law forbad the Priests
to Lev. 21. 5.
shave either head or beard. But though they were not to do this, yet they were
not to wear their hair Long, but a middle way was prescribed them, that is, a
Moderate cutting of the hair, as we read in Ezekiel. 44. 20. They shall not shave
their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long, they shall only poll their
heads. Neither Baldness nor too Long hair were to be used, both these Extremes
were to be shunned in opposition to the Heathens (as you shall hea^ afterward)
who sometimes cut off all their hair, at other times let it grow Neglected and
Long. But a Decency and Moderation are here enjoined the Priests, and they were
to be Examples to the People. And it is likely the people did follow this
Pattern at first, and wore their hair of a moderate length, although in this as
well as in other things they afterward swerved from the Rule, and were
dispensed with because of the hardness of their hearts. Thus some of the Jewish
people had very long hair, and the Pictures which we have of them represent
them oftentimes so. But from the beginning it was not so, for it is probable
that the same Law obliged the People and Priests, i. e. that they should
neither shave their heads, nor wear their hair long. But it will be asked,
where is this Prohibition? I answer, one part of it is expressly set down, and
the other is implied. All persons among them were forbid to shave, or cut close
their hair, lev. 19. 27. Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither
shall thou mar the corners of thy beard. They are forbid here the Circular Cut
of their hair, i. e. to cut the hair of their heads or beards after the
superstitious manner of the Pagans, who used* (as several Learned Bonfrerius,
Bochart, Groti^^, Heinsius.
Writers inform us) to round the hair of their heads, that is, to cut it off
all on the sides, and to leave only a Lock behind, or a Tust at top, which they
devoted to some God or Goddess. This particular way of Cutting the hair was
used in the time of Mourning for the dead, as I gather from the next verse,
where the making any cutting in the flesh for the dead is forbid. Their Cutting
themselves was a sign of their Excessive Lamentation for the deceased: and so
this rounding the corners of the head (i. e. cutting the hair off on all sides)
being joined with it, is to be interpreted (I conceive) of Immoderate Mourning
for the dead, Lamenting as the Heathens used to lament their departed friends.
And to confirm this Interpretation, you will find these two joined together
again in Deuteronomy. 14. 1. and in Ier. 16. 6. For otherwise you may remember that
they made themselves Bald at Funerals, and they did not offend in so doing. We
read that this was the practice of the best among them. And they were invited
to it by the Prophets, or rather by God himself. The Lord in that day called
for Baldness, Isa. 7. 15. and so in Isai. 22. 12. Ier. 7. 29. Mic. 7. 18. They
would not have been called upon to Lament after this manner, if it had been
sinful. So then, this Baldness or Tonsure at Funerals and other Sad Occasions
was not unlawful among the Jews, only so far as it was Superstitious, and in
imitation of the Idolatrous Gentiles. Therefore that Law in Leviticus chiefly
respects the Idolatrous Custom of throwing their Hair into the Sepulchers of
the dead, and devoting them to the departed souls, and such like practices
among the Pagans. But now from this particular Custom of cutting off their
hair, or Shaving in case of Great Mourning, we may gather that at Other times
they did not cut so close, for it is clear that if they did, they would have
left nothing to cut when the Mourning-Time came. It is reasonable therefore to
conclude that they generally wore their hair of a Moderate Dimension, and as
they cut not close, or in that Spherical way before spoken of, so they ran not
into the Other Ex^^eam, viz. of indulging Uncut and Long Hair. And This is as
evident as the other, for the practice of the Nazarites is a demonstration of
it. These were a peculiar sort of Devotionists among the Jews who suffered
their hair to grow, and wore it Long, and put it in fillets, or knots and
locks, as the women then did. Samson was such a Nazarite. A razor shall not
come upon his head, says the Angel to Mano^h's wife. And God promised him that
as long as he continued a Nazarite, and cut not his Hair, but let it grow; this
should be a token to him of that Strength which God extraordinarily (...) him
with *but he broke the Vow of Nazarism and suffered his hair to be cut off.
Some distinguish between Perpetual and Temporary Nazarites: among the former
they reckon this Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist, among the latter Absalom
(who cut his hair the thirtieth day of his Vow,) and St Paul, who had made a
Vow not to shave for a time; but this being expired he cut his hair after a
solemn manner, as was the Custom, and is expressed in Acts 18. 18. Having shorn
his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow. (Though it is thought by some that this
refers to Aquila just before mentioned, and not to St Paul.) And such were the
Nazarites spoken of in Acts 21. 23, 24. Yea Dr Lightfoot is of opinion that
these Corinthians, some of them at least, in a superstitious humor affected
Nazaritism, and that this was the occasion of the Apostle's reproving them for
their Long Hair. But though it be the received opinion that there were some
Perpetual, and others Temporary Nazarites, yet I am not satisfied about it; I
rather think that they were All left to their liberty to vow as they pleased,
and that some observed the Vow a longer, and others a shorter time. He that
(...) Number. 6. (which Chapter is wholly spent in setting down the Law of
Nazarites) will be persuaded to think so, especially if he well weigh the 17,
and 18. v. Thence it will appear that it is a mistake that some Nazarites never
cut their hair: From this place it is clear that none of them (for This is an
Universal Law concerning Nazarites) nourished their hair Continually, but that
after such a certain time they cut it off, and devoted it to God. All Nazarites
might after a set season dispose of their Hair. But that which I infer from the
premises is this, that the Law of Nazaritism concerning Long and Uncut Hair
(thoug^ but for a time) proves that the wearing of Long Hair was not the common
us^ge of the Jewish people. If it was peculiar to few, and that by Vow, then it
was not the practice of the general body of the Nation. The Nazarites abstained
from cutting their hair: therefore others (who were not obliged by the Law of
Nazaritism) did cut their hair, and suffered it not to grow Long. Nazarites by
Vow wore Long Hair, therefore those who were not tied by that Vow (as the
Generallity of the Jewish people) took up another usage. Long Hair was a thing
Unusual and Extraordinary in those Religious and Separate persons: therefore it
was the Usual Custom not to have long hair. These I take to be very Rational
Inferences. This was the first thing I undertook, to acquaint you what was the
Custom of the Jews. And here there is something more to be seen and gathered
then among Other People of the world, because besides the Law of Nature, they
had the Law of God to direct them in this as well as in other things.

In the second place let us see the practice of the Gentiles. The Arabians,
among whom I^b lived, used to shave their heads in time of Mourning and
Lamentation, as you may gather from his practice, Job 1. 20. And this was so
notorious that In Thalia.
Herodotus testifies of them that they were clipped as Apollo was, in a round
figure, they cut off all the angles about their temples. These are thought by
some to be (...) in Ier. 9. 26. and 25. 23. pr^cisi angulo, those that are cut
off in the corners, i. e. those that cut their hair round, and left no corners,
viz. when they had a solemn occasion of Lamenting. From Arabia if you pass into
Egypt, you may gather from their custom of letting their hair grow Long in time
of Calamity and Sorrow, that they did not nourish Long Hair at other times.
Thus (...) 2. cap. 36.
Herodotus acquaints us that the Egyptians (contrary to the Jews) in the days
of Mourning let their hair grow Long on their heads. The truth of which is
confirmed to us by Genesis 41. 14.
the Sacred Records, which tell us that Joseph cut his hair when he was
released from Prison, and was to go into King Pharaohs presence. But Herodotus
in the same place adds that the Egyptians used to shave their beards in time of
Sorrow, though they let the hair of their heads grow. And therefore in the
Egyptian Hieroglyphics, where Hair cut off signifies Grief and Bondage, it
must be understood of the Hair of the beard, not of the head. And as the people
indulged not themselves in an Excessive Length of hair* so neither did their
Priests; for the ^ore said Author relates that they were so far from this, that
they were all of them Shaven, But the Grecians make the greatest figure here,
and therefore I will in the next place show what their Custom and Practice was
as to the wearing of their Hair. That these people of old were used to wear
their hair Long we learn from their constant Epithet in Homer, (...). Though it
is certain that at first the Grecians were of another fashion. Short or
Moderately-grown hair was thought by them to be best, and accordingly they used
themselves to it: the Lacedaemonians especially were noted for this. But if you
would know how they came to alter their primitive usage, I am able to satisfy
you by offering. These following things to your thoughts. 1. It was a
Philosophic humor to wear the hair long: which though it began at first with
their Beards, yet afterward it proceeded higher, to the hair of their Heads.
The reason was, because Gravity and Majesty were thought to be in this sort of
Hair. And yet these very men, who of all others one would think should not be
sickle and inconstant, ran from one Excess to a contrary one. Hence it is that
in Aristophanes sometimes the Philosophers are laughed at as (...), at other
times for being (...); one while they appeared with long Locks flowing loosly
on their shoulders, another while they were shorn to the very Skin: and both
these Extremes were the effects of Sordin^ess and Coveteousness, and because
they had a mind to spare Charges. Some of the Philosophers wore short hair on
their Heads, but Long Beards. But the Cynicks and Stoics were all shaved
close. 2. It may be the Poets had some influence here as well as the
Philosophers: They generally described their Gods (excepting Apollo) with Long
hair, and so the Limners drew ^em; wherefore it is no wonde^ th^^ Mortals were
induced to imitate the Gods. 3. They indulged a great Length of hair because
they thougt it Beautiful. This is a reason Eustathius gives of the Epithet in
Homer before mentioned. It seems the Greeks very much affected Comeliness and
Beauty, and they persuaded themselves that these were augmented by their
Dangling Locks; hereupon they were very solicitous to nourish them. 4. Another
Reason (which may be thought to be almost inconsistent with the former) was
this, they did it to strike Terror into their Enemies. Thus particularly of
the Lacedaemonians, Lib. 1.
Herodotus reports that they began to wear Long hair and Beards when they
turned Warriors, and he tells the particular Time, viz. when they began the war
against the Argives. Nay, Xenophon relates that Lycurg^s* their famous Lawgiver
and Governor, would have them wear their hair long and dissheveld, to fright
their Enemies. Hence the forenamed Commentator on Homer, when he gives an
account why the Grecian soldiers tricked up themselves, and wore Long Hair,
says it was not only (...), but (...), not only to make them look Beautifully
but Formidably, to please their own eyes, and to affright their Enemies, to
show at once the Luster and Terror, the Bravery and Dreadfulness of War. But
however the Grecians thought and acted in, those ages when they became
Cor^upted, yet it is not to be questioned that the Thoughts and Actions of the
Wisest among them were of a different kind. The Scholiast on Aristophanes
recites it as an Athenian Law, that (...).
the Soldiers must not pamper themselves, neither wear hair long. And as for
That Pretense of theirs for letting their hair grow to an exceeding great
Length, viz. that they might thereby Affright their Enemies, it was afterward
found weak and insufficient, and the Grecians thought good to alter this
custom; which was done upon occasion of the Abantes, a warlike people, and
Skilful in arms, who because they used to fight close, cut off the hair of
their heads before, that their enemies might not take them by it when they
fought. These men let their hair grow only behind, and therefore are called
Iliad. ^.
(...). This was partly put in practice afterward by Alexander the Great's
Army in their Asian Expedition, that they might grapple with the Foe with the
greater freedom. And for this reason all the Macedonian Soldiers shaved their
heads, says In These^.
Plutarch, that their enemies might have no hold of them in that part. 5. They
were pleased to make the Difference of Wearing the Hair to be a mark of
Difference between Freemen and Slaves. Especially among the Lacedaemonians the
Freemen only did nourish their hair: whence that of Aristophanes, In A^ibus.
(...), Thou being but a servant wearest long hair, which is a very Unsitting
thing in thee. Of these Spartans 'Ev (...). Rbet. l. 1. c. 9.
Aristotle speaks, saying, It is a good and laudable thing among them to have
Long Hair, for it is a Badg of Liberty, where as Servants and Slaves were
shaved. Thus you see how Long Hair became Modish among the Greeks: they had one
pretense or other to commend this Fashion. Yet they could not but be sensible
that this was an Upstart usage* and that they varied herein from their pristine
custom. It may be from a reflection upon this, and to make some amends, and to
expiate as it were for this their folly, they afterward brought up the custom
of cutting their hair, and consecrating the f^^st fruits of it to some God or
Goddess. This was the first Notable thing they did as soon as they were grown
Men, and came to a perfect use of Reason. Nothing is more frequent in those
Writers who give an account of the Manners and Customs of the Greeks then this,
that it was a general use among them to nourish their hair till they were grown
up in years, and then to poll it, and dedicate it to some Deity, as to
Esculapius, or Bacc^us, or Hercules, o^ to the Nymphs, or the country Rivers
where they were born, as Hom. Iliad. (...).
Achilles did. Others consecrated their hair to Diana, but most persons
dedicated it to Apollo, and laid it up in his Temple at Delphos, as Plutarch,
in These.
Theseus did. Pindar, Aeschilus, and others give testimony concerning this
Consecrating their hair: which I conceive was an Expiating for their former
wearing of it so long. But, alas! after these first fruits of their hair (which
they called (...)) were thus dedicated by them, and when they came to men's
estate, they thought they might take liberty for the future, and indulge the
Length of their locks, as they had done before. But then at certain times, as
if they were conscious to themselves of their faultiness in wearing their hair
after too Luxurious a manner, they corrected themselves for it when they grew
more Sober, and had Occasion to Mourn and Lament. Then off went their Shaggy
Locks; and their Bald Pates appeared: they seemed now by their Baldness to
repent of the Contrary Folly, and to bewail it by this Symbal of Grief. But
behold again the ^ickle humor of these men! They testified their Mourning not
only by Baldness, but by letting their hair grow Long. They imitated the
contrary Customs of the Jews and Egyptians; the former of which shaved close in
time of Mourning, the latter went with Neglected hair and Uncut. That the
Grecians practiced this latter, is expressly witnessed by Plutarch, who says
that (...) Quaest. Roman.
if any Calamity happened among them, though the women were shorn, yet the men
cut not their hair all the time. And as for the former, but Contrary usage,
Lib. 1.
Herodotus assures us that in his days the Argives (the Antientest Grecians)
expressed their Sorrow and Mourning by cutting their hair off, and shaving
their heads. Or, if this be questioned, because it is but a single Instance,
the Reader may consult De animal. sacr.
Bochart, who will supply him with a great many. Now from these Contraries and
Extremes we may certainly gather what was the usual and Ordinary Custom of the
Greeks as to their hair. Their running out into Excess at those extraordinary
times acquaints us that they were Moderate at other times. Though I must say
this, there was a great Alteration as to this matter, in respect of the Age;
for in one Age the Greeks were more inclined to wear Long Hair then in another,
as might be proved from their Historians. It is certain that this was not their
fault at first; they then wore their hair Moderately, but by degrees, and for
several pretended reasons (as has been showed) they degenerated into the
custom of Long Hair.

The practice of the Romans is next to be enquired into. They did sometimes, as
the Grecians, express their Grief by cutting off their hair: especially in time
of great Danger they did this. In a storm at sea, when they were afraid of
Shipwreck they shaved their heads, as appears from that of Iuvenal, Tuti stagna
sinus gaudent ibi vertice raso,
Garrula securi narrare pericula naut^.
Petronius Arbiter and others confirm this usage, and perhaps this is the
meanning of St Paul's words, Acts 27. 34. There shall not a hair fall from the
head of any of you, i. e. the tempest at sea shall not be so great and
dangerous that you shall have occasion to shave your heads, as the custom is in
such cases* But this is certain, that the Romans were not ignorant that Hair
was given by Nature for a Covering and Ornament to mankind, and consequently
they looked upon the being Deprived of it as a Penal and Shameful thing.
Accordingly Shaving the head was the ^^dg of a Vile Light fellow, as Cieare
says with a quibble, Idcirce ^apite and supercilii^ semper est rasus, ne ^num
pilum boni viri habere dicatur. Thus he speaks of a Trisling fellow who had cut
himself close, and left no hair at all. And that the hair was wont to be cut
off in Mockery and Disgrace, is evident from what Domitian did to Apollonius
Tyanaeus; after he clapped him up in prison (says In vita Apollon. l. 7.
Philostratus) he sent a barber thither to poll his head, and cut off his
Philosophic beard. Hence it is that Lucian brings in a Philosopher in one of
his Dialogues, and Charon cutting off his beard. The Cyprian. Epist. 77.
damnati ad metalla were served thus, and Tacitus and others tell us that it
was the custom of the Romans to shave the heads of their Servants. And I am of
the opinion that it was intended to be ^ Memento to the Liberti of their former
Base and Low condition, that they Vt ego ^odie raso capite calv^s accipia^
pileum, Plaut. in Amph^^r.
received the hat or cap with shaved heads, when they were made Free. Though I
must confess there was a huge Difference and Variety as to this among the
Gentiles, which being not taken notice of has occasioned Mistakes among some
Critics. Criminals and Malefactors had their heads shorn sometimes: and at
other times they were not permitted to cut their hair. And so it was with their
Slaves; among some of the Romans, Shaving was a token of Slavery, but among
others of Liberty. Yet most commonly the former prevailed, but especially among
the Romans, who looked on Hair as a great Decency and Ornament. But not
withstanding this, I do not find that the better and more knowing Romans, were
Excessive in the length of their hair. I grant that before they were Civilized,
and taught to govern themselves in some tolerable manner, they neglected the
cutting of their hair. Dear rustic. l. 2.
Varro says it was a great while, almost five hundred years, before Ital^ knew
any such thing as a Barber. And some of the Old Statues of the Romans represent
them with hair of a very great Length. But when knowledge and manners were
cultivated, they lopt their locks. The Pictures of the very Emperors (even the
most effeminate of them) present them not immoderate as to the hair of their
heads. But as for beards, they wore none* Adrian was the first who let his
grow, viz. to cover his scar^s. And as for the body of the Roman people,
History testifies that these (as well as the Grecians) let their children, till
they came to be of years, nourish their hair to some considerable Length* and
then it was the fashion to offer it to some of the Deities they most affected.
When this was done, they for the most part cut their hair as often as it began
to come to an immoderate length, and would not suffer it to grow to any
extravagant dimensions.

Thus you see what was the Custom as to men's wearing their hair in respect of
length or shortness. If (...) has the signification of Custom in this place,
then you know what the Apostle referred to* viz. the practice of those Nations
which I have set before you. He might rightly say, Does not even Custom teach
you that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him? The Jews and Egyptians
wore moderate hair generally. The sober and gravest among the Greeks and Romans
had neither very Long nor very Short hair, but of a middle size. They were the
more Barbarous Nations that offended as to this, as the Scithians, Goths and
Vandals, etc. who perpetually wore their hair long: and so did the Ancient and
Savage Britains, as Caesar records. The like is observed of the Wild Irish by
Giraldus. And concerning the Picts (who were the Old Barbarous and Northern
Britains) Vitruvi^s testifies they had hair hanging downright, and very long.
The old Saxons, who at first cut the hair of their heads to the very Skin (as
Sidonius relates,) afterward let it grow to an excessive length, so that it
came below their shoulders, says Witichindus a Saxon Monk quoted by Cambden in
his Britannia. Strabo says the same of the Ancient Celtae, Galls, and Franks.
And we read that among these Old Franks this custom prevailed so much, that
with the Antie^^ Kings of France, to be shaven was to be Deposed, or Disabled
to reign. And Short Hair became Ignominious and Reproachful, as is manifest
from that French Proverb, Il a perdu ses cheveux, he has lopt his hair, i. e.
his honor. Which arose hence, says His French Dictionary.
Mr Howel, that in the first race of French Kings there was a Law that the
Nobles only should wear Long Hair (it was (...) thing so prized that they
engrossed it to themselves,) and when any of them were found guilty of a base
fact, they were punished with the loss of their hai^. This law, which was
called la Loy Chevelue, was made says the same person, by King Clodion (^he
mean^ Clovi^s) the Hairy, and was continued till King Pe^^^ time, and then
disa^^^^l'd as a Pag^^^^ Constitution. But the people who were in any measure
Masters of Civility and Hu^^anity, even among the Heathens, prac^ised
otherwise, and (as Plutarch (...)) had hai^ generally of a (...) growth.

Besides the Custom of those Nations which the Apostle had an eye to here, I
might adjoyn what the usage of Others has been since. Among the Turks all
their Slaves are shaved, to show ho^ Shameful and Vile a thing it is to be
destitute of hair; but they likewise show by their own example that they
dislike Long Hair, for they wear the hair of their heads very short. Of their
heads, I say: for the hair of their Bi^^ds is Long, in token, as they think, of
Freedom. (And here it may be generally observed on the contrary, that those
people who suffer the hair of their heads to grow to a great length, have
little of no Beards, as if the former made amends for the want of these latter.
Thus the Ancient Britatns (whom I mentioned before) shaved all their Beard away
except that growing on the upper ^ip. The Chin^ise have thin Beards, consisting
of not above twenty of thirty hairs: and they paint a Deformed man with a thick
beard. On the other side, it might be observed that there have been Extremes as
to beards, as well as the hair of the head. Some have so nourirhed them as if
they emulated the name of that Constantine who was called Pogonatus, whilst
others have so hated them, as if they were a kin to the Apostate Julian who
^^iled himself Misopogan.) But as the Mahometans, who are a Grave so^t of
people, do not lavishly nourish the hair of their heads, so a Different usage
prevails among the Rude Armenians, who generally wear their hair Uncut, and as
long as it will grow, bound with laces, and hanging down to their heels. These
Extremes on both hands have been carefully avoided by Christians, whole Custom
likewise I will in some part relate, and so pass to the next General head. The
Primitive Saints of the Christian Church, who were so strict and exact in all
other things, would not be defective in this. They who refused to comply with
the Rites and Fashions of the Gentiles (even when some of them were Innocent in
Themselves) would not certainly conform to This which was the practice of the
Lewdest Heathens. A Decent and moderate growth of the hair was thought
Commendable rather then Unlawful. And such even those of Age, and of the
Ministerial Function were not averse to, according to that of St Ambrose, Quam
reverenda caesaries in senibus? quam veneranda in sacerdotibus? A Moderate head
of hair was so far from being blameable in these persons, that it was Reverend
and Venerable. But from this Moderation they ^ell into an Excess. Even the
Retired and Contemplative Christians, who betook themselves to a Monastic
Life, let their hair grow in an Extravagant manner. St Augustine calls the Monks
of his time, whom he sharply inveighs against, Fratres Crinitos. De opere
Monach. cap 31.
the Hairy Brethren: for the Old Monks in those days had their hair down to
their feet* which was counted a sign of Mortification and Neglect of the world.
Where by the way observe that the Ancient Monk's were not Shaved, as they are
at this day in the Church of Rome: for if they were so Luxuriant in their hair,
it is not likely that they affected to take it away only on the top of their
heads, and to show their bald crowns. Yea, their Monks now are shaved for the
same reason that heretofore they let their hair grow to that ex^essive Length,
viz. because they would renounce the Ornament and Fashion of the world. Long
Hair is a sign of affecting. Worldly Delight, therefore the Popish Priests
shave to tell the world that they were not given to those Vanities. Even the
Nuns too undergo this discipline, though it is against the Ancient Councils.
(...) etc. Sub Sy^ves^^^.
If a woman under the pretense of Religion, says the Council of Gangra* shear
her hair, which God gave her for a remembrance of her subjection, let her be
accursed, as one that has broken the Command of subjection. And the Cap.
Vxcratus.
latter Decrees say that a woman cannot be ordained, or have Holy Orde^s either
jure or defacto, and that for this reason, because she must not be Shaved. But
though the Romish rite of Shaving Priests and Nuns be thus repugnane to their
own Orders and Constitutions, and contrary to the Practice before mentioned,
yet it is probable it was derived from some Other practice and custom of the
Church in former days. And That, as I conceive, was this; the Ancient Penitents
(as you may read) used to cut their Hair and Beards as soon as they were
received again into the Church: and hence might arise the Corrupt Custom of
lopping and polling the hair of their heads, and at last it was thought
sufficient to shave only one part, as is in use among the Religious Orders of
the Roman Church. But now I desire you to observe how the Decent and Moderate
wearing of the hair in men (which our Apostle aims at here) is authorized and
commended by those Ancient but Contrary Practices which I have mentioned. Since
suffering the Hair to grow very Long was a mark of Mortification among the Old
Monasticks, and was reckoned such by some of the Benitents, who by their
Cutting their hair at their Restitution to the Church showed that they took up
the wearing of Long Hair as a Penance or Punishment; and since on the other
side, Cutting the hair and even Shaving have been and are still practiced by
some men as tokens of Renouncing the world, and acts of Religious Severity, it
may be concluded from these Unusual and Extraordinary occurrences (as I said
before in the like case) what was the Usual and Constant practice of the
Christians in wearing their hair. These things which I have alleged are but
Superstitious derivations from the Stated course they observed. Wherefore
laying aside these Extremes, you know what was the middle way they took.

But I must add, that it was not Superstition and Fond Devotion only which made
Long Hair fashionable among Christians at first. The Primitive Custom was
altered by the irruption of the Barbarous Nations, viz. when the Longobards,
Goths, and Vandals invaded the territories of the Roman Empire. Long Hair
began to be worn in these European parts when those Long-haird Barbarians
violently broke in upon these Countries, and overtun them. Among other evils
and mischiefs which they were the Authors of, and which they left behind them
in these parts, This may justly be reckoned as one. Before this time the
Christians generally wore moderately short hair. This is the True Epoche of
this Custom among Christians; and it is a sufficient Disparagement to it that
it came in at the same time that Rudeness, Violence and Barbarity entered their
quarters. And as it was introduced into Europe by Barbarous people, so ever
since, those who have most of that character are the Admirers and Practisers of
it. It would be too tedious to descend to Particular Countries, and show what
effect this has had. Though this evil usage, brought in by Savage people,
prevailed very much, yet the folly and evil of it was discerned by the Sober
and Wife. These constantly, in observance of the Apostle's Canon here, wore
their hair cut, and moderately short. It was a great while before Long Hair
began to be Modish with our Christian Ancestors in this Isle. But when it was
so, it soon met with a check, for our Matthew. Westminster. A. D. 1127.
Chronicles acquaint us that it was taken notice of by a Synod of the Clergy in
King Henry the first's reign, and decreed against; and the King himself, and by
his example all his Knights, submitted to the Decree, and cut their hair short.
So this Excess was laid aside a great while, and scarcely revived till about
Sixty years ago, when we borrowed from France this evil practice, as we have
done many others. If a Synod now should follow the example of that before
mentioned, and show their dislike of this general disorder, it would be an act
worthy of them. Thus you have heard what has been the Custom concerning Long
and Short Hair. Now I will pass from Custom, which is said to be a second
Nature, to the consideration of Nature It self as it is properly so called.

II. Taking (...) here in a stricter sense, i. e. as it signifies the Inward
Law of Nature, or Right Reason in our minds, let us see whether This teaches
that a man should not have Long Hair. It is granted, before I go any further,
that Long Hair, as it is the product of Nature, as such (I say) is not a thing
to be condemned; for then it ought to be condemned in Women as well as in Men.
It is not to be denied that Nature has given Men long hair as well as the
Other Sex, if they will let it grow; as is clear from the instances of those
men (and I have before informed you that there are and have been such) who
suffer their hair to grow, and come down as low as their feet* Again, I grant
that wearing of Long Hair is not Intrinsecally Unlaw^ul, and Sinful in It self
absolutely, for what is so can never be otherwise: but we know that it was
Lawful in the Nazarites, because it was commanded by God. If Long Hair had been
in its intrinsic nature, and immutably sinful, it could not have been made
otherwise by God himself, and consequently it could not have been enjoined by
him. Thus you see in what sense Long Hair is not against the Law of Nature.
Having premised this (which was requisite for the understanding this matter
aright) I will show how it was and is against Nature, or the dictates of
Natural Reason.

First, you may judge of the Law of Nature by the Practice of men. What do All
Nations agree in? How do the Best and Wisest of all Countries behave themselves
in this affair? Which way does the Reason of mankind steer it self? This you
may be satisfied in from what has been said already. The Soberest part of the
world every where ( Jews and Infidels, as well as Christians) wear not their
hair at an Extravagant Length. What was the reason that the Stoics cut their
hair so short (as has been observed before?) It was no other then this, that
they who were Immodest and Lewd wore Long Hair, but those that were Modest and
Virtuous and of Good Lives did not. Hence those Philosophers, to gain credit
and repute with the people, betook themselves to this Better Fashion, yea they
ran into another excess, and to avoid Long Hair scarcely left themselves any.
-- Supercilio brevior coma. -- ^aith the (...).
Satyrist of them, the hair of their head was shorter then that of their
eyebrows. Hence their disciples are called Pers^^s.
Detonsa juventus. Thus they did, because Short hair was looked upon as a sign
of Modesty and Chastity, and was in use among those that were most Virtuous.
Therefore the Contrary usage, so far as it is against the Practice of the
Soberest persons, and such as are the greatest masters of Natural Reason, is
against Nature. So that these two first acceptions of the word (...) run into
One at last, Custom and Nature teach the same. You may judge what Nature
dictates by the Custom and Practice of Rational and Sober men.

Secondly, you may conclude that Nature or Right Reason forbids the wearing of
Long Hair to men, because this is against the laws of Natural Decency and
Comeliness. Observe then that the Apostle here in this Chapter, and even to the
end of the 14th corrects the miscarriages of the Corintbians in their public
meetings, and then concludes all thus, chapter 14. last v.
Let all things be done Decently. Whence I rightly infer, that Indecency (which
was accompanied with Disorder) was their great fault. Which one thing is a Key
to open the meaning of the Text, and acquaints us that Natural Decency is to be
understood here by Nature. Which is further confirmed by the words of the
Apostle in the verse immediately before This, Is it comely that a woman pray
unto God uncovered? And from this very notion of Decency or Comeliness he
continues to argue in these words, Does not Nature it self teach you, etc. [ Is
it comely?] and [ Does not Nature teach you?] are the same. Let us see then
what this (...), this Decorum, this Comeliness signifies. (...) is to follow
the order of Nature in respect of Persons, Place, Time, State or Condition, or
any other Circumstance whatsoever, and to act suitably according to the Variety
of these. And this Decorum is to be observed in all External Actions, Words,
Gestures and Behavior. When all these are rightly ordered, then a person acts
Decently or Fitly: but when these are not observed, he acts Vnbecomingly, and
what he does is Unseemly and Vnsiting. It was thought Indecent in grave
Socrates to be seen riding on a Cane, like a little boy. The Senate of
Areopagus, that Grave and Reverend Judicatory at Athens, made this Order,
(...). Plutarch.
that none of the Judges of that Bench should be permitted to write Comedies.
The reason was because it was Unseemly and Indecorous for those Grave Senators
to make Plays. These were not fit persons for such a purpose. Idem manebat,
neque idem decebat, said Tully of the famous Hortensius. His way of Oratory and
of Action became him in his Youthful years, but it had no Grace in Age. One
thing becomes one Time, another another. And so this Law of Congruity and
Incongruity runs through all the Circumstances of a man's life, as might be
showed. This is particularly to be discerned in the instance which is before
us: Short or Moderate hair is a thing Convenient and Seemly in men, but the
contrary is Unseemly, Incongruous, Uncomely, because it is not suitable to the
state and condition of Men, who ought to do things agreeable to their Rank and
Quality, who ought to show themselves Manly and Grave, who ought to act their
part Wisely, who are convinced that there is no time or place for Extravagancy
and Folly, who have natural impressions on their minds to incline them to what
is Serious, and who know very well that this Garb we have been speaking of, if
it be considered in all its circumstances and with all its appendages, is
Inconvenient and Unseemly. This being so, Christians of all persons are to
avoid that Unseemly wearing of their hair, because they are obliged by the
Apostles Injunction to do all things Decently, and because the Indecent Length
of hair has at least an appearance of evil, which the same Inspired Writer
bids them abstain from. Thus Nature teaches that it is a shame for a man to
wear long hair, and that it is Honest and Decent, and Becoming the Exactness of
Christianity to observe a Moderate Length. This in general: but more
particularly,

Thirdly, Even Natural Reason commends to us the Apostle's advice, to think on
things which are of good report, Phil. 4. 8. and to provide things honest in
the sight of all men, Romans 12. 17. 2 Cor. 8. 21. Now these Rules cannot be more
useful in any case then in the wearing of Habits, and of Hair. These ought to
be such as are generally reputed Honest and Laudable, and have the good word of
Sober men. Tertullian, it seems, was accused of Lightness and Inconstancy by
the people of Carthage for laying aside the use of the Gown (the common habit
of the Romans) and putting on the Cloak (the usual vestment of the Grecians:)
but he apologizeth for himself, telling them that he made choice of the Pallium
as the Fittest and most Becoming Habit, and which was of Good Esteem and Repute
among the Wisest persons, who are the most Competent Judges of the rules of
Decency and Sobriety. It was, says he, of great Antiquity, and so he could not
be blamed for affecting Novelty, and wearing an Upstart Habit. Besides, it was
a very Useful and Serviceable sort of apparel, and on that account also it
could not but be esteemed Honest and Lawful. Again, among the Grecians it was
the proper habit of Philosophers, who were the Soberest and Antientest persons
among them, and therefore was fittest for Christians, especially for Priests;
and it was at that time generally made use of by them: accordingly he wore it
as soon as he was made Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, and he is pleased
to call it a Priests Habit. Thus he followed those Rules of the Apostle
exactly. And they are as useful and practical in the Other case, of wearing the
Hair: which ought to be in that manner which is accounted Honest, and is of
Good Report, that is, approved of by the Best and Wisest men, that has the
good liking of the Soberest and Gravest Christians, and that is practiced by
them, and not by Russians.

Fourthly, Natural Reason teaches us that Long Hair is unlawful as it is any
ways subservient to Pride, Wantonness, and Effeminacy. This is true, whether we
speak of men's Own Hair, or whether it be Borrowed, and worn in lieu of their
Own, as is the common practice of these times. I am far from the thinking that
the wearing of a Peruke, barely considered, is Unlawful. There may be occasion
for borrowed hair in case of Necessity, want of Health, some unavoidable
Infirmity, or Decay and Loss of that Natural Covering which they had. But now
it is the custom, when neither Health, nor any Other honest cause can be
assigned, to clap on a false head of hair, as if hair were given women for a
Covering, not for themselves (as the Apostle meant it,) but for Men. But this
Needless use of false hair is not all that is to be blamed in the men of this
age. They are yet more guilty, for they affect an Extravagant Length of hair,
which is the fruit of Unmanly Vanity and Pride, I will not say in all, but in
many that use it. This Effeminate garb does generally betray a weak and infirm
mind; it is a sign of a want of other and better Head-Furniture. Commonly it is
attended with an immoderate love of Softness and Delicacy. When they thus
Extravagantly load themselves with Woman's hair, they become Wanton and
Luxurious, Soft and Womanish. These are none of Samson's breed, their Strength
lies not in their Locks, yea they are made feeble and effeminate by them. These
Wanton Labels are in the generality of persons that wear them as noted marks of
this disgrace, as a Fillet in Heraldry is of effeminacy, and as Gussets and a
Goar sinister are signs there of Cowardice and Womanish disposition.

Fifthly, it might be added that so far as Long Hair may prove Incommodious and
Cumber some, and be a Hindrance to men in their Business (which they best know
and are sensible of whose heads are hung with this Trouble some Tackle) it must
needs be pronounced to be against Nature, and the Law of our Rational
faculties, for this approves of nothing which really Incommodes us, and is an
impediment to us in any of the necessary offices of our lives. If a Resolute
Vanity did not posses these men's minds, and strangely harden them, they would
count those Ell-Wiggs an intolerable Luggage, and would beg to be rid of them.
They would complain that these hang in their way, and even impede their Eating
and Drinking, the greatest business of their lives. Or, if we could imagine
this sort of persons to be Warriors, they would then certainly feel the
mischief of this Encumbrance which they carry about them, and we should soon
see them leave these Horse-Tails to the Enemy as the Ensigns and Trophies of
their folly.

Lastly, the Natural Law of Reason bids men do nothing that is Shameful and
Opprobious, Disgraceful and Dishonorable; but such is a man's having of Long
Hair. It is, says the Apostle, a shame to him; or rather, it should have been
translated dishonor, for it is (...) in the Greek, and is opposed to (...) in
the next verse, which shows this rendering of the word to be most proper. If a
man wear long hair, it is a Dishonor to him, it being doing that which is
unworthy of his peculiar Sex, and so is Unnatural: which leads me to the next
Particular which I propounded. But before I enter upon That, I will sum up the
foregoing heads, that you may at one view discern how Nature (i. e. Natural
Reason, which dictates what is Good and what is Bad) teaches the Unlawfulness
of Long Hair, viz. As it is against the Judgment and Practice of the Soberest
race of men in all Regions of the world, as it is against Natural Decency and
Comeliness, as it is a thing not of Good Report, so far as it may serve to
Pride and Lewdness, so far as it may prove an Impediment, and lastly, as it is
a Disgrace and Dishonor to the Sex. These things being thus, I cannot excuse
the Learned De C^ma
Salmasius, who declares that Length of Hair in men is free from all fault and
blame, and that their Longest Locks are not against the Apostles (...). This is
one Extreme: the other is maintained by Poimenander, who looks upon this Text
as a kind of Depilatory Text. So far is this Dutch Divine from a^^roving of
Salmasius's Long Locks, that he will not suffer a man's hair to reach any
further then his ears. It must only cover his Skill, he says in another place.
And at last he tells us that to wear hair below the ears is such a sin as
deserves Eternal Death: But may we not ask this Damning man, What is the Hair
of the head for? If it be not of some Length and Thickness, it is not for use,
and so Nature gave it in vain. Is it not agreed on by all the Understanding
part of mankind, that the Hair of the head was given to cover it from the cold,
and to guard and shelter it from the winds, or other assaults? And is it
possible it should do this if it be so Clipped and Poll'd as some would have
it? No: this design of Nature cannot be accomplished. It is granted likewise by
all men of sober thoughts* that Nature intended the Hair of the head to be a
Comely Adorning to it, which it cannot be if it be not permitted to display it
self in some measure, especially if it be reduced to that Low Cut which was
mentioned before. Here then we are concerned to avoid Extremes on one side or
other. As a man must not go like a Nazarite, or a Greek Philosopher, or like a
N^buchadnezzar at grass with his hair hanging down about him, so neither must
he appear like a Shorn Animal with a bare Skull, like an Affrighted Jew in his
days of Mourning with his hair torn off, like a Cropped Synick, or like a Shaven
Monk. But there is a Decent Medium to be preferred before these, and to be
practiced, that is, to wear the hair with a Convenient Shortness, or a moderate
Length, call it which you will. This matter is easily decided by peaceable and
sober minds, though some have made a great Controversy of it, insomuch that it
has been called Bellum Capillare. This is certain, that no man can prescribe a
Just Exact Measure, a Precise Length: for this may alter according to the age,
temper, and quality of the person, yea even according to the dimensions of his
neck. We must not be Curious here, we must not be Censorious and Quarrelsom, we
must not create Scruples and Difficulties. Any Sober and well Considerate man,
who makes his Reason his Rule, will easily determine in this affair.

III. The Difference of Sexes, which is another signification of the word
(...), teaches that if a man have Long Hair, it is a shame and dishonor to
him: for wearing the hair in a Different manner is one badg of the Sex.
Difference of Habits distinguishes one Sex from another: accordingly Hair,
which is a sort of Habit, is a distinction of the Sexes. First, the hair of the
face which we call Beards, is as it were the Clothing of the face. Some indeed
have pulled these up by the roots, or shaved the place very close, as many of
the Greeks and Romans used to do: but others let them grow, and that to a
considerable length, as the Old Philosophers generally did. Adrian the Emperor
(as we have noted before) was the first that brought among the Romans the
fashion of Beards: before that time they usually had no hair on their chins or
lips. But this practice is against Nature, it taking away that which is one
Distinction between the Sexes. Hence God forbad his people not only to round
(i. e. to shave all round) the corners of their heads, but to mar the corners
of their beards, Lev. 19. 27. This latter, viz. the spoiling of the angles of
the Beard by cutting all off round, seems to be repugnant to Nature, and
consequently is as Shameful as the former. And there is nothing to excuse the
general custom at this day among us of shaving off the Beard, and going with
Smooth Chins like women, but this, that the Cutting or Not cutting of the Beard
is not so Great a Distinction of the Sexes as the ordering of the Hair of the
Head: for both men and women are furnished with Hair on their heads, but
several people in the world are without Beards, that is, no hair grows on their
faces. And besides, this Beardless fashion is the more tolerable, as long as
the Other Differences of the Sexes, viz. Clothes of the body, and Hair of the
head are kept up. And therefore it appears hence that we ought to be the more
concerned for this latter. By the Hair of the Head there is a plain
discrimination made between Man and Woman. And yet I do not say that simply and
absolutely speaking, it is a Distinction instituted by Nature, because Nature
has made the Hair of Male and Female alike. Though a Beard seems to be a
Natural Distinction, yet the Hair of the Head is not. But then This is to be
said, that it is Natural to distinguish the Sexes, and the Wearing of the Hair
being through custom agreed upon among all Nations to be one Distinction
between the Sexes, it follows that it is Natural and Reasonable to observe this
Distinction. Now if a Man wear his hair as long as a Woman, the Sex is not
discerned, which is against the Law and Decree of Nature, viz. that the
Distinction of Sexes is to be maintained, and not confounded. The very sum of
the first part of This Chapter to the Corinthians is, that Women must not be
forgetful of their Sex. There is a Modesty and Shamefacedness proper to them,
as the consequent of the Subjection they owe, which is to be showed by putting
on a Veil. Though they had Supernatural Gifts (as the Apostle here supposes,)
yet they were to remember their peculiar station and Sex. And so here the same
thing is urged, viz. the Difference of Sexes made by God and Nature. This
teaches the man that it is Unfit for him to wear Long Hair, for hereby the
Difference of Sexes would be taken away. We must not do things contrary to or
unbecoming our Sex. That is Decorous and Seemly in a Man which is not in a
Woman, and so vice versa. It must needs then be a shame to a Man to have hair
of the Length which a Woman has: for then he is truly Travestie, dressed in
another Clothes, (which is the import of that French word,) and for which he
may be justly Ridiculed. And This certainly is the Shame of This Age wherein we
live, Though it is not so accounted, but rather, the Contrary is thought
Shameful and Disgraceful. We may in our days alter and transpose the Apostle's
words, and say, If a man has Short hair, it is a Shame to him: but if a woman
have Short hair, nay, if she has none, it is a Glory to her. That Sex which
used not to nourish the hair, now does, or rather makes use of the hair which
others should nourish: and the Other Sex which used to have their hair at the
utmost Length, now cut it off and give it to the man. It is true, still the
Distinction of the Sexes is preserved, though the Marks and Badges of it be
Contrary to what they were herertofore. But notwithstanding this, here is a
Perverting and Confounding of the Natural and Primitive Order, a casting off
the received Tokens which used to distinguish the Sexes of man and woman. Thus
you see how Nature it self teaches that if a man have Long hair, it is a shame
to him.

Hitherto I have considered the word (...) in the first sense, i. e. as it
denotes having Long hair, or Loose hair which hangs down at length, and is
without any Artificial Ornament. But as This is a frequent signification of the
word, so there is another, viz. to have hair not only Long and Uncut, but to
dispose of it after the manner of Women, to deck and adorn it. This is a known
signification of the Greek word in the Text: yea, some will have this to be the
Primary and Proper denotation of the word (...). Here then I will examine, 1.
What this (...) was, wherein consisted the wearing of hair like Women, in
respect of its Dress and Ornament? 2. Whether the Apostle here means Hair of
this kind? 3. How Nature teaches men that they ought not to wear such hair?

I. What is it to wear hair like women? For we shall not be able to tell what
men are taught to do when they are forbid to have such hair, unless we know
first what that hair was, viz. in regard of its Composure and Dress. You must
know then, that women did not wear their hair at Length, though it was Long,
for they tied it up, and to this purpose made use of fillets, laces, ribbands.
And they did not truss and wrap up their hair confusedly, but ordered it into
several divisions: and accordingly they had Pins to divide the hair. It is no
small piece of Learning to be acquainted even with the Attire of Women from the
Antientest Writers. From them we may learn that all the Greek and Roman* yea
and all Europaean women bound up their hair in a handsome manner. It is true,
at Funerals, and when Extraordinary Grief surprised them, they let their hair
down about their shoulders, but from this custom alone it is clear that at
Other times they wore it after another fashion, that is, they neatly tied it up
one way or other, and suffered it not to hang down disheveld. Yea, they
gathered it sometimes into a knot on the top of their heads: the Hebrew, Greek,
and Roman women wore their hair thus. And it is probable this fantastic
Top-knot of their own hair is taken notice of and reproved by St Paul in 1 Timothy
2. 9. where he tells us that the Christian women must not be adorned (...),
which we translate [ with broidred hair,] but the word (...) among the Greeks
signified that Curled Lock or Tower which the women wore on the top of their
heads, and by the Latins was called Corymbus. This you may satisfy your selves
in from the best Lexicographers. But though this was a Particular use of the
word among the Greeks, yet here it may have a Larger meaning, and signify also
the Other excesses and follies the women were then guilty of in dressing their
hair. This is elegantly called in Isai. 3. 24. (...) calamistri opus: there was
a great deal of Workmanship in that effeminate dressing of the hair, it was an
Elaborate piece of art to dispose and order it aright. Accordingly from the
word (...) comes the verb (...), crines ornare, which the Greeks express
likewise by the word (...), which is akin to that I before named: whence you
may guess what (...) are, in the more comprehensive sense of the word. We
render it (as I have said) by [ broidred hair,] but I conjecture the word is
falsely set down, by the fault of the Printers it is likely. Broided is the word
used by Coverdale and Tindal here, whence our Last Translators took it, but in
Transcribing or Printing it was corrupted: which ought to be taken notice of by
those who have the Inspection of these things in our Church, that we may not
make use of a false and mistaken Version, for [ Broidred] was mistook for [
broided, or braided] (for both these words were heretofore in use.) Now,
braiding the hair is the same with (...), plaiting the hair, which is forbid by
St Peter, 1 Epist. 3. chapter 3. v. Though the hair might be put up decently, yet
it was not to be braided or plaited; by which word, and by that other before
named, all Lust and Wantonness in Trimming the head is condemned by those two
Apostles. The Magnasheh Miksheh, the well-set hair, the laborious Curling,
Frizling and Crisping the hair, which was then in use, and all other Gaudy and
Wanton Dressing of it are here pronounced Unlawful, and not fit to be practiced
by women professing Christianity. The short then is, that Women heretofore did
always wear their hair Uncut, and because of its Length they did not suffer it
to hang about their ears, but tied it up, and decently disposed of it: but at
last this Decent Ordering of their hair degenerated into an Indecent Trimming,
into a Lewd and Wanton Garnishing it. It is the former of these which is
expressed here in this one word (...). This signifies the Womanish Setting
forth and Adorning of the hair, the wearing of hair as Women wear it. The
Grammarians in the propriety and differences of words which they make, tell us
that (...) is properly of Women, as (...) and (...) of Men. Com^ est capillus
aliqua cura compositus, say the Masters of Grammar and Criticism. And
accordingly some of them derive it from (...) curare, colere, ^rnare, to take
care of, trim, deck, adorn. Therefore (...) is Women's hair properly, because it
requires great Care and Art to keep it, dress it, and tie it up. So (...) is to
be careful about the hair, decently to gather it together, and to dispose of
it: whence Loose and Squalid hair is opposed in all Good Authors to (...), and
(...). Thus I have done with the First Demand, what the wearing of hair like
women is.

II. I am to show you that the Apostle speaks here of This very wearing of
hair. The (...) which is mentioned twice together (in this, and the next verse)
is meant of the ^ame thing: this will not be denied, I suppose. Now the latter
(...), applied to the woman, cannot be meant of Long Hair only and simply, but
also of hair which is Ordered and Fashioned according to the use of women: and
that for these two Reasons. First, because it is said to be her Glory: but it is
well known that Hair Hanging down and Disheveld is no Glory, no Ornament, no
Honor, and never was thought to be to any of that Sex. When the Apostle says,
If a woman does (...), it is a glory to her, he cannot intend Long Hair
absolutely, and sol^ly, for that was no Comeliness or Decorum, much less, Glory
to the Greek or Roman, or any Europaean women* but on the contrary, it was
thought Indecent, and was a sign of Neglect^u^ness and Squ^lidity, and
therefore used in case of great Mourning and Lamentation. Secondly, in this
same verse it is said that the woman's hair is given her, (...) pro velamine.
for a Covering. Hence then I gather that this (...) must not be mere Long Hair
hanging down, and never cut. This indeed covers the neck and shoulders, but it
is no more a Covering to the head then short or Cut hair. Therefore it must be
meant not only of hair worn at Length, but of the Binding up the hair in an
Artificial manner, to do the service of a Veil, and in the way of a real
Covering to the head. When it is tied up, and in several parts made up
together, and fastened to the head, it is a Covering, whereas if it hang at
Length, and be Loose and Flowing, it is not a Covering, or if it be one, it is
as much a Covering to the other parts of the body as to the head. The Apostle
would have women cover or veil their heads, with their own Hair; and he
intimates at the same time that this Natural Covering dictates what they should
do moreover, that is, add an Artificial one, a Veil over their heads, as often
as they go into the public Assemblies, and are engaged in solemn acts of
Religion and Worship. God giving them the Veil of Hair, and by that as it were
tells them they must be covered with another. They are to have a Double
Covering; one Nature supplies them with, Art must afford the other: and if they
cast off this latter, they may as well cast off the former. This you find to be
the Apostle's way of arguing (whatsoever you think of it) in the beginning of
the Chapter, where he acquaints the Christian women of Corinth, that praying
with their heads uncovered is even all one as if they were shaven: and
accordingly he adds, If a woman be not covered, let her also be shorn. Nature
does as it were show the way in this case, and lets women know that they must
cover their heads in time of Divine Worship. Why so? Because Nature has given
them Hair for a Covering: it tells them they must have a Veil. But what kind of
Hair is this? It is Long Hair, but not hanging at length, it is gathered and
tied up, and made as it were into a Cap or Covering for the head. It is evident
then that the Apostle here speaks against those Corinthian men who were
Effeminate and Wanton, who at that time wore their hair after the manner of
Women, who artificially wrapped it up, and dressed and adorned it after the
fashion of that Sex. The Apostle forbids the Men to wear their hair thus: this
is (...), coma, properly so called, and belongs to a Woman. This Gathering and
Tying, and Adorning the hair is the woman's Natural Veil or Covering for her
head, and given her to that purpose. (...) is her proper Ornament, and is even
styled by the Apostle, her Glory, as has been often said. But this, as lawful
as it is in Women, becomes Unlawful and Sinful in the Masculine Sex. If a Man
makes use of it, (...), If he wears his ^hair like a woman, i. e. Gathered up,
and Composed by art, it is a shame to him. Not only Long Hair but Adorned Hair
is not permitted to Man, but is against Nature. Which is the

III. thing I am to undertake, viz. to show how Nature teaches that a Man
ought not to wear his hair after this manner. And here we will take the word
(...) in the Tripple sense which we took it in before, viz. as it signifies
Custom, Natural Reason, and Difference of Sex. First, it is not to be denied
that many Men among the Gentiles went with the Attire of their Hair like Women.
It is easily proved out of History that the Crecian Men kept their hair uncut
and unpoll'd, and were very vain and wanton in dressing it. They used to
perfume; cut and crisp their hair, and to take a great deal of care about it.
Yea, the Spartans went even to the Wars with their hair artificially combed and
adorned. The Corinthians, among other Grecians, degenerated into this
effeminate wearing of their hair, which the Apostle here reproves them for. But
among the Athenians particularly a Knot of hair tied up, and standing upright
on their crowns was the universal fashion even among the Men. This was called
by them (...) and (...): this latter word is used (as you have heard) by the
Apostle, and perhaps refers particularly to this fashion. It was also called
(...), a Scorpion, because perhaps it was partly framed in the figure of a
Scorpion or Snake; it twirled about like such an animal, for which reason also
a Curled Lock of hair is called a Worm in our modern style. Salmasius has
proved from Lucian, Virgil, and other Authors that this Top-Lock or Curled Tuft
of hair on the crown of the head was the fashion of Other Nations besides the
Greeks. This and other excesses of the like kind were used by the Men among the
Romans also, as appears from those Writers who took notice of them, and
inveighed against them. Ovid jerks those Effeminate Men who will not let a hair
be amiss or out of its place, Quisque suas ponunt in statione comas. Sat. 8.
Iuvenal corrects the pride of the Roman Gallants in wearing their hair finely
dressed: and Lib. 2. Ode 5.
Horace lashes them for the same Effeminacy. Nay, not only the Jeering Poets
took notice of their Luxury and Extravagancy in this point, but the Gravest
Moralists thought it a disorder fit to be animadverted on and severely
reproved. Thus Seneca gallantly reproves the Roman Vanity of being Delicate and
Curious about their Hai^: he checks them for spending so many hours under the
Barber's hands, he represents how Angry they were with him if he did not do
what they would have him, if their Set of Points did not hang right, if any the
least Curl were out of order: they had rather the Commonwealth should be
troubled and disordered then their Hair. In short, he rebukes them for being so
busy between the Glass and the Comb, and tells them it is a sign they have a
greater desire to be Sptuce and Fine then Honest. But Pagans were not the only
persons that were infected with this folly. The Author of the Lib. 1. cap. 3.
Apostolical Constitutions says, It is not lawful to nourish the hair, and to
tie it up in a Knot, nor to curl and crisp it, seeing the Law forbids it. From
whence it appears that this Vanity and Luxury of composing the hair in a
Womanish manner was crept in even among Christian Men. And this further appears
from that Ancient Canon of the 4th Council of Carthage, Clericus nec comam
nutriat, nec barbam, which was made against the Massaliani, a sort of Heretics
then in Africa who indulged an Effeminate wearing of their Hair, of whom
likewise H^res. 80.
Epiphanius and St De opere (...). cap* 31.
Augustine speak. But though this Vi^ious practice spread it self among Pagans
and Christians, yet it did not Universally prevail, it was no General Custom.
That it was not so among the Pagans is evident from the Reproofs which it met
with from the Sober and Grave among them yea, from the Witty and Facetious.
And that it obtained not among Christians is manifest, because it is checked
here by the Apostle as a single miscarriage of the Christians of Corinth: and
Councels, Fathers and Doctors have reproved it in their Decrees, Sermons and
Discourses, as the fault of some only. The short is, there were two Contrary
Practices or Customs on foot at that time, one of the Rude and Debauched part
of the world, the other of the Better and Civilized fort of people* now, we
cannot think that the Apostle appeals here to the Custom of the former, but of
the latter: for we cannot imagine that this Holy Man would propound the Worst
of men as an example to the Christians of Corinth to follow. Whence we may
certainly infer that he does not mean here the Custom of the Rude and Immoral,
but of the Civil part of mankind. He tells the Corinthians that if they will
conduct their lives by the usual practice of these, they may be sufficiently
furnished with Examples, all the Reformed part of the world act after this
manner, that is, they detest the Womanish wearing of their hair. The Modest,
Wise and Sober in all Nations and in all Ages have opposed this practice, it
being disagreeable to the dictates of Reason in all understanding and
considerate persons. Which brings me to the next Particular.

Secondly, Nature it self, i. e. the dictate of Natural Reason, Natures
instinct and Common Sense teach this, that a Man is not to wear hair like a
Woman. The Manly Sex is forbid by the Law of Nature to have hair after the
manner of the Female sex. Natural Reason d^ctates against Adorned Hair in men
on the same accounts that it was against their Long Hair, viz. because it is
Indecent, because it is of no Good Report, because it is subservient to Pride
and Wantonness, because it is contrary to the Practice of those who are most
guided by the conduct of Reason, etc. But I will insist only on the first of
these, the Natural Indecency of the thing. Here then, as before, we are to take
notice that there is a Decency and Fitness to be observed and followed by all
that own either Reason or Religion, There is Ps. 96. 10 and 110* 3.
(...) the Beauty or Comeliness of Holiness, which more immediately respects the
Worship of God, but there is also the Pulchritude and Decour of Holiness to be
observed in all the actions which relate to Religion, or are done by Holy men,
for these do nothing that is Uncomely and Indecorous. All those things which
our Apostle prescribes the Corinthian Christians concerning Virginity and
Marriage throughout the whole 7th chap. of his 1 Epistle to them, he tells them
he speaks (...), for that which is Comely, i. e. that a Decent and Fit
behavior might be kept in all they did. Again, in Phil. 4. 8. he commends to
them whatsoever things are honest; but the Greek (...) signifies Venerable,
Grave, Comely. And so that of the famous Roman Orator is true, Quod decet
hones^um est, and quod hones^um est, decet. Cic.
That which is Decent is Honest, and whatever is Honest is Decent. Thus when
the Apostle joins Godliness and Honesty together in 1 Timothy 2. 2. the latter
word in the (...).
Greek may denote that Grave and Decent deportment of life which I am speaking
of* Religion regards Civility, Christianity concerns it self in a Sober,
Decent, and Orderly carriage, in a Modest and Reverent behavior. What is said
of women in Tit. 2. 3. is to be applied to both sexes, they are to be (...), in
behavior as becomes holiness. The vulgar Latin renders it in habitu Sancto,
as if (...) were the same with (...), 1 Timothy 2. 9. It is certain that word
signifies not only Gesture, Countenace, Speech, and the whole Behavior of
persons, but their Habit also, viz. as this word denotes the Outward Dress.
This is to be regulated by those of the Masculine kind in a special manner. Man
was made for Business and Manly Employment: therefore a kind of Carelessness
and F^rm^ vites negl^cta decet. -- Ovid.
Neglect in respect of Beauty and Dress does become him. He must not study to
be Fine and Delicate: it is not agreeing with his work. To tie up the hair, and
to trim and adorn it, and to compose it by art, in brief to wear it as a Woman
does, is Unbecoming a man. Thus Nature or Natural Reason teaches that Adorned
hair in men is Indecent and Unfitting, and in plain terms Sinful and Unlawful.

Thirdly, Nature, i. e. the Difference of sexes dictates that a Man ought not
to wear his Hair in the fashion of a Woman. The Learned Salmasius, who
understands by (...)* the Distinction of sexes, or that Law of Nature which
teaches there should be a Difference made between the Sexes, has sufficiently
proved this Acception of the word. I need not therefore repeat here what I said
before, that Nature is taken in Good Writers in this sense: That I think is
unquestionable. Now I am only to prove that the Distinction which is between
the two Sexes is sufficient foundation for This Prohibition, viz. that a man
should not wear his hair as women do. You must consider then that there are
actions and deportments Proper to each Sex, the very make and Constitution of
the Sexes dictating these Peculiar and Proper operations. (...) in general is
that which is consentaneous to our Nature, and distinguishes us from Other
species of beings. But in particular this Decorum is that which is peculiar and
appropriated to one or the other Sex. There are certain boundaries which part
both Sexes. That which is decent in one is not so in the other, and never can
be. It is true Plato would have Women trained up to Martial Exercise and feats
of Arms, that, if there should be necessity, they might defend their Country.
But this was a Fanciful project of the Philosopher, as many of his are: and
others of his Brethren Philosophers were ashamed of it. One Sex must not
incroach on the other, and usurp the rights and usages proper to it. As (to
appro^ch to the matter which is before us) there is a Particular Habit and
Dress which belongs to Women, and there is another which is proper to Men: and
that Habit which does become the former, does in no wise become the latter, and
so vice versa. The Law of God which was given to the Jews by Moses positively
asserts this Distinction of Habits, and strictly forbids that people to
disguise themselves in the promiscuous Garments of either Sex. See their
Distinct Vestments commanded by God in Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Philo giving the Reason of
this Law says, The Mosaic Law takes care of the Habit of man and woman,
forbidding the former to wear what belongs to the other, (...). De F^rtiludine.
that not the least footstep or shadow of Effeminacy might disparage the
Masculine kind. And again, he says, (...). Ibid.
The Man ought to wear no Garment that is a badg of Unmanliness. For (as he
adds) (...). Ibid.
the Law follows Nature, and observes and enjoins what is Proper and Fitting
for all persons even in the least things. This Fittingness first introduced,
and ever since has kept up a Distinction of Habit or Dress in the Sexes. All
the Wise and Sober men of the World have approved of this as a Law of Nature,
and have sharply rebuked those that violated it. Thus we are told Stobaeus i^
Sermon. 164.
that when Aristotle beheld a yc^th finely trickt up, and in a dress very
effeminate, he upbraided him in these words, Art thou not ashamed, when Nature
has made thee a Man, to make thy self a Woman? The Poets indeed acquaint us
that Hercules for Omphale's fake put on woman's apparel, and spun, using the
Distaff instead of his Club: and Achilles, to avoid the wars, disguised himself
in a Female dress. This was indulged as a Shift for a time; But no men of Sober
Morals among the Gentiles allowed of this Change of Habit as an usual practice.
Seneca represents their sense when he speaks thus to his friend, Nonvidentur
tibi ^^ntra Naturam vivere qui c^mmutant cum (...) vestem? Ad Lucil. Ep. 123.
Do not those men live against Nature (the very thing in the Text) who change
their own habit for that which belongs to the other Sex? This Interrogatory is
a flat Negative, and it is as much as if he had said, these men do absolutely
confront Nature, and defy its Laws. The Poet who said, Quem praestare potest
mulier galeata pudorem,
Quae fugit a sexu?
was of the like opinion as to Women, viz. that they cannot without putting off
Shame and Modesty put on the apparel of Men. And if Jews and Gentiles have thus
declared their sentiments as to this particular, you may expect that Christians
have not been behind them. It was the peremptory determination of the Council
of Gangra that a woman is not to wear m^ns clothes, nor a man the woman's. And
there have been other Laws made by the Church, and also by the Secular
Magistrates to refrain disorder in this kind. For they thought that a Fitting
and Distinct Dress is a good guard of Honesty, is serviceable to promote
Modesty and Shamefacedness, and to hinder the violating of Chastity. Briefly,
All Nations and Countries have observed this Distinction, and accordingly have
had Proper and Distinct Garments for the Sexes. This was pursuant of what our
Apostle here says, that Nature teaches this, i. e. Nature which distinguishes
the Sexes, Nature which has every where made a Discrimination between Male and
Female, Nature which makes a Difference not only as to Clothes of the body, but
as to the manner of wearing the Hair of the head: for the Hair both of the
Head* and Beard is a Natural Clothing, and is rightly called by Salmasius,
altera vestis. The Difference of Men and Women ought to be manisested by this
very Clothing. The Different wearing of the Hair distinguishes the Sexes.
Nature which has made a Difference between male and female, dictates also that
they are to be Differenced as to This.

But you will say, Nature teaches not the way of Differencing the Sexes by the
wearing of Hair, for All People agree not as to the manner of wearing it. In
some Countries the woman is distinguished from the man by having Short hair,
and the man from the woman by Long Hair tied up, and never cut. I Answer, 1.
The practice of some Nations and people as to this thing is no Argument. It is
sufficient that the Generality of the Best and most Moralized people observe.
This manner of distinction between the Sexes, which I have proved they do. 2. I
have before proved that there is something of Natural Decency and Fitness in
distinguishing the Sexes by this Particular Manner of wearing the hair. 3.
Though I should say with Salmasius, that Nature teaches not the Particular way
of differencing the Sexes as to Hair, yet this I must say, that when Custom and
Institution have settled such a Particular way, Nature then teaches us to
observe it, it bids us not break the Distinction, but keep it up. We see there
are Different Usages and Customs in different Countries, but the^e is Honesty
or Dishonesty in the observing several of them, though they be Different, yea
almost Contrary. Good and Laudable Customs are a Law in many places; they are
so in This Land: and Reason, which is the Law of Nature, teaches us to observe
these. Say then that This of the Text was a Local Custom only, say that it was
a Temporary Precept (as there are several such in S^ Paul's Epistles,)
calculated only for such a place and certain time, yet the Precept nearly
concerns us. For though we are not immediately obliged to this Individual and
Particular thing, yet because the Reason of the Precept obliges us, we are on
that account, though more remotely, engaged to observe this very thing. On this
consideration De C^ma
Salmasius himself grants that it is a Sin in a man to wear his hair as Women
do. And although some of these things which the Apostle mentions in the
beginning of this Chapter, as men's being uncovered, to denote their
Superiority, and the women's Covering their heads as a sign of their Subjection,
together with the Particular Manner of wearing the hair used at that time,
which the Apostle refers to, be not in use with us at this day, yet the General
Rule of keeping up a Difference between the Sexes is still valid and
obligatory, and will always be so. This is certain and fi^ed, and never to be
shaken, that Nature has made a Difference between the Sexes, and that it is a
Sin to confound them. And it is not to be denied that this Difference of Sexes
is to be manifested by Different Habit and Apparel, to which appertain Wearing
the Hair. And this in the times of the Apostle was after this manner; Hair
hanging down, and moderately cut was proper to Man, and Long Hair, but tied up
and with some art disposed was proper to the Woman; for the difference of Men
and Women's hair consisted not only in the Length, but in the Disposing and
Dressing of it. It is Manly to cut the hair, and neglect the adorning of it: it
is Womanish to let it grow, to gather it up orderly and with some innocent art.
This is the Difference of Sexes made by the Hair which St Paul speaks of. This
is that which was suggested by the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions,
speaking of that Law in Leviticus, Thou shall no round the corners of thy head,
etc. (...). Lib. 1. cap. 3.
It behooves us, says he, not to spoil the hair of the head or of the beard,
not to change the fashion of man against Nature, i. e. to order the hair so as
to take away in part the Natural Difference between the Sexes. This is that
which an Ancient Father on the like occasion says, (...). Clem. Ale ^and.
Paedag^g. l. 2.
To violate the symbol (or sign) of the Virile Nature is impious. The Wearing
of hair is such a Symbol, and therefore to confound this in the Sexes, that is,
for a Man to wear his hair after the Womanish way, and for the Woman to wear
hers after the way which is proper to Men, is Unchristian, Impious, and
Unnatural. This, in conjunction with what I have said before, I take to be the
Apostle's meaning in these words, Does not even Nature it self (and with it
Custom) teach you, that if a man has Long hair, and disposes of it in that
manner which women do, it is a shame, it is a dishonor to him? But if a woman
have Long hair, and wears it after that way of Dress which is proper to her
Sex, the law of Nature, together with the Usage of the sober part of the world
teaches that it is a glory to her. This I offer as the Full and Complete sense
of the Apostle in this Text.

And now though I have finished my task, yet because This place of Scripture
about men and women's Hair comes in here only by the by, and is not the Main
thing intended by the Apostle, but is brought to prove what he had urged
before, that women praying or prophesying should cover their heads, and men
uncover theirs, it being (I say) brought in here as an Argument to prove the
Decency of such a practice in time of Divine Worship, which is the Main and
Principal thing the Apostle urges in the beginning of this Chapter, therefore
I will annex here something of this subject, and show you what has been the
Practice of the world as to this, and How, and for what Reasons the Apostle
presses it here. And though my chief design is to speak of this custom of
Covering or Uncovering the head as it was used in Divine Worship, yet, to show
the utmost extent of this practice, I shall say something as I go along
concerning this usage in General and Civil Conversation. I will begin first
with the practice of the Jews and other Eastern people. As for the Common and
Civil usage among them they seldom were Bare-headed in public. And the mode
used in Civil conversation gave the rule also for Religious Worship. The Jews
went always with their heads covered, and so continued even at Divine Worship:
and most of the Eastern people did the like. The Jews of old, both Priests that
sacrificed, and People that were present, had their heads covered. Not only
women but men hid their heads and faces with a Veil when they prayed, as the
Learned Harmony of the N. Test. 1 Corinthians. 11.
Dr Lightfoot has proved. The Hebrew Doctors who tell us that they came in
this posture into the Temple, and there remained so all the time of the
Service, tell us also, that they did it out of pure Reverence, and for ^ear of
seeing the Divine Majesty, as they speak. And from the Temple this was derived
to the Synagogues, and with some addition, for in these places you may at this
day see them (not only those that Officiate, but the whole Congregation) pray
standing with the Ordinary Covering on their heads, and over that likewise they
cast a Veil. This people he^etofore, when they solemnly Mourned (which was a
piece of Religion,) veiled their heads, besides that they covered them with
Dust and Ashes. Of this Mourning Covering, which was added to their Ordinary
one, the Scripture often speaks, as in the 2 Samuel ^5. 30. Ier. 14. 4. Ezekiel. 24.
27. and sund^y other places. This was also used by Other Nations in the East,
as the Persians; Thus Haman mourned, having his head covered, Esther 6. 12. And
this was a Prologue to another and Worse Covering, 7 chapter 8. v. they ^overed
Hamans face, which was done immediately upon the Kings being displeased with
him, for Covering the face or head was a sign among them of being cast out of
savor. This afterward was in use among the Jews, and was a token of,
Condemnation: and accordingly you read that when Christ was condemned to be
guilty of death, some began to cover his face, Mark 14. 64, 65. But passing
this by, I am concerned at present in the more usual and Ordinary Covering
which the Jews used. Their Priests had a Particular Covering for their heads,
which is called Migbanoth, Ex. 29. 9. Lev. 8. 13. Exodus 28. 40. and sometimes,
Zaniph, Zech. 3. 5. which are rendered by the Seventy (...), and by Our
Translators bonnets and mitres. After several disputes about the nature of this
Covering, it is not to be doubted that it was a kind of Turbant, which I gather
from Ex. 39. 28. where it is expressly said that it was made of fine linen, and
from Ex. 29. 9. and Lev. 8. 13. where it is said it was bound upon their heads.
Besides, the verb Zanaph, circumvolvere, circumligare, whence Zamph comes,
shows that this was a Cove^ing that was rolled and tied about the head. And as
for the rest of the people, they continually wore something on their heads, a
sort of Bonnet, or Hood, or Cap, (for it is differently represented.) Or you
may call it a Hat* and such perhaps were those Hats which the three young men
were bound in when they were thrown into the burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 21.
So our Translators render the word there, though the invention of Hats (such as
we have at this day) was since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign. It is
most probable that this was a sort of Turbants, and that the Jews generally
wore this sort of Covering on their heads, though it was not so rich and costly
as that which the Priests and Great Men wore. Whatsoever this Covering was, it
was so close to their heads that it could not be presently pulled off with
ease, and so it was not a custom to show Respect to their Superiors or equals
when they met them by pulling off this attire. For this cause it was no sign of
Reverence either in their Synagogues or any where else to be Bare-headed. They
had another way of showing Reverence and Respect to God and men, viz. by
Bowing; which prevailed with all other Oriental people genrally. They showed
also their Respect and Obeisance by baring their feet. Hence Moses put off his
shoes: instead of Uncovering his head, he did so to his feet. And perhaps
Solomon alludes to this Eastern mode in Ecol. 5. 1. Keep thy foot when thou
go to the house of God, i. e. show all signs of Reverence in that place. The
Persians likewise were of the number of those who used not to uncover their
heads either in Civil or Religious conversation. And the Mahometans to this day
(for I may bring them in here because they are successors of the Ancient
Eastern people in those Countries,) these (I say,) as well as the Persians,
wearing Turbants (which are not so easily put off) have their heads constantly
covered with them: they never put them off to the Greatest Men or Princes. And
being not uncovered to Men, they will not be so to God. They perform their
Religious Worship with their Turbants on their heads: only we are told that
when they go to Prayers they touch them with the tops of their fingers, in
token, some think, of taking them off. So much of the practice of the Jews and
other Eastern Nations.

Le^ us see what the Greeks and Romans did. The Old Greeks had a contrary
practice, they used no Covering on their heads, being an Hale and Sturdy
people, and not willing to use themselves tenderly. Besides, they were inured
to sharp enterprises and services in the Wars, wherein they found it most
proper to come on (...), which has been since used in a Proverbial way for
Bold and Manly Adventures. But those that came after them were not so disposed;
for Thucydides, Strabo, and Pollux acquaint us that the Spartans wore woollen
caps or hats, and that the Helots their servants had dog-skin hats: nor was it
a frequent custom to vail these hats or bonnets in way of Salutation. And if
you ask what was the usage at their Worship, Macrobius and Plutarch, two
sufficient witnesses, assure you they Uncovered their heads in Divine Offices.
It was their opinion it seems that the Gods were not to be addressed after the
manner of Men: and therefore though many of them in ordinary and common
converse covered their heads, yet they appeared in another posture at their
public Devotions. Besides, the Temples or Places consecrated to the Gods were
heretofore Open without any roof or covering: which the Old hardy Greeks seemed
to emulate, and would needs worship with bare heads. But the practice of the
Romans, as it is best known, so it is most observable. It is certain that the
Old Romans used no Covering on their heads. Whilst they were Hard and Strong,
and before they were grown Effeminate it was usual with them to go Bare.
Clothing arrived to what it was afterward by degrees both for the head and
other parts. But at first when they were not so tender and delicate, their very
Kings and Princes, and after that, their Consuls and Greatest Officers used to
go bare-headed. Yea, Sueton. in Jul. Caes.
Iul^us Caesar reckoned it the Greatest favor and honor that could be done
him by the people, that they bestowed upon him a Lawrel-Crown to hide his bald
head. But though it was the usual Custom of the Romans to go with their heads
Uncovered, yet this practice of theirs had these following Exceptions, (as you
may gather from those who have writ of the Roman Customs, and particularly from
Plutarch in his Quaest. Roman. and Lipsius de Amphitheatro, Cap. 19. as also
from Varro, Tully, Martial, Plautus, Suetonius, Ovid, Horace, Salust, Seneca,
with whose Names only I trouble the Reader here, that I may save him the
trouble afterward of consulting their words at length in the margin.) 1. At
their Plays they were Covered. Those Sports being indulged them out of Good
Will and Favor, they took the liberty at that time to sit with their caps or
hats on. 2. When they Traveled their heads were covered against the injury of
the weather. Although generally when ^hey went abroad they were bare-headed,
yet in considerable Journeys, when they were to be a good while out, and
especially in Voyages at sea, they took their caps with them. 3. In the Wars
they most frequently wore these caps or hats. It is true Statues and Medalls
present their Commanders and Soldiers bare-headed: but so they do our Kings of
England, and generally all others. We must not therefore infer thence that
These never wear hats or any other Covering on their heads. 4. The Aged people
wore something on their heads when their hair was fallen of. 5. So did they
that were Sick, and very much indisposed by infirmity of body. 6. Some add,
that when the Weather required it, as in Rain, Snow, Hail, great Winds, or when
the Sun beat on them extraordinarily, they took part of their Gown, and clapped
it on their heads: but that was no formal Covering. So 7ly, when they Mourned,
they covered their heads. 8ly, It is well known that the Romans when they were
made Free, had a Hat or Cap put on their heads: for this was a Symbol or Emblem
of Liberty among them. But though this Cap was given to them that were
Manumitted, yet I do not read that they made any use of it; some of them never
wore it afterward. Lastly, The Romans (as it is obvious to observe of them; in
which likewise they followed the Grecians) used one sort of Custom in their
Civil, another in their Sacred affairs, and accordingly when they were
interessed and employed about Religious Worship, they were not Bare-headed but
Covered. And yet though they generally worshipped their Gods with Veild heads,
I know not how it came to pass, but so it was, they worshipped Saturn with
heads Uncovered, But excepting this one Instance, it is universally agreed that
the Romans, when they were at Religious Exercises, were Covered, both Priests
and People, the former with their bonnets, caps or hats, the latter with some
part of their clothes thrown over their heads. This is observed of them by
Plutarch (who at the same time takes notice of the Contrary practice of the
Greeks,) and he gives This Reason why they covered their heads when they
Worshipped the Gods, viz. (...). Quaest. Romans
because by so doing they gave a testimony of their Humility and Submission to
the Gods. So Servius infers from a place in Virgils third Aeneid, that the
Italians covered their heads in time of Worship, of Sacrificing especially.
Nothing is more acknowledged by the Learned then that the Romans covered their
heads in their Temples, and at their Religious Service, as the Jews did; whom
they imitated also in Veiling themselves in time of Mourning. And from the
custom of having their heads covered when they Worshipped and when they Mourned,
we may infer that they used the Contrary practice at other times, and
consequently that they went with Bare-heads. Here I might remark that (contrary
to the custom of the Jews and all Eastern people) Uncovering the head to
Magistrates and Superiors as they passed by was used by the Ancient Romans as a
token of Respect and Honor. This was an usage for a time, as Varro and
Plautarch testify: but afterward, and in our Apostle's time it is most likely,
that custom was laid aside, and it was not a sign of Reverence, but of Manhood
and Superiority to bare the head. The Better sort of them, the Richest and most
Creditable persons appeared in this posture. Though after this Another Custom
prevailed, and in a short time Uncovering the head became a sign of Respect and
Reverence among the Romans, and all Western and Northern people. To pass then
to the customs of Other Nations; the Old Germans and Gauls used no Covering on
their heads, and therefore you cannot expect any such thing in their Worship.
As to the Americans lately discovered, the History of those places tells us
that generally they being strong and lusty use not themselves to any Covering
on their heads, as they have but little, and sometimes none on their bodies.
Particularly Purchase says of the people of Brasil that they all go
Bareheaded, and their heads are as hard as blocks. This being their custom, no
wonder that these Blockheads are Uncovered likewise before their Gods or Idols.

This is a short Account of the usage of Covering the head, especially in time
of Worshipping. Now to ^^ing it to our purpose, and to apply it to what the
Apostle enjoins in this Chapter, and which he gives us to understand was the
practice of the Corinthian Christians, although some had swerved from (...),
which occasioned his Reproof here. It is evident that S^ Paul did not borrow
this custom, o^ the men's praying with the head uncovered, from the Jews or
Romans, for we have proved that in their Temples they covered their heads.
Whence then was this custom among the Orderly Christians of Corinth, and how
came the Apostle to urge id^as a Decent and Reverent Observance? I answer, St
Paul writing to the Grecians (for so the Corinthians were) followed the Grecian
custom, among whom it was usual to be Bare-headed and Divine Worship. And
though the Romans were Covered at the service of their Gods, yet at other times
they generally were Uncovered. To go with the head bare was so far from being a
badg of Inferiority and Subjection, that it was rather a token of Honor and
Superiority, and was accordingly used by persons of the greatest Quality among
them. And we are sure that Covering the head in some cases was a sign of
Submission and Shame* and what was worse: else caput ab^u^ito had not been part
of the common Form of Sentencing and Condemning malefactors among them. Here
then the Apostle, who used Great Prudence, nay 2 Cor. 12. 16.
Cr^ft, as he himself is pleased to say, thought fit to make use both of the
Grecian and Roman customs, viz. the practice of the former in their Religious
Worship, which was the men's Uncovering their ^eads, and the usage of the latter
in their Ordinary and Common Converse, which was the same, and might now not
seem unacceptable to the Corinthians, since the Roman Tongue and most of the
fashion^ of that people were grown common among the Greeks, as interchangeably
the Greek Tongue and many of their customs were in good repute among the
Romans* St Paul therefore is pleased to introduce and adopt this custom into
the Christian Church, and to enjoin the Converts and Believers of Corinth to
make use of this in their Divine Worship and Service of God. It is not to be
doubted that this practice which the Apostle here urges is founded even on a
Civil Custom which obtained at that time among the persons the Apostle writ to.
For the Ecclesiastical* Order and (...) may be accommodated and conformed to
the Civil Usages of a Place, if they have nothing of evil in them. Particularly
in Prayer and Divine Service this may be observed. The Civil posture used in
supplicating Kings and Great ones is lawfully used in Religious supplication of
God. By the same Gesture and Habit wherewith we testify our Respect to Men we
may express our Reverence to God. All the Cristians of Europe generally do so.
Which by the by gives us the true Account why the Rites and Observances of
several Churches vary from one another. The reason is because Civil Customs
vary in several Countries: accordingly Ecclesiastical Rites do so too. But
observe here that the Apostle who takes this Particular Custom used in Common
and Civil conversation, and transfers it to a Religious use, yet would not let
the other Custom, viz. of Covering the head, which so generally prevailed in
the Roman and Jewish Worship be made use of in the Christian one. For it is
reasonable to think that the Apostle here rebukes the Custom of the Corinthians
about the Men's being Covered, because it was borrowed from the Roman Idolaters
and from the Jews. The Corinthian Church used the like in their Solemn
Assemblies, and therefore they are justly reprehended because they conformed to
a Custom which was so General and Prevalent among those Superstitious
Worshippers, who were then Covered and Veild at their devotions. First, He
would not have them cloud their heads at their Service as the Gentiles did at
the worship of their Idols. It has been intimated before that the Servile Fear
of their Gods made those worshippers Veil and hide their heads: but the Apostle
would have the Worship of Christians to be Free and Ingenuous, and void of that
slavish Fear and Dread. Besides, this would be an imitating of the Jews, who
without any Prescription and Order from God wrapped up their heads in Veils when
they were at their Public Worship. The Apostle would by no means allow the
Christians to follow this practice of Praying with their faces covered, it
being so great a piece of Jewish Superstition. He would not suffer them to ape
the Jewish people in this kind of Hood-winked Devotion. For These Reasons and
for Others suggested in this Chapter, St Paul's will is that the Corinthian
Men, who were Converts and Saints, should be Bare-headed in their Religious
Assemblies And from St Paul all Christians generally have received and
practiced this Usage, though not upon the very same grounds and reasons for
which he urged this practice. For the Christian Churches at this day conform to
this usage, because among them generally the Token of Respect or Reverence to
Men is Uncovering the head, and therefore they observe This also in their
Addresses to God, and express their Adoration and Worship by having no Covering
on their heads. And herein they follow the Apostle himself, who (as I have
suggested) made choice of the Civil usage of the Grecians and Romans, and
brought it into the Church.

Hitherto I have spoken only of the Covering or Uncovering used by Men. In the
next place, Because the Apostle adds, Every woman that prays or Prophesies
with her head uncovered dishonours her head, I must adjoyn a few words
concerning the Injunction which is included in these words, viz* that the
Christian Women were to cover and veil their heads when ever they were emploi'd
in Religions Worship. The Covering or Veiling the head among that Sex is no New
thing. It was an ancient custom to bring the wife to the husband covered with a
Veil, as we expressly read of Re^ekah when she was brought to Is^^^, Genesis 24.
65. and thence likely it was that Jacob was baguiled by La^an, and thought he
had Rachel when he was in possession of Leah. The Ra^ins tell ^s that he that
joined the man and woman in marriage used to Cover the head of the bride with
the end of the linen which hung down from the bridegrooms neck. To which they
say Ruth referred when she spoke to Boaz to spre^d his Skirt (the end of his
garment) ^-ver her, Ruth 3. 9. And hence Marriage it self is called Chuppah,
from Chippah, to cover. The Jewish women generally after they were married used
a Veil; they went covered with this into the Temple and Synagog^es, and they
wore it wherever they appeared publicly. As for the women among the Romans, it
is well Known that Nubere, which is the proper word for their Marrying, is as
much as Obnubere, because she clouded or covered her head: for those that are
acquainted with the Romans Customs know that the Bride was brought home covered
with a Veil. To this our English or rather Norman Laws may allude perhaps,
which call a Married Woman a femme covert, and by it they understand the Woman's
being sub potest a^e viri (as they speak,) under the power of her husband. A
woman, when she marries, puts her self into a state of Subjection, and this
without doubt was signified heretofore by the Veiling her. Thus it was among
the Jews and Romans, and thus it was among the Grecians (who imitated the
Romans, as I said before, in many things,) at least it was thus among the
Corinthians whom the Apostle wrote to; the Women went Veiled to show their
Humility and Subjection. And indeed this custom remains still not only among
the Turks but most Eastern Countries, Yea in most parts of the world. This
Cano^ then of the Apostle (as the other co^ce^ ning Men's Uncovering their
heads) is taken from the Civil usage among Women at that time (not excluding)
the Other Reasons assigned by the Apostle in this Chapter on which he grounds
this practice.) All modest and honest Ma^rons, Wives, and even Virgins wore
certain Veils: or Coverings on their heads, and they never used to ap^ear
publicly without them. And the Apostle liked this Custom so well that he would
have it obtain in the Worship of God. The Modesty which women show at Other
times must much more be expressed in the Sacred Assemblies. If they go with
Veiled heads in all other places, certainly it is unfi^^ing to come. Unvell'd
and Uncovered into the Public Congregation. Hence he enjoins that a Woman
praying or Prophesying be Covered. This Prophesying of Women was foretold by
the Prophet Ioe^, 2. chapter 28. v. and we read some Instances of it in Acts 21. 9.
Some of these Prophesying Women were in the Church of Corinth, and being
extraordinarily Gi^ted (which was the peculiar Donation of those first times of
the Gospel) they Prayed and Preached publicly (which latter especially was a
Manly Office,) and they proceeded to usurp on the Custom which was proper to
the Men, i. e. they Uncovered their heads, and would needs have their Faces
seen as well as their Voices heard. The Apostle soon took notice of this bold
disorder, and here enjoins them (together with all other women) a modest Veil,
or rather he does but bid them practice the known Custom used by that Sex. This
Injunction without doubt was observe'd by all the Faithful women; and we may
inform our selves from Ecclesiastical History that it was derived to After
ages, and practiced a long time by that Sex. It came down as far as the
Emperor Decius's time, by the same token that he put out a Decree that the
Christian women at Rome should leave off wearing the Veil on their heads,
hoping that by that Immodest usage they might be brought at last to Paganism
and Idolatry. But his design did not take of perverting their minds and
bringing them to comply with the Pag^n Worship, though they laid aside their
Veils and went Bare-headed, for which they gave This Reason, (...). Cedren.
Hist Compe^^.
that they counted it an Honor to them to suffer this disgrace among men for
Ch^ists sake. But soon after (if not about the same time) the Veil was thrown
off, not by force of Persecutors but of Choice for which that Sex is smartly
reprehe^ded by Tertullian, in his piece de Velandis Virginibus: where his main
endeavor is to prove that Virgins as well as Married Women were to be Veild in
the Religious Assemblies, and that it was S Paul's meaning in this Chapter.
Wherefore he reproves the manners of the Women and Maids who came into the
Congregations Uncovered and in their Hair, as a direct breach of the
Apostolical Canon. And certainly so it was, for that which the Apostle delivers
in this Chapter concerning Women's behavior in the Churches did not only oblige
the Women of that time, but is obligatory to this very day. All Christian women
are engaged by virtue of what the Apostle here says, to be always with their
heads covered in time of Prayer and other Religious Exercises. The Women among
the Jews and the Turks meet apart from the Men when they pray in public: the
Women (according to their custom) are shut up by themselves. But this is a kind
of Excommunicating them, and therefore is not allowable: wherefore let the
Apostles Injunction take place, that is, let them not appear with their heads
Uncovered all the time they are at Divine Worship. At other times and in other
places, especially at home and in their own families, Christian women, and more
especially English women, may lawfully show themselves without a Covering on
their heads (unless it be that which the Apostle says was given them for a
Covering,) that it may appear they are not of the number of those women who are
servilely used, as it ^s the custom of some Countries, where no woman is seen
but with her head muffled up and quite hid.

But it will be said, The Argument of the Apostle will not hold now, Covering
the head being not a sign of Subjec^tion, but of the contrary among us* I
answer, Christian women may, in conformity to the ancient practice of their
Sex, observe the Apostles Injunction though not for that one Parti^ular Reason
which he mentions, viz. to testify Subjection to their husbands. Suppose that
be Obsolete, and Antiq^ated with us, yet there are Other Reasons, which will
always hold, viz the regard which they ever o^ght to have to their Chastity,
the due care which they ought to take lest they expose themselves by an
unseemly behavior, the extraordinary Modesty as well as Reverence which they
are obliged to express whiles they are concerned in the Worship of God, the
deep sense of their being observed not only by Men, but by God and Angels.
Which last consideration seems to be made use of by our Apostle when he says,
For this cause the woman ought to have power on her head because of the Angels,
v. 10. She ought to have power. What is that? The same (...) velum a Radad
dominari, potestatem in aliquem exercere. So I could' observe that the word
Sad^k is used for petestas and ^egumentum.
Hebrew word (as our Learned Annotator observes) which signifies a Veil,
denotes also (...) power; when it is said therefore that the woman ought to have
power on her head, here is meant a Veil on her head, which is a sign and token
of the power over her. This all women ought to wear in the Congregation, if not
in subjection to Man yet in reverence to Angels, those Heavenly and Divine
Spirits who are present in the Public Assemblies (as even the Heathen
Moralists have confessed,) and are Overseers and Witnesses of the behavior of
Women as well as of Men in the Church. I know there are Other Glosses on these
words: some with Beza understand by the Angels the Ministers and Governors of
the Church, the Prophets that Prophesied in the Congregation, and they think
that St Paul exhorts the Women to be veiled, that they might not by exposing
their beauty be an occasion of diverting those persons from their serious
employment. Our Great English Rabbi fancies that by the Angels are meant the
Messengers or Deputies of Espousals, and that women had the liberty of
unveiling or veiling their faces upon their account. But that which may confute
this opinion is this (not to speak of the unusual acception of the word Angles)
that the Apostle in this Chapter speaks of the Sex in general, but especially
of Married Women, whereas this Author restrains the Apostles words to the
Unmarried only. This Worthy Man has another interpretation, of a far different
nature, which is this, that Evil Angels or Devils are to be understood here,
and that the Apostle's meaning is (to deliver it in this Authors own words)
that Harmony of the N. Test.
women must not expose their faces in the public congregation lest the Devil
make a bait of their beauty, and thereby int angle the hearts and eyes of the
men. Lastly, I could offer a conjecture of my own, viz. that (...) is a mistake
of the Transcribers for (...), be^aus^ of the flocks, i. e. the Congregations
or Assemblies of Christians, which are called flocks, Mat. 26. 31. Acts 20. 28.
1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. (although the same Greek word he not used in these places.) The
plain sense then is that Women ought not to appear with uncovered heads, but to
behave themselves with singular modesty and humility, considering the Solemn
Employment which they are about. They are met together to worship God, they are
come into the Assemblies of the Faithful for no other end, therefore let them
not dare to show themselves Immodest and Irreverent, let them have a Veil on
their heads because of the flock of Christ: let them avoid all lightness and
vanity, and set themselves with the utmost seriousness to that Divine Work
which they are gathered together for, and let them in this be exsamples to the
flock. But if you will not admit of any alteration in the Greek Copy, (which I
am not very forward to urge) then in my judgment the first Interpretation
which I named seems to be the most genuine. When the Apostle enjoins the women
to cover their heads because of the Angels, he proceeds upon the received
opinion of the Jews, that Angels are always present in Religious Meetings, and
indeed in all Great and Weighty Consultations. Wherefore he suggests the
Reasonableness of women's modest behavior in the Congregation because of these
Angels. As if the Apostle had said, If Men be dis^egarded by you, yet have
respect to these Invisible Overseers and Observers, who take notice of your
loose and disordely carriage, and will one day represent it to your
disadvantage. This Reason is perpetual.

And thus I have finished the Consideration of these words. The sum is this,
That the Apostle is desirous those Christians at Corinth, who had been
converted by his Ministry, should walk orderly and as became the professors of
the Gospel. Wherefore he blames the Men for Covering their heads, and the Women
for laying aside their Veils in time of Religious Worship; and again he chides
both Sexes for another Disorder, viz. that the Men wore their Hair like Women,
and that These appeared in the guise of Men as to their Hair. He lets them know
that both these kinds of Disorders are repugnant to the Institution of God and
the Dictates of Reason. But especially the latter of these practices is
con^uted here by an Appeal to Nature, which is a Comprehensive Topic, and you
may understand by it the General dictate of Natural Reason, and the Particular
Law of Nature concerning Distinction of Sexes, as also Usage and Custom which
is a Second Nature. According to the direction of these the Apostle would have
them walk, suggesting that not only the Length but the Adorning of the hair are
Uncomely and Indecorous, and therefore Unnatural in the Manly Sex, but are
Comely and Decent, yea even Proper and Natural in the other. In a word, a Man
must not be like a Woman either as to her Veil and Covering or as to her Long
and Dressed Hair, because he is taught otherwise by the Law of Reason, and by
that of the Sex, and even by the Practice and Custom of the soberest part of
the world, which are all comprised in the large extent of the word Nature in
this place of the Apostle.

The third TEXT Enquired into, viz. 1 Corinthians. XV. 29. Else what shall they do
that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they also
baptized for the dead? Or thus, Moreover, what shall they do that are baptized
for the sake of the dead, if the dead are not raised at all? why are they even
(or therefore) baptized for the sake of the dead?
IF I should say of these words as St Austin says of Those in 1 Cor. 3. 15. [
He shall be saved yet so as by fire,] namely that it is one of those places in
St Paul's Epistles which St Peter tells us are 2 Pet. 3. 16.
hard to be understood, I believe it would be difficult for any one to disprove
my assertion. For even what the Apostle there add^ is applicable to These words
also, They that are unstable and unlearned wr^st them unto their own
destruction: which plainly appears in the application of This Text to the
doctrine of Purgatory by some of the Roman Church, But whether St Peter had an
eye to This particular passage of our Apostle or no, I profess to know not. Yet
sure I am it may justly be ranked among his (...), since it has not been found
any easy task to reach the right understanding and sense of it. It is
generally acknowledged that This Text is not of the Ordinary rank, but that it
contains in it an Unusual and Surprising manner of expression. Interpreters
have shrewdly Tugged, and those who have been observed to be Lazy enough
sometimes have here plentifully Sweated, that they might have the Credit of
giving us the Apostle's true meaning, that by any means they might attai^ to
this Resurrection and (...) of the dead in this Chapter. Give me leave to
present you with a Brief Account of their Several Endeavors and Different
Deci^ions in the case, with a free and Impartial Animadversion on them, and
then to take the boldness to offer my Own thoughts in the Controversy, which I
purpose to do (as I ought) with a strict Veneration of Antiquity and the
Primitive Writers of the Church, with a faithful regard to the Masters of
Grammar and Criticism, with a due respect to the Whole Context, and to the
Analogy of Christian faith. I think it will not be amiss in the first place to
rank the Expositors on This place after This Method. They understand it of
Baptism either Properly or Improperly taken: 1. Properly, for a Real and
Outward Washing with water. 2. Improperly or Metaphorically, for the Baptism of
Afflction and Suffering, as sometimes the word is understood. But the Proper
Baptizing or Washing will engage me most of all in This Discourse, and That is
threefold, 1. Sacramental, which is no other then that Holy Ordinance of
Christ's institution, whereby children or those of riper years are admitted into
the Christian Church by the action of outward Washing or Sprinkling with water.
2. Funeral Washing, which was practiced in order to the burying of the dead
bodies. 3. Legal or Ceremonial washing, used by the Jews as often as they were
defiled by touching the dead: and this was done either in their own persons, or
by another for them in case they died before they were Cleansed.

I. Begin we with the Various Interpretations of Those on the place who
understand it of Sacramental Baptizing. And first, there are some who interpret
it of Those who at their Baptism profess themselves dead to sin and to the
world: and by this Baptismal act they are reputed to be thus Spiritually dead.
A second Opinion is of those who imagine the words spoken of Baptism as it
represents the Bodily Death. Others understand it of Baptism as it was
accompanied with the confession of the Article of the Resurrection of the dead;
A fourth sort say it is spoken of the Clinicks, those who lay on their sick
beds, and receive the Sacrament of Baptism. Fifthly, others understand it of
Baptizing over the dead, over the Tombs of the Deceased Martyrs. Sixthly, there
are some who think it is meant of Baptizing in the place and stead of the dead.
Seventhly, there is a Learned man who thinks it is spoken of an Annual
Baptizing for the benefit of the dead. Eighthly, Another conceveth in refers to
Baptizing with the imposition of the names of the dead. Lastly, there is a
Learned Critic who dissents from all the forenamed Opinions, and is persuaded
that (...) is put here for (...), the Plural for the Singular: but how he
applies it you shall hear afterward.

1. I begin with the First, the Opinion of those who imagine These words are
spoken of Baptized Christians, who by this very Sacrament professed to the
world that they were Spiritually dead. So that to be baptized for the dead is
as much as to be reputed as dead persons when they were baptized, or, at their
baptism to be like dead men, viz. Dead in respect of Sin and any Love to it. At
that Solemn Initiating themselves into the Church they openly renounced their
former sins, they publicly disowned their past vices, they became Mortified
persons, and betook themselves to a Severe and Strict course of life: thus
(Mystically and Spiritually speaking) they were Dead. So the words are
interpreted by some St Ierom, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius.
Ancient Fathers: with whom agree a few of the Melanchton, Cajetan, etc.
Moderns, amongst whom a Philip. a Limborch Theolog. Christian. l. 6. c. 10.
Late Writer expresses his sense thus, Baptized for the dead are they who when
they are baptized declare that they are ready to Die to the world, to be in it
as Dead men, and to live a new life: and if occasion be, to submit to the
Cross, and Die for their Religion. This they do that they may have a blessed
Resurrection. But This Interpretation will be far from gaining our consent if
we consider (besides what I shall add under the next Opinion) but these two
things: First, there is no reason to interpret these baptized for the dead, of
those that are spiritually dead, because it is generally advised by all Sober
Interpreters of Scr^pture, that we should not fly to an Improper and
Metaphorical sense when the Literal and Proper one will serve our turn. But I
shall afterward prove that a Plain and Literal meaning of these words is most
probable and reasonable. Secondly, the Context it self will con^ute this
interpretation, for if the Spiritual Death be here mean^, i. e. the being
buried with Christ in baptism, and being dead to sin and the world, then who
will think there is any Consequence in the Apostles Reasoning, whilst he
argues from a Spiritual and Mystical Death and Resurrection (of which Baptism
is a Sign) unto that which is Bodily and External, which is the subject he here
treats of through out the whole Chapter* The Inference is so Foreign that I
cannot see how it will ever be admitted.

2. Others are of the opinion, that These words are spoken of Baptism as it
represents the Bodily Death. And some of the Fathers who were Pat^ons of the
First Interpretation were pleased also to ^spouse this Second: for they thought
fit to join both these together, viz. the Spiritual and the Bodily Death,
asserting that the Representation or Resemblance of both was intended here by
the Apost^e. Now let us see how they apply these words to the Death of the
Body. They hold that the Apostle's Argument in the Text is of this sort, If
there shall be no rising of the dead hereafter, why is Baptism so significant a
Symbol of our Dying* and Rising again, and also of the Death and Resurrection
of Christ * For those that were Proselytes to the Christian Religion were
interpreted to make an open profession of These in their being plunged into the
Baptismal water, and in being there Overwhelmed and buried as it were in the
Consecrated Element. The Immersion into the water was thought to signify the
Death of Christ, and their Coming out denoted his Rising again, and did no less
represent their Own future Resurrection. On which account the Minister's
putting in of the Christian Converts into the Sacred waters, and his taking
them out thence, are styled by St Chrysostom (...). Homil. in 1 Epist. ad
Corinth. 15. cap.
the Sign and Pledge of descending into the state of the dead* and of a return
from thence. And thus because the Washing and Plunging of the newly admitted
Christians was a Visible Proof and Emblem first of Christ's* and then of Their
Resurrection from the grave, the forementioned Fathers have been induced to
believe that This passage of our Apostle which I am speaking of has a
particular respect to That, and is to be Interpreted by it. Nay, this seems to
agree exactly with the language and tenor of our Apostle himself, who may be
thought to be the Best Interpreter of his own words. Know ye not, says he,
that so many of us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his death?
therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was
(...) up from the dead, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6.
3, 4* It is no matter of admiration to me that some have thought and
confidently asserted, that the Apostle's manner of speech here is the same with
that in the Text which is before us, and that (...), is to be explained and
commented upon by (...), and by that other expression, (...). They may seem
indeed at first to be near a kin to one another, and to bear upon them the very
same Stamp and Form of speech. But I conceive it was only some little
Resemblance of the Phrase and Style, or Mode of speech, not the same
Significancy and Real Matter couched in both these places which wrou^ht any to
This Opinion. But without any more dispute, I would admit of the Interpretation
before mentioned as most Natural and Genuine, upon condition that any one can
make it good out of but One G^eek Author, much more from the Use and Idiom of
the Tongue, that to be baptized (...) for the dead, signifies to be baptized as
dead, or, after the manner and similitude of those that are dead: for Those of
the former Opinion and of This (that is, those that interpret the words of a
Representation of the Spiritual or Bodily Death) acknowledge for the dead, is
as much as like the dead, or, in resemblance of the dead, or, after the manner
of the dead. These must be proved to be Synonymous before that First or this
Second Exposition of the words can look for our Assent and Suffrage. Let it be
proved that (...) is as much as (...) i. e. that it is a word of Similitude,
and signifies the same with sicut, tanquam* quasi* in the Latin, or the same
with the Hebrew (...), which is used in Comparing and Likening one thing with
another. Till then it cannot be credited, that for the dead, signifies a
Resemblance or Likeness to those that are dead. I grant that Pro in Latin is
sometimes as much as quasi, perinde, instar; as when we read in Tully, pro
nihilo putare vel ducere, to esteem as nothing: and (to come nearer to the
present matter) when the same Author says, pro occiso relictus est, he was
left as dead. So pro mortuis may be applied in a sentence to signify as much
as tanquam mortui. And it is true that in our Own Vulgar way of speaking, for
dead denotes as much as dead, or as dead: thus we say, such a one lay for dead,
or was taken up for dead. But I never heard that it was thus in the Greek
Tongue, and therefore I am very ^oth to charge our Apostle here (as Erasmus and
Calvin do in other places) with false Greek. I grant that the Actions in
Baptism (especially as it was administered of old) were Representative of the
Death and Resurrection both of Christ and Believers: but that St Paul's words
here have reference to any such thing, the Propriety of Phrase (as you have
heard) will not permit us to believe. Besides, you may observe (as you shall
have farther occasion hereafter to take notice) it is (...) with a Praepositive
Article, which utterly spoils that sense which is pretended: for the Apostle
speaks here Definitively, and not at large: and the words are rightly rendered [
for the dead] not [ for dead.]

3. The next interpretation is that of Ss Chrysostom, (for you must know it is
usual with Him to adjoyn one Opinion to another, as here he thinks fit to add
This which I am now mentioning, to those other two which I named before) and he
is followed by Theophylact and O^cumenius, and they by Hemmingius and our
Learned Hammond. The baptized for the dead, say they, were those who were
baptized upon^ the Article of the Resurrection of the dead, and consequently in
hope of that Resurrection. So that the Apostle here is thought by them to refer
to the Form of Confession of Faith, or Reciting the Articles of the Greed, in
which among other things the person to be baptized openly professed his belief
of That Article of the Resurrection of the dead. And the Great Canonists,
Balsamon and Zonaras, refer the Apostle's words to This Custom* and explain
them in These terms, (...); Not. in 18 Can. Council. Carthag.
What shall they do that are baptized in the hope of the resurrection of the
dead? Which answers to the exposition of Theophylact, (...). In l^cum.
What shall they do who are baptized on the Expectation of the deads rising
again? But 1. though it be universally acknowledged that soon after the
Apostle's time, a Public Profession of the Creed was required of those that
presented themselves to be Baptized, yet it remains to be proved that in the
Time wherein our Apostle lived they solemnly Recited a Form of Belief at
Baptism, and that they had This very Confession of Faith which now goes under
the Apostles Names. This is Doubtful at least, and so we ought not to be
Definitive and Peremptory about it, and therefore we cannot be sure that the
Apostle argues in this place from any such practice as the Rehearsal of the
Creed. 2ly, Grant that this Form of Confession was used at Baptism by the
Catechumeni, and that all the Articles of it were openly rehearsed, and
consequently, in the Close that of the Resurrection of the dead: yet then it
should rather have been said, What shall they do that are baptized for those
that are Risen from the dead, not barely, for the dead? Nay 3ly, who sees not
yet farther a Greater Impropriety and Harshness in the Apostle's way of
speaking, if to be baptized for the dead must be interpreted thus, to be
baptized in hope of the resurrection of the dead? First, [ the dead] is put
here for the dead bodies of the deceased, for These only can be said to rise at
the last day. And therefore it is St Chrysostoms Gloss on the words, (...).
for the dead, that is (says he) for the dead bodies. Secondly* [the dead
bodies] is put for the Resurrection of those dead bodies. Nay, Thirdly, it is
put for the Confession, or the Article, or the Faith, or Hope of the
resurrection of the dead bodies. This is too Concise a way of speaking:
wherefore I yield to our Judicious Thorndyke, who descanting on this passage,
concludes it cannot be justified by any Example, that (...) should signify
(...), as St Chrysostom* would have it. Nay 4ly, if the words were to be taken in
his sense, the Article which is here inserted, should be left out, and it
should have been barely (...), as the Learned Hammond sets it down in his
Annotations, being Conscious (as it were) that it should be so.

4. Let us pass to another Reading of the words, and it shall be still of Those
who take Baptizing here in the Sacramentalsense, and hold that the baptized for
the dead were those persons who had That Sacrament administered to them when
they were close upon the confines of death, and just expiring their last. This
Exposition is abetted by Calvin. The baptized for the dead, says he, are they
who are baptized when they are Dying, Qui jam mortui censeantur, and qui de
vita ^mnino desperaverint.
when they are given over, and looked upon as dead. And so the particle (...)
is as much as the Latin pro, as when they say, habere pro derelieto. Peter
Martyr, Iud^vi^us Capellus, Estius
Other Learned Writers also take This to be the sense of the Apostle's words;
but it came first from Epiphanius, in his Book H^res. 28.
against Heretics, who acquaints us that when it so chanced that the
Catachumeni or New Comers to Christianity were overtaken with some Mortal
distemper, and there was an utter Despair of their Living till they could be
brought to the Sacred Font, they used to be baptized (...), as they lay in
their Beds: and from that usage of theirs the Clinici or Bed-ridden took their
Name. For you must know that it was usual with those that were converted to
Christianity to defer their Baptism. Perhaps (say some) at first it proceeded
from fear and cowardice, which made them unwilling to hazard themselves by the
open profession of their Religion, and so they put off their admission into the
Church as long as they could; but when they were arrested by Grievous Sickness,
and confined to their Beds, they passionately begged to be baptized before they
left the world. This was one sort of Clinicks. But there was a second sert who
deferred their Baptism on other accounts: These were no New Converts, but such
as had embraced Christianity a considerable time; yet they purposely deferred
their Baptism on one pretended ground or other. Thus Constantine the Great was
not baptized till the Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 26. Sozom. l. 2. ^. 32.
sixty fifth year of his age, which was the one and thirtieth year of his
Empire: and he declared himself (as De vit. Constant. l. 4. c 61.
Eusebius testifies) that he delayed his Baptism because he intended to be
Baptized in the River Jordan, the place which was so famous for the first
Baptizing, and where our Savior himself was baptized ^ut he was hindered from
going thither, (though I see no Cause of that hindrance in so many years,) and
being Aged he fell sick, and was Baptized in the City of Nicomedia (where he
then was) by Eusebius Bishop (either at that time, or formerly) of that place,
and he died in the very same year he was Baptized. I know this is Contradicted,
and it is said he was not baptized in the East, but in the West, not by a Greek
Bishop but a Roman one. This was Miltiades, say some: others stiffly maintain
that it was Sylvester, and this they have from Damas (...). Pontif
one of the Roman Bishops, who wrote Sylvesters Life, and asserts that He
baptized Constantine telling us withal that this Emperor, among other
Admirable Ornaments and Utensils, kept in his Palace the Font wherein he was
baptized* and des^ribes the Make and Costliness of it. Dr Burnets Travels.
It seems it is since translated or thought to be translated to Rome, and there
is kept as a Choice Memo^ial And as for the Occasion of Constantine's being
Baptized, they tell us it was This, he being guilty of his son Crispus's blood
and other unnatural murders, was struck by God with Leprosy, which Affected
him so much that he applied himself to the Bishop, and showed himself Sorrowful
for the fact; and to give an evidence of his Repentance he desired to receive
Baptism. Then by the ^ishops Prayers and this Holy Laver he was cured of his
Noisome Distemper. This was in the eighteenth year of his reign, A. D. 324. and
is mentioned by Zosimus and Baronius. Yet Cedrenus and others say he was
baptized at Rome by this Sylvester some years before, viz. in the seventh year
of his reign. But Eusebius, the famous Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, who
writ the Life of Constantine, says not a word of all this, but Constantine's
Life, book 4. ^h. 61, 62.
tells us that he was baptized not at Rome, but at Nicomedia, and that many
years after the Nicene Council, in the close of his life, the last year of his
reign, (five years after Sylvester was dead) by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia:
and this is testified and confirmed by St Ierom, St Ambrose, Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret, and others, and seems to be the True Account of the Emperors
Baptism. To hasten then out of this Digression, this Example of Constantine's
deferring his Baptism was followed by several other succeeding Emperors. Thus
his son Constantius (...). Athanas. de Syn. Arimini and Seleuc.
was baptized at the point of Death: Theodosius the Great falling sick was
thereupon baptized, and Recovered upon it: but he had deferred his Baptism
longer Socrat. l. 5. c. 25.
if his sickness had not hastened it. The next Oros. l. 7. c. 33.
Theodosius was not baptized till he was very old. Ecclesiastical History
acquaints us also that the Emperor Valentini^n put off his Baptism, that he
might receive that Sacrament from St Ambrose, but he was prevented by death. We
read the same of some of the most Eminent Fathers of the Church: St Ierom and
St Ambrose were not baptized till they were thirty years of age, although their
Parents were Christians. Augustine was a Manichean till he was one and thirty
years old, and then (and not before) he was baptized by the foresaid St Ambrose
the famous Bishop of Milan. Thus it was also in the Greek Church: some of the
most Eminent persons (besides the Emperors before spoken of) deferred their
Baptism till they came to some ripeness of years. Thus Chrysostom, though born
of and bred up under a Christian Mother, and Gregory Nazianzen born of
Christian Parents, were not baptized till they arrived to be Men. Nectarius,
Archbishop of Constantinople, entered into Episcopal Orders before he was
baptized. Now, there are Different, yea Contrary Reasons alleged for this
practice: some did purposely put off their Baptism till death approached, that
they might be the more at liberty to indulge their follies and vices: for when
one of the Catechumeni Committed a fault, they used to excuse his failing by
alleging This in his favor, that he was not yet Baptized. They did it also
that they might not sin after the celebrating the Sacrament of Baptism, for S
Cyprian tells us they had This fond and groundless notion, that there was no
Pardon for those that relapsed into sin after Baptism. This arose from the
mistaking of That place, Heb. 6. 4, 5. which the Novatians very warmly insisted
upon, and would by no means Absolve those that lapsed after Baptism. But the
Orthodox Fathers were of another mind, and sharply reproved this custom of
deferring Baptism. Orat. de baptismum differentibus.
Gregory Nyssen has a whole Oration against it, and Orat. 40 de Baptismo.
Gregory Nazianzen and Hom. 1 and 23 in Act. Apost.
Chrysostom inveigh against it very zealously. So St Augustine (whose parents
delayed his Baptism on purpose, because they feared the Young man's Relapse into
his former vices) Sermon. 97. de Temp.
complains of This Abuse in the Church, which prevailed in his days. It seems
it was grown into a Custom to omit the receiving of Baptism as long as they
were in health (and perhaps the Example of Constantine and his son Constantius
who did so gave some repute to this evil usage,) but as soon as they fell sick
they bethought themselves of their duty, and when they perceived the Malady
grew desperate, and themselves irrecoverable, then they sent presently for the
Christian Priests, and solemnly gave up their Names to Christ in Holy Baptism,
as being desirous to carry out of the world with them the Seal of their Eternal
Salvation. These are called by the Council of Laodicea (which was under
Sylvester) (...), those that were admitted to Baptism when they lay sick, for
(...) here signifies Baptism, as it does frequently among the Ancients. This
was called (...) by Orat. de baptism. differentib.
Gregory Nyssen, because they desired to be Baptized and to Die at once. Of
these speak Epist. 7 ad Magnum.
St Cyprian, Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 43.
Eusebius, and many Writers of the Primitive Times, and the Canons of several
Councils. Of such as These, viz. the Moribundi, who lay on their Deathbeds,
and called for Speedy Baptism, some interpret the words of the Text. But that
they have but little reason, I shall prove from these following Particulars. 1.
It is not probable that that sort of Clinicks who were newly converted from
Paganism is here meant, because in those first days Fear and Faintheartedness
did not possess men, as they are known to have done afterward. A singular Zeal
and Ardency inspired their minds, and they were not ashamed to own and
publicly maintain the Faith they had espoused: yea, they gloried in their
sufferings for the Cause of Christ, and rejoiced in their persecutions for it,
as the Acts of the Apostles assure us. It is not likely therefore that These
deferred their being baptized on the forenamed account, and consequently it is
not likely that the Text speaks of these. 2. It is not certain that it was the
opinion of the Christians in the Apostles days, that Sin after Baptism is
Irremissible, which was another ground of the Custom of deferring Baptism. And
consequently it is to be said, and that with evident Truth, that it does not
appear in the least that the forementioned Custom of the believers requesting
baptism in the very close of their lives prevailed in the times of the
Apostles: but it seems rather to have crept in after those first Guides of the
Church were gone; and therefore that Gloss on the words can have but a slender
foundation. Or 3ly, say that such an Use obtained even in the Apostles days,
yet will not St Paul's Argument have any force at all by relating unto That* For
thus it must proceed, What shall the baptized Clinicks do if the dead rise not
at all? why are they also baptized just at the point of death? why have they
that Holy Sacrament given to them at the last gasp? if there be no Rising
again, why do they thus? It may be answered, that though there should be no
Resurrection of the dead, yet it follows not that they were Baptized in vain,
for that Sacred Office of Baptism was thought in that case (and that rightly
too) chiefly to have respect to what was Past. Though the dead bodies rise not,
yet that Administration was useful to the Soul, and available to the Absolution
and Remission of their sins: which plainly appears from the Reason of deferring
baptism heretofore, namely, left they should sin, and so defile themselves
after washing. Though the dead should never rise again, Christ's Ordinance might
be conducible to this Present Life, whilst by That they were admitted into the
Church, and had their former sins washed away, and their consciences cleansed:
and also it might be seviceable to the Future Life, for the salvation and
happiness of their Souls, though their Bodies were unconcerned. But 4ly, to say
no more, This Interpretation of the words is faulty in the same kind that the
two former were, that is, it is irreconcilable to the Propriety of speech, and
the Usage of the Tongue in which the Apostle wrote: which I cannot but believe
till it is proved to me that These two are of the same import, viz. to be
baptized for the dead, and to be baptized when they are dying, or at their
death: which is the thing that the Abettors of this Exposition contend for, but
it could never yet be made out by any Parallel place of Scripture, or the least
Testimony of Approved Authors*

^ 5: Another Acception of the words is countenanced by the Authority of
Luther, Piscator, and the Admirable Vossius in his Thesis concerning the
Resurrection. They will have (...), rendered by (...), over the dead, i. e over
the dead corpse as they lay in the Coemeteries or Bu^ying places: or over the
dead, i. e. upon the Tombs, and over the Sepulchers of the newly deceased
Martyrs, which were called Memoriae Martyrum, and so the words refer to the
Custom of baptizing persons over the dead Martyrs graves or tombs. Here first,
I shall grant that according to the Syriack it is rendered super mortuos, upon,
above, or over the dead. Secondly, I grant that the Innocent Commemorations of
the Holy Martyrs, even at the Time of administering of Baptism, were no unusual
things of old, and have Great Antiquity to Assert them. But then, This I have
to say that (...) for (...) is not so Easy and Obvious an Acception as That
which I have to offer (and certainly the Easiest and Plainest is to be deemed
the most Natural and Genuine.) Again, though the Praeposition in the Text
frequently signifies over or above, and that with a Genitive case, when it is
applied to a place, yet it may be questioned whether it has the same
signification when it is joined with persons, as here: for though the baptizing
be supposed to be over the Graves, yet it is properly over those that are^dead,
who are considered as persons here: at least their bodies, not the places they
were in, are spoken of here. But I will not insist on this, but will rather
suppose it to be Good Greek for the sake of the Chief Author of this Opinion,
the Admirable Vossius, who was as Eminent a Grammarian as he was a Divine. But
further, I could object against this Custom as a Superstitious one, and
therefore not fit to be made an Argument of the Resurrection by St Paul. Again,
if this Ceremony of administering Baptism over the dead were wholly void of
Superstition, yet I am not satisfied that That Practice was at all in use in
our Apostle's time. Nay, the Evangelical History is against it, for we read
there that John 3 28.
Jordan and John ^ 23.
Aenon, not Churchyards and Vaults, but Rivers were made use of for Baptizing:
although it is true Ecclesiastical History relates that in After-Ages the Fonts
and the Graves were together, the Baptisteria and the Martyrs Tombs were close
to one another: But that they were so at First, and that the Memoriae M^rtyrum,
so often spoken of in St Cyprian, and St August^^n, were as old as the
Apostles, I have no where read. Or, if we should suppose there was such a
Custom then, yet That could not be applied by our Apostle to the present
purpose, for it cannot be proved that they that were so Baptize^ over the Tombs
did profess thereby to believe the Resurrection: for they might do this to show
that they would in some sort be like the dead, which is the thing Christians
profess in Baptism, as the Apostle tells us. Therefore I am not convinced that
the words before us have any Allusion to such a practice.

6. There are some Justellus ( ad Can. 12. C^ncil. Nece^sar.) Scaliger ( l. 3
Epist. 236 and 237 Epist.) Erasmus, Casaubon, Grotius.
Learned men who fetch the sense of these words from a Custom which they read
of in Tertullian and Epiphanius, which was This, when any of the Catechumeni
were suddenly snatched away by death (before they could have time and leisure
to approach to the Holy Laver of Baptism) some of the surviving friends were
entreated to be baptized for them, i. e. in their stead* and the persons that
were deceased, though unbaptized, were reputed to be baptized, because they
were so in their Representatives. (...) then is as much as (...), vice vel loco
mortuorum, in the room and place of the dead. And that the Praeposition bears
that as well as other significations is not to be doubted, there being abundant
Authority to confirm it. I shall help to strengthen it with a Remarkable
quotation which looks as like This of our Apostle as may be. It is out of
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (8th book) (...) (says he) (...), i. e. the
Magistrates would have other soldiers enrolled and admitted in the room of
those who died in the war. These two Examples (...) and (...) seem to be very
nearly allied, but really are not. However, from the former of these it is
evident that (...) sometimes is as much as (...). And there are abundant
Instances in the New Testament that this Praeposition signifies a Substitution,
a putting one person in the place of another, as De Satis fact^^^^.
Grotius has proved sufficiently against the Socinians, who will by no means
have it denote a Substitution or Surrogation. So that I must confess I wonder
at what a Great Critic says concerning This Interpretation, vice mortuorum,
viz. Nemo ita l^quitur qu^ds^iam. Heins. Exerc. S^^.
that he does not know that any body ever speaks after this manner. Whereas it
is apparent that This is an Usual and Common way of speaking, and is to be met
with frequently in the Best Writers: wherefore it must be imputed to the
Forgetfulness of that Great Scholar that he delivers any such thing. Having
spoken hitherto of the Grammatical part of the Opinion, now let us consider the
Custom on which it is founded. First then, suppose there was such a Custom of
old among the Marcionites or Cerinthians, or both (for De Resurrect. carn.
(...). 48. and (...). Mareion. l. 5. c. 10.
Tertullian imputes it to the Marcionites, and so does Chrysostom, but H^res.
^8.
Epiphanius relates it as an Heresy of the Cerinthians,) yet neither of these
Fathers acquaint us that it obtained in the days when St Paul or Cerinthus
lived; and therefore there is no evidence that the Apostle had notice of any
such thing, and consequently he could not mention it in his Writings. But let
us suppose (what we cannot grant) that even whilst the Apostle lived, such a
practice was more rarely and privately used, yet it is not credible that St
Paul, the Great Master of Logic and Discourse, would argue from a thing so
Obscure and Apocryphal, and not openly received at that time, especially in a
Catholic Epistle, directed not only to the Corinthian Church, but unto all
that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord (as you read in
the front of this Epistle, v. 2.) But this is not all, Shall it be thought
worthy of the clear and demonstrative Reason of him that was brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel, to build the Great Doctrine of the Resurrection on a Vain
Observance and a Manifest Error of some Conceited Heretics? If there were such
a thing as a Posthumous Baptism (if I may so call it,) a Representative
Washing, Vicarium Baptisma, as Tertullian styles it, a Sacrament by a Proxy or
Deputy, even when the party most concerned was in another world, if you can
imagine that there was such a thing as This in the Apostle's days, yet can you
think likewise that this is the thing designed in These words? Could so vain
and Idle a Rite come into the Apostle's mind upon This occasion? Would he argue
from a Vain Abuse of Baptism by Heretics? Would the Apostle proceed upon the
Errors of others? This would be no Simple and Absolute Proof, but it would only
be significant to those Erroneous persons, by bringing them by this Arguing to
an Inconvenience. Nay, can you imagine that this Holy man would so lightly pass
by and overlook so Gross an Abuse of the Baptismal Institution, that he would
not reflect in the least on so Notorious a Pollution of that Sacrament, when he
had taken particular notice of the very Postures and Habit of the Corinthians,
of the men's Praying Veiled, and of the women's Praying Vnveiled in the Public
Congregations, and likewise of the Length and Wearing of their Hair, and had
reproved them for these disorders? Why would he now be silent, or (I may say)
dissemble, when he had at other times smartly checked lesser Errors and
Obliquities? St Chrysostom in his Homily on This 15th Chap. of the 1 Epistle to
the Corinthians, relates the manner of this Absurd practice of those Heretics,
where he tells us that they used to put a Living man under the bed of the
Deceased, and then the dead person was asked whether he would be Baptized:
whereupon he that was under the bed made Answer for the dead, and desired
Baptism, and him they immediately baptized in the place of the dead. This the
Good Father relates there at large, but he tells his Auditors before hand, that
(...).
he knows he shall in rehearsing the Antic Custom of those Heretics move them
to no little laughter, it being a piece of mere Mockery, an Histrionical
Sacrament, a Ludicrous Profanation of Baptism, for those Ridiculous Sectaries
(as he expresses it) did but (...).
act a Part in a Play. Can it be imagined then that so Weighty and Solid an
Article as the Resurrection is, can be founded on so Slight and Absurd a
bottom? St Paul needed not to have sought for Aides from falsehood and Error,
when the Truth it self is sufficiently Armed, and has Auxiliaries enough of
its own to defend its cause. I might add also, that This Practice supposes a
Reiterating of the Sacrament of Baptism, which is an Absurd thing; unless it be
said that those persons were baptized only for Others: but then it cannot be
denied that at the same time they were really Baptized Themselves. This Meaning
of the words therefore will but little Credit our Apostle, and therefore I have
the less Esteem for it. And I have none at all for that which follows, viz.

7. The Opinion of the Learned Not. in N. T.
Joseph Scaliger, according to whom the baptized for the dead, are those who
are baptized for the benefit and advantage of the dead. It is granted indeed
that This might be True according to the Letter, or Grammatical part, for (...)
sometimes is as much as in utilitatem seu commodum in Good Authors. And
accordingly it is said often in the New Testament that Christ died (...), not
only in our stead, but for us, i. e. for our Good and Advantage, viz. that he
might purchase Salvation and Eternal Happiness for us. But the meaning which
the aforesaid Author conveys to us by This Construction is intolerably Absurd
and Superstitious; and it is no other then This, that the Apostle here in
mentioning the susception of Baptism for the dead, points at some Pious Office
of Bathing or Baptizing the dead, or being Baptized for them in order to the
Refreshment of their souls. The rise of it, he says, was This, that the
Ancients thought the souls of the dead were Imprisoned in the earth till the
day of Judgment, which he labors to prove out of Tertullian, Augustine, and
Lactantius: and from That Error, says this Great man, was propagated the
doctrine of Christ's Descent into Hell. Now people were mightily concerned for
these Close Prisoners, and they were desirous to purchase some Refreshing for
the souls of their friends and relations. To this purpose they frequently
Prayed, and made Oblations for them, and they were willing to do Any thing,
that their departed friends might fare as well as might be till the Last day.
And on this same ground they used Baptism for the dead, and that annually on a
certain day, viz. the Calends of February, as C^ntr. Marcion. l. 5.
Tertullian says expressly: and even to this day, says Scaliger, some of the
Ethiopian Church yearly renew their Baptism at the Feast of Epiphany; which
very thing Disputat. 17. de Baptismo.
Vossius also testifies of the Ethiopian Christians. And Scaliger explains This
Custom yet further out of Lactantius and St Augustine, and rangeth it among the
Ineptiae Patrum and Ecclesiae Doctorum, The Dotages of the Primitive Church.
Hence, says he, is the Apostle's heavy Censure of the Corinthians in the 34 v.
of this Chapter, some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your
shame, From which words this Mighty Critic would prove that the Practice, from
which the Argument in the Text is drawn, was no ways Good and Laudable, though
the Argument it self which the Apostle uses be solid enough. But this is a
Mistake, for when it is said, some have not the knowledge of God, it is
apparent that it strikes at those who denied or questioned the Resurrection of
the dead, as you may easily be convinced by perusing what immediately follows
in 35 and 36 v. Some man will say, how are the dead raised up, and with what
body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
die: and v. 38. God gives it a body as it pleases him. From whence it is
clear that the fond and foolish reasoning of the Corinthians about the manner
of the Resurrection, and their shameful ignorance of the Almighty power of God
concerning it, are the things which the Apostle there rebukes them for. He
tells them that some have not the knowledge of God, in the same sense that our
Savior reproved the Sadducees, saying, ye do err not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God, Mat. 22. 29. And as for the use of that Officious
Baptizing for the benefit of the dead, (which Scaliger thinks is intended in
this place,) before it gain our assent, it is to be proved that that fond and
Idle Rite had a being in the Apostle's d^ys, and was well known to the
Corinthians, which is not yet Proved, and so he cannot be thought to have an
eye to any such thing. Or, if we should be so liberal of our Concessions as to
grant that such a Custom was on foot when the Apostle writ this Epistle (which
it is utterly impossible to prove) yet have we no reason to think (unless we
can swallow down the Doctrine of Purgatory, and persuade our selves that that
Officious Washing was available to cool those Flames) unless, I say, we can
digest this, we have no reason to believe that the Present Argument is drawn
thence. But on the contrary, it is highly rational to maintain, that This
passage of St Paul, and That of St Peter in his 1 Epist. 3d Chap. and 19th v.
(of which we shall next speak,) with other places of Sacred Writ, have been
forcibly drawn by perverse men to patronize the Gainful doctrine of
Satisfaction for the rescuing of souls out of the prison of Purgatory. Besides,
I might ask, what does freeing from Purgatory, which happens before the
Resurrection, conduce to the confirming the Resurrection? They are, they say,
baptized for the dead, to free their friends from Purgatory, but That may be
though there be no Resurrection: for it is the Soul, not the Body that suffers
the pains of Purgatory. Nay further, it does not appear that even in After-Ages
the practice which Scaliger speaks of did prevail, viz. that the Living were
baptized for the Benefit of the dead. For the Annual Baptizing on a certain
day, which he alleges for his purpose, argues no such thing. It was done only
in remembrance and reverence of Christ's Baptism, which was performed by St John
on the Calends of February, according to some, or on the Epiphany, according to
others. That day is called (...) by the Ancients, either because of John
Baptist the Forerunner, the True Evangelical Phosphorus, or because (...) Heb.
6. 4.
(...) was (...). He that consults the Ancients shall find that they generally
assert Christ was Born and Baptized on the same day of the year, which they
think they prove from Luke 3. 23. This day being, according to their opinion,
so signalized by our Saviors Birth and Baptism, was reputed a very High day,
and was in Great Esteem among them; in so much it seems that they repeated
their Own Baptism on that day. And for this reason some of the Abissine
Christians (whom Scaliger calls the Ethiopian Church) yearly Baptize themselves
in Rivers and Lakes on Epiphany day. And I could add from a Late Author, that
the Bishops in Muscovy at this day consecrate the Rivers on the Epiphany every
year. But what is all this to the purpose? Is here any Baptizing for the
benefit of the dead? No assuredly. I am ready to grant also, that Baptizing of
the dead was used heretofore by some Christians. This is as certain as that it
was usual^ to give the Other Sacrament to the dead: which both appear to have
been Practiced from the Sixth Canon of the 3d Council of Carthage, and the 83
of the Council of Trullo, in which you find a Prohibition against that
administering the Eucharist and Baptism to the bodies of the deceased. And the
above named Balsamon and Zonar as.
Canonists in their Comments on the 18th Canon of Carthage, acquaint us with
the Ground of this Baptizing the dead, and likewise of the Baptizing the living
in the room of the dead, namely, upon the Misunderstanding these words of the
Apostle, What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? The Jews it seems
had the like Superstitious opinion and practice as to Circumcision; for
Sy^agoga.
Buxtorf acquaints us, that the Infant that died before it was eight days old
was Circumcised in the Burying-place, over the grave. And that is yet more
Fond, which I have read of a people among the Tartars, who had so great an
opinion of Matrimony, that if their sons and daughters died before Age, they
solemnized a Marriage between the parties after death. Such a piece of Folly
was the Baptizing of the dead, which was practiced (we grant) in some Ages
after the Apostles, and Those Learned Lawyers think it was sounded on the Text.
Yet any Unp^ejudiced man may see that there is not the least foundation in the
words for such a Practice: for it is impossible to make These two one,
Baptizing the dead, or baptizing persons when they are dead, and being Baptized
for the Benefit of the dead.

8. There is another Opinion which may be referred to This First Rank of
Interpreters, and that is, that the Apostle speaks here of the Custom received
in the Church of giving Names in Baptism in memory of the dead. This, says In
Exercitat. Sacr. in locum.
H^insi^s (who is the only Expositor that goes this way) was in use among the
Old Christians, and thence the Nominalia were instituted and so, lemnly
observed by them, which were Festival days kept by the Christians yearly in
remembrance of the Name given them in Baptism. These Nominalia (as Tertullian
calls them) or (...) (as Gregory Nazianzen styles them) were first derived from
the Jews in Circumcision, at which time the Infants had the Names given them of
their Parents or Near^st Kindred and Friends deceased (which is con^^^ed in the
Evangelical History by that dispute which was about the N^ming of S^ John the
Baptist.) And this usage prevailed in the Christian Church afterward, and they
were wont to give their Children the Names of their Kindred who had excelled an
virtue for These were thought to inspite them by the^ Worthy Examples. And by
this means also the Names of their departed friends were Recorded, and their
Memories preserved, and they seemed to Survive in those that bore their Names.
These were said to be Baptized for the dead, i. e. (says that Learned
Critic,) in gratiam and memoriam mortuorum. They might justly be said (...) to
raise up the Name of the dead, as those were said to do among the Jews, who
being next of kin married the widow of the deceased. The Apostle then is
thought by Him to refer to That giving of the Names of the dead to those that
were Baptized, because That was in Memory and Honor of the expired friends, in
hope of their Resurrection, and in belief of Eternity; for though they were
Dead, yet they really Lived in another world. Thus therefore the Argument is
supposed to run, Why are those Names of departed Parents and Friends given to
the Baptized Relations, if those persons are not at all in being? To what
purpose were this if the Deceased utterly perished, and after death were never
to rise again? The Resurrection supposes the Souls Immortality, and so
believing. This we cannot question the Other. The persons wearing the Names of
those that are dead, do hereby tell the world that they believe their Pious
Parents and Friends are still in being, and at the last day shall rise again.
What shall they do, how fondly do they act who are thus baptized themselves, or
baptize others in Memory of the Dead, if they believe not the Resurrection?
else why do they consider the Deceased as yet Living when they give or bear the
Names of those persons? The Answer to all this in short is, 1. If such a custom
was in the Apostles times, yet it seems to be too Particular and too Mean a one
to ground so Great and General a matter on. 2. It Is not giving or receiving a
Name that is here spoken of, but Baptizing, which is another thing, and of more
moment. And why Baptism should be put here for Imposition of Names in Baptism I
see no reason, unless it could be proved that an Improper Acception of a word
is more agreeable then the Proper and Native one. 3. It is not evident that
Names were generally and commonly given at Baptism so early. If we consult the
History even of the Times soon after Christ, we shall read of very few (which I
somewhat wonder at, I confess) who bore the Names either of the Evangelists or
Apostles, or other Martyrs. 4. To argue from the Imposition of the Names of the
dead to their Certain Rising again is no ways firm and solid. And therefore it
is not probable on These Considerations that This was the sense of the Apostle.

9. In the next place I will propound the Opinion of that late Learned Critic
Alexander More, who in his Notes on some Select places of the New Tostament,
understands this place of the Sacramental Baptism, but by the dead (which in
the Greek is in the Plural) he thinks is denoted a Singular Person, and that
person is Christ: and to be baptized for the dead, is to be baptized for
Christ, the meaning of which you may find in that Author. I will only here take
notice of the Unreasonableness of his Interpretation, so far as he understands
Christ by those that are dead. It is true I grant that there are several
Examples of the change of the Singular number for the Plural in Holy Scripture.
This Syllepsis, or Synechdoche, or Enallage numeri (call it as you please) is
frequent in the Sacred Style, and it is most used when some Eminent Person or
Thing is meant. And I grant that Christ was the most Eminent Person, and his
Death the most Signal and Remarkable Thing that ever was. But I cannot think
that the Apostle here expresses the Singular by the Plural, because 1. the
Apostle here mentions the dead three times, which shows he means it in the true
proper sense. For it were tolerable to put the Plural for the Singular once,
but to ^epeat it is unusual, much more to speak after the same manner a third
time is not to be allowed. Where you meet with the Change of Numbers in
Scripture, it is by the by, and not frequent; but this Reiterating of it is no
where to be found, which is an Argument that [ the dead] here is no such kind
of speech, but that it is a way of speaking after the ordinary rate, and
consequently that one Number is not put for another. 2. All along in this
Chapter Christ is spoken of, and represented as Risen; how comes it to pass
that the Character is here altered, and that now by the Dead (thrice named) we
must understand Christ? 3. When we can satisfy ourselves very well with the
Propriety of speech, we have no reason to fancy Improprieties, and then to fly
to that meaning which is contained in them. This is our present case, the
Apostle here speaks in the Plural, and we can very well understand him. Why
must we imagine that he intends the Singular when he expresses himself
Plurally? Why must we make him speak Improperly when we can apprehend him as
well, nay better in his Proper way of speaking? Thus we have no good ground to
think that (...) is put for (...).

There is another Interpretation yet remaining, even of those who take
Baptizing here in the Sacramental sense. But That being the Interpretation
which I shall fix upon as the most Probable and Accountable, I will therefore
reserve it for the Close of all.

Thus far we have examined those Expositions of the Text which make it to be
understood of Sacramental Washing, signally styled Baptism.

II. There are a Second sort of Expositors who will have the words meant of the
Washing of the dead bodies in order to Burial and of this opinion Beza is the
chief Patron, in his Annotations on the place, and he is followed by Paraeus.
It was indeed an ordinary practice to wash the corpse before their Interment,
and what St Luke tells us of Tabitha, in Acts 9. 37. is a Confirmation of it.
It Is likely say these Authors, that this was done in belief and expectation of
the Rising again of those bodies; and therefore it is probable the Apostle
argues from the received rite and custom of Washing the bodies of the dead
before they laid them in the grave, for this Cleansing (and Anointing too, for
that also was usual) was a visible profession of the belief of a future
Resurrection. What shall they do that make use of this Sepulcral Washing, to
what purpose do they observe this rite if the flesh be never to rise again? T
(...); what does this action of theirs signify? to what end is it? why are all
nations sollicitous about the liveless carcass? to what tends all this care of
theirs if the body shall not experience the happiness of a Restoration? The
Reply to this is casie, 1. The notion of baptizing according to this
interpretation, is forced and distorted, for though (...) may and does signify
Washing in the more General sense, and is applied to Common Washings, in Mark
7. 4. and Heb. 9. 10. yet there is no reason to relinquish the more Noted
Acception of it in the style of the New Testament: and here to restrain it to
the custom of Funeral Washing is very odd and unaccountable. 2. Though the
Christians used this sort of Sepulcral Washing, yet how does it appear that
This was a Proof of the Resurrection of the dead? Durandus in his Rationale
tells you that the Christians washed the dead, to show that their Souls were
cleansed from sin by Confession and Penance. 3. This Funeral Washing was in
use among the Jews as well as those that professed Christianity. Now it is known
that the Sadducets acknowledged no such thing as a Resurrection, and therefore
their Washing the dead could have no respect to the Rising again of the dead.
Again, 4ly^, the Ablutio (...) (as Plautus calls it) was used by the Pagans as
well as Christians; and it is not to be thought that These did it with regard
to the Resurrection. You may learn why they washed the dead bodies from Quod
videlicet plerumque putelur exclusus vitalis spiritus, qui calidac aqu^e
ablutione veluti sopitus excitatur. In Aeneid. 2.
Servius, viz. that if the vital spirits in those that seemed to be dead were
only benumbed, they might be revived and rouzed by the warm water, and rubbing
it on the body. But it is more probable in my opinion that they Washed the dead
bodies in order to Anointing them, for the Romans and Grecians and other
Nations used both these, and one made way for the other, for they first cleared
the Skin of its pollution, and then made use of their Perfumed Ointments.
Virgil giving account of Misenus's Funeral Obsequies, takes notice of this
practice, Aeneid. 6.
Post calidos latices, and ahena undantia flammis
Expediunt, corpusque lavant frigentis, and ungunt.
And Ennius does the like, speaking of deceased Tarquin, Tarquinii corpus bona
faemina lavit and unxit. And Iliud 9.
Homer describes Patroclus's funerals after the same manner. And by the by, I
might insert that it is probable they Washed our Saviors body, seeing we read
that Mark 16. 1.
Mary Magdalen and other women Anointed it after his death, as did also Io^n
19. 38, 39, 40.
Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. Homil. 84. in Johan.
St Chrysostom is Positive that Christ's body was Washed after he was taken down
from the Cross. Thus Jews as well as Other people used this Funeral Ceremony of
Washing the dead body, it being in order to Anointing: for it was proper first
to wash off the filth of the body before they laid on their sweet Ointments.
Or, what think you of another Reason of the Custom, which I have framed to my
self, from what I meet with in the Pagan Antiquities? There I find that Washing
the Infants that were newly born was a constant practice: not only Poslq^am
peperit, pueros lavare jussit. In Amphitr^on,
Plautus, but several Others take notice of it, and the very Sacred Records
expressly mention it, Ezekiel. 16. 4. and thereby confirm the Antiquity of this
custom. Perhaps therefore Washing after death was an imitation of the Washing
at the birth. Their Entering into the world, and their Leaving it had the like
(...), Plutarch. Sympos. l. 8. Ammian. Marcellin*
Names, and they would have them resemble one another in the like Actions. It
is probable they agreed upon it to End as they Began, at Coming into and Going
out of the world to use the same Custom. But if This Conjecture be not
admitted, then we must have recourse to the former Accounts given of This
Usage, or we may yet further add that the generality of the people who used the
Lustral Washing, did it either out of some Superstitious humor, or barely to
comply with Custom. Take it in any of these Aspects, it does not look like an
Argument that the Apostle would make use of for the proof of the Resurrection.
5. To say no more, the Criticizing genius of this Modern Expositor fails him
here, for what Construction can reconcile these two, and m^ke them the same,
viz. the washing of the dead (i. e. washing persons after they are dead) and
washing for the dead? These are vastly different, and it was never heard that
there was any Affinity between the one and the other. Therefore this Sepulchral
Washing ought to be dissallowed here; Grammar will not vouch it: Which is a
sufficient confutation of the Opinion, though there were nothing else to say.

III. A Third sort of Interpreters are (as fondly) of opinion that the words
refer to a Legal and Ceremonious Washing used among the Jews after their
touching of a dead body, or going into the Sepulchers, or standing too near the
persons that were breathing their last. The Pollution which they contracted by
this means was to be purged away by Washing themselves. And indeed it happens
that the word (...) is applied to This sort of Cleansing by the Apochryphal
Author, in Eccles. 34. 25. Nay St Mark applies the word in this sense, Mark 7.
4. Except they wash (or be baptized) they eat not. And the Arabic Version of
the Text seems to favor thi^ opinion, which renders it thus, Quid facient qui
propersonis mortuis baptizantur?
What shall they do that are baptized because of the dead persons, viz. whom
they have Touched, and so Polluted themselves? In Cipp. Hebrai^.
Hottinger therefore understands the Apostle of this Ceremonial Baptism of the
Old Testament (as he calls it) which he says was instituted to remind the
Israelites of the Resurrection of the dead. But I do not find that he has
gained any considerable Proselytes to his opinion, it being so sorrily
contrived, and having so little reason to rely upon. For to be baptized or
washed (...) for the dead, and (...) From the dead, i. e. from the pollution
contracted by touching or coming near the dead, are vastly different. Washing
themselves after their being defiled by a dead body, what is that to Washing
for the dead? And as this Mosaic Washing has no Grammar, so neither has it
any Logic to appear in its behalf, for it miserably perverts the sense of the
words, and the Consequence of the Apostle's discourse, which I leave you to
examine.

And so does that Other Opinion of Turrianus the Jesuit, who will needs have
this baptizing for the dead relate to a Legal Washing or Purifying of the dead
bodies. It is his fancy that the Apostle argues from the practice of the Jews,
among whom it was usual that if any man died Legally unclean (i. e. before he
was purified from his Uncleanness according to the Law, Number. 19.) some other
person was washed and cleansed in his stead: for they thought, says he, that
this Purging profited the dead, and by this means the Uncleanness which he died
in would not hurt him, nay that he should be thereby cleansed: and by this
Ceremony too they professed their faith of the Immortality of the soul and the
Resu^rection of the dead, against the heres^e of the Sadducees. But the naming
of this Conceit is enough to confute it: for first, there is no proof that
there ever was any such Practice; Secondly, there is no reason to think that
the Apostle by Baptizing means any other then Sacramental Baptism; Thirdly, any
man may guess that the Jesuit chiefly designed this Exposition for the sake of
his so much admired doctrine of Pargatory.

And for that end have Others of the Church of Rome fastened another, but as
Improbable a Meaning on the words. Which brings me to the Last rank of
Interpreters, viz.

IV. Those that will have the Baptizing in the Text to be understood in a
Metaphorical sense. It is the dream of Stapleton and Salmeron, and some others
of that party, that because by Baptism or Washing, is meant Affliction or
Suffering, in Mat. 20. 23. therefore the persons who are said to be baptized
for the dead, are such Kind souls who, to do the dead a Courtefie, undergo all
sorts of Afflictions and Hardships. As if St Paul had said, What shall they do
who voluntarily suffer so much in This world to help those that are in misery
in another? What shall they do that baptize themselves as 'twere in their Sweat
and Tears, and bathe themselves in their own Blood to redeem poor souls from
the pains of Purgatory? What will become of them that do and suffer any thing
for the advantage of the dead, if the dead shall not rise? Why do they inure
themselves to Long Prayers and tedious Fastings? Why do they undergo the
Baptism of Penance and Almsdeeds? (for Bellarmine understands it so, and
Salmeron upon the place tells us, that Alms are a kind of Washing for which he
quoteth forsooth Ecclesiasticus 3. 30. Water will quench a flaming fire, and
Alms makes an atonement for sins; and Luke 11. 4. Give alms, and behold, all
things are Clean unto you.) Why do so many undertake Long Pilgrimages, wear
Hair Shirts, roll themselves in Snow, Scourge and Torture themselves, and go
through all the hardships of Self-denial, if they do not think These things
will prove Satisfactions for disobedient souls. Why do they relinquish the
world, and study nothing but Severity and Mortifications and Austere Exercises
of their bodies, if they could not by These Arts do the Dead some good? Why are
they thus baptized or afflicted for the dead? Certainly this Baptizing will
mitigate the flames of Purgatory, and enable the distressed Prisoners to get
loose the sooner out of that Painful Durance. That which I have to Reply to
This is 1. that it is an odd Notion and Way of these men to reckon Repetance,
and Prayers and A^msdeeds, among Afflictions and Sufferings and Punishments.
This is a doctrine which no Divines but themselves ever taught. 2. Let it be
remembered that although Penances for the dead were in use among the Pagans, yet
Gods People were particularly forbid to use any such thing, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Ye
shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.
And shall not Christians think it unlawful as well as Jews? 3. Any man may see
that This is a plain fetch to establish That Doctrine which has brought the
Church of Rome so much Profit, and therefore must be maintained right or wrong.
4. Whereas they say the end of these Services and Undertakings of the living
for the Dead is that the Souls detained in Purgatory may be released; I reply
that this is fondly alle^ged, because Purgatory is not a Prison for Bodies but
for Souls only (as they confess.) Now I never heard of the Resurrection of
Souls, but of Bodies; and of This the Apostle speaks, If the dead rise not at
all, meaning it of the Bodies of the dead. So that This Text has no reference
to what they dream of. It speaks of another thing, unless Soul and Body are the
same thing. 5. It were enough to say that this Obscure and Mysti^al notion of
being Baptized, is but seldom used in the Style of Scripture, and then (one
place of St Luke excepted) it has an Explanation added after it, as These. de
Resurrect. ca^^.
Vossi^^ has well observed. There can be no reason therefore, in This place
especially* to think that This Allegorical Baptis^^, i. e. the Baptism of
Suffering, is intended.

I might annex here the Opinion of our Learned Rabbi Dr Lightfoot, who is the
only Protestant of any note* except Vostius, who interprets this place of the
Metaphorical Baptism, the Baptism of Suffering. What shall they do that are
baptized for the dead, if the dead etc. is as much, says he, as if the Apostle
had said, Harmony of the N. Test.
If the dead rise not again, what will become of those that are baptized with a
Martyrial Baptism, or that do suffer Death for the profession of the Truth: And
he adds, to confirm this Interpretation, that the Jewish Baptizings or Dippings
in their purifications were a very sharp piece of Religion, when in frost and
snow, and wind and weather, they must over head and ears in cold water, from
which the phrase was used to signify Death and the Bitterest Sufferings.
Whence he gathers that Baptism for the dead in this place, is suffering of
Martyrdom: and consequently he makes this to be the sense of the Text, What
shall they do who have or do undergo Martyrdom? what shall become of them if
their bodies rise not again? Thus he. But who sees not that this is a very
groundless notion, and taken up only from that Jewish way of speaking which he
mentions? whereas, if we consider it well, there is no affinity at all between
the one and the other. Though the Jewish Baptisms might be made use of to
express Great Severities, yea Death it self, yet what is this to being baptized
for the dead? Baptism may represent Martyrdom, but who can reasonably thence
infer that the baptized for the dead in this place are those that were
Martyred? There is not the least Connection between these two. It must be said
then that this Worthy and Reverend person espoused this notion merely upon the
account of that great reverence which he always paid to the Jewish and
Rabinical Writings, of which most of his Opinions have a tincture.

There are some Other odd fancies which I have met with on the words; as that
of Lyranus, Lombard and Aquinas, who by the dead understand mortal sins, called
by the Apostle dead works, Heb. 9. 1. and 6. 14. for the expiation and washing
away of which Holy Baptism was ordained. But their own Stapleton refutes This,
saying the Apostle speaks not of Sins but Men, not of Works, but Persons. This
and the rest of this sort I pass by, as unwilling to entertain you with
Trifles. Some of the Other Interpretations before mentioned carry with them a
greater semblance of Truth or Probability, and have some Antiquity and
Authority to recommend them. But This and some of those lately mentioned, are
invented on purpose to be assistant to a Bad Cause, which they are willing to
support by the Multitude of Arguments, seeing they are not able to do it by the
Goodness and Solidity of them.

V. I will now at last offer to you the Interpretation which I conceive is most
Reasonable and Accountable, and which I doubt not will gain your Suffrage and
Assent upon a deliberate consideration of it. Before I present you with This
Exposition, I will make way for it by premising These three things.

1. That I intend to adhere to the First rank of Expositors, who (as you may
remember) understand the words of Baptism Properly so called, i. e. some kind
of Real Washing, and particularly of the Sacramental Baptism, whereby we are
Initiated into the Church of Christ. For why should we without Necessity and
Urgent Reason (and I can see no such thing here) understand the words of a
Metaphorical Baptism? It is a General Rule delivered by De D^ctrina Christiana.
l. 3. c. 10.
St Austin, that we ought not to interpret those things Allegorically which are
spoken Properly, and that we must never depart from the Literal and Proper
sense of Scripture, unless it be manifestly proved that such a sense is not to
be followed. The Usual and Proper signification is first to be attended to, and
it is not fit we fly to Borrowed and Figutative senses, so long as the Natural
and Genuine one will serve our turns. This then I assert, that the Apostle
speaks here of the Usual and Received Baptism of the New Testament. But the
main thing in the words is the Praeposition. Therefore

2ly, I premise this, that the Praeposition (...), which is here translated
for, is as much as because of, or by reason of, or for the sake of: and
consequently (...), is as much as (...), mortuorum caus^acirc; sen gratia,
because of the dead, or for the sake of the dead: for it is well known that
(...) is in gratiam alicujus. This is the Plain and Ordinary import of That
Praeposition, and it is Usual and Obvious in Writers of all sorts, so that it
is a Wonder it has been overlooked here. Socin^s, to promote his beloved
doctrine, maintains that by no means an Impulsive but a Final Cause is denoted
in the New Testament always by This Particle (...), but Groti^^ has largely
showed this to be notoriously false, and thereby convinced the Learned how
faulty the Grammar, as well as the Divinity of that Heretic is. I doubt not
therefore that the Paaeposition signifies here an Impulsive Cause, and is taken
in the same sense that it is in those places where it is said, the Gentiles
should glorisie God for his mercy, Romans 15. 9. i. e. because of his mercy
showed unto them: and where the Apostle says, I cease not to give thanks for
you* Ephesians. 1. 16. i. e. because of you, of whom I have heard so great and
laudable things: this excites me to thank God: and where you read of suffering
for Christ's sake, and for the kingdom of God, Phil. 1. 29. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. But
most palpable is That of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 12. 10. where he says, he
takes pleasure in his persecutions and distresses, (...), for Christ's sake, as
we rightly render it, and so the Praeposition ought to be rendered in the Text.
I might observe that this Praepositive particle in the Greek, answers exactly
to the Hebrew (...) in many places of the Psalm. 44. 22. For thy sake we are
killed, etc. (which the Apostle renders by (...), Romans 8. 36.) Genesis 37. 8. and
43. 18 and 2 Samuel 1. 26. and in many other places, The Paaepositions gnale,
magnan, lemagnan are used after the same manner, and are accordingly translated
either (...) by the 70.
Old Testament, which signifies for the sake, or because of. So then This
Version of the words is Plain and Easy, and has the Greatest Authority to
vouch it, What shall they do that are baptized by reason of the dead, or for
their sakes* (How This is to be applied I will show you anon.) Having thus laid
down what I understand by the Verb (...), and the Praeposition (...) (in which
the Main difficulty of the Text lies,) I must also Premise and Observe this to
you,

3ly, That it is not barely (...), without an Article (as the Learned Scaliger
also notes on the place, and says it is not without some singular Emphasis.)
The Praepositive Article o is frequently of the like force with the Hebrew
(...), and the English that, which are notes of Emphasis and Specification. It
is probable therefore tht not All but Some Certain dead are here meant, for
this Article, which is here Demonstrative, denotes something that is Certain
and Definitive. It is true, it is sometimes left out, and other times inserted,
and yet the sense is neither heightened not impaired, and I deny not that it is
so in some places in This Chapter. But since it is oftentimes Significant and
Emphatical, and becomes a Relative and Demonstrative Pronoun, it may be so in
This Text that is before us, especially the Article being expressed twice, and
it being likely (as I will make it appear) that it particularly relates to
something mentioned before in this Chapter. So that the words are to run thus,
What shall they do that are baptized by reason of, or for the sake of those
dead, viz. those dead before spoken of? And now that you may understand Who
those dead are, and that we may the better apprehend the Whole Arguing of the
Apostle in the Text, and at the same time give the Confirmation of the Sense
which I am to offer, I will present you with a short view of the Context. This
is the best way certainly to enervate and destroy the former Opinions, and to
establish a right Judgment of the Text, By setting before you the Scope of the
words, and their Coherence with and Relation to the foregoing parts of the
Chapter, I despair not of leading you to the True Meaning of the words.

The Scope and Design of St Paul in this Chapter is to establish the Doctrine
of Our Resurrection, That so Weighty and Important Doctrine, to which he gives
the Name of The Gospel, v. 1. This Great Article of the Christian faith (which
some of the Corinthians had called into question) is here maintained by several
Arguments; the first whereof is Christ's Resurrection, which he tells us was
attested by above five hundred witnesses, some of whom he says are fallen
asleep, v. 6. The same, you know, is expressly said of St Stephen by the
Evangelist St Luke: and without doubt our Apostle speaks here of St Stephen,
who was stoned to death, ( Acts 7. 60.) and of St James the first Martyr of all
the Apostles, who was beheaded by Herod Agripppa, Acts, 12. 2. And (...). l. 7.
Clemens tells us that another died at the very same time: he relates how the
person that carried St James to the Place of Judgment, and heard him there so
fully give testimony to Christ, was thereby Converted, and presently professed
himself to be a Christian: whereupon both of them were carried together to
Execution, and were (as he reports) beheaded. The Apostle may be thought
likewise to speak here of the Other James, who was also called James, the Just;
who was barbarously knocked on the head by the Jews in Nero's time, as Eusebius
reports. But whether This James was put to death before St Paul writ. This
Epistle to the Corinthians, I will not confidently determine. We might also
here reckon Philip the Apostle, who was put to death at the same time that
James the Just was, as some relate: whence it is that Our Church celebrates the
memory of them both on the same day. But it is unquestionable that John the
Baptist, who was the First Martyr, fell asleep before all These, being beheaded
by a former Herod, in the first year of our Saviors Preaching. And there were
Many Others who were crowned with Martyrdom, as our Apostle himself testifies,
Acts, 26. 10. Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison; and when they were
put to death, I gave my voice against them. There were Many that suffered
Martyrdom, who are therefore said to be fallen asleep in Christ, v. 18th of
this Chapter. Still he mentions those that are fallen asleep, viz. those holy
men that Sacrificed their lives for the Gospel: those are the dead whom the
Text speaks of. And hence he frames a Second Argument to prove the Absurdity
which would follow upon denying the Resurrection, Then they also which are
fallen asleep in Christ are perished. To These very Saints who are thus fallen
asleep, who are the same with those mentioned, in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. them which
sleep in Jesus, and in v. 16. the dead in Christ, (the blessed Martyrs who died
for Christ's sake,) to These my Text has relation. These were (...), those dead
for whose sakes, and because of whom so many in the Apostle's days became
Converts, and were Baptized. These Martyrs, says he, who are fallen asleep in
Christ are perished if there be no Resurrection: they have utterly Undone
themselves and others by losing their lives for Christ. Thirdly, he proceeds to
Argue thus, as those Martyrs were arrant Fools, and Perished like such, if
there be no Resurrection, so We that survive are the Wretchedest creatures upon
earth if that be true: If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men most miserable, v. 19. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that slept, says the Apostle triumphantly in
the next verse. By this confident Assumption he baffles the Gainsayers, and
comforts the Christian Church. But within two verses after he breaks off this
Argument which he had newly resumed, and after a Digression about the Manner of
the future Resurrection, and the final Consummation of the world (which reaches
from the 23. v. to the words of my Text) he falls into a Fresh Argument thus,
Else what shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at
all? why are they also baptized for the dead? The first word (as we have it
translated) Else, implies that this verse refers to the immediately foregoing
ones, or to some General Conclusion before. But if you examine both, you will
not find any Connection between This and the immediately preceding verses: and
indeed the Syriack leaves out this Alioquin or Else, as if the Sentence were
entire without it. I conceive then that the Greek word is not rightly
translated here, but that it ought to be rendered [ Moreover,] (...) signifying
sometimes so in the Septuagints Version, as in (...).
Psalm. 78. 20. and in Profane, Authors, as in (...). lib. 2.
Herodotus, and (...). in Publiccola.
Plutarch, especially in this latter, out of whom many places might be
produced, wherein (...) is as much as (...) deinde, praeterea; and That is the
import of the word in the Text. So then the Apostle returns here to his
discourse about the Resurrection, and tenders another Argument, a New Reason to
confirm it. Moreover (says he,) to evince further the doctrine of the
Resurrection which I have been discoursing of; what shall they do that are
baptized for the sake of the dead Saints and Martyrs whom I spoke of before,
who I told you were fallen asleep, if the dead rise not at all, if they awake
not at the last day? why are they also, or (as Grotius notes, (...) in this
place is as much as (...), exgo,) why are they therefore baptized upon the
account. or for the sake of those dead? why do New Converts come in every day,
requesting to be admitted into the Church by Holy Baptism? Is it not, think
you, for the sake of those excellent persons who fell asleep in Christ? Is it
not by reason of them that they take up the profession of Christianity? Yes
surely; they have seen the Lives and Miracles of those Good men, they have
observed their Carriage and Constancy at their deaths, and by this they are
stirred up effectually to own the same Cause, to love the same Religion, and to
admit themselves into it by the Sacrament of Baptism. Those dead Saints and
Martyrs (whose Memories and Acts are still living) setch in these Great Numbers
of Converts. The Blood of dying Saints is the seed of the Church, which the
more plentifully it is sown and shed, yields the Larger Increase of Converts.
Hence, hence it is that Proselytes come in apace to Christianity, that Converts
flock to the Holy waters of Baptism, for they well observing the Admirable
Behavior of those persecuted Christians at their Death, are soon persuaded
into the belief of another Life. From their Examples they are excited to a Love
of the Christian Religion, which they see makes men live and die courageously,
and hereupon they are zealous to be made members of the Christian Church by the
Sacrament of Baptism. This is to be baptized for or because of the dead. Or,
after this manner, and in these words you may imagine the Apostle to argue in
my Text: You see, O Corinthians, that the Sufferings which the Christians
undergo, are so far from discouraging others from turning Christians, that vast
numbers of Unbelievers are animated thereby to own the Christian Profession,
and to live and die in the acknowledgement of it. See what power and efficacy
the Example of those Saints has, and how it works on the hearts of the most
Resolved, and makes them presently renounce and forsake their follies. Tell me,
what makes the Idolatrous Gentile quit his former profane life? or what makes
the Willful Jew renounce his Circumcision, and leave his Mosaical Washings for
the Laver of Christian Baptism? Is it not to be imputed to This cause chiefly,
viz. that they behold and are ravished with the singular behavior of the
Suffering Saints, who contentedly quit all for Christ their Master? They cannot
but reverence and embrace That Religion which inspires those men with such
Valor, and gives them so Invincible a Courage: and immediately hereupon they
hasten to be Initiated into the Society of such brave Christians. Now, tell me,
O ye men of Corinth, you especially that question the Article of the
Resurrection, is it nothing that so many every day voluntarily admit themselves
into the Church by Holy Baptism, and that upon the account of the Deceased
Confessors and Martyrs, who they see sacrifice all that is dear to them to
purchase another world? Why should you think there is no Other Life, when you
see men lay down their Lives for their Religion, and others presently taking up
that Religion for which they lost their lives? And for what reason do so Great
Sholes of Converts come into the Baptismal Waters? What shall they do that are
thus baptized? to what end and design do they this, and continue to do so? To
what purpose, on what account is it? You cannot but see that it is for the sake
of the Saints whose exemplary Lives and Deaths they have beheld, and thereby
were thoroughly convinced of the Truth of Christianity, which promises a better
life after this at the Resurrection of the dead. Why are so many, I say,
stirred up to embrace Christianity, and to enter into Holy Baptism? Is it not
by reason of the Deceased Saints and Martyrs? Is it not because of the Love
and Respect they bear Them, and the Goodness of the Cause which they so bravely
maintain? Is it not hence that they run to their Spiritual Guides and
Instructers, and beg to be Baptized: and if these demand the Reason of it, is
not This their Reply, we come to be Baptized for the dead, i. e. we are moved
to come to the Holy Baptism by reason of those Departed Saints, whose Godly
behavior we so much admired, whose Patience and Courage to the last we were
even astonished at: because of These Worthy Persons we are excited to enter
into the Baptismal Vow, and to admit ourselves into their Religion, which is
the best in the world. What Interpretation can be Plainer and Clearer then
this? And yet I know not any Writer excepting One, or Cloppenburg. Syntagm.
Select. Disput. 14. Spanhemius in locum.
Two at the most, who seem so much as to approach toward This Exposition, or
to give the least him of this Notion which I have presented to you. Yet
certainly, if you weigh This well, you will find it worthy of all acceptance:
for in all the forenamed Interpretations there is either something Defective or
Redundant: there is some fault in Grammar and Criti^ism, or a Mistake in
History and Chronology, or an apparent Inconsequence in the way of Argument. In
sum, there were Bold Suppositions, but Slender Proofs. Whereas you may observe
that in This Interpretation which I have tendered to you, the Propriety of the
words is preserved entire: the Criticism is not strained: the Genuine and
Proper signification of the words is upheld: the whole Design of the Context
and of the Apostle's Arguing is discovered: and the History of the Ancient
Church, and the Relation of the best Antiquity concur to make This Exposition
Solid and Authentic. Here is nothing begged, but all is free and
unconstrained. This is the clearest and most reasonable Sense in it self, and
likewise the most accommodate to the Present Purpose of the Apostle in this
Chapter, to the Style and Phraseology of the Scripture, and to the whole
Analogy of Christian Faith.

And now in the close of all, to Apply this Interpretation to Ourselves. We
have the same reason now to maintain the Christian Religion that those first
good Converts had to embrace it. The Consideration which made them enter into
Religion, should make us hold it fast. For we as well as they prosess that
Religion which was attested by the Death, and sealed with the Blood of Martyrs.
Martyrdom made Christians then; let it confirm us in Christianity now.
Especially let us be encouraged to love and maintain our Religion, which we can
hold with Ease and all the Conveniences of this life. We are not forced to
quit our Lives that we may secure our Religion and our Consciences. Blessed be
God, we can enjoy these here, and carry them with us into another World
afterward. But if ever the Divine Providence shall call us to lay down our
Lives, and spend our Blood in the service of our Lord and Savior, let us not
count our Lives dear unto us, so that we may finish our course with joy, and
testify the Gospel of the grace of God, as our Acts 20. 24.
Apostle speaks. Let us, like the Primitive Saints, Acts 5. 41.
rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame, and even Death for the
Name of Christ. Let us cheerfully sacrifice our Lives for the sake of him who
Died for us, let us drown our Affections to the world in our own Blood, thereby
propagating our Holy Religion, and therein following the Pattern of the Blessed
Apostles and Primitive Saints, who manfully and undauntedly died for the faith:
on whose account, and by virtue of whose Example it was that Thousands of
Converted persons flocked to the Waters of Baptism, and were ambitious to
Assert that Cause for which they saw those Excellent Christians lay down their
Lives. The Death of an Eminent Saint made a great number of Disciples in those
days: the Blood of a Holy Martyr baptized whole Cities. This I conceive was to
be baptized for the dead. This I offer as the most Plain and Easy, the most
Natural and Genuine Meaning of the Text.

The fourth TEXT Enquired into, viz. 1 St Peter III. 19, 20. By which also he
went and preached unto the Spirits in prison: which sometime were disobedient,
etc.
THIS is another Difficult Text of Scripture, and in order to the Clearing of
it, I will give you a brief account of the Chapter. It begins with the Peculiar
and Proper Duties of Man and Wife, which take up the first 7 verses: but the
rest of the Chapter treats of the Common Virtues and Graces which are required
in all Christians, as Meekness, Patience, Mercifulness, and all the obliging
and indearing offices of Love. The Apostle chiefly exhorts to Patience, that
is, to suffer with submission and cheerfulness what ever should be inflicted on
them. And here he shows particularly how they ought to behave themselves
toward their Persecutors. They must not be Revengeful, and render evil for
evil, v. 9. and he subjoins the Reasons of it in the following verses. Again,
They must not be afraid, neither be troubled, v. 14. They must take courage
maugre all their distresses, and strive to banish all Fear and Cowardice, all
Disorder and Perplexity of mind. Moreover, they are obliged to sanctify the
Lord God in their hearts, and to be ready to give an answer to every one that
asks them a reason of the hope which is in them, and that with meekness and
fear, v. 15. The meaning is that they were not to disguise their persuasion;
but to make open profession of their Religion even before their Persecutors.
Further, the Apostle tells them that they must not only profess Christianity
but lead Holy Lives, that thereby they may shame their Adversaries who falsely
accuse them as evil doers, v. 16. Lastly therefore he bids them be sure that
they look to their Lives and Conversations, that they suffer for well-doing,
not for evil-doing, v. 17. And that they may not be unwilling to suffer thus,
here is set before them the Example of Christ who suffered for them, For Christ
also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, v. 18. This highly
commends the Sufferings of the Blessed Jesus that he was himself an Innocent
person, and that he suffered for those that were Guilty: whereas no Christians
that suffer can altogether plead Innocence, they all in some measure deserve
what they suffer. And now the Apostle takes occasion to expatiate on Christ's
suffering, and the Happy effects of it, to the end of this Chapter, and in part
of the next. He shows the Design of our Saviors Passion, viz. that he might
bring us to God, v. 18. that he might make us Holy and Righteous and indue us
with the Divine and Godlike nature, and that he might at last lead us to Heaven
and Eternal Glory. And this He was effectually enabled to do, because, though
he suffered death, yet he soon rose from the dead, as you read in that 18. v.
Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. To pass by the
Notion of those men who think they find some ground here for their Ethereal or
Spiritual Vehicles, understanding the words thus, Put to death in his
Terrestrial body, but quickened or enlivened with a Spiritual one, for Christ's
soul and the souls of all the Saints after death (say they) are clothed with
Subtle and Aetherial bodies. To let this pass, the Plain Meaning of the place
is this (and it is confirmed by several of the Athanasius, Augustine, Oecumenius.
Fathers) that this Jesus though he suffered and was put to death for us in the
flesh, as a Man, as he had a Humane Body, yet he was quickened by the Spirit,
that is, he rose from the dead by the virtue and power of the Holy Spirit, who
was ever with him. Or thus, he was put to death in the flesh, i. e. crucified
in his Humane Nature, but he was quickened in the spirit, i. e. he was raised
from the Dead by his Divine Nature. A Parallel place is that in 2 Cor. 13. 4.
Though he was crucified through weakness, (his body being but Weak and Frail
and subject to death, as all Humane bodies are) yet he lives by the power of
God, he reassumed his soul, and lived again, and still lives by virtue of his
Divine Power. He died as Man, but restored himself to life as he was God. It
was by Christ's Divine Spirit that his separated soul and body were reunited:
which you find thus asserted by St Paul, Romans ^. 4. He was declared to be the
son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection
from the dead. The humane spirit of Christ was joined again to his body by his
Eternal Spirit. By Christ's Divinity his Humanity was raised up, and restored.
And now our Apostle inlarges here further upon this Quickening Power of Christ's
Spirit or Divinity, in these words, By which also he went and preached unto the
spirits in prison: which sometime were disobedient etc. The Greek which is here
translated [ By which,] is rendered by others [ wherefore:] (...) is as much as
(...), ideo, says Oecumenius, and so it is thought that these words bring in the
Reason of what was said before. But there are few that follow this
Interpretation. Our own Translation is more Plain, and more Probable, for those
that are acquainted with the style of the New Testament know that [ By] is the
frequent signification of the Praeposition [(...):] and it is most obvious and
rational to refer the Article [(...)] to the word which immediately preceded
it, and that is the Spirit, nor have we any reason to think that it relates to
any thing else. By this Spirit Christ did great and wonderful things after he
was risen from the dead: by this he went and preached. But to whom? To the
spirits in prison: and moreover it is added, that these spirits were sometimes
disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
etc. This is differently understood by Expositors, for 1. some apply it to
those who were Alive before and at the time of the Flood. 2. Others understand
it of the Souls of the dead. And what dead these are you shall hear when I come
to enlarge on this head. 3. Others apply it to the Preaching of the Gospel in
the Apostles times.

I. It is applied to those who were alive before or at the Flood. And here
there are These two Opinions; first, Arias Montanus is singular and by himself,
who holds that the spirits in prison were those that were shut up, and as it
were Imprisoned in Noah's Ark. Those eight souls, as they are called in the 20th
verse, are these Prisoners: they were kept by God in the Ark, as in Safe
Custody. But this Notion was started merely because there is mention here of
Noah's Ark; and the eight souls saved by it. This without doubt gave the rise to
this wild fancy. And besides, there are several things which may hinder us from
entertaining it, for 1. it is said, they were sometime disobedient, which we
cannot apply to any of these eight. It is true we read that afterward Cham
proved a Wicked person, and was justly Cursed for being so, but this has no
reference to what was before. 2. The Preaching to the spirits in prison here
spoken of was whilst the Ark was preparing, but they were not Imprisoned in the
Ark till it was made and finished: therefore this passage cannot be understood
of the persons shut up in the Ark. 3. It appears from the Context, that this
Preaching of Christ was after his Resurrection, and consequently cannot be meant
of any Preaching to those in the Ark. Secondly, Others understand it of those
sinners of the Old World who lived all the while the Ark was building, which
was a hundred and twenty years. The long-suffering of God waited thus long on
these Antediluvian sinners, who are called the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.
5. These are the spirits in prison, say the Learned Grotius and Dr Hammond. And
Epist. 99. ad Eucd.
St Augustine long before had this notion, and the Venerable Bede and Aquinas,
and others, borrowed it from him. It is true Christ may be said to preach to
these by the Spirit, that is, the Holy Spirit strove with these sinners whilst
Noah preached to them. This is plainly intimated in Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall
not allways strive with man. The Spirit then did strive with the men of that
Age, though at last the Allmighty declares that he will put a period to his
Spirits soliciting and striving with them. But the forenamed Expositors
understand these words not of the Spirit of God, but of the spirit of man put
into him by God. And accordingly they think that this phrase of the spirits in
prison alludes to those very words. Because St Peter was about using a
Similitude bo^rowed from Noah's time, he makes use, says Grotius, of the very
words of that History. But then you must note that he reads not the words as we
do, i. e. my Spirit shall not strive with man, but according to the (...).
Septuagint and Non permanebit.
Vulgar Latin, My Spirit shall not abide, or rest with man, or those men. And
because the Hebrew word [ Iadon] comes from Nadan, vagina.
another that signifies a Sheath or Scabbard, therefore he renders that place
thus, according to Xantes Pagninus, (who herein follows R. Kimchi) Non erit ut
in vagina spiritus men's cum homine.
My spirit shall not be detained in man as in a Scabbard. And then the meaning
of the words is, that the spirit of soul which I gave and put into man shall
not be useless, and produce no effect, as a Sword in a Scabbard, which does
nothing of that it was made for. A Scabbard is as it were a Prison to the
Sword, and the Body is as 'twere a Sheath or Prison to the Soul. So the Souls
of the Antedil^vian sinners were immersed in their Bodies, Imprisoned, and
Useless to any good purposes. Or thus, my Spirit shall not abide as a sword in
a sheath, it shall no longer be sheathed in man, it shall not be Imprisoned and
con^ined in him, i. e. I will destroy him, he shall not live any longer; for so
it follows, v. 7, 13. This is Grotius's Notion, and he is of opinion that [ the
spirits in prison] refer to this. And among the Fathers, St Ierom favors this
Interpretation. This Criticism is further confirmed (some think) by observing
that the Chaldee word (...) which signifies a sheath, signifies also a body, as
is evident from Dan. 7. 15. And hence perhaps that Rabinical saying, Omnia
corpora vaginae sunt: beatum illud quod meretur ut sit vagina Legis. Talm.
Sanedr.
All bodies are Sheaths: blessed is that which deserves to be the Sheath of the
Law. From all these things put together some infer that the Apostle here
alludes to this Notion, and that the spirits in prison are Souls sheathed, shut
up, imprisoned in their bodies. Christ came and preached to these souls. viz.
the sinners that lived in Noah's days, and he preached unto them by the
Preaching of Noah.

But this Interpretation is by no means to be admitted, for 1. This quaint
notion of the Sheath and the Body is a plain force upon that Text in Genesis 6. 3.
which is truly and uncorruptly rendered according to the Hebrew, [My Spirit
shall not strive*] that is, I will no longer concern my self with these men, I
will give them up to their own lusts and lewd desires; my Spirit shall not
strive, as formerly, with them, they shall not be convinced by Noah's Preaching,
nor wrought upon by the foresight of those Judgments which they cannot but see
hang over their heads: and when I have thus given them up to their own vile
imaginations* I will cut them off in their sins, and bereave them of all hopes
of mercy for the future. This is the True import of those words, and
consequently all that the foresaid Critics suggest is nothing to the Text, but
is a mere Distorting and Perverting of it. 2. Suppose this place of Scripture
might be rendered as they have done it, yet who sees not that it is far from
their purpose? What likeness is there between a sheath and a Prison? It must be
strong fancy that persuades a man to think that the latter is put here for the
former, and consequently that the words I am now treating of have reference to
those in Genesis. Or, 3ly, suppose it were so, yet all we learn from this
strange expression is, that the sinners before the Flood had souls in their
bodies, for that is the English, it seems, of the spirits in prison, it is no
more then souls in bodies. 4. This phrase might be made use of with more reason
to prove the Platonic Praeexistence, and the Detrusion of souls into bodies,
which they so much talk of. I wonder the Platonists never took notice of this
Text. Their Hypothesis cannot be expressed more fully then it is here. If I were
one that favored the Doctrine of Praeexistence, I should prize this place
exceedingly: there is none like it. For the spirits in prison are the souls
which are thrust into these Bodies as into Prisons. For the Body of man (as
they are wont to speak) is but Eygastulum anim^, the Prison or Dungeon of the
Soul: here it is enclosed or imprisoned as a Sword in a Sheath. And these
Spirits which are thus immersed into Humane Bodies were sometime disobedient,
i. e. they sinned in the state of Praeexistence, and therefore are sent into
these bodies, and there Imprisoned. Thus this place may be alleged in favor
of that Hypothesis; but any man who duly weighs the scope of the words may see
that they intend no such thing as this. The Defenders of that opinion might as
well make use of that place, Psalm. 142. 7. Bring my soul out of prison, and
thence prove that humane souls are thrust into the prisons of these bodies, and
that These are the spirits in prison meant by our Apostle. But 5ly, that which
unanswerably consounds This Opinion ( viz. that the words are to be understood
of the Sinners before the Flood, and of Christ's preaching to them by his
Spirit) is this, that the Text speaks not of something done by Christ before
his Resurrection, as his Descent into hell, when he was dead: but it speaks of
something which Christ did after his Suffering and Resurrection, when he was
endued with an extraordinary power; therefore it cannot be thus meant. This is
plain from the Context and the Words themselves, and therefore nothing can more
powerfully overthrow this Assertion then This does: this ruins that Opinion
without remedy. Besides, it is said here of those spirits, that they were
sometime disobedient, as much as to say, they were not so then when Christ
preached to them. But because this is not a Necessary Consequence, I will not
urge it: for they might be disobedient before and then too, as I willingly
grant, and shall have occasion to say more of it afterward.

Therefore Others (seeing the Levity of this Opinion) though they hold that by
the spirits in prison are meant the sinners that lived before the General
Deluge in Noah's days, yet they understand their being in prison in another
sense: as thus, Christ by his Spirit in Noah, who is called a 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Preacher of righteousness, did once preach to that generation of men who lived
before the Flood, whose spirits are now in prison, i. e. in Hell for their
former disobedience. These spirits were imprisoned in Hell at the time when St
Peter wrote this Epistle, but they were not in that Prison when Christ preached
to them by the Spirit. The short is, Christ preached to these men in the days
of Noah, who were in this infernal Prison in the days of the Apostles, and have
been ever since. St Peter speaks of the spirits now in prison, or then in
prison when he wrote, not of the spirits in prison when Christ preached to
them. This Interpretation is approved of by many, but it is very Harsh and much
Forced. For if you understand the words fairly and without straining them, they
must necessarily signify something which Christ did (...) to the spirits in
prison. Now to say, they were not in prison when he did it to them in prison,
is Absurd and Ridiculous: at least, it is Wresting the words, and not taking
them in their Genuine sense which they appear to us in. And why we should
abandon the Genuine and Plain sense for a Forced and ^ar-Fetched one I can see
no reason at all: therefore this sense must not have our Approbation, though it
be so generally received.

II. Others apply it to the Souls of the Dead. And here there is a great
Difference both among those of the Popish and Protestant persuasion. 1. Some
will have these spirits in prison to be the Souls of those Deceased sinners who
lived before the Flood, and perished in it, and were sent to Purgatory. 2. The
Souls of all the Saints and Righteous men who had been from the beginning of
the world till Christ, are ^eem'd by others to be these spirits in prison: and
this Prison is (...). 3. Some interpret it of the Damned Souls in Hell. Nay
4ly* the spirits in prison are the souls of the Blessed in Heaven, says
another.

First, (...) and some other Roman Catholics understand this Text of
Purgatory. This is the Prison wherein the souls of the Antediluvian sinners
were kept, for these persons were Un^^lievers and I^penitent all the time
before the Flood came, but then they believed and repented. St Ierom* Austin
and Hilary lean this way, interpreting the words to This purpose, that Christ
went to deliver those poor ^ouls who, when Noah preached to them, and God
patiently expected their repentance a hundred years, remained Incredulous and
Disobedient, but afterward, when they saw the Flood coming upon them, became
very Penitent, and hated their former evil ways. To these Christ, being Dead,
went and preached. So then in short, the Prison of Purgatory is meant here by
the Apostle, and Christ went perso^^lly down thither, and preached to the
people of that place. But I answer 1. They must evidently prove that there is
such a Place and State as Purgatory, otherwise we have no ground to believe
that This Text is meant of it. For this being but an Obscure place of Scripture
(as all grant) we cannot lay any stress on it. And though some of the Fathers
seem to understand it of Purgatory, yet it is to be remembered that the Mystery
of Iniquity began to work long before their time, and it is no wonder that This
and other Corrupt Opinions crept into the Church, and that even some of the
most Learned and Pious men were misled by them, for they were but Men, and so
were liable to Mistake and Error. 2. The Patrons of this Opinion hold that
Christ went personally to Purgatory, but no such thing is mentioned here; yea,
another sort of Going is expressly named, for it is said, [ by which, i. e. by
the Spirit he went,] which seems to exclude a Local and Personal Going. 3. How
inconsistent is this opinion with their doctrine of Purgatory? for they hold
that those impure souls are sent to be purged in the other world, who had some
Punishment yet remaining to undergo, and who were not sufficiently Purged in
this world. But this was not the case of the sinners who perished in the Flood.
Never was there such a Punishment and Judgment, and never shall the like be
again. And therefore according to the notion of these men, those persons were
sufficiently Punished, and there was nothing left to undergo. And then, as to
their Moral Purgation, if those persons repented at all, it is reasonable to
think that their Repentance in those unparalleled circumstances was exceeding
Great, and that it proved on all accounts Effectual and Complete. Those Waters
were able to cleanse them sufficiently, so that they needed not to be sent to
these Purging Flames. 4. This is against the received opinion of the Torments
of Purgatory, for they are said to end in a much shorter time. The Offenders of
the Old World had lain shut up in this Prison almost three thousand years,
according to these men's Interpretation of the Text; and yet it is the general
doctrine of those that assert the Pains of P^rgatory, that they are much sooner
over* and that it was not intended that these Torments should be of very long
continuance. 5. Why did Christ go and take the Antediluvian Wretches out of the
Prison of Purgatory, and none else? For these are only mentioned here, and we
read of no others any where else. Why did not (...) Savior clear that place,
and set open the Prison-doors to all, and make a General Jail-Delivery? Or,
will these men say that none went to Purgatory but those poor creatures who
lived in (...) time? This they will hardly assert. These and several other
reasons may induce us to believe that by the spirits in prison, are not meant
the souls in Purgatory.

Secondly, some imagine that Limb^^ Patrum is meant there by St Peter. Christ
went to this place, say they, and fetche^ thence all the Souls of the Saints
who died before his Coming. Some of the Fathers, as Athanasius, Ambrose, Cyr^l
of Alexandria, and others, interpret the Apostle's words thus: and it is their
known Assertion that all the souls of the righteous, as soon as they were
separated from their bodies, were imp^isone^ in some Low Place under ground,
and there were detained till our Savior came and enlarged them. These are the
spirits in ^^ison. (...) these words, telling us that the spirits in prison
wh^^ Christ (...) were Separate Souls sent to that foresaid Apartment and
Receptacle. And whereas it is said, Christ was quickened in the spirit, he says
this is meant of Christ's Separate Soul: this being quickened went strait way to
Limbo, to visit the separate souls there. But 1. Bellarmin talks very wi^dly on
this point, for the Soul being Immortal, cannot be said to be quickened or made
alive, and therefore it was unwarily and groundlesly said by him that Christ's
soul was quickened. But 2ly, I answer to what he and others alledg concerning
Limbus Patrum, that there never was such a place for the separate souls to go
to. This, according to those of the Church of Rome, is that place where the
souls of the Patriarchs and Faithful under the Old Testament were lodged. But
this is a mere Fiction, for the spirits of the deceased Saints go presently to
Heaven, and are not detained in any Prison, much less so Long a time, before
they reach that place of Bliss. Therefore we ought not to credit the Romanists,
when they tell us with great confidence, that Christ went and preached to
Abraham and the rest of the Patriarchs when he left this world, and that he
acquainted them that the work of Redemption was finished, and that he took them
up with him to Heaven. Let them first prove that there was such a Prison (for
they confess it is now demolished, and has been ever since Christ,) and then
we shall attend to what they say, and not before. 3. This Exposition is faulty,
because it is too Wide for the Text, which refers only to those of Noah's days.
Now supposing Christ preached to them in prison, how is it gathered from the
Text that Christ went and redeemed All from that place? And on the other side,
if they assert that Christ redeemed only those who were before the Flood, it
would be proper to ask how they came to have this Privilege above the rest,
but it will be hard to give a Reason of it. So that one way or other it is
Improbable.

Thirdly, there are Others who by the Spirits in prison understand the Damned
spirits or souls in Hell. Here I will not deny that the word Prison has
respect unto the Place of the Damned (as I shall show you afterward:) but that
Christ went into Hell, and Preached there to the inhabitants of that place, I
am not convinced how it can be made good from This Text* Though I grant that
some of the Ancient Fathers make use of this place of Scripture to prove that
Christ descended locally and personally into those infernal regions.
Particularly St Augustine endeavors to prove it from these very words, and
concludes at last, Quis ergo nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos
Christum? Epist. 99.
who but an Infidel will deny that Christ was in Hell? As for several Other
Writers of the Church, they are divided in their Comments on this Text; some
think it refers to Limbus Patrum, others to Purgatory, and a third sort
conceive it speaks of Hell, that place where the souls of the Wicked and
Reprobate are tormented. This is the Prison the Apostle here means, say they.
But how did Christ preach to the spirits there? This Preaching is interpreted
after a different manner: for some say our Savior went to Punish and Affright
the devils, to Triumph over the damned, and to show himself a Conqueror over
Satan and all the Infernal Powers. But these men grossly abuse St Peter's words
when they expound them thus, i. e. when they interpret Christ's Preaching to the
spirits in prison, of his T^iumphing over the damned in hell, the word [
preaching] being never in the Sacred Writings understood in such a manner, but
all that are acquainted with the Holy Style must needs acknowledge that it is
taken in a far other meaning: therefore this must be looked upon as a downright
perverting of the Apostle's words, only to serve their own ends. Others are not
content to say that Christ went to Triumph over the damned, but they talk of
something Higher, viz. the Relieving yea the Delivering of the damned out of
hell. This, say they, is the Preaching here spoken of. This is a Bold Flight,
and but few of the Clemens Alexand. strom. 6. Origin. c^nt. Cells. l. 2. With
whom may be reckoned Cyril of Alexandria, and O^cumenius, who seem to favor
this opinion.
Fathers have ventured to soar so High. But who would expect any such thing as
this from the Learned Author of the Mystery of Godliness? Yet there you will
find him giving This Interpretation of the words, viz. that the spirits in
prison, i. e. the Disobedient souls in Hell, were redeemed by Christ's
Preaching: they were a glorious spoil taken out of the hands of the devil. But
it does not follow (says he) there is any Redemption out of Hell now, much
less any Purgatory. For there were two Notable Occasions for This, such as will
never happen again. For it respects the souls of them that were suddenly swept
away in the Deluge, and the Solemnity of our Saviors Crucifixion and
As^^nsion. He undermined the Prince of death in the midst of death, and at his
Ascension victoriously carried away those first fruits of his suffering into
heaven. At the solemn Corona^ion of a Great Prince the Prison-doors are flung
open. This is the interpretation of Dr Henry More. But I am sorry this Worthy
person has given those men an occasion to think well of their doctrine of
Purgatory, and even Redemption from the pains of the Bottomless Pit, those men
(I say) whom he does not use to gratify at other times, by his too lavish
concessions. He has opened the door here, and All, as well as those
Antediluvian sinners, may go forth. If Hell be not a fixed place or state, if
it be not a Close-Prison, then there is hope that Every man at length may be
set free from it, and walk at large. And this is that which De h^^res. ad Qu^d
vult deum.
St Augustine tells us some endeavored to prove from This Text, viz. that All
shall at last be freed from Hell Torments. But the Doctor declares he intends
no such thing, but is persuaded only that the words speak of a Singular and
never to be Paralleled Instance. But in answer to what he and others before
have asserted, I will briefly make It good that the words speak not at all of
Christ's going down to Hell, or of his Preaching there. For 1. These words
refe^ring to the souls of those who lived in Noah's time, what was the reason
that our Savior went into Hell to preach to These rather then the rest? how
came these despisers of Noah's preaching to have this Privilege above all other
persons, that Christ should descend to the Infernal Pit to relieve them
particularly? Why did not the Sodomit^s and others share in the like kindness
2ly, It is here intimated that the words are not meant of Christ's Local
Descent into hell, for it is said he went by the spirit; which signifies another
thing, and what that is I have told you. But I have mentioned this before. 3.
It cannot be spoken of Christ's going to Hell, because the words are of something
that he did after his Resurrection, as has been before suggested. The order of
the Apostle's words is this, first Christ was put to death, then he was
quickened or rose again, and after that he went and preached: therefore it is
impossible that this Preaching should be meant of any sort of Preaching to
those in Hell, unless you will make Christ's Descent into hell follow his
Resurrection from the dead, which was never dreamt of yet. Let this therefore
be remembered, that the Text speaks of something which our Savior did after he
was risen from the dead, and then it must be acknowledged that this is a plain
con^utation of the Adversaries Opinion. 4. This (...) spoils their
Interpretation, for when it is said they were sometime disobedient, it is
implied (I do not say absolutely inferred) that they are not so now.

Fourthly, (and which shows the vast Difference between the Judgments of men
on this place) whereas some Protestants and most Papists think Hell is meant
here, Calvin believes the contrary, and vouches Heaven to be understood by this
word (...), which is not a Prison according to him, but a watchtower; and so
indeed the word signifies sometimes. The spirits or ^ouls of the faithful were
(...) in specu^a, on their watchtower, viz. in Heaven, Thither Christ
ascended, and there he found the Saint^ of the Old World very Incent on the
Salvation promised by Christ, they confidently hoped for it and his Coming, and
as it were Looked for these as from some Watch tower. But I confess I do not
see what reason that Learned Writer had to alter the ordinary Translation of
the word (...) and to render it here a Watchtower. He might have retained the
Other Translation, and yet have kept his Interpretation entire. For what better
word could there be to express Heaven then (...) as it signifies a (...), a
Hold, a place of Safety, like (...), which some render Abraham's Port or Haven.
Christ being raisd from the grave went and preached to the spirits in safe
custody, (...) in Heaven: there he declared to them what Great things he had
done, and how he had finished the work of man's Redemption. As the words before
spoke of Christ's Death and Resurrection, so these of his Ascension and
Exaltation. This is the sense of that Learned Man, and if he had not altered
the usual version of the word (...), it would have done as well. But against
his interpretation, I alledg first his Wavering in the solution of this Text,
for in his Institutions (...) and upon the Place, he expounds it of the souls
of the Faithful, but in his Psychopannychia he tells us, that Christ went and
preached not only Remission of sins to the spirits of the Godly, but also
Confusion to the spirits of the ungodly: thus he takes in both Heaven and Hell.
Secondly, to what purpose did Christ go and preach to the Saints in heaven,
when they could not but know the certainty of their Salvation by Their being in
that place? It was needless to preach to them what they knew already. Therefore
I cannot see how this word can be applied to Heaven. But the main thing which
hinders my Assent to his Interpretation is This, that the words have relation
to Noah's days, and the particular people of that time. Now 1. It is probable
that the greatest numbers of them perished everlastingly, as the Luke 17. 26. 2
Pet. 2. 5.
Scripture, when it speaks of the sinners of the Old World, does more then
intimate* These were so far from being placed in a High Watchtower, a place
whence they might look for, and epsy a Savior, that they were plunged into
the Lowest Abyss of misery and despair. 2. Supposing that people were Saved,
and in Heaven, yet wherefore did Christ, when he ascended thither, preach to
These rather then others? And why were These separate souls above all the rest
continually upon their Watch, in hopes of the promised salvation? I do not
apprehend any ground for this, and consequently I cannot admit of this
Exposition. These are the several Judgments of those Expositors who understand
the words concerning the souls of the deceased. Now I proceed to the Last
Cla^^is of Interpreters.

III. Others apply the words to the Preaching of the Gospel to unbelievers in
the Apostles times, understanding by the spirits in prison, the Heathens, and
by Christ's Preaching to them, his Sending his Disciples and Apostles to preach
to them. Institut. l. 4. c. 30.
Episcopius and Theolog. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Limborch are the men who offer this Interpretation, and I take it to be the
Fairest of all those which have been named. But yet as it is delivered by those
persons I cannot wholly subscribe to it: therefore I shall only proceed on the
main and general ground which they have laid, and I shall make bold to add
several things which I find wholly wanting in those A^thors Comments, and
thereby give you a perfect resolution of the Text. First then, the Spirits are
the same with Souls, and Souls are as much as Men or Persons with bodies and
souls: so in the next verse eight ^souls are said to be saved, i. e. eight
persons who were in the Ark. This is an usual Synecdoche: as Body is put for
the whole man often* so Soul or Spirit signifies the same. [Spirit] is not
always (though most commonly) applied to the Souls of the Deceased, as some
would persuade us. Living men are called Spirits, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 John 4. 1, 3.
Seducing spirits are seducers, or persons that seduce. Or, if you will not
grant this interpretation in these places, yet you must needs grant that
persons may be meant by spirits as well as by souls, which latter you cannot
deny, if you consult Romans 13. 1. and several other places, where by soul is
meant a person, i. e. a man consisting of body and soul, or (which is the same
thing) spirit. Or, if [Spirits] be meant of the Souls of Dead men properly,
then also there is reason to apply it here, because they are Dead in sin, and
they are as it were destined to Eternal Death. Those who are Spiritually dead
are rightly called Spirits. These spirits, i. e. these Men are no other then
the Gentile Idolaters (say the above named Expositors,) who lived in the days
of Christ and the Apostles. And because it is said, they were sometime
disobedient, Episcopius gives this account of it* He reckons all the Gentiles
from Noah's time, as one and the same people, (which is a thing not unusual with
the Holy Writ^^s:) and so when Christ preached to the Gentiles of his time, and
the Apostles times, he may be said to preach to the Gentiles of Noah's time, who
were a part of the whole body of the Gentiles. So that if you ask of him, How
could these people that lived in the Apostles times be said to be disobedient
in the days of Noah, his answer is, that the whole race of wicked men is
consfidered here as one Body, and consequently what the first and chief of them
did, those that came after them may be said to have done. These wicked Gentiles
that lived in the Apostles times are justly said to have been disobedient in
the days of Noah, because they were a part of the whole, and included in the
main Body of sinners. But I question whether this will be looked upon by the
Inquisitive as a Satisfactory Resolution. For my part, I cannot prevail with my
self to think it such, and therefore I shall anon offer another Interpretation.
Moreover, I most add this, why may we not understand these words [ who were
sometime disobedient] not only of the (...) but of the Jews also? The Text (as
I conceive) speaks both of the C^^version of Jews and Gentiles* the Gospel
being preached, and Salvation off^red to both these. I see therefore no reason
why the Exposition should be confined to one only, viz. to the P^gan Infidels,
and such as were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. Christ preached to
both Jews and Heathens, who were heretofore, or sometime disobedient. The
former of these, both under the Old and New Testament, are noted to be such,
they are complained of as a (...) people. That forefathers even of those who we
in the Apostles days were disobedient, and therefore those may be said to be
sometime disobedient, because they are included in their forefathers. Or
rather, this may be meant of the (...) Lives and Manners of those individual
persons who then lived. And as the Jews had lived in Superstion and Ignorance,
and gross Rebellion against God, so the Gentiles had been brought up in
Idolatry, and in most lewd and profane practices. Christ after his
Resurrection and Ascension pitied the miserable condition of both these sorts
of (...) Sinne^s. They had been disobedient, but now Christ by his Apostles
(whom he sent forth to preach the Gospel) effectually reminded them of it, of
which more (...) which we have hitherto suggested (and which was the first
thing to be done) is this, that these Jewish and Pagan people who had
heretofore (...) so ^^gnally disobedient, are the spirits or persons here
spoken of, who are also said to be in prison.

Of the Reasonableness and Consistency of which interpretation I will give you
this following account. They are called the spirits in prison, 1. because they
were shut up in Ignorance, as in a spiritual Prison* They refused the knowledge
of God, (...) wilfully blinded themselves, and so became, like the Egyptians, 1
Wisd. 17. 2.
Prisoners of darkness, and lay fettered in the bond^ of night^ 2. Because they
were not only shut up in the Dark Dung^^n of wilful Ignorance, but were (as our
Church exp^esseth it) tied and bound with the chain of their other grosser
sins. Whence you read of the cords or chains of sin, (...). 70.
Prove. 5. 22. In this respect very bad men are said to be Acts 8. 23.
in the bond of iniquity* and to be 2 Timothy 2* 26.
(...) his will. 3ly, This expresses the Misery they were in. They were spirits
in Prison, that is, unspeakably Distressed and Wretched. This you will find to
be the Style of Scripture: and accordingly the Psalmist says, The Lord
despises not his Prisoners, i. e. those that are in Distress and Misery, Psalm.
69. 33. And thus That in Ps. 79. 11. may be understood, Let the sighing of the
Prisoners come before thee. And again he prays, Bring my soul out of Prison,
Ps. 142. 8. Soul is to be taken here for the Person, and Prison ((...) is the
very word used by the Septuagint) for Calamity or Misery, and so this is the
like manner of speech with that in the Text, The spirits, or souls in prison.
We pity those poor wretches who are in Durance, who can only look through the
Grates, but are denied the liberty of going abroad to help themselves; we
reckon their condition very sad and deplorable. But it is certain that these
poor ^ouls who are imprisoned and Fettered by their Sins are in a far worse
case, because Sin is the greatest Bondage. They, like Samson, grind in the
prisonhouse, they are put to excessive Drudgery and Slavery, which are so much
the Worse because they are not Sensible of it. 4. This shows their Inability to
relieve themselves. They are as it were in some Str^ng and Close Prison, whence
there is no delivery without Gods help, and the special assistance of Divine
Grace. They are shut up in their Dark Cells, and know not how to free
themselves, they are so fast in prison that they cannot get forth. 5ly and
lastly, As I have before suggested, Hell is called a Prison in the Style of
Scripture. Thus in Mat. 5. 25. to be cast into prison is to be cast into Hell:
and accordingly the Syriack Version of the word is Sheol, which is the word
used sometimes for Hell. God cast the Angels down to hell, says S' Peter, and
immediately he adds that he delivered them into Chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.
4. and St Jude (v. 6.) speaks after the same manner. Hell implys Chains, and
that those who are in that place are Bound in the house of their prison. So
Satan is said to be bound with a great chain, Rev. 20. 1, 2. i. e. he was
Confined to Hell; and afterward, he was loosed out of that Prison, v. 7. Now,
Wicked and Ungodly men are deservedly said to be in This prison, even before
they are actually cast into it, because they are as sure to be there, i. e. to
be Damned as if they were actually so. They are as certainly to be shut up in
the Prison of Hell, as if they were now in it. In this sense Infidels and
Unbelievers are said to be condemned already, John 3. 18. All wilful sinners
are clapped up in the Prison, are consigned as it were to Hell, unless they
hearken to the Preaching of the Gospel, and Repent, and be Converted, and so
escape the damnation of Hell. From all these particulars you may be satisfied
how Fit an expression this is* how Appositely those Unbelievers and Idolaters
to whom the Gospel was preached are styled spirits in Prison. I will yet
further observe to you, how the Scripture delights in This way of expression.
As I have showed you from thence how Sinners are Imprisoned persons, so I have
This likewise to take notice of from Scripture, that the Converting of souls by
Christ's coming and preaching, is expressly set forth to us by Freeing them from
prison. Which confirms This notion, and the Use of this Phrase, that ^inners,
whilst they are in their Unregenerate state, whilst they are they are under the
power of their sins are in prison: for they cannot be taken out thence, unless
they had been in it. To this purpose we may observe the prophet Isaiah's words,
chapter 42. v. 7. where describing the Office of the Messiah, he makes this the
sum of it, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the prison house. And again, speaking of the blessed design of
the Messiah, he expresses it thus, chapter 49. v. 9. That thou may say to the
prisoners, Go forth. And further in chapter 61. v. 1. he introduces the Messiah
himself declaring with his own mouth, that he was sent to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Which (as
well as the former passages) is meant of the Spiritual Loosing of men from
their sins by the saving coming of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel, as is
evident from what our Savior said when he read these words of Isaiah, This
day, says he, is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, Luke 4. 21. As much as
if he had said, This is the grand end and purpose of my appearing in the world,
and of all my undertakings for mankind, namely, to set them at liberty, to save
them from their sins. This was long since foretold by the prophet Isaiah, and
now behold, it is accomplished in me at this time, who speak unto you and
preach the Gospel of Salvation. I came to seek and save that which was lost, I
came to bless you in turning you from your iniquities, I came to rescue you
from the bondage of sin and Satan. This is the meaning of opening the prison to
them that are bound, of saying to the prisoners, Go forth, of bringing the
prisoners out of the prison house. We see then that from the style of this
Evangelical Prophet we are directed to a right understanding of St Peter's
words, we are informed that the spirits in prison are men in their sins. Jesus
by his Spirit in his Apostles went and preached to these Prisoners, he
proclaimed Liberty to these poor miserable Captives.

And these are the dead to whom the Gospel was preached, 1 Pet. 4. 6. A place
of Scripture which has mightily puzzled Expositors. Dr Hammond and others
understand by these dead the sinners of the Old World: for these were dead (say
they) when Peter wrote this Epistle, though they were alive when they were
preached to. So that place, Ruth 1. 8. is interpreted, The Lord deal kindly
with you, as you have dealt with the dead, i. e. my sons and your husbands who
are now dead, (when Naomi spoke this to her daughters in law) but were alive
when the kindness was showed to them. But I have observed before that this is a
Strained sense, and therefore where a more Natural one offers it self we ought
to accept of it. The most Plain and Proper meaning of [ the dead] here is that
they were dead at that very time when the Gospel was preached to them. I
understand it of Spiritual death, which brings Eternal death with it without
repentance. The widow that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy
5. 6. It is usual to call Sinners dead men, because (as the same Apostle says)
they are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Yea, it were easy to show
that this way of speaking was not unusual with the Gentile Moralists. So the
dead here to whom the Gospel was preached were such as were Spiritually dead.
Otherwise you cannot make sense of the Reason or End of the Gospels being
preached to them, viz. that they might be judged according to men in the flesh,
but live according to God in the spirit. Castalio, after his modest way in the
like cases, professes that Hunc locum n^n intelling^.
he knows not what to make of these words. Some tell us that they speak of
Penitent sinners involved in a Common Ruin, that though they were judged in
the flesh, i. e. in respect of their Bodies, as far as Men can see, yet in
their Spirit or Soul they rest, and live with God. But it cannot be proved that
the Apostle here refers to any such Common Calamity, and therefore this
Exposition is not to be admitted. Others alter it a little thus, These words
(say they) are added to remove the scandal laid in the way of Religion by
Infidels and Pagans, who (as you read v. 4.) thought it strange that the
Christians ran not with them to the same excess of riot, and spoke evil of them
on that account. They censured, defamed, and even condemned them because they
were not like themselves. But though they were condemned as to their flesh,
their outward man, yet their spirits, their in ward man obtained favor, and
even eternal life with God. But how this is brought in as a Reason, as it is
here, [ For, for this cause etc.] no man can discover, and therefore we cannot
satisfy ourselves with this interpretation of the place. Others would
understand it thus, That they might be judged according to men in the flesh, i.
e. that those who lived carnally and wickedly might be damned, and live
according to God in the spirit, i. e. that those who lived godlily and
righteously might be saved. But this is a manifest perverting of the words,
turning the [ but] into [ and,] and making this place speak of two sorts of
persons, when it is most apparent that it speaks but of one. But now according
to the Sense I have before propounded, the Reason in these words is plain, viz.
thus, For, for this cause, viz. that they might be judged according to men in
the flesh, i. e. that they might pass a severe Judgment upon themselves, and
mortify all their sinful lusts, but live according to God in the spirit, i. e.
live new and holy lives, was the Gospel preached to those that are dead. Here
you may observe a clear Antithesis in the words; being judged or condemned is
opposed to living, and flesh to spirit, and according to men, to according to
God. For this cause the Gospel was preached to them that are dead in sin, viz.
that being once Converted they may judge and condemn themselves, and mortisie
the flesh, and die to sin, (as Judging and passing Sentence are in order to
Execution and putting to Death among men, or according to men) but be Alive to
the spirit, and walk according to Gods holy laws. So then these two places
mutually explain each other: the dead to whom the Gospel was preached are the
same with the spirits in prison, to whom Christ went and preached. In both
places are meant the Spiritually dead, those that are under the power and
dominion of their sins.

Thus I hope I have fully showed who are the spirits in prison. Now it remains
that I explain how Christ went and preached to these spirits. The Preaching,
here is not Christ Personal Preaching, but his preaching by his Apostles, after
his Resurrection, yea his Ascension, at which time he sent his Holy Spirit to
them, by which they were enabled to preach the Gospel to Jews and Gentiles. By
which spirit (for [(...)] is as much as [(...)]) poured forth on his Apostles
he preached, i. e. he caused them to preach to the Unconverted world, Jews and
Gentiles, who were yet in their sins. It is rightly said that He preached,
because what was done by the Apostles, Christ's Ministers, is said to be done by
Christ himself. And this which is here inserted, [ he went,] though if is
thought by Dr Hammond to be a mere Expletive, yet it is not so, but has its
particular weight and import. These two things, I conceive are suggested to us
by it, 1. the Deputation of his Apostles. Christ went not in his own person,
but he may be truly said to have gone by his Delegates and Ministers. These
went, and that from place to place to preach the Gospel. I look upon Ephesians. 2.
17. to be a parallel Text with this which I am insisting on. He came (or, he
went) and preached peace to you who were afar off, viz. to the Ephesians who
were Gentiles and Idolaters. He came not to these in person, but he came, or
went by those whom he sent to preach to them. Thus he went, and preached to
these spirits in prison. So more signally he went to the Jews, yea to them
indeed first, as St Peter speaks, Acts 3. 26. Unto you first, God having raised
up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you. God sent him after his Ascension, not
him in person, but Others in his name to preach repentance, to turn every one
of them from their iniquities, as it follows in that place. Thus Christ went:
he sent those who went. 2. This speaks the Freeness of the act. Neither Christ
nor his Apostles stayed till the Gentiles and Jews sought for the Gospel, and
Salvation by it, but they went to them. them, they freely offered these to
them. The word then is not redundant and superfluous, but very Pregnant and
Emphatical. God offers his grace freely, God the Father sends, God the Son
goes. With what Courtship and Unparalled Address did he seek and woe the love
of Sinners whilst he was here on earth? With what Concernedness and Passion did
he beseech and solicit the degenerate race of mankind? And when he left this
world and went to his Father, behold, he sent his Spirit to actuate his Church,
especially his Apostles, whom he appointed to instruct and convert souls
throughout the whole world. He inspired them with extraordinary Gifts and
Graces, to make them able to discharge their office. And accordingly they did
discharge it with great power and vigor, with mavelous and unexpected
success. They preached to the spirits in prison, and that so effectually that
they set them free from their Imprisonment.

But here it will be Objected, what is this to the purpose? what reason have
you to assert that These words speak of Christ preaching by his Apostles to the
Unbelievers, both Jews and Gentiles, in those times, when as the Text plainly
refers to the days of the Old World only, for the preaching to the spirits in
prison, is said to have been when once the long-suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, while the ark was preparing? How then can this belong to the
times of the Apostles, and their preaching to unbelieving Jews and Gentiles? To
solve this, I have told you already that the words do not altogether refer to
those Antediluvian Transgressors, but in a Latitude and by way of Analogy they
comprehend all that have sometime been disobedient. But because what the
Learned Episcopius has offered, viz. that the several generations of the
Wicked are looked upon as One Body of men, and in this Large consideration the
Preaching to those who lived in the days of Noah may reach even to them in the
Apostles times, because (I say) this may seem Unsatisfactory, I will offer That
which will abundantly satisfy all persons. It is this, that in these words
there is an Ellipsis, which is a Figure that is commonly made use of in the
Scripture, and therefore it ought not to seem strange in this place. That this
Ellipsis or Leaving out of a word is very frequent, you may satisfy yourselves
from those Writers who have made it their bufiness to treat of the Style and
Phraseology of the Bible: they will let you see at one view what a number of
Defective speeches there are in the Holy Writ. So it is here: and there being a
Defect, a Supplement must be made. And what is that? The Greek word (...), or
(...), or (...). is to be inserted before the word (...); and the words are to
be read thus, By which he went and preached to the spirits in prison who were
sometime disobedient, as when once the long-suffring, or patience of God waited
in the days of Noah. This word [as] which is a note of Similitude or
Comparison, being left out in the Greek, ought to be supplied in the
Translation. That it ought to be so, to make the sense entire, will appear by
setting before you some places of Scripture (for I will not trouble you with
instances of the Ellipsis of this particle in Profane Writers, though I could
produce very many) where this word is left out in the Original, but is supplied
by the Translators. As in Genesis 16. 12. Pagnine inserts tanquam, and reads it
thus, He will be as a wild men. In Psalm, 11, 1. the Septuagint add (...), and
the vulgar Latin sicut, and our English Translators [ as,] and read the words
thus, Flee as a bird to your mountain, notwithstanding that Adverb is not in
the Hebrew. In Psalm. 12. 6. our Translators thought it requisite to supply the
sense with an [ as,] though this particle be not in the Original: for thus they
render the place, The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a
furnace, etc. In Ps. 22. 13. (...) is Prefixed by the Seventy, and sicut by the
Vulgar Latin, and ut by Pagnine, and as by our Translators, [ as a ravening and
a roaring Lion,] but the Note of Comparison is omitted in the Hebrew. So in
those words, My tongue is the pen of a ready writer, [as] is implied: wherefore
in Pagnine's Interlineary Version [ ut] is added in the margent, to complete
the sense. I might mention Genesis 49. 9. Iudeh is a lions whelp, where [ as]
ought to be inserted. So in Cant. 1. 15. and 4. 1. thy eyes are doves, (for so
it is according to the Hebrew,) the meaning without doubt is, [ as doves,] viz.
as doves eyes. Likewise in Iam. 1. 11. this word is left out, for (...) is
supposed to answer to (...), although this latter be not expressed by the
Inspired Writer. Lastly, (to name no more, though several other places might be
produced) the omission of (...) in 2 Pet. 3. 4. is most palpable, and therefore
there is a supply made by our Translators, All things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation, as if the Greek were (...), whereas it is
barely (...). You see then that it has been thought necessary to add this word
in several places of Holy Scripture. The same necessity is in the Text which is
before us at present. This word [ as] being inserted, makes the sense Clear and
Manifest; for this plainly shows that there is a Comparison here between what
was done in the Apostles days, and what happened in the days of Noah. The
Long-suffering of God in the times of the Apostles, was like that in Noah's
age. As Christ the Eternal Wisdom preached by Noah to those who were
disobedient before the Flood, so he did by the Apostles to those who were such
in their times. As God heretofore showed an extraodinary Patience and Mercy
toward the people of the Old World, giving them a sufficient space to Repent
in, no less then 120 years, which yet was not Improved by them; only a few,
harkening to Gods Voice, were delivered and saved by the Ark: So Christ was
pleased to give proof of his Singular Long-suffering and Kindness toward the
disobedient Jews and Gentiles, who lived in the days of the Apostles: he by
these his Messengers offered grace to those profligate sinners, shut up and
consigned as 'twere to Execution and Destruction: yet he went and preached the
Gospel to them, and freely tendered the happy fruits of his Redemption. But the
greatest part of them evilly requited his Kindness, they continued in their
Unbelief and Impenitence: only there was a select number among them which
accepted of the divine favor and mercy, and was saved. Thus the Similitude or
Comparison runs. This word [ as] being added to the Text, the sense is obvious
and evident, which otherwise was very obscure and uncertain, notwithstanding
what the forementioned Expositors had said of it. The Text for want of
inserting this Note of Similitude has led men to several fond Conjectures and
Mistakes (as you have heard;) but now it is very Clear, and we have not made it
subservient to any Improbable and Absurd Opinions.

This then we are obliged to take notice of in a special manner, viz. how These
two are Alike, the Preaching of Christ or the Apostles to the unbelievers of
that time, and the Preaching of Noah to the people of the Old World. The
Likeness is mentioned in a General way here: but (to illustrate the words) let
us take a view of the Particulars of it. 1. Here is a parallel between Him that
preached to those before the Flood, and Him that preached to the Heathens and
Jews under the Gospel. Or rather indeed this is One and the same Person,
Christ, the essential Wisdom of the Father, God blessed for evermore. This is
He that preached to the men of All Ages. As he spoke to the people in Noah's
time, so he did the same afterward, and he spoke to the Unbelievers of the
Last days, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. 2. He spoke
to both by the spirit. By this he went and preached to them, and by this (even
his Eternal Spirit) he has preached to all generations of men ever since the
world was. But 3ly, this was not an Immediate Preaching, for as the Son of God
made use of Noah and his sons to admonish the sinners before the Deluge, so he
stirred up the Disciples and Apostles to preach to the Jews and Gentiles in the
primitive times of Christianity. 4. Here is a Comparison between the Hearers as
well as the Preachers. As the greatest part of the men of the Old World were
disobedient to Noah's preaching, so most of the Jews and Heathens were
disobedient to the preaching of the Apostles. Yet again, as some of the
Antediluvians were obedient to the Spirit and Noah's preaching, so some of the
Others believed and were converted when the Apostles were sent to them. 5. The
Parallel is observable as to the Effect, or rather the Consequence of both
Preachings: some Perished, others were Saved. The Impenitent and Hardened
sinners perished in the water, but the family of Noah was by the singular mercy
of Heaven rescued from destruction. 6ly, Therefore the Comparison is too
evident in the Paucity of the persons saved on both sides. This you find
particularly taken notice of. As in Noah's days few, that is eight souls were
saved, so when Christ came and preached by his Apostles and Ministers, those
that believed were but a very small number: a remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.
27. 7ly, and lastly, Observe the Analogy between the Ark and Baptism, which
were the signal attendants of Christ's Preaching, the one in Noah's, the other in
the Apostles days, This being particularly mentioned here, I will explain what
the Apostle means by it. In the Ark, says he, eight souls were saved by water:
that is, they were preserved and delivered out of the water of the Deluge: for
saving by water, is as much as saving out of the water: as saving by fire, (1
Cor. 3. 15.) is saving out of the fire. Or thus, saved by water, may be all one
with being saved by means of the water, viz. by the waves lifting up the Ark,
and carrying it aloft, and so saving them from being overwhelmed. The waters of
the flood bore up the Ark, and thereby kept the persons in it from drowning.
The like figure (or Antitype) whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us,
v. 21. That is, the holy Ordinance of Baptism resembles the Ark in the Flood:
for as This was the happy means of saving Noah and his family, so That was
appointed by Christ under the Gospel to be the blessed instrument of Salvation.
Unless you will take the word (...) here for a Contrary Figure (as it signifies
sometimes, according to the different rendering of (...)) and then the sense is,
that Saving is now by water, as heretofore it was by escaping it. The Water of
Baptism is now the means of our Safety, as of old the water of the Deluge was
the means of Destruction. Thus the Comparison holds good in all these
particulars. It was without doubt designed that one should be a Representation
of the other. I had reason therefore to insert the Note of Similitude [ as,] to
give you the true meaning of the words. And you see there was ground for
inserting it, there being several Examples of the like nature in the Holy
Scriptures.

Now then let us read the words, Christ has once suffered for sins, being put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison: who sometime were disobedient, as when
once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was
preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls, were saved by water. The like
figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us. The plain meaning of all
which is This, that Christ after his Crucifixion was raised from the dead by
the Spirit of God, and by the same Spirit communicated to the Apostles he
preached the Gospel to the stubborn Jews and the Idolatrous Gentiles. And upon
this preaching to them, most of those poor wretches who were Shut up in
darkness and ignorance, who were Imprisoned by Satan, and Bound with the chain
of their sins, remained still in the same miserable condition, rejecting the
Gospel, and in that were like unto the disobedient sinners in Noah's, days, who
refused the preaching of Noah, and of the Spirit by him. But as there were
some, though a few, in that age who attended to that Preacher of righteousness,
and found favor with God, so was it likewise in the times of the Apostles
Preaching, a small company (that is, Small in respect of those who refused the
tenders of Salvation, but otherwise very Great and Numerous) were so
effectually wrought upon that they believed in Jesus, and forsook their sins,
being washed from them by the waters of Baptism, which was prefigured by Noah's
Ark. This is that which the words present us with, and it is no other then the
Great Mystery of Godliness (as it is set forth in 1 Timothy 3. 16.) God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world. This is the substance of the words which I have been
treating of, this is the High and Noble Theme which St Peter here briefly
handles. Though the Generality of men (both then and since) refuse the offers
of Grace and Mercy in Christ Jesus, yet the Preaching of the Gospel is not
ineffectual and succes^ess: both in those first ages of the world, and in these
of late, there have continually been added unto the Church such as shall be
Saved. But because the Old World was the Greatest Example and Instance of Gods
Long-suffering, as well as of the Impenitence and Refractoriness of sinners,
therefore Gods sparing the Jews and Gentiles afterward, and sending the
Apostles to Preach the Gospel to them, are very fitly paralleled with the
Preaching of Noah, and Gods Long-suffering toward the people of that time. The
Apostle here, to give a Remarkable Instance of Gods Patience, chooses out the
days of Noah, a most Polluted and Degenerate Age, as you will find it
deciphered in Genesis 6. Hence among the Rabbis, the Age of the Flood is used to
express the most Wicked and Profane generation of men: for of all sinners
those Antediluvians are reckoned to be the Worst and Vilest. It is like the Age
of the Giants, noted among the Pagans, especially their Poets. For this reason
St Peter particularly mentions That Age, and makes the Preaching of Noah to
them to be a Figure and Representation of Christ and his Apostles Preaching to
the sinners of their time. They that in these days were disobedient and
believed not the Gospel, whilst the Christian Church was building up, are
represented by Those Sinners of old who believed not, whilst the Ark was
building. And so likewise, Those that believed in the Apostles times, and were
saved by Baptism, were prefigured by those who in Noah's days were saved in the
Ark by water. Yea, I am bold to say, that Noah's Preaching to the sinners of
that first age, is a figure of the Preaching of the Gospel even to the end of
the world: which was intimated by Epist. 99. ad Euodium.
Ss Augustine, who tells us, that the Age of Noah was a Type of the Ages to
come. Let Us then, on whom the ends of the world are come, think our selves
concerned here. The Long-suffering of God has waited in Our days, calling us
to repentance and Amendment of life. O that we may not abuse this Patience of
the Almighty, but that we may before it is too late, attend to the Preaching of
Christ by his Holy Ministers, and by his Sacred Spirit in our hearts, and that
we may be willing to come out of prison, to leave our sins, in which we have
been Fettered, to be set Free, and to be Saved.

Thus I have finished the task I undertook, which was to explain this Obs^ure
Text. I know there are Other Solutions of the words, but I cannot think that
they will be of any weight with lntelligent Readers. Some will read (...) in
stead of (...), and thereby alter the sense, but this is against all the Greek
Copies and the Syriack. Others tell us there is an Hyperbaton in the words,
that the Grammatical Order of them is transposed, and thence they proceed to
point them after another manner, and then to raise a New Sense: but this is
generally exploded. A late David Cleric. Qu^str Sacr.
Author from Geneva would have the words read thus, He went and preached with
the spirits in prison: Christ went with the Angels, those Good Spirits etc. and
thence he frames a very odd interpretation of the Text. But these and some
others I have forborne to trouble you with, because I believe you would look
upon them as very extravagant. If any one shall entertain the same thought of
that Exposition which I have offered, I shall not be offended, on condition he
will show me good reason for his thinking so. Otherwise I shall not attend to
what he says, but shall be the more confirmed in the Sense of the words which
I have offered. In brief, I have rejected the Wild Comments and Gemara's which
have been made on this Text, and I have seriously applied my self to the giving
you the True and Uncorrupted Meaning of the words, i. e. to show you who these
spirits in prison are. I have, I hope, let in some Light to them, yea I have
Opened their Prison-doors which were so fast locked up by the seveal Mistaken
Glosses on there words. But in this, as in the Other Expositions of Scripture
which I have tendered, I am always ready to submit to those who are of more
Sagacious Judgments.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 21. line 9. read (...). p. 61. l. 27. r. lost p. 67. l. 9. r. deviations.
p. 72. l. 21. dele (...). p. 75. against l. 12 add in the Margin, de Pallio. p
76. l. 21. dele the. p. 81. 1. 9. r. Cynick. p. 94. l. 23. r. curl.


