JOHANNES EDWARDS S. T. B.


POLYPOIKILOS SOPHIA.

A Complete HISTORY Or SURVEY Of all the Dispensations and Methods OF RELIGION,
From the beginning of the World to the Consummation of all things; As
represented in the OLD and NEW Testament.

SHOWING The several Reasons and Designs of those different Administrations;
and the Wisdom and Goodness of God in the Government of his Church, through all
the Ages of it.

In which also The Opinion of Dr. Spencer concerning the Jewish Rites and
Sacrifices, is examined: And the Certainty of the Christian Religion
demonstrated, against the Cavils of the Deists, etc.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, Ionath. Robinson, Andrew Bell, John Wyat,
and E. Harris. M.DC.XC.IX.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord SUMMERS, Baron of Evesham, Lord High
Chancellor of England.
My Lord,
WE every day behold the Lawyers and Physicians, the Philosophers, the
Historians, the Poets, and all Professors of useful Arts, presenting their
several Performances to your Lordship, not only as a Judge, but as their Common
Patron: Why then may not those of our Order presume to approach your Lordship
with their respective Offerings, and hope for a kind and favorable Reception?
Especially seeing you have let the World know by sundry illustrious Instances
what regard you bear to that Function, and those of that Character. They all
admire your capacious and universal Genius, which has given you a profound
insight into Theological Studies, as well as all others, Westminster Hall has
now another Hale, that is, one who is a Divine, a Lawyer, and Philosopher, and
skilled in every Science. Your Lordship every day atchieves great and brave
things, and with a Spirit that is such. You oblige the Good, and win upon the
Bad, and please all Men by the Methods of an unstained Integrity. Which brings
to my thoughts that Observation of my Lord Coke, that he never knew any
Excellent Judicious Lawyer, but was a faithful honest man. [Pref. to the 2 d
Part of Reports.]

But lest this should look too much like Panegyric (which I know is offensive
to your Lordship's Modesty) and lest I should obscure and tarnish the Splendor
of your Lordship's Virtues and Excellencies by an imperfect representing of
them, I will here check my self, and add no more on this Theme, which is so
inviting and charming. Permit me only to lay these Papers at your Lordship's
Feet, and humbly to beg of your Lordship that you would be pleased to exercise
that Equity and Favor, to which your present Province and High Office prompt
you: and then I shall not wholly despair of your Lordship's Acceptance of this
poor Oblation, and of your suffering me to have the Honor to profess my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servant, John Edwards.

THE PREFACE.
I Have undertaken a Great Work, viz. to display all the Transactions of Divine
Providence relating to the Methods of Religion, from the Creation to the end of
the World, from the first Chapter of Genesis to the last of the Revelation. For
I had not met with any Author that had undertaken to comprise them all, and to
give us an account of them according to their true Series: nor had I ever lit
upon a Writer (either Foreign or Domestic) who had designedly traced the
particular Causes and Grounds of them, or settled them on their right and true
Foundations. Wherefore I betook my self to this Work, resolving to attempt
something, tho it were only to invite others of greater skill to go on with it,
and to add the finishing Stroke to it. I acknowledge this Essay to be very mean,
and unworthy of its Noble Subject; but however, this I will say in its behalf,
and that with great truth, that though I have done but little, yet I never met
with any that has done so much on this Theme, whether ^e have respect to the
full Enumeration of the ^economies, or whether we speak of the Reasons and
Grounds of them.

But more especially as to the Last Economy. I have been very curious in the
Distribution of (...) several Parts: though I have, I confess, ^^^^ented
therein from most Writers; but I have ^^deavour'd to treat those with Candor
and Re^^ect who differ in this matter from me. For it (...) certain, that in
this case Liberty of Writing is (...) reasonable as that of Thoughts. I shall
not (...) angry with any Man for not being of my Opinion ^^out the State of the
World before the Close of (...): I leave every Man to his own Conjectures, and
I desire to be left to mine. I do not ask any ^ne whether he thinks Jansenism
and Quietism ^^ll make way for any Change of Religion in France, Spain, or
Italy; or whether they will be ^^ite rooted out of those Countries. I do not
ask ^hether the Moscovite, who seems to be no longer ^^^zen, but is entering
upon Action, is like to have (...) hand in such Revolutions as will end at last
in (...) alteration of Religion in the North-East. I (...) not enquire whether
the French Lillies will ^^read themselves further, and take Root in any
Protestant Soil. And all other the like Queries ^^hich may be occasioned by the
present Occurren^^s in the World) I wholly dismiss, and trouble (...) my self
or my Reader with the resolving of (...). In treating of this Last Dispensation
I (...), as to the main and substantial Strokes of it, (...) my self close to
the Bible; I have positively (...) nothing but what is plainly founded on
Divine Revelation, as delivered to us in the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles: and even there I have not presumed to fix any certain Time. Those
Halcyon Days which I treat of may commence in part very soon, and blaze out of
a sudden; or they may be stifled and smothered till many lusters of Years are
expired. I verily believe the Thing it self, but it is the highest arrogance to
determine the Season. This is all I have to say by way of Preface.

Errata to the first Volume.
PAge 24. l. 10. read sex. P. 27. l. 4. r. it in. P. 59. l. 15. for Tho r. But.
P. 107. l. 1. r. and he. P. 124. l. 23. r. seemed to run. P. 158. l. 2. r.
Minca^, or. P. 169. l. 26. for and r. had. P. 177. Margin, r. Philo de. P. 179.
l. 19. put the Comma after thus. P. 188. l. 26. r. Cherub. P. 194. l. 12. after
not insert that all this is significant? P. 201. 1. 22. r. but the latter. P.
217. l. 4. r. his. P. 235. l. 9. r. of any. l. 15. after meant insert not of
the flesh of those Animals, but. P. 289. l. antepen. r. as almost all. P. 332.
l. 9. after Gospel add, tho it was in part under the other Dispensations. P.
350. l. 10. for you r. them.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Volume.
CHAP. I.
THE great Advantage of the present Undertaking. A general Distribution of the
Work. The State of Innocence. The Folly of the Praeadamitick Opinion. The
solemn Consultation of the Sacred Trinity about the making of Man. His
Excellency. What God's Image in Man is not. What it is, largely discoursed of.
The various Opinions concerning Paradise. It is proved by sundry Arguments that
it was in Babylon. An account of its Four Rivers. An Objection fully answered,
whereby the Author's Opinion concerning those Rivers is explained and
established. The Employment of our First Parents in Paradise. Besides the Law
of Nature, there were these positive Laws in the State of Primitive Integrity:
1. That of Matrimony. 2. That concerning Propagation. 3. Observing the Sabbath
or Seventh Day. It is proved that Adam and Eve kept this Day. 4. Abstaining
from the Fruit of a certain Tree in the Garden of Eden. An Account of the Tree
of Lif^, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. The prohibiting of this
latter showed in several Particulars to be Reasonable and Equitable. 5. The
Covenant of Works. Not only the first Man and Woman, but all their Race were
under this First Dispensation. Page 1
CHAP. II.
The Nature of the Second General Dispensation. The several particular
Ingredients of the First Sin. Its Aggravation from the Matter of it. What kind
of Creature the Serpent was, whom the Devil made use of in seducing our first
Parents. It was not a fiery flying Serpent, but an ordinary one. Wherein the
Subtilty of this Animal consisted. That Adam and Eve fell not on the same day
in which they were made, is proved from Scripture and Reason. The dreadful
Effects of the Fall which related to themselves. Others which belonged not only
to them, but to their whole Race. Death was the Penal Consequence of the First
Defection. The Inward and Spiritual Evils that attended it are enumerated. How
Man became like the Beasts. Eternal Death the Fruit of his Apostasy. The
Penalty insticted on the Serpent. Not only our First Parents, but all Mankind
were under this Second Dispensation. p. 49
CHAP. III.
The Nature of the Third General Dispensation. The first part of which is the
Adamick State. The early Promise concerning the Messiah, Genesis 3. 15. explained.
He was expected betimes. The New Testament witnesses that he was to bruise the
Serpent's Head. Several positive Laws were under this Occonomy. That of
Oblations and Sacrifices is especially considered. Eucharistical Sacrifices
were part of the Law of Nature. Expiatory and Bloody onec were not so. Thence
these latter were disapproved of by the wisest Heathens. They are founded upon
Divine Institution. The Practice of Sacrificing among the Pagans was derived to
them by Tradition from the Jews, or the foregoing Patriarchs. Whether
sacrifices were prescribed before or after the Fall of our First Parents.
Concerning the Primitive Priesthood. The Distinction of clean and unclean
Animals was in respect of Sacrificing, not Eating. Genesis 4. 26. explained, and a
settled Church founded upon it. Marrying with Infidels seems to be prohibited
under this Dispensation. The Rise of Polygamy. The seven Precepts said to be
given to the Sons of Adam and Noah. The Improbability of this Jewish Tradition
evinced from several Considerations. The Mistakes of Volkelius and Episcopius
concerning the Antediluvian Economy. p. 83
CHAP. IV.
The Noachical Economy. The first Positive Law under it was about eating of
Flesh. It is proved that this prevailed n^^ till after the Flood. Objections
against it answered. The Testimony of Pagans to confirm it. The Reason of the
Prohibition. The second Positive Law was concerning not eating Flesh with the
Blood. The Reason of it. The third Positive Law was concerning not shedding of
Man's Blood. With the Penalty of it. And the Sanction of Magistracy. Ser^itude
not introduced under this Dispensation. The Longevity of the Patriarchs was
common to all in those Times. The Months and Years were of the same length then
that they are now. They were Solar not Lunar Years. The Causes of the long
Lives of those that lived before the Flood. The Abrahamick Economy. With its
several Steps and Advances. The Nature of the Covenant made with Abraham. Now
the Faithful were separated and distinguished from the rest of the World. Why
they are called Hebrews. The Nature and Design of Circumcision. Under this
Dispensation Altars were erected, Tithes paid, etc. Of Polygamy, and
Concubines, and other Vsages. p. 112
CHAP. V.
The Mosaic or Jewish Dispensation seems to be Preposterous. The Law of Grace
was veiled for a Season. The Triple Law which this Economy was famous for,
briefly displayed. Four Reasons assigned why the World was so long without a
Written Law. The Ceremonial Law is part of this Dispensation. The several
things which are comprehended in it. Oblations, viz. of Inanimate things.
Sacrifices, which were of Living Creatures. An enumeration of those Sacrifices
which were Set and Determined. Others were Occasional, viz. 1. Sin Offerings.
2. Trespass-Offerings. 3. Peace Offerings. Some Remarks about Sacrifices. The
several Ends and Designs of this way of Worship. How the Mosaic Sacrifices are
said to Expiate. It is largely proved that the guilt of all kinds of Sins
whatsoever was Atoned by them. The Objections to the contrary are answered. The
Principal End of the Jud^ick Sacrifices was to typifie and represent the
Sacrifi^e of Christ on the Cross. p. 145
CHAP. VI.
The High-Priest's Office. His peculiar Attire. The Employment and Apparel of
the P^iests. The Levites particular Charge. Whether they might sacrifice, or
no. Their Office in the Reigns of King David and King Solomon, differed in some
things from what it was before. The ordinary and fixed Place of Worship, and
particularly of Sacrificing, was the Tabernacle. A particular Account of the
three Divisions or Partitions of it, viz. the Outward Court, the Holy Place,
and the Holy of Holies, with all things contained in them. The Mystical and
Spiritual meaning of the several Particulars. The Travels and Removes of the
Tabernacle and Ark. A distinct Account of the Parts of the Temple, showing
wherein it differed from the Tabernacle. Of the Fabric it self, and its
Dimensions. Houses and Chambers belonging to it. The Sacraments appointed by
the Ceremonial Law. p. 173
CHAP. VII.
The Jewish Feasts, Sabbaths, New Moon, Passover. The Parallel between the
Paschal Lamb and our Sa^iour, showed in several Particulars. This Mystical Way
approved of. Christ celebrated not the Passover the same Evening that the Jews
did, but in the Evening before. This represented in a Scheme. The Feast of
Pentecost. The Feast of Tabernacles. The Feast of Trumpets. Of Expiation. Other
lesser Feasts, not commanded in the Law, but appointed by the Jewish Church.
Fasts kept, tho not enjoined by the Law. The difference of Clean and Unclean
Animals. Why the latter were forbidden to be eaten. The chief Reason of the
prohibition was, to prevent Idolatry. Two Objections answered. Vows proper to
the Mosaic Dispensation. They were either Personal or Real. The Cherem. p. 205
CHAP. VIII.
The Reasons of the Ceremonial Rites among the Jews. They were to Try that
People. They were to Restrain them. They were enjoined in opposition to the
Idolatrous Customs of the Heathens. Several Instances of this. Dr. Spencer
opposes it. His two Parallels of the Jewish and Gentile Rites. His Opinion
showed to be unreasonable, absurd, and contradictious. He makes the Eucharist
an Imitation of a Pagan Barbarous Usage. Other Writers mentioned who have
fallen into the like Notions. The Ceremonial Law was prescribed the Jews
because it was suitable to that Age and Disposition of the Church. Particularly
it agreed with them as they were Children and Minors. It was serviceable to
teach them something of Morality. Those Ritual Observances were designed to be
Types and Representations of Greater and Higher things. More especially they
prefigured the Messiah. The Contents of the Judicial Law. Some parts of it were
in force before Moses's time. What obligation it has upon Christians now under
the Gospel. p. 240
CHAP. IX.
The several ways and kinds of Divine Revelation under the different
Oeconomies. Ordinary External Revelation was by hearing or by seeing. Inward
Reve^l^tion was by Dreams or Prophetic. Inspiration. What Prophecy was. How
they knew to distinguish between True Prophets and False ones. The
extraordinary ways of Revelation were, 1. That which was vouchsa^ed to Moses
alone. The Nature of it. It differed from other Revelations as to Degree only.
2. That from between the Cherubims. 3. the Urim and Thummim. These are not the
same with the Teraphim. They were not borrowed from Pagan Idolaters. This would
be a countenancing of Image Worship. The absurdity and impiety of their opinion
who hold that the Urim and Thummim were of Heathen Extraction. These were no
other than those bare words written or engraven on the High Priest's
Breastplate. An Objection answered. p. 264
CHAP. X.
The Gentile Economy. Others besides those of the Family of Abraham were of
the Church. Some of these were in Palestine. An enumeration of the several
Opinions concerning Melchisedech. He was a Canaanitish King and Priest. Job's
Country. His Character. His Friends. Several other Pious and Religious
Gentiles in other Countries. Hebrew Prophets sent to the people of other
Nations. Malachi speaks of True Worshippers among the Gentiles. The Proselytes
of the Gate. The Proselytes of Righteousness. Tho the Nations were generally
for saken of God because of their Idolatry, yet some among them professed and
worshipped the True God. Those places of Scripture in the Old and New Testament
which set forth the peculiar Privileges of the Jewish People are not
inconsistent with this. No Nations were d^barr'd and excluded from God's Grace
and Favor. p. 285
CHAP. XI.
The Christian or Evangelical Economy. It agrees with the former Dispensations
of Grace as to the Designation of the Messiah* As to the way of Salvation. As
to the Conditions and Qualifications of it. This corroborated by the suff^^ge
of the Ancient Fathers. It differs from the Mosaic Economy or Law as to the
Author in some respect. As to the Actual Discovery of it. As to the Clearness
of it. As to its Spirituality. As to its Extent. As to several Circumstances
that relate to the Conditions of Salvation; which are largely enumerated. As to
the Motives of Obedience. The Doctrine of the Socinians, viz. that there were
no Promises of Eternal Life under the Old Testament, confuted. As to the
Perfection of its Pattern. As to its Helps and Assistances. This Query, Whether
Christ added any new Laws to those which were before under the Old Testament,
resolved in several Particulars. It is proved against the Socinians, that
Prayer was commanded under the Law. How Love is called a New Commandment. p.
306
CHAP. XII.
An Answer to an Objection from Mat. 5. 17. showing distinctly and particularly
what is the Law, and how Christ came to fulfill it. It is held by some that
Christ came to add New Precepts to the Moral Law. In confutation of which
Opinion it is proved that Anger is forbid by the Decalogue. So is a Lustful
Eye. So is all Rash and Profane Swearing. So is Divorce, unless in the case of
Adultery. So is Resisting of Evil. So is hating of our Enemies. It is largely
discussed whether it was lawful for the Israelites to hate the seven Nations
whom they were commanded to destroy. And whether the Command to destroy them
was Absolute. Objections from Deuteronomy. 13. 8, 9. and Psalm. 139. 21. answered. The
Nature of the Two Covenants, viz. of Works and of Grace, fully stated. The
Conditions, on our part. How [ do this, and live] is applicable to the Covenant
of Grace. The Covenant made with the Israelites at the giving of the Law on
Mount Sinai was the Covenant of Grace, tho it seemed to resemble the Covenant
of Works. The Covenant of Grace was completed and perfected by Christ's Coming,
and not before. The Mediator, the Terms, the Seals of this Covenant now fully
manifested. It is proved that according to the Style of Scripture the Old and
New Covenant are the same Covenant of Grace. p. 340
CHAP. XIII.
Tho we could assign no Reason why the Christian Economy was so late, and why
our Savior arrived no sooner in the World, this is sufficient to satisfy us,
that it was God's pleasure it should be so. But for the sake of the
Inquisitive, such Reasons and Considerations as these are offered: 1. It must
be remembered that Christ appeared in the World even in the early times of the
Patriarchs. 2. The Benefits of Christ's Redemption were imparted to the
Faithful before he actually appeared in the flesh. 3. The World was not fit to
receive him sooner. 4. He delayed his Coming to make the World sensible of
their Misery. 5. That the Advantages of his Coming might be prized. 6. It was
congruous that so great a Prince should not arrive without solemn Harbingers
and Heralds of his Coming. 7. The necessities of Mankind called for him at that
particular time and juncture when he came. The Jewish Church grew worse and
worse. An enumeration of the several Sects and Factions which they were divided
into, viz. Essenes, Pharisees, Sadduces Herodians, Samaritans, Galilaeans. 8.
God proceeds in a gradual Order and Method. The most perfect things are
reserved till the last. p. 379
OF THE Different Dispensations OF RELIGION.
CHAP. I.
The great Advantage of the present Undertaking. A general Distribution of the
Work. The State of Innocence. The Folly of the Praeadamitick Opinion. The
solemn Consultation of the Sacred Trinity about the making of Man. His
Excellency. What God's Image in Man is not. What it is, largely discoursed of.
The various Opinions concerning Paradise. It is proved by sundry Arguments that
it was in Babylon. An account of its Four Rivers. An Objection fully answered,
whereby the Author's Opinion concerning those Rivers is explained and
established. The Employment of our First Parents in Paradise. Besides the Law
of Nature, there were these positive Laws in the State of Primitive Integrity:
1. That of Matrimony. 2. That concerning Propagation. 3. Observing the Sabbath,
or Seventh Day. It is proved that Adam and Eve kept this Day. 4. Abstaining
from the Fruit of a certain Tree in the Garden of Eden. An Account of the Tree
of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. The prohibiting of this
latter showed in several Particulars to be Reasonable and Equitable. 5. The
covenant of Works. Not only the first Man and Woman, but all their Race were
under this First Dispensation.

THE Task which I undertake at present, is to delineate and display the various
Dispensations of Religion, which are recorded in the infallible Writings of the
Old and New Testament, and are by that means revealed to us, as well as they
were heretofore to the respective Persons and People among whom those* Sacred
Records were first dispersed. This certainly is a very deligh^ful Undertaking,
for it cannot but be a pleasant Prospect to see all Ages of the World at once,
and to behold the vast differences of them at one view. It must needs be very
welcome and entertaining to have before our Eyes the various States of
Religion, to observe the whole Chain of its Affairs throughout the World: And
it must be yet more pleasing and diverting to behold how it is linked together,
to take notice of the excellent Agreement and Harmony of the Universal Scheme
of these Administrations which are set before us.

And this ^ight is as profitable as it is ^elightful; for by sailing round this
Globe, by encompas^ing this whole Circle of Religious Dispensations, we shall
be able to make such discoveries as will be of singular use and advantage in
our lives: We shall hereby avoid that confusion which too often attends the
contemplation of these divine Matters; we shall apprehend aright the exact
Order of them in the succession of Times; we shall attain to a right
understanding of the Sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament where the
several Dispensations are mentioned; we shall have an insight into the whole
Method and Process of Divine Providence relating to Religion: We shall be
convinced of the transcendent Wisdom and Goodness of Heaven in the wonderful
diversity of those Oeconomies which are presented to our view, especially of
the Evangelical one, which is the perfection of all the rest, and was more
signally contrived for the welfare and happiness of Mankind.

Neither have we here a view only of what is past and present, but here is
represented to us a prospect of what is to come. For the same ^acred and
Infallible Records which give us an account of the one, are not deficient in
setting before us the other. They acquaint us with the Events and Issues of
things which shall be herea^ter; they foretell the Fate of the World till the
very last expiring Period of all: So that our utmost Curiosity as to Futurities
may be here fully satisfied. These are the things which I am to offer to the
Reader. And because there have been great failures in the handling of these
Dispensations, because Authors have not rightly distinguished them, but some
have made them more, and others fewer than they are; sometimes they have mixed
and confounded those which really differ in themselves, and at other times they
have made a distinction between such as indeed are the same; I shall therefore
use great caution, and be very careful to avoid these mistakes, both in
as^igning the general, and the more distinct and particular division or
dis^ribution of these Dispensations.

To enter then upon this Task, I assert that the more Catholic and Grand
Oeconomies are these three: 1. The State of Innocence and Felicity, or Adam
created Upright. II. The State of Sin and Misery, or Adam Fallen. In this State
were our first Parents, till they were reconciled to God: and in this are all
their Posterity, till they be made partakers of Grace and Pardon. III. The
State of Reconciliation, or Adam Recovered. In this State our first Parents
were after they were received into favor: And in this all the Faithful are.


Thus Man in Integrity, Man Lapsed, Man Restored, are the three Great
Oeconomies. The first of these continued from the Creation to Man's Fall: The
second from Man's Fall to his being recovered: The third reaches from Man's
Recovery or Restoration to the end of the World: And consequently this last
General Dispensation (which may be called the Dispensation of Grace) is the
largest of all, and of the longest continuance.

The first General Dispensation is the State of Innocence, which continued from
the Creation of Man till his Apostasy. We must know then that God having made
the World, and furnished it with all Convenience, at last made the most
excellent and accomplished piece of the visible Creation, Man. And to Man was
added Woman, to be a Companion of his Happiness. As the Divine Being would not
be without his Creatures, so neither was it his pleasure that Man should be
without the Woman, jointly to enjoy the good things of the Creation, which were
made for that very purpose. (...). (...).
It was wisely ordered by the Deity, says the Great Philosopher, that there
should be these two distinct Sexes for mutual Communion and Society in the
World: yea, and I may add, for keeping up the World it self, which would soon
have a period if Human Kind ceased. The first Person of this kind was by God
himself named Adam, because he was made of Earth. Adam of Adamah; he had this
name given him to remind him of his Original. And for this reason Adam was the
name given to Woman as well as Man; Genesis 5. 2. He called their name Adam in the
day when they were created. For tho the Man was immediately descended of the
Earth, yet the Woman, as being taken out of the Man, was remotely so (for it is
said, The Rib which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a Woman, Genesis 2.
22. where without doubt by a Rib are meant the Bone, and the Flesh and Muscles
that go along with it; for that is implied in the closing up the flesh in the
stead thereof, ver. 21. and we find Bone and Flesh together, ver. 23.) Whence
by the way we may take notice of that mistake of a learned Anatomist, the
younger Bartholine, that Adam had thirteen Ribs on each side, and that Eve was
made out of a pair of these; which is contrary to the express words of the
Text, God took one of his Ribs, Genesis 2. 21. and made the Woman of it. Of a
single Rib then she was formed; and that Rib, as the rest of Man's Body, being
made of Earth, she was but one remove from the Earth, and therefore might have
her name from the Earth in common with Man: tho afterward for another reason
she was named Eve by her Husband, Genesis 3. 20. and the name Adam became
appropriated to him, because he was the true (...), that had his first Original
out of the Earth. And there never was any but he, whatever the ancient
Athenians ^ancied of themselves. He was the only Person that had his rise from
the Soil he lived on: tho it is true in a remote sense we are all Aborigines, as
having our extraction from him, and consequently are descended from the Earth.

And here (before we go any further) we may observe that the ^olly of the
Praeadamitick Opinion is detected. The Sacred History of Moses assures us, that
Adam and Eve were the first Persons that were created on the Earth; and (lest
any should question it) our Savior has confirmed it, From the beginning of
the Creation God made them Male and Female, Mark 10. 6. For it is undeniable
that he speaks this of Adam and Eve, because in the next Verse he alleges
what was said by God presently after the production of this latter; Therefore
shall a Man leave his Father and his Mother, and cleave unto his Wife, Genesis 2.
24. Whence it evidently appears, that the Male and Female here spoken of are
Adam and Eve, and that these were made from the beginning of the Creation;
therefore there were no Men and Women before them.

This is clear from Genesis 3. 20. Adam called his Wife's name Eve, because she
was the Mother of all living. This reason of her Name is assigned by Moses,
(for when Adam gave her this Name she was not a Mother) she was so called,
^aith he, because she was the Mother of all living; she was the Person that was
the Root and Source of all Men and Women that ever are in the World; which
plainly intimates that there was no other Woman that was such ^ Mother: She was
constituted, by God's appointment, the only Mother of the living, yea of all
living, of human kind, that have been or shall be upon Earth: And consequently
there was no Race of Men or Women before her. If there were no other Text to be
alleged but this one, it were sufficient to consute the vain Opinion of the
Author of the Praeadamites, who with a great deal of straining and forcing of
Texts, endeavors to prove that there was another Generation besides that of
Adam and Eve. He tells us there is a Creation of Man and Woman spoken of in the
latter end of the first Chapter of Genesis; and another Creation of the Holy
Race of Mankind, of which the first Man and Woman were Adam and Eve, spoken of
Chap. 2. v. 2, 22. Whereas the plain, obvious and true Account is, that the
first Narrative is general, but the second is particular, that is, it gives a
distinct and particular account of the formation of Man and Woman.
Notwithstanding this, a late Mr. Blunt, Oracles of Reason, p. 218.
Writer has revived the Notion of a double Creation, and attempts to prove it
as Dyrerius does. The most considerable Objection that this latter make^, is
founded on those Passages which imply a great number of People in the World at
that time, whereas we read (says he) of none descended from Adam and Eve but
Cain, and Abel, and Seth about that time. But who knows not that the Mosaic
History is silent as to several things of the like nature, yea of an higher
i^portance? It is not to be doubted that Adam and Eve had more Children than
are expressly mentioned by Moses; yea, that they had a great many Children and
Grand children. If we consider this, we shall discover the vanity of the
Praeadamitical Conceit, and answer the Cavils that are raised about it by the
first Author of it, Dyrerius, who indeed at last was sensible of the folly of
his Opinion, and (as we are Is. Voss. de aetat. mund. cap. 12.
told) recanted it.

Besides, to think there was any Man before Adam is groundless, because he is
expressly called twice by the Apostle the first Man, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47. It is
ridiculous then to imagine that he was not the first of his kind, but that
there were Men in the World long before him, even some thousands of years
before him. This Text, and the others beforementioned, must be removed out of
the Bible before we can believe such a thing, or that there are others of human
Race besides those that descend from Adam, as some Inhabitants in the Moon, or
other Orbs of Heaven, as a Whiston 's New Theory, p. 20, 21, 24.
late Writer and some others fancy.

The fond Conceit of the Praeadamites being justly rejected, let us proceed.

As the forming of this most excellent Creature Man, was the close of the
Creation; so it may be observed that this was peculiar to him, to have a solemn
Consultation and Decree about his making, which was not about any other
Creature. God said, Let us make Man, Genesis 1. 26. De Opi^icio Mundi.
Philo the Jew is of the opinion, that Angels were Cooperators in framing
Adam's Body, and to them God spoke when he said, Let us make Man. This
Platonist derived this Notion from his Plato in Timaeo.
Master, who held that lesser and created Gods made Men, and all other Animals,
by the command of the greatest and supreme Deity. But others deservedly explode
this Opinion, and think that these words denote God the Father's con^erring
with the two other Persons of the Sacred Trinity concerning the making of Man.
This is the general Sentiment of the ancient Writers of the Church, who usually
alledg this place to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity. And certainly it is a
considerable place for that purpose. But however (abstracting from this) this
way of speaking may signify to us, that the making of Man was an ex^ellent and
noble Work, if it were said only after the manner of Men, who hold a
Conference, and seriously consult, and call in Assistance about a Matter which
is of great moment and worth. Thus God is represented speaking after the same
gui^e, to acquaint us what a worthy, excellent and transcendent Work this was.
I take Seneca's words to be a good Comment on that place; Scias non esse
hominem tumultuarium and incogitatum opus. ^e Bene^ic. l. 6.
Be it known to you ( says he) that Man is not a Work huddled over in haste,
and done without forethinking and great consideration; for Man is the greatest
and most stupendous Work of God.

Man has not only a Body in common with all inferior Animals, but into his
Body was in^used a Soul, of a far more noble Nature and Make, a rational
Principle, worthy of the name of a Soul. Hereby he is enabled to act according
to the designs of his Creation, that is, to contemplate the Works of God, to
admire his Perfections, and to worship him, to live as becomes one who received
his excellent Being from him, to converse with his fellow Creatures that are of
his own Order, to maintain mutual Love and Society, and to serve God in
Consort. Man is a wonderful Creature, and not undeservedly said to be a little
World, a World within himself, and containing whatever is found in the greater.
In him is the spiritual and immaterial Nature of God, the Reasonableness of
Angels, the sensitive Power of Brutes, the vegetative Life of Plants, and the
Virtues of all the Elements: In brief, he is a compound of all. And hence it is
that the Life of Man is difficulter than that of others; for other Creatures
are ruled by one single Nature, but Man is made up of diverse Qualities. But as
it is more difficult, so it is more excellent to be a Man. He has larger
Capacities than other Creatures, and moves in a wider Circumference; he
holds converse with both Worlds, This and That to come.

Thus Man is crowned with Glory and Honor, he is the most remarkable
Workmanship of God. Among the greatest things which Nature boasts of Inter
maxima rerum suarum Natura nihil habet qu^ magis glorietur. Sen. de Benef.
, she has nothing that she can glory in more than in Man. Magnum Miraculum est
homo, animal adorandum atque honorandum. Apuleius.
Man is a great Miracle, a Creature worthy of the highest respect and honor.
He is that (...), etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. Tom. 5.
great and admirable Animal which is more precious to God than all other
created Beings whatsoever, and for which the Heaven, the Earth, and the Sea,
and the rest of the World was made. Accordingly he was in a more signal eminent
manner framed by God, and f^rmed by the Advice of the Sacred Trinity, yea
(which is yet more wonderful) according to the similitude and resemblance of
it; ^or so we read in Genesis 1. 26. Let us make Man in our Image, after our
Likeness. Some quaintly distinguish between Image and Likeness, following
herein St. Augustine in his Retractations, and after him Peter Lombard and other
Schoolmen. But waving those Subtilties, I will endeavor to show you wherein
the Image or Similitude (for I take them to be both one) of God in Man
consists. Negatively;

1. Origen's Opinion concerning this Image is not to be embraced: for he says
here is meant the Image and Likeness of the Son of God, who is the express
Image of the Person of the Father, Heb. 1. 3. But besides that the words in the
Hebrew, and this (for it is but (...).
one) in the Greek do not exactly answer, it is to be observed first, that it
is said in the Plural, Let us make Man after our Image, and consequently it is
not restrained to the Image of the Second Person of the Trinity only: therefore
there is no reason that we should restrain it. Again, when afterward it is
spoken in the Singular, yet it is spoken generally of the Godhead; as in the
Verse following, God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created
he him. Still here is no restriction, and therefore we cannot say it is to be
understood only of the Image of the Second Person in the glorious Trinity.

2. De mundi opificio: and de vit^ Mosis.
Philo the Jew, and some of the Fathers that were Pla^onically disposed,
understood this Image of the Idea, according to which God made all things, and
particularly Man. For there were ( say they) Eternal Images and Exemplars of
things in God's mind, there were Universal Natures of all things, certain
Archetypes and Patterns, by looking on which God framed all things; as an
Artificer being to build a House, first delineateth in his own mind the whole
Frame and Scheme of the future Building, and by this he afterward proceeds in
erecting the Fabric. God's Idea, says (...). De special. leg.
Philo, is the Image by which Adam was made; and so Man was the fairest
Pourtraiture of the fairest Image, a Copy of the Divine Original. And Contra
gentes, l. 1.
Justin the Martyr (who had been educated in the Platonic Philosophy)
follows this Notion, asserting that the Image of God according to which Adam
was made, was the Exemplar of Man in the mind of God. And Strom. l. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus is of the same judgment, and interprets the Text in the
same manner.

Now in answer to this I will only say, that the Notion of Ideas, as it is
generally meant by the Platonists, is fond and precarious, and some of their
own Tribe have no great kindness for it. But if the Notion of the Divine Idea
be soberly understood, viz. that from Eternity there were in the Mind of God
Images of all things which were afterward to be made, and particularly of Man;
I see nothing amiss in this Assertion, yea (...) take it to be a very sound and
orthodox Notion, and such as is of great use in Divinity, it being the
Foundation of all Truth, as I shall show in another place, and it being the
Basis on which the Doctrine of the Divine Decrees is established. But this then
is nothing to our pre^ent purpose, for God's making of Man after his Image is
meant in the forecited place of some singular and peculiar thing. Neither
Beasts, nor Fishes, nor Birds, nor Plants, nor any visible Being in the whole
Creation mentioned in that Chapter, are said to be made after God's Image or
Likeness. We read that Man alone was created in the Divine Image; as much as to
say, no other Creature whatsoever on Earth resembles God but Man. Therefore it
is evident that these words cannot be understood of the Idea according to which
God made all things, for according to that he made Beasts as well as Men, and
then we might have expected to read in Genesis, not only Let us make Man, but
let us make Beasts and all other Creatures in our Image, after our Likeness.

3. The Anthropomorphites held this Image was in the Body of Man, because they
conceived that God had a Body; and so they dreamt that the Shape and Figure of
human Bodies answer to the same Lineaments and Proportions in God. But I need
not stand to con^ute so blasphemous and Maledictus qui Deitatem ad hominis
lineamenta refert. Augustine. in Genes.
cursed an Opinion. I know Tertul. de resurrect. carnis, c. 6.
some would mitigate it by saying, that man was made after the Image of Christ
who was to come in the Flesh, and was to have bodily Parts. But this has no
relation to the Anthropomorphites Doctrine, and consequently can be no
mitigation of it. Besides, it is contrary to the words themselves, which speak
not of the Image of Christ, either as God or Man, but of the Godhead in general.

Positively then, the Image of God wherein Man was created was something in his
Soul chiefly, something in his outward Man, and it also consisted in his
D^minion over the Creatures.

1. In the Soul of Man is God's Image or Likeness placed. For this part of us
is of an immaterial and spiritual Nature; and such is God, he is a Spirit, John
4. 24. Again, the Soul of Man is immortal, and therein is God's Image and
Representation. This indeed follows upon the former Quality; it being
immaterial and incorporeal, it must needs be in its own Nature incorruptible.
Herein we signally resemble the Deity, and therefore it is rightly asserted by
St. Augustine, that because of the immortality of the Soul (tho not only for
that) Man is said to be made according to God's Image. Moreover, the Soul of
Man is of a rational and intelligent Nature, and therein also is like unto God.
There was no visible or sublunary Creature before Adam that was of this kind:
therefore, says God, Let us make Man after our Image, let us frame a
terrestrial Creature with a reasonable Soul, with an immortal and immaterial
Nature, which are Resemblances of the Divinity it self: Let us make him capable
of conceiving things aright, of arguing and discoursing, and of making
inferences and deductions from things, which no Brutes are able to do. Let us
furnish him with all Divine Knowledge, that he may be able to apprehend the
things of God, and have an insight into the most sublime and heavenly Truths,
and by this means also partake of the Divine Nature and Likeness.

That this Knowledge and Wisdom are part of the Divine Image, is clear from the
Apostle's words in Col. 3. 10. where he acquaints us, that the new Man is
renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. Whence it is
rationally to be inferred, that God's Image partly consisted in Knowledge and
Understanding. Lib. de statu primi hominis.
Socinus and Lib. de ver. Deit. fill. c. 7.
Smalcius had a very low opinion of the first Man when they asserted that at
his being first made, he had no more understanding than a stupid Infant, yea,
that Adam was next to a Fool. But may not these Writers be thought to be next
to something of that Nature, when they assert a thing so unreasonable and
absurd, so wild and extravagant? I do not say that Adam was subtle and
scholastical in his Notions, that he had any skill in the quirks of Wit and
Logic. I believe Scotus would have baffled him, a knotty Schoolman would have
put him to a nonplus; and it would quite have puzzled and amused his Brain to
have reduced a Syllogism in Bocardo. For these Subtilties were not the
accomplishments of Innocence, and the early attendents of the Spade and Plough.
No; these are the Consequents of Apostasy, the Crutches of lame Reason, and
Supporters of lapsed Understanding, the Salvo's of Ignorance, and sometimes the
greatest increasers of it. Therefore I do not think that Adam's intellectual
Happiness consisted in these, but in that which was solid and useful.

What Man of sense and sober thoughts can deny that God endued Adam with a
quick Understanding, upon considering this one thing, viz. that he gave Names
to every living creature, Genesis 2. 19. and it may be (tho it is not recorded) to
the Plants and all Vegetables on Earth, yea, even to the Stars in Heaven, (tho
the Names of them are now lost) yea, to all things above and below, which were
useful and common in the Life of Man? And those Names then did express and
signify the very Nature and Properties of the things, whereas now they are
generally ex instituto, merely from custom and the arbitrary will of Men. He
that was able thus to give Names to all Creatures according to their Natures,
was no Fool or Sot certainly. This was the great Plato's judgment, who tells us
it was no ordinary and mean thing, it was not the work of a vulgar Person to
impose Names on things: yea, he that did it at first, (...). In Cra^ylo, vel
(...).
was master of more than human wisdom and skill. It is reasonable to believe
that Adam was a great natural Philosopher, had knowledge of all those Creatures
which he named; else he could not have fitted Names to them. And that he did
so, is evident from comparing the 19th Verse of the forementioned Chapter, with
the 22 d and 23 d Verses. In the former it is said, that the Lord God formed
every living Creature out of the ground, and brought them to Adam, to see what
he would call them; and whatsoever he called them that was the Name thereof. In
the latter it is said, The Rib which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a
Woman, and brought her unto the Man. And Adam said, She shall be called Woman,
because she was taken out of Man. You see the parallel, the brute Creatures
were brough by God to Adam, on purpose that he should bestow Names on them: So
was Eve brought to him, that she should have a Name given her by him. Adam gave
proper and significant Names to the other Creatures; and so he did to the
Woman. We gather the former from the latter. We find that when God brought the
Woman to the Man, he fastened a Name on her suitable to her Nature and Original:
therefore it is reasonably to be concluded, that when the other Creatures of an
inferior rank were brought by God to Adam, he con^er'd such Names on them as
were most expressive of their different Properties and Qualities.

As God had given Adam his Name which was significant, so Adam gave other
Creatures Names which carried significancy with them. This argues his
Intellectuals to have been very acute and profound, otherwise he could not have
perceived the several Signatures and Properties of those Animals which were
brought before him. It is not to be questioned then, that he had an insight
into the true Nature of all Beings, and was one of unspeakable Sagacity. In
fine, whatever some Rabbis extravagantly assert on the one hand concerning the
prodigious transcendency of Adam's knowledge, and how meanly soever some of
Pelagius and Socinus's Followers on the other hand speak of his Endowments, it
is a sober Truth that our First Parents were very knowing Persons. It is not to
be doubted that they had especially a perfect knowledge of Divine Truth, from
whence all Virtue and Holiness spring.

Which reminds me of another Quality of Man's Soul in the first Creation, viz.
its Righteousness or Holiness. For God endued it, not only with Understanding,
but with a Will, which he adorned with Divine Graces; and in these also
consists the Image of God, as we are ascertained by an inspired and
infallible Writer, who tells us, that the new Man is created after God ( i. e.
after the Image and Likeness of God) in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. These give us the perfect resemblance of our Maker, and imprint upon us
the Divine and heavenly Image. For these are principally placed in the Will, in
the elective Faculty of Man, that noblest part of his Soul, that (...). Philo
de opif. mundi.
Sovereign and Ruling Faculty of the mind. Thus I have showed how the Soul of
Man is justly said to be God's Image and Likeness, namely as it is a Spiritual,
Immortal, and Intelligent Being; but chiefly as it is capable of Religion, and
is indu'd with Divine Virtues and Graces. By these it is that Man most of all
resembles God, and is truly blessed and happy, and is, as 'twere, another God.
Princes stamp their Image on their Coin: That which is choicest and most
precious, bears their Effigies. And so here the exactest Lineaments of the
Divine Image are to be seen impressed on this choice Part of Man, which is the
Seat of true Grace and Goodness. God, who is the chief Pulchritude, would draw
his own beautiful Image on the Soul, that That on Earth might be a kind of
Representative of Himself, and a Pourtray of his own Divine Perfections.

2. Tho the Image of God in which Man was made, be seated chiefly in the
rational Soul of Man, yet it is imprinted also on his Body, as Adv. haeres. l.
5. c. 6.
Ireneus and some other Fathers have rightly asserted. (...). Philo.
Not that the Body can resemble God, as if God were of human Shape: This we
exploded before as absurd and ridiculous. But the Image of God was on the Body
of the first Man, first, as it was extraordinarily fair, comely and beautiful.
It is true, Adam's Body was made of Earth; but this Earth was marvelously
refined and purified. And this is implied, if not expressed, in Adam's Name,
and in the word which is used in the Original for the EARTH out of which he was
taken. For the import of the Hebrew Verb Adam (whence is the Noun Adamah) is
not only rubuit, he was red or ruddy, (and so Adam is as much as Edom, rufus,
which was Esau's Name, because he was ruddy when he was born, Genesis 25. 25.) but
it is of a larger signification, and is as much as splenduit. That it bears
this sense, may be gathered from the word Adamdameth, Levit. 13. 19. where it
must be rendered shining or glistering, or else the same thing there spoken of
must be very white and very red, as Bochart has noted, Hieroz. P. 2. l. 5. c.
6. Sometimes Adam is as much as formosus fuit. Thus of the temperate and
healthful Nazarites it is said, Lam. 4. 7. (...) they were ruddy, i. e. they
were fair; whence Arias Montanus renders it nitidi fuere. And so the word
Admoni (which comes from the Verb Adam) is taken in this sense, as in 1 Samuel
16. 12. where it is said of David, that he was ruddy, i. e. beautiful, as is
explained in the following words. Thus Edom, of the very same extraction, is
understood in Cant. 5. 10. where the Spouse says of her Beloved, that he is
ruddy, i. e. he is comely, he is one of a beautiful Aspect.

And I could here add, that the Verb Adam in other Languages bears this
meaning; thus De Sacr. Animalib.
Bochart acquaints us, that in Arabic it is as much as splendere: And by
Comment. in Hist. AEthiop.
Ludolphus we are ascertained that in Ethiopick it signifies formosum, pulchrum
esse. In the Latin I could observe something like this, for rutilare in its
more general signification is splendidum esse. So purpureus is the same with
splendidus, pulcher; whence Et pro purpureo poenas dat Scylla capillo. Virg.
Georg. 1.
purpureus capillus, and Horat. lib. 4. Ode. 1.
purpurei olores. I know no Oriental word that comes so near to this as Chur,
which is both albus fuit and erubuit. And the reason I conceive is this, both
these colors, white and red, have a great deal of light mixed with them;
therefore the signification of them is alike, and they both of them denote that
which is fair and bright.

And as it is thus with the Hebrew Verb Adam, so proportionably the Substantive
Adamah does not only signify red Earth (as if it were so called from its red
Color, because it is said, that that was the native hew of the Earth in the
East Country: And Antiq. l. 1. c. 1.
Josephus the learned Jew, speaking of Adam's Make, relates, that the natural
Mould called Virgin-Earth, is of a red or yellow Complexion. So we have a small
Rutland; qu. Redland, for rut or rud in Saxon is red.
County in England that carries Red Earth in its Name, because the Soil is
generally reddish) but the word is of a larger extent, and signifies that Earth
which is bright and shining, and is of the best and purest sort. So that when
it is said that Adam was formed out of Adamah, there is meant by this word,
that Earth which was of the purest and finest Composition. And to this purpose
it may be further observed, that whereas other Animals are said to be made out
of aretz, common Earth, Genesis 1. 24, 25. it is particularly recorded, that the
first Man was made out of Adamah, a peculiar and choice sort of Ground, ( ex
meli^re luto, as the Poet speaking of this very thing fitly expresses it) yea,
out of the dust of this ground, Genesis 2. 7. i. e. the finest and most agile part
of it. All which is an eviction of what I at first asserted concerning the
Materials of Adam's Body. This was the true Terra Sigillata, this was the Earth
which God set his Mark and Image on, that it might be known whose it was. Adam
in his Body, as well as in his Soul, outvied all his Race.

I attend not to the prodigious Stories which some fanciful Rabbis and
Talmudick Doctors tell us of the strange Beauty and Elegancy, and of the vast
Proportions of Adam's Body. Rabbi In Deuter. 4.
Solomon Iarchi avers that Adam was so tall, that standing on the Earth he
could touch the Heavens with his hand. And several other such romantic
Passages in the Writings of these fond Men, I disregard; (nay, those that are
sober among themselves give no credit to it, but understand it in a mystical
manner, for Beresh. Rab. Sect. 17.
some of them tell us, that when it is said, Adam's Stature reached from one
end of the Earth to the other, it is to be understood of the Perfection of his
Mind, that he knew and comprehended the Nature of all things contained in the
World) but it is certain, that as Adam's Soul was made a Transcript of God
himself, so his Body was framed in a most exquisite manner, and the Divine Art
and Skill were wonderfully discovered in the shaping of it. For as Philo says,
(...). De Opif. mundi.
We are begot of Men, but God himself made Adam. The Author being better, the
Work must be more excellent. Yea, this must be said, that all of us, having
been in Adam's Loins, are part of that excellent Workmanship, and have the same
Image stamped upon us that Adam had. We are all marked and sealed by the Divine
Hand; his own Impression and Signature are upon us, even upon our corporeal
part, tho it is true it was much defaced by the Primitive Aopstacy.

Secondly, The Body of Adam was God's Image as it was made Immortal. He was
created in full Strength, and as a Person of Dixit R. Jochanan, Adamus and Eva
quasi filii viginti annorum creati sunt. Beresh. Rab. Sect. 14.
a just Age, healthful, sound and flourishing. For his Body was not like those
of Beasts, weak and corruptible, but was made to be of perpetual Duration,
obnoxious to no Decays, Diseases or Changes. If Man had stood entire, and kept
his Innocence, this had been his condition. But this Image was restored to him
and us who are his Posterity; and not only our Souls but Bodies shall
everlastingly subsist. Thus by their Immortality and eternal Continuance, they
partake in some measure of the Divine Nature and Likeness.

Thirdly, In the Body of Man, as well as in his Soul, the Image of God
consists, because the Soul works on the Body, and by it. Hence the Members
of the Body are said to be Instruments of Righteousness, Romans 6. 13. As they
are instrumental to so excellent a purpose, as they are subservient to Grace
and Holiness, and as the Virtues of the Holy Spirit are exerted by them, they
are part of the Image of God. For it is not to be questioned, that the whole
Man is God's Image. Therefore tho the Divine Likeness does not equally shine in
all Parts, yet this corporeal Part of Man in some degree, shareth in that
Image. For which reason the Bodies of good Men are styled the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

Fourthly, God's Image is on the Body of Man, as it is of that particular erect
Figure, which no living Creature else partaketh of. Aristotle was so much a
Divine as to apprehend and acknowledge this. Man only (says he) (...). De
partib. animal. l. 4. c. 10.
of all the Animals was made upright, because his Nature and Substance are
Divine. For this particular Figure represented the inward Uprightness and
Rectitude which he was created in. The Frame of the Body was to signify the
Quality of the Soul. The outward Man was made an Hieroglyphick of the inward
Temper and Disposition of the Mind. Again, this erect Shape represented the
Sovere^gnty and Power of Man over all other Animals. For being not made in that
low and grovelling posture which these are in, it is a sign he was to be
distinguished from them, and to be made a Ruler over them. Which brings me to
the next thing I propounded.

3. God's Image in Man consists in his Dominion over the Creatures. Observe
therefore, that when God had said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our
Likeness, it immediately follows, Let him have dominion over the Fish of the
Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, etc. So God created Man in his own Image,
Genesis 1. 26, 27. Which intimates to us (as St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and other
Fathers agree on that place) that Man's Dominion over the Creatures was the
Image and Representation of God's Principality and Sovereignty. God constituted
him Lord of the Earth, and Governor over all things in it; he made him Prince
of the whole Creation, Universal Lord and Emperor, and there is nothing but is
made subject to him. Which David sets forth thus in Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8. Thou
made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands, thou have put all
things under his feet: All Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the Beasts of the Field,
(i. e. Beasts which are untamed and wild) the Fowl of the Air, and the Fish of
the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the Paths of the Sea. Here is part of
God's Image and Likeness. And this Power which Adam had over all Animals was
exerted and manifested afterward in a very visible and notable Instance, viz.
when he called them all together, and gave Names to them. Genesis 2. 19.
The Lord God brought them to him, by giving him this Power to summon them, and
to cause them to appear before him at his pleasure. And when they were come.
Adam struck a terror into the fiercest of them. At the sight of him they stood
astonished; the wildest of them (for some may be said, in comparison of others,
to be wild) grew tame and gentle, and adored him as their Lord and Ruler. There
is seated in the Nature of Man (faith De Occult. Philos. l. 3. c. 40.
Cornelius Agrippa) a certain Power of Dominion from that dread which he is
able to strike into other Creatures. This remains in Man at this day, and he
might exert it if he knew how to make use of it. There is a certain Terrifick
Character impressed on Man by the Creator, by which all Creatures stand in aw
of him as the Image of his Creator. If a Man could exercise this Power aright,
he might work Wonders in the World: So he. But the Power which Adam had over
the Creatures was discovered, not only in making them appear, and stand
submissive before him, but also in his giving of Names to them. The Imposition
of Names (says (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 14. in Genesis
a learned Father) was a Token of his Authority and Dominion over the
Creatures, as when Men buy Servants, they change their Names and give them new
ones; this shows that they are Lords over them. And there is something of this
perhaps in Adam's giving the Woman her Name. She shall be called Woman, says
he; which may imply his Primitive Power and Authority over her.

But tho I propound this only as probable, yet the other is past all doubt,
viz. that Man had and has an Empire over the in^erior Creatures; and herein
the Image of God partly consists. Chrysost^m (as I have said) imbraceth this
Opinion, but therein is mistaken, that the Image of God in Man is Homil. 10. in
Genesis
nothing else but this Dominion. And he would prove it from 1 Cor. 11. 7. where
the Apostle, speaking of the behavior of Christians in the Assemblies, says,
The Man must be uncovered on his head, because he is the Image and Glory of
God. Uncovering was a sign of Liberty and Dominion; so that the Image of God in
Man is that Dominion and Superiority which God has given him over the Woman
and all things else. This is but poor proof, and not worth the refuting:
Besides that, according to this Father, the Image of God is peculiar to Man,
and the other Six is wholly excluded. Which shows this to be a fanciful and
groundless Opinion: for Man and Woman are both of the same Nature in the
considerations of Religion, and with respect to so great and important a thing
as the Divine Image is. This Opinion, that God's Image consists wholly or
chiefly in Man's Sovereignty over the Creatures, is espoused by the Socinians,
and strongly maintained by them. You will find Praelect. cap. 3.
Socinus himself, and De Ver. Rel. l. 2. c. 6.
Volkelius, and C^t. Racov. cap. 1. de Vi^ salu^is. Episcop. Instir. lib. 4.
others, asserting, in express terms, that the Image of God is placed solely or
principally in Dominion. But tho this be apparently false, and asserted by
those Men only to uphold a beloved Doctrine of theirs, yet there is reason to
believe that that Power over the rest of the Creatures which God invested Man
with, is part of the Divine Image. Man does eminently resemble God in this
Prerogative. In his presiding and ruling over them he is a lively
representation of him who is the King and Ruler of all.

Thus you see this Image of God in Man is a complex thing. It is not only in
the Soul, or in the Body, or in Power and Dominion, but it is in all of them
together; in opposition to those different Parties who place it in one of them
singly, as Cont. Celf. l. 4.
Origin and In cap. 28. Ezekiel.
The^doret in perfect Knowledge and Wisdom, Strom. 7.
Clement of Alexandria in perfect Holiness, Chrysostom (as you have heard) and
Cont. Anthropomorph.
Cyril of Alexandria in Dominion over the Creatures; and maugre the wild
Opinion of another Epiphan. Haeres. 70.
ancient Writer, who holds this Image of God is neither in Man's Body nor Soul,
nor in any thing else that is known to us: it is not, it cannot be determined
in what it consists.

Soon after Adam and Eve were made by God, and thus adorned with his Image,
they were placed in the Garden of Eden, ( Genesis 2. 8.) i. e. a Garden of Delight
or Pleasure, for so much the Gneden, deliciae, voluptates: unde forsan Gr.
(...).
Hebr^w word denotes. Paradise is the word used by the Septuagint, and is of
(...), a Pardes pomarium.
Hebrew (some say of Persian) original, and signifies a place enclosed for
Pleasure and Delight; whether it be a Nehem. 2. 8. vivarium.
Park where Beasts do range, or a spot of Ground stocked with choice Plants,
which is properly a Number. 24. 6. Isai 1. 30. Jer. 29. ^. Ezekiel. 28. 13.
Garden, or curiously set with Trees yielding all manner of Fruits, which is an
Eccl. 5. 5.
Orchard. And the word is here fitly applied to the pleasant Plantation wherein
our first Parents were placed by God. This was not only a delightful Garden,
and a fruitful Orchard, washed with convenient Rivers, (as you shall hear
afterward) but a spacious Park or Forest, where all the Beasts met together,
as you have heard already.

Concerning this place there have been different Opinions; yet, it has been
questioned whether it was a Place or no, and when it had its beginning.
Paradise was made before the Heavens and the Earth, say some of the Jewish
Doctors. And De Tradition. Hebraic.
St. Ierom, who was a great admirer of Theodotion and Symmachus, Heretical
Jews, and averse to the Translation of the Septuagint, follows them in that
Opinion. Some held that Paradise was not Local, but that it was a State rather
than a Place; and that this State was not on Earth. This was the high-flown
Notion of Philo and Origin, of Basil, Ambrose and Damascen, and sometimes of
Ierom, who understood Paradise in a spiritual and mystical Sense, and conceived
it to be meant only of some blessed and happy Condition. Some of them seem to
refer it to Heaven, others to the Virtues of the Soul, or the Soul's chief and
principal Faculties: Tho St. Ierom on Daniel laughs at those who think Rivers,
and Trees, and Paradise it self to be Allegories; which is a sign he changed
his Opinion. And this is not to be marvelled at, for he is not wont to approve
of that mystical Strain, and to allegorize after that high rate, which is the
way to make void all Scripture-History, and by that to null the whole Bible.
Therefore we find that the Epiphan. Haeres. 66.
Manichees were condemned of old for allegorizing of Paradise: And we read
Augustine. I^b. de Haere^.
that it was part of the H^resy of the Seleuciani and Hermiani, that they
denied a visible Paradise. This Opinion has been revived by some Moderns, and
very lately by Archaeolog. l. 2. c. 2.
one, who makes the History of Moses concerning the Terrestrial Paradise (as
well as he does other parts of it) a mere Fable, at least a Parable. That is
the result of his disquisition about it. St. Ad Oros.
Augustine goes in a middle way, and holds Paradise to be partly Local and
Corporeal, and partly Spiritual. Ephraim Syrus grants Paradise to be Local, but
places it an other World beyond this. It is a place above the whole Creation,
says an (...). Basil.
Other: It is seated in the Third Heaven by St. Ambrose. Some make it to be the
Coelum Empyreum. Hieronym. Vitalis Lexic. Mathemat. in verbo [Paradisus.]
Others say the Moon was the Paradise wherein our first Parents were created,
and from whence they were thrust down to this Earth. Bid and Rabanus Maurus
will have it be near the Orb of the Moon. Moses Bar-Cepha, lib. de Paradiso.
One of the ^ewish Doctors comes pretty near this, and tells us that Paradise
is about the second Region of the Air, and hangs between Heaven and Earth. It
was the whol^ Earth, say Beca^us and Noviamagus. Some of old held that it was
the whole World, as Ha^res. l. 2. c. 66. Epiphanius
relates. And Luther of late held the same, asserting that the whole World was
called Paradise, because it was at first so delightful and pleasant.

Others (and with good reason) assert it to be a part only of this lower World,
or the Earth; but they agree not about the particular Place: For some tell us
it is seated in an unknown Country, remote from the company of the Wicked,
where En^ch and Elias inhabit. So Bellarmine thinks, D^ Great. primi hominis,
cap. 14. And some of that Church follow him, and they derive it from some of
the Ancients, who had it from Papias. Others assign a known part of the Earth,
but among these there is also a difference; some groundlesly placing it in
Africa, and in the warmest part there. Thus Maimonides, Aben Ezra, and other
Jewish Doctors hold it was seated under the Equinoctial. And Durandus and
Bonaventure among the Schoolmen are of that Judgment. Others fancy it to be in
America, and in the warmest Country there; for these Men think the Torrid Zone
to be the most comfortable part of the World. But those most certainly are in
the right who place it in Asia. There is Cirrellus.
one Man who is singular in imagining Paradise to have been in that part of
Asia which is called Palestine, near Jordan in the Land of Sodom; which he
gathers from Genesis 13. 10. But any one may see that no such thing can be
inferred from those words, which only intimate, that the Plain of Jordan where
Sodom stood, was a very pleasant and delightful place, and might in some
respect be compared with Paradise. But after all the rambling Conjectures and
wild Fancies concerning Paradise, and the particular place where it was, this
is to be embraced as the most probable and accountable Truth, that it was
situated on those most pleasant and fruitful Fields of Asia, which of old were
called Babylon, and afterward Mesopotamia. In the lower part of this
Mesopotamia, taking in also a part of Shinar and Armenia, was this Garden of
Eden planted, as a Sir W. R^leigh.
learned Knight has excellently showed. In the Map you may observe it stands
35 degrees from the Equinoctial, and 55 from the Northern Pole. Because
Paradise (being of a very great extent) reached toward Armenia, Galtruchius
places it in the Mountains of Armenia the Greater; especially the Mountain
Paiarde (says he) was Paradise. But herein this learned Man was mistaken: for
it is evident that Paradise was in Babylon, because Eden was there; as that
worthy Knight has proved from If a. 37. 12. and Ezekiel. 27. 23. by showing where
those other Countries are found which are joined with Eden. By many Arguments
he makes it clear that Eden was part of Babylonia, and Babylonia a part of
Mesopotamia. Or rather I am inclined to determine thus, (which does not alter
the main thing, but only gives you a more distinct account of it) Eden, and
Babylon, and Mesopotamia, were three Names of the same Country. Eden was the
first and antientest: Babylon was the Name it was called by afterward, and
Mesopotamia is a Greek Name given to it, and signifies that it stood in the
midst of Rivers; especially it refers to its being situated between those
two Rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, tho I know there is a stricter acceptance
(and that not uncommon) of Mesopotamia.

And so you find this place described in Genesis, as famous for its Rivers,
Genesis 2. 10. A River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it
was parted, and became into four heads: i. e. the principal River of Paradise
had four great Channels. The name of the first is Pison; that is it which
compasses the whole Land of Havilah, verse. 11. This Pison is called by some
Phasis, or Phasitigris; it runs (they say) by that Havilah whither the
Amalekites fled, 1 Samuel 15. 7. and divides it from the Country of Susiana, and
at last falls into the Persian Gulf. So Galtruchius is positive that Armenia
the Greater, and the Coutries thereabout are meant by Havilah, and that the
River Phasis in that Armenia is the same with Moses' s Pison. Str^bo places
Havilah in the Borders of Arabia and Mesop^tamia: And Bochart thinks it is
Arabia it self. But (so far as I can judge) there is no reason to recede from
the old Opinion of the Christian Writers, who hold that Havilah is India, and
Pison the River Ganges. This was first asserted by Antiq. I. 1. c. 2.
Josephus, and from him Eusebius, Ierom, and most of the Fathers received it.
And not without good reason, for Moses here adds, as a Mark to know the place
by, that there is Gold, and the Gold of that Land is good, ver. 11. Now it is
confes'd by all, that India is the most noted for Gold, and that of the best
sort. Further it is added, as a Note whereby to discover that place, that there
is Bdellium and the Onyx Stone. There is some dispute about the former; some
hold it to be a Tree or a Resinous Gum, but most think it a precious Stone or a
Pearl: And this is probable, it being joined with the Onyx Stone: And India is
famous for precious Stones and Pearls.

The name of the second River is Gihon, verse. 13. Galtruchius holds that the
River Araxes in Armenia the Greater is meant by Gihon; this as well as Phasis
flowing from the Mountain Payarde there. But Moses adding in this Verse, that
the River Gihon is the same that compasses the whole Land of Ethiopia, (or
Cush, as it is in the Original) there is reason to believe that this Gihon is
the River Nile, as the forenamed Jewish Antiquary, and most of the ancient
Writers of the Church hold. Which may be confirmed by what you may take notice
of in the forenamed place, where the Garden of the Lord, and the Land of Egygt
are joined the other, intimating that Paradise, by the help of the River Nile, did
as 'twere border upon Egypt, which is the principal part of the African
Ethiopia, which it is most probable is meant here.

The name of the third River is Hiddekel: that is it which goes toward the
East of Assyria, ver. 14. That it was a River belonging to Babylon, is clear
from Dan. 10. 4. This is generally concluded to be the River Tigris, which
divides Mesopotamia from Assyria, and therefore runs toward the East of it.
This commonly goes along with Euphrates, and so it does here; for we are told,
ver. 14. that the fourth River (which issued out of Paradise) was Euphrates*

The fourth River, or the fourth Channel of the great River Euphrates, is, by
way of eminence, here called Euphrates, this being the great middle Channel
that ran through Eden or Babylon; and it may be thought to take its name from its
fructifying quality. For what some have thought, viz. that the word is derived
from (...) l^tificare; and that in allusion to this it is called the River
whose Streams make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4. it has little
foundation; seeing there is a great probability that its Original is from the
Hebrew Perah, which is the world here and in all other places of the Bible for
this River, and is from parah crescere, fructificare, because the Country owned
its fertility and fruitfulness of the spreading streams of this River. But how
is Euphrates derived from Perah? It is likely that the Greeks made it out of
these two words in this Verse, (...) Hu P^rath, Perath it self; for they read
it Buxtorf. Lexic.
Vphrath, and added a Termination of their own, and thence came Euphrates. Nor
is it an unusual thing with the Grecians to borrow words from the Hebrew. I
will at present instance only in another word which has relation to the matter
in hand, and that is (...), which is used by several Gentile Writers for a
Garden or Orchard, and it is the corruption of the Hebrew word (...) pardes,
hortus: it is this word transmuted into a Greek form.

These are the Rivers of Paradise mentioned by Moses, of which that Noble
Author of the History of the World has copiously discoursed, and those that
are curious may find satisfaction to their Scruples about this matter. We are
to think this (and it is a very rational thought) that Paradise is now scarce
to be found; because after so many Changes, especially that made by the Deluge,
which marred the Figure of it, and washed away a great deal of its Beauty, it
is exceedingly altered. Wherefore we must not expect to find in Historians and
Geographers the same description of Paradise which Moses gives. Herodotus and
Pliny will tell you, that Euphrates has not the same Channel it had in the
Ages of old, it has several times been put out of its way. And if in so long a
time the course of Rivers be changed, the Region may be altered as to other
things. Besides, the names of Pison and Gihon, two Branches of the River of
Paradise, are not very well known to us, because they are not the Names that
they are called by in profane Authors; for it is common in Scripture to use the
names of Places (as well as of Men sometimes) which are not used in other
Writers. Or, this may be as truly said, that some names of Rivers mentioned by
Moses, are long since lost and extinct (as the ancient names of several
Countries are, which is acknowledged by all the Learned. After so many
Generations, and changings of Languages, it is no wonder that they are not
called after the same manner that they once were. But we cannot gather thence
that they are not in being; we cannot say (with a late Whiston, Theory of the
Earth*
Writer) that of the four Ancient Rivers of Paradise two remain, but the other
two do not. But this may, and ought to be said, that the altering of the
Primitive Names renders it difficult to assign the more particular place of
Paradise, and to tell exactly where it was. But from the Account given us in
Genesis, and by comparing all things together, there is reason to assert that
Paradise was in Babylon, that noted part of the World.

For first Moses acquaints us, that God planted a Garden eastward in Eden, Genesis
2. 8. Which agrees well with that Region of Assyria which it is certain was
situate eastward in Asia; besides, that it lay eastward from Canaan, or the
Deserts of the Amorites where Moses wrote. Again, from what you read of this
place called Eden, in 2 King. 19. 12. and Amos 1. 5. (besides those other Texts
before mentioned, which Sir W. R^leigh takes notice of, and comments upon) you
may gather that this Country was the place where Paradise was seated. Next, no
part of the whole Earth bids so fair for the Seat of Paradise as that, for all
the Ancient Historians agree in this, that that Region was the pleasantest in
the whole World, and that the Soil of it was prodigiously fertile, and almost
fruitful to a Miracle. Moreover, Paradise was a place remarkable for its
Rivers; and such is that Country represented by all to be, and particularly it
is famous for the great and noted River Euphrates.

But if it shall be objected, that it is improbable Paradise was washed with
all these four Rivers, viz. Euphrates, Tigris, Ganges, and Nile; for then it
must needs be almost as large as a third part of half the Globe: Especially as
to Pison and Gihon, how can we hold that the former is Ganges, and the latter
Nile? for then we must take in almost all Asia, and a great part of Africa into
Paradise. Therefore this Notion concerning the Rivers of Paradise is very
extravagant, and consequently must not look for any reception.

I answer, 1. It is not so extravagant to make a quarter of half the Earth
Paradisiacal, as to hold that it was all of it so at first, which yet we find
vouched of late.

But, 2. it is a gross mistake in the Objectors to think, that what I have said
enlarges Paradise to that wideness which they mention; for when we speak of the
Rivers belonging to this place, this must be remembered, that the Heads and
Springs of them are meant, not the whole body and current of them. For you read
but of a River (Genesis 2. 10.) i. e. one River; but this one River was parted (as
you read in the same Verse) into four Branches, or (if you will) into four
Rivers, viz. without Paradise, not within it. The one River was in Paradise,
and was serviceable to water it, whilst these Arms and Branches of it spread
themselves to a vast distance, even on one hand to some Regions of Africa, and
further yet on the other hand to some remote parts of India. Here is nothing
extravagant in this Assertion, and consequently Nile and Ganges might, and
certainly did descend from the capital River of Eden. The River Pison is said
to compass the whole Land of Havilah, and Gihon is said to compass the whole
Land of Ethiopia; that is, the Waters of these Springs or Fountain-heads which
had their rise in Paradise, flowed as far as Havilah in India, and Ethiopia in
Africa, and encompassed these places with their various turnings and windings.
Moses tells us what Regions of the World these derivative Streams and Branches
(which in broad Channels made very considerable Rivers) reached to: But we
cannot conclude thence that Paradise it self was extended so far. This, I
think, is very plain and intelligible, and no Man of sense can oppose it; and
therefore there is no cause for that outcry which is made against Ganges and
Nile's being two of the Rivers mentioned in Genesis 2. Notwithstanding what some
late Monsieur Hu^t. Mr. Carver.
Writers have ingeniously offered, I think the old Opinion is the most
probable, or at least I take it to have as much probability in it as any of the
Modern ones. And so any unprejudiced Person will be inclined to think, if he
considers how likely a thing it is, that the Fountains and Springs of Rivers
are much altered since the Creation of the World; and consequently what these
learned Men alledg concerning the rise and spring of Euphrates, etc. which they
have met with in some Authors, is to little purpose.

3. I will add this, that Euphrates and Tigris were the only Rivers that were
proper to Eden or Paradise; but the other two are mentioned, because they
washed those Regions which appertained to and bordered upon that blessed Ground
called Paradise. Paradise strictly taken was not so wide and spacious; but all
the whole Country lying about that particular Ground, is in a large sense
termed Paradise. We may observe it is said, God planted a Garden in Eden, Genesis
2. 8. not that the Garden was as large as Eden, but rather it is evident from
these words that Eden, was that Region of the Earth in part of which God
planted a Garden; which was not, and indeed could not be so large as the place
he planted it in. Yet without doubt it was of a very considerable length and
breadth; the circumference of it was large and specious, and therefore Rivers,
or Arms of Rivers at a great distance might belong to it. In short, the Soil
thereabouts was in some measure Paradisiacal; but this one part of it was more
eminently so, and in a peculiar sense might be called Paradise, and the Garden
of Eden.

Thus I hope I have given a full Answer to what was objected, and thereby made
it very clear and perspicuous that Paradise was planted in that Region which
was afterward called Eden, and that Babylon (even that which was cursed Babylon
afterward) was the Seat of that blessed Ground. And tho what Tertullian and
Augustine, and several of the Moderns (as Aquina^, Gregory de Valentia,
Bellarmine, Del Rio, and others) have held, viz. that this happy place is not
known to Mortals, may be thus far true, that we are not acquainted with the
individual Spot of Ground where Adam and Eve were placed in their Innocence:
yet if these Persons aforementioned meant what they said in a more general
sense, their Opinion is false and groundless, for it is evident from the
premises that Paradise was in the eastern part of the Continent of Asia; that
it was that part of Mesopotamia which was washed with Tigris and Euphrates;
that it was a kind of an Island made so by these and other Rivers that
encompass it; and particularly that Babylon (now a known place in Turkey) was
afterward the name of the Country, that pleasant and delightful Country where
the Garden of Paradise was situated. Here it was that our first Parents were
seated by the particular appointment of God. In this happy Region of the World,
in this blessed Island they were to spend their days.

But what were they to do here? What manner of Life were they to lead? What
Laws were they governed by? This we are next to consider, and it is necessary
to do so, in order to our being acquainted with the nature of this first
Dispensation. God who had given Adam the whole Earth, and all that was in it to
possess and enjoy, yet assigned him this lesser portion of Ground to inhabit
in, and to cultivate: and he would not suffer him to be idle and unimploy'd in
that happy state of Innocence, but set him to dress and keep that choice piece
of Earth, Genesis 2. 15. which would want his care, because it was so luxuriant.
Here he was to employ his Mind, as well as exercise his Body: here he was to
enjoy God, Himself, and the whole World: Here he was to contemplate and study
God's Works; to submit himself wholly to the Divine Conduct; to conform^ all
his Actions to the Will of his Maker, and to live in a constant dependence upon
him: Here he was to spend his days in the continual exercises of Prayers and
Praises: and it may be the very natural dictates of Gratitude would prompt him
to offer up some of the Fruits of the Ground, and some living Creatures in way
of Sacrifice unto God. There were thousands of Objects to exercise his Wit and
Understanding, to call forth his Reason, and to employ it. But the ultimate
perfection of his Life, without doubt, was to consist in the Union of his Soul
with the chief Good, the infinite and eternal Being, for it is this alone which
constitutes the Happiness of Man. His Mind being of a spiritual Nature, could
find no satisfaction but in an Object that was of that kind; for a spiritual
and intellectual Being must be entertained by its like. But the chief happiness
ought to be something that is above us, and far exceeds us in excellency; for
the Capacities of the Mind cannot be happy in any thing that is of an inferior
nature to them. And the chief Good must be of infinite perfection, otherwise
the vast and capacious Faculties of the Soul cannot be satisfied. Hence it
follows that God alone was his supreme Blessedness, which he was entirely to
possess and enjoy by such a knowledge as was perfective of his Understanding,
and by such vehement and ardent Acts of Love, whereby he might be intimately
united to the eternal Good, and live in perpetual ^ruition of it, and that
without Satiety; for there is (...). Aristot. Rhet. ^ 1. c. 7.
no excess in the chief Good, it cannot be known, desired, loved, or enjoyed
too much. This was the designed Felicity of our first Parents. Neither they nor
their whole Race were to be liable to sorrow or misery of any kind, but to be
possessed of a constant and never-failing Happiness: and after innumerable Ages
and Successions, they were in their courses to be taken up to a heavenly
Paradise.

In this Economy Adam had two sorts of Laws to conduct him, viz. 1. The
natural Law of Goodness and Righteousness in his own Breast. The Light of
Reason was his Guide; and this shone very bright at that time: He had true
conceptions of things, he had clear apprehensions of what was Good and Right,
Just and Holy. He had a perfect knowledge of his Duty from this Law which God
had implanted in his Nature. 2. Besides this natural or moral Law, Adam
received positive Laws from God in this state of his Innocence; and they were
these three.

1. There was the Law of Matrimony. That this State of Life was instituted and
appointed by God in Paradise, is clear from what we read in Genesis 2. 24. God
having made the Woman, and brought her to the Man, he pronounced the Law of
Marriage in these words, A Man shall leave his Father and his Mother, and shall
cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. Here is the indissoluble
Knot of Wedlock. But yet this must be said, that tho the first instituting and
appointing of this State was from God, yet the Law of Nature dictated something
of it. For this teaches that two, and no more, agreeing to join in the
Fellowship of Marriage, should become one Flesh: the Light of Reason discovers,
that a conjugal Union cannot consist of a Plurality. Thus far Matrimony, as
it is the joining of one Man to one Woman, is a branch of the natural Law. But,
as I have showed in another place, a Law may be partly natural, and partly
positive; and so is this. It was positive, because God himself directed our
first Parents to this State of Matrimony. But then Reason approving of the
natural Equity of it, it may be said to be a Law of Nature.

2. The Hebrew Masters reckon that an absolute Precept, Genesis 1. 28. Be fruitful
and multiply; and they look upon it as the first and the chiefest of all, as
out of several of their own Writers, and out of Synag. Jud. p. 408.
Buxtorf is evident. But others esteem it rather a Benediction, wherein God
approves of the propagation of Mankind, as he does also of other Creatures,
ver. 22. Yet this we may grant, that those words had the force of a Precept or
Law, as well as a Benediction, with respect to our first Parents; they had the
full force of a Command to those two individual Persons Adam and Eve, and
indispensably obliged them, because it was intended by God that Mankind should
be increased and propagated by those two particular Persons. But they are words
of Approbation to all others afterward; that is, they signify the lawfulness,
tho not the necessity of Matrimony and Generation.

3. There was a positive Law given to Adam in his Integrity concerning the
keeping of the Sabbath, or observing the Seventh Day. God blessed the Seventh
Day, and sanctified it, Genesis 2. 3. i. e. he assigned it for some special
purpose; he separated it from the other Days; he dedicated it more especially
to Divine Worship: he set it apart to be the Feast of the World's Nativity; to
call to mind the Works of the Creation; to magnify the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of God in the framing of the Universe; to extol his Providence in the
World. In short, this Day was devoted to holy Uses, and the more solemn Service
of God: This is blessing and sanctifying of that Day. Indeed we read not that
Adam kept this Day after this manner; nor is it said that any of the old
Patriarchs did: But we know that many things were done which are not recorded.
Moses omits several Matters of Fact, (and he intending brevity in his History,
must needs do so) but we may supply them by our own collective Reason. Thus in
the present case we find it expressly recorded, that God blessed and sanctified
the Seventh Day; here he instituted the celebration of it. We need not then
question whether Adam, and the righteous Men that succeeded him, practiced
according to this divine Institution. But if any shall question it, I prove it
thus.

First, There was no imaginable reason why this Day should not be celebrated
presently after it was instituted. What was it sanctified and set apart for if
not for this, to be observed? And can you conceive any thing that hindered this?
No certainly. Therefore seeing it was instituted, we may conclude it was kept,
that is, that it was so from the Creation of the World. If it be objected, that
Adam in Innocence lived free from Toil and Labor, and therefore the cessation
on the Seventh Day was not necessary or proper for him: I answer, It is true,
he was not subject to hard and uneasy labor, and such as was accompanied with
fatigue; but it is as true, that he was bid to dress and keep the Garden, and
consequently he was not unimploy'd; he had ordinarily some bodily Work to do,
and to think of: But there was a certain time set him by God's particular
appointment, on which he was to cease from this or any other worldly and
corporeal Business, that he might devote himself wholly to the Worship of God.
This was the Sabbath Day which he was to keep, and there is no reason to think
he did not keep it.

Secondly, This appears from the reason of God's appointing and setting apart
this Day. His ceasing from his Works of the Creation on this Day was the ground
of it: And what did that infer, but Man's cessation from working on that Day?
Genesis 2. 2, 3. And can we think that God would not require this at his hand? Can
we think that he would not take care to see this Rest from all labor observed?
Can we think that Adam and Eve, the last Piece of the Divine Work, did not call
their Creation and Formation to remembrance, and praise God for that as well as
for his wonderful making of the World? Can we reasonably and on good grounds
imagine any of these things, when the very Sabbath was instituted on purpose to
perpetuate the memory of the Creation? May we not rather say that it is
expressly recorded, that God blessed the Seventh Day before Adam's Fall, to
intimate to us what Adam and Eve were to do the next day after their Formation,
viz. to sanctify that Day in a solemn commemoration of the Divine Goodness to
them?

Thirdly, There are several passages in the Old Testament, whence we may gather
the early observation of the Seventh Day. The keeping of it seems to be
intimated in Genesis 8. 10. where we find that Noah divides the Time by Weeks, or
seven Days: And so he does again, ver. 12. Which being repeated, seems to tell
us that the Seventh Day was then observed in a religious way by Noah in the
Ark; who questionless had it from Adam, who received it from God, who
instituted it to be a Commemoration of the Birthday of the World, of the
Divine Blessings that accompanied the Creation. It is not improbably
conjectured by a Dr. Lightfoot on Job, Chapter 1.
Learned Writer, that the Day when the Sons of God (i. e. Job's Sons and other
Holy Men, who are rightly called God's Sons or Children) came to present
themselves before the Lord (Job 1. 6. and 2. 1.) was the Sabbath Day, the Day
when the Professors of Religion met together in the public Assemblies; for
even in the Land of Vz they kept this solemn Day, they living near the Hebrews,
who had it derived to them from the Creation. Further, I desire it may be
observed that there is express mention of the Sabbath Day before the Law was
delivered on Mount Sinai. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord, Faith Moses, Exodus 16. 23. And when that Day was come, he thus speaks to
them, To Day is a Sabbath unto the Lord, ver. 25. And it is plain, that it is
meant of the Seventh day Sabbath, because the Day before was the sixth day, as
you read in the foregoing Verse; but more expressly in ver. 26. there is mention
of the Seventh Day which is the Sabbath. It appears then that this Day was kept
before the Decalogue was given, and was antienter than the Laws of Moses.

And indeed the Fourth Commandment which enjoins the keeping holy the Sabbath
Day, seems to hint no less to us; for when the Israelites are bid to remember
to do this, there is intimated to us in this manner of expression, that it was
kept holy before, for remembrance has regard to things past, and so forgetting
respects what has been heretofore. It might be observed also that it is called
in this Commandment Ha Sabbath, the Sabbath, or that Sabbath which I have
enjoined you before to keep: The Article here seems to imply so much. But
however, from what has been said it is manifest that there was a day of Rest,
a keeping of a Sabbath observed before the Law of Moses. And if before it, then
it was by virtue of this Primitive Institution which I am now speaking of, and
consequently the celebrating of this Day was from the beginning of the World.
In Paradise was given the Law of Sanctifying the Seventh Day as a Day of Rest
and holy Worship; as some of the Epiphan. Haeres. 51. Theodoret. Quaest. 21. in
Genesis
ancient Writers of the Christian Church, who searched into this matter further
than others, have freely acknowledged. And therefore those words, Genesis 2. 3.
God blessed the seventh Day, are not proleptick as some groundlesly imagine,
but acquaint us that that Day was then instituted, and was to be observed from
that very time, that they might be settled in the Truth of God's creating the
World, and not (like Pagans) think it to have been from Eternity. This then
must go along with the succeeding Dispensations.

Fourthly, There was a positive Law given to Adam of abstaining from the Fruit
of a certain Tree in the Garden of Eden. We must know then, that in Paradise
were diverse sorts of Trees, but two of them were of more especial not than the
rest. The first was the Tree of Life; which was called so, because it was
appointed by God to signify, that if our first Parents did obey God's Command,
they should live for ever. It was designed to be a Sacrament of that
Immortality which Man should have had if he had retained his Innocence. This is
clear from what is said in Genesis 3. 22. -- lest he take of the Tree of Life, and
eat, and live for ever. This Text proves (against the Socinians) that our first
Parents should not have died if they had not transgressed the Divine Law; and
it proves that the Tree of Life was give them on purpose to perpetuate their
lives. The eating of the Fruit of that Tree would have been a means to have
kept them from dying, and to have made them immortal. Yea, this Tree was a
Symbol of all Happiness, as Life is taken in that sense very frequently. Wisdom
is said to be a Tree of Life to those that lay hold on her, Prove. 3. 18. Which
is thus explained in the next Verse, Happy is every one that retains her. As
often then as our first Parents had eaten of the Tree of Life, they were to be
reminded by it, that all manner of Bliss and Happiness was to be entailed upon
them and their Posterity, if they continued in their Obedience, and broke not
the Command of God. As long as they ^ed on this Tree, they should be void of
old Age, Sickness, Pains, Cares, and all troubles of Body and Mind, till at
last they should have been translated from the earthly Paradise to those
complete and eternal Regions of Bliss at God's right hand. So that it was a
Type of enternal Life and Bliss, and a Sign and Seal of these to them if they
had not apostatized. How long a time this particular course of preserving
Health and Life should have continued, if Mankind (supposing in a state of
Innocence) had increased, or whether other Trees of the same nature should have
been produced in other Regions of the Earth, or whether there should have been
some other way of keeping Men's Bodies from decay, I am not able to determine,
nor need we concern our selves about it.

The other Tree in the Garden which was of more note than the rest, was the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. And they were strictly forbidden by God to
eat of This, they were by no means to taste any part of it. It was called the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, because it was to try Adam whether he would
do well or ill; or because the observing of that Prohibition was to be followed
with the perfect enjoyment of Good, and the violating of it with the experience
of all Evil of Sin and Punishment. It was to signify what they should know by
eating, viz. the difference between the Evil of Disobedience, and the God of
the contrary. Or thus, it was the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, i. e. of
the Good they had before, and of the Evil which was to ensue upon eating. They
should experimentally find what Good they lost, and what Evil they fell into.
So that it is probable this Tree had its name from the Event and Effect of it.
It taught them by experience what Good and Evil was; for after Man had sinned
in eating that forbidden Fruit, he saw and felt what Happiness he had lost, and
what Misery he had procured.

Some have been so curious as to enquire, and so bold as to determine what
particular Tree and Fruit this was. It was and Apple Tree, say some, and they
would make it probable from Cant. 8. 5. It was the Vine, says Vossius. It was
the Indian Fig Tree, says Goropius Becanus. Most say it was a Fig Tree, with
the Leaves of which Adam and Eve covered their nakedness as soon as they had
eaten of the Fruit. (...). Quest. 28. in Genesis
Theodoret stiffly maintains this Opinion, and says. This was the reason why
Christ cursed the Fig Tree. Quaest. 58. ad Antioch.
Athanasius, with Procopius, Isidor. Pelus.
others, incline to this belief, but there is no ground for it: it must only
pass as a Conjecture. And so that Father grants, in his Answer to that Demand,
What Tree was it of which Adam eat the Fruit? (...).
No Man, says he, is able exactly to discover that which the Scripture has
wilfully concealed.

The grand thing which we are to mind (and which is the principal thing in this
first Economy) is this, that it was God's pleasure that the Fruit of that Tree
(whatever it was) should not be meddled with, and therefore straightly charged
Adam and his Consort, that they should not dare to touch it. God might
reasonably act after this manner: For first (as an ancient Writer says on this
Subject) (...), etc. Theodoret. de Provid. Orat. 10.
God dispenses all things sutably to the particular Time, and measures his
Institutions by the Abilities and Powers of Men. Therefore he gave that Command
of not eating of this Tree to Adam, as it were to a newborn Babe. He dealt with
our first Parents as with Infants and Children; he tried them by mean and low
things, as most agreeable to their nature. But secondly, tho he was thus
pleased to prohibit them the Fruit of one single Tree, yet this was highly
accountable if you consider that God gave them the use of all the rest of the
Trees in Paradise. Of every Tree in the Garden thou may freely eat, Genesis 2.
16. there was only this one Tree excepted and reserved. Here was Liberty and
Indulgence sufficient. And they might well have contented themselves in the
enjoyment of it. Besides, the Creator can lay what Restraints he pleases on
his Creatures. He that made both them and the Garden, could justly bar them of
any thing which that place afforded. Therefore God gave them this Precept to
show his Dominion over them, as he was their Maker and Lord. (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. 16. in Genesis
He would let them see by this little Command his absolute Soverainty over
them, as a pious Father speaks.

Again, God having made them reasonable, and endowed them with a power or
freedom of choice, he might justly exercise that Faculty, and put them to an
actual trial of it: which could not be done but by proposing something to their
choice. As they had a rational Nature and free Will given them by God, they
were able to keep that Law of Abstinence; and therefore it was not unjust in
God, yea it was just and fit to impose this upon them as they were free and
reasonable Beings. This shows the reason of this positive Law which was given
them to try their Obedience. Likewise, it was very reasonable and equitable
Command, that seeing God had con^err'd on them so many Benefits and Blessings,
they should be limited as to a single one, that thereby they might show their
Thankfulness to God for all the rest. In the next place, consider also that God
particularly told them what he expected from them, when he gave them a
Prohibition about the Tree. He assured them, that if they ventured to eat of
it, it should cost them their Lives, or, more emphatically in the Original,
they should die the death. Here was fair warning, and they had time to consider
of it; and they were sensible how greatly they were obliged to God, and how
just and reasonable a thing it was to observe his first and original Law, (that
which was Advers. Jud. cap. 2.
matrix omnium praeceptorum, as Tertullian calls it) yea, to obey God in
whatsoever he commanded.

Fifthly, To the revealed Laws under the State of Integrity, we must refer the
Covenant of Works: For we may gather from the Sacred Writings, that there was a
mutual Agreement or federal Compact between God and our first Parents, wherein
he promised to them Eternal Life and Happiness, on condition of their perfect
Obedience to his Laws; and on the contrary, Death was threatened if they
disobeyed, as we have heard already. It is true, it is not expressly called a
Covenant in Genesis; but it was one, for God gave Man a Law, and backed it with
Threatenings and Promises, and Man agreed and consented to it, which is the
formal nature of a Covenant. Not are we to think that those two Persons, and no
more, were under this Dispensation. Although only Adam and Eve were in actual
being at that time, yet all Mankind were included in them, and represented by
them, and therefore are to be reckoned as under that Dispensation. For God
having created our first Parents without Sin, and with knowledge of their Duty,
and strength to do it, he made a Covenant or Agreement with them, not only in
behalf of themselves, but of all their Posterity. It was covenanted, that if
they and their Race continued in Obedience, they should never die, but be
always blessed and happy; but if they disobeyed the Divine Command, they should
be subject to Death, and be every way wretched and miserable. It is certain
they consented and agreed to this; for in that State of Integrity, what God
propounded to them could not but be acceptable. God would offer that which was
just and equitable, as he was God: Our first Parents would not disagree to it,
as they were indu^d with a perfect understanding, and knew that what their
Maker propounded was most reasonable. They could not but approve of the
Condition on their part, viz. Obedience; and they could not but accept of the
Reward promised on God's part, viz. endless Happiness. That they fully
consented to the Contract, in the name of themselves and their Posterity, is
demonstrable from many passages in Holy Writ, as that Hos. 6. 7. They like Adam
(for so it is the Hebrew) have transgressed the Covenant; which refers to God's
Covenant with Mankind in the beginning of the World, when Adam was their
Representative: And it is certain that he could not transgress it unless he had
first agreed to it. And this is abundantly clear from the Epistles of St.
Paul., which frequently have reference to this very thing. And the Truth of
this may be too manifestly gathered from the miserable Effects and Consequences
of it which we now experience. This Covenant then, and this Dispensation to
which it belongs, extend to all Mankind. As being in Adam they were all endued
with the Divine Image, they were all possessed of Life and Happiness; and might
have so continued, unless they had in him fallen from their Primitive Integrity.

Hitherto Man was in honor, Psalm. 49. 12. being created in God's Image he was
placed in Paradise, he was possessed of all manner of Felicity; and he might
have perpetuated it to himself and his Posterity. This is the first State of
Man, viz. that of Innocence, which constitutes the first Dispensation.

CHAP. II.
The Nature of the Second General Dispensation. The several particular
Ingredients of the First Sin. Its Aggravations from the Matter of it. What kind
of Creature the Serpent was, whom the Devil made use of in seducing our first
Parents. It was not a fiery flying Serpent, but an ordinary one. Wherein the
Subtilty of this Animal consisted. That Adam and Eve fell not on the same day
in which they were made, is proved from Scripture and Reason. The dreadful
Effects of the Fall which related to themselves. Others which belonged not only
to them, but to their whole Race. Death was the Penal Consequence of the First
Defection. The Inward and Spiritual Evils that attended it are enumerated. How
Man became like the Beasts. Eternal Death the Fruit of his Apostasy. The
Penalty inflicted on the Serpent. Not only our First Parents, but all Mankind
were under this Second Dispensation.

THE second General Dispensation is the State of Sin and Infelicity, viz. from
Adam's Fall till he was Restored and Recovered. This State is doubly expressed
by the Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 20.
Man understood not, but became like the Beasts. The first represents his Sin
and Fall, the second the Effects of it: So here are both his Fault and his
Penalty. As among Philosophers there is Physiology, which is the considering of
Bodies in their natural Temper, and there is Pathology, which is the
consideration of Man's Body, as fallen into a state of Disease; so in Divinity
we distinctly treat of these two, the State of Innocence (the primitive temper
of Mankind) and the State of Corruption, (which is a degeneracy from that first
Temper and Constitution.) Des Carts imagines this Earth of ours to have been
once a glorious Sun, but afterward to have sunk into another Vortex, and to be
overcast with Spots and Scum, and so to move slowly, and to be what it now is.
It is certain that Man, the best Creature on Earth, was once a bright and
glorious Being, and moved in a high Sphere, and cast a most ravishing Light: He
had the Image of God, and the Characters of Divine Wisdom impressed upon him:
but he soon lost his Primitive Light and Luster, he forsook his Station, and
was absorp'd into darkness, and overspread with Sin and Misery.

I begin first with Adam's Sin: and here I must enquire into these two things;
1. What this Sin was? 2. Who were the Instruments of it? As to the Sin it self,
it was no other than this; Whereas God had commanded our first Parents, that
they should not eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Good and Evil, they wilfully
despised that Command, and took of the forbidden Fruit, and did eat of it. This
was the Sin of Adam and Eve, and the first Sin that ever was in the World. But
this I must insert, that there were many undue Inclinations and vicious
Dispositions in their Souls, which made way for this actual and external
Transgression, and may be said to be parts and ingredients of this Sin, and
which are also great Aggravations of their Crime.

1. Man being in Honor understood not, which may signify that ignorance and
senslesness which they had contracted by non-attention. They considered not
what Honor and Dignity they had, and so discerned not what was their proper
Duty in that State. Incogitancy was the first rise and occasion of the Fall of
our first Parents, says the profound Dr. Iackson, and that very rightly. And
before him St. Chrysostom had determined in the like manner; for he holds that
Negligence was the first Fault: they grew heedless and careless, not reflecting
on their state and circumstances, not duly thinking what they were, and what
they ought to do: thence arose their transgression.

2. Sensuality was the previous cause of the first Apostasy. The sight of the
Fruit excited the Woman's Appetite. When she saw the Tree was good for Food,
and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, she took of the Fruit thereof, and did
eat, Genesis 3. 6. And she might easily prevail with her Husband to do so too,
whilst he perhaps was as much taken with her Beauty, as she was with that of
the Fruit. There have been several Conjectures about the rise of the first
Transgression (and I am now presenting the Reader with them) but if I should
say that Lust, among other Incentives, was the first spring of it, I think no
considerate Man can disallow what I propound. For tho the new-married couple
were created without any tincture of sinful Concupiscence, yet God had planted
in them those natural Inclinations which were proper and suitable to the
Conjugal State. Tho these were unpolluted and void of all Vice, yet God had
placed the Possessors of them in such a mutable State, and had endued them with
such Powers and Faculties, both of Soul and Body, that they might make use of
them to good or evil, as they pleased. And accordingly they inclined to the
latter, and turned the concupiscible part into that which was evil and vicious,
and so their innocent Propensions to one another were changed into lustful
Amors; and their mutual desires and complacencies, occasioned by the force of
each others Beauty, became instrumental to that Sin which we are treating of.
With Adam more especially this had a great sway, for his Wise was a very fair
and lovely Creature; and it is probable that he looked on her more than on the
Fruit. This was not so fair as she that handed it to him; and therefore he was
more in love with her than with that, because he saw a brightness in that Face
which was more charming than what the Tree afforded. But yet he had a love to
this for the sake of the other; and thereupon the uxorious Man (after several
fits of reluctance, we may suppose) resolved to gratify his Spouse; being
beguiled by her Beauty, and by that amorous propension which it had produced in
him, he could deny her nothing: Or, to speak in more general terms, his entire
love and affection to her prevailed with him to do as she did, i. e. to violate
the Commandment because she did so. Which we may gather from those words of
his, Genesis 3. 12. The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, (and to be my
other-self) she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat: For tho he did ill in
laying his Fault, and transferring his Guilt on the Woman, thereby only to
excuse himself; yet thus far we may believe him, that he was drawn into this
transgression by her whom God had given unto him. His passionate regard to her
betrayed him to this folly. Thus this desire of his Eyes was one occasion of
his misery. By the Enchantments and Solicitations of a Woman, Man was first
ruined. Whilst he was alone he did well, but when he saw so fair and Image he
was tempted to fall down to it, and to comply with it, and to forget himself
and his duty. This was the Origin of Adam's prevarication; the sensitive part
was too powerful. Pleasure betrayed him, and ever since all Mankind: the animal
and sensual Life gets the better of the Divine.

3. Another previous Sin of our first Parents was, a being dissatisfied with
their condition, and an ambitious desiring to know more, and to become greater.
It was a vile compound of Curiosity, Discontent and Pride: yea, this latter
seems to have the predominancy; whence it was the determination of Chrysostom.
Hom. 65. in Matthew.
one of the Ancient Fathers, that Adam and Eve's first Sin by which they fell
was Pride. The Devil inve^gled them with telling them, that their Eyes should
be opened, and that they should know Good and Evil; nay, that they should be as
Gods in knowledge and perfection, Genesis 3. 5. This was no mean incentive to the
breach of the Divine Law; tho indeed it was a strange solecism and absurdity,
(and it is an strange that our first Parents should not observe it) viz. that
they should be like God by breaking his Law. This was an arrant piece of
Nonsense, and yet it was swallowed, the vehement desire of seeing having
blinded them, their inordinate longing after Wisdom rendering them so foolish
and sottish. Their affection of Knowledge, and their vain Ambition, ruined them.
Their desire to arrive to the Partners with God Almighty, made them forget they
were his Creatures. Their wishing to be Gods, made them become like Beasts
which perish (as you shall hear afterward): Yea, their desire to be like Gods,
made them too like unto Devils.

The 4th Sin which made way for their actual violating God's Command was
Unbelief. God had himself told him, that in the day they eat of the forbidden
Fruit, they should surely die, Genesis 2. 17. But Satan comes and con^ronts this,
and tells them, Y^ shall not surely die, Genesis 3. 4. Whereupon they give credit
to this Tempter, and disbelieve what God had said. They attend not to the
Divine Threatenings, but listen to the Devil's Promises of Impunity. They
believe the Father of Lies, but what the God of Truth says is none of their
Creed. This was the cursed Infidelity which was the forerunner of the actual
breaking of the Divine Command.

Thus you may be convinced, that tho the eating the forbidden Fruit may at
first sight seem to be a small matter, a kind of venial Fault, (and some vain
Men have labored to represent it as such) yet upon a particular and narrow
view of it, and by reason of the Circumstances that attend it, it was a most
grievous and horrid Crime. That Sin which was ushered in with so many vile
Harbingers, must needs be a capital Offense. Besides, the greatness of the
Transgression must be esteemed and measured by the Authority of the Lawgiver;
we must consider not so much what was forbid, as who forbad it. God, their
Creator and Father, who had absolute Power and Command over them; God, who knew
best how to govern them, and what was most for their real Good and Advantage;
God, who required the observance but of a small and easy thing, ought to have
been obeyed with all exactness. Adam and Eve had no Father but God; how just
and reasonable then was it, that they should express all Duty and Obedience to
him; that they should observe his Laws, and not dare to break the ^east Command
of his; that they should do nothing without his order, and never listen to any
that would attempt to withdraw them from their duty; but that they should
continually live in a sense of their dependence upon him; that they should call
upon him, trust in him, honor and worship him only; that they should strive to
walk worthy of the singular Favors they had received from him, and that they
should endeavor to persevere in their Innocence and Integrity, and to continue
in that blessed State wherein God had created them?

And as for the Matter of the Sin, the letter and lighter it is, the greater is
the Sinner's contempt of God. This inhances his Fault, that he prefers so
slight a thing before God's Will and Pleasure; that he regards not the Divine
Anger, tho it be so easy to avoid it. Here we may say, as Cicero does in
defense of the Stoics Paradox, ( viz. that all Sins are alike) Parva, inqui^,
res est; atqui magna culpa.
The Matter is small, but the Fault is great. Yea, I may add, the latter is the
greater because the former is so small. The Sin of Adam and Eve was the more
grievous and inexcusable, because it was in so little a matter as the bare
tasting of the Fruit of a Tree. Which was a thing they had no temptation to, if
we consider that the whole Garden of Fruit was before them, and there was but
one single Tree only forbidden them. But it seems all the rest were insipid
without this; no Tree will so content them as the forbidden one. There was no
Fruit so desirable as this; and it is likely this had not been desired if it
had not been forbidden. This argues great perverseness and obstinacy, and
consequently aggravateth their Sin, and senders their Offense very heinous.

Say not then, the eating of the Fruit of a Tree is a light and inconsiderable
thing. So it might be said, Lot's Wise did only look back to see the miserable
ruin of the place she lived in. What! might she not look behind her? It was out
of pity that she did this. Did this deserve so sore a Punishment? Abraham Genesis
19. 28.
looked on Sod^m in its flames, and was not punished. It was not criminal in
him to do so: Why then was it in this poor Woman? The plain Answer is this,
that there are many things from whence Actions are denominated Good or Evil.
They are sometimes reputed so by God according to the intrinsic Causes and
Reasons of them, sometimes also according to their good or evil Adjuncts; but
at all times according to the Will and Command of God, allowing or disallowing
of such Actions. By these we must judge of Lot's Wife's Sin^ Out of an
immoderate love of the City, which had been the place of her abode, or from an
inward cove^ing of the Goods which she left behind her, or from a foolish
pitying of those whom God had designed for Destruction, she stood, and looked
back. Which Example of hers might have produced the like Passions in others:
And if it had gone unpunished, a great contempt of God's Providence would have
been the effect. But the chief thing which made her looking back to^ be sinful
was this, that it was a direct Affront to the Command of God, who had strictly
charged them to fly, and not to look back, Genesis 19. 15. 17. And he certainly
ought to have been obeyed, he that so graciously delivered them from the flames
of Sodom, he that rescued them thence out of his mere Mercy and Favor; he that
required observance in so easy a matter as this, he surely was not to be
repaid with Disobedience; therefore he acted most justly when he severely
punished it in this stubborn Woman.

So in the Sin of our first Parents, we have showed before that the intrinsic
Causes of it were very bad, and the adjoining Circumstances might be proved to
be as evil and pernicious: but if we consider that it was a wilful violating of
the Divine Command (as it most palpably was) it will appear to be yet more
sinful and vicious. It was no less than a set and voluntary choosing of Death
and Misery, and re^using of everlasting Happiness. There cannot be imagined a
greater Sin than this; nothing could speak them greater Rebels against Heaven.
For God designing that his new-made Creatures, by conforming to that
Prohibition, should testify their acknowledgment of him, and their subjection
to him; their acting contrary to it was a high instance of Rebellion, and a
downright disowning of God's Dominion and Authority. And tho indeed it was
disobedience to the Divine Command in a lesser matter, yet even thence the
baseness of the Action is more manifested, and the greater ingratitude and
un^aithfulness of the Sinners are discovered. Thus you see what the Sin of our
first Parents was, you are acquainted with the nature of their Offense.

Secondly, I will in a few words speak of the Pr^curer and Instrument of it.
Whilst our first Parents were in their happy state of Integrity, they are
envied by the Spirits of Darkness, the Fallen Angels, a rank of Creatures that
were made by God to enjoy a blessed Immortality, and to be the Attendents and
Ministers of the Majesty of Heaven; but they soon John 8. 34. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jud^
5, 6.
revolted from God, and for their Pride and Arrogance were thrust down from
Heaven, and divested of that Dignity and Glory which were conferred upon them.
These wicked and reprobate Spirits being thus degraded, maliciously and
revengefully resolved to disturb the Felicity of Mankind, and to betray the
innocent Inhabitants of Paradise into the same misery with themselves. The
Prince of these Apostate Spirits (it is most probable) was by general consent
of the rest chosen to effect this direful Project, and the method they pitched
upon was to set upon the Woman first, and that in the disguise of a Serpent.
Cont. Julian. l. 3.
Cyril, and one or two others of the Ancients were of Opinion, that he Devil
appeared in the likeness only of a Serpent: but it is more probable that the
entered into a true and real Serpent, according to the sentiment of most of the
Fathers. And they have the plain History on their side, which says he was the
subtilest of all the Beasts of the Field, Genesis 3. 1. And besides, the Curs^
denounced against this Animal, shows it was a natural Serpent, Genesis 3. 14.
Eugubinus.
One tells us, that this Creature was a Basilisk: Delrio.
Another says, it was a Viper; and a Bonaventure.
third says, it was a Dragon, (which is an overgrown Serpent). But the Devil
appearing in the shape of these Creatures, would have terrified rather than
allured the poor Female. Others (on a contrary extreme) think that it was a
bright, glorious and winged Serpent that appeared to her. They fancy that a
Demon or Devil came to Eve like some Angel or Saraph: for the Seraphim or
Angels appeared in form of splendid flying Serpents sometimes, as they would
prove from Num^ 21. 6. where the Serpents that God sent among the Israelites
are called Seraphim. And from this place, and Isa. 14. 29. they gather that
these flying Serpents, that were very bright, and shining like Fire, were usual
in the Eastern Countries.

I have found lately, that two excellent Persons, of great Name and Esteem in
our own Church, favor this Opinion. But, with due respect and deference given
first to their Judgment, I make bold to offer these Reasons why I dissent from
them in this present matter: 1. We have no certain knowledge or account of the
Serpents spoken of in the forenamed Texts; only we know that they were raging,
fierce and venomous, and thence it is likely they were called Seraphim,
burning, because by their venomous Sting they produced an inflammation in that
part of the Body which they stung. And they might be said to fly, because of
their swift and impetuous motion, wherein they exceeded other Serpents. 2. If I
should grant that there were such fiery flying Serpents as these worthy Persons
suppose, and that they are spoken of in the foregoing places, yet it seems not
to me probable that Satan would make use of such an affrighting Creature to
deal with our Mother Eve. This sort of Animals, in my apprehension, would
sooner scare than entice her. Methinks his fierce and furious motion should
strike terror into her; his flaming Wings should make her fly from him, not
hold discourse with him. Or at least, 3. this Spectacle was too glittering and
dazeling, so that she could not endure the brightness of it. I am apt to
conceive that such a sight was fitter to amaze than to tempt. 4. When I find
this Serpent reckoned among the Beasts of the Field, and that twice, Genesis 3. 1,
14. I must needs say, I cannot easily be persuaded that it was of that kind
before named; it seems not to me to be a winged Animal moving aloft in the Air.
I do not well apprehend, I confess, how such a one can be numbered among the
Beasts of the Field, or Earth. Tho the Holy Ghost in Scripture having barely
told us that it was a Serpent, it is most natural and genuine to conclude, it
was an ordinary Serpent, such as God had lately created, and such as among
other Creatures lived on the Soil of Paradise.

Now the Serpent was more subtle than any Beasts of the Field which the Lord
God had made, Genesis 3. 1. The subtilty of the Serpent denotes here to us the
gentle, familiar and insinuating nature of this Animal: For the Author of the
Jewish Antiquities observes, that this Creature (...). Antiquitat. l. 1. c. 2.
frequently conversed, and in a familiar manner associated with Adam and his
Wife. And so an Basil. Homil. de Paradiso.
Ancient Father of the Church agrees with this Jewish Writer, telling us, that
the Serpent before the Fall was mild and gentle, and more familiar with Man
than other Creatures were, that he came to him often, and was pleased with his
Society, that he did not creep on the ground, but went on his feet. But the
same Author goes too far when he intimates, that he was of an erect Figure, for
that is proper only to Man. It is very probable that the Serpent did not then
grovel and creep on the Earth as he now does, (for this was the Curse
pronounced against him after the Fall) but he was somewhat lifted up from the
ground by feet, (tho perhaps they were very short) for you find in the
forenamed place, that he is sorted with the Beasts of the Field, which are
distinguished in kind from creeping things, Genesis 1. 25. Another Damascen. de
Orthod. fid. l. 2. c. 10.
Ecclesiastical Writer agrees with the former Author, that the Serpent was more
sociable and conversant with our first Parents than all the other Creatures
were; that he often approached to them, and insinuated himself into them with
the gentle motions of his Body. I do not think, with Josephus, that the Serpent
(and all other Beasts) naturally spoke in Paradise, (a Dream which Basil also
assents to); but this I am ascertained of from the inspired Records of Moses,
that the Devil spoke by the Serpent, or (which is all one) that the Serpent
possessed by the Devil spoke to Eve. So we read afterward that an Ass by an
extraordinary impulse spoke to Balaam.

And since that time, several Histories mention the speaking of irrational
Animals, yea of inanimate Creatures: Thus a River spoke to Pythagoras, and
saluted him as he passed by it, if we may believe Porphyrius in his Life. A
Tree spoke to Apollonius Tyanaeus, says Philostratus. This was the effect of
Magic, both those Persons being skilled in that Art. It will be granted then,
that the Devil is able to do what his Agents and Ministers can effect; thus
here, the Serpent spoke to Eve by the motion of Satan actuating his Body: The
Devil moved his Tongue, and enabled him to hold a Discourse with the Woman. And
now if you consider that he was by his Nature and Make of a graceful Hew and
Figure, and that he was made by God a subtle and insinuating Creature, you will
not deny that he was fit to be made use of by Satan to entice and inveigle the
Woman. Wherefore the Archaeol. Philos. cap. 7.
bold Man that laughs at this part of the Mosaic History concerning the
Serpent and Eve talking together, and in effect represents it as a mere
Fiction, has as little Reason as Religion on his side. It is certainly
agreeable to Reason that the Devil would tempt and seduce her by making use of
some familiar and domestic Creature, if he used any at all. The Fox was
cunning and crafty, but the Serpent was the most gentle and tractable of all;
this was his proper subtilty. It is probable that this Creature was beloved
both by Adam and Eve: She especially was delighted with it, and used to play
and sport with it; she laid it perhaps in her Bosom, or adorned her Neck with
its twistings and windings; or she made it a Bracelet for her Arms.

This is certain, that the enmity between the Serpent and Mankind was not till
after Man's Fall, as appears from Genesis 3. 15. I will put Enmity between thee
and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed. There could not be an Enmity
put between them, unless there had been a Friendship before. Or, if the Serpent
used before to ensnare or hurt Mankind, and to show himself an Enemy, why is it
denounced by God as a Threatening and Curse, that he will put Enmity between
them? It is evident then, that the Serpent was some goodly lovely Creature, and
would needs make himself acceptable to the Woman: And in this Masquerade the
Devil soon got the better of her, persuading her that if she did eat of the
prohibited Fruit, she should be so far from receiving any harm and damage, that
she should thereby mend her condition, and be some Goddess rather than a Woman.
She was caught with these fond and flattering Suggestions, and slighted the
Divine Injunction, and boldly ventured on the forbidden Dainties. The subtle
Ingineer planted his Artillery against the weakest part of the Fort: he began
his Batteries against the feeble Sex first, Alas! a silly Woman, and a subtle
Serpent acted by the Devil, were not Matches. And as this latter tempted Eve by
a Serpent, so he tempted Man by Eve, who was gentle and alluring, familiar and
insinuating, and not easily to be repulsed. The weak Woman must needs fall,
being solicited both by Satan and the Serpent: The poor Man could not but fall
who had a triple temptation, that of the Devil, the Serpent, and the Woman.

Thus both Man and Woman fell, and that in a short time after they were
created. Man being in honor, Psalm. 49. 12. Non pernoctabit. Pagnin.
abides not. He stood not one night (say some) in integrity, but apostatized
in the close of the same day in which he was made; and in the very same day he
was cast out of Paradise. So the Jews generally, and many of the Christian
Fathers assert. Luther is very punctual: Colloq. Mensal.
Our first Parents entered (says he) into the Garden at Noonday; and the Woman
having an Appetite, and taking delight in the Food, eat of it about two a
clock. But these two things may incline us to think that they did not: 1. What
the Sacred History concerning that matter affords us. 2. What Reason, and the
thing it self will suggest to us about it. 1. The History of the Acts of that
Day on which Adam was made, is a sufficient confutation of this Opinion. For
Moses in the Book of Genesis acquaints us, that on that Day wherein he was
created (which was the sixth day) all these things were done: 1. Being created
without Paradise, he was that day Genesis 2. 8, 15.
brought into it. 2. The Tree of Life, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil were Genesis 2. 9, 16.
proposed to him. 3. A Law concerning Genesis 2. 17.
abstaining from one of them was given him. 4. All the four-footed Creatures,
one of a sort at least, were Genesis 2. 19, 20.
brought to him, and set before him; and he viewed and observed them, and
according to the nature and differences of every Species, gave peculiar Names
to them. The same he did to all the Fowls of the Air. This would take up a
considerable time. 5. After this Adam Genesis 2. 21.
fell into a deep sleep, and a Rib is taken out of his side, and of it the
Woman was made. 6. God, as the Paranymph, Genesis 2. 22, 23.
brings this Spouse to Adam, who acknowledges her to be a part of him, and
takes her into intimate familiarity, and made her his Wife. All this was done
on the sixth Day; but we do not read that any more was done.

But you will say, If it admitted of so much work, we may as well add the
eating of the forbidden Fruit, which did not take up much time. But I answer,
we learn not from the History that this was done on that day: Yea, we are sure
it was not done, for it is said of the Works of the sixth day, as of the
foregoing ones, God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very
good, Genesis 1. 31. It is not probable this would have been said, if Man had not
continued good till then, and if Sin, the greatest Evil of all, was entered at
that time. And we are to observe that these words were pronounced concerning
what happened all the space of that sixth day of the Creation: And all the
things beforementioned (which are the Contents of the second Chapter of
Genesis) are supposed to be comprehended within this time; for it is said
immediately after the foregoing approbation in the close of the first Chapter
of Genesis, that the Evening and the Morning (which make the Day complete) were
the sixth Day. After this you read that the story of Adam's Fall begins, that
Satan attempts the Woman, that there were several Discourses between the
Serpent and the Woman, and between her and the Man. Therefore it is evident that
our Parents did not fall from God on the same day they were ^reated.

Secondly, Several Reasons may be offered why it was not so, viz. first because
it is more worthy of God to believe that Adam and his Mate were not baffled so
soo^ after their Creation. It is not congruous to God's Wisdom to create so
excellent a Frame, and let it be spoiled immediately. Then more particularly
this may be alleged, that God's proposal of the Covenant of Works to our first
Parents, (on which depended the whole result of the present Affair) their
mutual consenting to it, and the ratifying it on God's part, and Man's part, in
some solemn manner, were a Work which required some length of time. Further,
the Parley between Satan and Eve might be of a long continuance, to it is
briefly set down by Moses. It is probable that she at first gave a repulse to
the Assault; it is likely that several Onsets were made before she yielded. We
cannot but suppose a considerable time of tempting, because otherwise it would
have been a Surprise, and then it would not have been what it is; that is, the
Transgression would not have been of so heinous a nature, and would not have
been animadverted on so severely. Again, it is rational to think that Adam and
his Wise being created by God in that perfection of Knowledge and Holiness which
are acknowledged to have been in them, could not suddenly be drawn from their
obedience to God. Those high Endowments could not easily be lost, those Divine
Gifts could not decay but by little and little. Therefore upon this account we
have reason to believe and affirm, that these Persons shrunk back from their
Integrity by degrees, and not all at once, and that the space of time between
their Temptation and actual Transgression in eating the forbidden Fruit, was of
some length, much more than we can reasonably suppose to have been crowded into
one single day. Thus both Scripture and Reason induce us to reject that common
Opinion, that our first Parents fell from their Primitive Innocence on the very
day that they were made.

But when I say this, I pretend not to determine how long Adam and Eve
continued in their Innocence, and what time passed before they were turned out
of Paradise. None can positively assert, that they were created and fell upon
the same day, because it is no where said so. But then on the other hand, it is
as true that none can be positive as to the certain time of their abiding in
their Innocence, because we find it not mentioned. As those who say they fell
in the very day in which God formed them, are not to be credited; so those
Cabalistick Jews, who say they were twenty years in Paradise before they were
turned out, are to be utterly exploded. The renowned Usher (in his Annals)
holds, that Adam was expelled out of Paradise on the tenth day from the
beginning of the World; according to which timing of it, he fell in the third
or fourth day after that of his Creation; for it is not to be thought that he
staid there after his Fall. But in my judgment those Hebrew Doctors (for they
are not all o^ them of the same mind) who hold that our first Parents continued
both in their Integrity and in Paradise eight days, do approach nearest to the
Truth. It is likely that they retained their Innocence, amidst many Assaults
and Temptations, ^ill about that time: so that as the first Week in the World
ended with the Creation of Man and Woman; so their fatal Seduction and Fall
were the close of the second week. However, from the Premises it is eviden^,
that there was a considerable time between their Formation and Lapse.

Hitherto I have considered the Sin and Fall of our first Pa^ents; now I must
speak of the dreadful Effects, of it. Man became like the Beasts which perish.
Man was in a happy and glorious condition, but made himself wretched and
miserable. Man was in honor; we were once happy. In which sense those words in
Genesis 3. 22. may be understood; Behold, the Man was as one of us, for so it may
be rendered according to the Hajah, fui^^
Hebrew. He was so happy as to be like one of us; he was created after our
Image, but now is miserable. It is such a manner of speaking as that of the
Poet, -- Fuimus Troes, ^uit Ilium, and ingens
Gloria Teucrorum.
Unless you are rather inclined to think those words are spoken ironically, and
by way of Interrogation, Is the Man become like one of us? As much as to say,
he is not, he is far from it, he is lost and undone, he has made himself a
very lamentable and wretched Creature.

Let us now briefly recount the Particulars of his Misery. First, God who
for^ad Man to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, now forbids him to touch the Tree of
Life. Now Man is turned out of Paradise, that Garden of Pleasure; he is sent
out of God's Presence, and is become a Reprobate and Castaway. There is a stern
Angel with a flaming Sword set at the entrance of Eden, to keep him and his
Posterity out for ever. We may in part imagine, but we cannot sufficiently
relate how sad and deplorable the condition of Adam and Eve was at this time.
They could not but spend their days in languishing Grief, in continual Sighs
and Tears; they could not but be filled with Regret and Remorse, when they
reflected on their past Felicity, and the loss of it by their Folly; when they
looked forward also, and saw the innumerable Evils which ensue upon this their
Miscarriage.

To augment their Sorrows, there soon happened a dismal effect of their Fall
and Depravation. Their dear Son Abel was murdered by his own Brother, the same
Devil that deluded them working on him. And how can the disconsolate Parents
bear this and the rest of their Sorrows? The Children had been brought up well,
they had been set to honest Employments. Adam gave unto Cain, Lands to till,
unto Abel Sheep to keep; their Callings intimating to them what should be their
Allotment and Portion afterward, the Real Estate being to be assigned to the
eldest Son, and the Personal to the younger, as is in use at this day. But the
careful Parents might dispose of their Estate, but they could not entail Virtue
and Grace upon their Children. Cain most maliciously rose up against his
Brother, and neither his Innocence nor his near Relation to him, could divert
him from violently pursuing and shedding his Blood. This made the hearts of the
distressed Parents bleed afresh, this added new dolours to their former ones,
and caused them yet more seriously to look back on their vile Apostasy from
God, which was the spring of all the Miseries they underwent.

There is nothing said in Scripture of the Repentaonce of these Sinners after
their Fall; whereupon some have concluded, that these first Offenders died in
Impenitency, and were denied all Mercy and Pardon. But it thust be remembered,
that the Sacred History omits many things, being very short and compendious;
yea, of this very nature some things are passed by, as that Noah repented of
his Drunkenness, and Lot of his Incest; so that we cannot draw an Argument in
this case from Scripture-silence. But we have reason rather to believe that
Adam and Eve did repent, and were saved: for the^ Promise of the Seed, which
was to redeem and save Mankind, was made immediately after the Fall, and so
concerned them as well as others, Genesis 3. 15. Besides, we may piously believe,
that God's Mercy would not overpass these poor Offenders at its very first
setting out, but rather that it would begin with them, to give an Instance of
his present Pity and Kindness, and an assurance of his future Goodness and
Clemency. The wise God would not suffer Satan to boast, that his first Conquest
and Spoils remained entire, and met not with an afterdefeat. This was the
Judgment of the most ancient, pious and learned Irenaeus adv. haeres. l. 3. c.
34. Tertullian. lib. de Praescript. cap. 52. Epiphan. cont. haeres. 46.
Augustin^ de Not. and Great. cap. 21. Greg. Naz. Orat. 18. and 31.
Fathers, and they declared, that the Tatiani, and others who held that Adam
never repented, but was damned, were very unreasonable and absurd in their
Assertion. Yea, Irenaeus and Epiphanius reckon this as an Haresy, and con^ute
it. And this may be observed, that the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, do
generally agree in this, that Adam was buried on Mount Calvary, where Christ
was crucified, intimating thereby that he had the benefit of our Savior's
Sufferings, that his Repentance for his Apostasy was accepted for Christ's
sake, that in the great and universal Shipwreck of the World (for it was then
all concerned) he swam safe to shore on this Plank.

But I proceed to consider some larger Effects of our first Parents Apostasy,
i. e. what befell their whole Race as well as themselves. We will consider them
both together. And these dole^ul Effects are both Temporal and Eternal. I begin
with the first, the temporal Evils; they are either outward or inward. The
outward and bodily Evils, which are the Consequences of Man's revolt, are very
many and great. Cursed is the Ground for thy sake, says God to Adam, Genesis 3.
17. At first its pregnancy and ^ecundity were exceeding great, so that it
yielded its Fruit easily without any toil. -- Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1.
Per se dabat omnia tellus.


And again, -- Ipsaque tellus
Omnia liberius nullo poscente ferebat.
And the like we find spoken by other Poets concerning the Golden Age, from
some broken Notions and Traditions (as a Dr. Jackson, Vol. 3. Book 10. chapter 25.
judicious Person of our own has observed) of Man's first Estate in Paradise,
and of that Estate wherein the World and all things should have continued, of
Man had not fallen. There was nothing noxious in the Earth at first, all things
were safe and wholesome, useful and pleasant, serviceable for the Life of Man,
and every ways advantageous to him. But Man's Fall introduced a change, the
Ground brought forth Thorns and Thistles, Genesis 3. 18. which shows, that the
former fruitfulness of it was decayed, and that now it would require some toil
and pains to prepare and manure it, in order to a plentiful Crop.

And therefore I am not forward to assent to what a late learned Writer
suggests, that Dr. Woodward Not. Hist. p. 85.
the Pl^ugh was of no use till after the Deluge, and was not invented till
than: as if the State of Innocence lasted till that time. He confesses himself,
that Ibid. p. 84 and 89.
God sent the Deluge ^o destroy that Constitution of the Earth, which was
calculated and contrived for a State of Innocence, and to fashion it anew
according to the lapsed and frail state of Mankind: And therefore according to
his own concession, the Flood should have come presently after the Fall of Man,
whereas it was above sixteen hundred years after i^r This Author ingeniously
lays hold upon the Sentence of Death, which was pronounced at the same time
with this part of the Curse about the Earth's Sterility, and argues from the
suspending of that to the suspending of this. But I conceive this is not a good
way of arguing, unless he could have proved that neither our first Parents, nor
any others, felt the effect of that Sentence of Mortality before the Deluge;
for it is of this which he was discoursing, and his Opinion is, that this was
the cause which checked the exuberance of the Earth, and therefore the Curse
took not place till this time. But the very words and expressions themselves,
by which the Curse of Sterility is set forth, seem to me to put this matter out
of controversy: for they respect not only Mankind in general, but the first Man
in particular, and more especially, and therefore must have taken place before
the Flood. Cursed is the Ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of it
all the days of thy Life. See here, Adam himself, for whose sake the Earth had
its Doom, was to experience the sad Effect of it by eating of the Fruits of the
Ground in sorrow, that is, with labor and toil, the Ground not bringing sorth
its Fruits with that ease, and in that plenty which it did before. The Curse
then was inflicted in Adam's time, and consequently before the Deluge. And unto
Adam himself the following words are directed, Thorns and Thistles shall it
bring ^orth unto thee, and ^hou shall eat the Herb of the Field, viz. with hard
labor and pains, or (as it is expressed in the next Verse) IN THE SWEAT OF THY
FACE; and this must continue until he return UNTO THE GROUND, OVT OF WHICH HE
VAS TAKEN. And we know he returned above 700 years before the Flood, and
consequently the Commination did affect that generation of Men which lived
before that time.

And there is a farther proof of this in v. 23. Therefore the Lord sent him
forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the Ground from whence he was taken.
This shows that the Curse had actually taken effect, and that Thorns and
Thi^tles were come up; for Adam here is set on work, by the immediate Order of
God himself, to root up those unprofitable Weeds, and other less useful Plants,
and to apply himself to laborious Agriculture, this being now become necessary
since his Apostasy, and since the denuntiation of the Curse, for unto this the
word therefore in the beginning of the Verse re^ers: as much as if it had been
said to Adam, Seeing the Earth is deprived of its former fruitfulness, seeing
it will not for the future bring forth Food for Man without painful ^illage,
and wearisome culture, therefore I send thee ^orth, etc. Here is a plain
Instance of the actual inflicting of the Curse in our first Parents time, even
long before the Universal Deluge. Wherefore I hope I shall prevail with this
ingenious Author to aker his System of the Earth as to this particular, that he
may avoid so considerable an Objection as this is, viz. That it is repugnant to
the Sacred Writings, to which I know he pays a great Reverence. And besides, so
far as I apprehend, his general Syst^m can very well be without this particular
Hypothesis. I take the freedom to suggest this to one who seems to be made for
great Discoveries in Natural Philosophy; and therefore out of that friendship
which I bear to him, and which he is pleased mutually to honor me with, I
would not have them tinctured with the least disrespect to the Mosaic
Writings, for this is enough to blast them in the esteem of those that are wise
and sober.

But tho I cannot yield assent to this Gentleman's Hypothesis as he has laid
It down; yet thus far I agree with him, that the Sentence before mentioned took
not place in the most effectual manner till the time he assigns; it was not
fully accomplished and executed till the Deluge. That indeed was the
Consummation of the Curse of Barrenness: then there was a more general
Restraint and Decay of the Fruits of the Earth, caused by that destructive
Inundation. But the Curse commenced before in part, as is clear from the
express words of the Mosaic History. And therefore I take it for an
impregnable Truth, because it is founded on the Sacred Records, that the Earth
was immediately cursed upon Man's Fall, and that all the Creatures degenerated
when he fell. The Earth, and Air, and other Elements became disordered, and in
some measure unwholesom, and sometimes fatal. Hence proceeded Dearth, Scarcity,
Pestilences, Earthquakes, Storms, Tempests, harmful Thunder and Lightning,
Conflagrations, and all manner of Evils and Calamities. Man's Body, which was
made of the Earth, participated of the Curse; whence flows such a variety of
Diseases and Distempers, that the Masters of Medicks have not yet completed
their Bill of Mortality, and given us a perfect Catalogue of the Maladies which
infest us.

Another external Effect of Man's Fall, is the labor and trouble of this Life.
Using Diligence and Labor in a lawful Calling is no Curse, for God set Adam to
work even in the State of Innocence: but afterward his Labor was attended
with faintness and weariness, with pain and uneasiness, as in that formentioned
place. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat Bread. Which seems more
particularly and especially to have reference to the great labor which
accompanies plowing and sowing, and gathering in of the Fruits of the Earth.
For tho, it is true, part of Adam's employment in Paradise was dressing the
Ground, yet it cost him not any considerable labor then, it was not like the
Husbandry which was afterward, and is at present, viz. uneasy and toilsome by
reason of the barrenness of the Ground. But in a larger and more extensive
sense these words denote all the fatigue and pains which Men undergo in this
World. It was the eating of the forbidden Fruit which was the cause of this
eating in sorrow and sweat. Now innumerable hardships and distresses are the
allotment of Man's Life: Now Man is born to trouble, Job 5. 7. All his days are
sorrow, and his travel grief, Eccles. 2. 23. Now the Earth is truly the Land of
Laborers: Numberless poor people sweat and turmoil in getting a livelihood,
and even their Bodies are bowed down sometimes with a burden: so the erect
Figure of Man is partly impaired. Who can recount the various Troubles and
Afflictions of this mortal State? What a vast number of Calamities and Miseries
is a Man liable to daily? How strangely is he beset with Crosses and Disasters
at home and abroad, in his private and relative Capacity, in his Body, Mind,
and all his Concerns? His Dominion over the Creatures is much diminished: Many
of them being hard to be tamed and kept in subjection, many of them proving
hurtful and mortal.

He may lament the loss of another Dominion which is more considerable, I mean
that which relates to that Sex over which God and Nature had given him a
Command and Authority. And on the other side, the undue subjection of the Woman
to her Husband, is the Curse and Punishment of the first Woman's Sin. Which I
take to be the meaning of those words, Genesis 3. 16. Thy desire shall be to thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee. It is true, she was under his Rule and
Command even in Innocence, as was suggested before: There was then a Power and
Preeminence in Man over the Woman, as the Apostle informs us 1 Cor. 11. 7, 8,
9. but they did not dispute this Superiority, they did not contend about it,
for the Man did not exert his Power imperiously; and the Woman's subjection
(called here her desire unto her Husband) was free and voluntary. But
afterward, this Obedience was forced and unwilling, and the Man's Dominion too
often degenerated into an arbitrary unreasonable sway. And that this is the
meaning of this place is plain from the like words of God to Cain (to pacify
his Wrath against his Brother Abel) unto thee shall be his desire, and thou
shall rule over him, Genesis 4. 7. that is, Abel is thy younger Brother, and shall
be subject unto thee, and thou shall have the superiority over him. So then the
import of the foresaid words is this, that tho indeed Man, as being first
created, had a superiority and preeminence over the Woman, and should have yet
had if they had stood in their Intergrity; yet now since the Fall the latter is
oftentimes too indecently treated, whilst the former instead of claiming his
just Precedence and Power, becomes inhuman and tyrannical.

A farther Curse on Womankind is that which is mentioned in Genesis 3. 16. I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow* and thy conception: in sorrow thou shall bring
forth Children. Difficulty in Childbearing, bringing forth with pain, is the
effect of the first Woman's transgression: Whereas (as De An^malib. lib. 7. c.
9.
Aristotle observes) other Creatures have not that uneasiness and torment in
bringing ^orth their Young.

Thus both Sexes partake of the Evil which accrued by the first Apostasy. And
wheresoever you look, you may see the cursed Fruits of it: All things are out
of order, and shattered by the Fall. That which the Apostles were falsely
accused for, viz. that they turned the World upside down, may truly be
attributed to our first Parents: they have by their wil^ul disobedience
perverted the Order of Nature, and disturbed the Course of the World. It is by
their means become a Place of Disorder and Confusion, a Stage of Affliction and
Misery, a Scene of Sorrows, Losses, Disappointments, Poverty, Reproach,
Diseases, Pains, Tortures and Plagues of all sorts. This is Man's portion till
he returns unto the Ground; for out of it was he taken, and unto it he shall
return, ver. 19.

Death is the last of all outward and bodily Evils: this was threatened in Genesis
2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Which place alone
is sufficient to refute the Socinian Conceit, that Smal^. de Div. Christi, cap.
7. Volkel. l. 3. c. 11.
Man was mortal in his first state of Innocence, and that the he had not
fallen, yet he should have died. We find here Mortality pronounced the Effect
of Adam's Transgression, In the day that thou eatest of the fo^bidden Fruit,
and thereby ^innest against thy Maker, thou shall surely die, i. e. thou shall
immediately become subject to Death, and afterward it shall actually be
inflicted on thee. So we are to understand these words, according to that of
Theodoret, (...). Theod. in Genesis Qu. 38.
God here call^th the Sentence of Mortality Death. And so Chrysost^m on the
place; Man is said ( says he) to die, in that the Sentence of Death is
pronounced against him. It was God's Mercy to reprieve him, that he might have
time to repent. But he was a dead Man at first, as a condemned Malefactor is
reckoned a dead Man, tho his Execution be respi^ed for a time. So is it with
the whole Race of Adam, they are obnoxious to Death, they have the Sentence of
it upon them, and they daily incur that Penalty by their Sins. The Great Judge
is pleased to spare them for a time, but at last the Sentence is executed on
them. Their Nature being corrupted and poisoned by the Fall, at length the
Venom and Virulency of it break forth; the contrary Qualities, which have been
long fighting within them, destroy them in the close; or in some other manner
their Bodies sink into the Grave, and stench and rottenness are their Portion.

The Inward and Spiritual Evils, which are the Consequences of the Fall, are
yet more grievous and direful. Not only the Bodies, but the Souls of all Adam's
Race feel the cursed Effects of his Apostasy from God. Hereby the Rational and
Divine Moiety of Man (which was the chief and noblest part of his Constitution)
was corrupted, its original Rectitude and primitive Righteousness were defaced,
and all the Powers and Faculties of his Mind miserably depraved. First, His
intellectual Powers are impaired by Ignorance and Error: the Notions of Good
and Evil are much obliterated, Reason is weakened, and can hardly do its office.
Man understanding not, must needs be like the Beasts, for it is this Faculty
which differenceth him from that rank of Beings. It was said of old, (...).
that Man is a wise Creature: And he was so questionless in the state of his
first Creation, and Primitive Innocence; but since his vile Defection he is
sunk into folly and sottishness. He confutes all his Pretenses, and baffles all
his Boastings of Knowledge and Wisdom; for when he should give experiment of
them, he discovers plainly that he is possessor of no such thing, but that his
rational part is much enfeebled, and that he has very ^alse and erroneous
conceptions of things, especially of those which relate to the Kingdom of God.
Thus Man's Head is hurt by the Fall.

His Heart likewise, his Will and Affections are exceedingly endamag'd by it.
There is a strange Impotency in our elective Faculty; we are not only disabled
in a great measure from choosing Good, but we have an aversion in us to God and
Goodness, and an inclination on the contrary to comply with Satan, and to do
whatever is displeasing to our Marker. We 2 Timothy 2. 26.
are taken captive by Satan at his will: for we have lost our Liberty, and we
have not so much sense as to bemoan our loss. This is our condition by Nature,
abstracted from the blessed Remedy which we have by Christ Jesus, and the
powerful Influences of the Holy Spirit. As for our Affections and Passions,
they are miserably dis^orted and dislocated, they continually sally forth to
undue Objects, they are unruly and extravagant, and put us into great disorder
and dis^raction. And indeed we cannot wonder that they are very refractory and
headstrong, when they have slipped off that Bridle which right Reason had put
upon them. Our Love and Hatred, our Desires, our Fears, our Hopes, our Joys,
our Anger, our Sorrows are all unbridled and ungoverned; they hurry us into
mischief, they fill us with perturbation, they make us uneasy, restless, and
unquiet, and they end in vanity and vexation of Spirit. These disorders in the
Understanding, Will and Affections, make way for more visible ones in the
actions of men's Lives. Hence proceed Idolatry, Profaneness, Blasphemy,
Perjury, Injustice, Theft, Rapine, Violence, Slaughter, Murder, Drunkenness,
Luxury, Whoredom, and all kind of Lasciviousness; in short, Sins of all
degrees, Vices of all dimensions.

Thus it was rightly said by the Royal Prophet, that Man in his lapsed
condition is become like the Beasts; he is sunk below his own Species. He that
listened to a Brute (the Serpent) is become like one. Man, the Flower and Glory
of the Creation, resembles the Beasts. He is as sly and crafty as a Fox, as
lustful and salacious as a Goat, as fierce as a Lion, as savage as a Bear, as
ravenous as a Wolf, as gluttonous as a Swine, as angry and barking as a Dog,
and sometimes as stupid and dull as an Ass. Thus Man is become like the Beasts.
which this Psalmist takes notice of in other places likewise, where you find
him representing wicked Men as Psalm. 22. 12.
fat Bulls, Psalm. 74. 13.
devouring Dragons, Psalm. 57. 4.
roaring Lions, Psalm. 22. 16.
ravenous Dogs. And this good King acknowledges even concerning himself, that,
so far as he had acted sinfully against God, he was not only foolish and
ignorant, but even as a Beast before him. So Agur, i. e. as some think,
Solomon, who had been a notorious Offender, confesses that he was more brutish
than any one, Prove. 30. 2. The New Testament also speaks after this manner;
Christ calls false Prophets Mat. 7. 15.
ravenous Wolves, and Luke 13. 32.
Herod a Fox: And John Baptist styles the wicked Jews Mat. 3. 7.
Vipers. St. Paul calls his Adversaries whom he grappled with at Ephesus, 1
Cor. 15. 32.
Beasts: he styles false Teachers Acts 20. 29.
grievous Wolves, and Phil. 3. 2.
Dogs: and he thanks God that he was delivered out of the Mouth of the 2 Timothy
4. 17.
Lion, meaning Nero. And the Apocalyptick Beast is to be understood of the
vilest and wickedest Body of Men under Heaven. This too was the Notion and
Phrase of the best Moralist among the Platonists and Stoics. They held that
wicked men are a kind of Brutes, that Vice transforms them into mere sensitive
Animals. The rectified Mind, said they, is the Man, but the sensitive Appetite
is the Beast. This latter they declared to be the Principle which predominateth
in all vicious Men: and because they wholly ^ollow their Sense, and are led
merely by a corporeal Appetite, they resemble Brutes. Accordingly Epimenides
calls the Cr^tians, evil Beasts, as the Tit. 1. 12.
Apostle takes notice; and for the same reason all Persons that are given to
Vice deserve that Denomination. For their Portion, like Nebuchadnezzar's, is
with the Beasts. You cannot reckon them in the number of Men, for tho they
retain the human Shape, yet they are really degenerated into the nature of
Brutes.

Nay, Man is become more irrational by far than the whole Herd of Brutes, who
by a natural Instinct or by some certain Laws of Motion, following the
Apprehensions of their Senses, discern what is good or hurtful to them, and not
only so, but embrace the one, and avoid the other. Man alone, once the
excellentest Creature in the World, but now depraved, knows not his Happiness,
or despises it. which in the sacred Style is expressed after this manner, The
Ox knows his Owner, and the As^ his Master's Crib, but Israel does not know, my
people do not consider, Isa. 1. 3. These are the inword and spiritual Evils
which are the effects of Adam's Degeneracy, and they are usually called by
Divines by the name of Spiritual Death; for these also were part of that
dreadful Threatening, In the day thou ^atest thereof thou shall surely die.

But there are not only temporal but eternal Evils which are the fruit of Man's
Apostatizing. Man by his Guilt and Pollution contracted by the Fall, and since
delighted in, is liable to be excluded from Happiness in another Life, and is
obnoxious to eternal Punishment and Misery in the World to come: for Sin of it
self can never be expiated, and therefore the Guilt of it must necessarily
continue without any Period. Accordingly we read that the Wages of Sin is
Death, Romans 6. 23. i. e. eternal Death; for it being opposed in that place to
eternal Life, it cannot signify less. It appears then that the Sinner deserves
to be ^ormented both in Body and Soul with endless and eternal pains; which
makes his Condition far worse than that of the Beasts, who Perish, and so are
made incapable of all future Sufferings, This is that worst of Deaths, which is
another part of that dire^ul Threatening denounced against Adam, and which is
the most grievous and terrible effect of his Disobedience and falling from God;
and from this (as from the other Evils procured by Man's Apostasy) there is no
redemption on (...) the merciful and meritorious Undertakings of the blessed
Messiah, who was afterward promised.

After all, it might be observed, that not only Adam and Eve were threatened to
be punished for this Transgression, but even the Serpent, which the Devil made
use of in order to it: he was rendered the most cursed of all Creatures, and
condemned to grovel on his Belly, and to feed on the Dust of the Earth, Genesis 3.
14. Which was designed to be a lasting, as well as a visible Memorial of God's
Displeasure against the first Sin in the World. So we read afterward that God
spared not the brut^ Beasts, whom the Sinners of the old world had abused, but
destined them no less than the Offenders themselves to Destruction, Genesis 6. 7.
which gives us some account of the implacable Opposition of the Divine Nature
to all Sin, and even to all that are but instrumental and serviceable to it. He
that is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity, will not suffer it to go
unpunished wherever he observes it. And this might be added here, that the
foresaid Curs^ on the Serpent has reference also to the malicious D^mon who
actuated that Animal. The doom of this impure Spirit is here included; his
being not able to raise up himself against the Servants of the most High, so as
to hurt them; and his being (...) to Hell, and his being made for ever a curs^d
Creature, l^ath'd and abhorred of God and Man, are comprehended in this
Execration.

Thus I have finished the second State of Man. This I call a State as it
respects Us, but I call it a Dispensation as it has respect unto God, because
it was his Will and Pleasure to suffer this to be. Out of infinite Wisdom he
permitted Man's Fall, designing to make it subservient at last to the Good of
Mankind, and to his own Glory, by inhansing his Mercy and Goodness in the (...)
and unexpected rescuing of Mankind from the Miseries which they had incurred by
this general Lapse. I say general; for as I asserted before concerning the
first State, that of Innoc^ncy, that it included all Men in it as well as our
first Progenitors, so I must declare the same concerning this second State and
Dispensation. It takes in not only Adam and Ev^ (who indeed were the most
consp^cuous Persons) but all the succeeding Generations of Men and Women. For
by reason of our first Parents wilful sinning and transgressing the Divine Law,
all Persons are under the Displeasure of God, the Penalty of his Law, and the
Power of Satan: for they are all conceived in Sin, and brought forth in
Iniquity; they are naturally averse to all Good, and prone to all Evil, and
therefore a Condemnation is justly passed on them all.

Here I might cop^ously treat of Original Sin, and the fatal Influence of it:
but I intend not at present to enlarge on any main Article or Point of
Divinity, this Treatise being designed only as an (...) to so great a
Performance. This only in brief is to be remembered, that Adam, as a common
Person, sinned for himself and his whole Posterity. In him all Mankind were
created, and in him they all ^ell and were corrupted. Adam being the Father and
Root of all Successions, by his sinning involved himself and his Prog^ny into a
State of Guilt and Enmity against God. This great Banker broke, and with him
all his Race were beggared and ruined. His particular Fault became the
Catholic Crime of all Persons descended from him, even before they knew what
was Good and Evil, i. e. before they were born. They were all accursed in him,
and rendered obnoxious to the Divine Wrath, and no Creature was able to deliver
them from it. But God, the merciful Creator and indulgent Father of Mankind,
was pleased to contrive their Deliverance. Accordingly he made an early
Discovery of his Grace and Love to our first Parents, and to their Posterity,
which leads me to the next Dispensation.

CHAP. III.
The Nature of the Third General Dispensation. The first part of which is the
Adamick State. The early Promise concerning the Messiah, Genesis 3. 15. explained.
He was expected betimes. The New Testament witnesses that he was to bruise the
Serpent's Head. Several positive Laws were under this Economy. That of
Oblations and Sacrifices is especially considered. Eucharistical Sacrifices
were part of the Law of Nature. Expiatory and bloody ones were not so. Thence
these latter were disapproved of by the wisest Heathens. They are ^ounded upon
Divine Institution. The practice of Sacrificing among the Pagans was derived to
them by Tradition from the Jews, or the foregoing Patriarchs. Whether
Sacrifices were prescribed before or after the Fall of our First Parents.
Concerning the Primitive Priesthood. The Distinction of clean and unclean
Animals was in respect of Sacrificing, not Eating. Genesis 4. 26. explained, and a
settled Church founded upon it. Marrying with Infidels seems to b^ prohibited
under this Dispensation. The Rise of Polygamy. The seven Precepts said to be
given to the Sons of Adam and Noah. The Improbability of this Jewish Tradition
evinced from several Considerations. The Mistakes of Volkelius and Episcopius
concerning the Antediluvian O^conomy.

THE Third General Dispensation is that of (...) and Recovery through the
M^ssia^. This is the most considerable State of all, and the most lasting: for
it extends from Adam's Restoration to the end of the World. Now begins the Law
of grace, and the Law of Faith, which makes this a new O^conomy. Now God's Will
concerning Man's Redemption and the free Pardon of Sins was discovered. Now,
upon the Fall of Adam, and the Corruption of Mankind, and the forfeiture of all
Happiness, Life and Immortality are bestowed anew. Rev. 2. 7.
To him that overcom^th, it is given to eat of the Tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Deliverance here, and Eternal Life hereafter,
are freely offer^d. Now God treats with Man de novo, viz. by a Mediator. Now
there was a New Covenant made between God and Adam, or rather between God and
Mankind in him. The sum of the Covenant was this, that God on his part would
show Mercy unto Adam and his Prosterity for the sake of the Messiah, who was to
die for their Sins, and that by virtue of his Satisfaction and Merit Man should
be accepted. And on Man's part it was covenanted and promised by Adam, that
they should believe in this Messiah, and rely upon his Undertakings and Merits,
and faithfully perform all the other Conditions required of them in those Laws
which God published to the World. This Covenant of Grace succeeded in the room
of the Covenant of Works made with Man in his State of Integrity: for he by his
Fall breaking that Covenant, there was another entered into; and it is called
the Covenant of Grace, because it is the result of the Divine Favor and
Goodness: for on the violation of the first Covenant, Man became obnoxious to
the Devine Displeasure, and might justly have been left to perish in his Sin;
but the Divine Mercy and Philanthropy exerted themselves in favor of Mankind,
and graciously submitted to a n^w Cov^nant through the Mediator and Sponsor
Christ Jesus, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. This is the
Cov^nant of Grace made with Mankind, of which I shall speak.

But let me remark this by the by, that tho this grand Revelation and Covenant
constitute a new Economy, yet the Administration of the Law of Nature still
remained. As natural Religion was of use before in the two other Oeconomies
(for they were under the Law of Nature mixed with some Revelutions) so now it
c^aseth not. Tho Nature is corrupted, yet this Light is not extinguished. The
Law of Nature written in Man's Heart at his Creation is still necessary and
useful. This was imprinted on Men as they were created with rational Minds, and
therefore this must last always, and it was made to do so* for it must conduct
them as they are M^n, i. e. as they are endued with Principles of Reason. This
goes through all the Particular Dispensations which I shall mention afterward.

Having premised this, I come to speak of the (...) O^conomy of Grace, which
contains in it all those Periods of Time which were from the discovery of the
blessed Seed to Adam until the end of the World. This one great Disp^nsation of
Grace comprehends under it these four particular and p^culiar ones 1. The
Patriarchal. 2. The M^s^ical or L^gal. 3. The G^ntil^. 4. The Christian or
Evang^lical Dispensation.

(...) I begin first with the Patriarchal O^conomy, which is called so because
it prevailed in the Time when the old Patriarchs lived. Adam, N^ah, and
Abraham, were the principal of them, and from them this O^conomy may be
distinguished into three Periods, viz. the A^amical, (for though the two former
Dispensations may be ^ruly called Adamick^ as respecting both the innocent and
^allen State of Adam; yet here I restrain the term to that particular part of
God's Dispensation, which was in this first Patriarch's time, from his blessed
Recovery till his leaving the World: and it comprehends whatever things the
Holy Scripture has mentioned as proper to him and his immediate Posterity till
the Flood) the Noachical, and the Abrahamick. The first commenceth with the
discovery of the Messiah made to Adam, and lasts till Noah: the second begins
with Noah, and the Confirmation of the Covenant of Grace made to him: the third
takes place from the renewing of it to Abraham.

The first Patriarchal Dispensation, called Adamical and Antediluvian, began
with that signal Promise concerning the M^ssias in Genesis 3. 15. I will put
Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed. It shall
bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. It is true, this may be meant
of the natural Brood of Serpents, and of all the Woman's Offspring, namely,
there shall be a great Antipathy between those and these. Who sees not that
there is a natural Enmity between the Serpent and Man? The former is ready with
his venomous Sting to hurt Mankind; he may be said to bruise their Heel, for
this Creature being on the ground, can more easily come at that part, and
i^jure it. Therefore Man is afraid of him, and f^eeth from him; but, if he has
an opportunity, he crusheth him, he bruiseth his Head, he destroys him. Thus
the Jews generally interpret this Text, viz. of the i^bred Antipathy between
the natur^l Serpent and all Mankind. But tho this be the literal and most
obviou^ Sense of the words, yet it is not the primary one. For there is another
and higher meaning of them, and that is this; by the Serpent is meant the
Devil, because he entered into the Serpent, and appea^'d in that Shape when he
tempted Eve: and by the Seed of the Woman is mean^ Christ, who is signally said
to be made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. in contradistinction to others who are made
of Man, and are the Seed of Man. There is an irreconcilable Enmity and
Hostility between these two, Christ and Satan. This latter shows his Enmity in
bruising the Heel of the other, in persecuting him and his Followers; but the
former shall show his Antipathy in bruising the others Head, i. ^. in utterly
destroying his Power and Dominion. Here then is the Promise of Christ's coming
in the Flesh, of the Son of God assuming our Nature, and thereby redressing the
Evils which came by the Fall, and by his meritorious Death making Atonement for
the Sins of Men, and reconciling them to the incensed Majesty of Heaven. And it
is here included that even before he was incarnate, the Merit of his future
Suffe^ings and Death should in all Ages be imputed to those who believe in him,
and look for his Coming. For he is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World, he was appointed from Eternity to redeem and save lost Mankind by the
effusion of his precious Blood. This is the purport of this gracious Promis^
made to Adam in Paradise: this was the first dawning of the Gospel Light, here
were the first Tidings of a M^ssia^.

Some of the Church of Rom^ understand this Promise concerning the Virgin Mary;
the Vulgar Latin have rendered it ips^, she shall bruis^ thy Head: and hence it
is inferred by Tiri^us and others on the place, that that Pronoun refers to a
Woman, and that Woman is the Virgin Mary, who bringing forth Christ, bruised
the Serpent's Head. But these Men must be reminded that the H^br^w word which
we translate It, is not hi, but (...), not she but (...) However, being of the
Masculine Gender, it must needs re^er to the word before, which is of the same
Gender^ and that is Z^rang, the S^^d, viz. the Seed of the Woman, which is
Christ. The Law^ of Grammar forbid us to render it she, and the Laws of the
Christian Religion forbid us to apply it to the Virgin Mary, seeing it is the
proper Work of the M^ssia^ to bruise and break the Serpent's Head, i. e. to
destroy Satan. This Interpretation then we quit, not only as it is
ungrammatical, but as it is profane, and blasphemously derogates from the
Office and Undertakings of Christ. Of him alone we ought to understand these
words, to him only we can with good reason apply them.

Thus without doubt they were understood by our First Parents, and administered
unspeakable Solace and Comfort to them. Hence the Messia^ was daily expected by
them, and when Eve was delivered of her firstborn Son, she thought verily she
had brought forth the M^ssia^, who should bruise the Serpent's Head. I have
gotten (^aith she) a Man from the Lord, or (according to the Hebrew) Ish eth
Jehovah, Genesis 4. 1.
the Man the Lord. Not only the Jewish, especially the Cabalistick Doctors, but
Helvic. Desider. matri^ Evae. Cocceiu^ in lo^um.
some worthy Persons of the Christian Persuasion read the words thus, and
interpret them concerning the Blessed Seed. Helvicus has showed that Eth is an
Article of the Accusative Cas^, and he does it in so many Instances in
Scripture, that it seems to be the Hebr^w Idiom. And besides, it is a
demonstrative or ^mphatick Particle, and points at some Thing or Person in a
signal manner. So here it emphatically refers to the M^ssia^, who was (...),
both Man and God. Our Grandmother Ev^ was in hopes that she had born this
God-man, that Person who was to bruise Sa^an's Head, according to the Promise
made to them.

It is not wholly improbable that (...) also persuaded himself that his Son
Noah should be the Messiah, and take away the Curse of the Fall, and bring a
Blessing with him, and comfort the distressed World, and give it Rest and Ease;
and therefore he named him Noah, which signifies both Rest and Consolation.
There was without question a continual expectation of the Coming of this
Person, and of the ful^illing of that Promise concerning his destroying of
Satan. The seventy Interpreters understood that Text of the Messiah, which
occasioned their making the masculine (...) to answer to (...) of the Neu^er
Gender, as the Apostle also does, Gal. 3. 16. And all the anti^nt Jews
understood this Promise of the blessed Seed Christ, tho the Moderns do not. You
will find it thus applied by both the Targums.

And the New Testament approves of this, by bearing witness that Christ is the
Person who ^ruis^s the Serpent's Head. He took Flesh and Blood, that through
Death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the D^vil,
Heb. 2. 14. To this purpose the Son of God was manifest^d, that he might
destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. and Luke 10. 18. John 12. 31. and
14. 30. with many other places, declare that this was he who was to bruise
Satan under our feet. This is the Scope of the whole Gospel, and this is that
Gospel which was preached by God in Paradis^. When Adam, and in him all
Mankind, aposta^ized from God, and could expect nothing but the Reward of their
Rebellion, and therefore might have abandoned themselves to utter Despair, God
revived them with this Promise of the M^ssias, The Seed of the Woman shall
bruis^ the S^rp^nt's Head. God the Father so loved the World, that he resolved
to give to his Only Son to be their Redeemer; who being the Eternal Wisdom and
Word of God, and so truly God, and one in Essence with the Father, was in due
time to assume our Nature, and become Man, thereby to transact the Redemption
of lost Mankind, and accomplish the Designs of Grace and Mercy to undone
Sinners. Which tho it be not expressly on this occasion set down in the M^saick
History, yet other passages of Sacred Scripture assure us that it was so; and
that the Second Pers^n in the S^cred Trini^y undertook to pacify the Wrath of
the Dei^y, and to reconcile Man unto God, and to accomplish the New Covenant
made with Adam and his Posterity, even a Covenant of Grace and Mercy through
his Blood. Having thus showed the main thing in this Dispensation, I must in
the next place acquaint you what other considerable things made up this
particular Economy and Administration of the Almighty.

After this grand Revelation and Discovery made to Adam and Eve concerning the
Messiah to come, there were several positive Precepts and Laws given to them
and their Children. Some reckon that as one, that the Woman should be subject
to the Man, He shall rule over thee, Genesis 3. 16. For these words, they say, may
contain, not only a Threatening, but a Command. Here is not only signified the
Punishment consequent on the Fall, that the Husband should imperiously rule
over the Woman (which we mentioned before) but here is enjoined the subjection
of the latter to the former, this being now become requisite in the state that
Men and Women are in. And tho it was a Curse to be tyrannically ruled, tho a
servile subjection was the Consequent of the Fall, yet now it is a Duty to be
freely submissive, and with it goes a Blessing.

That also may be looked upon as another positiv^ Law, that Men should labor.
For tho those words, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat Bread, Genesis 3. 19.
carry the nature of a Commination and Curse, so far as Man's Labor is with
uneasiness, trouble and pain, yet* they may likewise be understood in the way
of a Precept, in as much as Labor and Diligence in ^ lawful Calling are useful
and necessary in this present State, and are indeed of the Law of Nature and
Reason, tho they are here made Positive, as I have heretofore showed that these
two are not inconsistent.

Moreover, under this Dispensation the Marriag^ of Parents and Children, (which
was also against the Law of Nature) was forbid by God, Genesis 2. 24. And it is
not improbable that there was a particular prohibition from God, that none who
were near by Nature and Blood, should be joined together in Marriage: for although
at first it was absolutely necessary in order to Propagation, that the Brother
should marry the Sister; yet when this Necessity was removed, we read that they
observed the Laws of Consanguinity and Propinquity.

The next thing I take notice of must be more largely insisted upon, viz. That
Oblations and Sacrifices were the Religion of the People of this Adamick
Dispensation. Sacrificing and Offering are sometimes taken as synonymous: When
they offered up the Fruits of the Earth, and other things, they might be said
to sacrifice. Therefore P^rphyri^^ De Abstinenti^.
distinguishes between bloody and unbloody Sacrifices: the former were of the
Fruits of the Ground, the latter were of living Creatures. Of both these we
read in Genesis 4. 3, 4. where it is said that Cain ^ffer'd of the Fruit of the
Ground, Abel of the Firstlings of his Flock. Both these, viz. the Oblations of
first Fruits, and the Sacrifices of Beasts were constantly observed by the
Antediluvian Patriarchs. The question is, Whether this kind of Worship was
natural, or by divine Command. As for the offering the First Fruits of the
Earth unto God, St. Chrysostom gives his Judgment thus, Cain had no Law
concerning these, but (...). De. Sta^.
merely of himself, and by the incit^ment of his own Conscience, offered this
^ort of Oblation. And so others afterward offered their First Fruits unto God
as an acknowledgment that they received those and all other good things from
him. They were grateful Recognitions of the Almighty's Soveraign^y, and of
their dependence upon him. These Annual Oblations were owning the year's
Income, and the Mercies of all their Life to be from God. By these first Fruits
they acknowledged him the Author of all, that particularly he was the Owner of
the Soil whence those Fruits came, and that a Blessing and Increase were to be
expected only from him. The best and most precious things that God bestows on
us, ^aith (...). De Abstinent.
Porphyriu^, are the Fruits of the Earth: therefore with these we ought to
worship God; and these he calls the Natural Worship of a Deity. There needed
not a Command of God for these; for the Law of Nature dictated this kind of
Oblations, tho it may be there was a Divine Command added to enforce the
Natural Dictate.

As for the other sort of Offerings, and which Porphyry calls Bloody
Sacrifices, the killing of Beasts, and offering them up to God, there is some
Controversy (and that not undeservedly) about these. It is disputed whether
Abel and those before Noah offered this kind of Sacrifice by any natural Reason
moving them to it, or by God's Institution and Command; whether it was done by
the mere Light of Nature, or by Revelation. ^ There are Learned Writer^ on both
sides. Justin Martyr (or whoever was the A^thor of the Questions and Answers to
the Orthodox) is very peremptory: None of those (says he) who offered Brutes
as a Sacrifice to God before ^he Law, did it (...).
by Divine Order. Then according to him all of them did it by some Natural
Instinct, and Dictate of Reason. And so say other (...) and several of the
Rabbis: So say De Miss^ lib. 1. c. 20.
Be^^armine, Suarez, Aquinas, and most of the Papists. So say Soci^us and his
Followers; and for this Reason, that those Sacrifices may not be thought to be
the Representations of the Sacrifice of Christ, which without doubt was the
chief end of the instituting of Sacrifices. Some of other Persuasions likewise
agree in this Tenent, that Sacrifices ( i. e. the killing and offering of
Beasts) were by the Law of Nature. But these are contradicted by others, both
Papists and Protestants, who confidently aver, that these Sacrifices were by
the special Injunction of God, and did not proceed from any natural Notions and
Principles which they had.

Now, it is my desire here (as it is in all other Cases) to reconcile dissenting
and disputing Men: which may effectually be done, by leading them off from
their Extremes which they adhere to. In my judgment neither to these Parties
are in the right, not those who say all Sacrifices are by the Law of Nature,
nor those who assert that all of them must needs be by Divine Revelation. There
is a middle way between these, which I take to be the true one, viz. that both
Natural Reason, and Supernatural Revelation concurred here. Reason taught them
to offer some Sacrifices, and a positive Word from God (tho not expressed by
Mos^s) taught them to offer others. I must remind you then, that Sacrifices
were either Eucharistical or Expiatory, that is, they were either offered to
God in way of thankful acknowledgment, or to atone and expiate for their Sins.
The former of these, I conceive, were dictated by the Light of Nature, but the
latter were wholly or partly from God.

First, I say, the offering of Eucharistical Sacrifices was part of the Law of
Nature: for Reason would teach them to offer their Flocks as well as their
Fruits to God. These, no less than the other, were Acknowledgments, they were
owning of God's Dominion and Sovereignty. As Cain, a Husbandman, offered by the
mere instinct of Nature the Fruits of the Ground as an Acknowledgment that God
was his Benefactor; so the same Principle moved Abel a Shepherd, to offer the
first of his Flock in way of Recognition, that God bestowed those good things
upon him. Yea, Abel by the only instinct of right Reason, judged that God was
to be worshipped with the best things, and that the Sacrifices ought to be of
the fattest of the Flock. I do not think Minutius Felix discourses and argues
closely, when to the Gentiles, who objected against the Christians that they
had no Altars and Sacrifices, he replieth thus; Shall we offer Sacrifices and
Oblations to God, which he gave us on purpose for our use and service? It is
Ingratitude to return him Gifts again. And Arnobius says the same, in answer
to the same Objection, but with as little reason: It is madness ( says he) to
measure God by our Needs, and to give the things that are useful to us, to God
who is the giver of them. But this was a great mistake; there was no madness in
doing this, but a great deal of reason and sobriety: For natural Gratitude
directed them to give something to God: therefore Sacrifices are called Gifts
in the Holy Scripture, particularly Abel's Offering is styled a Gift, Heb. 11.
4. and so the Mosaic Sacrifices are called Corban, i. e. a Gift, Mat. 5. 23
24. The Law of Thankfulness, which is a Law of Nature, taught the Ancient
Patriarchs to offer these Gifts as Tokens and Testimonies of their Gratitude.
By these they openly proclaimed, that God was the supreme Giver of all things.
Natural Light informed them, that it was fitting to make some Returns to God,
to give something to him from whom they received all. They needed not a
particular Command from God for this: These were spontaneous, free and
uncommanded Offerings, these were dictated by Reason, and the voluntary Motions
of their Hearts, which told them that they ought to acknowledge God's Goodness
to them by such gratulatory Sacrifices. These were but so many Acts of
Thanksgiving to God for Benefits and Favors received of him, and were but
natural Signs of Worship due to him. But,

Secondly, Besides the Eucharistical Sacrifices, there were Expiatory ones: But
these were not the Dictates of Natural Reason; for tho the Patriarchs might
persuade themselves that those Sacrifices being thankful Acknowledgments and
Gifts would be acceptable to God, that he would receive them kindly, and be
pleased not to show himself angry and offended for their former Miscarriages;
yet this they might as well have thought to have been done by the unbloody
Sacrifices, the offering of the Fruits of the Earth: for they being Gifts as
well as these, those that offered them might expect that God would be pleased
with them, and that thereby they should conciliate the Divine Favor and
Acceptance, and so that there should be an Expiation made for their Sine. Thus
the unbloody sort of Sacrifices would have been sufficient, and there is no
reason why the bloody ones should be added. No truly, Nature could afford them
no substantial Reason why the Blood of Beasts should be shed. Reason does not
tell us that God is delighted in the Blood and Pain of the innocent Brutes.
Reason does not acquaint us that the offering of these is a satisfaction to his
Justice, and a means to avert the Judgments of God. there is no Law of Nature
that dictates any such thing.

Hence the sacrificing of the Beasts was condemned by the wisest Men among the
Heathens. What says Porphyrius? (and by him you may know what the Pythagoreans
thought and held, for he was a principal Man of that Sect;) De Abstinenti^
As for sacrificing of Beasts and Blood ( says he) that was not from the
beginning. but introduced lately by superstitious and wicked Persons. Bloody
Sacrifices commenced from Famine and War, when People were forced to taste
Blood. When they had tasted of the Blood of Animals, they sacrificed them to
the Gods. Again, says he, in the same place, As they sacrificed, so they eat:
Flesh was at first not eaten; afterward that being sacrificed, they eat it,
for they reckoned what was good for their Gods, was good for themselves; so
from ^^ating they proceeded to offer. Thus this Philosopher was mistaken about
the first Original of bloody Sacrifices: and it could not be expected that he
should attain to the true Reason of it, which (as I shall show you) is the
grand bottom of revealed Religion. But this Testimony of Porphyrius confirms
what I am asserting, viz. that bloody Sacrificing was not the Dictate or
Precept of Nature. Had it been so, this Person, who was so well versed in the
Law of Nature and Reason, would not have inveighed against this kind of
Sacrificing, as not becoming God nor Men, as having no Reason nor Religion to
justify it. He would not have told us in plain terms, that God is by no means
delighted in the Blood of Beasts, and that this manner of Sacrificing was
discountenanced and disapproved by the Oracles, as he relates.

Let us hear what other Heathens thought of the bloody Sacrifices. It is
impious to pollute Altars with Blood, says De Legib. 1. 6.
Plato: Who concurreth with Pythagor^s in this as well as in many other things.
Varro, quoted by Arnobius, declares, That the true Gods neither desire nor
expect these Sacrifices, and the false Gods made of Brass and Wood do less care
for them. From Tertullian we learn that the Philosophers had no good opinion of
Sacrifices, and Quis enim Philosophorum sacrificare compellit? Apol. cap. 4^.
never were urgent with the People to offer them. The best Heathen Moralists
professed, that the only acceptable Offerings were Non in victimis, licet
opimae sine, auroque praefulgeant Deorum est honos, ^ed pi^ and rect^ voluntate
venerantium. Sen. de Benef. I. 1. c. 6.
a pious Heart and an upright Will. Some of the Poets have slighted and
disparaged the offering of slain Beasts in Sacrifice. Non bove mactato
coelestia numina gaudent.
Ovid is of this number, and moreover tells us, that Lib. Metamorph. 15.
bloody Sacrifices were not in the more Innocent and Primitive Ages of the
World. Which tho it be false, yet it shows the Sentiment of this and other wise
Men, who had no good opinion of this kind of Sacrifices. Among the Egyptians,
who were the wisest of the Ancient Nations, no Animals were killed for
Sacrifice to the Gods, says Macrobius.

Do you think now that the gravest and wisest Heathens would have disapproved
of and condemned Sacrifices, if they had been a Dictate of Nature and Morality,
if they had been the Natural Worship of God? Would they not rather have
defended and maintained them? for natural Religion, and the main Offices of it,
are extolled by none more than them. But as they were bloody Sacrifices, there
was no Principle in Nature and Reason to commend them: and thence it is that
the wisest Pagans never spoke seriously for them, but generally against them;
and they were of the opinion that God was not honored by the Blood of Brutes,
and the killing of harmless Beasts; and that he took no pleasure in the Smoke
that ascended from their slain Bodies. It is evident then, that bloody
Sacrificing, as it denotes Atonement and Propitiating, was not the result of
Natural Light, but was by positive and Divine Institution. And from what was
known hence, there came to be even among the Pagans a Notion of Expiation by
sacrificing, which we find in several of their Writings: but they had not of
themselves any such apprehension.

This I prove from the Reason which Moses, or rather the Lord by Moses, gives
of bloody Sacrifices, Levit. 17. 11. The Life of the Flesh is in the Blood, and
I have given it to you on the Altar, to make an Atonement for your Souls, for
it is the Blood that makes Atonement for the Soul. Tho this Reason of offering
the Blood of slain Beasts was divulged to the Israelites at this particular
time, yet this reason was good at first, and was the true account of the
Service of Bloody Sacrifices among the Patriarchs. Now the Reason here given
why these Sacrifices are to be used, is, because it is the Blood that makes
Atonement for the Soul. And if you ask the Reason of this, it is implied in the
beginning of the Verse before recited, the Life of the Flesh is in the Blood:
So then when the Blood of the Beast is offered in Sacrifice, the Life of it is
offered; and the Life of the Beast is supposed to be given instead of the Life
of the Offender, for whom the Sacrifice is offered: and so the Beast was slain
instead of the Person that offended. This was the intent and meaning of Bloody
Sacrifices.

But this Divine Significations of them was not the issue of Natural Reason.
Did this tell them that the Blood of beasts was an Atonement for the Souls of
men, that the blood of slain animals on the altar, signified that men deserved
to bleed and die? Did this tell them that the blood of Brutes was poured forth
instead of the blood of Men? that Sacrisicing was an Acknowledgment of Demerit
and Guilt, and that he that killed the Beast did as much as confess he deserved
to be so used? It must be from Revelation at first that they had a particular
and distinct knowledge of this, that God would accept of a Sacrifice in the
place of the Guilty Sinner. Natural light could not make this out: much less
could it discover that these Sacrifices were Representations and Types of the
Great Sacrifice which was to come; that they shadowed our Christ the Redeemer
who was to be sacrificed on the Cross, and to shed his Blood for the Salvation
of Mankind. This was the main thing which those Sacrifices represented. God
instituted them chiefly to intimate the translating of our punishment on our
Redeemer, and to signify the great bloody Sacrifice of the Messiah which is
truly Propitiatory. It was then by Divine Revelation discovered to our first
Parents, and to the Ancient Patriarchs, that offering the blood of slain Beasts
would be an acceptable service to God: and hereupon they constantly used
themselves to this service and worship.

But you will say, Expiatory and Bloody Sacrificing has been in use among all
Nations, not only Jews, but Greeks, Romans, Barbarians, and even the whole
Gentile World. If they knew nothing of this by the light of Nature, how came
they to use this sort of Sacrifice constantly? How came some of them to have
this notion, that the Beasts bled in their stead? I answer, it was derived to
the Gentiles by Tradition: they received it from those who had it first by
Supernatural Manifestation. Hence they got the notion of Expiatory Sacrifices
(as well as of some other things, as I could show you) they were transmitted to
them from the practice of the Jews: or if any of the Gentiles had this
persuasion before, they received it by Tradition from their Forefathers, who
had it from the Father of all, Adam, who had it from God by particular
Revelation. And this seems to be confirmed by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, chap. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice
than Cain. If he sacrificed by Faith (as that word may be well understood here)
there was some Warrant and Word of God for it, for Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. Faith is grounded on some Word, it
relyeth on a Divine Command, or Promise. Therefore when Abel offered of the fat
of his flock in Sacrifice, he did that which was instituted by God, and
consequently that sort of Sacrifices was by Divine Institution, there was a
precept for it. Adam and his Sons had a particular Order from God, though it is
not recorded by Moses, neither was it necessary it should be in so short an
Account as he intended of things.

Take the Sum of all in few words: This Law of Sacrifices, which was in use in
the Adamick Economy, was partly Natural and partly Divine. As Sacrifices were
tokens of Thankfulness, and Acknowledgments that as they received the fruits of
the Earth and all other inanimate good things from God, so the Animals which
they sacrificed, and all other living creatures for the use and benefit of man,
were given them by the same Divine hand; thus they were a Service dictated by
Natural Reason, and so were natural acts of Worship: but as they carried with
them the notion of Expiation and Atonement for the Souls of men, but especially
as they referred to the Messiah, and signified the future Sacrifice of Christ,
and so were to strengthen and support their faith till that time, thus it is
certain they were instituted by God, and the practice of them was founded on a
Divine Command: and the Patriarchs knew they would be acceptable to God,
because they were of his own Appointment.

It may be asked, (as it is a question among Writers) whether Sacrifices were
prescribed before or after the Fall of Adam? Here they are divided (as the
manner is) and some say they were instituted before, and others say after the
Fall. But I have made way for a more satisfactory Answer to this Query by the
distinction of Bloody and Unbloody Sacrifices, and of Propitiatory and
Eucharistical Sacrifices. Unbloody Sacrifices, and such as are merely
Eucharistical, i. e. such as were natural Tokens of Thanksgiving for benefits
received, were used, it is likely, by Adam before his Fall: (which I intimated
under that Economy) these might begin in Paradise. But these Sacrifices needed
not to be prescribed them by God, because they were a part of Natural Religion
and Worship. But as for Bloody Sacrifices, I mean such as were Expiatory, they
were not instituted by God till after the Fall: For when there was no Sin,
there was no need of Expiation.

Priesthood goes along with Sacrificing, and therefore it were pertinent to say
something of that here. Adam was the first Priest and Sacrificer: but now under
this Dispensation it is expressly recorded, that Cain made an oblation of the
fruits of the Earth, and Abel offered the firstlings of his flock to God. The
Priestly Office is hitherto but obscure, and no particular Persons are assigned
and appointed by God to act in it. This we know that Abel, the younger brother,
was the proper Sacrificer, and acted the part of a Priest, which was to stay
and offer Living Creatures unto God; but what the practice was afterward in
the sequel of this Dispensation is not set down by Moses, and therefore was
cannot determine any thing. But in the other following Patriarchal
Dispensations, we find that the Domestic Sacrifices belonging to the Family
(for of public Sacrificing we read nothing yet) were offered by the Fathers
and Masters of Families generally, as by Noab ( Genesis 8. 20.) Abraham (Genesis 12.
7.) Jacob ( Genesis 35. 3, 7.) It is the opinion of Seldom, Grotius, and others,
that the Sacerdotal Dignity resided in the Firstborn before Moses's time, and
that the Primogeniture and Priesthood went together. Nay, they add Kingship or
Magistracy to these, asserting that the Firstborn among the Patriarchs were
Princes as well as Priests. And so indeed Cohen, which is the word for a
Priest, signifies also a Prince or Ruler (as in Job. 12. 19. 2 Samuel 8. 18. and
20. 26.) and such were the Heads and Fathers of Families, and the Firstborn of
old. But though it is true the Priesthood was exercised by the chief Heads and
Fathers of Families, and by the Firstborn Sons, yet we likewise read of
Priests or Sacrificers who were younger Brothers, as Abel and Jacob, Genesis 4. 4.
and 28. 18. and 46. 1. Whence I gather that was not the sole Prerogative of the
Firstborn before the Mosaic Law: For if the younger Brothers offered as well
as the Elder, the Office of Priest was not confined to the Primogeniture. The
Sum then of all is this, that before the Priesthood, was settled by the Law of
Moses, the Firstborn were Priests, that is, generally and for the most part,
but not always, for some instances there are of others that offered Sacrifices.
So that this middle way which I have taken may decide the Controversy that
has been among some Learned Writers, viz. whether the Priesthood at first
resided altogether in the Firstborn?

In the next place, the Difference of Clean and Unclean Animals was part of
this Dispensation. We read of the Distinction between these first of all in
Genesis 7. 2. where Noah is commanded by God to put up in the Ark seven pair of
Clean, and two pair of Unclean Creatures. Of every clean beast thou shall take
to thee by sevens, the male and his female; and of beasts that are not clean,
by two, the male and his female. This account of the number of the Beasts taken
into the Ark, may seem to differ from what is said in Genesis 6. 19. Of every
living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shall thou bring into the Ark; and
in Genesis 7. 9. There went in two and two into the Ark, the male and the female.
But by comparing the former of these Texts with the foresaid place, we shall
find that it is only a general account of bringing the beasts into the Ark,
viz. by pairs, a male and a female of every sort of living creatures. But that
place which I first produced speaks particularly, and specifics the number of
the pairs, i. e. seven pair of clean beasts, and two pair of unclean. For
whereas some have thought that of clean animals seven only of a sort entered the
Ark, it is evident from the Original that they are mistaken, for the Hebrew
word Shibgnah is repeated, to signify that there were two seven, i. e. seven
males and seven females taken into the Ark, that they might have enough for
Sacrifice and Food after the flood. And as for the latter place, that also
speaks of all the Creatures whether clean or not clean (as you will see in ver
8.) and is to be understood of the manner of their going into the Ark: they
went by couples (and here by the way observe, that if there were only seven,
they could not go by Couples) but this order of their march contradicts not
what has been said, and is plainly gathered from the other Text, viz. that 7
males and 7 females in all of the clean Beasts were preserved in that
Receptacle. Having thus cleared the Text (which has been misunderstood) I come
to the matter in hand.

Some think these Beasts are called Clean or Unclean by a Prolepsis: as much as
to say, some Beasts went then into the Ark, which now since that time are
reputed Clean; and others went in which are now reckoned Unclean. Moses calls
them Clean or Unclean, because there was that distinction of Animals in his
time. Thus Rabbi Solomon on the place tells us, that That is called Clean which
was afterward to be Clean: Whence we learn (says he) that Noah at that time
knew the Law. For it is a fancy of the Rabbis and Talmudical Doctors, that the
Mosaical Law was made, and existed before the World was. But this Historical
Anticipation will not serve the turn here (though at some other times I grant
it is useful) for you may observe there is a Reason included in the
forementioned words, why Noah was to shut up in the Ark more of one sort of
Animals than of another, viz. because at that time some were Clean and others
Unclean. Wherefore did God order him to take fourteen of one sort of living
creatures, and but four of another? Was there not a reason for this disparity?
And what can we imagine it to be but this, that the creatures were of a
different nature, i. e. (as it is here expressly said) that some of them were
Clean, and others not? And this was before Noah's time, for this is supposed
here as a thing well known.

But how is this to be understood? No creatures are Naturally Unclean: they are
all Clean, and Pure, and Good from the first Creation. In what sense then are
any said to be Unclean? It is certain this Distinction could not be in regard
of Eating, for no Animals were eaten before the Flood (as shall be proved anon)
but it is reasonable to think that it was with respect to the Sacrifices, that
they were called Clean or Unclean: And if you consult Genesis 8. 20. you will see
that this is spoken with particular reference to Sacrifices. Noah made use of
clean Beasts and Fowls in Sacrificing, and whoever sacrificed then, did so.
They did not sacrifice all sorts of Creatures, but some only. They looked upon
some Animals, in respect of others, as unfit for Sacrifice: they offered to God
the best, or what they thought so, as the Sheep, and not the Hog, etc. This was
founded in their natural Reason, as Sacrifices themselves partly were. These
Animals which at that time they esteemed the best and choicest, and fittest for
Sacrifice, were reputed Clean and Pure, and were called so: And on the
contrary, the meanest and worst Animals, and which they thought unfit for
Sacrifice, were reckoned as Impure and Unclean, and were so called. And it is
likely there was also a Positive Law for this as well as Sacrifices. By this
Law such and such Creatures were determined to be Clean our Unclean: and this
Law was before that of Moses, yea it was long before the Flood* Even then
Beasts were called Clean or Unclean in respect of Sacrificing, as afterward
they were called so in respect of Eating.

We may observe further that there was a Public Settled Church in the days of
those renowned and godly Patriarchs Seth and Enos. Then began men to call upon
the name of the Lord, Genesis 4. 26. I know there is a contrary reading of these
words, for some think that huchal signifies profaned as well as began, and
accordingly they render the words thus, Then men profaned by calling on the
name of the Lord. So the Jewish Writers generally interpret this place, and
particularly the Chalde^ Paraphrast and Rabbi Solomon Iarchi understand it.
Whence De Diis Sir. Prolegom. 3.
Mr. Seldom infers that there was Idolatry in those days, and that it was set
up then first of all. But these learned persons considered not that the verb
Chalal as it is here used, i. e. in the Conjugation Hophal, and with an
Infinitive Verb after it, is never used in Scripture to signify profaning but
beginning. Nor did these Writers give themselves time to remember that this
place speaks of Seth and his godly Family, and not of any Idolaters (yea it is
likely there was no such thing as Idolatry in those days, but that its date was
afterward) and therefore it must be meant of Religious Invoking of God, and
the solemn use of it. There are others, who though they are satisfied that the
word is to be rendered began (not profaned) yet understand what follows
according to (...).
Aquila's Translation, and therefore read the whole thus, Then men began to be
called by the name of the Lord, i. e. Seth and Enos for their great Piety were
the first that had the honor as it were of a Divine Appellation, whence they
that were their Offspring were called the Son of God; or they were called by
Gods names, i. e. they were reputed and celebrated as eminent Worshippers of
God, as his professed Servants and Votaries. But this seems to be a forced
Interpretation, and is built upon a wrong Translation of the words.

The plain and genuine meaning (both according to the Original, the Seventy,
and other Versions which are held to be most exact) is this, that though Adam,
Ab^l, Seth, and others had called on God in their Houses and Families long
before this time, yet now they met together publicly, and the Rites of
Religion which God had appointed them were fixed. Here is the first Infancy of
the more visible Church. Now Holy Assemblies are set up; and perhaps as Cain
then built Cities, so Enos built Temples or Places for Divine Worship.
Sacrifices were settled before: Now the way and manner of invoking God aright
are established. Or, if you will take Calling on the Lord as a general
expression for Religion, then the meaning is, that in the time of these holy
men, the true Worship and Service of God begun to flourish openly. Though Cain
and his Seed lived atheistically and profanely, yet those of the Family of
Seth and Enos promoted all Piety and Virtue, they generally ^eared God, and
walked uprightly, and Religion was in great esteem among men.

There seems to have been a Law under this Patriarchal Period, not to marry
with Infidels. This is implied in Genesis 6. 2. The sons of God saw the daught^rs
of men, and they took them Wives of all that they chose. The children of Seth
were joined in wedlock with the wicked posterity of Cain, which we have reason
to think was forbidden them, because this is reckoned as the great sin which
provoked God's wrath, and brought the devouring flood, v. 3.

Here it may be taken notice of, that whereas Marriag^ (the joining of one Man
and one Woman only) had prevailed hitherto by virtue of the Primitive Order and
Institution in Genesis 2. 24. now at the latter end of the Adamick Dispensation
Polygamy began to be introduced. Lam^ch took unto him two Wives, Genesis 4. 19.
and was the fir^^ person that transgressed against that Conjugal Law. I find a
very Reverend and Worthy Bp. Patrick Comment. on Genesis 4.
person ^avourable to him, and thinks his ^arnest desire of seeing that Blessed
Seed which was promised to Eve, might induce him to take more Wives than one,
hoping by multiplying of his posterity, some or other of them might prove so
happy as to produce that Seed. This is a very Learned and Pious Account of the
Original of Polygamy.

Here I might mention the Seven Precepts which the Jews much talk of, and say
were given by God to the sons of Adam and N^ah before Moses's time. But Rabbi
Maimon is more distinct, and ^aith six of these Precepts were given to Adam,
and those that immediately came of his loins (and so they fall in under this
Patriarchal Dispensation) and afterward these six with another added ( i. ^.
of Abstaining from blood) were delivered to Noah and his Sons. Of the Seventh I
am not to speak in this place, it belonging to the Noac^ical Dispensation: but
it is proper to give you some account of the other Six. Both the Talmuds and
other Writings of the Hebrew Doctors recite them in this order: the first
Precept was of Judgments, of Politic and Civil Government, of Administration
of Justice in public Tribunals and Courts of Judicature; and that those who
offended in the kinds after named ought to be severely punished. The Second was
of Cursing the most Holy Name, or Blasphemy; that God's Name is not to be
profaned. The Third was of strang^ Worship or Idolatry; that they should not
worship Id^ls. The Fourth is of uncovering of Nakedness, or unlawful
Copulation, as Adultery, Incest, and the like: that these are absolutely
unlawful. The Fifth is of sh^dding of Blood, or Homicide. The Sixth is of Thef^
and Rapine: Clandestine or open stealing; taking away what is another: that
none of these are to be practiced. Those that would see these Precepts largely
commented upon may consult the Learned De Jur. Not. and Gent.
Seld^n, who has almost filled a whole Volume with them. That which I am to
inquire into at present is, whether it be reasonable to give credit to the
common Assertion of the Jews, who say that these Precepts were given by God
himself to Adam and the Patriarchs before Noah.

First, I might take notice that the Jews agree not fully about the number of
the Precepts given to Adam: for though Seven generally be said to be the number
of them, yet there are Gemara Babylon.
those who dissent here, and so in some sort bring the giving of the Precepts,
as well as the number of them, into question.

Secondly, We read no where in Genesis (nor in any of the inspired Books
afterward) that any of these Precepts were given by God to Adam, or his
immediate children. We meet with nothing like them before Noah and Moses, and
therefore we cannot with any certainty and confidence assert, that God
delivered these before that time. I know it is said, and that by the
Learnedest, that all Facts are not mentioned in the Bible; the Scripture refers
to some as known and acknowledged, though no where expressly recorded: Thus
these Precepts are referred to in Acts 15. 20. But I answer, though one thing
done at this time, and another at another may be omitted in Scripture-History,
as Adam's observing the Seventh day, and God's Injunction about Bloody
Sacrifices, etc. yet it is folly to think that a Whole Body of Precepts should
be given to Adam and his Sons, and that they should be openly divulged (as the
Jews say there was a formal Promulgation of them) and yet not one of them be
mentioned, nor so much as hinted at in the History, which purposely treats of
those things. Credat I^da^^, etc. And as to what some say, that these Precepts
are referred to in the Decree of the Apostolical Council at Jerusalem, it is
but a surmise, and there is no real ground for it: only the matter or substance
of two or three of those Precepts is there enjoined (as we find in some other
places) and that is all.

Thirdly, Not only the Writings of Moses and other books of Holy Writ were
silent concerning the giving of these Precepts, but Joseph, the Learned Jewish
Antiquary, who comments upon the Mosaical Writings, and is wont to insert and
add what he thought was left out, says not one word concerning these.

Fourthly, These Precepts are all of them the Laws of Nature, or most easily
reducible to them: They are Prohibitions against Injustice, Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Uncleanness* Bloodshed, Rapine: All which are general Dictates of
Nature and Reason, and written in man's Mind originally. Therefore it may be
rememb^red that these Precepts obtained not only among the Hebrews, but among
all Nations whatsoever. It is not likely then that God did orally deliver these
to the Patriarchs before the Flood; for in that early time of the World it was
not requisite. Tho afterward some of these Precepts were given to Noah, viz.
after the corruption and gross degeneracy of the People of the Old World, and
when a New World of Men was to be set up: And tho these and the like Precepts
were made up afterward into Ten Commandments, and given to the Jews, i. e. when
the World was more corrupted, and the Dictates of Reason and Morality were
almost lost; and when it was as necessary to rouse men's Minds, and to keep
Religion from decaying, and when God was erecting a New O^conomy, and choosing a
peculiar People to himself; tho in these Circumstances the giving of such
Precepts was necessary, yet now, in the Patriarchs days, there was no need of
delivering them, they having them fresh on their minds. There is no ground then
for us to credit the Hebrew Doctors when they tell us, that those six Precepts
were delivered solemnly to the Sons of Adam. It is only a Tradition of the
Jews: and of what truth and reality their Traditions generally are, is known to
those who are sober and unprejudiced Persons; they are usually mere Fancies and
Conceits, Dreams and Dotages, Lies and Forgeries.

Thus you see how it went with the World from Adam to the Flood, which is
reckoned to be about sixteen hundred Years. You see how the State of Religion
stood, what Communications the World had from God. And here by the way I cannot
but take notice of the groundless assertion of that Volkel. l. 2. c. 28.
Socinian Writer who declares, That before the Flood there was no General
Precept given to Men by God: they had only some Injunctions, which appertained
to certain particular Persons and particular* Affairs. Nor had they any general
Promise made to them, he says. Instit. l. 1. c. 8.
Episcopius is more large, telling us, That they lived almost 2000 Years
without any Law, without any Promises, without any Precepts from God. And he
further adds, That the Religion from Adam to Abraham was merely Natural, and
had nothing but Right Reason for its Rule and Measure. All which are mistaken
Notions; for from what has been delivered concerning this Economy before the
Flood, it is evident that there was a Divine Pr^cept (which was general)
concerning Sacrifices; and there was a Promise (and that a general one)
concerning the Blessed Seed; and there were other Laws and Prescriptions
besides those that were founded on mere Reason: for it appears that this
Antediluvian Dispensation was mixed, partly guided by the Light and Law of
Nature, partly by Revelation. Religion consisted both of Natural Principles,
and Positive Commands. These were all along interwoven with one another. Thus
the Old World was governed: In which Period there were these ten Patriarchs who
were all long-lived but one; Adam was the first, who (when Abel was dead) begat
Seth: whose Son was Enosh, who begat Cainan, and he Mahalalel; and this Iared,
whose Son was Enoch, who was translated. Then Methusala^, the longest liver of
them all, ( Adam and he took up all the time between the Creation and the
Flood); then Lamech (not he of that Name who was of Cain's Race); and Noah was
the last of the ten Antediluvian Fathers.

CHAP. IV.
The Noachical Economy. The first Positive Law under it was about eating of
Flesh. It is proved that this prevailed not till after the Flood. Objections
against it answered. The Testimony of Pagans to confirm it. The Reason of the
Prohibition. The second Positive Law was concerning not eating Flesh with the
Blood. The Reason of it. The third Positive Law was concerning not shedding of
Man's Blood. With the Penalty of it. And the Sanction of Magistracy. Servitude
not introduced under this Dispensation. The Longevity of the Patriarchs was
common to all in those Times. The Months and Years were of the same length then
that they are now. They were Solar, not Lunar Years. The Causes of the long
Lives of those that lived before the Flood. The Abrahamick Economy. With its
several Steps and Advances. The Nature of the Covenant made with Abraham. Now
the Faithful were separated and distinguished from the rest of the World. Why
they are called Hebrews. The Nature and Design of Circumcision. Under this
Dispensation Altars were erected, Tithes paid, etc. Of Polygamy, and
Concubines, and other Vsages.

THE Second Patriarchal Dispensation, or the Noachical O^conomy began in Noah's
days, and lasted till Abraham. Immediately after the Flood, the Covenant which
was made with our first Parents was renewed to Noah: the Law of Grace which had
been given to them, was now confirmed to this eminent Person, and to the ^est
of Mankind in him: and the ^ow in the Cloud was made a Sign of the Covenant,
Genesis 9. 9. It is to be believed, that a farther discovery of the M^ssias was
made to Noah, tho the Sacred History says nothing of it. But this is expressly
recorded, that this renewing and confirming of the Dispensation of Grace, were
accompanied with some positive Institutions and Laws, which were an addition to
those that were before given to Adam. These are the things which make the
difference between this and the former O^conomy.

The first Positive Law was concerning ^ating of Flesh. Ev^ry moving thing that
lives shall b^ Meat for you, Genesis 9. 3. The discrimination of Meats is taken
away, and Flesh is granted to be eaten: and indeed there was a necessity of it
at that time, because the Fruits of the Earth were destroyed by the Flood.
Before the Delug^ there was not a liberty given to eat Flesh, for they were
limited by that Injunction in Genesis 1. 29. which appoints Herbs and Fruits to be
their Meat. God said, B^h^ld, I have given you every H^rb bearing S^^d which is
upon the Face of all the Earth, and every Tree in the which is the Fruit of a
Tree yielding Seed, to you i^ shall b^ for Meat. Here is the Lex Cibaria, Man
is confined as to his Diet: Herbs and Fruits are appointed his Food, and no
other. But now this Restraint is taken off by the same hand that laid it on;
and God permit^ Noah and his Posterity to eat Flesh as well as Herbs.

But yet it is a Controversy among Writers, whether eating of Flesh was granted
just after the Flood, and was altogether prohibited before. The Hebrews
generally say, that the People before the Deluge fed only upon what the Earth
produced, and abstained from all living Creatures. Most of the Christian
Fathers hold this, and say, it was by Divine Injunction: But Homil. in Genesis 27.
Chrysostom and In Genesis Quaest. 55.
Theodoret seem to be of another Judgment. The Moderns are divided; some hold
that Flesh was eaten before the Flood, and others not till after it. Luther,
Peter Martyr, Fr. Iunius, and Musculus, hold the latter: But Calvin, Rivet,
Par^us, and other Reformed Divines, hold the former, viz. that eating of Flesh
as well as Herbs was free from the very Creation. Of this Opinion too are
Beverovici^^ the Physician, Bochart, Voetius, Hottinger, and our Wille^. But I
conceive that these worthy Men fail in this Point, and that the other Opinion
is to be preferred before this, because there is a plain Text of Scripture to
back it, (which the other Opinion is destitute of) Every moving thing that
lives shall be meat for you: even as the green Herb (which was the only Food
allowed you before, Genesis 1. 29.) have I given you all things, Genesis 9. 3. As
much as to say, you have as free liberty now, since the Flood, to eat the Flesh
of every living Creature, as you had before the Flood to feed on every sort of
Herbs and Fruits, tho you were stinted as to Flesh. This is the clear sense and
import of the words; and consequently proves, that eating Flesh before the
Flood was unl^wful. I do not say, they never ate Flesh, for it is p^obable they
did transgress sometimes, and made bold to taste of that sort of Food; but this
is the thing I assert, that ^ating Flesh was forbidden them at that time, and
that the Prohibition was not taken off till after the Flood; and that then
first of all it was lawful to kill Animals in order to the eating of their
Flesh; all which appears from clear words of Scripture.

If it be objected that the Antediluvians kept Sheep; and therefore it is to be
inferred thence, that they ^ade use of their Flesh for Food: I answer, That they
kept flocks of Sheep; 1. For their Wool and Skins to clothe them. 2. For
Sacrifices, which consumed many of their Sheep and other Cattle: And perhaps,
3* for Milk, to sustain them (for, as I suggested before, they ventured to
transgress sometimes, and to eat something else besides Herbs and Fruits, tho
it was against a Command.) Thus you see the Shepherds Life, or keeping of
Sheep, proves not that they used the Flesh of Sheep for Food. And by what has
been said we know likewise how to answer that common Objection, that killing of
Beasts was used by the Patriarchs; therefore eating Flesh was in use. It
follows not, because they killed them either for their Skins or Fleece, or to
offer them on the Altar. The elder (...) Idololat. l. 3. c. 65.
(...) thinks that tho at all other times they abstained from Flesh, yet this
was their extraordinary repast at Sacrificing. But I do not see any reason to
confirm what he suggests; for tho afterward it was usual to eat of the
Sacrifices, yet it does not follow thence that this was practiced before the
Flood.

Others argue also from the difference of clean and unclean Beasts before the
Flood. It is evident, say they, that there was eating of B^asts at that time;
else some could not be said to be clean, and others unclean. But I have proved
before, that the distinction of clean and unclean Animals which was before the
Flood, had respect only to Sacrifices, not to Eating. Notwithstanding then
these Objections, I assert, that there was no Sarcophagy before the Flood, at
least it was not common; and that if any presumed to eat Flesh, it was
unlawfully done of them.

This Notion the Pagan Poets and Philosophers had (...). -- Et ante

Impia quam caesis gens est epulata juven^is. Georg. I. 2.


Virgil intimates, that eating of Flesh was an impious thing, and not known in
the first and purest Ages of the World. Metamorph. I. 15.
Ovid describing those Times, lets us know that they sed on no Flesh, but lived
altogether on the Fruits of the Earth. A^ vetus illa ^tas, cui fecimus aur^a
n^men,
Foetibus arboreis, and quas hum^^ educat herbi^
Fortunata fuit, nec polluit or a cruore.
Tunc and aves tut^ mover^ p^r ^era pennas,
Et lepus impavidus mediis erravit in arvis,
Nec sua credulitas pisc^m suspender at h^mo.
Cuncta, sine in^idiis, nullaamque timentia fra^dem,
Plenaque paci^ erant.


Which may be Englished thus; The Ancient Age, which we the Golden call,
Was blessed with H^rbs and Fruits, the only Fare
That wholesome is. Those days were not defiled
With bloody Dainties. In those early Times
The Fowls in safety flew in the open Air,
The Beasts securely ranged in the Plains,
Fishes were not by their Credulity
Unwarily betrayed. All Creatures lived
In a profound security. For why?
They neither used nor feared Treachery.
This the Pythagoreans testify, who were great Searchers into the Ancient and
Primitive Practices of the World. P^rphyrius, who was one of that Sect, asserts
that in the Golden Age no Flesh of Beasts was eaten: and he is to be pardoned
in what he adds afterward in the same De Abstinenti^.
Book, that War and Famine first introduced this usage. He was not acquainted
with Genesis, he knew not that God's Order to Noa^ after the Flood was, that
every living Creature should be Meat for him.

If you enquire into the Reason why God, who had restrained Men from eating of
Flesh before the Flood, permitted them to do it after it; it is likely he did
it because the Earth was corrupted by the Deluge, and by the saltness of the
Seas; and so the Plants and Herbs, and all Fruits of the Earth were indamaged:
The natural Virtue of Vegetables was much impaired, and thereby they could not
yield so wholesome and solid a Nourishment as they once did, they were not so
suitable to Man's Body as they were before. Hereupon God gave them a License to
eat Flesh, he indulged this to them out of the Care and Love he bore to them.

The Second Positive Law which Noa^ received was concerning the not ^ating of
Flesh with the Blood. Genesis 9. 4. Flesh with the Lif^ th^reof, which is the
Blood thereof, shall ye not ^at. Lud^vic^^ de Die^ is of opinion, that the
eating of Creatures that died of themselves is here forbid; but I see no
foundation for it. St. Chrys^^tom thinks, that eating of things strangled is
spoken against here. But this does not reach the full meaning of this
Prohibition: for by this Law it was made unlawful to eat any raw Flesh whilst
it was yet warm, and had the Blood and Life in it. Thus the Jewish Doctors
understood it, and that very rightly, as the famous De Jur. Not. and Gent. lib.
7. c. 1.
Mr. Seldom has showed. This, they say, was the Seventh Precept given by God
to Noah after the Flood. We are sure it was one, for the Holy Ghost by Moses
attesteth it here. Tho they had leave to eat Flesh, yet it was with this
Exception, that they should not eat it with the Life or Soul, which is the
Blood, that is, they were forbid to eat live Flesh with the Blood in it; they
were not permitted to eat the Flesh before it was quite dead: or they were not
to eat any Limb or Member torn off from an Animal alive. The Reason given, in
another place, why they must not ^at Blood, is, because it is the Soul or Life
of all Flesh; that is, it is the chief Instrument of Life; and therefore is
properly and significantly used in making Atonement for Souls. Therefore it was
designed wholly for Expiation, it was appointed and appropriated to that sacred
Use on the Altar: And for this reason it ought not to be used in a common way.
Again, God forbad eating of Blood (and that even before the Law) to teach
abstaining from Man's Blood. They must eat no Beast's Blood, that they might
not thereby learn to delight in Human Blood: as we see (says Mercer. in Genesis
9. 4.
an Expositor upon the place) Butchers, who kill Beasts, are generally cruel
and bloody to Men; and for that reason the Law suffers them not to be on the
Jury of Life and Death Plutarch.
The Ath^nians, ordered one to be flead alive because he had served a Ram so.
Quintilian.
The Areopagite Judges condemned a Boy to death, because he put out the eyes of
Quails; and this is given as the reason, because it showed that the Boy was of
a cruel disposition, and would prove very hurtful if he lived. So here it was
thought that Blood-eating was a sign of and preparative to inhuman Actions, and
accordingly was not allowed of. Therefore this Precept, of not eating the Flesh
of Beasts with the Blood running about it, was to restrain this Cruelty. The
old Giants of the World before the Flood, generally lived on the Blood of
Beasts, and so learned to be cruel and savage to Men; and thence, as Maimonides
and Mr. Seldom from him conjecture, this Law had its rise: God therefore
commanded those of Noah's Posterity to re^rain wholly from Blood, that they
might not proceed from cruelty to Beasts, to killing of Men. Besides, this may
seem partly to be a natural Law, Blood being a gross Meat, and not fit for
nourishment.

A Third Law given to Noah was that in Genesis 9. 5, 6. Surely the blood of your
lives will I require: at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the
hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I require the lif^ of man.
Whosoever ^^eddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the Image of
God made (...) man. There is indeed a Treble Law comprised in these words: 1.
They are forbid to shed man's blood. Noa^ and his sons are commanded not to be
guilty of Homicid^. Taking away a man's life was unlawful before, as in C ain;
but here it is solemnly denounced to be such: and moreover, the Punishment of
it is set down. If shedding of man's blood were not here forbidden as unlawful,
it would not be followed with a P^nalty, as you see it is. Which is the second
Sanction here, the blood of your lives I will require at the hand of every
beast, and at the hand of every man. Whether man or beast procure the death of
a man, their blood shall be required for it. Death is here made the Penalty of
Murder. Yea, the very Beasts that killed a man should themselves be killed.
There was no Law before this for the punishing of Bloodshed. And thirdly, here
is also signified the Aut^ority of the Magistrate, whose particular and
peculiar work it is to require the life of man at the hand of every man's
br^th^r. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Here the
manner of punishing bloodshed is set down, and appointed; it must be done by
the Magistrate. A public Minister of Justice is here ordered and appointed to
punish the guilty: Here is the first Institution of that Political Order. Here
is the first injunction for erecting Courts of Judicature.

Some of the Ostorod. Instit. c. 28. Smalc. cont. Frantz. disp. 6.
Socinian party will allow this to be a Commination, but not a Precept given to
Magistrates. But herein they separate what they ought to have united, for these
words are both a threatening of Punishment, and also an Order or Warrant given
to the Magistrate to execute that Punishment. It is to be done by Man (Adam)
which word sometimes is appropriated to one of Eminency and Power, and
therefore here not unfitly denotes the Magistrate, the Ruler, him that has
Authority and Power above others. This is the person that is commissioned here
not to suffer Bloodshed to go unpunished, but to return blood for blood: which
is a practice grounded on the Law of Reason and Equity, which in such a case as
this requires a just and equal Retribution. But this and other places those of
the Rac^vian way distort, to serve their own end, viz. to patronize their
opinions concerning Magistrates, who according to them are not to use any
Capital Punishment, not to (...) War, etc. But any unprejudiced and considerate
person cannot but see that the power of the Sword is here given to the Civil
Magistrate. Upon this one Charter depends the Execution of Justice against all
Crimes: upon this is founded the power of executing judgment upon Offenders,
and of cutting off of Malefactors. So that you see in this forecited place are
contained two of those Precepts which were said to be given to Adam, the Titles
whereof were of Judgments, and of not Shedding of Blood, which both were Laws
of Nature imprinted in men's breasts; but when after the flood the World began
anew, God thought fit to revive the remembrance of these Laws, and made them
Positiv^, and not before, that we know of.

Some think that under this Dispensation was introduced Slavery; that men were
all free before the Flood, and that not long after Servitud^ began, viz. in
Canaan the Son of Cham; for which they alledg that Text, Genesis 9. 25. A servant
of servant^ shall he b^. Here is the first servant mentioned; and because we
read of none before, they conclude that Bondage, which is a great Curse, began
in this Cursed Person, the Offspring of cursed C^am. But I cannot so easily
assert that Servitud^ had its first rise here; for though Canaan be the first
servant mentioned, yet it does not follow thence that Thraldom had its
beginning in him: for silence is no Argument that there was none before. But
the main thing which I have to say is this, that if Bondage commenced in
Canaan, it is to be understood not of himself, but of his posterity. So that we
may truly say, it did not begin in this Disp^nsati^n, but afterward. And this
is plain from the place it self, and the following verses, where it is said,
Canaan shall be the servant of Sh^m; and he was so when his posterity the
Canaanit^s were overcome and subdued by those of the race of Sh^m, viz. the
Isra^lites. Then it was that this Curse on Canaan was fulfilled, and not
before. But as to common Servitude, we read of it long before that time;
A^ra^am had m^n-servants and maid-s^rvants, who (...) bo^ght with hi^ m^n^y,
Genesis 12. 16. and 24. 35. so had Jacob, Genesis 30. 43. and 32. 5. And according to
the M^saick Law they were permitted, in case of extreme poverty, to get money
by the sale of their children, Exodus 21. 7. Lev. 39. but when the (...)
arrived, Liberty was to be proclaimed, and Servants were set free.

There is nothing more, besides what has been said, that is considerable in
this Disp^nsati^n, unless it be the Long^vity of those persons who lived both
under this and the foregoing Economy. This indeed is very remarkable; and
because it is peculiar to this period of time (for we find that soon after the
Deluge the Age of men was abridged, and in a short time terminated as ours
does) I think it will not be foreign to our present design to give the Reader
some account of it; that is, to inquire into the particular causes of the long
Lives of the Patriarchs, to assign the reasons why they arrived to six, seven,
eight, nine hundred, yea almost a thousand years. So it is expressly recorded in
Genesis 5. 3, etc. Adam lived 930 years, Seth 912, Enos 905, Cainan 910,
Mahalaleel 895, Iared 962, Methusela^ 969, Lamech 777: and Noah's age is said
to be 950 years, Genesis 9. 29. Some indeed labor to persuade us that this
Vivacity was peculiar only to those Patriarchs that Moses rehearses. More
Nevoch. par. 2. c. 47.
Maimonides goes this way, and In Cap. 5. Genes.
Aberbanel agrees with him. None of late have endeavored the proof of this
more ingeniously than Mr. warren in his Geologia, where he tells us that the
fifth Chapter of Genesis is the complete List of those whose lives were thus
lengthened in those first times of the world, because these were very Eminent
and Useful persons above others, men of Extraordinary Piety and Honesty, and
therefore fitly designed by God to live so long in the world to instruct and
reform it, and carry on other designs of Providence for that time. But there is
no manifest proof of this, yea the contrary is very evident; for all the days
of Enoch (who is mentioned in the same chapter with those long livers before
named) (...) but three hundred sixty and five, v. 23. and yet he was the most
Holy, Religious and Exemplary man of them all, which is meant by his walking
with God, which is applied only to the most Genesis 6. 9. and 12. 4.
Pious and Virtuous persons. And on the other side, there is no mark of
Eminency set on most of those whose long lives are recorded, as Cainan,
Mahalal^el, Iared, Mathuselah, etc. This is the Sum total of their lives, that
they liv^d so many y^ars, and b^gat s^ns and daught^rs.

So that it is evident hence, that this length of years was not indulged to the
Ant^diluvian Patriarchs for their singular Virtue and Excellency above others,
but that it was common to all, i. ^. to the greatest part of the persons of
those times, as they were people of that peculiar Dispensation, wherein God was
pleased for several Reasons (which I shall produce afterward) to prolong their
days after this manner, And this which Mos^s says, is backed and confirmed by
Pagan Testimony, as Antiq. l. 1. c. 4.
Joseph the (...) takes notice, who alleges the Antientest Authors that have
writ concerning the Antiquities of the Egyptians, Chald^ans, Ph^nicians,
Grecians, as witnesses to this part of the Mosaic History. They all ^ver that
the measure of the time which the first people of the world lived was exceeding
large, and even amounted to a thousand years in some. There is no reason
therefore to doubt of what M^ses delivers, or to think that those of this
Period who are not mentioned by him, lived not so long as these whose names are
enumerated in the 5. Chap. of G^n^sis: for the Mosaic Relation is known and
confessed by all to be brief and concise, and is wont to specify only a few
Instances when the generality is understood.

But others detract from the Mosaic Verity by a more severe way of cavilling,
whilst they insinuate a mistake in the Y^ar^ which the Old Testament speaks of.
It is not likely, say they, that there should be such a vast disproportion
between the Antediluvians and us, between their lives and ours. It may be they
then reckoned a shorter time for a year than we do now, and thence it is that
they are thought to have lived so much longer than we. The years of Adam's life
were Lunar, i. e. they were but Months, says a The Trinitar. Scheme of Relig.
Confident man, without assigning any reason for what he says. The like was
alleged by Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 48.
Pliny long since, who mentioning some that were said to live seven or eight
hundred years, tells us that this proceeded from ignorance of those times, and
of the account or computation they went by; their Years being some of them but
half, others but a quarter of a year. And it is true, I grant, that the
Arcadian Y^ar was but three months; yea, I shall not deny that the Egyptians
Y^ar was no more than the Moons course, i. e. a month: so that we need not
wonder at what Diodore of Sicily says, that some Egyptian people lived in a
thousand years. And here by the way we may know how to solve those several
passages in this Author, and Herodotus, and Pliny, and AElian concerning the
vast Antiquity which the Egyptians so much boasted of. We find in these Writers
that the Egyptian Calculation ran extravagantly high, some making their Kingdom
to be above ten thousand, some above twenty thousand years standing. Thus far
then I am willing to grant, that the V^lgar Year among the Egyptians of old was
but a Month (though if we may credit De Idoloat. l. 1. c. 28.
Vossi^s, they had other years that were longer; and we learn from a much
antienter Alex. ab Alexand^ l. 3. c. 24.
Author that they had a different computation, and that their Year was not
always alike) but it is groundless and ridiculous to conclude hence, that the
Years which all other Nations and People reckoned by were of this small
dimension, and particularly that these Years are meant by Moses when he speaks
of the Patriarchs. Yet there are some that have taken up this Conceit, and hold
that these Years were but Menstruous, i. ^. they were of no longer duration
than the space of the Moon's passing through the twelve Signs, which is done in
28 or 29 days; and hereby they think they give a fair account of the reputed
Long^vity of those persons.

But this Opinion is soon baffled by considering these following things; 1.
There never was any such Computation of Years in use among the H^br^ws, and
those from whom they descended. The Learnedest and Skilfullest Antiquaries, and
those who are most conversant in that sort of Knowledge, will assure you of
this. 2. Moses himself, who is the person that gives us the Account of the
Lives of the Patriarchs, makes express mention of Months as distinct from
Y^ars, G^n. 7. 11. and 8. 13. And if they be really distinct, who can have the
confidence to say they are the same? 3. If you carefully peruse the History of
the Flood, that will certainly demonstrate that the Y^ars in those times
contained many M^nths in them, as in G^n. 8. 5, 13, 14. where you read not only
of the first and sec^nd, but the t^nt^ m^nt^ of that Y^ar in which the Deluge
was. And that it may appear that the Months were like ours, we read not only of
the seventeenth day of the second Month, Genesis 7. 11. but of the twenty s^venth
day of the same Month, G^n. 8. 14. Nay I will prove that the Antediluvians had
30 days in their Months, from those words in Genesis 7. 24. The waters pr^vail'd
on the Earth a hundred and fifty days. On the 17 th day of the 2d Month Noah
entered into the Ark, as we read in Genesis 7. 7, 11. then the Flood began, and it
prevailed till the 17th day of the 7th Month, as we find it in G^n. 8. 4. which
space of time is exactly fiv^ m^nths, reckoning 30 days to a Month, for five
times thirty is a hundred and fifty. This proves that both their Years and
their Months were such as ours, and that they had the same Computation which we
have at this day. And this Calculation continued till St. John's time, as we
may satisfy our selves from Rev. 11. 2, 3. and 13. 5. where forty two Months
are ^ thousand two hundred and threescore days. 4. What I assert may be proved
from the Absurdity of the contrary Opinion; for if the ancient Years were no
longer than our Months, then it would follow that some of the Patriarchs begot
Children when they were but six or seven Years of Age; which appears undeniably
from the History of Moses, for Mahalaleel begat Iared, and Enoch begat
Methuselah at the Age of sixty five Years: now if these Years were no other
than Months, these Persons were but five years of Age, and a little more, when
they begot Children; which is a thing that no Man of sober thoughts will
entertain. 5. According to this Calculation the Patriarchs would have been very
short-lived. If Years were only so many Revolutions of the Moon, it will follow
that some of those Persons mentioned in Genesis 5. lived not so long as we
generally do at this day. Nay, Methuselah himself, according to this way of
computing, had not arrived to a hundred Years, which is a number that several
reach even in this Age of the World. Thus you see what Absurdities ensue upon
this Opinion.

Some therefore taking notice of these absured Consequences, are forced to
abandon this Conceit; but yet they betake themselves to another, which is this.
Lunary Years, say they, are so called either because they are but one Month, or
because they fall short of the Solar Y^ar eleven days, as being reckoned wholly
by the Revolution of the Moon. These latter sort of Lunary Years consist of 354
days, whereas the Solar Year contains 365 days in it. It is by those, and not
by these that we are to reckon the years of the Patr^archs before spoken of,
say the present Objectors: and accordingly their Years and ours now in use; are
not the same. I answer, it is true the Ancient H^br^ws held the Y^ars in
Scripture to be L^nar in this sense now mentioned, and there is good ground for
it, because the I^ws began the Month with the New Moon; so that there could be
not above nine and twenty days in one of their Months; for the Course of that
Planet is finished within that time. And it cannot be denied that the old way
of computing the Months among the Ancient Arabians, Grecians, and R^mans, was
from the Phas^s of the Moon, and consequently they reckoned by these Lunar
Years. De Emendat. temp. l. 2. c. 2 and 3.
Ios^ph Scalig^r was the first that denied the Hebr^^ Years to be of this sort,
and undertook to prove that they were S^lar, i. ^. that they contained 365
Days, and consequently the Months consisted of 30 Days. And herein he was
partly in the right; but when he contends that this was the use always among
them, and that they had no other Computation, he goes too far. But De Doctr.
^emp. l. 3 and 4.
Petavius, who designedly handles this Controversy, viz. whether they were
Lunar or Solar Years which they reckoned by of old, and are mentioned in the
Old Testament, is more exact when he holds that both the Lunar and S^lar Y^ar
were used by the Hebrews: the first was their Civil, the second their Sacred or
Ecclesiastical Year. This reconciles all.

But what have the Objectors gained by it? They have only brought the Year down
from 365 Days to 354 (for this is a Lunar, and the other a Solar Year) and the
one is but 11 days shorter than the other. That is all, which is no great
matter: It does not considerably alter the Account, and therefore it was to
little purpose to alledg it. Besides, this may be said after all, that the
Years of the Patriarchs (whom we are speaking of) and those of the Hebrews or
Jews, who observed the New Moons, and reckoned their Months by their
Appearances, are not altogether the same; and therefore we cannot argue from
these latter to the former, especially when I have proved before from the
Relation of the Deluge, that the Years and Months were then of the like extent
with ours. Therefore we have reason to believe that Moses means Solar Years in
Genesis 5. and other places which speak of the Lives of the Men of those first
times, and consequently that the Length and Duration of them were such as we
have represented them to be: which was the first thing I undertook to prove.

But all this time I have been but clearing the way to what I principally
intended, which is this, To search into the Causes of the Long Lives of those
that lived before the Flood; for to say with Maimonides, that it was a Miracle
that they lived so long, will not, I suppose, be satisfactory to the Curious
Reader: Wherefore I will enquire whenc^ it was that they usually lived seven or
eight hundred Years, and sometimes almost a thousand, tho we read of none that
reached to that full number. This will appear very Reasonable and Accountable
if you consider,

1. That God gave them a longer space of time that they might multiply Mankind,
and replenish the Earth, that (as Theodoret says) (...). Qu. 49. in Genesis
their numbers might be increased by their Annosity. Their Lives were lengthned
out for the sake of Generation. There was a necessity of the prolonging of
their Days, that the World might be peopled the sooner, that the Earth might be
stocked with Inhabitants in a short time. And this is a General Reason, you
see; and therefore it is not likely that Longevity was the Privilege of a few
only in those days, as More Nevoch.
Maimonides and some others have thought, but that it was common to the whole
race of Men, excepting a few, as Enoch, and two or three more perhaps.

2. As men lived long before the Flood for propagating of Mankind the more
speedily, so their Lives were prolonged, that they might the better propagate
Arts and Sciences for the use of Life, that they might find out and discover
things the more successfully, and deliver to Posterity the things which they
invented. It is Antiqu. l. 1. c. 4, and 8.
Iosep^'s opinion that God indulged the Autediluvians a long Life, that they
might study the Stars, and find out the Nature, Motion, and Influence of the
Heavenly Bodies; for they could not attain to a Certainty and an Experience of
these things without this. And he adds that the Great Year comes not about till
the period of 600 Years, wherefore it was requisi^e they should live so long at
least. But whether we admit of this particular Conceit of his or no, it is
certain that Astronomy and other Arts could not be attained at first in a short
time. Long Observation was necessary for this purpose, frequent and repeated
Experiments being the great Basis of most Arts. These therefore could not be
accomplished and perfected but by a large term of Years. The persons who lived
to a great age were able to convey and entail Knowledge more effectually than w^
can now: only this is to be said, that w^ have some other ways and advantages
of promoting Knowledge which they had not.

3. Their long Lives were serviceable to a higher and a nobler purpose, viz.
for the retaining and preserving of Religion, and the true Worship of God, in a
more entire manner: for it is to be remembered that there was no Scripture then,
and therefore Religion could not be more advantageously spread and propagated
than by a sa^e Tradition. And that this was especially aimed at and designed by
the Wisdom and Providence of God is evident hence, that as soon as the
matchless Treasure of Religion was delivered and secured to the World by
committing the Law to writing, the Age of Man was presently stinted, and
reduced to a set Period. This shows that one reason why the Dimensions of Men's
Lives were far longer in those days than they were afterward, was, that
Religion might be the more surely kept up, they having no Written Laws at that
time. Therefore these Living Laws (for such were the long-lived Patriarchs)
were requisite, whereby the Will of God was communicated with great ease and
advantage to all men. This could be done even by Four Persons for the space of
2000 Years and more; for Adam's Auditor was Methuselah, whom Noah succeeded,
and taught Shem, and he those of his Age, even till the Year of the World 2160,
or thereabouts: So compendious a way this was of instructing the World, and
upholding Religion in it. But of this I shall speak afterward.

4. Another ground of the Long Lives of the Patriarchs before the Deluge was
their Healthful Temper, wherein they much exceeded others that followed them.
For tho we need not assert (as some have done) that the Earth was not situated
before the Flood as it is now, that there were no Summers and Winters, but that
there was a perpetual Equinox all over the World; yet this we may with good
reason hold that there was a greater Equality of Heat and Cold in those days,
and, as the consequent of that, there was a more constant and uniform
Temperature of Men's Bodies. For we cannot but think that there was a great
change caused by that Universal Deluge which covered the Earth; this could not
but damp and chill the Air, and thereby exceedingly affect Men's Bodies, and
contribute toward the shortning of their Lives. But before this general
Inundation they were healthful, and lived a long time. And this Account which I
give lets us see that this was not a peculiar Donation to those Persons only
whom Moses mentions, but that it was vouchsafed to all that lived in those
early times.

5. I might add, that their Food was purer and wholesomer than that of the
following Ages. The Fruits of the Earth came up more kindly before the Deluge
than afterward; for we cannot but conceive that they were endamaged by the
briny Waters of the Seas which were let loose on the Ground. By this means the
products of the Earth were not so nutritive as before, not so adjusted to the
Constitutions and Tempers of Men's Bodies, and thence the Plenitude of Years was
abated.

6. Their Health and Long-living may be ascribed to their Temperance and
Moderation; for their Diet being more simple and plain (consisting wholly of
Herbs and Plants, and such like Products of the Ground) they were not tempted
to that Excess which prevailed afterward, when several sorts of curious and
delicat^ Dishes were allowed them. Hereupon followed Wantonness, Intemperance,
Luxury and Riot; and by these the Hale Temper of Men's Bodies was impaired, and
Diseases bred, and their Days shortened. But as long as they continued sober and
temperate, they were blessed with a sound Constitution, they were strong and
vigorous, witness what you read in Genesis 5. 32. Noah was fiv^ hundred Y^ars ^ld,
and b^gat Shem, Ham and Japhet.

I could adjoin in the next place, that it is very probable they had greater
Skill in Physic than there was afterward, tho they had seldom occasion to
make use of it. The Professors of the Spagyrick Art do indeed tell us that the
Longevity of the Patriarchs is to be attributed to their Skill in Chemistry
(for it is of that Antiquity they say) but it is to be questioned whether there
was any such thing at that time: we may rather content our selves with this
belief, that they understood well the Nature of Herbs and Plants, and had more
Time and Opportunity to study their Qualities and Operations than Men since
have; and thence perhaps they made especial choice of such of them as were
great Strengthners of Nature, and upheld the Life of Man.

Again, their quiet and contented way of living contributed much to the
lengthning of their Lives. They were generally free from Care and Distraction,
they understood not the Intrigues and Perplexities which vain Men are now
plagued with. In those Golden Times there was more Simplicity and Honesty, Men
were satisfied with a little, and could live at a cheap rate. But afterward
the World was disordered, Men's Desires and Wishes grew immoderate and
extravagant, and their Days were worn out with Troubles and Vexations. This is
the best Account I can give of the Long Lives of the Patriarchs of the first
Ages, and of the shorter Term of Years of those that succeeded them.

The Third Patriarchal Dispensation, or the Abrahamick Economy, began with
Abraham, and continued till the giving of the Law by Moses, which was 430
Years, Ex. 12. 41. Gal. 3. 17. The Person from whom this Period has its
Denomination was a Chald^an by Birth, and lived in Vr, the chief City of
Chald^a. In this Idolatrous Country it is probable he was partly infected with
the Vic^ of the Place, and thence perhaps he is said to be Ungodly, R^m. 4. 5.
But tho he was not wholly free from the impious Practice of Idolatry which then
re^gn'd in the World, yet he retained his Integrity as to the main, and would
not suffer himself to be born down with the wicked Examples of others.
Maimonides and other Hebrew Writers tell us that he was cast into the Fire by
the Chald^ans, because he would not worship it. So the Trial of his Faith was
by Fire, in the most strict and limited Sense of the Apostle's Words, 1 Pet. 1.
7. This we are certain of, that it seemed good to God to call him out of that
place of so great Temptation, and to command him to repair to the Land of
Canaan. When Noah's Family and Race were corrupted, he made choice of this
Person above the rest, and raised him up to profess the true Doctrine and
Worship. He vouchsa^ed to reveal his Will to him in an extraordinary and
peculiar manner, and to make a Covenant with him, and to constitute him the
Father of the Faithful: For Idolatry had invaded the holy Race of S^^m, and
thereby obliterated the Memory of the Covenant made with Adam, and afterward
with Noah; wherefore it was congruous to the Divine Wisdom to call forth
Abraham who was of that Offspring, and to renew the Covenant and Promise with
him, and further to assure him and his Seed of the Blessings that should accrue
to them by the coming of the Messiah.

It will not be amiss to take notice of the several Steps leading to this. 1.
God appeared to Abraham in Chald^a, hidding him leave that Place, and seek
another Country, and he assured him of his Blessing. G^n. 12. 1, 2, 3. The Lord
had said unto Abram, Get there out of thy Country, and from thy Kindre^, and
from thy Father's H^us^, unto a Land that I will show thee. And I will make of
thee a great Nation, and I will bless th^^, and make thy Name great, and t^ou
shall be a Blessing. And I will bless them that bl^ss th^^, and curse him that
curs^th the^: and in (...) shall all the Families of the Earth b^ blessed. 2.
Abraham being come into Canaan, God appeared to him first at Sich^m, and the
Promise he then made him was this, Unto they S^^d will I giv^ this Land, Genesis
12. 7. 3. God appeared again to him at B^th^l, and renewed his former Promises,
telling him that (...) would (...) his Seed as the Dust of the Earth, Genesis 13.
16. 4. He appeared again to him, encouraging and comforting him when he
complained for want of an Heir. He promised him that he should have a Son, and
that his Seed should be multiplied, and repeats his Promise also concerning his
possessing the Land of Canaan. Only he adds, that his Seed must expect to be
strangers in a foreign Land, and to be afflicted 400 Years before they came to
settle in the promised Country, Genesis 15. 1 to 17. And at the same time God
solemnly made a Covenant with him, saying, Unto thy Seed have I given this
Land, ver. 18. 5. God appeared to Abraham yet again, and renewed the former
Covenant, saying unto him after this manner, I am the Almighty God; walk before
me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and I
will multiply thee exceedingly: and thou shall be a Father of many Nations; and
I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in
their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to
thy Seed after thee. Genesis 17. 1, 2, 4, 7. And now it was that his name Abraham
was given to him, which signifies the Father of a multitude, i. e. of many
Nations; for Hamon, which is the word here contracted, is a Multitude. 6. This
Covenant is confirmed with the Seal of Circumcision: Every Man-child among you
shall be circumcised, Genesis 17. 10.

This is a particular and distinct Account of God's appearing to Abraham, and
of his gracious communicating himself to him. It is all in way of Covenant; and
accordingly what has been said, may be reduced to these two things: 1. What
God promises to do on his part. 2. What Abraham and his Seed were to do on
theirs. God promised in general that he would be a God unto him, and to his
Seed; yea, he would be an Almighty or Alsufficient God to him; which
comprehends all that can be said. But particularly, God promised him these
things: 1. To give him ( i. ^. his Posterity) the Land of Canaan in due time.
2. To multiply his Seed exceedingly, even as the Sta^s of Heaven. 3. To bless
all Nations of the Earth in his Seed. And St. Peter in his Sermon ( Acts 3. 25,
26.) interprets and explains this Blessing, speaking thus to the Jews, Y^ are
the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our
Fathers, saying unto Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Kingdoms of the Earth
be blessed. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities. Christ Jesus
the Messiah is the Blessing that was promised by God to Abraham. This we learn
also from St. Paul, Gal. 3. 8, 9. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gosp^l unto Abraham,
saying, In the^ shall all Nations be blessed. So then they which be of Faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham. And in the 14 th Verse the Apostle declares,
that the Blessing of Abraham cam^ on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. And to
make this more evident, he adds, ver. 16. To Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises mad^. He says not, Unto Seeds, as of many, but a^ of one, And to thy
Seed, which is Christ.

This was the Covenant on God's part: Now let us see what it was on Abraham's
part. He and his Seed were obliged by this Covenant to behave themselves
answerably to such bountiful Promises made to them, and such great things as
were to be done for them. As the Lord had engaged to be their God, so they by
virtue of this Covenant undertook to be his (...), to deport themselves as such
in all the actions of their lives, and to do nothing unworthy of this singular
Honor and Favor conferred on them. All is summed up in those words, Walk
b^for^ m^, and be thou perfect. To walk before God, is to please him. Enoch
walked with God, Genesis 5. 22. which by the S^v^nty Int^rpret^rs is rendered,
Enoch pleased God. And accordingly the Author to the Hebrews says, that Enoch,
before his translation, had this testimony, that he pleased God, Heb. 11. 5. So
Noah walked with God, Genesis 6. 9. (...)* LXX. I will walk before the Lord, Psalm.
116. 9. (...), say the same In^erpreters. Therefore to walk, and to please God,
are joined together by the same inspired Writer, in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. the latter
being the Explication of the former. This is, according to the same Apostle, to
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, Col. 1. 10. Thus Abraham and his
Seed, by virtue of this Federal Transaction, were engaged to walk before God,
to serve him in that way which was most acceptable to him. This religious and
spiritual walking denotes (as the bodily one generally does) continued Motion,
Progress, Acquaintance, Converse, Amos 3. 3.
Friendship. And to walk before God, implies that the Persons who do so,
consider that they are in God's Presence, and therefore do nothing but what is
pleasing to him. The walking before God after this manner, denominates a Man
perfect; that is, it is the only Persection which he is capable of in this Life.

We see then what it was that made this a peculiar Dispensation. The Law of
Grace, or Covenant made with Adam, and confirmed to Noah, was renewed to
Abraham with special and peculiar Promises to him and his Seed, with singular
Engagements on their part. Here were new Discoveries and Manifestations
concerning the Messiah, viz. That he should be of the Seed of Abraham, and
consequently of the Nation of the Jews; and that tho he should spring out of
the Herbe^ Stock, yet he should be an Universal Savior, and all Nations should
be capable of receiving benefit from him, and of being blessed by him: and that
they should all be justified by Faith, as we have ground to infer from what is
said of Abraham in Genesis 15. 6. He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to
him f^r Rightcousn^ss; and from the Apostle's Comment on it in Gal. 3. 8, 9.

And then, this is peculiar to this Period, that whereas hitherto there had
been no diff^rence of any Countries and Nations of Men; now there is a palpable
difference made. For as God chose a Person out from the rest of the World, so
he will now make of him a great Nation and People, which shall be differenced
from the rest of Mankind. God seeing the World generally running into Idolatry,
and all sorts of Wickedness, set up Abraham's Seed to stem the Torrent of Vice,
to keep up Religion pure and entire, and to maintain the true Worship of God
upon the Earth. The Church before was not separated, and gathered from the rest
of the World, but was in common with it as to Place and Stock till Abraham's
time. But now it is distinguished from other Nations, and it is confined to one
Race of People, among whom there shall constantly be some religious Men, who
are true and living Members of the Church, and of whom at length the Messiah,
the Lord of Righteousness, shall come according to the Flesh.

This Stock and Posterity of Abraham were called Hebrews; but what occasioned
this Name first of all is disputable. The Joseph. Antiq. I. 1. c. 7.
Jewish Antiquary, and from him several Eusebius, Jerome, Austin, and several of
the Rabbis. Among the Moderns, Calvin, Mercer, Cornel. a Lapide, Genebrard,
Pererius, Broughton, Buxtorf, Bochart, Lightfoot.
others, have thought that the Hebrews were called so from Heber, the Son of
Salah, the Father of Peleg. Others think it more reasonable to assert, that
they had their Name from Abraham. I do not mean it in St. Augustin's sense, i.
e. Hebrai, quasi Abra^^i (which was the Opinion of this Father at first, but
afterward he retracted it, and adhered to the forementioned one): But I mean
this, that this Name of the Hebrews (as Origin, Chrysostom, Arias Montanus,
Erpenius, Seldom.
several have been induced to believe) is derived from Gneber, transiit, viz.
from the passing of Abraham and others with him from Vr in Chaldea, through
Mesopotamia into Canaan. Thence this Patriarch is called* and that
emphatically, Abram the Passenger, Hagnibri, Genesis 14. 13. We translate it Abram
the Hebrew: But the Septuagint, who well understood the true derivation of the
word, render it (...), the Passenger, or the Traveller. The Reader may take his
choice of these two Opinions, viz. whether the Hebrews were called so from
Heber, or from G^ibri. But, to speak freely, tho I have no Author on my side, I
do not see why they might not have their Name from both, i. e. from Heber, and
afterward from Abraham. For it is certain that the Jews were the Progeny of
that worthy Man Gneber or Heber, and therefore from him might originally be
called, and he may be said to be the Father of the Hebrews. But it is as
certain that Abraham was also the Father of them; and we cannot but acknowledge
that his leaving his Country, and traveling into Canaan (where afterward his
Posterity settled) were most famous and remarkable Occurrences, and might
deservedly give him the name of Gnibri the Traveller; whence the denomination
of the People descended from him is Hebrews. In this Name is recorded the Rise
of that Nation, viz. from Mesopotamia, whence the Father of them came. And you
may observe that it is particularly and signally mentioned by God himself,
Josh. 24. 2. that he led him over Euphrates to go to Canaan: and therefore I am
inclined to think that from this Epithet, (tho not wholly) I say, from this
Epithet given to Abraham (because he left his own Country, and passed over
E^phrates, and so came traveling to Palestine) the Posterity of Abraham took
their Name, and were called Hebrews. Afterward they were called Israelites
(from Jacob, whose Name was changed into that of Israel); and Jews (from Judah,
Jacob's Son). Some think this last Name did not prevail till the Kingdom, upon
Solomon's death, was divided into Judah and Israel. But I see no footsteps of
its prevailing then, for these People are not called Jews but once in the Old
Testament before the Captivity, viz. in King Ahaz's Reign, 2 Kings 16. 6. Which
how^ver confutes that of Antiq. l. 11. c. 5.
Josephus, that they were first called Jews when they returned from the
Captivity in Babylon.

That they might be known to be a peculiar People, they were distinguished from
all others by the bloody Badg of Circumcision: which was another thing that
contributed toward the making this a new Dispensation. It is true, this Rite
was instituted first with relation to Abraham's particular Person; for in my
judgment the best Account is given by Qu. and Resp. 102. ad Orthodox.
Justin Martyr of the primary reason of this practice, viz. because Abraham
believed in God, even when he was aged and un^^t for Generation, and when his
Wife was decrepid and barren; he then believed (I say) that he should be a
Father of a Child: for that reason God gave him a Sign of this nature, viz. the
Circumcision of the Foreskin of that part of his Body, which then through Age
was useless as to Procreation, but through Faith became otherwise. But there
are other Reasons (secondary ones, and some of them mystical) which have
reference, not only to Abraham, but the People descended from him. 1.
Circumcision was intended and appointed to be a Character of Genealogical
Sanctity, a special Mark of distinction between the People of God and Infidels,
between the true Worshippers and Idolaters, between the holy Seed and the
Profane; in short, between the Seed of Abra^am and the rest of the World.
Therefore all the forty Years the Israelites were in the Desert, they did not
make use of this distinguishing Mark, because then they had no converse with
other People, and so there was no need of an external Note of distinction to
discriminate them from other Nations. 2. Circumcision (as has been suggested
already) was a Sign and Seal of the Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed, a
confirmation of the Promises made by God to them. Thence it is called by God
himself his Covenant, Genesis 17. 9, 10. i. e. the Sign of it, as you read it
explained in the next Verse, It shall be a Token of the Covenant between you
and me. Thus this bloody Rite is called the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.
8. and the Sign of Circumcision, Romans 4. 11. where the Apostle adds this high
Encomium of it, that it is the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, i. e. of
Justification and Pardon of Sin through the free Mercy of God, for the sake of
the promi^ed Seed, in whom all the Faithful believe. For this Federal Mark in
that part of his Body, was to remind and assure Abraham, that Christ should be
born of his Seed. 3. It was reckoned by the Hebrew Doctors as a kind of an
Oblation and Sacrifice to God, there being a taking of something from the Body,
and offering is to God: yea, it was a bloody Sacrifice. 4. Philo asserts, that
the cutting off of that part was a (...). Lib. de Circumcis.
sign of the abscission and casting away of superfluous Pleasures and carnal
Delights.

Some have thought it was an artificial Restraint of Lust and Lewdness, and in
the nature of the thing it self was some check to Lasciviousness. This is but a
Fancy, for it is known that the People of that Nation (and so of others since
who use Circumcision) are none of the chastest Men in the World, to say no
worse. That is another Rabbinical Notion, that Circumcision was made in that
part of their Flesh, to represent they were to be a Holy Seed unto the Lord.
But to speak with Sobriety and Reason, Circumcision was appointed for the ends
at first mentioned; and lastly, to be a Symbol of the inward and spiritual
Circumcision, the Circumcision of the Heart. Accordingly you read in the old
Law of circumcising the Foreskin of the Heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and 30. 6. and so
in Ier. 4. 4. And in the New Testament the Apostle speaks of the Circumcision
of the Heart, in the Spirit, Romans 2. 29. and of putting ^ff the Body of the
Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, Col. 2. 11. Hence observe why
Sin is called a Body, because it is represented by the Body or Flesh in
Circumcision. When the Flesh of the Foreskin is cut off, the taking away of Sin
is signified; Sin is as it were cut off by it. And in the 13th Verse of that
Chapter the Apostle speaks thus, You being dead in your sins, and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened. Sin and the Pr^putium are here
put together as the same; and it is plainly signified, that Sin is denoted to
be taken away when the Foreskin is cut off. Circumcision then was designed as
the Symbol of a Holy Nation, a religious and (...) People; and thence you read
in Scripture, not only of the Circumcision of the Heart, but of the Ears and
Lips, to denote the Sanctity which was required in their Words and Convers^,
and indeed in their whole Lives.

As to other Religious Rites and Offices, those that were used in the former
Oeconomi^s prevailed now also, as Genesis 12. 7, 8. and 13. 4, 18.
Sacrifices, Altars, Priesthood, etc. Tho we read not of Temples or Tabernacles
under the Patriarchal Dispensation; yet now their manner was to erect Altars in
those places where God appeared to them: and these were signalized for the
future by dedicating them to the public Service of God. Here they were wont to
assemble together, to offer solemn Prayers and Praises to the most High; and
they became as it were, Temples and Houses of God, Genesis 28. 17, 22. To the
ordinary Sacrifices before used, you will find that Abraham and Jacob added
another kind, viz. mere federal ones, which are described in Genesis 15. 9, 18.
and 31. 54.

Now also we first hear of Tithes: Abraham paid Tithes of all (i. e. all the
Spoils) to Melchisedeck a Priest, Genesis 14. 20. Jacob made this Vow, I will
surely give the Tenth of all to thee, i. e. of all that came of his Flock, or
of the Fields, Genesis 28. 22. Thus the paying Tithes became a Pledge of Religion,
and of subjection to God.

The Patriarchs now also used certain Ceremonial Lustrations and Purifications,
as may be gathered from Genesis 35. 2, 3. Jacob said unto his Household, Be clean,
and change your Garments: and let us arise and go up to Bethel. I might add the
Ceremony used in Swearing, viz. of putting the hand under the thigh of the
Person they swore to, Genesis 24. 2. Also, you may observe there were at that time
Holy Feasts of the remainders of the Sacrifices, Exodus 5. 1. All these were
Rites relating to Religion and Worship.

There were other remarkable things in this O^conomy, which are reducible to
Religion and Manners. At this time began the Ius Leviri, or right of marrying
the Brother's Widow. Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy Brother's Wife, and
marry her, and raise up Seed to thy Brother, Genesis 38. 8. The surviving Brother
was to marry the Relict of the Brother deceased, if he died without Issue. But
it took not effect at this time. As to the Degrees of Consanguinity in
reference to Marriage, they were not all of them observed, for Abraham married
Sarah who was his Niece, for she was his eldest Brother Haran's Daughter, (tho
he called her his Sister, and labored to make it out, saying, She is the
Daughter of my Father, but not of my Mother, Genesis 20. 12. i. e. She was
Grand-daugh^^r to his Father; and such were reckoned by the Hebrews as half
Sisters.) Iac^b married his Cousin-German Rachel, the Daughter of his Uncle
Laban, Genesis 29. 28.

And as for P^lygamy, which was begun by Lamech many Years before, it was now
practiced by Abraham, Esau, Jacob, and others, tho it was against the Primitive
Law and Institution, Genesis 2. 24. The Concubines which they took were a
secondary sort of Wives, as the Issue they had by them were a secondary kind of
Children, for they had Gifts and Legacies, but no Inheritance, Genesis 25. 6. But
this must be said, and that with evident truth, that Abraham and Jacob's taking
of other Wives or Concubines differed from the same custom and practice of that
time in three things, which much alters the case. 1. They did not this of
themselves, and so it was not their own act properly. It is expressly said, that
Sarah brought her Maid Hagar to Abraham, and gave her to him to be his Wife,
Genesis 16. 3. So Jacob, upon the motion and persuation of his Wife Rachel, took
his Handmaid to Wife; it is in express terms said, she gave him her to Wife,
Genesis 30. 4. So Lea^ did the same with her Maid, verse. 9. 2. Antiq. I. 1. C. 11.
Joseph the learned Jew rightly notes, that Abraham and Sarah did what they
did by the particular direction and approbation of God; for their History
informs us, that they were Persons that were under the mo^e immediate guidance
of Heaven. 3. It is not unlikely that the ^oresaid Women moved their Husbands
to this, and that they consented to it on the account of the Promise which God
had made concerning the Blessed Seed which should be of their Family; they were
impatient of having it fulfilled some way or other. And particularly as to
Abraham, God having only told him, that he should have a Child, but had not yet
said by Sarah, this good Patriarch thought it might be this way fulfilled, as
an' Bishop Patrick Comment. on Genesis 16. 2.
excellent Person suggests.

We read that Whoredom and Adultery were now punished with death: thus Judah
sentenced Thamar to be burnt, Genesis 38. 24. Unless with Mr. Seldom de jur. Not.
and Gent. I. 7.
some we shall say, that this was no capital Infliction, but a stigmatizing or
branding with a hot Iron. Incest was in those times unlawful, for Re^ben is
reprehended by his Father for defiling his Bed, Genesis 49. 4. and his Birthright
was taken from him, 1 Chronicles. 5. 1.

The Law of Primogeniture now prevailed, as appears in the Instances of Esa^
and Reuben, tho by their own fault they divested themselves of that Privilege.
These were the several kinds of Positive Laws relating either to Religion or to
Civil Affairs, which were in use among the Patriarchs: (where by the by we may
take notice how unskilful De Cive c. 16
Mr. Hobbs was in the Sacred History, when he says, Abraham had no other Law,
except that of Circumcision, whereunto he was obliged but the Laws of Nature.)

This must be added and remembered by us in the last place, that the Precepts
and Injunctions which were given in the foregoing Dispensation, are supposed to
be retained here. So much concerning the Primitive State of things before the
Law of Moses: which was the Patriarchal Dispensation, or the first Dispensation
of Grace.

CHAP. V.
The Mosaic or Jewish Dispensation seems to be Preposterous. The Law of Grace
was veiled for a season. The Triple Law which this Economy was famous for,
briefly displayed. Four Reasons assigned why the World was so long without a
Written Law. The Ceremonial Law is part of this Dispensation. The several
things which are comprehended in it. Oblations, viz. of Inanimate things.
Sacrifices, which were of Living Creatures. An enumeration of those Sacrifices
which were Set and Determined. Others were Occasional, viz. 1. Sin Offerings.
2. Trespass-Offerings. 3. Peace Offerings. Some Remarks about Sacrifices. The
several Ends and Designs of this way of Worship. How the Mosaic Sacrifices are
said to Expiate. It is largely proved that the guilt of all kinds of Sins
whatsoever was Atoned by them. The Objections to the contrary are answered. The
Principal End of the Judaick Sacrifices was to typifie and represent the
Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross.

THe Second Dispensation of Grace is that which is known by the name of Jewish,
Mosaic, or Legal. Concerning which we may observe this, before we go any
further, that though this Economy in some respects was not so perfect as the
Abrahamick, yet it was introduced after it. The Promise made to Abraham was of
Justification by Faith in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle, who best understood it,
expounds it in Gal. 3. where he calls it Ver. 17.
the Covenant confirmed before of God in Christ, (...), that Covenant whereby
the Faithful were engaged to believe in Christ for Salvation. But then comes
Moses's Law, and seems to establish Justification by the Works of it. So God
was pleased to go back as it were. You will find the Apostle taking special
notice of this in Gal. 3. 17, 19. The Covenant that was confirmed before of God
in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot
disannul. -- Wherefore then serves the Law: It was added because of
Transgressions, till the Seed should come, etc. He acquaints them here with the
Reason of this strange and preposterous Transaction, viz. Why Moses succeeded
Abraham, why the Mosaic Law came after the Covenant made and confirmed of God
in Christ. There was a necessity of it, as things then were: The Law was added,
i. e. it followed the Promise made to Abraham, because of transgressions: as
much as to say, though Justification was then and ever to be had by that
Promise to the Father of the Faithful, yet the Mosaic O^c^n^my took place four
hundred and thirty years afterward, to restrain men from Sin, to show them
their Guilt, and to cause them to look for a Remedy. The Law was given so long
after the Covenant of Grace renewed to Abraham, because the infinitely Wise
Disposer of all things knew that it would be serviceable in discovering Sin and
Transgression, and so in preparing men for the Gospel. Thus it was found
requisite to go back a little, for the Law of Faith could not have its free
course and progress till the Law of Works was as it were brought upon the stage
again. There seemed to be a Representation of this when Abraham's posterity, the
holy Patriarch Jacob's childr^n, went out of Canaan into Egypt, out of the
Promised Land to the house of Bondage, and then returned back to Canaan. This
shadowed out this Retr^grad^ Dispensation. The World was not fit for an higher
Oecono^y, the Law was to do the Office of a S^hoolmaster, and to prepare and
discipline them against Christ's Coming. So it was necessary till the S^^d
should come to whom the Promise was made, i. e. till Christ himself should
appear, and till the spiritual S^^d of Abraham, the Church of Christ, made up
of Jews and Gentil^s, should be in the World.

Yet this is not so to be understood as if the Law of Grace were Nulled all the
time of the Mosaic Economy. No: it was only in some respects obscured and
veiled for a certain season. Or, it may be said, One was superinduced upon the
Other, and they did in a manner take place together, but in different Degrees,
and among different Persons. Whilst the I^wish Economy was in being, the
Former One yet continued: For when a New Economy is introduced, the preceding
one is not always abolished, but remains partly in force. So here, the Law of
Faith, or the Covenant of Grace which was made with Abraham, is still on foot
under the Mosaic Administration. Therefore it is ob^ervabl^ that the Law
published in the Des^rt of Sinai, and received ther^ by the people, is called a
Covenant, ^xod. 19. 5. And with reference to this M^ses tells the Isra^lites
that the Lord their God made a Covenant with them in Hor^^, Deuteronomy. 5. 2. which
was no other than the Covenant of Grace made with Adam, and confirmed to (...)
and Abraham (as has been before showed) but now in a more illustrious manner
ratified, and also enlarged and augmented, and transferred from a Family to a
Nation* And this Covenant is actually and personally made good to the Jews by
their being S^parated ^n a more signal manner than before from the rest of the
World, and by their being made a peculiar People, and taken into Grace and
Favor. There was a Distinction made between God's Servants and others under
the Abrahamick Period, but now it is more Visible and Remarkable; now the
Jewish State properly commenceth: now these People are molded into a new
Commonwealth, and God is their peculiar Governor. The Church of God was first
united into One Politic Body or Society, and grew to be National in Moses's
time. Now the Church in the Wilderness (as it is called by St. Stephen Acts 7.
38.) became a Distinct Body of men known by the name of Israelites.

This Economy is famous for the Delivering of a Threefold Law, Moral,
Ceremonial, Judicial. Tho Moral, Ecclesiastical, Civil may be a better Division
of those Laws: for some that are reckoned among the Ceremonial and Typical Laws
(as Tithes and First Fruits) are not such: and some of those called Judicial,
deserve not that name. But the Usual Partition shall serve; and by the Moral
Law we understand those Precepts and Commands by the observance of which men
are madereally Good and Virtuous. The Ceremonial Law is the Jews Canon Law, and
directs them in their external Behavior in Religious Worship, and tells them
what Rites and Usages they must observe. By the Judicial Law we understand the
Civil Law of the Jewish Nation, as Ius Civil is taken for the Particular Law
of every single State: This contains those Constitutions and Orders which
respect Public Justice, and acquaints men what is Right and Equitable in their
Dealings and Commerce* with one another. The first of these are such Precepts
and Prohibitions as are good in themselves. The Second are indifferent in their
own Nature, but are so far good as they are commanded by a Positive Law of God.
The third sort are of a mixed Nature, being partly in their own nature good, and
partly indifferent.

This Triple Law is thought by the Jewish Writers to be comprised in those
three words, Commandments, Statutes, Judgments, Deuteronomy. 6. 1. Mitzoth Praecepta
are said to be the Ten Commandments, the Moral Law: Chukkim Statuta are thought
to be those Rites and Ceremonies that respect God's Worship, as Circumcision,
etc. Mishaphattim Iudicia are supposed to be all those Politic Constitutions
that concern humane Society. But it is not certain that by these three words
are meant those three distinct kinds of Laws, for these are mentioned in Genesis
26. 5. before there was this formal Distinction of Laws. And in Deuteronomy. 11. 1.
you will find these words transposed, which intimates that those are too nice
who understand them in the former manner, for it is not likely that the
Commandments, i. e. the Moral Law, would be set in the last place. Wherefore I
think it more probable that this diversity of words is used only to signify
the whole body of Precepts, of what nature soever, that was given to the Jews.
But this is unquestionable, that the Dec^logue is the chief and most eminent
part of these Laws, and the rest are b^t Appendages and Supplements to it. The
Cerom^^ial Injunctions are annexed to the Precepts of the first Table, and
those that are Judicial to them of the Second. The former are Particular
Instances of the Duty which was required of the Jewish people toward God: the
latt^r of their Duty toward their Neighbors.

The Hebrew Doctors divide all the Commandments of the Law into 248 (...) and
365 Negative, and both (...) into Twelve Houses (as they call them) and under
each House more or less Commandments. The ^^mplete Sum is 613* which they say
is according to the number of the ^etter^ in the (...), in which all the Law is
virtually and reductively comprised. These Ten Words (as they are called in the
Hebrew) and those other Judicial and Ceremonial Laws (which you may find set
down from the 20 th Chap. of Exodus to the end of the Pentateuch) began to be
delivered on Mount Sinai three months after the Israelites came out of Egypt,
Exodus 19. 1. Moses was forty days (or six weeks) in the Mount: or rather (if
you con^ult the ^^^tory) you will find that he was twice or thrice on the Mount
so long a time, or a very considerable time; and then it was that he received
these Divine Laws.

First, I will speak concerning the Moral Law, comprised in the Ten
Commandments. I call the wh^l^ Decalogue the Moral Law, although the
Observation of the Seventh Day, app^inted in the Fourth Commandment, be not
strictly Moral* but because the Devoting some Certain Time to God's Service is
Moral, and is contained in that Comm^ndment, therefore I reckon it part of the
Moral Law. You meet with several particular Laws relating to Moral Duties,
scattered up and down in the four last Books of Moses; but these Ten Words (as
they are called) are a (...). Philo d^ D^^alo^o.
Summary Account of all those Laws and Rules which are more sp^cially and
particularly set down. This Law of Morality and Natural Reason was in all the
former Dispensations: but that which makes it Peculiar in is this, that this
Law, which before was Written in men's Hearts, is now Engraven on Stone. If I
should say that there were no Lett^rs at all before these which God used on
Mount Sinai: If I should a^sert that they had no Books or Writings before the
(...), but that the Characters of the Law were the first that ever were in the
World, and consequently that now God taught men to write, I do not see how why
man can disprove me. But this we are sure of, that from Adam to Moses (which is
above 2000 years) there was no Written Word of God to direct the World. The
Church was without Scriptures. God's Will which was communicated to them by
Revelation, was continued and kept up by Tradition. If it be demanded why God
suffered the World to live so long without a written Law, and what was the
Reason of the writing of the Law at last; I answer,

1. The long Lives of the Patriarchs (as has been intimated before) were one
main Reason why there was no Written Law for so long a time. There was a
College and Society of many Seniors living many hundred years together with one
another. Adam lived with Seth 800 years, with Enes 695, with Cainan 605, with
Mahalaleel 535, with Iared 470, with Methuselah 243, with Lamech 56. Or we may
instance in Pious Shem, who was both before and after the Flood: he lived with
Methuselah 97 years, with Lam^ch 92, with Noah 447, with Arphaxad, Sala and
Heber about 430, with Peleg and Regu about 239, with Serug 230, with Nabor 149,
with Terah 205, with Abraham 150, with Isaac 50. These therefore could con^er
Notes with great ease, they could inform themselves truly concerning the Faith
and Religion and Practice of the First Man, they could instruct one another
concerning their Duty, and the indispensible necessity of it. Or take it more
briefly thu^, Adam lived to converse with Methuselah, Methuselah lived to see
and know Shem, Shem lived till Jacob was born: so that these three Patriarchs,
who could give an Account of all that time wherein they lived (which was above
2000 years) were able to keep their Families, and all other People that were
near them, in the knowledge of the true Religion, and where they erred and
offended, to correct them. Thus Religion and Divine Worship might be faithfully
transmitted from the beginning of the World to above twenty Centuries by three
persons only. The Church was then sufficiently taught by Tradition from Father
to Son, viv^ v^c^, because of the Longevity of the Patriarchs, some of whom
lived 700 years, others 800, or 900. For this reason the Church was without
Scripture almost five and twenty hundred years. But afterward when the years
of man's Life were shortened, God used another Method, he taught men by a Written
Law.

2. The Degeneracy of the World was another Reason why the Law was committed to
Writing. The World at first had many Pious as well as Ancient Patriarchs, who
were (as Philo notes) (...). Philo de Abrahamo.
Living and Rational Laws, and so stood in need of no Written ones: for these
are but (...). Ibid.
Commentaries on those Old Fathers Lives. But the Vices of men grew
proportionable to their Numbers: and when Mankind was spread wide up and down
the Earth, Immorality and Sin were dispersed likewise, and the World became
notoriously wicked. The Deluge did not wash away the Contagion, but in a
considerable time after men were as bad as ever, and the very Dictates of their
Reasonable nature were discarded by them. When they had thus obliterated the
Law written on their minds, God thence ingraved it on Tables of Stone. If men
had not been wonderfully corrupted, there had been no need of this. So faith
the Apostle, speaking of this Law, It was not made for the Righteous, but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, I Tim. 1. 9. The
same he had intimated before in Gal. 3. 19. The Law was added because of
transgression; it was given to be a Check to their notorious Sins, and that
they might not offend uncontrolled. And this may be the meaning of the
Apostle's words in Romans 5. 20. The Law entered, that the Offense might abound,
i. e. that men might see how their Sins abounded. God gave his Law in Writing,
to show them their Guilt, to convince them of their gross Miscarriages, and to
reduce them to the way of Virtue and Obedience, that when God himself had writ
down their Duty with his own hand, they might be inexcusable.

3. The Law was committed to Writing that it might not be forgot. Mr. (...)
One, reputed to be a Judicious Writer, is of opinion that the Patriarchs were
happier without the Written Law than with it; it was a mark of God's love and
favor that they had no books and writings, I suppose he means because they did
not need them. But afterward there was occasion for them; for the Impressions
of the Law of Nature were almost defaced and obliterated; the Instructions and
Traditions of their Fathers were neglected; and the knowledge of God and their
Duty could not be kept pure by Oral Tradition, when not only their Lives were
short, but corrupted and miserably depraved. Therefore an exact Written Law was
wanting, to set before their eyes, and to remind them of what they were to do,
to put them constantly in remembrance of what God required of them. Hereupon
the Moral Precepts were written by God himself, and delivered to M^s^s, that
the might communicate them to the People, and they to the rest of the World.
This was out of kindness to them, it was designed to be a Remedy against their
forgetfulness and negligence. Lastly, (which comprehends all) the Law was
written that it might not be corrupted. Tradition was unsafe when the numbers
of men were increased, and the World was dispersed, and arrived to a great
height of Impiety. Therefore God thought it necessary to preserve and
perpetuate the Law by Ingraving it on Tables of Stone, which are Solid and
Du^able, and by lodging it in the A^k as in a safe Treasury, by ordering it to
be Transcribed, and to be Read to all the People, and that they themselves
should read it continually. This was the best way to prevent all Error and
Imposture, all Fraud and Corruption about the Law. This made it a thing
impossible to deprave and pervert the Letter and plain Sense of it. For these
Reasons that Word, which for near 25 Centuries of Years was delivered and
promulged by Tradition, was committed to Writing in Moses's time, and not
before. For these Reasons the Common Law of Nature was turned into this Statut^
Law of the Commandments.

I will not here speak particularly of the Ten Commandments, because in the
Body of the Work which I intend, I am obliged to insist upon every one of them
distinctly and largely: and also because it is the Writing of the Moral Law (of
which I have given you an Account) not the Law it self, that is part of this
Mosaic Dispensation, as it is different from those which went before. The Ten
Command^ents were given now, not that they were of no force before this time:
but now they were Written on Tables, and more Solemnly Promulg'd. This was it
which we were to take notice of as New, and proper to this Iudaical Period. If
any man thinks that these Ten Commandments, because they were deliver'^ to
the Jews, were drawn up for that Body of People only, and are not of universal
Concernment, I could silence that surmise, by showing that these Commandments
were in force before the Law given by Moses to the Jews, and that every one of
them was a Law before the Mosaic Economy, and that those who lived in all the
former Dispensations observed these Commandments. Nay, they are all of them,
excepting only the Determination of the Sabbath day, the very Law of Nature,
written on the heart of man at his Creation. They are Dictates of Natural
Reason, and therefore they ought to be done though they were not commanded. For
this Reason likewise it is not proper to insist upon them in this place: for
they are no special part of this Economy. But the Cerem^nial and Judicial Laws
are the grand things which make this a distinct and peculiar Administration. Of
those therefore I will hasten to speak.

The Ceremonial or Ecclesiastical Law is no other than the Precepts given by
God to the Jews concerning External Rites belonging to Religion and the Worship
of God. Of these Ceremonial Usages several were in use before Moses's time,
viz. Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, Oblations, Tithes, Distinction of Clean and
Unclean Animals, Not Eating Blood, Circumcision. But now all the former Rites
and Ceremonies are digested into One Body, and are become more Fixed and
Certain. The Ceremonial Service of the I^ws was now precisely determined, and
there was no varying from it. Again, whereas in some Ag^s one Ceremony was
used, in another another, Now they are all together, and are observed at the
same Time, and by the same Persons. Besides, the Worship of the Patriarchs, tho
not wholly void of Ceremonies, was Simple and Plain in respect of what was now.
Under this Legal Dispensation the number of Ceremonies was vastly increased,
and the Worship was all Gay and Pompous by reason of them. Moreover, (as you
will have occasion to observe) several of the Ceremonies used by the Jews
differ from the same in use among the Patriarchs, as to some considerable
Circ^^stances and Qualifications.

The Cer^monial Law of the Jews comprehended in it, 1. The External Worship it
(...), which consisted chiefly in Ob^^tions and Sa^^if^ces, in Offer^ng and
Consuming (...) to the Honor of God. 2. The things belonging to the Persons
who Officiated, as Highpriests, Priests, (...) 3. The Place of God's Worship,
viz. the Tabernacle and Temple, with all the Utensils and Instruments employed
about them. 4. The Sacraments, Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb. 5. The Times
and Set Seasons of Worship. 6. Some things that respect the Co^^ersation of the
Worshippers, as the difference of Meats and Drinks, Uncleanness in touching the
Dead, Garments, etc. 7. The Religion of Vows. Of these in their order.

I begin with Oblations and Sacrifices, which were the principal Matter of the
Ceremonious Worship commanded by the Mosaic Law. These two are distinct
things, as we see in Psalm. 40. 6. Sacrifice and Offering thou would not. And
in Dan. 9. 27. He shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. Zebach and
Minchah, which are the words here used for Sacrifice and Oblation, are answered
by (...) and (...) in Heb. 10. 5. And the same Author again makes this division
of the Legal Offerings, (...), Gifts and Sacrifices, Heb. 9. 9. The Jewish
Writers keep this distinction inviolably in their Zebachim, tractatus in h^^
Mish^^h de Sacrifici^s.
Treatises relating to this matter.

First, The Mosaic Law enjoined the Minchah, the Gift, or Oblation, i. e.
Meal, Flower, Bread, Cakes, Wafers, Salt, Oil, Frankincense, handfuls of green
Ears of Corn, and all other Fruits of the Earth. These were brought and burnt
before God, or partly eaten and partly burnt. But tho Minchah was the general
Name for the Offering and Burning of all inanimate things which were presented
to God; yet the Bread, Meal, or Flower that was offered, was more signally
called Minchah, For which reason I conceive (if I may be permitted to be
critical in this matter) Minchah, which we constantly translate in the
^ent^teuch, a meat Offering, should rather be rendered a meal or flower
Offering, And the Sacrifices of Fl^s^ might be called the meat Offerings
rather, according to our usual way of speaking* But the Mincah was a C^^e made
of fine Meal, Oil, and Frankincense, and baked. (...)
It was offered every Morning and Evening with the ordinary Sacrifices; and at
other times it was generally joined with all bloody Sacrifices. The like kind
of Oblation among the Gentiles was called Libum. The Oblations of the things
before mentioned, were sometimes, styled Terumoth, or Heave-offerings, from the
manner of offering them, viz. by holding them up, and by shaking them up and
down, to signisy (say the Jews) that God was Lord of Heaven and Earth: For
Terumah was an Offering to God of something they had received, to acknowledge
God's Dominion over the whole Earth, and to set forth his Praise and Honor. It
was an honoring of God with their Substance, and a thankful remembrance of the
Blessings they enjoyed in so good a Land. The Oblations of these things were
sometimes also called Tenuphoth, or Wave-Offerings, because they used this kind
of gesture in offering them, they waved them to and fro* from the right to the
left, East and West, North and South: and this also was to declare, that God
was Lord of the whole World. These Offerings were instituted by God as an
Acknowledgment, that the Fruits of the Earth which they enjoyed were from him.
The liquid things which were offered to God, were Water, Wine, Oil, and Blood:
The way of offering these Liquors was partly by effusion; they poured out the
Water, Oil, and Blood, and some portion of the Wine on the ground, and spilt
them about the Altar, and upon the Sacrifices. Thence that of the Apostle may
be understood, If I be poured forth (for so it is in the Greek) upon the
Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, Phil. 2. 17. And part of the Wine they
drank, whence you read of Drink Offerings or Libations: Of which the Psalmist
speaks, when he says, he will take the Cup of Salvation, Psalm. 116. 13. which
is meant of the Drink Offering of Praise, which was in use when they sacrificed
and feasted in the Temple. These were the inanimate things of which (...)
Oblations consisted, which were generally known by the name of Mincahor,
Meat Offering, as we translate it, tho it is true likewise that Mincah (which
is a word of a large signification) was the usual term for the daily Sacrifice.

Secondly, Their Worship was accompanied with Sacrifices, which were of living
Creatures. Zebach was the bloody Sacrifice, such a one as was always attended
with the shedding of the Blood of Beasts. It is usually called by the Greeks
(...), macto.
(...) i. e. a Slaughter Offering, and sometimes (...), and by the Latins
Victima, and Hostia. These Sacrifices, properly so called, were Animals killed,
and then burnt. These Animals used in Scripture were either Terrestrial, or
AErial, Beasts or Birds. Of Beasts there were these three kinds only, viz. the
Bull, or Cow, or Ox, which made but one kind; the Goat or Kid; the sheep or
Lamb; (and this may be observed, that a Lamb is applied to the young ones both
of Goats and Sheep, Exodus 12. 5.) The Jewish Masters take notice, that these
were the only Cattle that were used in Sacrifice, because they are mild and
tame Creatures. God made choice, say they, of those Animals that are driven by
others, not those that drive and worry others, as the Lion, the Wolf, the
Leopard. Whence they make a good moral Observation, that those are the Elect of
God, and are fit to be offered unto him, who are of a meek and patient Spirit.
Tho I believe the true reason why Bulls, Sheep and Goats were the standing
Sacrifices, was this, that they were obvious and easy to be had. Of Birds or
Fowls, they sacrificed Pigeons, and Turtle Doves, and some add the Sparrow. But
this is certain, that if we reckon not this last among Sacrifices, we must put
it into the number of Oblations.

The Jewish Sacrifices were either Set and Determined, or Unlimited and
Occasional. The former were these that follow, 1. Such as were Anniversary, as
that once a year in the Holy of Holies, and those that were offered yearly at
the Passover and other Solemn Feasts. And the Paschal Lamb it self was a
Sacrifice, and often so called, Exodus 12. 27. and 23. 18. and 34. 25. Deuteronomy. 16.
4, 5. Why then is it not numbered among the Sacrifices by those that write on
this Subject? 2. Such as were Monthly, viz. the Sacrifices offered constantly
at the New Moons. 3. Some were Weekly, offered every Sabbath: for we read of
Sacrifices proper for this time; God commanded the Jews to offer more on this
day than on any other, Number. 28. 9, 10. Two Lambs were sacrificed both in the
morning and in the evening, and a double portion of Flower and Wine. 4. There
was the Daily Sacrifice, Hatamid, Judge Sacrificium, Dan. 8. 11. Two of these
were offered every day, viz. a Lamb in the Morning and a Lamb in the Evening,
Ex. 29. 38. but this Lamb is taken in a Large sense, for it might be either of
the Sheep or of the Goats. The Morning Sacrifice was offered at the Third hour,
i. e. Nine a clock in the Morning: and the Evening Sacrifice at the Ninth hour,
i. e. Three a clock in the Afternoon. This latter is said to be offered Exodus
29. 39.
between the two Evenings, viz. (as Josephus expounds it) between the
Afternoon-Evening (i. e. when the Sun began to decline) and the Sunset
Evening, which is reckoned from the Suns Setting to Midnight. It was offered
between the Declining and the Setting Sun. These Daily Sacrifices were of that
kind of Sacrifices which were called Holocausts, or Burnt Offerings, and
therefore are called Continual Burnt-Offerings, Number. 28. 10, 15, 24. and 29.
11. Ezr. 3. 5. Ne^. 10. 33. Now the nature of this sort of Sacrifice was, that
it was wholly consumed, and all of it turned into Smoke and Flame, to the
honor of God: thence it was called Gnolah, i. e. Ascension, because the whole
Animal (except the skin and entrails) ascended up in Flames of God. Yet some
Learned men, because of those words in Psalm. 51. 19 distinguish between a
Burnt-Offering and a Whole Burnt-Offering. The G^olah or Burnt-Offering (say
they) was that of which one part only was burnt, and the other part was given
to him that brought the Sacrifice: but of the Chalil, the Whole Burnt-Offering,
every part was consumed by fire, even the very Skin; not the least portion
being spared either for the Priest, or him that presented it. Concerning the
Burnt-Offering we may observe, that it was never offered without the
Meat Offering of Flower and Oil mingled, and never without a Drink Offering of
Wine, Number. 15. 3, 4, 5. So much of the more. Solemn and Stated Sacrifices among
the Jews.

The Latter sort of Jewish Sacrifices were Occasional, the precise Time of
offering, which was not determined by the Law. These were either after the
Commission of some Sins against the Jewish Law, or after the Receipt of some
particular Mercies. The first, I say, were offered when some Sin against the
Law was committed: therefore they were called Sacrifices for Sin, or
Sin Offerings. But here we are taught to distinguish, for these Sacrifices were
either for (...)
Sin, as it denotes some lesser Fault, or for (...)
Trespass, which signifies a greater one. The former of these Sacrifices was
called Chattah a Sin-Offering, because it was appointed to be offered for the
Expiating of a Sin of Infirmity and Inadvertency, or of Ignorance and Error.
The latter of them is named Asham, a Trepass Offering, because it was
commanded to be offered for the Expiating of a Trespass knowingly committed, a
Voluntary, Deliberate Sin, and therefore it required a more costly Sacrifice
than the other. This is the usual distinction between Chattah and Asham, and it
is approved of by that Great and Piercing Critic Monsieur B^chart, Hieroz. P.
1. l. 2. C. 33. But Maimonides a Learned Jew held the quite contrary, and was
of opinion that Chattah was a Sacrifice that was offered for the Expiating of
faults of an high nature, and Asham for those of an inferior sort; More Nev.
P. 3. C. 46. There are other Reasons given of the Names of these two Piacular
Sacrifices: particularly Mr. Mede (Discourse 49.) thinks that the
Trepass Offering was for sins against the First Table, and the Sin-Offering
was for sins against the Second. Some of the Hebrew Doctors distinguish
otherwise; and indeed there is no great Certainty here amongst the most Learned
Writers that I have met with. I might observe to you further concerning these
Sacrifices, that they were partly Burnt, and partly went to the use of the
Priests, who in the Atrium of the Tabernacle or Temple sed upon them, i. e.
when the Sacrifice was for a particular Person. But if it was for the People or
the Priest himself, it was All of it Burnt to Ashes.

The Second sort of Occasional Sacrifices was upon the actual Receiving some
particular Mercy from God, or upon good hopes and expectations of the arrival
of some singular Benefit and Favor. These were generally called Shelamim,
Peace Offerings, or Sacrifices of Peace: and they were either Eucharistical, i.
e. Voluntary Sacrifices to return Thanks to God for the benefits they had
received; or they were Euctical, i. e. attended with Wishes and Prayers for New
Mercies and Benefits. Both these kinds of Sacrifices were Free Will Offerings,
and of Choice. Whereas the Holocaust was all of it consumed in the fire, and
nothing was left; and whereas part of the Sin-Offering was burnt, and another
part was given to the Priest, here it is otherwise; for these Sacrifices were
distributed into three parts, one part, ( i. e. the Fat and the Kidneys and
Blood) was burnt to God on the Altar for a sweet favor: another part was the
Priests, to him belonged the right shoulder, the breast, the two cheeks or
jaws, the tongue, and the maw: the third part, viz. the rest of the flesh, and
the skin were for the use of those that gave the Peace Offering, and such as
they pleased to call to partake with them: so that always after the
Peace Offering followed a Feast made of the remainders of the Sacrifice. Yet
there was some difference as to the Peace Offerings of the Congregation (which
were for the whole People) and the Peace Offerings of particular Persons. In
the former the Blood of them was sprinkled, and only the Inwards burnt, and the
Flesh not eaten by the persons who offered them, but only by the Priests in the
Court: but in the latter (which were Private Sacrifices) it was not so. It is
to be noted that those parts of the flesh which were not appointed to be
consumed on the Altar, but to be eaten by the Priests and the persons that
brought the Sacrifices, were not roasted, but sodden, Number. 6. 19. 1 Samuel 2. 13.
2. Chron. 35. 13. Observe also that whereas Males only might eat of the
Sin-Offering and Trepass Offering, Women were admitted to the Peace Offerings.
Note this too, that these Sacrifices were of Beasts of both Sexes, but the
Burnt-Offerings were of the Males only.

I might add this, as having relation to the Discourse of Sacrifices, that the
Fire which kindled them at first came down from Heaven, Lev. 9. 24. This was
perpetually kept, and not suffered to go out: and any Fire but this was
accounted Lev. 10. 1.
Strange Fire. It is thought that That Celestial Fire was preserved in some
Vessel whilst the Israelites were in the Wilderness, and so was continued till
Solomon's Temple was finished: and then Fire came down again from Heaven, and
consumed the Sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. This was preserved till the Babylonian
Captivity, and afterward renewed, 2 Macc. 1. 22.

Here the Difference between the Patriarchal Sacrifices and the Mosaic ones
might be taken notice of. The Patriarchs had no other Expiatory Sacrifices but
Holocausts or Burnt-Offerings, as is clear from several places. Besides, there
were Anniversary, Monthly, and Weekly Sacrifices among the Jews, but we know
not that there was any such thing before the Law. And some other Differences
the Reader may gather from the particulars aforesaid.

But the End and Design of these Sacrifices are chiefly to be inquired into:
(where we shall also see a further Difference in some things between the
Mosaical and Patriarchal Sacrifices) Let us see to What Purpose all those
Bloody Offerings were appointed, let us acquaint our selves with the Design of
Heaven in it. First, They were (as the Fruits of the Earth) intended as
Acknowledgments that God was their Benefactor. He gave these Animals as well as
those Fruits, and therefore it was fit to offer these as well as the others. 2.
If we speak concerning the Continual Morning and Evening Sacrifices, it is
certain they were Symbolical, they were a Token of God's Presence among them.
They were instituted as a Testimony of This, as you read in Exodus 29. 38, to
the end. They were a Sign that the Lord would be continually with them, and be
their God. 3. The Mosaical Sacrifices were to testify what the Jews deserved
for their Sins, viz. Death. By these Bloody Oblations it was signified that the
Life of Beasts should expiate for the Life of Men who had sinned, and were
become worse than Beasts. Sheep and Oxen were substituted in the room of
Offenders: these sinned, and those were slain. Though this could not be
evidently discovered by Natural Light (as has been said) yet now, upon God's
declaring in the Law, the nature of these Sacrifices, it appears that this was
one design of them. Those Legal Sacrifices were a kind of Confession of their
Guilt. By killing their Beasts they did as 'twere acknowledge that themselves
deserved to be used so. 4. The Mosaical Sacrifices were Federal Rites, and
designed to signify the Correspondence and Agreement between God and Man. To
which purpose you may observe that as part of the Shelamim, the
Peace Offerings, was burnt on the Altar, so the remainder and greater part were
eaten by the People that brought it, to show that it was truly a Sacrifice of
Peace, a Ceremony of Communion and Friendship with God, a Token of Fellowship
and Amity between God and Man. As for the Holocaust, that indeed was all of it
burnt; but there was a Meat Offering and Drink Offering annexed to it, to
denote Familiarity and Friendship, to show that they were Guests in God's
House, or rather that they were of his Family, and were fed at his Table, and
eat of his Meat (as the Sacrifices are called in Mal. 3. 10.) and Household
Provision.

Again, the great Design of the Mosaic Sacrifices was to Expiate and Atone.
Not only Burnt-Offerings or Helocausts, but all Free-will-Offerings were
Expiatory, notwithstanding what Crellius affirms, viz. that they were
Eucharistical, and therefore were not Expiatory. But we must know that That
Epithet does not respect the End which those Sacrifices were designed for, but
the occasion of their Offering them. As for the name of Peace Offerings, that
was given to this sort of Sacrifices, not only because they were offered in way
of Return for their Peace, i. e. (as the Hebrew word denotes) their Safety and
Welfare which were vouchsafed to them, but because the offering of them did
also procure Peace with God, and did assure them of the like Blessing for the
future from the same Propitious Hand. And therefore tho in another Dispensation
I distinguished between Eucharistical and Expiatory Sacrifices, yet there is no
reason to do so here, when I am speaking of the Mosaic Sacrifices, all or most
of which have on them the evident marks and tokens of Expiation. They were
appointed to propitiate and appea^e God's Wrath, and therefore might all of
them be called Pacifick, as well as some. That these Peace Offerings were
Expiatory, is proved from this, that here was putting the Beast to Death, here
was Sprinkling the Blood, here was the Consumption of some part of the Beast on
the Altar as an Oblation to God, which are the three Ingredients of an
Expiatory Sacrifice.

But what was this Expiation which was made by the Mosaic Sacrifices? I
answer, It was threesold: 1. In respect of Corporal Punishment. The Sanction of
the whole Mosaic Law is expressed in Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law
to do them. Which Curse imports no less then Death it self, besides all the
miseries of this life. But God was pleased to mitigate the rigor of this
Sanction; and whereas according to the strictness of the Law those who were
found guilty of violating it were to Die, this was not put in Execution, but
Beasts were appointed to suffer death for the Offenders, and their death was
accepted for the death of Sinners. 2. These Sacrifices Expiated as to Legal and
Bodily Impurities, which separated them from public Converse and Worship. Such
were Leprosy, Touching the Dead, etc. Hence the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebr^ws says, that they Sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh, Heb. 9. 13.
3. These Sacrifices (which is the most considerable thing of all) Expiated for
Moral Impurities, viz. all sorts of Sins.

I know it is asserted by some Men of great Learning, when they discourse of
Sacrifices, that the Mosaic Law gave no pardon to he^^ous Sinners, that great
Offenses were not expiated by Scarifices. This is more especially held by
(...), who urges, that the Sacrifices under the Law were available only for
lesser Sins, not for De Servat. par. 2. cap. 9.
great ones. And De. V. Rel. l. 2. cap. 12.
Volkelius and other profes'd Socinians, insist upon the same thing, and labor
to prove, that Sacrifices were offered only for expiating of Sins of Lgnorance,
Weakness and Error, and that Death was the Penalty of all great and enormous
Offenses. The same is defended by Cont. Frantz. Disp. 4.
Smalcius, as the Reader may find it in his Writing. And we are told by Dr.
Tillotson' s Sermon on 2 Pet. 1. 4.
one of our own Divines, that the Jewish Religion allowed of no Expiation but
for legal Impurities and involuntary Transgressions, such as proceeded from
Ignorance and Inadvertency, but not for Sins of Presumption, and such as were
committed with an high hand. If Men sinned wilfully, there was no Sacrifice
appointed by the Law for such Sins. And Dr. Scot, The Christain Life, Part 2.
Vol. 2. Chap. 7.
another of great repute in our Church agrees with him, saying, The greater
Crimes under the Law were no otherwise to be expiated but by the Blood of the
Offender himself: whereas for lesser ones the Blood of Beast was accepted. And
this passes for a general Opinion with us, and not without a great show of
Reason, for it seems to be founded on the Mosaic Law it self: there we see
that Idolatry, Murder, Blasphemy, etc. were always punished with Death, unless
the special Favor of God interposed. There was no Sacrifice permitted to
expiate the pro^anation of the Sabbath, for it is expressly said, Everyone that
defiles the Sabbath shall surely be put to death, Exodus 31. 14. Nor could he
that eat the Sacrifice, whilst he was in his Uncleanness, be pardoned; for this
is his Doom, That Soul shall be cut off from his People, Levit. 7. 20, 21.
There was no Sacrifice admitted for Adultery, or for disobeying of Parents: In
short, Sins of Ignorance only were expiated by the Mosaic Sacrifices, but all
Sins of Presumption remained unatoned; which they prove from Numb. 15. 28, 30.
The Priest shall make an atonement for the Soul that sins ignorantly. But
the Soul that does ought presumptuously shall be cut off from among his People.
So that Sins of Obstinacy and Malice had no Sacrifice allowed: the Offenders
were either put to death by the Magistrate, or cut off by God.

But notwithstanding all this that is alleged, it seems to me very evident,
that the guilt of all Sins whatsoever, if they were heartily repented of, was
atoned by the Mosaic Sacrifices. For when those of the other Opinion say there
was no Expiation for greater Sins, it must be meant either of Internal or
External Sins. Now it is generally confessed, that God appointed Sacrifices and
Expiations for the greatest Sins of the Heart and Mind, as Unbelief,
blasphemous Thoughts, idolatrous Imaginations, desires of Murder, uncleanness
of the Heart, etc. for even some of the best Men it is likely were not free
from these mental Pollutions. Who can imagine that there was no atonement for
these under the Law? Can we think that all perished who were at any time guilty
of these? No certainly; they were pardoned through God's Mercy upon Repentance,
and the appointed means of sacrificing. And as for visible and outward gross
Enormities, tho there may seem to be no provision made in the Mosaic Law for
their Expiation, because the Offenders were presently punished with Death; yet
it does not follow thence, that there was no Expiation for those notorious
Crimes, for they might be expiated, tho it was fitting and necessary that they
should be animadverted upon by a severe Penalty, le^t Impunity should encourage
Men in Sin and Vice. When we find then in Moses's Law, that such as were guilty
of Adultery, Murder, Incest, etc. were not exempted from Capital Punishment; we
cannot thence infer that Sacrifices purged none from the guilt of these
Enormities, and that the Legal Offerings were designed only to expiate for
smaller Aberrations: for the reason why those great Offenders were punished,
was not because there were no Sacrifices and Oblations to clear them of their
Guilt, but because it was requisite Death should be the Recompense of those
Crimes, lest the Commonwealth should be endamaged and ruined by suffering such
to go unpunished. But even the guilt of these heinous Sins, if those that
committed them sincerely repented of them, was expiated by those daily
Offerings which were made for the Sins of the People, and by the frequent
Trespass-Offerings, notwithstanding the infliction of the corporal Punishment.
The Propitiatory Sacrifices were available even to those who suffered for their
Sins. They were able through God's Appointment, to remove the Guilt, the not
the Punishment.

Is it not acknowledged (and that because it is manifest from several
Instances) that the Crimes of Persons have been forgiven and pardoned, tho they
themselves were not exempted from the Penalty? Moses's Death was the Recompense
of his Unbelief, tho none doubts of his expiring in the Divine Favor. David
was punished with the Death of his Child, tho we read that his Sin was
pardoned. Josiah was justly snatched away in Battle, because he engaged in it
against the Divine Will and Command; but yet he died in peace, i. e. in the
Favor of God, and was transmitted to the place of Everlasting Peace and
Happiness. Wherefore I gather hence, that tho Death was made by Moses's Law the
penal Consequence of Adultery, Disobedience to Parents, Violation of the
Sabbath Day, etc. yet whoever among such Criminals as these turned unto God by
an unfeigned detestation of the Sins they committed, had without doubt the
benefit of the Legal Sacrifices, which expiated the Offenses of all true
Penitents tho they were never so great.

And the reason is this, because this Institution or Ordinance of Sacrificing
was the standing means of Salvation in the Jewish Dispensation; and therefore
it was requisite that the influence of it should extend to all Sinners that
were heartily sorry for their Offenses, and abhorred their past Crimes, yea and
themselves for being guilty of them. This we must grant, unless we will say,
that no heinous Sinners under the Law were ever pardoned and received to Mercy:
which is an assertion that is easily baffled by a great many Instances which
the Old Testament records. It was in the was of Sacrifices that these Persons
had their Guilt remitted and expiated, for there was no other Expedient or
Remedy at that time, as we are assured, not only from the End and Design of
instituting the Sacrifices, which was to take away Sin, but from those express
words of the Apostle, (which refer to this manner of Expiation) without
shedding of Blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22. This then being the only
way of Remission and Pardon of Sin, it was certainly efficacious; and even
those who were cut off from their People, (tho this Doom does not always
signify immature Death, and therefore cannot be absolutely made use of here) or
were cut off from the Land of the Living, and their Sins atoned by the Law of
Sacrifices, supposing (as has been said before) that they repented from their
Hearts of their vile and flagitious Miscarriages.

And this may be further made good from that plain distinction of Chattah and
Asham, the Sin Offering and the Trespass Offering, the one being designed to
remove the Guilt of petty Declensions, the other to make satisfaction for gross
and enormous Crimes. And moreover, this is plain from Levit. 5. 4, 15. where
Sacrifices are commanded to be offered for great Crimes, as unlawful swearing
and sacrilege. And the A^niversary Oblation in Levit. 16. 16, etc. was not only
for their Uncleannesses, but for for their Transgressions in all their Sins.
But as for the sin of Presumption, or sinning with a high hand, (as it is in the
Hebrew) Numb. 15. 30. it includes in this place Impenitence and final
Obstinacy; and therefore it is no wonder that there was no Atonement for it,
for even the Alsufficient Merit of Christ Jesus does not expiate for this Sin;
but all other Sins were atoned by Sacrifices. I see no reason to the contrary,
and therefore I beg leave to dissent from those who assert, that these
Sacrifices expiated only for lesser Sins and Failings, and not for the greater
ones of external idolatry, Murder, Blasphemy, and the like. It is not to be
doubted that all kinds and degrees of Sin were expiated by the legal
Sacrifices; not only corporal Punishment (in the sense which I have explained)
and legal Uncleanness, but all moral Impurity and Guilt were taken away by
them. But this the Mosaic Sacrifices did not do of themselves, but by virtue
only of the Expiatory Sacrifice of the MESSIAH to come, of which they were but
Shadows. To speak properly and strictly, they did not really and formally, but
typically expiate, i. e. as they were Significations and Figures of that great
Sacrifice to be offered.

Lastly then, the grand and principal End of the Judaical Sacrifices was to
typify and represent the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross. Socinus denies not
that the Anniversary Sacrifice on the Day of Expiation was a Type of Christ' s
Death: But as for the other common and usual Sacrifices, he De Christo
Servatore, cap. 9.
holds that Christ was not prefigured by them, but that the Spiritual
Sacrifices of Christians were only typified thereby. This is a gross Error, for
the Burnt-Offerings, and Sin Offerings, and Peace Offerings, which were common
and frequent, were Expiatory Sacrifices (as I showed before) and they were as
much Expiatory as that which was but once a Year. Now, being Expiatory, they,
as such, were Types of the great Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Lamb of God,
they prefigured Christ's Death, and the Expiation and Satisfaction which he was
to make for Sin. It is a strange thing therefore to me that Socinus, who denies
Christ to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice, should grant that the Sacrifice which
the High Priest offered once a Year, entering into the Holy of Holies,
prefigured the Death of Christ; for the same reason he ought to grant, that all
the Expiatory Sacrifices of the Law were Types of our Savior. And he could not
but see that the Holy Ghost in Scripture does, not only speak of that Annual
Sacrifice as a prefiguration of Christ's Passion, and apply it expressly to him
in Heb. 9. 12. By his own Blood ^e entered in once into the Holy Place; but the
same Infallible Spirit in that Epistle, applies what is said of the other
Sacrifices unto Christ: Therefore the Apostle says, Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 15. 7. Therefore John the Baptist called our Savior
the Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World, John 1. 29. having
respect, without doubt, to the Expiatory Sacrifices of the Old Testament, which
prefigured Christ the true Immaculate Lamb, the Lamb that was slain (as the
same inspired Writer speaks) from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8.
Christ's Offering was the Idea and Pattern of all the Levitical and Mosaical
Sacrifices. To this very end God instituted these, that they might shadow out
that to us. A greater and better Sacrifice, and Oblation of a higher nature was
to succeed those, viz. the Sacrifice of Christ Jesus, by which God is appeased,
and all our Sins are expiated: and therefore the Phrase of a sweet smelling
Savor applied to Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, is used (and that
properly) by the Apostle concerning Christ his giving up Ephesians. 5. 2.
himself for us, and pacifying God's Wrath on our behalf. That the Legal
Sacrifices were Types and Symbols of spiritual things, is acknowledged by De
Victimis.
Philo; but we who have an infallible information from the New Testament are
taught further, viz. that they were Types of Christ the great Sacrifice. And we
have the greatest reason imaginable to assent to this, because the Blood of
Bulls and Goats was a poor Expiation of it self. That Butchery, that bloody
Employment could have no real and intrinsic worth in it, and therefore it must
needs have been in order to something else; it was to prefigure the expiatory
Death and Sacrifice of the Massias. And all the time that these Mosaic
Sacrifices lasted, they did not pacify God's Anger, and satisfy his Justice,
and take away Sin, and justify Persons by their own Force and Virtue, or by
their own worthiness; but they did all this typically and mystically, as they
represented Christ and his Merit, who was the Great Sacrifice; they did it by
Divine Order and Institution.

CHAP. VI.
The High-Priest's Office. His peculiar Attire. The Employment and Apparel of
the Priests. The Levites Particular Charge. Whether they might sacrifice, or
no. Their Office in the Reigns of King David and King Solomon, differed in some
things from what it was before. The ordinary and fixed Place of Worship, and
particularly of Sacrificing, was the Tabernacle. A particular Account of the
three Divisions or Partitions of it, viz. the Outward Court, the Holy Place,
and the Holy of Holies, with all things contained in them. The Mystical and
Spiritual meaning of the several Particulars. The Travels and Removes of the
Tabernacle and Ark. A distinct Account of the Parts of the Temple, showing
wherein it differed from the Tabernacle. Of the Fabric it self, and its
Dimensions. Houses and Chambers belonging to it. The Sacraments appointed by
the Ceremonial Law.

HAving spoken of Sacrifices, we will now in the second place speak of the
Sacrificers, the Persons that officiated in the Ceremonial Worship under the
Law. There were three Orders of these, the first whereof was the High Priest:
For tho there were Priests before the Law, who were Fathers and Heads, and the
Firstborn of Families, yet we read of (...) High Priest. This Office is now
added, and Aaron had it first of all, to whose House it was tied by Divine
Institution. But it continued not long there* only Eleazer succeeded his Father
Aaron, and upon Eleazer's Death three Priests of his Family successively were
Highpriests: Then the Office went out of the House of Aaron, and came to Eli
of the Family of Ithamar. But generally afterward the High Priesthood was by
succession of Blood, and lineally descended from the Father to the Son: or, if
there were no Son, to the next of the Kindred. This High Priest was the great
and supreme Ecclesiastical Minister among the Jews: And even according to De
Vit^ Mosis. (...), and alibi.
Philo and some other Jews, was a Type of the Messiah. His Office was in common
with that of the Priests (of whom afterward) to pray for, instruct and bless
the People: but his peculiar Province was to preside over the Priests and other
inferior Officers of the Church, to take care that they discharged their
Function aright. Whereas these administered daily, he was obliged to officiate
only on the solemn Day of Expiation. He differed from them in the manner of his
Consecration, and was peculiar in some other things. He had the singular honor
to be the Metropolitan of the Jewish Church, and the President of the Great
Council or Sanhedrim.

To make him more pompous and venerable, the Law took care of his very Attire.
I will only show you this Sacred Wardrobe, (and truly if the Holy Ghost in
Scripture was pleased to make mention of it, and to describe it, it cannot be
improper here to repeat it) and then leave Origin, Ierom, Durandus, Erasmus,
and others, to comment upon the several Parts, and to give you the moral and
mystical Sense of them. 1. There were Linen Breeches which the High Priest was
enjoined to wear to cover his nakedness, Exodus 28. 42. that is, that his secret
Parts might not be exposed, whenever it chanced that the Wind blew up his upper
Garments: for the Men in those Eastern Countries wore long Garments hanging
down low, without Breeches; whence we read that David was uncovered in those
Parts when he danced before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 20. That the High Priest
therefore might not be liable to this Indecency and Inconvenience, when he
administered in Sacred things, or at any other time, he was commanded to wear
these Bre^ches or Drawers of Linen. 2. There was Ketonah (from whence perhaps
(...)) a Tunick or Coat, Exodus 28. 39. It was of fine Linen, and white, and had
Sleeves, and reached down beyond the Ankles. It was properly the Shirt, for it
was that Garment which was worn next to his flesh; only it was closer than a
Shirt, and it was curiously woven with artificial Figures. 3. Over these was
Mechil, a Robe of Blue, Exodus 28. 31. which answered exactly to the Ephod both
in wideness and shape, tho not as to length. At the bottom or skirts of this
Robe, instead of Fringes, hung 72 Pomegranates of Blue, Purple and Scarlet, and
as many golden Bells. 4. The Ephod, which was a short Garment without sleeves,
but most artificially wrought with Gold, Purple and broider'd Work in diverse
figures and colors, and thereby made very beautiful and glorious. It was worn
over all the other Garments but the Girdle; it had two holes on the sides to
let the Arms come through; and they put it on over their Heads as a Surplice is
put on. This imbroider'd Cope was remarkable for these following things; First,
On the shoulders of it were set two great Onyx Stones, whereon were engraved the
Names of the Children of Israel, Exodus 28. 9. that is, of the twelve Tribes,
six on one Stone, and six on another. These precious Gems were set in Gold,
with two Chains of Gold hanging at them. Secondly, On the forepart of this
Garment there was fastened a apiece piece of Cloth doubled; the breadth and
length of it were the dimension of a span, imbroider'd with Gold, and adorned
with twelve precious Stones, Exodus 28. 15. They were of four Classes or Rows,
and there were three Stones in each Class; and the name of one of the twelve
Tribes of Israel was ingraved in each of the 12 Stones. In this apiece
piece there were also contained the Vrim and Thummim, of which I will
distinctly speak when I give you a Catalogue of the several ways of Divine
Revelation. This forepart of the Garment was called Coshen, the Pectoral or
Breast Plate, and sometimes the Breast Plate of Judgment; and also by the
Vulgar Latin Version Rationale: which answers to (...) in the Translation of
the Septuagint. This was fastened to the Ephod with golden Chains and Rings, and
might be put on or off on occasion. This Breast Plate was of the same
artificial composure and curious work with the Ephod, i. e. it was of fine
Linen of diverse colors imbroider'd with Gold. Thirdly, This Garment was
remarkable for the Girdle or Belt with which it was surrounded, Exodus 28. 39.
This was made of the same materials and embroidered work with the Ephod. This
Pontifical Shash (and who knows but this word is originally the same with
Shesh, which is the usual word in Scripture for fine Linen, of which the
Eastern Girdles were made?) was useful to tie the rest of the High-Priest's
Habits close, especially when he was called to his public Work and Ministry,
for then it girt them so together, that they were no impediment to him in that
Service. 5. There was a Mitr^; or Bonnet of fine Linen, which was wrapped up in
several folds, and worn about his head, Exodus 28. 39. On the forefront of
which Mitre was tied with a blue Lace a Plate of Gold two fingers broad (called
a Crown, and the Plate of the Holy Crown, Exodus 28. 36. and 39. 30* for the
Ancients called any thing that was tied about the head, a Crown or a Diadem) in
which Holiness to the Lord, and the Name of Ieh^vah was engraven. In this gay
Attire the Jewish Pentif appeared as often as he officiated, and at all great
and solemn Times. This indeed was an Attire fit to be been only on Holy Days:
But especially when he was to enter into the Holy of Holies (which was the
peculiar Dignity of the High Priest) to consult and know God's Will, he was
seen to shine in this Glorious Array; a great part of which was as to the
matter and shape of it such as Kings and Princes wore, as a very knowing De
Sacerdot* honorib.
Jew expressly testifies. However we are certain that these Vestments were
appointed for Glory and for Beauty, Exodus 28. 2. to represent the Person and
Office of the High Priest, Glorious and Beautiful, he being a type of him who
was the Glory of his People Israel, Luke 2. 32.

Secondly, Priests are the next Order: whose Office was now fixed to a certain
Family, whereas before it was executed by any Head of Father of a Family, or by
the Firstborn, as was said before. As the High Priesthood was now confined to
the Line of Aaron's firstborn, so the Priests were the Successors of Aaron's
other Children, Exodus 28. 1. And afterward the Priesthood was solemnly settled
and entailed on the Family of Levi, Numb. 3. 5. and 25. 13. This particular
Tribe was dedicated to the Priest's Office, and so it went by Succession and
Birthright. As to the Employment or Office of the Priests, it was to offer
Sacrifices for the People to God ( Numb. 3 and 4.) to intercede for them with
him; to bless the People, Numb. 6. 23. and to expound and teach the Law, Levit.
10. 11. They were the ordinary Instructers of the People, as Prophets were the
extraordinary ones* The Priest's Lips kept Knowledge, and they sought the Law at
his Mouth; for he is the M^^^enger of the Lord of Plosts, Mal. 2. 7. Moreover,
the Priests were employed sometimes in the Courts of Judicature, they were
Judges in Causes both Spiritual and Civil, Levit. 10 and 13. D^^^ 17. 8, etc.
Ezekiel. 44. 24. But tho these things were their chief Employment, yet they did
also, when there was occasion, a^^^ in the carrying of the Av^^, and in looking
after the Vessels of the Tab^^nacle. David a (...) wards, when the Ark was
settled, appointed 24 Orders or Cours^s of Priests: and there was a Chief of
every one of those O^ders. Both in the Tabe^nacle and in the Temple they
officiated in their Courses according to the several Ranks they were divided
into. In the time of their attendance they watched in their turns all night, 1 Samuel 3. 3. whence they are called the Servants of the Lord, who by Night stand
in the House of the Lord, Psalm. 134. 1. It is likely the four and twenty
Elders, Rev. 4. 4. have reference to these four and twenty Orders or Class^s of
Priests. These Priests likewise had Apparel to distinguish them from the
People. Some think they had as many Garments, and the very same with the High
Priest excepting the Ephod. Not to engage in this needless Controversy, this we
are certain of, that the rich and sumptuous Cope to which the Br^^st-plat^ and
the Vrim and Thummi^ belonged, was peculiar to the High Priest alone. But there
was another Ephod which was common to Priest and Levites, 1^. Sam. 22. 18. this
was made of white. Linen, and was an ordinary Surplice* and this Garments
others besides Priests might use in God's Ser^^^, as David did. Or it may be,
when we read that David was gird^d with a L^^^^ Ephod, 2^ Sam. 6. 14. it is not
meant of the Sacred Pri^^^ly Habit so called, but of any other Garment, for Ab
Aphad, operuit.
Eph^^ signifies a Covering in general. But the Ep^^^ (strictly taken) was
proper and peculiar to the High Priest, which he wore as the particular and
distinguishing Livery of his Lord and Master.

The Third Order or Rank was Levites, so called, because they were of the Tribe
of Levi; tho it is certain (as has been said before) that the Tribe of Levi
consisted of Priests as well as Levites. The Levites were distinguished,
according to Levi's three Sons, into Gershonites, Cohathites, and Morarites.
Concerning the particular and distinct Office of these Levites, there is some
difference among the Learned; for some say it was the proper Work of the
Levites to carry and pitch the Tabernacle and Ark, and to carry and take care
of all the Utensils belonging to both. Others say it was none of their Office
to carry the Ark, but only to carry and take care of the Tabernacle and all its
Vessels. And whereas that Text 2 Chronicles. 5. 4. is alleged against them, where
it is expressly said, the Levites carried the Ark; they answer thus in Scripture,
the Priests are sometimes called Levites, (yea, a certain Josuah ben Levi.
Nettles against Seldom.
Rabbin tells us, that no less than 24 times they are called so) but at other
times these are distinct Names: and this may occasion the Controversy. When
therefore it is said, the Levites carried the Ark, the meaning is, that the
Priests who were of Levi's Race did so; for this was the Priest's Work, as the
Levites employment was to carry the Tabernacle, and Utensils of it. But from a
due comparing of what is said on both sides. I am bold to affirm this as the
truth in this matter, viz. that both Priests and Levites bore the Ark; but it
was ordinarily and chiefly the Levites Office. Yet might not those Levites
touch any of the Holy things which they carried till they were covered by the
Priests, Numb. 4. 15. Vzzah therefore was smitten, not only because he suffered
the Ark to be carried on a Cart, (which they should have carried on their
Shoulders according to the Law) but because he touched the Holy things contrary
to the Law in Numb. 4. 11. or, it may be he touched some part of the Ark, which
was forbid to be touched. So then the Office of a Levite in Moses's days, and
some time after, was to bear up and down the Ark and the Tabernacle, and to
look after the several things appeartining to them. And tho the Priests might
do something of this, yet the L^vit^ could not do any thing of the Priest's
main Office, which was Sacrificing.

But here we must distinguish, or else we shall not understand this Point
aright. We must make a difference between private and public Sacrificing, and
between ordinary and extraordinary Sacrificing, and between Sacrificing and
assisting at Sacrifice. On a private Altar others besides Priests might
sacrifice: so Samuel did, who was but a L^vit^, 1. Sam. 7. 10. And so Elkanah,
who was but of that Order, 1 Samuel 1. 3. And tho it is said he went up to
sacrifice at Shiloh, the public Place of yearly Sacrificing, yet he might
sacrifice on a private Altar, and on a private account: or, he assisted the
Priest in Sacrificing. Some have asserted, that those who were neither Priests
nor L^vit^s might sacrifice thus, and they say Saul did so; and that Saul is
rebuked, not for Sacrificing, but for not staying the full time of God's
appointment, 1 Samuel 10. 8. But if you consult 1 Samuel 13. 8. you will see that
Saul tarried seven days, according to the set time which Samuel had appointed.
Therefore it is clear that Saul invaded the Priest's Office; for Kings cannot
sacrifice as Kings. Vzziah incroached on the Priest's Office, and you read the
effect of it in 2 Chronicles. 26. 21. If David before this sacrificed with his own
hands, (which is questioned by some) it may be said he was an extraordinary
Person, and extraordinarily moved thereto. So Gi^^^^n and Elias were not
capacitated according to the Law to sacrifice, yet they performed that Office
themselves, they being in an extraordinary manner stirred up by God to do it. As
for M^ses, we read that he executed part of the Priestly Office about
Sacrificing, Exodus 24. 5, etc. Levit. 8. 22. but that also was an extraordinary
Act, and we always allow for such, and never make them a Rule in the matter we
are speaking of. Besides, Moses himself was an extraordinary Person: he was a
compound of Priest as well as Magistrate, or else he could not have consecrated
Aaron and his Sons, Ex^d. 29. 35. Nay, he had the Character of a High Priest,
for he went into the Holy of Holies, where none could enter but the High
Priest, Exodus 25. 22. In Psalm. 99. 6. you find M^ses called a Priest as well as
Aaron. Hence it appears that he was an extraordinary Person, and that what he
did was unusual and extraordinary, particularly as to his Sacrificing, But we
speak not of the ordinary Sacrificing, which we rightly assert to belong to the
Order of Priests only, and not to that of L^vit^s, or to any other sort of Men
whatsoever. Tho Priests were permitted to officiate in some things that
respected the L^vit^s Office, and every Priest might be said to be a L^vit^s,
yet no Levite was a Priest, i. e. could take upon him to sacrifice publicly,
ordinarily, and as the chief Sacrificer. But whenever he discharged the Office
of Sacrificing, he did it on a private account, and in private places: he did
it also on some singular and unwonted occasion: he was not the principal
Offerer, but only subservient (as D^ac^ns are with us to Priests) he might be
busy in preparing all things for the Priest, and in order to Sacrificing.
Whenever you read in Scripture that the L^vit^s sacrificed, it is to be
understood in these acceptions. The short is, the Levites were the Priests
Ministers and Servants, and not Priests, which was a higher Office. And that
they were inferior to the Priests, appeared in their paying the Tithe of their
Tithes to the Priests, as if in respect of the Priests they were a kind of
Laymen.

But tho the Levites never mingled the Priestly Office with theirs, yet it is
to be taken notice of, that in David's time they were somewhat altered and
advanced; for that pious King having settled the Tabernacle, Ark, and
Priesthood, appointed the Levites also their Charges and Administrations, and
as to some things added to their Office and Employment. He chose some of them
Singers and Musicians, and Officers about the Tabernacle. At last in Solomon's
time, when there was no Tabernacle or Ark to carry about, but a Temple was
erected, and all things fixed, it must needs follow that that part of the
Levite's Work ceased. Now their standing Task was to assist at the Altar in the
time of Sacrificing, to help in the Service of the Temple, and openly to teach
and instruct the People, and to be Assessors sometimes with the Priests in
Courts of Judicature. Thus you see there was some difference and variety in the
Function of the Levites, according to the different Times of this O^conomy. So
much concerning the three Holy Orders of Ministers in the Jewish Church, which
seem to have been fitted to the three Divisions and Apartments of the
Tabernacle. The Tabernacle consisted of the Court, the Holy, and the most Holy
Place. Accordingly the L^vit^s minist^red in the Court, waiting there on the
Priests, and helping them about their Offerings and Sacrifices. The Priests did
Service in the holy Place, for they only were admitted hither to offer Incense
daily. And the High Priests alone officiated in the most holy Place. Of these
distinct Apartments (whether you respect the Tabernacle or Temple) I am to give
you an Account next.

Thirdly, The Place of the Ceremonial Worship among the Jews is to be
considered. For now under the Mosaical O^conomy a certain place of Worship was
fixed, and not before, as you may gather from Levit. 17. 3, 4. D^ut. 12. 5, 13.
They erected Altars, and offered Sacrifice in the Fields, or where they thought
good: but a Tabernacle and Temple are proper to the Jewish Dispensation. In
these set and appointed Places they were commanded to sacrifice, and not in any
other, Levit. 17. 5. yet they did not punctually observe this: there are
several Examples in Scripture of Persons who offered Sacrifice in other places
besides the Tabernacle and Temple. This then is to be said, that tho the place
of ordinary Sacrificing was determined, yet upon extraordinary Occasions it was
lawful to sacrifice in any place, as Samuel intimates he might sacrifice in
Iesse's House, 1 Samuel 16. 2. And we read that Elijah sacrificed on Mount
Carmel, 1 Kings 18. 19, 22. Neither were the High Places forbidden them
altogether, as appears from 1. Sam. 9. 11, 12. The High Places were used for
Sacrifice among the Jews, who were no Idolaters, from the time that the Ark and
the Tabernacle were removed from Shilo^. L^^ places were not thought so worthy
of God's Worship: (...) ar^ in colle posit^. (...) a bamal^. Altar, qu.
exaltatum.
Altars were named from their height: the Temple at Jerusalem was built on a
Hill. Yea the Tabernacle, before that, was placed on Hills, in David's time:
whence are those Expressions in Psalm. 87. 1. and 121. 1. and 133. 3. unless you
will say these Psalms were not penned by David, but after the building of the
Temple, which will be very hard to prove. The high Places then are condemned in
Scripture, and commanded to be destroyed, because they were used to
superstitious and idolatrous Worship: and the Gentiles chose these places,
because they were nearer Heaven than others, they Luci^n de Dea Sir.
thought the Gods could hear their Prayers sooner thence than from the low
Valleys. Otherwise the Jews were not forbid to worship God on Hills and High
places, nor indeed in any places, if there were Urgent Occasion for it. This
liberty you will find granted in Exodus 20. 24. But for the Usual, Ordinary and
Fixed Worship of God, the Tabernacle first was erected: to which afterward
succeeded the Temple, which is sometimes called the Tabernacle, Jer. 10. 20.
Lam. 4. 2, 6. and the Tabernacle is sometimes called the Temple, 1 Samuel 1. 9.
and Chap. 3. Ver. 3. The Reason of which interchanging of names was because the
Tabernacle was a moveable Temple, and the Temple was a fixed and immovable
Tabernacle.

The Jewish Tabernacle (which was first erected when they came out of Egypt
into the Wilderness, and was the first fixed place for Oblations, Sacrifices,
Hearing the Law, Public Praying, etc.) stood East and West, as appears from
Number. 3. 38. The Entrance into it was at the East end, and there we will begin,
for I will speak, 1. Of the Court of the Tabernacle. 2. Of the Body of it, or
the Holy Place. 3. Of the Holy of Holies. And this I will do not only to give a
brief Account of this most Remarkable Piece of Jewish Antiquity, but to clear
some passages of Scripture which relate to it, and to rectify some mistakes
(and those of no mean Writers) concerning it.

1. There was the Court of the Tabernacle, which was very large and spacious,
for it was an hundred Cubits in length, Exodus 27. 9. and fifty Cubits in
breadth, ver. 12. This Atrium, or P^rch, or Outward Court of the Tabernacle
(for it has these several Names) was that open Place or Yard before it which
was without any covering or roof: but it was enclosed or bounded on the sides
with Hangings and Pillars, Exodus 27. 9, etc. This Court was divided into
several lesser Apartments or Divisions, and thence we read of Courts in the
plural, Psalm. 65. 5. and 84. 3. one place was for the Priests, another for the
People that were Men; a third perhaps for the Women: but there is nothing
express concerning this, and therefore I cannot be positive here. In general we
are certain that in this Court the People met for Divine Worship, hither they
brought all their Offerings, and here the Priests took them of them, and here
they Prayed, and Heard, and stood all the while the Priests sacrificed. The
West part of this Atrium, and which was next the Body of the Temple, was the
place where the Priests sacrificed. Here was the Great Altar on which the
Beasts were daily slain, and utterly consumed by fire. This Altar of Hol^causts
or Burnt-Offerings was apiece, being five cubits long, and five cubits
broad: but it was but three cubits high. We may take notice here by the by,
that Altars were of two sorts. 1. Extemporaneous, Occasional and Extra^rdinary:
and these were made either of Earth, i. e. Green Turf, Ex^d. 20. 24. (Such as
these were used upon occasion by Moses, Toshua, Samuel, Elias, and others) or
(if they could not have convenient Turf) they might make them of Stone, as they
did in the Wilderness, Ex^d. 20. 25. But these Altars were not to be made of
H^w^n Stone, and the ascent to them was to be made without steps, i. e. the
Earth was to be laid so as that it should rise by little and little, as you
learn in this place of Ver. 25, and 26.
Ex^du^. 2. There were Fixed, Settled, and Ordinary Altars for Sacrifice, such
as those in the Tabernacle and Temple; and these were made of Wood overlaid
either with Gold or Brass. Of this latter sort was this Altar in the Court of
the Tabernacle. Exodus 27. 1, 2. It was made with four H^rns, on which they that
fled for Refuge were wont to lay hold, and to these Horns the Sacrifices also
were tied. In this Court was the Brazen Laver (as well as the Brazen Altar) in
which was contained Water for the Priests to wash their hands and feet with
before they offered Sacrifice, and before they went into the Holy Place, or
before they undertook any Holy Work belonging to the Tabernacle. This Laver
stood at the entrance of the Court of the Tabernacle, a little on the South
side: it had C^cks or Spouts at the lower part of it (which are meant by the
foot of it, Exodus 30. 18.) to let out the Water for the foresaid use.

2. The Body of the Tabernacle, the Sanctum, the H^ly Place, the Tabernacle of
Testimony, the Sanctuary (for it has these different Names) is next to be
spoken of. Here was placed the Altar of Incense, overlayd with Gold, on which
was burnt Frankincense and other sweet Persumes morning and evening: for as
there were daily Burnt-Offerings on the Brazen Altar in the Court of the
Tabernacle (of which before) so there was every day Incense, morning and
evening, offered and burnt on this Golden Altar within the Sanctuary; Exodus 30.
7, 8. There was also a Golden Censer belonging to this Altar, i. e. a Persuming
Pan or Dish to transmit and scatter the scent of the Frankincense round about.
And indeed there was great occasion for this sweet Incense and Perfumes at the
Altar, Exodus 30. 1, 34. and for those Fragrant Ointments and Ar^matick Oils
which all Holy Persons and things were anointed and tinctured with, Exodus 30.
23. to cause odoriferous smells, because otherwise the scent of the flesh of
the Sacrifices, which was continually burnt, would have been very offensive and
ungrateful: but these Sweet Odors were a preservative against that ill smell.
This Altar was a cubit long, a cubit broad, and two cubits high, and stood
close by the entrance into the Holy of Holies. On one side ( viz. the
North-side) of this Altar was placed the Table of Shewbread, or according to
the Hebr^w the Bread of Faces, because it was placed before the Ark where God
was present, it was thus set before God's face looking from the Mercy-Seat.
This Shewbread consisted of six Loaves set in one dish, and six in another
piled upon one another. These twelve Loaves were changed weekly, the old ones
being every Sabbath day taken away, and new ones put in their place.
Frankincense in dishes was placed on the two rows of this Shewbread, and was
burnt every week to the Lord. On the other, viz. the South Side of the Altar,
was the Golden Candlestick with seven branches, which were so many Lamps of
Oil. These were burning all night in the Tabernacle, and put out in the
morning, as appears from 1. Sam. 3. 3.

3. There was the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, or the Holiest of all,
as we translate it, Heb. 9. 3. the most Holy Place of the Tabernacle. And it is
also called the second Tabernacl^ by the Apostle in Heb. 9. 7. viz. in regard
of the other last spoken of, which is styled by the same Holy Writer the first
Tabernacle, Heb. 9. 6. Here was the Ark, wherein were laid up the Pot of Manna,
Aaron's R^d, and the two Tables of Stone, which last are also called the
T^stim^ny, and the Covenant of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. 13, 23. 1 Kings 8. 21.
because God testified his Will by them, and because he made a Covenant with the
people when he delivered them to them. Hence likewise the Ark which contained
them was called the Ark of the T^stim^ny, Exodus 25. 22. and the Ark of the
Covenant, Jos. 4. 7. Some think that Aaron's R^d and the Manna were not
deposited in the Ark, but in some place near it, for it is not expressly said in
the Old Testament that they were put into the Ark. But it is said of both of
them, that they were laid up, and kept before the Testimony, Exodus 16. 34. Number.
17. 10. Now, This [before the Testimony] may signify that they were laid up
before the two Tables in the Ark: that is, the two Tables being placed in the
chief Apartment of the Ark, the Manna and R^d were laid in another place or
apartment of the Ark, just before them. This is the plain and obvious sense
according to my apprehension: and the Author to the Hebrews confirms it, for
speaking of the Ark he says expressly that therein w^^ the golden pot that had
Manna, and Aaron's Red that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant, Heb. 9. 4.
Some would persuade us that therein refers to the Taber^acle and not to the Ark
in particular; but such a reference is strained and unusual, and therefore we
need not admit it, especially when what the Old Testament delivers concerning
this matter directs us to another meaning.

The Ark was two Cubits and a half in length, one Cubit and a half in breadth,
and one Cubit and a half in height. The Covering of the Ark was called the
Mercy-Seat, and Pr^pitiatory. From this Propitiatory the Oracle was given, yea
the place it self was called the Oracle, Debir, Psalm. 28. 2. (which Name it
also retained afterward, 1 Kings 8. 6.) because from that place God spoke to
the High Priest, and gave Answers concerning what was inquired of. We read that
these Answers were delivered from the Uppermost part of the Mercy-Seat, that
place which was between the Wings of the Cherubims, which hovered over this
Propitiatory.

Of these Cherubims let me give some account, because it is the only thing here
that has any difficulty in it. Concerning these, 1. Some have thought they
were Images in the shape of Boys: so the Hebrew Doctors generally affirm. 2.
Bonsrerius, Gaffarel, etc.
Others say they were Images in the likeness of Oxen or Calves, because
Cherubim in Chaldee and Syriack is Bos, and so is taken in Ezekiel 10. 14.
compared with Ezekiel. 1. 10. And Ier^boam's Calves were in imitation of these,
they say. 3. There are those that hold them to have been Images not of one
Shape, but of many. Thus in Ezekiel 1. 5. the Cherubims had the faces or shapes of
a Man, a Lion, an Ox, an Eagle. Allusively in Rev. 4. 6, 7. the Angels or
Cherubim are represented under the distinct shapes of these four Animal^
severally. It is probable they had the Face and erect Stature of a Man, four
Wings like Eagles, the Backs of Lions, with Mains hanging down, the Thighs and
Legs of Oxen or Calves. This is the Opinion of Villalpandus, Mede, Grotius,
Bochart, etc.
Some. 4 It is thought by Others that the Shape of the Cherubim is not known.
Thus the Jewish Antiquary tells us that Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 6.
they were winged Animals of such a shape as never was seen by Men. And in
another place he says, (...) l. 8. c. 2.
no man can say or conceive what Figure the Cherubims were of. This might be
the best Account (if it be any account at all) supposing that were true which
some say, viz. that the Cherubims were never seen by any but the High Priest,
who only could go into the Holy of Holies: and so they were not known to
Others. But this (although very Learned Writers have asserted it) is a mistake,
for the Cherubims were pictured not only in the Holy of Holies, but on the Veil
between that and the Holy Place, and on the Walls and Doors and Vessels of the
Temple; 1 Kings 6. 29, 32. 2 Chronicles. 3. 7. 1 Kings 7. 29. Besides, those Images
or Pictures were for Ornament, and therefore were to be exposed to Sight; and
consequently the Shape of them was well known.

That they were not any of those Shapes before described is probable, if you
consider these things: 1. It is likely that those Cherubims described by
Ez^ki^l had no affinity with the Cherubims over the Ark; for the Prophet saw
them in a Vision only, they were no real things. 2. The Talmudists and Hebr^^
Rabbis were very fanciful people, and so their Opinion is of little value. 3.
It appears that some of them had too great a liking to young Boys faces, and
thence perhaps this Notion came into their minds. 4. That God should be so
incensed as we read he was, at the making a golden Calf, and yet presently
alter set up Calves over the Ark is not to be believed. 5. Calves or Oxen are
expressly distinguished from Cherubims; 1 Kings 7. 29.

But if you will fix on any thing, the most probable is this, that they were
the Images and Representations of Angels, the Heavenly Messengers. For what
other is the signification of Cherubim in Genesis 3. 24. and so in the 10 th and
11 th Chapters of Ez^kiel? And what is more usual in Sacted Sc^ipture than to
give the name of the thing signified or represented to that which represents
the thing? So here, Cherubim are the Angels of Heaven, and the Images of them
over the Propi^i^ory are called Cherubim for this reason, because they
represent them. And very ^itly are Angels, those Ministering Spiri^s, placed in
the Tabernacle or Temple, because this was God's Palace, the Holy of Holies
represented Heaven: therefore the (...) are placed here as the Servants and
Attendants of the Heavenly King; they are always near him, and stand round
about him.

I have this further to add to the present Account, that the Holy of Holies had
no Window to let in Light: nor had the Holy Place any. But they had (...) come
in by drawing aside the Veil that was between the Sanctuary and the Outward
Court. And they burnt Lamps even in the day time in the Sanctuary, which they
did not do in the Holy of Holies, and consequently this latte^ was quite (...).
Not indeed was there any use or occasion for Light there, because the High
Priest visited it but once in a Year; and then upon drawing aside the Upper
Veil, which was next the Holy of Holies, the Light of the burning Lamps might
be transmitted into this place. But the Priests officiating every day in the
Sanctuary, there was need of Light in that place (...), and accordingly in the
very day time (as well as in the night) the Lamps were burning, for this was
according to the Prescription, Exodus 27. 20. But how could this be if the Lamps
were put out in the morning? as we read in 1. Sa^. 3. 3. This is thus
reconciled by the Joseph* Antiq. l. 3. c. 9.
Jewish Antiquary, who was himself a Priest of the Law, and therefore was no
stranger to the Usages of it. Three of the Lamps of the Golden Candlestick,
^aith he, b^^nt all day in the Tabernacle, and the others were lighted in the
Evening. It appears hence that though the seven Lamps burnt all might long, yet
the Custom (...) to put some of them out in the morning. Again, I ^ight mention
the Veil of the Tabernac^, of which we re^d in Exodus 26. 31. M^^. 27. 57. Heb.
9. 3. which was a thick Curtain drawn between the Holy of Holies and the Body
of the Tabernacle, and parted the one from the other. But there was another
Veil (called M^^^^, to distinguish it from the (...) one, called (...)) which
is not taken notice of by Writers, but is certainly meant by the d^^^ of t^^
(...). 26. 36. and the gate of the Court, Exodus 27. 16. For tho the Tabernaole,
when it was brought to Shtlob, and afterward, had a Building (...) about it,
which had Doors to it, and had Lodgings within for the Priest and Levites, I
Chron. 9. 19. yet whilst the Tabemack was in the Wildernese, it had no Doors
properly so called; but by the Door and Gate in the forementioned places is
meant that Veil or (...) which divided the Come of the People from the
Apartment of the Priests, of rather it was the Cartain that hung at the
entrance of the Sanctuary, therefore called the hanging of the Door of the
Tabornacle, Exodus 26. 36. and it was of the foam embroidered: Work with the i^
ward Curtains of the Tabernacle. Which gives me occesion to speak of these and
the other Covetings belonging to in, and then I have finished my Desorlption of
it. It was on the sides and ends hung with ten pieces of Tapestry, very
artificially wrought, and with diverse colors, Exodus 26. 1. and besides these
fine inward Hangings (which are called Curtains, because they hung in such a
fashion) there were others of Goats hair, of Rams skins, etc. which were course
in comparison of the former, and were thrown over them to preserve them from
the injury of the weather, Exodus 26. 7, etc. And not only the sides and ends,
but the Roof of the Tabernacle was covered with rich Tapestry within, but on
the outside with stronger Coverings, the same with those beforementioned: and
there were no less than four of these Coverings or Safeguards all particularly
specified in the foresaid Chapter. Besides the Curtains or Hangings, there were
Boards or Planks on the sides of the Tabernacle, to render the Structure more
strong, firm and steady; and these were so artificially fastened together, that
they seemed to be all of a piece, and yet they could easily be taken asunder,
Exodus 26. 15, to 30.

Now I am obliged in the next place to discover briefly the Mystical meaning of
all these strange things before mentioned, which appertain to the Furniture of
the Tabernacle: for it is reasonable to think that these being so solemnly
appointed by God, were not insignificant, but had some Great and Worthy
Mysteries couched in them. Nay, which is more, we are assured from the Inspired
Writings of the New Testament that it was so, for the Tabernacle is said to
have been a Figure for the time then present, Heb. 9. 9. i. e. all the time of
that way of Service and Worship some great Mystery was represented by it. And
the Mosaic Priests are said to serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly
things, Heb. 8. 5. Let us briefly see what these Celestial and Spiritual things
were, or at least let us guess and modestly conceive what they were. First, in
the Court of the Tabernacle the Altar of Burnt-Offering fitly signified the
great Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, Heb. 13. 10. And the Laver
was a very congruous Symbol of Spiritual Washing and Purifying, Ephesians. 5. 26.
Tit. 3. 5. Then in the Sanctuary, the Altar of Incense and the Golden Censer
plainly denoted the Intercession of the Messiah: thereby was signified that he
should pray for us, and offer our Prayers, and make them acceptable to God
through his Merits; for the Incense figures the continual sweet Savor and
Acceptableness of the Offering. The Table of Show bread did not only represent
God's Providing a Table and Maintenance for the Israelites whilst they were in
the Wilderness, but it teaches us that God's Church has his constant Eye and
Care, and that he Provideth for it daily, he gives them their Daily Bread: or
it signified Christ, who calls himself the Bread of Life, with which the
Faithful are nourished to eternal life. Or (as things of this nature frequently
have diverse significations) the Brazen Laver before, and the Shewbread here
represented the Two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. The Candlestick
and Lamps very appositely signify Christ and his Apostles: He is the True
Light, and in a secondary sense his Ministers may be called so too. The Sacred
Oil belonging to them may set forth the Anointing of the Spirit, the Unction
from the Holy One, whereby the faithful are enlightened and know all things, 1 John 2. 20. Or, the Golden Candlestick with Seven Branches may denote the
manifold Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost, with that Abundant Light which is
the Blessing of the Gospel, Rev. 1. 4. and 4. 5.

Lastly, The inmost part of the Tabernacle into which the High Priest entered,
and none else, is yet a more lively Representation of the Great Mysteries of
the Gospel. The Atonement which the High Priest made by Blood, and his offering
it in this most Holy Place, and that but once a Year, are all expressly applied
to Christ, our Great High Priest, by the Apostle, Heb. 9. 7. and 12. 24. and 9.
22, 24. But more particularly it is worth our observing on this occasion, that
tho the High Priest entered this place but once a Year, and that on a set day
in the Year, yet he entered thrice in that one day. For, first, he went in with
the Censer of Coals and the Cup of Incense, and put the Incense upon the Fire
before the Lord, Levit. 16. 13. Then he came out, and took the Blood of the
Bullock slain at the Altar of Burnt-offering, and went with it into the Holy of
Holies, and sprinkled it upon the Mercy-Seat, Levit. 16. 14. Then he came ^orth
and carried the Blood of a Goat which was also slain at the foresaid Altar, and
sprinkled it upon, or toward the Mercy-Seat, ver. 15. This was the third time
of going into the Holy of Holies. And who sees not that the High Priest's
offering of Incense appositely represents the solemn Prayers which our High
Priest Jesus offered before he became a Sacrifice, which is particularly
mentioned John 17. 1, 2, etc? And is it not as plain that the sprinkling of the
Blood of the slain Bullock and Goat signified the Blood of Christ crucified
applied to Believers, to atone for their Sins? For those words of the Apostle,
Heb. 13. 10, 11, 12, etc. refer to the Blood of the Beasts brought into the
Holy Place to make Atonement, Levit. 16. 27.

In this place was the Ark, the special Symbol of God's Presence, for that
carnal People could not believe God was present with them, unless they had some
apparent and visible Token of it: Wherefore God was pleased so far to indulge
their weakness, as to give them this corporeal and sensible Sign of his
Presence with them, tho he thought good to remove it sometimes from their
sight, to wean them by degrees from that grosser Dispensation. But it is
certain that the Ark was a Symbol of mighty import, and represented not only
the Divine Presence, but was a Type of Christ Jesus, the incarnate and visible
God, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily. The Oracle from whence
God gave answer, was the Figure of the Incarnate Word, who revealed the Will of
God to us. By the Pot of Manna was signified the hidden Manna vouchsafed to all
Believers. Aarons Rod that blossomed, figured that efficacious Blessing which
is given to the Labors of Christ's Ministers. The Testimony in the Ark, the
Witness or Evidence of God's Presence there, represents to us the Word of God,
the Holy Scriptures. The Mercy-Seat, or the Covering of the Ark, was a more
particular and signal Representation of Christ, by whom alone the Divine Mercy
is conferred on Mankind; by whose Merits the Church is covered and de^ended
from God's Wrath. Whom God has set for^h to be a Propitiation, Romans 3. 25.
(...), the very word which the same Apostle uses for the Mercy-Seat, Heb. 9. 5.
As the Law in the Ark was covered and hid by this, so the Messiah covers,
hides, shields us from the condemnation which is by the Law, and consequently
from the Divine Displeasure. Or, which is the same thing, Sin is covered (as
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 32. 1.) by Christ our Propitiatory. And it is
observable that the Apostle says, God has set him forth, (...), which refers
to the Prefigurations of the Law: he was before set forth (as the word
signifies) he was of old propounded in the Legal Types, and more signally in
this of the Propitiatory.

The Cherubims hovering over the Ark, denote the Angels protecting the Church:
and withal it speaks their future prying into the Mysteries of the Gospel,
which they desire to look into, as St. Peter says, 1 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 12.
which very words re^er to the Cherubims stooping and looking down with bowed
Heads toward the Mercy-Seat. And this by the way lets us know, that those
Cherubims over the Ark were Angels. The Veil in the Tabernacle (and so that of
the Templ^ afterward) sets forth the Humane Nature of Christ, if we will give
credit to the Apostle, Heb. 10. 10. The V^il, that is to say, his Flesh. This
was rent at Christ's Passion, to signify, that he by his Death opened the way
into the Kingdom of Heaven: for we learn from St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, that Heaven was meant by the Holy of Holies, Heb. 9. 24. Whence it is
called that within the Veil, Heb. 6. 19. And Christian Hope is said to enter
into it, because this Grace looks beyond the Afflictions and Calamities of this
Life, into that place of endless Glory. Antiq. l. 3. c. 5 and 8.
Joseph the Learned Jew gives his Suffrage here, and declares, that this part
of the Tabernacle was a Type of the Celestial Mansions above. Aberbanel in Leg.
R. Bechai in Leg.
Other Learned Jews acknowledged this place to be a Typical Representation of
Heaven. Yea, the whole Tabernacle was, if we may so speak, God's Heaven here
below, for it was the place of his special Presence and Habitation. To which
purpose I could observe that Blue or Sky-colour, which denotes Heaven, God's
Seat, was very much made use of in the Tabernacle, and all the Sacred Ornaments
belonging to it.

To conclude, The Presence of God with his People, the Glorious Undertakings of
the Son of God, the Gracious Influence of the Holy Spirit, the State of
Christ's Church both here and hereafter, were shadowed forth by the several
things which were contained in the distinct Partitions of the Mosaic
Tabernacle. I do not pretend to affirm that there are no other Mystical and
Spiritual meanings of these things but what I have mentioned: But as I am sure
in the general that a mystical Sense was intended by the Holy Ghost, as is
evident from the greatest part of the Epistle to the Hebrews; so the particular
meaning which I have offered may be gathered by Analogy, as many things in our
Holy Religion are; yea, the main part of what I have said is grounded on
express Texts in the New Testament, where these Sacred Mysteries are thus
unfolded, explained and illustrated.

Lastly, Before I take my leave of this old Venerable Jewish Monument, the
Tabernacle, I will set down the Travels and Removes of it, and the Ark. First,
They were in the Wilderness forty Years; thence they removed to Gilgal, and
staid there about fourteen Years. Afterward their Mansion-place was Deuteronomy. 12.
5.
Shil^h a Country of Samaria, a City in the Tribe of Benjamin: hither they were
brought in the seventh Year of Joshua's Government, and continued here till
Samuel's time, which was in all about 240 Years, as from the Years of the
Judges may be computed. Hitherto the Tabernacle and Ark were together; now they
are parted, for the Ark was taken by the Philistines and carried to
Bethsh^mesh, and thence to Kirjathjearim, where it remained many Years; then it
came to Mishphat, then to Gilgal, then to Nob, then to Gib^^^, and to the House
of Obed Edom, where it staid but three months, and was fetched with great joy
and triumph to Mount Sion, the City of David, 2 Samuel 6. 17. 1 Chronicles. 16. 1.
where this Pious Prince erected a Tabernacle for it; which whether it was a new
one, or the old one preserved at Shiloh, and fetched thence, I will not
dispute. And at last the Ark after all its Travels was fixed in the Holy of
Holies in Solomon's Temple. And the Tabernacle it self (which was fitted for
the foregoing State, their continual removing from place to place) was laid up
(as some think) as a Sacred Monument in some part of the Temple; of which I am
to speak next. And this I do (as when before I gave an account of the
Tab^rnacle) to correct some Mistakes about this matter.

The Temple was built answerable to the Tabernacle, for the Front of it was
toward the East, and the Holy of Holies was situate toward the West. Thence the
East Door of the Temple is called Shagnar haithon, Ezekiel. 40. 15. the Gate of
Access or Ingress, because it was the chief Gate whereby they entered into the
Temple, or that directly led up to the main part of it. And perhaps from this
situation of it, and their coming up to it with their Faces and Foreparts
toward this East End and Gate of it, the East is called Kedem and Kadim the
forepart, Ezekiel. 43. 17. The Temple being thus placed, they accordingly
worshipped and bowed toward the West: tho afterward some in imitation of the
Idolatrous Gentiles, bowed toward the East, and turned their backs on the Holy
of Holies, Ezekiel. 8. 16. The Temple as well as the Tabernacle, consisted of
three divisions, viz. the Court, the holy Place, and the Holiest of all. I will
briefly show you what these several Parts contained in them: for tho as to the
main the Temple was built proportionable to the Tabernacle, yet it differed
from it in several things. And for variety sake I will present the Temple to
you differently from the Tabernacle, that is, I will begin first with the Holy
of Holies, and so pass downward, whereas I went upward before.

In this first part of the Temple was the Ark of the Covenant, wherein were
deposited the Two Tables of Stone on which the Law was written. Some think the
Temple fell short of the Tabernacle in this, that in the Ark of the Tabernacle
were the Two Tables, and the P^t of Manna, and Aaron' s Rod: But in the Ark of
the Temple there was nothing save the two Tables of Stone, which Moses put
there at Horeb, 1 King. 8. 9. Deuteronomy. 10. 5. It is implied in these words, say
they, that there had been something else in the Ark hereto^ore, and that now it
was missing, else it would have been barely said, that in the Ark were the two
Tables of Stone, without this addition there was nothing else, which intima^es
that other things were there before, but now are lost, viz. by the Ark's being
carried from place to place so often. But all this is false arguing, and
groundless surmise; and the true account is this, (which I partly assigned
before when I spoke of the Tabernacle, and on which I have enlarged in a Of the
Style of Scripture, page 365, 366, 367.
former Discourse) that the Ark in that place of the Kings is taken strictly
for the chief Apartment or Division of the Ark, and so it is rightly said it
had nothing in it but the two Tables: But in a larger Sense, i. e. as the Ark
signifies the whole Body and Compass of the Ark, it contained those other
things in it. In this part of the Temple were the Cherubims, which were placed
at each end of the Ark with Wings spread abroad. But this is to be observed,
that whereas in the Tabernacle there were but two Cherubims, in the Temple
there were four. Between their Wings were the Propitiatory, and the Oracle
whence God gave Answers in difficult Cases; but this latter was much larger
than that in the Tabernacle.

The second Part of the Temple was the Body of it, or the holy Place, or
Sanctuary, or the outward House of the Lord. Here was the Veil, adorned with
Cherubims, which separated the Holy of Holies from the Holy Place, but was much
wider and longer than that of the Tabernacle. Here were the Shewbread and
Golden Candlesticks: the former of these in the Tabernacle was set on one Table
only, but in the Temple it was set on t^n Tables, five being on one side, and
five on the other. In the Tabernacle there was but one Golden Candlestick, with
seven Branches; but instead of that in the Temple, there were ten Golden
Candlesticks, five on one hand, and five on the other; for the Temple being
greater, wanted more Light. The (...), the Altar of Incense was of the same
materials and make with that in the Tabernacle.

The third Part of the Temple was that which was called the Court. This part
was not covered, but lay open to the Sky; but the Body of the Temple and the
Oracle were covered. This East End of the Temple was divided into four lesser
Courts, whereas in the Tabern^cle there was but one Area or Court.

1. The Priests Court, which was next the Body of the Temple. In it was the
(...), the Brazen Altar of Burnt-Offerings, which were offered every Morning
and Evening. This was a great deal longer, broader and wider than that in the
Tabernacle, for it was 20 Cubits in l^ngth, 20 in breadth, and 10 in height.
Observe that at first Altars were without Steps; but ^^^^wards this was
dispensed with: And as Religion advanced, so did the Altars, and rose higher
and higher, as is evid^nt here in this; tho some Abatements are ^ade in these
Dim^nsions, by saying, this Altar should not be measured by Sacred Cubits, but
common ones, which are as short again as the others. In this Court were two
Brass Pillars, called Iachin and Boaz, one on the right hand, and the other on
the left; which are an addition to what was in the Tabernacle, for we read of
no such thing there. Here also were ten Lavers of Brass, five on the right
hand, and five on the left, whereas there was but one brazen Laver in the
Tabernacle. The Beasts for Sacrifice were washed here, being first washed in
the Sheep-pool. Here was the Sea of Brass, standing on 12 Oxen of Brass: In
this the Priests and Levites washed their hands and feet before they served at
the Altar. Into this Court none generally entered but the Priests and Levites.

2. The Peoples Court, i. e. the Court of the Israelites, and all other
Circumcised Worshippers. This is that which is called the Great Court, 2 Chronicles.
4. 9. Here they stood to pray, and to see the performance of the Sacrifices.
Here were several Porches for the People to repair to in rainy weather, and
thence this Court is sometimes called the Porch: and it is particularly called
Solomo^'s Porch, Acts 3. 11. and 5. 12. because he stood here when he dedicated
the Temple. About the middle of this Court was the brazen Scaffold or Stage
which Solomon erected, and where he stood and prayed, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. The Gate
of this Court is that which was called the beautiful Gate, as some think, Acts
3. 10. The King only went in at this Gate, Ezekiel. 44. 3. but the People went in
by two Gates on the North and South, Ezekiel. 46. 9. This Court was called the
Peoples Court, because the Jewish People went no further than this Court, and
worshipped here. But this Court frequently goes under the Name of the Temple in
the New Testament, as in Matthew. 21. 12. Acts 3. 1. and other places. Here
Christ preached, and here he cast out the Buyers and Sellers.

3. The Women's Court, which was an Apartment distinct from that of the Men. In
imitation of which perhaps it is, that among the I^ws at this day the Men and
Women do not worship together, but are confined to a place that looks into the
Synagogue. So among the Turks, none but Males enter the Moschs. And in Russia
the Women either stand at the Door of the Church, or are in some place shut up
from the Men. In this Court stood the Treasury, from whence this Court is
called the Treasury, John 8. 20. It was styled in H^brew Corban, i. e. a Gift,
because it contained the Gifts and Money offered by the People toward the
repairing of the Temple, relieving the Poor, and the providing of Sacrifices.
Here Christ saw the Widow casting in her Mite.

4. The Court of the Gentiles, or of the Proselytes of the Gate. Here, as some
think, was a Market of Sheep and Oxen, Doves, etc. and here were the Shops and
Tables of Mony-changers, for the supply of Oblations. The others think (as has
been mentioned) that the Buyers and Sellers had intruded even into the Peoples
Court. This outward Court of the Gentiles, or Uncircumcised Proselytes, is
called Mark 11. 17.
the House of Prayer to (or for) all Nations, because the Gentiles were
admitted to pray in this part of the Temple. But they were not permitted to
come into the Inner Court of the Temple: thence St. Paul is impeached for
bringing Greeks into the Temple, Acts 21. 28. This Partition was divided from
the other Court (where the Jews and Circumcised Proselytes were) by a little
Stone-wall but three Cubits high, with this Inscription on Pillars, Let no
Alien enter into the Holy Place. To this Wall the Apostle alludeth, saying,
Christ has broken down (...)
the middle Wall of Partition between us, i. e. between Jews and Gentiles,
Ephesians. ^. 14. This Court is sometimes called the Temple, for the Temple is
taken either strictly for that part which was covered, into which the Priests
only entered; or largely for all that space walled in, but not covered, where
the People as well as the Priests were: and thus these four Courts may be
called the Temple. This may suffice for an Account of those particular things
which were contained in the Jewish Temple.

As for the Fabric it self, I will only say this (which exalts it above all
the Buildings in the World) that the Contriver of it was God himself; the
Platform was from Heaven. For which reason the Form of it has been imitated by
Christians, who generally built their Churches after that Model. Thence we
read, in the Writings of the Greek Fathers, and in the Ancient Councils and
Historians, of, 1. (...). 2. (...) or (...). 3. (...) or (...), which answer to
the Court, the Holy Place, and the Holy of Holies in Solomon's Temple. Thus the
Ancient Christians emulated that Divine Pattern, I may truly call it the
Pattern in the Mount; for this stately Pile stood upon Mount Sion, a principal
part of I^rusalem. Here God's Temple and the King's Palace were seated. Here it
was that Abraham of old offered his Son Isaac, for Mount Sion and Mount M^riah
are the same, as Antiqu. I. 1. c. 14.
Joseph (...); and so it was a fit place where those Solemn O^^erings and
Sacrifices should b^, which were to represent and presigni^y the Mystical
Isaac, the Blessed Messiah, the Sacrifice offered for the Sins of the World. As
for the Dimensions of this Temple built by Solomon, (for that which was erected
after the return from the Captivity, and was afterward repaired, and in a
manner rebuilt by H^r^d seven Years before our Savior's Birth, differed from
this as to its Magnitude) it was just as big again as the Tabernacle, for the
one was 60 Cubits long, 20 Cubits broad, and 30 Cubits high; but that was but
30 Cubits in length, 10 in breadth, and 15 in height. But when it is said in 1
Kings 6. 2. that the Temple was 30 Cubits high, it must be meant only of the
space which reached from the Floor to the first Story; for when it is compared
with the Tabernacle, it is considered without a Roof or any Superstructure,
because the Tabernacle was such. But if you take the whole height of the
Temple, it was no less than 120 Cubits, as you read in 2 Chronicles. 3. 3. Thus then
it is, from the bottom to the first Roof were 30 Cubits, from thence to the
second Roof 30 more, and from thence to the top 60 Cubits: So the height of the
Temple from the Floor to the top of all, was 120 Cubits. Thus the Learned
Joseph. Antiqu. l. 8. c. 2.
Jewish Antiquary reconciles those Texts in Kings and Chronicles which seem to
oppose one another.

I might add, that as the Tabernacle, when 'twas fixed in Shilo^, had Buildings
about it for the Priests and Levites to lodge in, so likewise it was contrived
in the spot of Ground where the Temple was erected, there were Houses to
receive those Sacred Officers of the Temple, and in them they lodged and
resided all the time of their Ministry, as our Deans and Prebendaries Houses
are round about their respective Cathedrals. And about the Temple there were
diverse Chambers, some of which were used as Storehoses to lay up the Tithes and
Offerings, 1 Chronicles. 9. 26. 2. Chron. 31. 11. Others were Repositories for the
Vessels and Utensils, and all things belonging to the Service of the Temple,
Nehem. 1. 39. and 13. 5. And some of them were made use of as places of
Re^ection, Ier. 35. 2. So much of this Magnificent Temple at Jerusalem, which
was the Jews Cathedral (as the Synagogues were their Parish-Churches) where
their Ceremonious Worship was performed with the greatest pomp and splendour.

Fourthly, The Sacraments appointed by the Ceremonial Law are here to be taken
notice of. They were Circumcision and the Passover: The former was in use
before the Mosaic Dispensation, it being appointed as a Sign of the Covenant
between God and Abraham. It was reestablished by God when he delivered the
Ceremonial Law to Moses; and it was to continue a Badg and Confirmation of the
same Covenant, that the Posterity of Abraham, the Jews, might receive comfort
thence. It was also to be a remarkable Token to difference the Jews from other
Nations (tho other People afterward borrowed Circumcision from the Israelites,
as the Idumaeans, the Egyptians, etc.) There were other Ends and Designs of
this bloody Rite, which you will find enumerated under the Abrahamick
Dispensation, and ther^^^e I will not repeat them here. The other Jewish
Sacrament was the Passover; but because I may more properly speak of it among
the other Feasts, I refer it thither, and accordingly proceed to the
consideration of the set Times of Jewish Worship.

CHAP. VII.
The Jewish Feasts, Sabbaths, New Moon, Passover. The Parallel between the
Paschal Lamb and our Savior, showed in several Particulars. This mystical Way
approved of. Christ celebrated not the Passover on the same Evening that the
Jews did, but in the Evening before. This represented in a Scheme. The Feast of
Pentecost. The Feast of Tabernacles. The Feast of Trumpets. Of Expiation. Other
lesser Feasts, not commanded in the Law, but appointed by the Jewish Church.
Fasts kept, tho not enjoined by the Law. The difference of Clean and Unclean
Animals. Why the latter were forbidden to be eaten. The chief Reason of the
Prohibition was, to prevent Idolatry. Two Objections answered. Vows proper to
the Mosaic Dispensation. They were either Personal or Real. The Cherem.

IN the Fifth place I am to treat of the Solemn Times and Set Seasons of
Worship appointed the Jews by the Mosaic Law. These by a general Name were
called Feasts; but if you speak properly, some of them were Fasts. But because
the word is sometimes taken by the Jews for a solemn Time of Religious Worship,
whether it was accompanied with Rejoicing or Mourning, that term is applied to
them all. The Design of these Festivals was to commemorate some great Blessing,
to maintain mutual Love, Friendship and Communion, and to join together in the
Service of God. These Feasts are divided by the Jews into the greater and the
lesser. The greater Feasts are these.

1. The Sabbaths. For tho this word be of a larger signification, and is
applied to all Feasts and Solemn Times of Worship, yet it has a restrained
Sense, and is particularly applied to these certain Seasons, viz. the Sabbaths
of Days, and the Sabbaths of Years. The Sabbaths of Days are the lesser and the
greater: the lesser are every seventh Day, called the Sabbath by way of
eminence, in memory of God's resting or ceasing from the Works of the Creation.
But it was commanded now with particular reference to the Jewish People, and to
their resting from their Captivity and Bondage in Egypt. I say no more of it
here, because I am to insist largely upon it when I come to treat of the Fourth
Commandment. The greater Sabbath of Days was, when the Passover ^ell on the
Sabbath Day, as it did that Year when Christ suffered, John 19. 31. This was
called the Great Sabbath by the Jews.

And as there were the Sabbaths of Days, so there were the Sabbaths of Years:
These were two; first, Every Seventh Year was a Sabbath of Rest to the Land,
Levit. ^5. 4. and then there was no plowing or sowing, nor making any the like
provision, but what the Ground yielded that Year of it self was sufficient, and
it was in common to all Persons to eat of it. It was God's Pleasure to deal
thus with this People, to bring them to a sense of his Providence in the World,
that he was able without their Care and Art to sustain them, that he was Lord
of all things, and the Supreme Disposer of them. This was the reason why their
Land enjoyed its Sabbaths. Secondly, There was the Sabbath which was the end of
seven times seven Years, that is, 49 Years, Levit. 25. 8. This was the greatest
Sabbath of all, and was called the Iubilee. But whether it was kept in the
close of that 49 th Year, (as Scalig^r, Petavi^s, Calvisius think) or in the
Year after, viz. the 50 th Year (^s those who follow Antiq. l. 3. c. 10.
Josephus determine) I will not dispute at present, having said something of it
in another place. This we are certain of, that when the Year of Iubilee
returned, all Debts were to be cancelled, and mortgaged Lands were to return to
their Owners, and every Freeholder repossess'd what was alien'd from him, and
all Prisoners and Debtors were set free, and Captives were released, and all
Controversies and Suits about Lands, Estates, Possessions and Properties were
ended. It is certain likewise, that as on every seventh Year, so in every Year
of Iubilee the Jews plough'd not their Ground, but fed upon what came up of it
self; which may be attributed to the singular Nature of the Soil, and to God's
particular Blessing on that People.

2. Every New Moon, or the first Day of every Month, was another Festival among
the Jews. It is disputed whether they kept the Day of the Moon's c^njunction
with the Sun, or of its appearance, which is two or three days after. But it is
most probable that they observed the former, because it is most properly the
New Moon; and as for the latter, it was uncertain, because the Clouds might
hinder it several Days or Nights from appearing, and so the Festival would be
uncertain, which we cannot well imagine. It is true, there is no express
Institution that we read of for the observing this Feast: but it may be
gathered from many places, (1 Samuel 20. 5, 18. 1 Chronicles. 23. 31. Prove. 7. 20.
Isa. 1. 13. and 66. 23.) that they kept this day in a festival manner. On these
Hebrew Calends, as on the Sa^^ath, People repaired to the Prophets for
Ins^^uction, 2 Kings 4. 23. and it was not lawful to buy or sell, Amos 8. 4. or
follow any other Works of their ordinary Calling.

3. The Pesac^, or the Feast of the Pass^ver, kept in the first Month of the
Year, according to the Ecclesiastic Order of the Months, (for we must know
that the Jews reckoned their Months two ways, viz. either according to the
Political or the Ecclesiastical Year.) According to the Political or Civil Year
(which was for Contracts and Business) they began the Year with the Month Tisri
or September, and ended it with Elul or August. But according to the Sacred and
Ecclesiastical Account (which they observed in keeping their Feasts) they began
the Year with the Month Abib, Exodus 13. 4. called also Nisan, Nehem. 2. 1.
which answers to our March, and concluded with Adar or February. This Account
was not in use till Moses's Time, and was instituted in memory of their coming
out of Egypt, which was in the Month Nisan or Ab^b. For it had these two Names;
it was called Nisan from Nus, fugit, from the Israelites flying (...) of Egypt
(so this is the Jewish Hegira); it was called Abib, because that word
signifies a green Ear of Corn, denoting that that was the time when Corn began
to ripen. The Feast of the Passover began in this first Month according to the
Ecclesiastical Computation, nay indeed according to Divine Institution; for the
Month wherein the Israelites were delivered, being the seventh in Civil
Account, was for ever after called the first Month, by God's Command, Exodus 12.
2. This solemn Feast began on the 15th of this Month, and lasted till the 21st,
i. e. seven Days. On the Evening before this Feast, viz. on the 14 th Day, the
Paschal Lamb was killed and eaten; and on the seven following Days the Paschal
Sacrifices were offered. This was also called the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
because this sort of Bread was used at that time, and no other. Therefore two
or three days together before the Passover, they used to light up Candles, and
to look into every hole and corner about their Houses, to see if any old
leavened Bread was scattered there. This Feast of the Passover was the greatest
of all the Feasts which the Jews observed; and the first and last days were the
greatest days of all. This extraordinary F^ast was c^l^brated in remembrance of
the Angel's passing (...), and sparing the Israelites Firstborn in Egypt, and
in commemoration of God's wonderful bringing them out of that place. But this
was not the only reason of the instituting this Feast; there was a higher
Design, and it was no other than this, that the Paschal Lamb should be a Type
of the Lamb of God, who was to be slain, and to take away the Sins of the
World. As I have showed before how the Jewish Sacrifices, and how several of
those things which appertained to the Tabernacle prefigured Christ* so here I
will let you see how the Jewish Passover did the same.

I will take then those words of the Apostle for the Groundwork of what I
shall say on this Subject, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.
7. This word Passover is taken in several senses, viz. for the thing it self
represented, the Angel's passing over the Houses of the Israelites, and doing
no harm. This is the first and original meaning of that term. But it is taken
likewise for the Israelites representation of that Act of the Angel's
Transition, Exodus 12. 11. for the Feast which was appointed to be kept in
remembrance of that Mercy; for the Sacrifices offered at that Solemnity, Deuteronomy.
16. 4. Lastly, For the Lamb which was then offered and eaten, 2 Chr^^. 35. 11.
And so it is taken here, Christ our Passover, i. e. our Paschal Lamb, is killed
and sacrificed for us: And all the Rites and Observances of the Jews about
their Passover, were but Re^resentations of the true Christian Passover. Homil.
18. Tom. 5.
S. Chrysostom expresses it thus briefly, speaking of the Paschal L^m^, It
prefigured something to come; that Lamb was a Type of another, viz. the
Spiritual Lamb: that was but the Shadow, this is the Truth. I will then
undertake to show the Analogy and Resemblance between the one and the other. It
is easy for a quick Fancy and a nimble Invention to make more Resemblances than
indeed there are: but without doubt these two agree in very many things*
insomuch that several Writers have composed entire Tract^^^s about it. I shall
only mention those things which every sober Mind may at the very first view
take notice of.

In the 12 th Chapter of Ex^dus, where you read of the first Institution of the
Jewish Pass^ver, and where you have a particular Account of all Rites and
Observances belonging to it, first it is said, They sha^^ tak^ to them every
Man a Lamb, ver. 3. A Lamb then was made choice o^ for the Pass^ver: and by
that Christ I^^us was pre^igured; for first he is called by that Name in
Scripture, John 1. 29, 36. Rev. 5. 6. and ten times at lea^^ this Name is given
to Christ in this Book. And then, as to his Q^alities and Virtues, he is a
Lamb: he was Innocent, M^^k, Patient, and Obedient; therefore the Evangelical
Prophet says, He is brought ^s a Lamb to the slaugh^er, and as a Sheep before
her (...) is dumb, so he opens not his mouth, Isa. 53. 7. Thus the Person of
Christ is fitly represented under the Type of a Lamb. But every Lamb would not
serve for the Passover; the Paschal Lamb was to have these three Conditions and
Qualifications*

First, It was to be without blemish, ver. 5. This ^^gnally points ^o^th the
Messiah, who was the only Person o^ all mankind that was sinless. For this Lamb
of God who was to take away other men's (...), was not to have any himself. It
was necessary that he should be a Lamb without blemish and without spot, (as he
is called 1 Pet. 19.) who was to present to himself a Church not having spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 27. This was he (and there was none ever like him) who ^id
no ^in, neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Secondly, The
Paschal Lamb was to be a Male, ver. 5. Serviu^ on that place of Virgil, AEneid.
l. 8.
-- Casa jungebant foed^r^ porca,
has this Note, that the Gentiles thought the S^^-Sacrifices were most
prevalent and acceptable. Whence some conjecture that here is a Male-Sacrifice
enjoined in opposition to the custom of the Gentiles; for it is well known that
many things were commanded the Jews, because they were contrary to the practice
of the Heathen People round about them. And there might be some regard to this
here, tho I cannot say with a Dr. Spe^cer. de Legi^. Heb. l. 2. c. 4.
late Writer, that all the Circumstances here relating to the Passover, were
inj^ined in opp^sition to the practice of the superstitious and idolatrous
Gentiles. Others think a Male was to represent Christ, who was Man as well as
God. So that this qualification was fulfilled (as the Learned Bochart observes)
in the very strictness of the Letter. And this excellent Writer adds, that it
was a Male, because the Sacrifice of this kind was reputed more worthy and
excellent than the Female Offerings, Mal. 1. 14. But the plainest and most
obvious Reason why the Paschal Lamb was a Male, is, because it is the stronger
and more vigorous, and so it was fittest to represent him who is the Christians
Strength. Phil. 4. 13.
I can do all things through Christ who strengthn^t^ me, says the Apostle. God
has Psalm. 89. 19.
laid help on one that is mighty, one that (...) Heb. 7. ^5.
able to save to the uttermost them that com^ to God by him, one who was endued
with sufficient Power to accomplish the great Work he undertook* And as the
Paschal Lamb was to be a Male; so on the very same account the third
Qualification of it was, that it must be of the first Year, ver. 5. for then it
was supposed to arrive to its vigor. Such a Lamb was Christ Jesus, he was
crucified when he was in the strength of his Years, in the full vigor of his
Age, when he was young and lively. Thus you see there is a perfect resemblance
in all these Particulars between the Paschal Lamb and the Lamb of God, even our
Lord Jesus Christ.

And I may add this too, that the Paschal Lamb was to be taken out of their own
Folds, ver. 3. and Deuteronomy. 16. 2. So was our Redeemer one of the Flock, taken out
of the Fold of Mankind, taken from his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Heb. 2. 17. He
was one of us, a true Man, of our Flesh, and of our Bone. And, which was yet
nearer to the matter, he was taken out of the Fold of the Jews, and he was of
the Seed of David. In the next place the Lamb was to be killed, and in this
also it is a manifest Type of Christ. That without shedding of Blood there
should be no remission, was the appointment of Eternal Wisdom, that which
Angels admire, and Men must ever stand amazed at. Therefore the Messiah was to
die for us, to expiate our Sins by his Blood, for his Blood cleanses us from
all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. But before the Lamb was killed, it was to be kept in
their Houses four days, ver. 3. and ver. 6. You will find, upon perusing the
History of the Gospel, that Christ was crucified the 4 th day after his last
coming into Jerusalem, the Jews own Home: he was, as it were, all that time
kept up before he was slain. Or it may be Hierozoic. pars 1. l. 2. cap. 50.
Bochart's Notion may be acceptable, who observes that this Passage was thus
fulfilled, Christ was taken from his Mother's House (the Fold where he was
brought up) at 30 Years of Age, and suffered Death the 4 th Year after that. If
according to the Prophetic Style we take a Day for a Year, this is exactly
accomplished. But this Judicious Author favors rather the other
Interpretation, viz. Christ suffering on the fourth day after his coming to
Jerusalem; tho I conceive this Learned Man is mistaken in his Reckoning of it,
for tho our Savior rode into Jerusalem on the 10 th day of the Month, yet he
returned to Bethany (whence he came) at the Evening, Mat. 21. 17. and came back
to Jerusalem the next day, Mat. 21. 18. and consequently he was not crucified
on the 14 th day (as this Author determines) but on the 15 th.

But let us pass to the next Circumstance of Time, and that is, that they were
to kill the Lamb in the Evening, at the going down of the Sun, ver. 6. and
Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Which plainly points at the Time of Christ's Passion and Death,
viz. toward the shutting in of the day, at the declining of the Sun. Then did
this Sun of Righteousness leave this World. For tho some apply it to the
Evening of the Jewish Economy and Government, and others to the Evening of the
World, yet I rather pitch upon the most easy and unexceptionable meaning, i.
e. the Evening of the Day: then our Christian Passover was sacrificed for us.
He was slain in the Evening, or, as it is said here of the Paschal Lamb, between
the two Evenings, i. e. (as I have showed before) between the first declining
of the Sun, and its going down, or setting, which was about the Ninth hour, or
Three a clock in the Afternoon. Then the Lamb which was slain from the
foundation of the World, viz. as to the Decree of God, and as to the virtue and
efficacy of his Death (for those that were before Christ's coming, were as
effectually saved by him as those that lived at or after it) was really and
actually slain in his body on the Cross. And thus He and the Paschal Lamb were
slain at the same hour of the day, Mat. 27. 45, 46.

The next thing observable is the Effusion and Sprinkling of the Blood of the
Lamb, ver. 7, and 13. The Blood was to be to them for a Token upon the houses
where they were, that when the Angel saw the Blood he should pass over them,
and the plague should not be upon them to destroy them. Here is the Benefit
which came to the Israelites by the Passover, they were kept safe and secure
from the Destroying Angel, when Death and Destruction seized upon the
Egyptians. Can any thing more evidently set forth the Design of Jesus the
Messiah, who was to come and shed his Blood for us, that thereby we might be
freed from the Vengeance of God, and escape the stroke of the Destroyer, and be
rescued from Death and Eternal Misery? Wherefore a Chrysostom. in Psalm. 119.
Pious Father says rightly, The Lamb which of old was slain by the Israelites
was a Type of the True Lamb Christ our Lord, who was sacrificed for us: for as
there the Blood sprinkled on the posts saved those that sprinkled it, so the
Blood of the True Lamb Christ our God delivers us from the Curse of the Enemy
and from Eternal Death. Indeed this is the grand and principal thing signified
by the Paschal Lamb, viz. our Redemption by the Blood of Jesus Christ. And the
Sprinkling of this Blood is twice expressly mentioned as absolutely necessary
for this purpose, Heb. 12. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 1. And the hearts of Believers are
said to be sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10. 22. that is, purged and
cleans'd from the defilements of Sin by sprinkling of the Blood of this Lamb.
Besides, the sprinkling and striking of the Blood on the posts, denotes unto us
the particular applying of the Blood of Jesus and the virtue of his Passion to
our selves by a lively Faith. Which that Religious and Pious Bochart, ibid.
Critic, whom I have before quoted, expresses thus, The Blood of Christ (says
he) is sprinkled on the posts of our hearts, when with a firm Faith we embrace
the Doctrine of the Cross, being assured that the Son of God poured out his
Blood for us, so that every one of us may say with the Apostle, This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Moreover, at the Celebration of the
Passover they were to strike the blood of the slain Lamb on the two side posts
of the door within and without, on purpose that they might see it, and take
special notice of it (as the Angel did before) and that they might call that
Wonderful Mercy to remembrance. This shall be to you for a Memorial, and ye
shall keep it a Feast to the Lord for ever, ver. 14. This solemn Feast was
instituted on purpose to remind them of their Deliverance: and so the Lords
Supper, which succeeds in its room, is a Commem^ration of our Deliverance by
Christ. Do this in Remembrance of me, says he; observe this Holy Feast, to
help you to call to mind my Death, and consequently the Infinite Benefits and
Advantages which you receive by it.

In the next place, we come to speak of the Eating of the Paschal Lamb, and the
several Circumstances that were observable in it: and let us see how they agree
with that which we are speaking of. First, I say, it was to be Eaten, and so
was the Lamb of God. He himself uses this style and language, he calls unto us
saying, Take, eat, this is my Body, Mat. 26. 26. And he assures us that except
we eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, we have no life in u^.
Whose ^ateth my Flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life: for my Flesh is
meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh and drinks
my Blood dwelle^h in me, and I in him. Joh. 6. 53, etc. This I think is
sufficient to prove the Parallel between Christ and the Paschal Lamb, as to
eating them. Next, we are to observe that this Lamb which was to be eaten, was
to be roasted with fire, ver. 8. And therein also is prefigured what be^el the
Lamb of God. The Holy Ghost in Scripture is pleased to compare God's Wrath to
Fire, Deuteronomy. 32. 24. Jer. 4. 4. Jer. 15. 14. Jer. 21. 12. Lam. 1. 13. Lam. 2. 4.
and in many other places. Therefore Roasting in the fire fitly expresses the
Extremity of Christ's Sufferings under the Flames of God's Anger. He was as it
were Scorched and Burnt, he underwent the Displeasure of God, who is a
Consuming Fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Heb. 12. 29. This is thus expressed in other terms
by Isaiah, He was wo^nded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, Isa. 53. 5. He was oppressed and he was afflicted, ver. 7. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, ver. 10. Some
Commentators take no notice of this Parallel, but certainly it is not to be
omitted, nay it is of very great moment: and the manner of speech very fitly
and significantly expresses the Heat, the Height of God's wrath kindled against
Sinners. We see this Torrefaction is adapted to the usual language of
Scripture, where the Extremity of the Divine Anger against the wicked is set
forth by fire, with which (says the Learned and Pious Hierozoic. p. 1.
Bochart) it behoved Christ to be as it were scorched and burnt, who had made
himself a Surety for Sinners, that he might undergo the Punishment which they
deserved. Nay, besides the Mystical signification, there is a kind of literal
fulfilling of the Expression here used, if we may credit an ancient and pious
Just. Mart. Dialog. cum Tryph.
Father, who acquaints us that the Roasted Lamb at the Passover was spitted in
such a manner that it resembled the figure of a Cross, and he particularly
tells us how. If we consider that this Ancient Writer of the Church was born
and bred in Palestine, and was skilled in the Jewish (as well as Pagan) Rites
and Customs; and likewise if we remember that he spoke these words in a
Conference with a knowing Jew, who could and would have contradicted him if he
had delivered any thing concerning the Jewish practices which was not true, we
cannot but look upon this as a very considerable Testimony, and we must
conclude that he would not have dared to apply this particular passage of the
Roasting of the Lamb to our blessed Savi^ur; he would not have compared this
Cross to the Spit, unless there had been ground for it.

The next thing observable is, that the whole Lamb was to be eaten, ver. 10. Ye
shall let nothing of it remain's which may import how Entire and Complete the
spiritual eating of the Lamb of God should be. Whole Christ, or none, must be
received by Faith. Which the forecited Author thus piously descants upon. It is
not sufficient to eat Christ in part, as if we were desirous to enjoy his
Glory, but not to be partakers of his Sufferings, or as if we would have him
for our Redeemer, not for our Lawgiver and Master: as if not attributing enough
to the Merits of Christ, we would partly place our confident hope of Salvation
in our own Works, or in the Mediation and Intercession of others. And further,
when it is said that the Lamb must not remain till morning, it does strangely
and marvelously agree with what the Evangelists relate, that Christ was taken
down from the Cross on a sudden, contrary to the Custom in such cases, and
partly because of the Sabbath on the ensuing day, that thereby the Parallel
between our Savior and the Jewish Passover might be more manifest. It is said
further ver. 46. and Number. 9. 12. Neither shall ye break a bone thereof. That
Christ Jesus, who suffered on the Cross, was presignifi'd and foretold by this,
is plain from what is recorded by St. John, who tells us that Divine Providence
so ordered it, that tho the Soldiers broke the Legs of those that were
crucified with Christ, yet they br^ke not his Legs, Joh. 19. 33. A most
remarkable completion of the Type, and that by the wonderful disposal of
Heaven. Whereupon the Evangelist says, This was done, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, A B^n^ of him shall not be broken, ver. 36. Which plainly refers
to this passage concerning the Paschal Lamb of the Jews, that they were
commanded not to break any bone of it. And if, according to St. John, that
particular injunction concerning the Lamb be applicable to Christ, and was
fulfilled in him, there is just ground so believe that the other passages and
circumstances relating to that Lamb, are to be applied to Christ the Lamb of
God, and are accomplished in him. This no man of composed thoughts can deny.

And whereas the Jews were to eat their Paschal Lamb with Unleavened Bread,
ver. 8, and 20. the Apostle has told us the meaning of that; for after he had
said, Christ our Passover i^ sacrificed for us, he immediately adds, Let us
therefore keep the Feast, not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of
malice and wickedness, but with the Unleavened Bread of sincerity and truth.
The corrupt Ferment of Sin, especially of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, (which
our Savior also calls Leaven, Luks 12. 1.) futeth not with the Bread of Life
which we are to eat.

Yea, we must purge out all sin and wickedness, which the same Inspired Author
in the same place again calls the Old Leaven, ver. 7. If we would keep the
Christian Passover aright, we must abandon every known Vice, which is fitly
compared to Leaven, because it spreads it self, and soon corrupts the Soul:
a little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump, ver. 6. and Gal. 5. 9. But from what
we read in Deuteronomy. 16. 3. we may gather that something besides this is shadowed
out: there they are bid to eat all the time of the Passover Unleavened Bread,
even the Bread of affliction, because they came forth out of the Land of Egypt
in haste. Unleavened Bread then is the Bread of affliction; but why is it
called so? I conceive it has this name, because it is such Bread as the Poor
and Afflicted by reason of pressing hunger eat, not staying till it be
leavened: This sort of Bread they were to eat. And so we are taught here in
what manner we are to eat the Christian Passover, viz. with the Bread of
affliction: we must not pamper our carnal part, we must not make provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; we must, according to the Apostles
Example, keep under our bodies, and bring them into subjection to our better
part.

And this was partly signified by the eating of the Paschal Lamb with bitter
herbs, ver. 8. The spiritual meaning whereof is, that we should not indulge our
selves in the pleasures of Sin, that we should celebrate our Evangelical
Passover with godly Contrition and Sorrow, with hearty Remorse and Repentance,
and that with the Penitent Apostle, we should weep bitterly for our Sins. The
Crucified Jesus is best entertained with a broken Heart.

And moreover, the posture and demeanor which the Israelites were to observe
in their celebrating the Passover, viz. with their loins girded, and with sh^^s
on their feet, and staves in their hands, ver. 11. which expressed their
readiness to leave Egypt, and to depart out of it at the first warning,
represent unto us our duty, which is to be prepared to quit our sins, which
make us worse than Egyptian Bondslaves. Christ being sacrificed and ascended,
we are to fit our selves to follow him, we must gird up the loins of our minds,
we must have our feet sh^^ with the Evangelical preparation; we must be
constantly in the posture of Pilgrims, whose thoughts are on leaving the place
where they are: and we must be willing and ready to follow our Blessed Savior
which way soever he calls us.

This is to be remarked likewise, that no Uncircumcised person was to eat of
the Passover, no F^reigner or Stranger, ver. 43, 44. Which acquainteth us that
none but those who are admitted into Christ's Church, and are True and Proper
Members of it, can partake of the Benefits which accrue by the death of our
Lord; and also, that Strangers and Aliens from the Covenant of Grace, and those
that are Uncircumsised in heart, receive no real Advantage by coming to the
Lord's Supper: they partake only of the outward Elements, but are excluded from
sharing in the Inward Grace and Blessing which are represented by those
External Signs.

Thus you see the Parallel between the Jewish and Christian Passover. The
Paschal Lamb was a Male, and without Blemish, and of the First Year: It was
taken out of their own Fold, and killed in the Evening, and the Door-posts were
sprinkled with the Blood: It was roasted, and then eaten whole, not a bone of
it was to be broken, and nothing of it was to remain. It was eaten with
Unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, with loins girt, and in haste: it was eaten
not by Strangers and Uncircumcised persons: and in every one of these
particulars it was Typical and Representative. For tho it is true, there was
this general Reason why these several Observances concerning the Paschal Lamb
were enjoined, namely because of their direct opposition to the Heathen
Cerem^nies then in practice (as you shall hear afterward) yet there was a more
particular reason and distinct ground of the prescribing of these several
Rites, viz. because they in some manner were Types and Significations of what
our Lord Christ was to do or suffer, and of what is required of us in
solemnizing the Gospel-Passover. If any man shall despise these things, and
imagine them little, and not worthy of the Spirit of God, he may correct his
profane mistake by looking into the Epistles of St. Paul, especially that to
the Hebrews, where he will find that the Apostle takes notice of such passages
as these which relate to the Jewish Observances, and by the direction of the
Divine and Infallible Spirit applies them to our Lord, and his Blessed
Undertakings, and the main things of the Gospel Dispensation. Let none then be
so presumptuous and imp^ous as to say that these are Little and Contemptible,
seeing they are such as the Holy Spirit was pleased to dictate. Nay, I might
add with great reason and truth that this Mystical way of delivering the most
weighty matters was heretofore used and approved of by all the Ancient Sages
and Men of Wisdom, especially by the Egyptians, whose Learning chiefly
consisted in Hieroglyphics. And therefore when we see that some men who have a
great esteem of the Egyptian Learning, and admire it at a very high rate, do
yet slight and vilify those Mysterious Representations of the greatest and
most important Truths which the Old Testament presents us with, we cannot but
observe their wicked perverseness, whilst they disregard and even ridicule that
very way of communicating Truth in the Holy and Inspired Scriptures which they
magnify and extol in Profane Writers.

But I have not finished this Parallel yet. To make it every way complete,
Christ our Passover chose to be sacrificed on the very day that the Jews eat
their Paschal Lamb. It is remarkable that Christ, who came to abolish the
Typical and Ceremonious Service of the Jews, yet just before his leaving the
World submitted to this Mosaical Observance, and kept it with his Disciples,
which certainly he would never have done if it had not been to signify this
very thing which I am treating of, viz. that He was the True and Real Paschal
Lamb, and that before he died he designed to let them know that there was an
exact Resemblance and Agreement between one and the other, and more especially
as to the Times. This has been partly proved already; I will now give farther
evidence of it. It is a mighty Controversy among some Writers, whether Christ
kept the Passover on the same day the Jews did, or the day before? Some are of
the opinion that the Lamb according to the Law was to be killed on that night
Christ kept his Passover, but was to be eaten the next Evening. Therefore they
say Christ eat not the Paschal Lamb, but only celebrated the Passover with
Unleavened Bread and Bitter Herbs. But this is only said, and not proved. On
the contrary, we know that the Paschal Lamb was to be killed and eaten in the
same night, Exodus 12. 8. Dent. 16. 4. Yea, all of it was to be eaten that very
night, nothing was to remain till the morning. Next then, it is to be demanded
whether Christ eat the Passover on the same night with the Jews? I answer, he
did not keep the Passover on the same night that the Jews did, but on the night
before i. e. on the Evening of the day before. Not that Christ anticipated the
time of celebrating the Passover according to the Law (as the Greek Church
holds) but he kept the true time, he celebrated it according to Moses's Law, i.
e. on the 14 th day of the first Month (which answered to our March) after
Evening, Levit. 23. 5 Mat. 26. 17, etc. But the Jews (contrary to the Law) eat
the Passover on the Evening of the day following, being the 15 th day. This
they did according to a Custom among them which had obtained for a good while.
I will at present offer only one Text, as a clear proof of this their practice:
In John 18. 28. it is said of the jews, that they went not into the Judgment
Hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might (...) the Passover.
Thence it appears that they had not at that time ( viz. on Friday morning)
eaten the Passover, which Christ and his Apostles had done; therefore Christ
kept the Passover a Night sooner then the Jews did: they eat not theirs till
the Evening after Christ was crucified, i. e. on Friday Night or Evening. This
following Scheme will represent it to you more clearly; which also will be
serviceable to clear some other passages in the Evangelical History, which I
find are mistaken by some Persons.

On the 10th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 1st
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Our Sunday, or Lord's
Day Christ Came from Bethany, and en^^ed into Jerusalem in triumph, Mat. 21. 1*
etc. and returned to Bethany in the Evening, Mat. 21. 17.

On the 11th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 2d
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Monday Christ Cursed
the Figree as he returned from Bethany, Mat. 21. 18, etc.

On the 12th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 3rd
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Tuesday Christ Foretold
the destruction of Jerusalem, Mat. 24. 1.

On the 13th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 4th
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Wednesday Christ Was
sold by Judas, Mat. 26. 14.

On the 14th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 5th
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Thursday, the day of
the Preparat. to the Passover Feast according to the Law. Christ In the evening
eat the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples; instituted the Lord's Supper Met. 26.
20. Afterward was appreheaded and arraigned, Mat 26. 57. Joh. 18. 13.

On the 15th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 6th
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Friday, the day of
Preparation by the Jews custom. Christ Was arraigned again, and condemned,
crucified and buried, Mat. 27. In the Evening of this day the Jews eat the
Passover, Ioh. 18. 28.

On the 16th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 7th
(or Sabbath) Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Saturday,
or Jews Sabbath, on which they observed the Passover Feast. Christ Lay in the
Grave all this day, Mat. 27. 62, etc.

On the 17th Day of the Month (...) (which answers to our March) being the 1st
Day of the week according to the Jews, which answers to Sunday, or Id's D.
Christ Rose from the Dead very early, Mat. 28. 1.

Some Writers, because the Jews day of 24 Hours was reckoned from Sun set to
Sunset, take the Evening of the 14 th day of the Month to be the beginning of
the next day, the 15 th; for if the day commenced from the Evening, then the
Evening of the 14 th day belonged to the next ensuing Day. But this is to be
said, that tho it is true the Jewish Feasts took their beginning in the Evening,
and the natural Day was counted from Evening to Evening, yet the (...) Day of
12 Hours began with Sunrising, and ended at Sunset* and the sormer part of
the ensuing Night was added to the account; and consequently the Evening of the
14 th day was reckoned as part of that Day. However, if you should say that the
Evening of the 14 th day belonged to the 15 th which followed, you may make
allowance for that in the Scheme, and adjust the forementioned time by a small
alteration: but still it holds true, that the Passover was not killed and eaten
by Christ and his Apostles, on the same day that the Jews killed and eat their
Passover, as appears from the place before alleged. And this is very
remarkable, for the Jews putting off their Passover a day longer, contrary to
their own Law, was not without the disposal of the All-wise God, that hereby
the Paschal Lamb, and he that was represented by it, might be slain on the same
day. Which shows the Agreement and Resemblance between Christ and the Jewish
Passover, which was the thing I here intended.

4. The Feast of Weeks, or the Feast of Pentecost (for it was known by both
those Names) was another of those greater Feasts observed by the Jews. It was
called the Feast of Weeks, because it was kept at the and of seven Weeks, i. e.
49 Days, Levit. 23. 15, 16. and it had the Greek name of Pentecost, because the
first day of it was the 50 th day after the first day of the Passover, as
Whitsunday is 50 days after Easter. This Feast (it is probable) is meant by the
(...).
second Sabbath after the first, Luke 6. 1. for the day of Pentecost falling
then on a Sabbath, is called the second Sabbath after the first, or the second
Prime or chief Sabbath, because the Passover before being on a Sabbath Day, was
the first Prime or chief Sabbath. So then in respect of that, this is called
the second chief Sabbath, as the Feast of Tabernacles (which come afterward)
may be called the third chief Sabbath. Thus Grotius and Hammond; but Scaliger
and Lightfoot refer it to the Feast of Vnleaven'd Bread, and make it the first
Sabbath after the second day of the Passover. The Feast of Pentecost began on
the sixth day of the Month Sivan, which answers to our May: and the Harvest
began at this time. Wherefore it is called the Feast of Harvest, and the Feast
of First Fruits of what was sown in the Field, Exodus 23. 16. Then the
first fruits of the Corn were offered to God. So I may call it the Jewish
Lammass, Sax. Lafmasse i. e. Loas-Masse or Bread-Masse, so called heretofore as
a Feast of Thanksgiving to God for the First Fruits of the Corn. But when the
Feast of Pentecost is called the Feast of Harvest, we must understand this
aright, (and I mention it the rather, because some Writers have mistaken here,
and represented the Matter amiss) we must know then that there were two
Harvests among the Jews, but not in the same order that they are with us, for
their Barley-harvest began first, viz. at the Passover, and their Wheat-harvest
was seven weeks after that. It is of this latter that the foresaid Text in
Exodus is meant. This Feast was of seven days continuance, but the first and
last days were most solemnly kept: it was instituted in memory of the Law given
on Mount Sinai fifty days after the Passover, Lev. 23. 15, etc.

5. There was the Feast of Tabernacles, which began on the 15 th day of the 7
th Month, or September, according to the computation of the Sacred Year, which
commenced from March, Levit. 23. 34, etc. It continued eight days, in the first
seven of which they dwelt in Tabernacles or Booths, made of the Boughs of these
Trees especially, Willow, Palm, Myrtle. Whatever weather happened, they
remained in these Tabernacles so many days together. They used at this time to
hold in their hands Branches of Trees, which they called Hosannas, because when
they had them in their hands, it was their custom to cry Hasanna, Save now. The
first and last days were the chiefest, as it was in all their Feasts. On the
last day they fetched Water out of the River Siloah, and brought it to the
Temple, which they delivered to the Priest, who poured it with Wine upon the
Altar, the People singing that in Isa. 12. 3. Hence our Savior took occasion
on this last day of the Feast to cry, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink, etc. John 7. 37, 38. This Anniversary Feast was kept in
remembrance of the 40 Years sojourning in the Wilderness, all which time they
dwelt in Tabernacles.

These are they which the Jews call Shalosh regalim, the great Feasts: but more
especially they call the three last so, which you find mentioned together in
Exodus 23. 14, 15. Three times in the Year shall thou keep a Feast unto me: thou
shall keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread, ( i. e. the Feast of the Passover)
and the Feast of Ingathering, which is in the end of the Year, ( i. e. the
Feast of Tabernacles): these three times in the Year shall all thy Males appear
before the Lord, i. e. they were to go from their own Habitations up to Shiloh,
and afterward to Jerusalem on these three principal Feasts. But the other
lesser Feasts (which they called (...)
Good Days) were kept in the Place and Cities where they lived. Of these I am
to speak next.

The lesser Feasts are these two: 1. Levit. 23. 24.
The Feast of Trumpets, or New Years Day; for they made a solemn promulgation
of the New Year, by sounding of Trumpets at that time more than at another. As
they kept the first day of every Month* (of which we spoke before) so likewise
of every Year; i. e. they celebrated the first day of the Month Tisri, or
September, because it was the first day of the Year, according to the Era that
they computed their Civil Years by. There are some that think the Feast of
Trumpets was in remembrance of the Trumpets on Mount Sinai when the Law* was
given, Exodus 19. 16, 19. 2. The Exodus 30. 1^. Levit. 16. 23, etc. and 23. 27.
Feast of Expiation: for in a general way it may be called a Feast; and so it
is reckoned among the Feasts, Levit. 23. 2. but not strictly and properly,
because it was not a day of rejoicing, which is essential to a Feast, but was
spent wholly in Repentance, Humiliation, and Mourning. Yet it is called a
Feast, because it was a day of Resting; on this day they were to do no manner
of work, Lev. 23. 31. which is not enjoined concerning any other Feast but the
Grand Sabbath, or Weekly Feast (on other Feast-days they were forbid only to do
servile Work, Levit. 23. 21, 36.) and so on that account this day may be styled
a Festival. But otherwise it ought to be called the F^st of Expiation, for it
was a great Fast, nay it was the only Fast Day that was enjoined the Jews by
Moses's Law, tho others were observed by their own free choice. It was kept on
the 10 th day of the 7 th Month (Tisri) on which the High Priest Solemnly
enterd (as has been showed before) into the Holy of Holies, to expiate for his
own and the peoples Sins committed the whole Year before. This Fast is meant in
Acts 27. 9. and thence it is gathered, that sailing was then dangerous, that
season of the Year being usually boistrous and tempestuous. Concerning the
Modern Jews, Buxtorf tells us, that on this day every Man Killed a Cock (and a
white Cock it was, and of no other color) and every Woman Killed a Hen; and
this they thought was expiatory, and satisfied for their former Faults, and
took away their past Sins.

Besides the Festivals and solemn Days commanded in the Mosaic Law, there were
others appointed by the Jewish Church, some of which are recorded in the Old
Testament, and on that account belong to the Jewish Dispensation. These were,
1. The Feast of the Law, or of the rejoicing of the Law, on which day was read
the last Parasha in the Pentat^uch, i. e. the last Chapter but one of
Deuteronomy. For the Law was divided into 52 Sections, and on every Sabbath
they read one of them; the last reading was on the 23 d of September. The next
Sabbath the Law was begun to be read again, and this Sabbath was called Sabbath
Bereshith, because they began then to read Bereshith, i. e. the beginning of
Genesis. They celebrated the foresaid day in thanking of God for his great
Mercy in vouchsa^ing them the reading of the Law. 2. The Eeast of the
Dedication of the Temple, instituted by Solomon, 1 Kings 8. 1. and afterward
observed (as some think) by the Jews. 3. The Feast of Dedication, or Encoenia,
celebrated on the 25 th day of November, which Month is called Ki^leu by the
Hebrews. It was instituted in memory of that great Hero Judas Macchabaeu^, who
after the death of his Father Mattathias conquered the Greeks and Syrians who
had taken Jerusalem, and tyrannized over the Jews. He recovered that City, and
dedicated the Temple anew, which the impious Antioch^^^ had profaned. He
commanded this Festival to be solemnly kept yearly eight days together,
beginning on the 25 th day of the foresaid Month, 1 Mac. 4. 59. 4. P^rim, or
the Feast of L^ts, Esther 9. 21, etc. in remembrance of the Deliverance in
Esther's time. It was kept on the 14 th and 15 th days of the Month Ad^r, the
12 th Month, or February. It was called Purim (which is a Persian word, and
signifies Lots) in memory of Haman's throwing Lots, that all the Jews in
A^asuerus's Dominions should be killed: for this was an old Custom to cast Lots
to find ^it and seasonable times for effecting of any great Business. They writ
the Days and the Months, and put them into a Pitcher, and so what they took out
(according to the Marks they had set down) was lucky or unlucky. This Feast
then of Purim, was celebrated in remembrance of the Massacre appointed by Lot
against the Jews.

There were also Fasts among the Jews, which, tho they were not commanded by
the Law of Mos^s, yet the Jewish Church enjoined them to be kept. of these you
read in Zech. 8. 19. viz. the Fast of the ^ourth Month, Tamuz, or June, in
remembrance of the time when Jerusalem was invaded, and the Tables of the Law
broken, and the Book of the Law burnt, Ier. 52. 6, 7. and the Fast of the fifth
Month, or July, for the destruction of the Temple, Zech. 7. 3. and the Fast of
the seventh Month, Tisr^, or September, for the ki^ling of Gedaliah, 2 Kings
25. 28, and the Fast of the Tenth (in which Month, Thebat, or December, the
City began to be besieged) Ier. 52. 4. Thus much of the R^ligious Feast^ and
Sacred S^asons, wherein the Jewish People used to lay aside Secular Business,
and to be employed wholly in Religious Worship.

Sixthly, There were in the Law of Moses, some particular Obs^rvanc^s which
r^spected the Convers^^ion of the W^rshippers. They were tied up as to their
Commerce with others, they were not at liberty to associate with every one,
they were confined as to their Garments, and as to their Diet. There was no
such thing as Uncleanness by touching the Dead among the old Patriarchs, (for
we read that Joseph kissed dead Jacob:) This was pu^ely Mosaic, and so was
that of not coming near any Leprous Person, or touching those who had issues of
Blood, and the like. But the main thing remarkable was, the difference of Meats
and Drinks: therefore I will speak particularly of that in this place, (and I
may have occasion to glance on some of the rest afterward.) Some have thought
(as has been suggested before) that this usage prevailed before the Mosaic
Law, i. e. that some Creatures were clean, and others unclean, in regard of
their being permitted or forbidden to be eaten. But I have already showed in
what sense they were said to be clean o^ unclean, viz. in respect of
Sacrificing, and not of eating. But under the Mosaic Law there is (and never
was before) set down the Number of those Creatures which must not be eaten, and
we are particularly told what the Cleanness or Uncleanness of them is. The
clean Animals were only those that chew the Cud, and divide the Hoof. This was
the Sign and Mark of them; and it must be observed, that by dividing the Hoof
is meant, dividing it into two parts only, not into more; for some divide the
Hoof into more parts, and are not clean, as a Dog, a Lion, a Wolf. And Camels
have the Hoof divided, but not quite through, it is pa^ted above, but not
below; therefore it is said of the Camel, Levit. 11. 4. that he div^deth not
the Hoof, viz. from the top to the bottom, but only in part, as Na^ural
Historians have observed. And as parting the Hoof, and chewing the Cud, are two
signs of a clean Beast, so Fins and Scales make a Fish legally clean. And as
for Fowl, you have a particular enumeration of those that are clean or unclean.
Bees also were unclean and forbidden Food to the Jews, but their Honey was not.
I might observe further, that Fat is forbidden to be eaten, i. e. the Fat which
covers the inward Parts, as the Heart, Liver, Kidneys, etc. Levit. 3. 16. This
the Jews might not eat, no not at home when they killed a Beast. But it is to
be understood of such Beasts as were used to be sacrificed to God, as Sheep,
Oxen, Goats, Levit. 7. 23, 25. The Fat of these Creatures was to be burnt, but
by no means eaten. And as for the Blood of these, and all other Animals, it was
to be poured on the Ground, and by no means to be eaten or drank. I could add,
that the Jews stretched this Abstinence from Meats beyond what was injoined,
for they would not eat the hinder Legs o^ Animals because the Angel strained
Jacob's Thigh, whereupon the Sinews shrank: But in Italy the Jews cut out these
Nerves by Art, and eat the Legs.

If it be asked, What was the Reason that such and such Creatures were
forbidden to be Food? Why did not God suffer the Jews to feed on all Animals
indifferently? The Answer may be that of St. Augus^in in the like case, Quia
voluit, because it seemed good to God to do so: it was his Will and Pleasure,
and no Reason is to be given. Thus C^naeus and Spanhemius resolve it wholly
into God's Authority and Sovereignty. But others offer Reason of God's acting
thus: 1. Some think that it was God's Pleasure to ins^il Lessons of Morality by
that Prohibition, according to the Quali^ies observed in those Creatures. They
conceive that so many Sins and Vices are represented by unclean Animals, and so
many Virtues and Graces by the clean ones. In a mystical w^y God taught the
Jews, and Brutes were Symbolical and Hieroglyphical. When God bid them not eat
the Flesh of the Hare, the Swin^, and the Hawk, he warned them against the
Timorousness of the one, the Filthiness of the other, and the Ravenousness of
the third. Thus the ancient Jewish Commentators, and some of the Origin, Cyril
of Alexandr. Clemens Alexandr. Basil, Ambrose, and others.
Fathers of the Christian Church, give moral Reasons why such and such
Creatures were forbid to be eaten by the Jews. And more particularly as to
unclean Birds, they were forbid because they were Rapacious, or because they
were night-Birds, or because they ^ed upon impure and filthy things: on which
considerations they were to teach some useful Matter to the Jews. This is
agreed to, not only by some of the Ancient Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
Origin. Hom. 7. in Levit. Cyril. l. 9. cont. Julian.
Writers of the Church, but by Thomas Aq^inas and others among the Moderns, and
by Monsieur Hierozoic. P. 2. l. 2. c. 33.
Bochart of late. But none has assigned the moral Account of the Law
concerning difference of Meats among the Jews more satisfactorily than that
worthy and ingenious Writer of this Age I. Wagenseil on Sota. 2. This Jewish
Institution is though^ by others so have been designed to teach them Temperance
and Self-denial, to curb Luxury, to check an immoderate Appetite: therefore
some Meats were denied them. So Tertulli^n. 3. Josephus renders this Reason,
because some were gross Meat, and would with their feculent Vapors pollute the
Mind, and cloud the Soul. 4. Grotius assigns this as another Reason why God
forbad the Jews some sorts of Food, because they were not good Nutriment for
the Body. To this, it is likely, may be referred that Mosaic Command, Thou
shall not sees a Kid in his Mother's Milk, Exodus 23. 19. For whilst some of
the Hebrew Doctors imagine, that by virtue of this Prohibition, no Flesh which
is to be eaten ought to be boiled with Milk; whilst another thinks that it is
cruel and unnatural to take away the young One from its Dam before it is
weaned, and consequently that there is good Morality contained in these words;
whilst others are of opinion, that not Cruelty, but affectation of Curiosity
and pleasing the Taste are checked here; whilst some very strangely and
unaccountably understand this place of sacrificing the Paschal Lamb or Kid;
whilst others think this to be a Prohibition of a Gentile Custom that had a
Smack of Idolatry; and whilst other odd Fancies have been propounded about the
meaning of it, which you will find rehearsed by several Commentators on the
Text, and by Bochart in his Hieroz^icon ( part 1. Book 2. Chap. 52.) I take
this to be the easy and plain Interpretation, that the Jews were forbid to eat
Lambs or Kids, or Calves before the due time. To b^il a Kid in its Mother's
Milk, is to dress and eat it whilst it sucks the milk of its Dam i. e. at its
very first sucking, before the Flesh is come to any consistency and maturity,
and consequently before it is wholesome Aliment. I look upon it as a Pr^c^p^ of
Health. And so, it is probable, many of those are that make a distinction as to
Animals, and forbid the eating of some rather than others, viz. because the
Flesh of them is not so good and laudable Food as that of other Creatures. The
Great Maimonides was of this Opinion, and positively afferts, that they were
unwholefom Meats, and therefore forbidden, M^r. N^v^^h. Page 3. cap. 48. There
was this natural Cause of the Prohibition; God consulted their Health. I do not
see sufficient reason to affirm, that any of these, much less that all of them,
are false Accounts of the Prohibition, as a late Dr. Spencer de Leg. Hebr^ I.
1. c. 5. ^ect 1.
Learned Writer confidently asserts. They are not the chief Reasons; but I
cannot aver with him that they are no Reasons. But, 5. one of the Chief and
main Reasons of God's appointing the difference of Meats to the Jews was,
because he intended this should be a distinction between them and other People.
This is the positive Reason given by God himself, in Deuteronomy. 14. 2, 3. Levit. 20.
24, 25. The Jews were a peculiar People, and therefore had this as a peculiar
Law. 6. With this Reason another is inseparably joined, viz. that by this means
they were kept from occasions of Idolatry: for hereby a familiar Converse with
the Gentiles was hindered. They could not eat together, because some Meats were
unclean to the Jews: therefore the Jews could not mix with them, but were
forced to separate from them, which was a good Expedient to keep them from the
Idolatry of the Nations.

Lastly, This Law was given the Jews, to prevent all Idolatry on another
account, as thus, God appointed some Animals Clen, and others Unclean, that
these People eating the former, and abhorring the latter, might worship
neither; for (...). Theodoret. Qu. 55. in ^en.
it is the highest madness imaginable to adore what we eat; and there is no
likelihood of deifying what we abominate. Thus Theodoret and some other Fathers
say, the difference of Clean and Unclean Animals was set by God, because he
foresaw the Jews inclinable to Idolatry. He ordered some to be clean, as Sheep,
and Oxen, and Goats, and Doves, these being abstained from, and counted as Gods
by the Egyptians: therefore the Israelites were commanded to eat these. They
must now not only sacrifice, but feed upon that which some of them before
worshipped in Egypt. But what the Egyptians eat, that the Jews were to abstain
from: Thus God enjoined them to eat no Swines Flesh, because the Egyptians ^ed
on no Flesh of four-footed Animals but this, reckoning other Creatures as
Sacred, as Herodotus, Diod^re of Sicily, and several other good Authors
testify, and as we may gather from Genesis 43. 32. and 46. 34. which places not
only the famous Onkel^s and Jonathan, but the chiefest Expositors, ancient and
modern, interpret this way.

But did not the murmuring Israelites call to mind the fleshpots they sat by
when they were in Egypt? Exodus 16. 3. which seems to argue that the Egyptians
(from whom they had these Fleshpots) did not abstain from the flesh of
Animals. To which I answer, 1. This may be understood of the flesh of Sheep,
Oxen, and Goats, which it was lawful for the Israelites to eat, and which they
did eat in Egypt as often as they could get it. So that this refers not to the
Egyptians, but the Israelites only. Or 2. supposing it has reference to the
former, it is meant of the flesh of Fish and Fowl which the Egyptians fed upon,
and of which there was very great plenty in that Country. And it is to be
understood likewise of the Pots and vessels wherein the Egyptians boiled and
kept Hogs-flesh, which was a ^ood permitted to them. And indeed generally the
people of other Heathen Countries, tho they abstained from some other Animals
out of a certain reverence to them, fed freely on Swines-flesh. Whence, I
remember, Dr. Lightfoot gathers that the Gadarens were Heathens, viz. because
we read there were Swine among them, Luke. 8. 32, etc.

If it be objected, the Egytians had Cattle, Genesis 47. 6. and flocks and h^rds,
ver. 17. therefore they eat of their flesh: I answer, that this is no good
Consequence, for they bred up these Cattle not for food, but to use in
Sacrifices. That they did not make use of them in the former manner. I prove
from that forecited place, Genesis 47. 17. where it is said, the Egyptians brought
their Cattl^ (their flocks and ^erds) to Joseph, and exchanged them for Bread.
Which they would not have done in the time of Famine, if they had thought Sheep
and Oxen were to be eaten by them: for certainly these were as good provision
against hunger as Bread. Therefore their battering of those for this, shows
that they were not used to ^eed on the flesh of Cattle, but that they reserved
and sold their Beasts for Sacrifice, as if they were meat for their Gods, and
not for themselves. This part then of the Mosaic Law seems to have been
instituted on purpose to affront the Idolatry of the Egyptians, who used to
adore several Animals. Now G^d would show that they were not to be a^ored by
his commanding them to be eaten. This Eating was to confute their Divinity: for
feeding upon their Gods was not dreamt of then, tho the Papists have introduced
it since.

7ly. And Lastly, There were Vows proper to the Mosaic Dispensation. The
famous Votaries under the Law were the Nezarites, and these are said to be
either Perpetual, as Sampson, Samuel, John the Baptist; or Temporary (i. e. for
a certain time only) as Absalom, Acts 18. 18.
St. Paul, and others: But if we look narrowly into the matter, we shall find
(as I have elsewhere showed) that they were all at their liberty to relinquish
their vow. As for the Rechabites, theirs was no Religious but a mere Civil
Practice, grounded on a National Custom, 1 Chronicles. 2. 55. The old Kenites were
dwellers in Tents from the beginning, and abstained from Wine, and they
retained the same Usage when they came into C^naan. And when at length their
posterity laid it aside, Ionadab the Son of Rechab a famous K^nit^ renewed it,
2 Kings 10. 5. Ier. 35. 6. But in the 27 th Chapter of Leviticus we have a
peculiar and select Account of the Religion of Vows under the Law. There you
will find these Vows (which were voluntary Services tending to the Honor of
God) were either Estimat^ry, or Vows of Destruction. Of the first of these the
Chapter treats from the beginning to the 28 th ver. Estimatory Vows were
either Personal or Real. Of the former, viz. the Vowing or Consecrating of the
Persons of Men, Women or Children to God, that Chapter speaks from ver. 1. to
the 9 th. But tho the Persons were Vowed, it was intended that a Valuation
should serve the turn, i. e. the Priest was to set a Value on the Person, and
then such a Sum of Money was to be paid by the person that made the Vow, which
was to be laid out on pious uses, as repairing the Tabernacle, etc. And
accordingly you find the Persons are here Estimated, and so were to be redeemed
with money. Such Vows as that of Anna, who dedicated Samu^l to the Lord, were
of another kind: That was a Vow to be actually performed, not to be redeemed.
That devoted a person to a particular Function or Service, but this was the
solemn promising of giving the Rate of a Person, of Himself, or his Wife, or
Servant, or Child to God. And there was a general Law that all the firstborn
of Men should be set apart for God's Service, Exodus 13. 2. which was occasioned
by God's saving the firstborn of the Israelites when he destroyed those of the
Egyptians, Exodus 13. 15. These therefore were to be redeemed with a certain Sum
which was to be paid to the Priest. This is all the meaning of this sort of
Personal Vows.

Of the Real Vows the Chapter speaks from ver. 9. to 28. These were Vowings of
Things to God, as Cattle, Fields, Houses, Possessions. The giving of Beasts by
Vow was to sacrifice them, if they were Clean, (and indeed the Firstborn males
of all Clean Creatures were to be sacrificed, Exodus 13. 2, 12. Number. 18. 17.) if
Unclean, to redeem them, Exodus 13. 8. (for here an As^stands for all other
Unclean Animals) that is, to pay a Price to the Priest for them. Or if they
would not do this, they were to break their n^cks, they must have no use of
them. The vowing of Houses and Poss^ssions to God, was bestowing them on the
Priests and Levites for their maintenance, or for repairing the Tabernacle or
Temple, or for any other Pious uses. But all these might be Redeemed at a
certain Price or Rate; i. e. by giving something in lieu of them to the
Priests: the particular Valuations are set down in this Chapter. And here it is
to be observed, that it was intolerable profaneness to vow and offer things to
God that were mean and base, and of a polluted nature. Which is thus expressed
in Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Thou shall not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a
dog into the house of the Lord thy God for any Vow. Money which Harlots
received for prostitution was to be by no means dedicated to God. The
Sacrifices which were bought with the price of their Whoredom were abominable
to him. Their Money was adulterate as well as themselves. Not only they but
their Gains were detestable. It was the price of Sin, and therefore must not be
offered. This was a sufficient Caution against the future practice of some of
the Pontifs of the Roman Church, who exact a Tribute of the Stews, and pretend
to employ it to Religious uses. And so as for money for the sale of any vile
Creature, especially of a Dog, it was not to be brought into the Sanctuary or
Temple. Nay, whereas the Firstilings of all other Unclean Animals were redeemed
with money, this is excepted, as being under the Law a very contemptible and
base Creature, and therefore deservedly joined with Harlets. So Gregor. Tolos.
De Repub. l. 3. c. 5.
one tells us that a Tribute on Dogs as well as Prostitutes was used among the
Greeks, and he proves it out of Evagrius and Cedrenus. So much for the Real
Vows, which concern things Redeemable.

But as there were some Persons and Things Vowed which might be Redeemed, so
there was another fort of Devoted Things and Persons, called Cherem, which
could not be Redeemed. Of these you read in Ver. 28, and. 29. of this Chapter.
Here are meant Vows of Destruction, i. e. Devoting Persons to slaughter and
death, or destining Things to Desolation and Ruin, as in the case of Jericho,
which was pronounced a Cursed, a Devoted place, with all the persons in it,
Ios. 6. 17. And the killing and destroying of the Seven Nations was an Instance
of the like nature. The Ch^rem, the thing or persons devoted with a Curse,
could not be redeemed, as in the former cases. Some have thought that Iephthah
sacrificed his Daughter by virtue of the Vow he had thus made, but I have
heretofore disproved this in a Set Discourse, and therefore I need not say any
thing of it here. Nor shall I particularly insist on any more of the Religious
Usages and Rites (though they are very numerous) which were proper to the
Mosaic O^conomy.

CHAP. VIII.
The Reasons of the Ceremonial Rites among the Jews. They were to Try that
People. They were to Restrain them. They were enjoined in opposition to the
Idolatrous Customs of the Heathens. Several Instances of this. Dr. Spencer
opposes it. His two Parallels of the Jewish and Gent^le Rites. His opinion
showed to be unreasonable, absurd, and contradictious. He makes the Eucharist
an Imitation of a Pagan Barbarous Usage. Other Writers mentioned who have
fallen into the like Notions. The Ceremonial Law was prescribed the Jews
because it was suitable to that Age and Disposition of the Church. Particularly
it agreed with them as they were Children and Minors. It was serviceable to
teach them something of Morality. Those Ritual Observances were designed to be
Types and Representations of Greater and Higher things. More especially they
prefigured the Messiah. The Contents of the Judicial Law. Some parts of it were
in force before Moses's time. What obligation it has upon Christians now under
the Gospel.

I Will now enter upon another Task: for tho I have already, as I went along,
interspersed some Reasons of the particular Rites and Ceremonial Practices
which I mentioned; yet, before I proceed to the next main Head propounded, I
will yet further produce some general, and some more particular Reasons of
those Ceremonies and Observances already mentioned, as also of the rest of the
Iudaical Customs and Practices. And these six Reasons I offer,

1. By these Ceremonious Rites God was pleased to try and exercise the Jews
Obedience. I do not say with Cocceiu^, and some that have espoused his notions,
that the Ceremonies and Observa^ces prescribed the Jews were imposed upon them
by God as a Punishment ^or making the Golden Calf; as if the whole Ceremonial
Law was given them merely to chastize them for their Idolatry: This is a
groundless ^ancy, and con^ounds the notions of a Law and Punishment, which are
two distinct things. But this we may safely and on good grounds assert, that
God designed this Law to be a Trial of them. As God thought fit to try the
Obedience of our First Parents by the Fruit of one single Tree, as it was his
Pleasure to choose that particular way, so here it seemed good to him to make
experiment of the Jews readiness to comply with his Will, by imposing these
Rit^s upon them, and by requiring their submission to them.

2. God thought good to put This Restraint upon the Jewish people. Before Faith
came (says the Apostle) we were (...).
kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be
revealed, Gal. 3. 23. Those that are Critical tell us that he here compares
the Ceremonial Law to a Strict Watch, or Military Guard set upon the Jews. This
as it were imprisoned and shut them up, this confined and checked them. This
s^jag let^rah, this Hedge of the Law (as the Jews called the Mosaic Rites)
enclosed them, and kept them in. It [was the Wisdom of God to keep that People
in Awe by this severe Discipline. If there were no other Account to be given of
the Imposing of the Legal Ceremonies but this, this were enough. But there are
several others.

3. The primary Reason of the Mosaic Rites was to keep the people from
Idolatry. This I had occasion to touch upon when I gave the particular Reason
of the Law concerning the Distinction of Meats. But now I apply it more
generally to all the parts of the Ceremonial Law. The Observance of these kept
them from Idolatry; and this it did two ways: 1. As those Rites held the people
in Employment. 2. As they were directly opposite to the Rites and Customs of
the Idolatrous Nations^ First, I say, they serve to keep them Employed, and so
in some measure hindered them from Idolatry. This is certain, that the Jewish
people were strangely prone to imitate the Heathens that lived about them, they
used to ape their gross^st Idolatries. Wherefore God used this Method, he
prescribed them all these various Rites, which he knew would certainly keep
them in action, and not allow them leisure to mind the Usages of other Nations.
They had their hands full, and could not well apply themselves to any thing
else. By busying themselves with their own Rites and Customs they were diverted
from following Idolatrous ones. By the multitude and variety of those
Ceremonies they were diverted from the Idolatry of the Gentiles who were round
about them, and who otherwise would have infected them with their Pagan
fashions. St. Chrysostom expresses it thus: (...). Hom. 7. in 1 ad Corint^^.
Th^se Ceremonies were prescribed to the Jews for a certain Bridle to them, and
that they might yield an occasion of Business and Employment. They had work
enough to do, and so could not attend to Idolatrous practices. Secondly, The
Mosaic Rites and Ceremonies were a good Remedy against these, because they
were directly opposite to the Idolatrous Rites of the Gentiles. I have showed
this already in the Instance of forbidding of Swines flesh, etc. But now I will
make it good in other parts of the Mosaic Law: I will let you see that they
were instituted in opposition to the Customs and Practices of the Heathen
Idolaters.

We must know then that the Eastern Nations, as Assyrians, and Egyptians, and
others that were neighbors to the Jews, used these following Ceremonies, viz.
Cutting their flesh, Rounding the corners of their heads, Sowing the ground
with diverse seeds: It was usual for Women to wear the Garments of Men, and Men
those of Women; they accustomed themselves to eating of the blood of Animals,
looking toward the East when they Worshipped, and Adoring the rising Sun; and
some things likewise relating to Sacrifices and Oblations might be mentioned.
These and many more were constantly practiced by the Zabians and other
neighboring people who were given to Idolatry, and they were used by them in a
Superstitious and Idolatrous manner. This you will find proved by the Excellent
Seldom, Hottinger, and other Learned Writers out of In More Nevochim. P. 3.
Maimonides. And from him the Learned De Legib. Hebraic. lib. 3.
Dr. Spencer and others show that even all the Rites and Ceremonies used at the
Paschal Feast, which I particularly enumerated before, were in opposition to
Idolatrous Customs among the Gentiles. The Paschal Lamb was to be a Male of the
first year, i. e. a young Ram, in defiance of the idolatrous Egyptians who
counted a Ram the most sacred Animal: this therefore God bids them kill and
sacrifice. They must not eat it raw, because the Heathens eat their Sacrifices
raw. It was to be eaten in the house, to avoid the Procession used by the
Gentiles. A Bone was not to be broken, because the Heathens tore their
Sacrifices in pieces. The head with the legs and purtenance were to be eaten,
to affront the Pagans who eat the Entrails only. Nothing was to remain till the
morning, in opposition to the Heathens who used the relics of Sacrifices
superstitiously. It was not to be sodden in water, but to be roasted, to oppose
the custom of the Egyptians and others who boiled their Sacrifices.

This Maimonides was indeed the first that opposed and confuted that received
opinion of some Jewish Doctors, that there was no Reason to be given of the
Ritual Law, but that it was wholly from the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God.
He on the Contrary proves that these Mosaic Rites have Reason to vouch them,
and that they were not given as the Arbitrary Commands of an Absolute Empire
over mankind. And he came to know this particular Reason, which I now assign of
the Mosaic Observances, from his being acquainted with the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Zabii. He largely insists on this Proposition, that most of
the Jewish Rites were instituted to oppose the Superstitions of those Zabii, an
ancient sort of Idolaters in the East. The very things which those Heathens
practiced are particularly forbid by God to the Jews: Hence they are forbid to
Lev. 19. 27, 28.
cut or mangle their flesh, to Lev. 19. 27, 28.
shave the corners of their heads, to Deuteronomy. 22. 9.
sow the ground with different seeds, because all these were Superstitious
Usages of the Zabii. Likewise Lev. 19. 26.
eating of blood was severely forbidden on the same account, and so was Deuteronomy.
22. 5.
the Woman's wearing the Garment of a Man, and vice versa. This changing of
Vestments is forbid (says De Diis Sir. Syntag. 2.
Seldom) that they might not imitate the Worshippers of the Syrian Venus, who
had various Rites in worshipping her, and according to the difference of those
put on Men's or Women's clothes. And this Learned Antiquary had it from More
Nevoch. pars 3. cap. 38.
Maimonides, who tells us that by that Mosaic Precept is forbid Idolatrous
Worship, and particularly the Worship of Venus Male and Female in use among the
Assyrians. The Jews were forbid also Exodus 23. 19.
to sees a Kid in his Mother's milk, i. e. to offer a Kid or any Animal in
Sacrifice whilst it is immature, and sucking its Dam: It must be kept up seven
days with its Dam, Exodus 22. 30. Or, this may refer not only to Sacrifices and
Firstfruits, but to Food; they were not to eat a Kid till it was come to a
sufficient growth, i. e. till it was fit, by reason of age, to be eaten: so
this is applied in Deuteronomy. 14. 21. In either of these senses the Precept may seem
to be opposed to a Heathenish Zabian Rite, and therefore was enjoined the Jews,
says our Learned Gregory. A Dog was the most abominable Animal of all the
Creation under the Law (as appears from what was said before) the occasion of
which was this, it was the chief Animal and in highest respect among the
Egyptians, and was worshipped by them. Whence in opposition to this base and
idolatrous venerating of it by the Egyptians, it is by the Mosaic Law rendered
the most filthy and detestable Creature upon earth. So the Jews were commanded
to worship toward the West, and accordingly the Holy of Holies in the Sanctuary
and Temple was built Westward, in opposition to the Sabaan Worshippers of the
Sun, who turned toward the East. Therefore God would have the Jews turn their
backs to the Sun when they worshipped.

And several other Precepts of the Mosaic Law were given in direct opposition
to the superstitious Rites and Ceremonies of the Sab^^ans, Chaldeans,
Assyrians, and other Gentile Nations. God would not permit His People to
symbolize with the Pagans in their corrupt Customs. To this end, as Quaest. 1.
in Lev.
Theod^ret observes, God commanded the Jews to kill and sacrifice those Animals
which the Egyptians chiefly held as sacred, that they might not take them for
Gods. And with him agrees More Nevochim.
Maimonides, who says there was a design in this Command to check the
Idolatrous inclination of the Jews, and to condemn the Idolatrous practice of
the Egyptians. This very thing was taken notice of by the Gentile Historians;
thus Diodorus Siculus says, of Moses, (...). Eclog.
That he commanded the Rites of Sacrificing, and the manner of the Jews Lives,
to differ much from the way and usage of other Nations. And Tacitus speaking of
this same Lawgiver, says, Quo sibi gentem firmaret novos ritus contrariosque
caeteri^ mortalibus indidit. Profana illis omnia quae apud no^ sacra^ rursum
concessa apud illos quae nobis incesta. Hist. l. 5.
That the Jewish Nation was set up by him, by his enjoining them new Rites, and
such as were contrary to the Customs of other Mortals. Those things were
counted Profane with them which are held Sacred with us: and again, those
things were lawful with them which are reputed abominable with by us. Whence it
appears that the Mosaic Laws and Rites were given to the Jews because they
were repugnant to the practices of the Gentiles, and that one great design of
these Laws was to prevent Idolatry for the future, and to keep them at the
greatest distance imaginable from it.

But tho this be a very clear notion, yet it has been strongly opposed of
late. Sr. Tho. ^. Blunt's Essays.
One Ingenious Gentleman is bold to say, that God enjoined the Jews the use of
Sacrifices (which were the chiefest of their Religious Ceremonies) because they
had been used to this kind of Worship in Egypt, and God had no other way to
bring them off from their Idolatry but this. Therefore he was forced to comply
with them, and indulge them in this Pagan folly. But there is another Dr.
Spencer de Legib. Hebraic. lib. 3.
of very great Learning that outdoth him in this Point, and has pro^essedly
and amply maintained this Assertion, That most of the Rites and Usages which we
read of in the Old Testament, and which were prescribed by God to the Jews,
were borrowed from the Gentile Idolaters, viz. worshipping God in a Tabernacle,
Purifications, New Moons, the Scapegoat, Offering of Sacrifices, making Horns
for the Altars, Feasts at Sacrifices, or eating what was left of the
Sacrifices, keeping of Festival Days, offering of First Fruits, paying of
Tithes, the Priest's Vestments of Linen, the Vow of Nazarites, or letting the
hair grow for a time, and then consecrating it to God, the Temple, Urim and
Thummim, the Ark and Cherubims. In all these Instances he endeavors to show
how God followed the Gentile Worshippers, and accordingly he undertakes to give
several Parallels between the Jewish and the Heathen Rites. I had occasion
heretofore to offer one of them, and now I will present the Reader with two
more.

The first is of the Ark which both the Gentiles and the Jews had. 1. The
Gentiles, who were cursed Idolaters, had Arks made of C^dar, and covered with
Gold. To comply with ^his time and rich Invention of the Heathens God caused an
Ark to be made for the Jewish people of the same materials, i. e. of Shittim
wood, which passes for C^dar with this Author, and it was to be overlaid with
pure Gold; Exodus 25. 10, 11. 2. The Pagan Worshippers called these Chests or
Arks Holy: accordingly the Ark of the Covenant is styled so, Number. 4. 20. 1.
Kings 8. 8. Thus they were to be like one another as to their title of
Sanctity. 3. The Gentile Gods showed themselves angry against those that looked
into their Ark, and sometimes struck dead the profane handlers of it: even so
(says this Writer) the true God punished the curiosity and profaneness of
such as peeped into his Ark, or irreverently laid hands upon it, 1. Sam. 6. 19.
4. The Idolaters placed their Ark in the Temple, and in the chief Apartment of
their Temple: thus the Ark of the Testament was set in the Holiest place of the
Tabernacle or Temple. Thus they agree as to the place. 5. The Pagans had their
(...) men appointed on purpose for the carrying of their Ark. Every one was not
permitted to be employed in that sacred work: yea they chose persons of the
highest Rank among them to execute this worthy Office. Thus the bearing of the
Ark among the Israelites was the work of those who were Consecrated to that
Employment, and were of the Levitical Race, which was esteemed most Worthy and
Noble. 6. Both sorts of Arks agree in their Use and principal End, which was to
contain the sacred things belonging to God and Idols. As the Pagans Ark held
their magical Instruments, Diabolical Utensils, and profane Knacks and
Trumpery, even so, and just so God appointed his Ark to hold and preserve the
Tables of the Law. Is not this playing with Holy Things? The very exposing
these particulars is, I think, Confutation sufficient.

The Second Parallel is between the Egyptian Images and the Cherubims: 1. Says
he, those Images were held to be the most sacred things among that people; so
the Jews, God's people, knew nothing more Sacred and August than the
Cherubinical Images. 2. The Images of Egypt were generally made of Gold: In
imitation of which the Cherubims were of the same costly matter.

3. The Egyptians, all the time of their Worship, cast their eyes on their
Images; In like manner the Jews looked toward the Cherubins whenever they
prayed, or sprinkled the Blood of the Sacrifices. 4. The Egyptian Images were
the Seat or Throne of their Gods, from whence they gave Answers to those who
came to inquire of them; after which Example God placed his Royal Seat or
Throne between the Cherubins, and from thence he gave forth Answers to Moses
whenever he came to consult upon great occasions. 5. The Images of those Pagans
were of a mixed shape, and did not resemble any one Animal: thus the C^erubim
appointed by God were miscellaneous Images, made up of the likeness of Man and
Beasts. 6. He adds that it was the Custom of the Egyptian Priests to bear their
Images on their shoulders, and to carry them about with great Pomp. The Jewish
Priests were commanded by God to follow this Practice, whence we read that they
li^ted the Ark and Cherubim upon their shoulders, and carried them in
Procession among the people with great Ovations and signs of Rejoicing.

These are the Particulars which make up the two Parall^ls; which if this
Author had inverted, i. e. had showed that the Pagans imitated God's Ark, that
their Images were an Aping of the Cherubim, he had undertaken a laudable Work:
but the has taken the quite contrary course, and labors to persuade us that
God was punctually observant of every little Idolat^ous Ri^e of the Heathen
Worshippers. He makes the True God most diligently and precisely tread in the
steps of the false Gods and Idols. I appeal to the World whether this be
Doctrine becoming a Christian Theologer. And moreover, I will appeal to any
sober and considerate Man whether it be reconcilable to Sense, Reason, and
Truth, that God should make Laws exactly contrary to the Customs of the
Chaldeans and Egypti^^s, and other Pagan Nations (which is freely acknowledged
by this very Author) showing thereby that he hated the very Semblance of their
Rites, and that his Will was that his People should avoid the very Appearance
of any such practices, and yet that at the same time he should give them Laws
exactly complying with the Customs and practices of those Gen^iles. Throughout
his whole Second Book this Author endeavors to prove that the Mosaic Laws are
diam^trically opposed to the Gentile Rites, and that therefore God injoined
those Laws because they were so directly contrary to the Pagan Rights and
Usages. Yet in his whole Third Book he labors to prove that the Jewish Rites
were taken from the Gentile Idolaters. He (as well as Maimonides, Scaliger,
Hottinger and others) asserts that the Mosaic Institutions were a remedy
against Zabiism, i. e. they were given and enjoined to the Jews to keep them
from Idolatry, especially that practiced by the Zabii, that is, the Chaldeans
and Arabians, yea and Egyptians, whose Idolatrous practices were most known in
Moses's time. But you may wonder to find at the same time the great Asserter of
this Notion endeavoring to convince his Readers in many places of his
Writings, that God in the instituting and framing of the Jewish Laws, borrowed
many things from those Zabii, and designedly made his Laws in imitation of them.

What strange Notions are these! God instituted diverse Rites me^ely and purely
in opposition to the Idolatrous Rites of the Heathens; for he would have the
Jews to be Antipodes to the Gentiles in their Worship: Yet he appointed several
other Rites and Observances, and strictly commanded his people to use them for
this reason, because they were such Rites as were observed by the Heathen
Idolaters. The Jews were forbid to symbolize with the Pagans, lest they should
learn their Idolatry: and yet they were commanded to practice sundry of their
Rites, that they might not relapse into Idolatry. What? must we believe that a
great part of Moses's Laws were made on purpose to oppose the Rites of the
Zabii, and likewise that God takes these Heathens for his pattern, and gives
his people several Commandments merely to comply with their Usages? Is it to be
credited that God forbad and abhorred the Gentile practices, and yet at the
same time appointed his people several Rites which the Gentiles used, yea
because they were Gentile Rites, and practiced by the Idolatrous Nations, as
this Author expressly asserts?

He has no where satisfied these Difficulties, and reconciled these
Absurdities and Contradictions, which it was very necessary for him to have
done, in order to his gaining belief among Understanding Considerate per^^ns.
But being warmed with this Notion, he keeps on with full career, and attempts
to show (as he imagines) that many Customs Profane and Diabolical were taken
into the M^saick Laws by God, he translating them from Satan's service to his
own. A great part of his Third Book is spent in this. With those Old Rites the
Devil had been served, and now he pretends it is God's turn to be served by
them. He labors to show there that the most Holy and Tremendous things in our
Religion are taken from the most profane and impure practices of the worst of
Heathens. In short, he maintains no other than this throughout his whole Third
Book, that God raked up all the Vain, Lud^crous, Superstitious, Impure,
Obscene, Irreligious, Impious, Profane, Idolatrous, Execrable, Magical,
Devilish Customs which had been first invented, and afterward constantly used
by the most Barbarous Gentiles, the Scum of the World, the Dregs of Mankind,
and out of all these patched up a great part of the Religion which he appointed
his own People. If you can credit this (and you must credit it if you assent to
what that Author propounds) there is nothing too hard for your Belief and
Assent.

Nay, he would make one of the most Solemn Offices of Christianity to be in
pure Imitation of a Pagan Usage for De Leg. Hebr. Lib. 3.
he says, Christ in Celebrating the Holy Sacrament of his Supper, referred to
the Custom of the Barbarous Scythians and other Savage Nations, who used to
drink Blood at their making of Covenants and Bargains: thence it is said, This
Cup is my Blood of the New Testament; drink ye all of this. This was the
highest and most daring result of his ^ormer Notion. But I hope the Learned
Doctor, before he left the World, corrected his Error, and entertained other
thoughts of these things, and therefore I will not press them any further:
especially because I discoursed of this matter somewhat freely when I made it
my business to prove that many of the Pagan Rites and Customs in Religion (as
well as in Secular Affairs) were borrowed from the Jews and their Sacred
Usages: which is directly contrary to what this Author asserts, viz. that the
Rites and Ceremonies enjoined by God himself to the Jews were of Pagan
Extraction.

I might here mention that some others have fallen into the same or the like
Notion, and have made use of it to ill purpose. Our A Defense of the brief
History of the Unitaria^^, p. 49.
English Socinians approve of this Doctrine, that God complied with the
Idolatrous Nations in the Sacrifices and other Rites which he instituted. And
some of the Antienter Racovians run up higher, and refer the method of Man's
Redemption and Salvation to the Usages of the Pagan World. Thus a Slichting.
Comment. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 1. ver. 25.
noted Man among them tells us that God sent Christ into the World in
compliance with a Custom that was very prevailing, viz. that those who were
eminent and celebrated for their Virtue and their serviceableness to Mankind,
were after their death Canonized as 'twere, and placed in Heaven as an
inferior kind of Deities: and those that wanted their help used to implore it,
and make them their Mediators. Even so God exalted Christ, who had been an
Excellent and Useful Person, and made him a kind of God. And as noted a person
of our own seems to have imbibed the same Doctrine, for Dr. Tillotson (late A.
Bp.) in his Sermons on the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ.
he asserts that a gre^^ part of the Jewish Religion, which was instituted by
God himself, seems to have been a plain condescension to the general
apprehension of Mankind (i. e. the Heathen world, as he explains himself
afterward) concerning the way of appeasing the offended Deity by Sacrifices.
Nay, he makes the Incarnation of Christ, and his Suffering of death to be a
condescension to the Pagans, who (he says) loved a visible Deity, and had a
great esteem of Sacrifices, especially of human Sacrifices, and used to Dei^y
their Benefactors and Heroes. That is very strange, which he gives as Reason
why Christ was incarnate, Sermon. 4. p. 188.
that Men (viz. the Gentiles) who were much given to admire Myst^ri^s in
Religion, might have one that is a Mystery indeed. So that all was direct
compliance with the Gentiles, and according to this Writer the way of Salvation
of Mankind is derived from the impious Customs of the Heathens. But his Page 7,
22, 23.
more Particular words (which are almost too harsh to be mentioned) I shall
have occasion shortly to represent to the Reader in a more proper place.

4. The Ceremonial Law and other Mosaic Usages were prescribed the Jewish
people, because these were fit and proper for them at that time, because they
were most suitable to their present Geniu^ and Disposition. Thus the Apostle in
Gal. 3. 24, etc. very handsomely illustrates the nature of this part of the
Legal Dispensation: The Law was our Schoolmaster, says he. Here is Moses with
a Rod in his hand. We were instituted and educated (says the Apostle) under
the Pedag^gi^ of the Law, for being but in our minority, we were not capable
then of a higher Institution and Instruction. But this fitted and prepared us
by degrees for the reception of that other, and this Schoolmaster of the Law
served as an usher to the Gospel. But says the Apostle in the next verse,
After that Faith (i. e. the time of the Gospel) is come, w^ are no longer under
a Schoolmaster: we are then no longer under the lash of the Law; our state and
condition do not require it. And God is pleased to administer things wisely
according to the condition and circumstances we are under. And this Apostle by
another fit Allusion in Gal. 4. 1, etc. sets forth the nature of this Economy
which he had spoken of before: The Heir as long as he is a child, differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, bu^ is under Tut^rs and
Governors, until the time appointed of the Father. Even so we, when we were
children, were in bondage under the elements of the world: but when the fullness
of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, etc. In which words St. Paul
compares the Iudaical Law to a Tutor or Guardian, under whom the Heir does not
enjoy that freedom of a Son which afterward he is to come to. This (says he)
was the case of the Jewish people: they were but Minors and Pupils, and so
stood in need of a Tutor, i. e. one that is appointed to take care and have the
charge of those who by reason of their insufficient age and understanding
cannot look to themselves. The Ceremonial Law was the Jews Guardian whilst they
were under age: this sour Governor and Overseer kept them in, and curbed them,
and on that account was very useful to them at that time.

But the Apostle seems here to recur to his former comparison of the Law to a
Schoolmaster, when he adds, that the Jews as long as they were Children, were
in bondage under the Elements of the world. The Jews were then got no further
than their (...), their First Elements, they were but conning their Alphabet.
Their Sacrifices and Circumcision were as it were so many plain Letters in
Blood; and there were other Fair and Legible Characters: but there were few of
the common Jews so good Proficients as to Spell out of them any thing of a
future and higher Concernment. These and their other Rudiments were suitable to
the mean Capacity and Nonage of the Jewish Church; when they were in this
State, such a low and mean Dispensation as this, was good enough for them.
Diversity of Ages calls ^or diversity of Actions and Behavior, and
consequently for diversity of Laws. Parents rule Children after another manner
than when they arrive to any ripeness of Years, and are capable of Discourse.
So God orders his Church: that is fit for it at one time which is not at
another. Israel was a Child, Hos. 11. 1. that was the state of the Jews when
they were called out of Egypt. And the Apostle uses the same Expression, as you
have heard. Now, when the Jewish Church was in this lower Form, the First
Rudiments were most agreeable to that condition: these Beginners were to be
used to their Letters. God dealt with that People according to their Weakness
and Shallowness. Wherefore we may observe that he Invited and Allured them, as
well as Terrified them: The Promise of a Land flowing with Milk and Honey
suited these Children well. Horat. Sermon. 1.
Pueris olimdant crustula blandi
Doctores, elementa veli^t ut disc^r^ prima.
Earthly and Carnal things, and the Conveniences of this present Life were
chiefly propounded to the Jews to encourage them, to draw them on gently, and
to win upon them.

Children are taken with a gaudy Outside; accordingly these were brought up
with Ceremonies, Fine and Gay things, to please their Childish Fancies. The
goodly Garments and pompous Vestments of the High Priest were a very agreeable
Sight to them, the jingling Bells of A^ron were a very pleasing Music. Indeed
the whole Mosaic Work was very Curious and Fine, most of the Legal Furniture
was Rich and Sumptuous, and therefore a Suitable Entertainment for them. To
teach and instruct Children (whose Reason is weak and imperfect) we use
Emblems, Pictures, and Representations. Thus Types and Symbols were a sort of
Instructions suitable to the Jews: In those dark Times these Shadows served very
well. But these Ceremonious Rites and Practices were in order to something
else. God called the Jews by things Carnal and Sensual to those that are
Spiritual, by Temporal Objects to those that are Eternal, and by things Earthly
unto those that are Heavenly. The Mosaic Laws were like Frames and Props which
support an Arch, till it is finished and can stand alone: then the Supporters
are removed, and become useless to the Building. When the Evangelical Economy
approached, then the Jewish Ceremonies and Observances ceased, and were laid
aside: for the Ritual Law of Moses was given on purpose to be (...). Euse^.
Demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. 6.
a Governor and Manager of Childish and Imperfect Souls, and to prepare and
train them up to something that is Manly and Perfect, viz. the Administration
of the Gospel, which was to succeed. Nor is this unworthy of God, for he wisely
alters his methods, in his administering the Affairs of the World, (...).
Theodoret. Haere^. fab. l. ^. c. 11.
according to the Times and Ages he deals with. Wherefore he is wont to approve
of such and such Practices for a season, and then afterward to change them.
Which argues not any mistake or error, or want of foreknowledg in God (as the
Deists, who laugh at the Jewish as well as the Evangelical Dispensation, would
suggest) but the alteration is prudently made according to the circumstances of
Times and Persons.

5. It was the opinion of the Jewish Doctors and Rabbis that some of these
Ceremonial Usages were designed to instruct the Jews in their necessary Du^ies
and Practices, and to teach them wholesome Lessons of Morality. This Mystical
and Moral meaning of the different kinds of Sacrifices, difference of Meats,
and all the other Mosaic Observances, is set down by Theodoret in his
Questions on Levi^icu^, which I will not h^re recite. And Prima Secundae
Quaest. 162. Artic. 3, 4, etc.
Aquinas and others in the Account or Rationale which they give of the
Ceremonial Institutions, speak something of this. I know indeed that many of
old, and some more lately have most fondly and fantastically interpreted those
Ritual Laws: what they deliver is their own conceit, and has no foundation to
support it. They under the pretense of giving the meaning of those Jewish Rites
say and write any thing. This is that sort of men who fill all things^ in
Divinity with Allegory and Mystery, and thereby abuse and profane the Holy
Scripture. But yet there may be a Moral sense profitably made of the Mosaic
Law which treats of the Ceremonies: wholesome Instructions may be drawn thence
for directing our Lives and Manners: and this might be partly, and by the^ by
designed in the instituting these things.

6. These Ritual Observances and Ceremonial practices were Types and Figures to
represent greater things that were to come. God chose out a certain People from
the rest of the World, to make them a Spectacle to all others, and by his
wonderful dealing with them as in a Type, to signify to us the admirable
method of his gracious Will to Mankind in future Ages. All their Promises and
Rewards were presignificative of the Mercy intended to be exhibited to the
World afterward. And the same may be said of their Ceremonial and Ritual
Worship. I have showed already that the Mosaic Sacrifices and the Tabernacle,
and all the things appertaining to it, and the Feast of the Passover signified
higher Things: but it is as true that the Other considerable Ri^es enjoined by
Moses's Law did so too, for there is the like Reason for one as for another.
That they were to represent Sublime, Sacred and Heavenly things, we are assured
from the Infallible Scriptures, where they are called Heb. 8. 5.
the Example and Shadow of heavenly things, and Heb. 9. 23.
Patterns of things in the Heavens. And more ^ully the Apostle declares that
Meat and Drink (i. e. the difference of these) and Holy Days, and New Moons,
and Sabbath Days are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ,
Col. 2. 16, 17. The main design of those things was to prefigure the Messiah,
and the Benefits of the Gospel: these are the Substance, and the others were
the Shadow. Thus St. Epist. ad Paulin.
Ierom, speaking of the Book of Leviticus, says that all the Sacrifices in it,
yea almost all the syllables, and the Garments of Aaron, and the whole Levi^ick
Order breat ^e heavenly Sacraments. Thus Justin Martyr informed the Jew whom he
discoursed with, that all the Ordinances and Rites of the Mosaic Law were
(...). Dialog. cum Tryph.
Figures, Symb^ls and Declara^ions of the things which were to happen
afterward unto Christ. The Origin, Philo, Clemens Alex. Rahanus, Beda,
Rupertus, etc.
Allegorical Interpreters, who apply the Mosaic Rites to the Church of Christ,
and to the Messiah himself, tho they are sometimes more Ingenious than Solid,
and may be thought to strain and force some things, yet as to the main they let
us see that those Mosaic and Ritual Constitutions had some reference to the
Gospel, and that most of them ^ypifie and represent the great things of the
Christian Dispensation.

Indeed the Mosaic Observances, taken according to the mere Letter, are very
odd and strange, and some of them seem to be very light and frivolous, and
unworthy of their Author. I am bold to say with Ho^^il. 7. in Levi^.
Origin that if these Ceremonial Laws of Moses have no other meaning than the
literal one, they come far short of the Roman, Athenian, or Lacedemonian Laws.
But if you consider that they were serviceable to try the Jews Obedience, to
restrain them and keep them in awe, to divert them from Idolatry, and that they
were ^uitable to their present Condition, and also that they were to inform
their manners, and Lastly, that they were Images and Types of Spiritual things,
that they represented and pointed out the Messiah with all his Blessed
Undertakings, and the unspeakable Benefits which accrue to us thence, you will
not say those Laws were light and ludicrous and unworthy of God, but that they
were of great and singular use, and served to most excellent purposes. This is
the best account I can give of the true Reasons of this part of the Legal
Dispensation, viz. why after so long a time from the Creation these Ceremonies
and Observations (some of which were very irksome and burdensome) were imposed
by God on the Hebrew People, and lasted till Christ's coming.

It may be expected I should treat, in the next place, of the Judicial Law,
which was for preserving of Civil Peace and Justice among the Jews. This was
the Common or Municipal Law of that Nation. It contained Precepts concerning
the ordering of that People in the matter of Judgment, Punishments, Contracts,
Division of Lands and Inheritances, making of War and the like. These Precepts
may be distinguished according to the different Ranks of Men, and so, 1. they
have a regard to the Relation between the Prince or Magistrate and the People:
there you have the Injunctions which concern Governors and their Office, and
likewise the Duty which is to be paid to them. 2. They have respect to the
Relation and Commerce which People have with one another: and there you have
Precepts concerning Buying and Selling, etc. 3. They direct the Jews as to
their Behavior toward Strangers* here are Rules concerning entertaining of
Strangers, going to War against their Enemies, etc. 4. They take notice of
Domestic Relations, and accordingly give directions as to the behavior of
Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants, etc.

It is not of this Law that I am concerned at present to speak, because it is
Secular rather than Religious, and so does not properly fall under my
consideration when I treat of the Dispensations of Religion. Only, as we
observed before of some of the Ceremonies enjoined by the Mosaic Law, that
they were in use before that Dispensation, so here it may be noted that some of
the Judicial Laws were in force before Moses's time, as punishing Adultery with
death: (only with this difference, that before the Law Adultery was punish^d
with Fire, but now with S^oning) Killing of a Man or Woman was punished with
death: marrying the Brother's Widow was enjoined: Cutting off from the People
was a Sanction among the Patriarchs. The Right of Primogeniture obtained before
the Law of Moses.

Moreover, I will remark that some things in this juncture pass for Laws, which
are rather, and more properly may be called Dispensations or Permissions. Thus
Poligamy, which was practiced by Lamech first, then by Abraham and Jacob, is
now permitted under the Law, as in Elkana^, David, Solomon, etc. And thus they
permitted a Man to put away his Wife for Fornication or Adultery. As for the
Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, within which the Jews were forbid to
marry, the 18 th Chapter of Leviticus gives us a full account of them, and I
shall afterward have an opportunity of discoursing of them. Therefore I will
not insert any thing of them in this place, for what I have said is sufficient
for my purpose, which was to give you some account of this distinct
Administration, and to let you see wherein it differs from the rest.

Only here I will inquire what obligation these Judicial Laws have upon
Christians. It was the opinion of Castalio and some others, that these are to
be perpetually retained in Christian Commonwealths, but it is not reasonable to
pronounce this in the gross, for we ought rather to distinguish concerning this
matter. I could observe then to you that as Moral Laws, viz. concerning the
Poor, Forgiving of Injuries, Equity in Contracts, Duty toward Strangers, were
mixed with the Ceremonial ones in Levit. 19. So several Moral or Natural Laws,
such as oblige all Nations, were delivered on Mount Sinai mixed with Judicial
ones. Such was the Law against Homicide, the Duty of Men to Widows, and
Orphans, the Reverence due to the Magistrate, and others mentioned in the 21,
and 22. Chapters of Exodu^. These belong not to the M^saical Polity or the
Judicial Law, but concern all Persons at all Times, and in all Places. In the
inquiry then proposed, there are these two kinds of Laws, 1. Such as have
respect to the particular Condition and Circumstances of the Jews, and concern
their individual Polity and State. 2. Such as are not appropriated to the State
of the Hebrew People, but were given to them as Men rather than Jews, and
consequently may be serviceable and useful to other Nations. As to the former
of these, they do not oblige Christians in the least, but expired with the
State of that People: but the latter are obligatory under the Gospel, so far as
they are of common Equity, and as they may be made use of now as well as then.
And tho what our Church (in her Seventh Article) says is to be granted,
namely, that the Civil Precepts of the Mosaic Law ought not of necessity to be
received in any Commonwealth, yet where Reason and Equity commend those Civil
Constitutions to any Commonwealth or Kingdom, they are to be embraced and made
use of. For there is some Reverence to be given to those Politics which were
the Invention and Appointment of Heaven: and so far as they were not
appropriated to the condition of the Jewish People, they may be practiced among
Christians without offense. Thus the Law of Tithes is lawfully adopted into our
Constitutions in this Nation.

So likewise if you look to their bodily Punishments, you will see that some of
them are made use of in Christian Kingdoms, if not all of them, in one place or
other. But here it will be asked, May Christians inflict severer Punishments
than the Jewish Law prescribed? To which Hist. of the World, B. 2. Chapter 5.
Sr. W. Raleigh answers thus, Christian Magistrates may abate of the severity
of Moses's Law, and mitigate the punishment of Death, but they cannot make it
more heavy; for it becomes not the Gospel to show more rigor than the Law. But
why then is a Capital Punishment i^flicted on Thieves and Robbers not only
among our selves but in other Christian Countries, whereas such Offenders were
only to make Restitution, or to be Sold, according to the Mosaic Law? I
answer, Lawgivers have ^ound that a less punishment than Death is not a
sufficient Restraint, and therefore think it necessary to make use of this. And
as to what is alleged, we return this, that Thieves sometimes had a greater
Punishment than a Mulct even under the Law. We read that they might have been
killed by those that found them breaking up a house in the night time, Exodus
22. 2. And it appears from that Judgment and Decision of King David in 2 Samuel
12. 5. that Theft in some cases was Capital. And we read that two Thieves were
Crucifled with Christ, which was no Punishment for Theft among the Romans, and
therefore we may probably think the Execution was Jewish, and had ^ome
foundation in the Mosaic Law, according to which some kind of Theft was
Felony: and in this, as in several other things, the Christian Laws diffe^ not
from the Jewish ones. It is probable that the Jewi^^ Cherem or Cu^^ing off gave
occasion to the Christian Church to in^^oduce Excommunication, which is a
Cutting off or Separating from the Communion of the Faithful. A very useful
Ordinance in the Church. And there seem to be among Christians several
footsteps of other Cons^itutions (and those merely Secular) which were among
the Jews, as Apprentices generally serving six or seven Years, which may be
borrowed from the Iewi^^ Servants being ^et free every seventh Year. So from
the Law of dividing the Lands to the Israelites by Let, the Custom is re^eiv'd
in many Christian Countries of assigning portions of Land in that manner, and
in case of Co^te^tion especially to have recourse to L^ts. And in other
Instances it might be showed, how the Mosaic Laws are imitable by Christians
in the times of the Gospel. And it is certain that this may lawfully be done,
so far as those Laws are of common Use and Equity, and advance the welfare of
the Public, and promote Charity, good Will, Justice, Innocence, Peace and
Tranqu^llity in the Commonwealth. It is needless to sally forth to any more
particulars here: for my design was to present you with a competent Draught of
this part of the Iud^ical O^conomy, which I hope I have done. Thus much of this
Mosaic O^conomy.

CHAP. IX.
The several ways and kinds of Divine Revelation under the different
Oeconomies. Ordinary External Revelation was by hearing or by seeing. Inward
Revelation was by Dreams or Prophetic Inspiration. What Prophecy was. How they
knew to distinguish between True Prophets and False ones. The extraordinary
ways of Revelation were, 1. That which was vouchsafed to Moses alone. The
Nature of it. It differed from other Revelations as to Degree only. 2. That
from between the Cherubims. 3. The Urim and Thummim. These are not the same
with the Teraphim. They were not borrowed from Pagan Idolaters. This would be a
countenancing of Image Worship. The absurdity and impiety of their opinion who
hold that the Urim and Thummim were of Heathen Extraction. These were no other
than those bare words written or engraven on the High Priest's Breastplate. An
Objection answered.

Before I proceed to the next Dispensation, I look upon this as a proper place
wherein to speak of the Several Kinds of Revelations, the various ways of God's
Communicating himself to Mankind in the different Dispen^ations which we have
discoursed of. Here I will recount them all together. God under all his
Administrations made known his Will by the Law of Nature and Reason which he
implanted in Men: but I speak not of this here, but of Divine and Supernatural
Revel^tion, as distinct from the Discoveries of natural Light and Reason. There
were several ways of this Revelation: for God not only spoke at sundry times
(as the Apostle says) i. e. in the days of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshua,
the Judges, David, and of the following Kings and Prophets; (or, as the (...)
Greek word signifies likewise, He spoke by degrees, by several parts, not all
at once, but now one thing and then another) But He also spoke (...)
in diverse manners, i. e. there was a great variety of Revelations, there were
several distinct ways of God's discovering his Will to the World: and as the
World was more and more corrupted, the discoveries of God's Will were
multiplied and increased.

These supernatural Revelations are divided by Writers into Immediate and
Mediate, but they cannot well agree in determining which are of the former sort,
and which of the latter. Some rank Revelations by Dreams and Visions under
those that are Immediate, others again hold that they belong to mediate
Discoveries, and in several other instances I could show how they disagree. To
avoid controversy here I will take another course, and I offer this as the
exactest Division of Divine Revelations, viz. that they are either Ordinary and
Frequent, or Extraordinary and Rare. The Ordinary are either Outward or Inward.
The Outward are made to the Bodily Sense, viz. Hearing and Seeing. The Inward
are made to the Soul, viz. either to the Fancy, when persons are asleep, or to
the Rational mind of Man when he is awake.

God spoke, i. e, communicated his Will, 1. In an Outward manner, viz. to the
Bodily Senses, and first to the Hearing. This was done first by an Immediate
Voice: so God spoke to Adam and Eve when he commanded them not to eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Genesis 2. 16, 17. (which was the first
Revelation we read of) and thus He communicated his Pleasure to them at other
times, mentioned in the third Chapter, for it is called the Voice of the Lord,
ver. 8. Thus he revealed his Will several times to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as
we read. By such a Voice ^ramed by the air, God spoke to Moses in the
Tabernacle and in the Bush, and to Samuel in the Temple, 1 Samuel 3. 3. And it is
probable that at other times in those first ages God conversed with his
Servants by speaking audibly to them. Secondly, God spoke by the Voice of an
Angel very frequently, as to Adam, it is likely, presently after his Fall: for
that Angel who guarded Paradise spoke to him without doubt, and told him
roundly of the dire effects of his Apostasy, and warned him not to approach the
flaming Sword, lest he perish immediately. We read that God spoke by Angels to
Moses, Lot, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Daniel, and several others. Or, when God
spoke by a Wind or Thunder, or some strange Sound and terrible Concu^^ion of
the Air, it was thought to be by the ministry of Angels. This was called by the
Jews Bath Kol, the Daughter of a Voice. It was any Voice heard as descending
from Heaven, and directing them in any matter or concern whatsoever. The Jews
say that by this Voice the Six Precept^ were given to the Sons of Adam, and the
additional one to Noah and his Sons: and by this the Law of Circumcision and
the Ten Commandments (which were not written at first) were given to Moses.
Many of the Hebrew Doctors assert This Bath Kol to have been the lowest degree
of Revelation; and they say this supplied the room of Prophecy, and was
frequent after that ceased among the Jews. Thirdly, God spoke to his People by
the Voice of Pr^phe^s, Na^ijim, Messengers dispatched on purpose to declare his
Will. Of these we often read in the Old Testament, but especially about King
David's time, and afterward. For tho Abraham be the first that is called by
the name of Prophet, Genesis 20. 7. because he was one that was acquainted with
God's Will, and was prevalent in Prayer, yet now we are speaking of that
particular sort of Prophets who foretold things to come, and denounced the
Judgments which were to be executed on Offenders, and were sent forth by God to
that purpose very usually, but especially when the Nation of the Jews grew very
wicked and Idolatrous. Then these Persons were raised up by God to admonish
that People, to tell them freely of their Miscarriages, and to declare the
displeasure of God against them. And these Envoys of Heaven were sent not only
to God's own People, but sometimes to others, as the Ninivites. Thus Revelation
was made by Voice: God spoke himself, or by others audibly: and this was no
uncommon way of divulging and discovering his Will.

Again, God spoke, i. e. communicated himself heretofore not only by the sense
of Hearing, but by that of Seeing. He was pleased to make known his Divine
Pleasure by some visible Appearances, which most vigorously struck on that
Sense, and gave more evident Testimony of the Will of Heaven. Thus God
discovered himself, 1. by Angels Appearing; for tho it was not the Appearing of
these Messengers, but their Speaking to persons which gave them the discovery
of God's pleasure, yet the former was no mean Confirmation of what was
delivered, because those Glorious Spi^^ts could not appear to Mankind unless
they were commissioned by God. When he thought fit to send them, then (and not
else) they descended from Heaven, and showed themselves to Men. 2. Writing was
another manner of Visible Revelation. Thus the Law was delivered to Moses, and
afterward this way of Revelation grew frequent, the Sacred History of Moses,
and other Histories and Prophecy being committed to Writing. Thus the Ancient
Church before Christ's coming had the Written Word of the Holy Scriptures to
inform them. 3. God spoke to the Sight by those Representations which in Holy
Writ are so usually styled Visions, for these properly belong to the outward
Sense of Seeing: they are either Real Spectacles exposed to the eye, as the
Burning Bush which Moses saw, Exodus 3. 2. and the Pillar of a Cloud which went
before the Israelites in the day, and the Pillar of Fire which conducted them
in the night, Exodus 13. 21. and the Cloud in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13, 14.
called the Glory of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1, 2. And this Expression is used in
other places of the Old Testament, to signify that Visible Glory and Majesty
whereby he manifested himself to Mankind in those times. Or else Visions in
Holy Scripture are certain Images of things represented by God to the Eye, as
those Strange Appearances and Signs mentioned in the Books of Jeremiah, Ezekiel
and Daniel. Whether these things may be said to be real Objects, or whether
they be mere Apparitions, we need not (as some) solicitously inquire. If they
be Resemblances caused by God, and there be such an Impression made on the
Sense of Seeing that the Organ be affected, as if there were such an Object
before it, it is sufficient to denominate it Vision. But this is not to be
doubted of, that these external Representations and Figures pointed out Real
things, either present or to come. From this sort of Manifestation, called
Vision, the Prophets who were most conversant in this way of Revelation, were
styled Se^rs, 1 Samuel 9. 9, 18. 2 Chronicles. 35. 15.

Thus I have distinctly spoken of Voices and Visions: but it must be observed
also that these two are joined together sometimes. This you may see in some of
the foregoing Instances; and in others not named, the Revelation by Voice was
mixed with that by Vision: so in the New Testament Saul saw a Light, and heard
a Voice. But I am confined at present to the Old Testament, for I speak now
only of the variety of Revelations which were before the
Gospel-Dicd\sspensation. It is to be observed moreover that sometimes Vision
and Voice were accompanied with an Ecstasy: tho the persons were awake, yet they
were cast into a Trance. Lastly, under this head it is remarkable that all the
outward and sensible ways of God's revealing himself, especially those that are
visible, are called by the Jewish Masters the Shekinah, i. e. the Divine
Presence and Majesty, whereby the does as it were dwell, and is constantly
present with his Church (for the word Shakan signifies to inha^^^^ or dwell)
whereby he does gloriously discover himself to his Servants. With reference to
this the Apostle says, to the Israelites pertains the Glory, Romans 9. 4. i.
e. the Glorious Presence and Habitation of God with them, not only by Angels,
but all those other ways before spoken of, in which he appeared and manifested
himself in the times of the Law. This St. Paul styles the Glory, because this
Visible Appearing of God is so styled (as you have heard) in the Old Testament,
and because the Seventy Interpreters (whose way of speaking this Apostle is
wont to imitate) used the word (...) to express the Glorious Presence of the
Divine Majesty in any kind of Sensible and External manner.

2. There are Inward as well as Outward Revelations. These are made more
immediately to the Soul, as the other were to the Body. First, God spoke or
revealed himself to the Fancies of Men, by Dreams. He thought good to
communicate his Will to persons by a powerful Influence on their Imaginations
whilst they were asleep, as well as by presenting things to their Senses when
they were awake. Thus God revealed himself to Genesis 15. 12.
Abraham, Genesis 20. 3.
Abimelech, Genesis 28. 12.
Jacob, Genesis 37. 5.
Joseph, Genesis 41. 15.
Pharaoh, 2 Kings 3. 15.
Solomon, Dan. 2. 1.
Nebuchadnezzar. In their Dreams their Fancies were impressed with such and
such Representations, they verily thought they beheld this or that Object, as
Jacob thought he saw a Ladder that reached from Heaven to Earth. And because
these Representations seem to be offered to the eye, therefore they are
sometimes called Visions in Scripture. I saw a Dream, says Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 4. 5. And so we read of a Dream of the night Vision, Isai. 29. 7. But if
you speak of Visions in the proper sense, then it is certain Visions and Dreams
are two distinct Species of Revelation; and so I have made them, having before
spoken of Visions strictly so called. But this is a thing not considered
sometimes by Writers on this Subject, and so they confound Visions and Dreams.

Secondly, God speaks to the Soul not only by working on the Imagination in
Sleep, but by immediate Inspiring the minds of the Prophets when they are
awake. This way of revealing his Will to Men is called Inspiration, and
sometimes Illumination: but there is a gradual difference between these, the
former being of a higher degree than the later, and the later being as it were
a Preparative to the former. This Inspiration, which is made by an inward
Afflatus and Excitation of the Spirit, is signally called Ruach Hakkadesh.
the Holy Spirit by the Jewish Writers. A man, say they, is said to have the
Holy Spirit when being awake, and having the full use of his Senses, he speaks
by the Incitement of the Spirit. Thus the Prophets of old spoke as they were
stirred up, by this Inward Afflation and Instinct. The Jewish Doctors think
that this degree of Divine Revelation is especially in the Psalms of David, and
the Proverbs of Solomon, and the Book of Job, etc. the Writers of which are
termed by way of Excellency Chetubim Scriptores, by the Hebrews, and their
Writings are distinguished from other Books of Scripture by the name of
Hagiographa. This put Holy Men upon Pious Discourses, and excellent Strains of
Devotion, and raised them above their ordinary temper. Yea, All the Holy Penmen
of Scripture were moved and actuated by this Divine Influx: By this they
dictated and composed those Sacred Writings. This is that degree of Prophecy or
Prophetic Inspiration which is called the Holy Spirit. Tho you may observe too
that all those kinds of Revelation beforementioned, are styled in the Jewish
Writings Inspiration and the Holy Spirit, and sometimes they are called
Prophecy, and the Spirit of Prophecy. For Prophecy (Nebuah) is taken either
strictly or largely: In the strict acception, according to the Jewish Notion of
it, it is when any thing is revealed to a person when he is asleep, or in a
rapture, or besides himself. And others of them say, that Prophecy properly so
called, is either in the way of Dreams or Visions. Prophecy in Scripture is
taken in a restrained sense, for seeing and foretelling things to come: and
hence (as well as from what was suggested before) it is probable the Prophets
anciently were called (...) Seers. This also is that which most usually is
called Prophecy by the Jews. But Prophecy in the largest acception is the
general word to comprehend all kinds of Divine Revelation: it is the way
whereby all revealed Knowledge and Truth are conveyed to us. Therefore the
Schools of the Prophets were those places where young Men were prepared for all
sorts of Revelation and Inspiration; and out of these Schools generally the
Prophets were chosen. Education and Improvement fitted them for the Prophetic
Office, and by these Testimonials they were able to go abroad.

There was a way to know who were True Prophets and who False, and to
distinguish one from the other. Indeed when a Prophet foretold things to come
to pass hereafter, he could not be convinced of falsehood presently, because his
Prophecy must be known to be true or false by the Event of his Prediction,
Deuteronomy. 18. 21. And yet here was some uncertainty, for the thing he foretold
might not come to pass, and yet he might be a True Prophet, for God could do
otherwise than the Prophet foretold, Ier. 18. 7, 8. But then the Prediction was
conditional, not absolute, or rather it was a Commination. But if any one by
the Prophetical Spirit dictated such and such things to be done, it was
possible to tell, and that presently, or in a very short time, whether he was a
true Prophet or no. This might be known first from the Qualifications of a true
Prophet: for first he must be no way inclined to Idolatry; secondly he must
predict nothing against the Law. If he said any thing derogatory to the Law of
Moses, the Moral Law chiefly and the Worship of God, he discovered himself to
be a false Prophet; Deuteronomy. 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Thirdly, some add, that as
he was one who said nothing against the Law, so neither must he do any thing
against it. It was a Notion of the Jews that the Spirit of Prophecy was not
communicated to any but Holy Men. But there is reason to doubt as to this.
Besides the Qualifications, a Prophet might be known to be true, when he was
backed by another Prophet who was certainly known to be true, when this Prophet
testified of the other. Further, when God himself testified concerning a
Prophet by some manifest Sign, as in 1 Kings 13. Thus they were to judge whether
Prophets were counterfeit or no. Add this also, that they were deterred from
counterfeiting the Prophetic Spirit, because by the Law a false Prophet was to
be punished with Death, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. Lastly, The true Prophets might be
discerned and distinguished from the false ones by this, that they were plain
and downright in their Predictions, whereas the others were generally ambiguous
and equivocating, as we see in the Example of those false Prophets whom Ahab
consulted, The Lord shall deliver it (say they) into the hands of the King, 1
Kings 22. 6. So we render that place, but the Relative it is not in the Hebrew,
and so the words have two senses, either the Lord shall deliver Ramoth Gilead
into the hands of the King of Israel, or, the Lord shall deliver thee and thy
forces into the hands of the King of Syria. This was frequently imitated
afterward by Croesus Halyn penetrans, etc. Aio te AEacida, etc. Ibis, r^dibis,
etc.
the Heathen Oracles, and was of some advantage; for from the ambiguity of the
words mistakes might easily arise, and by that means the credit of the false
Prophets was salved. But however this rendered their Predictions uncertain and
wavering, whereas those that had the true Prophetic Spirit were sure and
fixed: and thus there could not but be a certainty of Prophecy among the Jews.
But at last the Spirit of Prophecy ceased, and (as the Jewish Writers and
Christian Fathers agree) ended in Malachi, who was the last Prophet. But this
way of Revelation was afterward restored by Christ, as shall be showed
afterward.

To the forementioned ways of God's communicating his Will and Pleasure, may be
added that Impulse whereby persons are stirred up by God to undertake some
extraordinary Enterprise, and to accomplish some very notable Act. Thus More
Nevoch. p. 2. c. 45.
Maimonides reckons it among the several kinds of Prophecy, that Moses by a
particular intimation from God slew the Egyptian, Exodus 2. 12. So by the same
Divine Motion Phineas knew it would be acceptable to God to kill those two
notorious Sinners, and he was stirred up accordingly to do it. By the same
Heavenly Impulse Sampson was excited to destroy the Philistines, tho with the
loss of his own life. And several other Instances might be produced of this
nature in the Old Testament. Thus you see what were the Ordinary ways of
Revelation, what was the frequent and usual manner of God's communicating his
Will in the several Dispensations before treated of. In the next place I will
enumerate the Extraordinary Means of revealing God's Will: As,

1. That way of Revelation whereby God conversed with Moses on the Mount, when
he gave him the Law, and whereby he was pleased to communicate himself to him
at some other times. The Jewish Doctors cry up This for the highest Degree of
Revelation that ever was, and some of them talk such strange things of it as
are next to Blasphemy. But this we are sure of, that the Sacred Spirit
represents this as an Unusual and Extraordinary Revelation, and such as was
peculiar to Moses alone: for it is said, The Lord spoke to Moses Panim el Panim.
face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, Exodus 33. 11. Indeed Jacob
testifies of himself, that he had seen God face to face, Genesis 32. 30. But tho
he had seen God so, yet we do not read that he talked with him after that
manner, which implies something more. I know Moses tells the people of Israel,
that God talked with them face to face in the Mount, Deuteronomy. 5. 4. But this he
means of himself, viz. that after God had spoken to him in that immediate
manner, he imparted God's Will to them, but they were not suffered to come near
the Mount, as we expressly read. Besides, this is part of Moses's peculiar
character, that there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto him, whom
the Lord knew face to face, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. viz. by talking, conversing with him
face to face; therefore this was a singular Prerogative granted to him, and no
other Prophet partook of it, or was to be compared with Moses as to this. But
what you read in Number. 12. 6, 7, 8. is yet more full: If there be a Prophet
among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will
speak unto him in a Dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all
my House (he is a singular person, and I trust him with all my Concerns:
therefore I vouchsafe him a greater measure of Revelation than other Prophets
have. I make my Pleasure known to them in Dreams and Visions, the ordinary ways
of Divine Discovery, but) with him will I speak Peh el Peh.
mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches: and the Similitude
of the Lord shall be behold.

Hence it is evident, that the Gradus Mosaicus was not communicable to any
other Prophet, and consequently that there was a vast difference between
Moses's Prophesying and that of other Prophets. Moses conversed immediately
with God: that is, in that clear and evident manner which no other Prophets
were acquainted with, without any disturbing Impressions on his Imagination, as
in the usual Dreams and Visions of Prophets. Or, Moses had not that Awe and
Astonishment on him which the rest of the Prophets had. Or, face to face, i. e.
friendlily (as it is explained in the place before mentioned; as a man speaks
to his friend) signifies that he conversed intimately and familiarly with God;
he was admitted to the nearest Communion with the Divine Presence and Majesty
that ever any mortal Man had. In this he excelled all former Prophets, as to
This he was Singular and Peculiar, and the way of Discovery made to him was the
highest Degree that ever was.

But tho I allow this, that Moses experienced a more Immediate and Familiar way
of Revelation than any others, and that this was the most Exalted Degree of
Inspiration, yet I do not see but that we may affirm it was in some of those
ways I have before mentioned. As to the Degree it was most Sublime and
Transcendent, but yet the way of Conveyance might be the same. It might be by
immediate Voice from God, and by the Voice of Angels, by Visions and Dreams,
Sleeping and Waking, by inward Illumination and Divine Afflation: in all these
ways, and in the height and transcendency of them, Moses, it is likely,
received Communications from God. Thus it differs from all other Revelations,
tho as to the substance it is the same.

God's calling to Moses out of the Bush, Exodus 3. 4. is counted by More Nevoch.
p. 2. cap. 45.
Maimonides one of the highest Degrees of Divine Revelation; for none but
Moses, says he, had the honor to hear God speak to him in a Vision, whilst he
was awake. But this Learned Jew seems to be singular here, and therefore I will
not reckon this as a distinct and peculiar way of Divine Manifestation.

2. Another way of Revelation was that of the Oracle in the Tabernacle, or
Temple. Exodus 25. 22. I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee, from
above the Mercy-Seat, from between the two Cherubims which are upon the Ark of
the Testimony, of all things which I will give thee in Commandment unto the
Children of Israel. And accordingly in Number. 7. 89. we read that God spoke to
Moses from the Mercy-Seat, and gave Answer to him when he consulted him: and
none else had that honor in his time. But afterward the High Priests had this
privilege conferred upon them. Some of the Uncircumcised Doctors tell us
prodigious things of this way of Revelation: they talk as seraphically as if
they had been the persons that were admitted to that Sacred Oracle. But after
all they have said, either we must refer it to some, or all of the ways of
Revelation before specified, or else we must fit still, and say we know not
what it was.

3. The Answering by Vrim and Thummim was another Extraordinary way of
Revelation. By this God gave Answers in great and weighty Affairs, especially
about the Kingdom, for it may be reckoned a Politic Oracle: and some have
thought (from what they read in 1 Samuel 30. 7, 8.) that Kings as well as the
High Priests were the persons to whom the Vrim and Thummim were committed. But
I see no ground for this, for this Oracle had its residence in the High Priests
Breast Plate, and therefore was given out wholly by him. And as for what is
said in the forementioned place in Samuel, it is not to be understood of
David's personal Act, but of what he did by his Authority. But that this great
Oracle of the Jews was consulted chiefly in difficult cases of State, may be
gathered from Number. 27. 21. 1 Samuel 23. 9. and 28. 6. and 30. 7. 2 Samuel 2. 1. Tho
I fee no reason to appropriate it wholly to Civil Matters, for the High Priests
Pectoral had this general Name given it, Coshen hamishphat, the Breastplate of
judgment, Exodus 28. 15. because by the Vrim and Thummim, which were lodged
here, Judgment infallibly passed; but we do not find that this Judgment or
Decision was restrained to one particular sort of Cases. When this Oracle
ceased, is not agreed among Writers. According to Antiq. l. 3. c. q.
Joseph the Jew there was no such thing about two hundred years before our
Savior's time. But some of the Hebrew Doctors say, it had its period in the
Prophet Haggai's days. Nay, it was never heard of from the day that the
Children of Israel were carried captive to Babylon, say others of the Jews, who
it is probable come nearest to the truth.

As to the nature of the Vrim and Thummim; there have been several Conjectures
of Jews and Christians; but the most considerable of late has been that of the
famous Mr. Seldom, and some others, who think they were little Images, that
were representations of Angels, and that they were the same with the Teraphim.
But I have subverted the foundation of this opinion, by showing that the word
Teraphim is not of a middle signification in Scripture, but that it is the word
to express Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15. 23. And that in all other places it signifies
some unlawful Images, Idols, or False Gods. A Noble Dr. Spencer de Leg. Hebr.
Critic strikes in with our famous Antiquary, and would persuade us that Vrim
and Teraphim are the same. He has showed a great deal of excellent Reading and
Criticism in his undertaking, to maintain the Identity of these two: he has
done great and amazing things in so barren a Subject; his Achievements are
extraordinary, and like himself: but if I may be so free with this worthy Man,
and the rest of those Authors that have gone this way, as to deliver my
thoughts impartially concerning the Reasons and Arguments which they have
offered, truly I must pronounce that some of them are slight and frivolous, and
they might as well have asserted that the Vrim and Teraphim are the same
because they both end in im. This Learned Writer adds, that both the Vrim and
Thummim were of Pagan Extraction; but herein he leaves the Judicious Seldom,
who held not that the Vrim was borrowed from the Teraphim, but that this was
taken from that, for he says expressly that the Teraphim are called Vrim and
Thummim, because they aped the fanctity of these.

But this later Author avers that the Jews imitated he Gentiles in their
Teraphim and other Idolatrous Rites and Practices. Tho the Jewish Laws were
made in absolute opposition (as has been said before) to the Customs of the
Idolatrous Nations, yet (notwithstanding this) he asserts that God borrowed
this and most of the Mosaic Rites from those Pagan Idolaters. Did God himself
openly declare against the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and yet would he by these
Images of Pagan Invention nurse it up? Is it possible for considerate minds to
give credit to this? To think that the Jews, who were particularly commanded
not to learn the way of the Heathen, Ier. 10. 12. not to comply with the
Customs of the Idolatrous Nations, but to avoid them, and act quite contrary to
them; to think that these persons were permitted, nay in a particular manner
commanded and enjoined to use this Superstitious and Magical Rite, and other
the like Customs of the Heathens; to think that God, who had so often declared
his hatred and abomination of Idols, and whatever looked like Idolatry, gave
out his Oracles to his own People by a couple of little Pert Waxen Images, and
that in compliance with the Talismanical Puppets used by most Pagans, and which
were first invented by their Idolatrous Priests, is such a heap of odd and wild
Conceits that no unprejudiced and unbiased mind can entertain. As for the
Thummim, that also is held by the same Author to have been borrowed from the
Gentiles. As Vrim was fetched from Serapis an Egyptian Idol, so (says he)
Thummim is of the like Original, for it was an Image set with precious Stones
which the High Priests of Egypt wore about their necks. Now, because these
Pagans were brave and gaudy, and had a rich Sapphire and Truth engraven on it
hanging at their breasts, therefore God appointed his own High Priest a
Thummim, which was such another fine brave thing. Yea, God gave him Bells to
dangle and make a noise at his heels, because the Egyptian Priests were hung
about after that manner, for which this Author quoteth Alexander ab Alexandre.
This in brief is his conjecture about Thummim. And thus the Vrim were Images,
and the Thummim was an Image.

Which it seems was the opinion of A. Castre heretofore (tho he has not the
same particular notion concerning these Images with this present Writer) but
hear how a Corn. ^ Lapide.
Learned and Sober Man of his own Communion censures him for it; As this is a
new opinion, so it is very improbable, because such a thing as this would have
been of dangerous consequence among that people who were so inclined to
Idolatry. If they had seen Images, or heard them speak, and deliver Oracles,
they would thereby have been encouraged and confirmed in their Idolatrous
Service, i. e. worshipping of Images. And truly, if I may speak freely, this
assertion that God's most Holy Oracle, whereby he delivered his Will to the
Hebrew people, was managed altogether by Images, gives too much encouragement
to the Image Worship maintained and practiced by some of the Church of Rome.
Accordingly you will find that Dr. Parker (Bp. of Oxford) against the Test.
One who was a well-willer to the Roman Cause and Interest, highly applauds
these Notions, and borrows several pages together from Doctor Spencer as
suitable to his purpose. He furnished himself with materials for his Pamphlet
about the notion of Idolatry, from this Writer's conceptions of it.

But that which is the greatest reproach to these Images is, that they were
borrowed from the Idolatrous Pagans, which is the thing this Reverend Gentleman
asserts and defends. This makes them unworthy of God and his Worship, and not
fit to be used by the People of God. This Opinion makes God to imitate the
Pagan in their Customs and usages. But he thinks he salves the absurdity and
impiety of this, by adding, that God did this, by reason of the bardness of the
Jews hearts. He imputes the use of this Vrim or Teraphim to the morosity of
that people, who were to be pleased by all means, and therefore GOd indulged
them in these Heathen Superstitions. But who can think this to be a
satisfactory account of the matter? It is as much as to say, God, to comply
with the vain humor of this people, gave them these Little Images, these
Prattling Puppets to dance and dandle. The Jewish Nation being Children, must
have these Baubles to play with. The froward Israelites cried for the Pagan
Gewgaws, therefore God let them have them, that they might Play and Worship at
the same time. We must hold that these Pretty Idols wrapped up in a folded piece
of cloth of a span long, were the Famous, Celebrated, and Sacred Vrim of the
Jews: these Ludicrous Images were the Holy Oracles whereby God spoke to his
people on the most serious and eminent occasions: In short, the Vrim were the
very same with the Teraphim, which were the Heathens Penates, the Pagans
Houshold-Gods, or rather (to speak more plainly) they were the Bodies of those
Gods, or (to speak yet more plainly) of the Infernal Ghosts, who came and
informed these little Carcases after they were prepared under a certain
Constellation: then and not before, they were a Trap to catch Damons, as Mr.
Mede pleasantly speaks. These were the Teraphim, as all the Learned know, and
consequently they were the Vrim: which if any man can believe, it is next to the
Faith of Miracles, in my apprehension. If we can persuade our selves that the
Holy God of Israel was an exact Imitator of the Pagans Magical Feats, and
Diabolical Conjurations, we may then swallow any thing, be it never so
incredible and impossible. What is erroneous and absurd, yea what is profane
and blasphemous if this be not, viz. that God's Worship was borrowed by God
himself from the Idolatrous Gentiles?

I have in another place offered my particular Sentiment concerning these Vrim
and Thummim (so much controverted by the Learned) the Sum of which is this,
that they were no other than these two Hebrew words VRIM and THVMMIM written or
engraven, and put into the High Priest's Breast Plate. To which purpose it is
observable that in Exodus 39. 8, etc. where the High Priests Garments are
rehearsed, and are said to be made, the Vrim and Thummim are not mentioned at
all, because these were not made of materials of Linen, Gold, etc. as the
Garments were, but were only bare words written or engraved, and deposited in
the hollow of the Breast Plate, which was a folded or doubled Cloth, and was
capable of holding those written Words: wherefore they are bid to put them in
it, not upon it, for upon it were the twelve Precious Stones. I have showed the
probability of this Opinion from several material Considerations, as well as
from the manner of Expression used in Exodus 28. 30. Thou shall put, or
(according to the Hebrew) thou shall give in the Breast Plate the Vrim and
Thummim. I have showed that giving is applied in several places of Scripture to
writing: and I will further confirm it by one Instance more, viz. in Ezekiel. 9.
4. (...), give i. e. write a mark on the Foreheads, etc. for it is spoken to
him who had the Writer's Inkhorn, ver. 2, 3. Thus giving and writing are the
same. And so in our own way of speaking there is something like it, for to
render or give and to ascribe are sometimes synonimous. These written Words
(which were of mighty Importance and Significancy) were put into the Rationale,
or rather, the Duplicature contained in it, and were made use of by the High
Priest when Answers were to be given. Those Words may signify to us the nature
of this kind of Oracle, viz. that by consulting it they should be illuminated
(that is the import of Vrim) they should have a clear discovery of what they
asked and enquired after, and they should have not only a Distinct, but a Full
and Perfect Answer (that is implied in Thummim) to their Demands.

If it be Objected (as I find it is) that the Hebrew ^ being set before Vrim
and Thummim, and the particle the being placed before them in our English
Translation, argue the Vrim and Thummim to be things, and not bare words: I
answer, it is true that the Hebrew ha which is sometimes a Praepositive Article
before Nouns, and is rendered the, is (like the Greek Articles (...) before some
words) very significant and emphatical, having the force of a Demonstrative:
but at other times you will find that it is of no significancy at all, but is a
mere Expletive. So that we cannot infer with any certainty that ha or the being
prefixed to Vrim and Thummim have any Emphasis, or argue them to be Things, and
not Words. Again, you may observe that tho it be haurim in Exodus 28. 30. and is
translated the Vrim, yet in Number. 27. 21. tho there be the Article ha in the
Original, yet in our English Translation it is plain Vrim. And moreover, take
notice that it is barely Vrim, Deuteronomy. 33. 8. 1 Samuel 28. 6. both in the Hebrew
and in our Translation. Whence still you may infer that there is no stress to
be laid on either the Hebrew ha or the English the when they are prefixed to
Vrim and Thummim, there is nothing Emphatick in it. Nay, that the is no note of
a thing is clear from Hag. 2. 6. (not to mention any other place) where the
Hebrew ha and the English the are set before [word] and you will find almost a
hundred times in your English Bible the word, but I suppose you will not thence
gather that a word is a thing, taking this latter in the strictest sense. This
is the best and plainest account I can give of the Vrim and Thummim, on which I
should further have enlarged if I had not prevented my self by a Particular
Essay on this subject. I never met with any one that had any thing considerable
to object against this Notion, but on the contrary I find that one or two
Writers of good Note have showed themselves much inclined to embrace it. I am
not concerned to satisfy those who ask, how God answered by these Words or
Letters. It is hard to resolve this Question, but such a Conjecture as this may
be probable, that the High Priest was particularly taught by God to understand
this Secret, from some difference which he observed in the Letters made by
God's own disposal. If the Jewish Writers thought such a thing as this was
Reasonable and Accountable when they asserted the Responses to be made by the
Precious Stones, I do not see why we may not with greater reason make use of
the same Solution here. But this we are certain of, that the Divine Responses
were given by and from these Vrim and Thummim, and we are sure that they were
part of the celebrated Shekinah, the Divine Presence, the Visible and Glorious
Appearance of God: for by these in an extraordinary manner (which none is able
to relate) he revealed his Will to the High Priests, and they imparted it to
those who came to inquire of this Oracle.

And so I have let you see what were the Various Revelations, both Ordinary and
Extraordinary, under the several Dispensations we have been speaking of. The
Mosaic Occonomy especially had the advantage of all these: the Jewish People
were most signally honored with all these sorts of Revelations; Unto them were
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. The High Priest's Pectoral is called
(...), because Responses in some difficult cases were Spoken and Revealed
thereby: and so the Revelations of God's Will by that way are called (...) by
the Apostle here, but that is not all, for this is to be looked upon as a large
word, to signify all the Various Discoveries vouchsafed by God, the Diverse
manners of communicating his Pleasure to Mankind. He spoke (...).

It might be expected now that I should pass to the Evangelical Dispensation:
but I having said under the Abrahamick Occonomy that there was then a palpable
Distinction made between God's Servants and Worshippers, and those that
worshipped false Gods; and afterward in the Mosaic Dispensation there being a
more Visible Distinction made, it is necessary here to add something to
qualify what was there said, and to acquaint you with the whole Account of
God's Transactions in that affair: it is proper here to say something of God's
dealing with other Nations, which makes a Distinct O^conomy.

CHAP. X.
The Gentile Economy. Others besides those of the Family of Abraham were of
the Church. Some of these were in Palestine. An enumeration of the several
Opinions concerning Melchisedech. He was a Canaanitish King and Priest. Job's
Country. His Character. His Friends. Several other Pious and Religious
Gentiles in other Countries. Hebrew Prophets sent to the people of other
Nations. Malachi speaks of True Worshippers among the Gentiles. The Proselytes
of the Gate. The Proselytes of Righteousness. Tho the Nations were generally
forsaken of God because of their Idolatry, yet some among them professed and
worshipped the True God. Those places of Scripture in the Old and New Testament
which set forth the Peculiar Privileges of the Jewish People are not
inconsistent with this. No Nations were debarred and excluded from God's Grace
and Favor.

THerefore in the next place I proceed to the Gentile O^conomy: for so I may
call it, tho it lies not all together, as the other Dispensations do, but is
dispersed both through the Abrahamick and Mosaic O^conomi^s. You must know
then that tho the Church of God, or the Faithful, were separated from the
greater part of the World which were Infidels, and commonly called in Scripture
the Nations, (for tho sometimes, but very rarely, this word be applied to Jews
as well as Heathens in the Old and New Testament, yet generally G^jim gentes is
the word in the Old Testament proper to those that believe not in the true God,
and (...) in the New Testament expresses the same. Thence is the common
Antithesis in the New Testament of Jew and Greek or Gentile: and this was the
perfect dichotomy of all Mankind at that time) and tho the Church were those of
the stock of Abraham who retained the true Worship of God, and more especially
and eminently the Jews were called the Church and peculiar People of God; and
the Nations were those that invented new Gods, and worshipped them, and lived
in all sorts of Wickedness and Lewdness (as Babylon, Sodom, Egypt, and other
places) yet the Seat of the Church was not so tied to Abraham's family, or
afterward to the Jews, that Salvation was confined to that People, or that
there were no other persons professing Godliness besides them. Although God in a
peculiar way revealed himself to Abraham and his Family, and that by Covenant,
yet others likewise were favored by God, and included in that Covenant. Tho
God calls himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
Exodus 3. 6. that is, he was the God of those Patriarchs and of their Seed in a
peculiar manner, as having actually made a Covenant with them, and promised
that the Blessed Seed, the Messia^, should arise thence; yet in a larger and
extensive sense God was the God of other People besides. For as all were not
Good that were in Abraham's Family or of his Posterity (there were Ismael and
Esau, Incestuous Reuben, the Bloody Simeon and Levi; and both in the Wilderness
and in Canaan there were Murmurers, Blasphemers, Idolaters, and persons every
way defiled) so all were not Bad or shut out from Grace and the Covenant of
Mercy that were not of the Family or Race of Abraham. There was Shem, Noah's
Firstborn, who lived in Palestine when Abraham came thither out of Babylon,
and it is highly probable that he was a Good Man and a Religious Worshipper.
Nor must Iaphet be supposed to have revolted form God: this was one of the Sons
of the Blessing, and it is likely was a godly Person. Abimelech, one of the
Kings of Canaan (it is probable of the Southern part of it, as Melchisedech, of
whom I shall speak^ anon, was King of the Northern parts) was at that time one
that feared the true God, and thereby was taught to abstain form Abraham's
Wife, Genesis 20. 3, 4. And indeed form several passages in this Chapter it
appears that this King was a very Religious and conscientious Man, that he had
the knowledge of the true God, and worshipped him. Abraham's asking God to spare
Sodom if there were fifty Righteous Men in it, implies that he thought there
were so many there: and consequently other Cities of that bigness had at least
that number of Righteous Persons: and proportionably in greater places he
thought there were more that might be saved. Now it is not probable that he was
wholly mistaken, and consequently there were Religious Persons besides those of
Abraham's Seed even in the Cities of Palestine. Rahab was a Canaanite, but yet
a Religious Faithful Woman, one that acknowledged and worshipped the God of
Israel, and accordingly is commended for her Faith, Heb. 11. 31. and
questionless others there were in that Country (tho they are not particularly
mentioned) who feared God.

I will instance in one very Great and Eminent Person who was a Canaanite, viz.
M^lchisedech. I know it is disputed who he was: 1. Some have thought that he
was an Angel in the Form of a Man, as St. Lib. 1. Quaest. super Genesis quaest. 72.
Augustine tells us. This was the fancy of Origin, as we may gather from Hom. 1.
in Genesis
one of his Homilies. 2. Others, as Hierax and the Hieracites (a sort of
Heretics in the Third Century named from him) hold that Melchisedech was the
Divine Power of God, or (more plainly) the Person of the Holy Ghost in shape of
a Man, as Haeres. 55. and 67.
Epiphanius reports. 3. Others (as the same Haeres. 55.
Father relates) said he was the Son of God Incarnate. And this Opinion is
embraced by a modern Cunaeus de Rep. Hebr. l. 3. c. 3.
Writer, who would persuade us that Melchisedech and Christ are the same. But
these are false and groundless surmises, and have no bottom to support them. As
to the last of them, it is incredible that the Type and Antitype should be the
same: for this is the case here, Melchisedech was a Representative of our
Savior, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 6. 20. Jesus was a Priest after
the Order of Melchisedech. Which he explains in Chap. 7. ver. 15. After the
similitude of Melchisedech there arises another Priest: as much as to say,
Melchisedech and Christ were like one another in several things, and thereupon
one was designed to be a fit Type of the other. But it is unreasonable and
absurd to say that a Person is like himself, therefore we cannot rationally
imagine that Christ, who (as St. Paul says) was after the similitude of
Melchisedech, was the same with him. This cannot be admitted by any considerate
Man. And this also is to be remembered, that the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews (where he particularly treats of Melchisedech) would certainly have
told us this if it had been so.

St. Ad Evagrium, and de Quaestion. Hebraic.
Ierom is of the Opinion that Melchisedech and Shem the Son of N^ah were the
same Person, and he says it was the general Tradition of the Hebrews. But this
is not the first time that he as well as other Christians have been deceived by
Jews. I grant that the Jerusalem Targum (on the Text that speaks of
Melchisedech) asserts him to be Shem, and I deny not that Jonathan the Author
of this Targum lived before Christ's coming. It was then the Ancient persuasion
of the Jewish Doctors, and therefore I cannot excuse Iacobus Capellus, who
says it was but a late Device and Fiction of the Jews. If he had said it was
an old Fiction of the Rabbis, he had spoken Truth, for it is w^ll known to the
Learned, that these Men were given to Forgery form the beginning, and that
their Writings abound with mere Inventions of their own: and this among the
rest may be one Instance of their Abilities that way. Again, it was not
universally received by the Jews that Shem and Melchisedech were the same, for
both Josephus and Phil^ (two of the most Learned and Judicious Men of that
Nation) think otherwise. Further, you will be persuaded of this if you consider
the several Arguments which Pereti^^ uses to prove that M^lchisedech was not
Shem* and if you weigh the seven Reasons produced by In Genesis 14.
Bochare to confirm the same. Or, without consulting of these, you may be
convinced by that one single Text of the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 7. ver.
3. where you are told that this Melchisedech was without father, without
mother, without descent; i. e. whereas Moses in his Writings has told the
Genealogy and Ped^gree of all other Pious Worthies mentioned by him, he says
nothing at all of this Person's Birth or Stock. Whence you may certainly gather
that this Person was not Shem, because we know his Genealogy: his Father and
Mother and Descent are expressly recorded. Moreover, Melchise^ch was not Shem,
for Canaan, where he was King, sell to Cham, not to Shem, as all Historians
assert. This may suffice to confute those Jews and Christians who think (...)
and (...) were the ^ame. (...) 1. 2. c. 1.


Nor, 5ly, was this Melchisedech (as Monsieur I^rieu fancies) the other Son of
Noah, viz. Cham: for who can upon deliberate thoughts believe that this cursed
Person was the Priest of the most High God, from whom Abraham so joyfully
received the Priestly Benediction that he returned it with the payment of his
Tithes? and much less can we believe that one of so ill a character as Cham was
the Type of the Blessed Jesus.

6ly, There are some Arabian Writers, as Elmacine and Patricides quoted by
H^ttinger, who held that Melchisedech was the Son of Ph^leg, but this is
exploded for a Fiction.

7ly. Some of the Jews of old (as we are informed by that Ancient Writer often
mentioned on the present Account) had a Conceit, that this was one that was the
Offspring of a Harlet, and therefore he is said to be with^^^ father and
without mother, i. e. his Parents were so infamous that they were unworthy to
be named in Scripture. But such stuff as this is not worth mentioning.

In the last place therefore, that which is unquestionanably true (because
attested by Sacred History) is, that this Melchisedech was really a King and a
Priest in the Land of Canaan. It is expressly said that he was King of Salem,
Genesis 14. 18. that is, he was Ruler of that part of Canaan which was afterward
called Jerusalem, or else (as some St. Ierom, Bochart, Bp. Patrick in his
Commentary on Genesis 14. 18.
Learned Men have thought) of that place on this side of Jordan, and near to
Sodom, which had the name of Salem, perhaps the same with Salim, Joh. 3. 23.
The Learned Jewish Joseph. de bello Jud. l. 7. ^. 18.
Historian plainly tells us, that this Melchisedech was (...), a Potentate of
the people of Canaan. And with him agree the Christian Fathers: he was not only
a Prince among the Canaanites, but he was of their Stock, and particularly of
the Sidonians, says Haeres. 67.
Epiphanins. So Quaest. 64. in Genesis
Theodoret delivers it as a thing unquestionable, that as he was a King in
Palestine; so he was of the Race of that Gentile People. He was moreover a
Priest of the most High God, i. e. of (...), the only True God, Genesis 14. 18.
And being such, it is not to be questioned that (in discharge of his Sacred
Office) he taught the people to worship and serve God aright. So that if we
consider this Person not only as a King but as a Priest, we must grant that he
had some influence on the place where he exercised these Offices, and
consequently he being a Good and Holy Man did by his Discipline and Example
make others so. Some of his People feared God, as well as honored him: and
thus there might be a considerable number of (...) that were Religious and
Virtuous at that time, and were true Worshippers of the Divine Majesty.

But not only in Palestine but Arabia and the adjacent parts, there were those
that feared God, and were accepted of him. Many of the Race of Abraham's
Children not by Sarah, but by Haga^, or by his second Wife Keturah, were Heirs
of the Covenant made with Abraham. The Children of Ismael were circumcised, and
some of them may be thought to have attained to the Spiritual Circumcision.
(...), Moses's Father-in-Law, was a Religious Man tho he was a Kenite by
Nation, i. e. an Ara^ian, and tho he dwelt in Midian, an Heathen Country. He
exercised his Priestly Function here, and offered Sacrifice to the God of
Israel, Exodus 18. 12. And we cannot but think that those of that Country that
joined in Sacrifice and Worship with him, had the knowledge of the same True
God. If we may give credit to the Hebrew Doctors, whom Mr. De jure Not. and
Gent. l. 2. c. 2.
Seldom quotes, Iethr^ is expressly called a Pr^selyte in the G^mara, and
consequently he was a Worshipper of the True God. And such might some others of
that part of Arabia be: it is likely they were Proselytes to the true Religion.
We may think as favorably of some of the Sabaans, Inhabitants of part of
Arabia the Desert, of the Posterity of Keturah. Job without doubt was a
Gentile, and for that reason Joseph the Jew reckons not his Book in the Canon
of Scripture, because it belongs not to the Jewish Nation, whose Antiquities he
was writing. And perhaps for that reason his Book is placed in the Bible after
all the Jewish History. But there is some dispute whether he was an Arabian
(properly so called) or an Ed^mite. That he was the former, is the more general
belief; but some think he was the same with Io^a^ King of the Idumeans, of the
Race of Es^u, Genesis 36. 34. And some have thought he was that Job who was the
Son of Issachar, Genesis 46. 13. and who was also called Iashab, 1 Chronicles. 7. 1.
But there is little or no ground for this. His Country Vz. was so called, say
some, from Vz. Nahor's Firstborn by Milcah, Genesis 22. 21. Others think it had
its name from Vz. of the Family of E^sau, Genesis 36. 28. 1. Chron. 1. 42. Others
say from Vz, of the House of Aram, a Son of Shem, Genesis 10. 23. As to the
situation of the place, Sir W. Raleigh is positive that it lay between
Palestine and Coel^ syria, which he gathers from Ier. 25. 20. where those of
the Land of Vz. are reckoned among the Borderers on Iudaa. So Argument in Lib.
Job.
St. Ierom of old placed Vz in the confines of (...) and Arabia, and thence it
is usually said to be in Ar^bia.

I will not now enter into controversy about (...) Country, because it is the
same to my present purpose whether he was an Arabian or an Idumean. If he was
either of them, it is certain he was a Gentile; and yet (which is the thing we
are now concen'd in) he was a Holy Man and a Right Worshipper. His Character is
briefly given him by him who wrote the Book, He was (says he) perfect and
upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Chap. 1. ver. 1. And God
himself gave him this high Encomium, There was none like him, (i. e. for
Goodness) in the earth, ver. 8. Whence some would gather that he lived not in
the time of any of the Holy Patriarchs, or of Moses, for then it could not be
said, that he had not his fellow in the earth. But this Inference is of no
weight, because it is most probable that this is spoken of that particular
Country wherein Job lived, as the Earth is sometimes taken in that restrained
sense in Scripture. So that the meaning is, there was no man like him in the
Land of Uz, for the Hebrew word, Eretz, is the same in both places. He was the
most eminent Saint in that Region of the World. That which we observe at
present is, that he was so, tho he was no Israelite, tho he was not of the Holy
Seed. Notwithstanding this, he was a Worshipper of the True God, and a
Righteous Person. In Chap. 31. you may hear him making a solemn Protestation of
his Integrity as to many grand things of Religion, and particularly his
abhorrence of Idolatry, ver. 26. Indeed the greatest part of the Book is a
Testimony of his singular Faith, Patience, and Piety. Whereupon St. Augustine
says thus of him, Divinitus provisum suisse non dubito ut ex hoc uno sciremus
etiam per alias gentes esse potuisse qui secundum Deum vixerunt, eique
placuerunt pertinentes ad Jerusalem spiritualem. De civ. Dei, lib. 16.
I doubt not but it was particularly ordered by Divine Providence that we
should learn from this one Person, that even amongst other Nations there might
be those who lived according to God, and pleased him, and belonged to the
Spiritual Jerusalem.

Job's Friends likewise may be reckoned among the Gentiles, for Eliphaz the
Temanite was of Esau's lineage, Genesis 36. 11. and Bildad the Shuite was of the
posterity of Shuah the Son of Abraham by Keturah, Genesis 25. 2. and Elihu the
Buzite was of Buz the Son of Nahor, Genesis 22. 21. As Job sacrificed for his
Sons, (Chap. 1. ver. 5.) so Eliphaz did for himself and his two friends ( Job
42. 8) to appease God's Wrath: and all of them showed themselves Religious and
Pious persons. For tho they were faulty as to their misrepresentation of Job
sometimes, yet they were in their designs upright, and intended only to
justify God, and to assert his Providence, and to check Sin and Wickedness
where they thought they espied them. And it is not unreasonable to think that
Job and his Companions, who were Persons of such eminent Goodness, and moreover
were Rich and Wealthy Men, and of great Authority in the Land of Vz (for as Job
himself was a Great Man, a kind of King in that Country, so his three friends
were Men of Power and Eminency, and are called Kings by the Author of the Book
of Tobit) used their Wealth and Authority for the promoting of Religion among
the Inhabitants of that place: and so it is probable that there were several
that feared God there, and consequently that the Church was not confined to one
Nation, but that God revealed himself in a saving manner to other Countries.

Of this we have further proof, for as there were these Religious People in
Canaan, and Arabia or Idumea, so in other places some of those that were
Uncircumcised were acquainted with the True Religion. Abraham's Brother Nahor
and his Family, tho they dwelt in Mes^potamia (an Heathenish Country, and
which Abraham left for that reason) were not strangers to the True God and his
Worship (tho they mixed it with some Superstition) thus in Genesis 24. 31, 50. the
Language of Laba^ and Bethuel shows that they had a good Sense of Religion, and
knew and worshipped Ieh^vah. If we pass to Egypt, we shall find there that the
Midwives that were Natives of that Country (for such they are deservedly
thought to be, by the Learned Jewish Historian and Antiquary; and tho they are
called Hebrew Midwives, ver. 15. yet the Reason of that Denomination was
because (as it is explained in the next verse) they did the Office of Midwives
to the Hebrew Women: and from several circumstances in that part of the Sacred
History we may gather that they were of the Egyptian Nation and not Hebrews)
feared God, Exodus 1. 17. and gave a remarkable Testimony of it, and accordingly
were rewarded by God for it, ver. 21. Hagar, who was originally an Egyptian,
was honored with Divine Apparitions, and favored by God in a particular
manner, Genesis 16. 10, 11, 13.

And afterward, when the Jewish Nation and Church were set up by God, other
persons and people were not excluded from his Grace and Favor, Ruth was a
Mo^bite, of the Race of the Daughters of Lot, but was converted to the Belief
of the True God, and her Virtue and Piety were so signal, that the Holy Spirit
has recorded them in an entire Book. Our Savior takes notice that the Prophet
Elias was sent to the Widow of Sarep^a, who was a Gentile, a Sidonian (Luke 4.
26) but showed her self a very Good Religious Woman, and believed in the God of
the Patriarchs. Naaman the Syrian was a Proselyte, he sacrificed to the God of
Israel alone, and carried Earth with him out of Judea to build an Altar, a
Kings 5. 15, 17. and without doubt he propagated the true Religion and Knowledge
of God in his own Country. Ebedmelech, an Ethiopian, Chamberlain or some such
like Great Officer to King Zedekiah, was a Patron of the Prophet Jeremiah, and
a Man of singular Zeal and Piety, and was therefore eminently favored of God,
Ier. 38. 7. and 39. 16. It is not improbable that Hiram King of Tire was a
Prosolyte, 1 Kings 5. 7. And such we have reason to think the Queen of Sheba
was, 1 Kings 10. 9. Nebuchadnezzar was of this sort, and became a Convert, as
may be partly collected from Dan. 3. 28, 29. Dan. 4. 34, etc. And it may be
Cyrus (who is styled by God his Anointed, Isai. 45. 1.) may be reckoned in this
number. But tho there may be some doubt as to these latter, yet it is certain
that the rest, and several others that might be named in Gentile Countries,
were Proselytes to the true Faith, In prosecution of which Subject it may be
further observed that God sent Hebrew Prophets to the People of other Nations:
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiest, prophesied almost to all Nations; Obadiah to
the Idumeans, and Jonas was dispatched to the people of Ninive the Metropolis
of Assyria, who believed and repented at Ionas's Preaching. This shows that God
was kind to Them as well as to the Jews, and that they had the True God and his
Will in some measure discovered to them before: otherwise they would not have
been so capable of understanding the Divine Message when it came to them, and
of behaving themselves sutably to it. For it is not to be questioned that the
Ninivites Repentance was true, it proceeding (as some of the Ancients of the
Christian Church have observed) from a true Faith, Ion. 2. 5. Mat. 12. 41.
Their Fasting and Humiliation were so eminent, that the Abyssine Church keeps
yearly a Fast of threeday in remembrance of it. And I find it is the
Comfortable Note of Rabbi Kimchi, questioning, why the Book of Jonas was ranked
among the Holy Scriptures, it making no mention of Israel, as all other
Prophets do, but being wholly directed against the Ninivites, who were Heathens
and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, This Book, says he, was written
to show that God is merciful to those that repent, of what Nation soever they
be. This Example makes it evident that the Gentiles were not wholly rejected,
although as to the greatest part they were, but that many of them were accepted of
God.

Yea, it seems to be plain from Mal. 1. 11. that the Getiles worshipped God
no less than the Jews. The words are in the present time in the Original. and
therefore ought to be so meant, that some of the Gentiles in those days had the
true Worship of God among them, in one part or other of the whole World he was
Adored and Served. The History of the Jewish Nation, and of God's care of them,
was the thing chiefly designed in the Old Testament; and therefore it cannot be
expected that it should treat of other Nations, and give a particular account
of what was done there. But it makes mention (as you have heard) of some Holy
Persons among them, and without doubt there were many more, tho not spoken of.
The Gentiles were not deserted of God, but taken notice of by him, and
encouraged. The Visible Church did not altogether consist of Abraham's Family
and Kindred; but many others that were not of that Stock were true Members of
it. Especially among the neighboring Nations several were converted to God by
the Preaching of the Israelitish Prophets, and in part received the Jewish
Religion, and by the Jews were called Proselytes. These properly belong to the
Gentile Dispensation, because they were first Gentiles, but converted from
their Gentilism to the Knowledge and Worship of the True God. These Proselytes
or Converts were of two sorts:

1. The Proselytes of the Gate, as the Jews styled them (because they lived
within the Gates of Isreal, and they held free Commerce and Trade within their
Houses, the same with the Strangers within their Gates, Exodus 20. 10. Deat. 14.
21.) They were those Heathens that abandoned their Pagan Superstition and
Idolatry, and received the True Faith, and acknowledged the True God, but were
left to their liberty as to Circumcision. Therefore this Rank of Proselytes
remained Uncircumcised, neither did they observe the other Mosaic Laws and
Rites, but were only tied to the keeping of the Seven Precepts, supposed to be
given to Noab's Sons, as Maimonides and other Learned Writers among the Jews
inform us. These, tho they were no Idolaters, yet because they were
Uncircumcised, were not permitted to worship in the same Court of the Temple
with the Jews, but in a distinct Place by themselves, therefore called the
Court of the Gentiles: and tho they went to the Jewish Synagogues, yet they had
a distinct Apartment there. There were many of these Proselytes among the Jews
every where in their Cities. Of these you read in the New Testament, where they
are called (...), Acts 8. 2. (...), Acts 10. 2, 7.
Devout, or Pious, or Religious Men, or (...), Acts 13. 43. Acts 17. 4.
Worshippers, for the Greek words signify any of these. I conceive the Roman
Centurion of Capernaum, who built the Jews a Synagogue (Luke 7. 5.) was one of
these. Cornelius, a Captain of the Italian Band, Acts 10. 2. was another
Proselyte of this sort, i. e. a Gentile Worshipper of the True God, but not
Circumcised, or counted a Member of the Church of the Jews. And such a one, it
is likely, was the Ethiopian Eunuch mentioned in Acts 8. 27. who came to
Jerusalem to worship. And such was Lydia of Thyatira, who worshipped God, Acts
16. 14. And hither may be referred those devout men out of every Nation under
Heaven, Acts 2. 5. and th^se that feared God, Acts 13. 16, 26. These were
Proselytes from among the Gentiles. And these, it is likely, are meant by the
(...), Acts 9. 29. and 11. 10. for tho this be the name for the Grecizing Jews
who read the Scriptures in the Septuagint's Version, and prayed and did other
Religious Offices in Greek, whereas others performed them in Hebrew, yet here
by Heltemists we are to understand those that were converted to the Jewish
Religion from Gentilism. But tho they had renounced the Heathen Worship, yet
they had not received all the Jewish Ceremonies and Laws.

2. There were another sort of Pr^selytes called the Pr^selytes of
Right^eousness, or of the Covenant. These were of a far higher degree than the
former, for they were Gentiles converted wholly to Judaism, and were initiated
into the Jewish Church by Baptism and Circumcision, and were tied to keep all
the Mosaic Law, and worshipped in the same Court of the Temple with the
Natural Jews, and so became every way Jews unless in respect of their Birth and
Nation. These in the New Testament are simply and absolutely called Proselytes.

Thus Persons of other Nations besides that of the Jews embraced the True
Religion and Worship, and were accepted of God, and obtained his favor. Here
then is the Gentile Economy. Not but that the Nations were generally sorsaken
of God, and given up to Idolatry and all manner of Wickedness and Profaneness,
which the Apostle took notice of when he said, Acts 14. 16.
God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways; All Nations,
i. e. all those Kingdoms which were erected after the Flood, viz. the Assyrian
or Babylonian Monarchy, which began soon after the Flood under Nimr^d the Son
of Cush: the Sicyonian Kingdom, and the Old Germans who began at the same time
with the Assyrian Monarchy: next the Egyptian Empire under Cham, and his
Successor Misraim or Osiria. About the same time began the Argives Kingdom,
under Inachus their first King. Then the Kingdoms of Bactria and Iudia: another
Grecian Kingdom, viz. the Athenian, about the middle of the Chaldean Empire:
then the Lacedemonian or Spartan Dinasty; the Kingdom of Italy, the Lydian,
Corinthian Tyrian, Maced^nian Dynasties, besides the Persian, whose King upon
the expiring of the Ass^rian Empire became Head of the Second Monarchy, which
is the boundary of the Sacred History of the Old Testament. These were all left
by God to themselves, and Idolatry prevailed among them all: they worshipped
the Sun, Moon and Stars, yea all kinds of Beasts tho never so base and
contemptible: Nay, Worshipping of Devils was a common practice with them. Thus
God suffered the greatest part of the World to walk in their own ways until the
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Thus they were (as the Apostle speaks of the
Gentiles) without God in the World, till he came into it. But yet even then,
when they were addicted to Idolatry (which is also to be observed in this
Economy of the Nations) God left not himself without witness, Acts 14. 17. He
led them to the knowledge of himself by the Book of Nature: they had sufficient
light of God and Religion, i. e. to teach them some general Duties of Virtue
and Goodness, and to instruct them in the Nature and Attributes of God,
according to that of the Apostle, That which may be known of God was manifest
in them: for God showed it unto them, Romans 1. 19. But (as the Apostle there
adds) they held the Truth in unrighteousness, and when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into
an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and fourfooted Beasts, and
creeping things: and were filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, and all manner
of Vice and Villainy.

But tho it was thus with the Gentiles generally, yet it was not so with them
All: there were many that abandoned Idolatry, and professed the only True God.
There were excellent Persons even among the Heathens, who were eminent for
Grace and Holiness, as the Examples before mentioned testify. There was a kind
of a Church out of the Church. Many of the Gentiles had the knowledge of (...),
and of his Covenant with Mankind: for a great part of the Covenant consisted in
the Moral Law, which was solemnly proclaimed on Mount Sinai, and was the
principal part of the Mosaic Religion, but appertained to all Men: for being
the Law of Nature, it had respect to the whole Race of (...), it concerned
every Person of what Nation or Country soever. And it might be remarked to
this purpose, that at the promulgation of this Law, there were present not only
Israelites but Strangers and Gentiles, Exodus 12. 38. Number. 11. 4. Deuteronomy. 29. 11.
This intimated that the Church was not shut up within the Jewish Nation: the
Covenant of Grace extended farther than Judea. And thus we see this
Dispensation is a Dispensation of Grace: Not only as the whole Gentile World
was a sharer in the common Favors and Blessings of Heaven* but as some of them
were actual partakers of the peculiar and saving Grace of God, upon their
owning the God of Israel, and turning unto him. Thus God excluded no sort of
People from the participation of his Favor: But that of St. Peter was
verified, God is no respector of Persons, but in every Nation he that seareth
God and (...) Righteousness, is accepted with him. Acts 10. 34, 35.

And what I have said is not inconsistent with those places of Holy scripture
which speak of the Jews as of a peculiar People, and which exast them above all
other Nations in the World. What Nation (says Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
Moses) is there so great, who has God so nigh to them, as the Lord our God in
all things that we call upon him for? As if he had said, Other Nations indeed
are great, yea greater as to (...) than the Jews; in this they out do us: but
the Nation of the Jews is to be preferred to them all, because God Himself
dwells with us, he is always nigh at hand, and we converse familiarly with,
him daily: whenever we inquire of him, he answers us; whenever we stand in
need of Direction and Assistance, he goes before us as our Guide, He protects
and defends us, He helps and delivers us. Again, Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
What Nation is there so great that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous?
Where he shows on another account the Jews Preeminence, viz. their having so
exact a Law given them by God. It appears not that the Gentiles had any Special
Rules and Positive Laws prescribed them, as the Jews had. The Laws of the Old
Testament were revealed only to this People, and to no other Nations. They were
peculiar Laws, and therefore the Gentiles were not under the particular
Obligation of them. Moses his Law never bound any but the Jews and Proselytes
who made themselves Inhabitants of that Land: it obliged no other Nations under
Heaven. For it was designed for the Jews only, and not for others; that is,
Christ being to be born amongst them, God granted to them Particular and
Special Favors, to distinguish them from other people, to Sanctify and
Consecrate them especially. Therefore God separated the Israelites from the
rest of the World, and gave them particular Constitutions and Injunctions: he
showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel: he has not
deal so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments, they have not known them,
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. i. e. the Nations of the World were not governed by
particular Laws as the Jews, they were not so highly honored and blessed. God
was not pleased to manifest himself to them in a like degree. In this regard
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 139. 4. The Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and
Israel for his peculiar treasure. And in this respect God says to Israel, You
only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, Amos 3. 2. God knew that
People in a manner different from all others: he conversed with them in a more
intimate way than with the rest of the World, he revealed himself to them in a
particular and special manner: he governed and ruled that People by peculiar
Laws and Sanctions, and he wrought extraordinary Wonders to support and deliver
them: so that in comparison of the Jews God may be said not to have known the
Gentiles. The Apostle likewise declares the Preference and Prerogative of the
Jew above other People, in answer to that question, Romans 3. 1, 2.
What advantage has the Jew? or what profit is there of Circumcision? much
every way, says he, chiefly because unto them were committed the Oracles of
God. They had singular Discoveries and Revelations of God's Will above others,
which was a Sign and Assurance of the greatest Favor imaginable. They had Holy
Laws, to make them holier than others, and they carried the Sign and Mark of
the Holy Covenant even on their flesh. For this reason God may be said to have
been the God of their Nation.

But whilst he showed more especial kindness to them, he did not neglect the
rest; for besides that all of them lived under the Law of general Grace, many
of them were specially favored, and experienced the distinguishing Grace of
God. The Blessings of God's Church reached even to some of those that were not
within the Pale of it. A Divine Light was reflected from the Church to those
that were not thought Members of it. Some enlightening and refreshing Rays were
sent out to them, tho the Sun was not risen on their Horizon. The Sum of all
is, that when God made a Covenant with Abraham and his Posterity the
Israelites, he did not debar other People from Saving Grace and all Spiritual
Benefits. There were, besides Abraham's Family, and the Body of the Israelites
who came from Abraham, other Persons in the World who knew and worshipped God in
a true and right manner. Some that were at a great distance from the Holy Land,
and were Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, were Heirs of Eternal life. Some
of all Nations were virtually included in the Covenant, although not mantioned.
Tho they were not to enter into Canaan, (and Canaan could not hold them) which
was part of the Covenant to the Israelites, yet they were as good as taken in
as to other Clauses of it, and as to the Effence and Substance of it, viz. the
Spiritual Mercies couched in it. Thus they were comprehended in the Covenant of
Life and Salvation, for all (of what Nation soever) were Partakers of the
Benefits of it upon their believing and repenting. Not only Jews but Gentiles
were interested in it. In the full Meal and Provision which God made for his
own People the Israelites, some Portions, some Fragments fell besides the
Table, which others gathered up. This is God's Administration to the Gentiles:
and I make it a particular and distinct Dispensation, tho I see those who
reckon up the different Dispensations of Religion omit this. The Reason, I
suppose, is because this Gentile Dispensation is mixed with the rest of the
Dispensations. Because it was concurrent with the Patriachal and Mosaical
Oeconomies, and was not a thing by it self, they took no notice of it. But
notwithstanding this, it is a peculiar Dispensation, and a very remarkable one
too, as the Premises may convince us. And at last our Blessed Savior perfected
this Dispensation, for a little before he left the World he enjoined the
Apostles to go and teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. to Evangelize the Goyim, the
Nations, (for so the Jews called all People besides themselves) to propagate
Christianity throughout the whole World. And accordingly we read that when the
Apostles had continued some time at Jerusalem after Christ's Ascension (only
some of them now and then slepping abroad to confirm the neighboring Churches
that were lately planted) Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 18.
they issued out with one consent into several Countries, where by their
Travels they spread the Gospel as effectually, as David and Solomon did the
Hebrew Tongue, the one by his numerous Conquests, the other by his prosperous
Fleets and Commerces: so that even in St. Paul's time the Gospel was Preached
to every Creature under Heaven, Col. 1. 23. Thus at length the Gentile
Dispensation was swallowed up of the Evangelical one, which now I will
particularly speak of.

CHAP. XI.
The Christian or Evangelical Economy. It agrees with the former Dispensations
of Grace as to the Designation of the Messiah. As to the way of Salvation. As
to the Conditions and Qualifications of it. This corroborated by the suffrage
of the Ancient Fathers. It differs from the Mosaic Economy or Law as to the
Author in some respect. As to the Actual Discovery of it. As to the Clearness
of it. As to its Spirituality. As to its Extent. As to several Circumstances
that relate to the Conditions of Salvation; which are largely enumerated. As to
the Motives of Obedience. The Doctrine of the Socinians, viz. that there were
no Promises of Eternal Life under the Old Testament, confuted. As to the
Perfection of its Pattern. As to its Helps and Assistances. This Query, Whether
Christ added any new Laws to those which were before under the Old Testament,
resolved in several Particulars. It is proved against the Socinians, that
Prayer was commanded under the Law. How Love is called a New Commandment.

THe Christian or Evangelical Dispensation is next to be treated of. God having
at sundry times and in diverse manners spoken in times past, has now in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. l. 1, 2. He was pleased to reserve
the utmost Completion of all the Promis^s made to the Patriarchs and the Jews
till this time: Now by Christ's coming we have the perfect Accomplishment of
them all. Christianity comprehends all the other Dispensations, and is the
Upshot of them all. This is called the Revelation of the Mystery which was keep
secret since the World began but now is made manifest, Romans 16. 26, 27. and the
Mystery of Christ which in other ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men,
but is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.
4, 5. (...) is properly he that brings forth, and distributes that which was
before laid up. This is agreeable to the Economy which we are now to discourse
of; the great Things which were hidden and treasured up before, are now brought
forth, and discovered, and communicated to the World. This is that Dispensation
which brings Everlasting Righteousness with it, this is the Highest and Noblest
Exertment of the Covenant of Grace; and all the Mercy and Pardon which former
Generations found, were on the sole account of this Period. This Dispensation
of the Messiah is represented by John Baptist, and by Christ himself, to be the
most Glorious State that has yet appeared in the World, or that ever shall
appear; for Christianity, as most perfect, includes all the Laws before named,
and all the ways of Discovery that can be made.

1. I will show the particular Nature of this Dispensation, and how it differs
from the others. 2. I will show why this Evangelical Dispensation took not
place in the World before. 3. I must particularly and directly prove the Truth
and Certainty of this Economy, and of the Christian Religion. 4. I will
discover to you the several Degrees of this Dispensation. All which Particulars
are of great use for the right understanding of this last Administration of
Religion.

1. I will display the particular Nature and Quality of this Economy, this new
Economy of the Gospel. Here I will let you see, 1. That as to the main it
agrees with all the other Oeconomies of Grace, viz. from the Restoration of
Adam. 2. That tho as to the main it agrees with all the foregoing
Dispensations, yet as to sundry particulars it differs from them. First, all
the Dispensations agree in the main, i. e.

1. The Divine Designation or Appointment of the Messiah reached to them all.
This Lamb was slain from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. His
Sufferings and Death were decreed from all Ages; Christ was crucified from the
beginning, even from Eternity. For tho some interpret this place, as if it
alluded to the Murder of Abel, the first holy Person that was slain, and as if
it took in the rest of the Martyrs in after Ages, the Lamb here signifying the
whole Succession of Saints who were innocent and spotless in their Lives, and
invincible in their Deaths (and so Christ as well as others may be said to be
slain from the fo^ndation of the World, because there was at First, even at the
Beginning of the World, this Example of the Wicked's murdering the Just) yet
this must be looked upon as a forced Interpretation of the words: for in the
style of Scripture (excepting those places where the Sense must needs be
restrained and limited because of the subject matter) from the foundation of
the World is as much as from Eternity, as is plain from Mat. 25. 34. Inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World; and from Ioh.
17. 24. Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the World* for from the
foundation or before the foundation are here the same. Or, suppose this Phrase
[from the foundation of the World] does not denote Eternity, yet it is enough
for our purpose that Christ, the Lamb of God, was slain from the beginning of
the World, for from thence we may gather, that it was designed and appointed to
reach to all following Generations.

2. The way and method of Salvation was the same under all the Dispensations of
Grace: for Christ instructed his Church in all Ages: the Gospel was preached to
them a^ well as to us, Heb. 4. 2. All the Patriarchs and Prophets and Holy Men
of past ages, arrived at Heaven and Happiness by the Conduct of this great
Guide. Heb. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, (...) day, and for ever, are words appliable
to Christ, nor only as he is King and Priest, but also as he is Prophet and
Teacher of his Church. Which Sacred Office he has faithfully performed in all
Ages, and there has been no Time since the Church was founded, but he has
been the Instructor of it. The Covenant of Grace was made first of all with
Adam in Paradise, and God has from Age to Age renewed that Covenant to his
Church: and the Grace of God in Christ was common to the Ancient Patriarchs and
Jews with us. So that from the Fall of our first Parents to the end of the
World, the way of Exp^ation and of obtaining Salvation has been, is, and shall
be the same, viz. by Christ and by his Merits. The Virtue of his Death (although
he actually died long after) commenced with the first Promise made to Adam. The
Volkel. l. 3. c. 11. and Lib. 4. c. 3. Catech. Racov. cap. 11. de Proph.
Christi ^unere. Crellius de D^o l. 1. c. 28.
Socinians oppose this, and generally hold that the Godly who lived before the
time of the Messiah were not saved by Him: they assert that they knew nothing
of it, and that there were other means of being saved under the Old Testament
than there are under the New. But this is a Doctrine deservedly exploded by all
Persons who are of the Orthodox Faith, and who own the True Christian Religion.
They all agree that the same way of Salvation has always prevailed, that all
who were saved under the Old Testament, were saved by Virtue of Christ's Death
and Satisfaction. There was Justification under the Law, tho not by it, or by
virtue of it. Those that believed with their whole hearts on God, and
faithfully served him, were justified, and obtained Remission of their Sins,
and Eternal Life by that Grace which was couched in the Law, i. e. promised in
the Messiah, and figured and represented by the obscure Types of the Law. By
virtue of the Grace to be exhibited by Christ, even those who were before his
arrival, were saved. This is the Doctrine which St. Peter preached, Acts 15.
11. We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved even as They, i. e. the Fathers before Christ, as is clear from the
foregoing verse. The Holy Men then were acquainted with the Substance of this
Covenant, viz. the Promise of Restoration by Christ: and consequently the Old
Testament Saints were saved by him. Thus we are told by another inspired
Author, that by means of Christ's Death there was Redemption for the
Transgressors that were under the first Testament, Heb. 9. 15. For tho the
Redemption of Mankind was not actually wrought by him till he died on the
Cross, yet the Virtue and Benefit of it were in all Ages, as the Sun spreads
its light, and illuminates our Region before its glorious Body appears above
the Horizon.

3. As to the Conditions and Qualifications on our part, all the Dispensations
of Grace were the same. All substantial Duties toward God and Man are the same
now that they were then. Even Faith in the Messiah is as ancient as that
Promise on which it was first founded, that the Blessed Seed should break the
Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. They who lived before Christ's Incarnation con^ided
in this Promised Deliverer, by whose Merit they hoped to be reconciled to God.
Faith in Christ was a Duty under the Old Testament, because there were Promises
concerning the Messiah then, as is evident from Luke 1. 72. and what were these
Promisessor, but to be credited and relied upon? Therefore it is recorded that
Abraham Believed, Romans 4. 3. Gal. 3. 6. And our Savior witnesses, that
Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it, and was glad, Joh. 8. 56. The
Reason was, because (as the Apostle says) God preached the Gospel to Abraham,
Gal. 3. 8. and discovered the Messiah to him. The just lived by Faith in
Habakkuk's time, Hab. 2. 4. which by the Apostle is applied to the Evangelical
Faith, in Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Therefore when De Justificat.
Socinus tells us that Faith in Christ was not comprehended in the Mosaic
Covenant, and when one of his Scholars confidently avers, that Veteres in Jesum
venturum credidisse, and e^ ^ide justificatos, inter crassos errores jure
recenseri debet. Sma^^. Disp. 4. cont. Frantz.
it is a gross Error to think that the Fathers under the Old Testament believed
in Christ to come, and were justified by that Faith, we know whence to confute
these bold Men. That the Evangelical Righteousness and Justification were in
the Old Testament is clear, because the Apostle brings Examples of this free
Justification out of the Old Testament, Romans 4. 3, 6, etc. That Salvation by
Faith in Christ was no New thing is evident from other places, as Acts 10. 43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes
in him, shall receive remission of sins. And Romans 3. 21, 22. The righteousness
of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets, even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto
all, and upon all them that believe. And St. Peter (1 Epis^. Chap. 2. ver. 6.)
proves that Christ is the foundation whereupon all the Saints are built, from
Isa. 28. 16. Behold I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious; and he
that believes on him, shall not be confounded. From all which it may be
undeniably infe^'d, that under the Law they believed in Christ for
Justi^^cation, and that the Fathers before Christ were saved by Faith in him,
and (in a word) that all from the beginning of the World have been Justified
and Saved the same way, viz. for Christ's Merits, and upon the Gospel-terms of
Sincere Faith and Obedience, and of persevering in the same unto the end. Thus
in respect of the Designation, the Way, and the Efficacy of Salvation, the
Evangelical Dispensation differs not from the preceding ones.

This the Ancient Fathers speak of particularly: they defend the Antiquity of
Christianity, and prove it to be as old as Moses, yea as Adam. Apologia ad
Anton. Pium.
Justin Mar^yr reckons Abraham and Elias (but he goes too far when he reckons
Heraclitus and Socrates) among Christians, in answer to that Objection, that
those were Christians only that lived within a hundred and fifty Years. This
Pious Father in Paraenesis ad Gentiles.
another place argues from the Antiquity of the Christian Religion, and the
Authors of it. That Religion which has the best Authors, and is oldest, is the
truest, says he. They were Fabulous Poets and Dissenting Philosophers that
were the Authors of Gentilism, but both of them are ridiculous; whereas the
Doctors and Authors of Christianity are Prophets divinely inspired, and those
even in the first Ages of the World. That the Christian Religion is the First
and most Ancient is designedly showed by Eusebius in his Evangelical
Preparation* and again in his Ecclesiastical History he maintains that (...)
lib. 1. cap. 4. toto.
the way of Religion and Piety preached by Christ was no Ne^ and Strange thing.
More particularly it is maintained by Adv. ha^res. l. 4. c. 13.
(...) that Abraham's Faith and Ours is the same: and this is asserted by
Eusebius. I. 1. Eccles. Hist. c. 1. Epiphanius, Augustine.
other Fathers. Christianity was on foot always in the Wo^ld. It was not only
under the Dispensation of the Law, but it was the Religion of the Old
Patriarchs, and of those before the Flood, and of our First Parents: for the
Christian Religion is the Revelation of God's Will concerning the Redeeming and
Saving of Man by Christ Jesus. Now, this Religion was in being presently after
the Fall of Adam. Then, and ever afterward, there was no way of Salvation but
this, viz. by Jesus the Messiah. Indeed we may in some Sense say, it was all
along a Gospel Dispensation. This is that which was from the Beginning, 1 John
1. 1. The Truths of Christianity which the Apostles preached were the first
Truths. The Doctrine and Duties taught in the New Testament are the same in
substance, which were delivered to the Servants of God in the most Ancient Ages.

Secondly, tho the Christian Dispensation agrees with the foregoing
Dispensations of Grace as to the main, yet it differs from them all, and more
especially from the Mosaic and Legal O^conomy as to sundry things. As Loving
our Brethren is said by ^ Joh. 2. 7, 8.
St. John to be an Old Commandment, and yet a N^w One; so the Gospel
Dispensation is both Old and New in different respects. I have showed in what
respect it is the former: now I will make it appear also that it is the latter,
i. e. that it differs on several accounts from the former ones.

1. It differs as to the Auth^r. Not as if there were another Author; but this
I mean, that the Author was not the same in (...) respect, i. e. he was not
Incar^ate before. The Son of God was not then the Son of Man, he had not
assumed (...). This (...) therefore is New and Peculiar on the account of
Christ's Incarnation: He now appeared in Human shape. It is worth our notice
that this Appearing of Christ is signally and eminently called (...) the
Dispensation by the Ancient Christians. Sometimes it is Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. in
Proaem. Theodoret. Dialog. 2. c. 9. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Ma^th. and in Psalm.
113. and in Hom. 39. in 1 Cor. Epiphan. Haeres. 69.
barely styled so, and at other times with some Additions, as the (...). Clem.
Alex. strom. l. 5.
Dispensation according to the flesh, (...). Athanas. Orat. 3.
the Dispensation of the Word according to Man, (...). Ibid.
the human Dispensation, (...). Basil. Homil. in Psalm. 44.
the Dispensation of the Manhood* Chrysostom. hom. 106. Phot. Cod. 46.
the Dispensation of the Mediator, Chrysostom. hom. 106. Phot. Cod. 46.
the Glorious Saving Dispensation. B^iefly, not only Christ's Incar^ation, but
the whole Mystery of our Redemption by him, and whatever he was pleased to
submit and condescend to in his human Nature ^or the good of Mankind, is called
(...) by the Greek Fathers, and is said to be understood and taken (...). And
some of the Latin Fathers likewise may be observed to use the word Oeconomia in
this Emphatical way, as Hilary in his 9th Book of the Trinity: and it is said by
St. Ierom that the Here^ic^ Apollinaris Dimidiatam Christi introduxit
Oeconomiam. Hieron. Epist. ad Pammach. 65.
introduced the half Economy of Christ, i. e. he did in a manner deny the
Assumption of the human Nature in Christ. And you may further remark that this
word is very singularly applied to the Administration of the Gospel by St. Paul
in several places (which was the occasion, it is probable, of the Fathers using
it in that way) he calls this the Dispensation of the fullness of Time, Ephesians. 1.
10. The Mystery of Salvation was decreed by God from Eternity, but he chose out
a fit and convenient opportunity to dispense and exert his Eternal Counsels,
and this is here in an eminent manner called the Dispensation in the full and
complete time. The Apostle also calls it the Dispensation of the Grace of God,
Ephesians. 3. 2. and the Dispensation of God, Col. 1. 25. and barely a Dispensation,
1 Cor. 9. 17. It is no wonder then that Christ's Coming in the flesh is more
emphatically called the Dispensation, and (...). Suidas.
the Incarnate Dispensation; which makes it a peculiar One, and different from
all the rest.

2. It differs from all other Dispensations, because now is the Actual
Performing and Fulfilling of that which was only foretold and promised under
the other Oeconomi^s. The Law was a shadow of things to come, Col. 2. 17. The
Hebrews have no Present Tense, the Jewish Dispensation looked forward to what
was to be accomplished aft^^wards. But the Christian Dispensation looks
backward, and has an eye to what is al^eady done and finished. The Saints
before the time of the Gospel were saved by Christ that was to come, but the
Saints since are saved by Christ that is already come. There is this different
Aspect in these Dispensations.

3. The Evangelical Administration is distinguished from the others as to this,
that they were dark and ^bscure, but this is plain and clear; they abounded
with mere Shadows and Representations, but this presents us with a distin^t
knowledge of the things themselves which were shadowed forth. The Salvation by
Christ, and his whole Undertaking, Birth, Life, and Death, were obscurely and
mystically delivered under the Law. It is granted that that Proposition of St.
Peter, Acts 4. 12.
There is no other Name under heaven given among men wh^reby w^ must be saved,
was no less true before the Birth and Coming of Christ in the flesh, than it is
now since his Coming, but it was not so manifestly revealed as it is since. God
led Israel by a Cloud: they were entertained with Shadows, mystical and dark
Representations; that is, they were undiscernable by the vulgar sort of
Persons, who had not time or opportunity to search into them, and whose minds
are taken up with gross and inferior matters. And as for those Holy and Good
Men amongst them who saw through these Shadows, and grasped at the very
Substance, they could not at that distance understand the things concerning the
Messiah, which we now have a perfect notice of. The Mosaic Rites were but an
imperfect delineating of that which the Gospel gives us a lively Pourtray of.
Which is the meaning of that (...) of the Evangelist, The Law wa^ by Moses, but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. The gracious Dispensation of
the Messiah under the Gospel, is a True, Real, and Substantial thing, opposed
to the Mosaic Shadows and Resemblances. Thus you will find Truth opposed to
Typ^s and Figures, in Dan. 7. 16, 19. Heb. 8. 2. and 9. 24. Truth then came by
Jesus Christ, not as Truth stands in opposition to Falsehood and Lies, but to
Types and Shadows. Christ in this sense is called the tr^e Light, and true
Bread, Joh. 1. 9. Joh. 6. 32. The Ceremonial Law was but a Figure of the
Evangelical Truth. And this is deservedly called Tr^th, because all the
Ceremonial Types are Verified and Fulfilled in Christ. All those Iudaick
Hieroglyphics are now unridled, and plainly discovered to the World, and he
that runs may read them. The Types and Symbols are gone, and now the Things
themselves are present, and are clearly understood by us. This makes the
difference between the Mosaic Dispensation and the Evangelical One. The
Doctrine of Salvation and the means of Life by Christ, are more intelligible
and plain than they were before. Their Conceptions of those things were
intricate and obscure, but we have arrived to clear and distinct Notions
concerning them. In short, the way of Salvation was before more dark and
general, they saw Christ through ^ertain Perspectives afar off, but now the
fullness of time is come, and has given us a near and more perfect view of
those things which they saw but in a glass darkly.

4. The Religion of the Gospel is more Inward and Lively than that of the Law
and the Jewish Administration. There is now introduced a Rational and Manly
Service: our Religion is chiefly the employment of our Minds and
Understandings, and not so much of our Bodies and lower Faculties. We now
worship God in Spirit as well as in Truth (of which I spoke before): we worship
in a spiritual manner, opposed to outward and bodily Service, as Sacrifices,
Purifications, etc. The Evangelical Righteousness is a Spiritual
Administration, a Vital Principle, able to beget a Divine Life; whereas the Law
comparatively was an external dead Letter, and did not sufficiently actuate the
Minds and Spirits of Men. It is true, the History of the Gospel, or the Doctrine
of the Evangelists, as it is merely propounded and written, is as much external
as the Law; but the ministration of the Spirit (as the Apostle calls it) going
along with the Gospel in a more especial and peculiar manner, is a powerful
Principle in the Souls of Men, whereby they are inwardly renewed and
transformed. And so the Gospel (compared with the Law) is of greater Power,
Might and Efficacy, and is able to produce a heavenly and spiritual frame of
Soul, and a sincere performance of the Divine Laws. This is the Law promised to
be written in the Hearts of Men, and to be put into their inward parts, Jer.
31. 33.

5. This Dispensation of the Gospel is larger and ampler than that of the Law,
and of other Dispensations before it: For the Church was shut up in narrow
bounds, and confined to a few Families of the Patriarchs: Afterward it was
limited to the Land of Canaan, and to the H^brew People, (excepting a few that
were without, who knew God's Will, and were graciously accepted.) But after
Christ came, the Church was not tied to one Place or certain Nation, but has
been ever since the Congregation of all such as truly know and worship Christ
in any part of the World. The Christian Dispensation is not local and
temporary, not confined to place or time, not circumscribed by a particular
Country. Now not one Nat^on only, or a few of others, are honored with Laws
given from God himself; but Gentiles and Jews, Greeks and Barbarians, all
Kindreds and Tongues, all Countries and Regions of the Universe have heard the
sound of the Gospel, and have had the Divine Laws, which were given by Christ
himself, offered to them. Our Savior bid his Disciples Mat. 28. 19.
go into all the World, and teach all Nations: And accordingly (as was observed
before) they traveled into all the World which was at that time known, and
proclaimed the Messiah to them. Thus Christ came and preached Peace to them
that were afar off, and to them that were nigh, Ephesians. 2. 17. All Places and
Countries had the privilege of the Gospel, and might receive advantage by it.
This is one remarkable Difference between the Legal and the Evangelical
Dispensation: the former was Narrow and Contracted; the latter was Full, Ample,
Comprehensive and Catholic.

6. Although (as has been said) the Conditions of Salvation are the same now as
to the main with those before, yet they vary as to several Circumstances. To
begin with Faith, the first and chief Condition of Salvation, the grand
Fundamental Grace of Christianity: This is reckoned by the Reverend Bishop
Tailor among the Instances of Duties which are new under the Gospel: But the
true account is this, that Faith was not a Precept of the Natural or Moral Law,
but was a new Precept added to it by Revelation, when the First Promise and New
Covenant were made. But ever since that it has not been New; for (as I have
proved) the Ancient Patriarchs were saved by Faith in Christ. He was the Object
of Faith then as well as now: the Tempora variata sunt, non fides. Augustine.
Faith of the first Believers was the same with the Faith of Christians. Yet
notwithstanding this, this Grace of Faith has a different aspect from what it
had. The Fathers believed in the Messiah that was to come, and we believe in
the same Jesus who is come, and has taken on him our Nature, and laid down his
Life, and shed his precious Blood for the redemption of lost Man; and rose
again and ascended into Heaven. Thus the believing of Christ's Birth, Passion,
Resurrection and Ascension, is in this respect n^w, that Faith looks upon them
as accomplished. But otherwise, in respect of the things themselves, it is the
old Faith, i. e. the same which those that lived before the time of the Messiah
exerted. Christ that was to be crucified, was the Object of their Belief; and
Christ already crucified, is the Object of ours. This is confirmed from Isa.
53. Acts 15. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Heb. 9. 11. and abundance of other Texts. St.
Augustine having affirmed, that the Saints of old were saved in the same way
that we are, viz. by Faith in Jesus, adds Ipsi per fidem futurae passionis
ejus, sicut nos per fidem praeteritae, salvi fuerunt. Confess. l. 10. c. 43.
this distinction, They (says he) were saved by Faith in Christ's future
Sufferings, and we by Faith in those Sufferings as they are already past. This
is that which our Church says, H^mily of Faith, the second Part.
speaking of the People of God that lived before Christ's Incarnation: Alth^
they were not named Christian men, yet was it a Christian Faith which they had,
for they looked for all the Benefits of God the Father, through the Merits of
his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do. This difference is between them and us,
that they looked when Christ should come, and we are in the time when he is
come. Besides, a more general Belief was sufficient for men's Salvation before
the Messias's coming than is now. It was not necessary to Salvation to believe
so expressly and explicitly concerning Christ and his Undertakings, as we are
obliged to believe since. So that tho there is not now a New Faith, neither are
there New Articles of Faith, yet there are New Exertments of Faith, and more
clear and express Acts of Belief.

And to Faith I may adjoin Hope, for Hope is founded on Faith; and therefore
Faith being more clear and express under the Gospel (as I have said) it follows
that Hope is so too* it is more stable and firm, more sure and certain than the
Hope of those before Christ's coming: and on this account the Gospel is
deservedly called the bringing in of a better Hope, Heb. 7. 19. Christians
having seen the accomplishment of all those things which ^ormer Ages had no
experiment of, their Hope must needs be bettered, i. e. exalted and increased.

And as for Charity, and all the rest of the Virtues, Graces and Duties
required of us (for I will speak of them altogether) they differ from what they
were under the Mosaic Dispensation as to these following things.

(1.) There are greater measures of every Grace now under Christianity, than
there were under the other Dispensations. Christians reach now to higher
Degrees and Perfections of Virtue than those under the Law did: And this indeed
was the design of the Gospel; this Dispensation came in the last place, to add
a greater Perfection than ever any other preceding Models of Religion pretended
to.

(2.) A greater stri^tness and ^nactness in all Duties is required now, than
was under the legal Dispensation. This you must know, that tho the Rigor of
the Law be abated under the Gospel, yet the Evangelical Obedience is stricter
than that of the Law; Except your Righteo^sness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, yo cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, says our
Savior, Mat. 5. 20. A more circumspect and accurate way of living is expected
from Christ's Disciples, than from those of Moses: A more severe sanctity and
conformity to God's Will are required of them, than of these.

But yet I must add in the third place, That whereas the Law (which did in a
manner revive the Covenant of Works) required perfect Works and sinless
Obedience, the Gospel requires no such thing, but accepts of imperfect, but
sincere Obedience, which is made acceptable by Christ's Satisfaction. Under the
Gospel Men are not so much obnoxious for offending, as for continuing
obstinately in their Offenses: And Mercy is now denied, not for Sin committed,
but for persisting in Sin without Repentance. This is a grand Difference
between the Law and the Gospel* that was harsh and rigorous, this is gentle and
favorable.

Again, Duties are further extended and enlarged now than they were before:
Which must needs be, because the State of Christianity is wider and larger than
that of Judaism* There is more Love now, because the former aversness and
enmities are removed. Ephesians. 2. 15.
Christ (as the Apostle says) sath abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, i. e. the Mosaic Law consisting
in Precepts about peculiar Rites and distinct Observances, whereby the Gentiles
were differenced from the Jews, which made a breach between them. But a
Universal Charity breaths in the Gospel, and the Exertments of it are of
greater latitude than those heretofore. Elijah called for Fire from Heaven upon
his Enemies, and was not blamed, but heard by God, 2 Kings 1. 10, 12. but James
and John, Apostles of Christ, did the same thing, and were severely checked for
it, Luke 9. 54. And we read that St. Peter was commanded to put up his Sword
when he drew it in his Master's Quarrel, which certainly was the best in the
World. The reason of this is not only because the Evangelical Temper is more
mild and loving than that legal one, but because its Laws are more extensive,
and more favorable. Nay, whereas the Old Law commanded Love to their Brethren,
the Gospel bids us show that Love by dying for them, if there be occasion, John
15. 12. 1 John 3. 16. And in other Circumstances I might show that the
Evangelical Obedience is larger and more comprehensive than that of the Law.

In the fifth place, this must be said likewise, that some particular Graces
and Duties flow more g^nuinely from the Spirit of the Gospel, than from the
Legal Principles, and are more frequently inculcated, and more closely urged on
our Consciences and Lives in the New Testament, than they are in the Old. These
special Graces and Exercises of Evangelical Righteousness, are purity of Heart,
and inward sincerity, minding the manner of our Duties, and serving of God from
an inward love of Holiness; a shunning of secret Sins* a constant sense of our
Weakness and Unworthiness, of our Inability of our selves to think or do any
thing that is good and acceptable to God; a being weary and heavy laden under
the sense of Sin, a feeling of the odious Nature of it, and loathing our selves
for it; Self-denial and Mortification, an absolute resigning our selves, Souls
and Bodies, unto God* a subduing all our Carnal Desires, Lusts and Appetites* a
refraining from the least Sins; making conscience of all Offenses, evil
Thoughts, idle Words; abstaining from all appearance of Evil; renouncing every
Sin, tho against our Profit and Interest; a universal hatred of all Vice,
without any reserves* a continual watchfulness against all Temptations, and
striving by all means to conquer Sin in us; moderation in the use and enjoyment
of the good things of this Life; a using this World as not abusing it; a
possessing our Souls in patience in the midst of all Afflictions and
Tribulations; an entertaining all Occurrences with thankfulness and
contentedness, and a preparing for the worst; a quelling of all inordinate
Passion, and suffering not the Sun to go down on our Wrath* ^a^^ ^bstaining
from all reviling and bitterness of Speech, ye^ a praying for our Persecutors*
Bowels of Mercy, tender-heartedness, pity and compassion; weeping with those
that weep, and bearing one another burdens; mildness and meekness toward all
Men, laying aside revenge, and forgiving those who have done us wrong* yea,
loving and doing good to our very Enemies; Truth and Faithfulness toward those
we converse with, simplicity, openheartedness, sincerity in words and actions*
a profound humility and lowliness of mind, a preferring others before our
selves; a minding not of high things, but condescending to those of low estate;
the spirit of Supplication and Prayer, taking delight in communion with God,
daily presenting our selves before the Throne of Grace, to ask pardon of our
Sins for Christ's sake; peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost;
contempt of the World, heavenly-mindedness, a Spirit raised above the Earth,
breathing and longing for Heaven, and a better State* a living on the Life to
come, a depending on the unseen Glory hereafter* a pre^erring Heaven and
everlasting Joys before all things here below; a making God the ultimate End,
and referring all to his Glory; not fearing Death, but cheerfully expecting it;
lastly, growing in Grace, daily increasing in Godliness and Righteousness,
aspiring to the highest degree of Holiness, and striving for the utmost
perfection we are capable of. This is no new Draught of Religion, but such as
the most Holy Men before Christ's coming were acquainted with; but these
Precepts and Duties are chiefly the result of the Ev^ngelical Spirit, and they
are mos^ improved by Christianity, and they are of^ner inculcated and pressed
upon us in the Evangelical Writings than in those of the Old Testament.

7. The Grounds and Motives of Evangelical Obedience differ from those of the
Legal one, as will appear from these three Particulars.

First, There are more deterring Punishments under the Gospel, than under the
Law. It is true, the Penalty of Sin unrepented of under the legal Economy, was
the Eternal Wrath of God, called by Dan. 12. 2.
Daniel, everlasting sha^^ and contempt; and by Isa. 33. 14.
Isaiah, everlasting burnings: but there was not so full a discovery, and so
great a certainty of these at that time as there has been since; which should
be a mighty disswasive to us from sinning against the Light of the Gospel,
especially when we consider that our Guilt is unspeakably aggravated, by
sinning in defiance of the extraordinary means vouchsafed to us by the coming
of Christ. If the Word spoken by Angels (i. e. if the Law, which was given by
the ministry of Angels) was steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience
received a just recompense of Reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation, which was at first spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed
afterward to us by them that heard him? Heb. 2. 2, 3. And to the same purpose,
in Heb. 10. 28, 29. He that despised Moses 's Law died without Mercy. Of how
much s^rer Punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under-foot
the Son of God? The Penalty of disobedience to the Gospel is more grievous than
that which was inflicted upon Offenders against the Law.

Secondly, There are more prevailing Rewards. The Law dealt in Temporal
Blessings and Earthly Promises chiefly, the very mold and make of their
Religion being earthly and grovelling; but their terrene and temporal Promises
figured a Celestial Felicity, and were Umbrages of a Future Inheritance.
Spiritual and Heavenly things were exhibited to the Church of old under Sensual
and Earthly Representations, and Eternal Life was included in the Promise of
the Land of Canaan. Yea, it cannot be denied that Immortal Life and Endless
Happiness were expressly made known, and promised by God to the Faithful among
the Jews. This is very fiercely contradicted by Cont. Palaeolog. par. 4. Resp.
ad defens. Puccii.
S^cinus, and the generality of his Party. The De Proph. Christi mun. cap. 5.
Rac^vian Catechism is positive, that none of the Pious Men and Holy Patriarchs
before the coming of Christ, knew any thing of Heaven and Everlasting Life.
These were not known, say they, because they were not promised to those under
the Old Covenant. The same thing is asserted in Disput. 7.
one of Smalcius's Disputations against Frantzius. Indeed De Ver. Relig. lib.
3. c. 11.
Volk^lius grants, that the Jews might have some desire and expectation of
Eternal Life, tho there was no promise of it: but he confutes himself in saying
before, that such a Discovery was not proper and convenient for that
Dispensation. He maintains that it is peculiar to the New Covenant under which
Christians are; and that this is one main thing wherein it excels the Old
Covenant: To say otherwise, says he, were to mix and confound the Covenants
and Dispensations. And therefore he peremptorily determines that there were no
Promises of Eternal Life under the Old Testament: they knew nothing of an
Immortal State, they were tied down to the Earth, Canaan was their Heaven. He
spends a whole Chapter (and that one of his longest) upon this very thing. The
Remonstrants are partly of this Opinion, as you may see in their Cap. 15.
Apology, and in Annotat. ad Cassand. Art. 2.
Gr^tius and Institut. l. 1. c. 10.
Episcopius, who hold, that Eternal Life was not promised by God to Adam and
the Old Patriarchs, neither did they know any thing of it. Tho S^crates and
Plat^, who were Heathens, make some mention of a ^uture and endless State, yet
the People of God, the Chosen Generation, to whom were committed the Oracles of
God, had no apprehension of any such thing. Abraham, Moses, David, and all the
Inspired Soul^ whom the Writings of the Old Testament speak of, had scarce any
notice of it. All the Ancient Worshippers of God, all the Religious Patriarchs
were ignorant of Future Happiness; poor grovelling Creatures, they looked no
higher, no further than this present Life.

This is the Doctrine of S^cinus's Followers and Friends; but certainly he that
has carefully perused the Old and New Testament, cannot but pronounce it
false: For God tells the Jews, that if they will do his Commandments, they
shall live in them, Levit. 18. 5. Which Promise you will find to comprehend in
it Eternal Life, if you compare that place with Romans 10. 5. and Gal. 3. 12. And
that Life Everlasting was known to those of the Old Testament, is manifest from
Dan. 12. 2. where it is said, Many of them that sleep in the Dust, shall aw^^^
to Everlasting Life. This one place is a sufficient con^utation of the Secinian
Writers, who deny that there was any such thing revealed and known under the
Law. I might take notice how Job expresses his sense and belief of this Future
State, Chap. 19. 25. which without doubt he learnt from the neighboring Jews.
But I will pass to the New Testament, where it is farther evident, that this
endless Blessedness was not unknown to the Jews. It was one of that Nation that
came to our Savior, and asked him, What ^e should d^ that he might have
Eternal Life, Matthew. 19. 16. Which shows that Eternal Life was made known to
that People, and that the M^s^ick Law promised no less to the Keepers of it.
Again, this is clear from our Savior's words in John 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life. He speaks here to the
Jews, Ye think and believe (and that most truly) says he, that there is an
Eternal State hereafter, it being revealed in the Sacred Writings which are
committed to you. We read, that the Pharisees, a considerable part of the
Jewish People, believed a Resurrection to a Future Life, Acts 24. 15. Nay, this
was the ground of the hope of the Promise made of God unto the Fathers, Chap.
26. 6. viz. the Promise of Eternal Life founded on the Resurrection from the
Dead. And that the Fathers of old rested not in Temporal and Earthly Promises,
is evident from that very plain Text, Heb. 11. 14, 16. The Patriarchs, those
Holy Pilgrims, sought and desired a better Country, that is, an Heavenly, viz.
a State of Immortal Glory and Happiness in the highest ^eavens. From all these
places of Holy Writ we may (...) (in the words of our Article the 7th.
Church) That the Old Testament is not centrary to the New; for in both of them
Everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ. Wherefore they are not to be
heard, who ^eign that the Old Fathers did look only for transitory Promises.
This Fiction, as the Learned Dr. Hammond rightly faith, is caused, by Annot. on
Mat. 23. 23.
not distinguishing between le^s clear Revelation, and none at all. It is true,
there were not such plain and evident Discoveries to those Ancients of a future
endless Existence, and consequently a Reward in another World, as there have
been since the coming of the Messiah. It is granted, that the Law dealt in
temporal and secular things most of all; but it does not follow thence that the
Jews had no higher Promises than those that were earthly, and respected this
Life only. Yea, this also must be further granted, that tho Moses and Daniel,
and the Prophets, and the most devout Persons among them were sensible of this;
yet it is likely many of the Jews looked no further than the present Enjoyments
of this Animal Life; and indeed most of the Blessings we read of seem to hold
forth nothing else.

But under the New Testament, Eternal Life is openly and clearly offered, and
all Persons may be made apprehensive of it. Hence it is that Christ is said to
be the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is established on better Promises,
Heb. 8. 6. The Promises under the Gospel are better than those under the Law,
because they are clearer and plainer concerning an Immortal State hereafter.
Here is one great difference between the Evangelical and the Legal
Dispensation: the latter propounds future Punishments without end to terrify
Of^enders, and endless Rewards to ^^courage the Faithful; but the former adds
an Assur^^^^ of both these. It makes it manifest, evident and undeniable, that
there are such things; it demonstrates to us, that there are never-ceasing
Torments for the Wicked, and eternal Joys for the Righteous; of which latter
Christ has assured us by his ascending into Heaven, there to prepare perpetual
Mansions of Glory for all his Followers. He came from above, and went thither
again, that we might have Life, and that we might have it more abundantly, John
1^0. 10. that we might be every way ascertained of an Immortal State of Glory,
and thereby be effectually moved and excited to Obedience.

Thirdly, There is this Motive peculiar to the Dispens^tion of the Gospel, viz*
the Love of God the Father who sent his Son, and the Love of Christ who died
for us. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, says that
blessed Disciple whom Jesus loved, John 3. 16. And again, 1 John 4. 9, 10. In
this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him. Herein is Love,
not that we (first) loved him, but that he loved us (first.) Now observe how he
makes this a Motive to the Duty of Evangelical Love; If God so loved us, we
ought to love one another, ver. 11. No former Dispensation affords this Motive.
Christ therefore might well say, A New Commandment I give unto you, that ye
love one another as I have loved you, John 13. 34. This is a new thing, and is
proper to Christianity only. Here the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts,
Romans 5. 5. Here the Love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And then no
Duty in Religion comes amiss to us, then we act with vigor and cheerfulness,
and exert our utmost Powers, and that with ease and complacency. This Principle
of Love is contrary to the Spirit of Bondage, which is most proper to the
Occonomy of the Law, to the breach of every part of which God has annexed
severe Curses to terrify Offenders, and these generally were the most powerful
Motives they had to make them obedient. The promulgation of the Law was with
great Terrors and Astonishment: Mount Sinai was another AEtna, it cast out
Flames and Smoke, and nothing was seen and heard but what was very frightful:
This well represented the terrible administration of the Law, which breaths
Severity and Rigor, and is rightly called Esh dath, a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
They were scared into their Duty for the most part. But this servile Spirit,
this Principle of legal Fear is banished out of Christianity: those that are
effectually brought under this Dispensation, act by a Principle of Love; for
the Spirit of the Gospel is free and ingenuous, sweet and gentle, and needs not
to be pushed on by rigor and austerity. God has not given us the Spirit of
Fear, but of Love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Theref^re we may rightly conclude with St.
Augustine, Quantum differunt Lex and Evangelium? Quantum timor and amor.
that Fear and Love are the grand difference between the Law and the Gospel.

8. As Christianity has (...) Motives, as our Duty is fastened on us by new
Obligations* and those the greatest and noblest, so we have the perfectes^
P^^tern, the Example of Christ Jesus our Blessed Lord. En^ch, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Job, David, and many others, were worthy and eminent Examples of Virtue
and Goodness in the former Dispensations: But alas, these were Men of like
Failings and Infirmities with our selves, and their Lives were not an exact
Rule for us to walk by. But the Blessed Jesus, the Founder of our Religion, was
without spot and blemish in his Life, he neither spoke nor did any thing amiss,
he was every ways blameless and harmless, pure and under^^led. He gave us a
perfect Example of Piety and Devotion, of Justice and Righteousness, of
Moderation and Sobriety, of Mercy and Charity, of Humility and Self-denial, of
Contentedness and Resignation, of religious Zeal and Courage, of all Virtues
and Graces whatsoever which are to adorn the Life of a Christian. Our Savior
was sent on purpose to be a Guide, a Pattern, a Rule to the degenerate World,
that by the excellency and transcendency of his Example, he might reduce
Mankind to the ways of Religion and Righteousness, that in him they might
behold and admire the beauty of Goodness, and the worth of Piety and Holiness;
and that by this means Christianity might be commended to the World, and that
Men might esteem and love it when it shines forth so gloriously in this
admirable and unparalled Example. In this we have an advantage above those
who lived before our Savior's time. Therefore this may be reckoned as one
Difference between the Jewish and the Christian Church.

9. We under the Gospel have greater Helps and Assistances toward the
performing of our Duty, than those who lived under other Dispensations had. We
have greater Light to direct us, we have more effectual Means to make use of;
we have all the revealed Knowledge which they had, and we have much more
besides. We have the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament to enlighten, to
inform, to instruct us, to check and reprove us, to comfort and support us. We
are blessed with the Sacred Ordinances of Christ's own Institution, the sole
design of which was to convey Knowledge and Grace, Strength and Establishment to
our Souls. God has set in the Church some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ; till we all
come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 11, etc. To this Perfection and Fullness contribute the Holy Sacraments of
Christ's appointment. It is true, the Apostle shows that the Israelites had
the same Religion, the same Cov^nant, and that they might be said to have the
same Sacra^^nts with us, 1 Cor. 10. 1, etc. (and indeed the Covenant being the
same, the Sacraments must be so, which are Seals of the Covenant.) But the
Evangelical Sacraments were only typified by those; they were never in actual
use till Christ's coming. Baptism and the Eucharist, the two Sacraments of the
Gospel, may be rightly said to have been virtually in Circumcision and the
Passover, and so are not new: but they are new in another respect, viz. as by
the former we are initiated and adopted into the Christian O^conomy, and by the
latter we are confirmed in it. By the pious celebrating of both which the
Spiritual Benefits of the Gospel are exhibited and conferred, sealed and
assured to the Souls of the Faithful, and they are found to be no contemptible
Helps to Religion and Holiness. But the assistance of the Holy Spirit in these
and all other Duties of Christianity, is the most signal Privilege of the
Gospel. For when Ephesians. 4. 8.
Christ ascended up on high he gave Gifts unto Men, especially that matchless
Gift the Holy Spirit, whereby not only the Apostles and Primitive Christians
were enabled to speak and act in a miraculous manner; but in all succeeding
Ages, the true Followers of Jesus feel the wonderful influence and operation of
it on their Hearts and Lives, whereby they are strengthened to perform what is
required of them in a way far surpassing what was in the former Dispensations.
This is that which makes Evangelical Grace differ from Moral Virtue and
Iudaical Righteousness, viz. that the former is heightened (not only by the
Motives of the Gospel, of which I spoke before, but) by the Assistance of the
Spirit. By this we not only cry, Abba Father, but are enabled to demean our
selves as those who are the Sons of God. Thus our Power is mightily increased,
which is another great Difference between the Law and the Gospel, between
Judaism and Christianity.

This is a brief Account of the Difference between those two Dispensations, the
Legal and Evan^elical. Tho it was once said by Luther, Colloqu. Mensal.
There never was that Man found on Earth, who could make a right Difference
between the Law and the Gospel; yet afterward he gives us to understand, that
he thought this was no impossible thing, for he tells us, That whosoever can
rightly judge between the Law and the Gospel, let him thank God, and know that
he is a right Divine. There is great difficulty in performing this Task, and
therefore I have gone through it with much caution; and the whole I leave to
the judgment of the Learned and Judicious. The Manichean Heretics held
Augustine. de Civ. Dei, 1. 6. c. 10.
there was one God that was the Founder of the Law, and another God that was
Author of the Gospel: But this gross and blasphemous Error is baffled by those
several Particulars which I have offered to you concerning the Law and the
Gospel. The same God, blessed for evermore, wisely appointed both these
Oeconomies; and tho they are different, yet they are not contradictory. God
made those two great Lights, the one to rule the Night, the other the Day: the
former was fitted to those darker times, and the latter is most suitable to the
Fullness of time, when a redundant Light overspread the World. The Jewish
Economy was narrow, weak and imperfect, and best comported with the People
that were under it: but the Gospel Dispensation is large and ample, complete
and perfect, and therein more adapted to the condition of the Persons who are
under this Dispensation, of Christ's Fullness receive, and Grace for Grace, John
1. 16.

From what has been said, we may know what to think and determine of that
great Query, Whether our Savior has added any new Laws and Precepts to those
which were before under the Old Testament; or w^ether his Laws and those are
the same? I find this Question is too peremptorily decided on both sides. One
positively asserts, that all the Evangelical Commands are the very same with
the Laws of the former Administration: The others say, there are New Commands
added in the Gospel to those of the Law. But, I conceive, the Question is not
to be decided thus in gross, but we ought to be more particular and exact in
it. Take it in short thus; First, There were many things of Religion under the
Law, which are abrogated under the Gospel, as all Rites and Ceremonies merely
Mosaic: Therefore the Gospel is called the Law of Liberty, Jam. 1. 25. because
it ^reesus from observing those Jewish Rites. These were Duties then, but are
no Duties now. But, secondly, all things that are our Duty now, were their Duty
then. Which I explain thus in these four Propositions.

Prop. 1. There were the same Laws and Commandments in general in the Old
Testament that are in the New; tho there are some particular things enjoined in
the New Testament, which were not prescribed in the Old; as admitting of all
Believers into the Church by Baptism (which was never practiced among the Body
of the Jews, tho it was used toward some Proselytes) and celebrating the Lord's
Death in the Holy Communion (which could not be done before, because Christ was
not come, and therefore could not die.) So there are some particular Precept^
about the Government and Discipline of the Church of Christ, which were not
before in the Jewish Church; and indeed could not be, the state and condition
of things being far otherwise. Likewise with the New Dispensation came a New
Sab^ath; the Seventh day of the w^ek was changed into the First. This is very
rational to believe, tho there were no express mention of any such thing: for
now the Jewish Sabbath being repealed, Gal. 4. 10, 11. Col. 2. 16. some other
day was to be celebrated in its room; that as the former was set apart from the
beginning for commemorating the Creation of the World, so this latter might be
in remembrance of the Redemption of Mankind. The change of the Day, and our
celebrating of it, are upon weighty grounds, viz. 1. Christ's Resurrection from
the Dead, whereby Man's New Creation was perfected. a. Warrantable Authority*
no less than that of our Savior himself: for first it is most probable that
Christ himself gave particular Order concerning the observing of this day, when
(as we read) for forty days together after his Resurrection, he spak^ to his
Disciples concerning the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 3.
This being of so great concern, and so nearly relating to that Kingdom, and the
Occonomy of the Gospel, it is to be presu^^ed, that our Savior gave particular
directions about it, (tho it is not to be denied that there may be a more
restrained sense of the Kingdom of God in this place.) It is granted that we
have not an express Command from Christ for this practice, but the Scripture is
silent as to many other things, which yet we must suppose to have been said or
done. Again, 3 ly. There is our Savior's Example and Fact for it, for we find
that he set himself in the midst of his Apostles every first day of the week
till his Ascension to Heaven, Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 14. Luke 24. 36. Ioh. 20.
19. Moreover, his Spirit speaking and acting in his Apostles, taught them to
meet constantly together on this day, and in a more solemn manner, to perform
the Offices of Divine Worship at this time; Ioh. 20. 9, 26. Acts 17. 7. Acts
20. 7. and 25. 66. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. By reason of this divine Institution from
our Lord himself, this first day of the week began to be called the Lord's Day,
Rev. 1. 10. and afterward it was called so by Epist. ad Magnes.
Ignati^^, as well as St. John. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 46.
Constantin^ the Great renewed and revived this Name (which some had laid
aside) and caused the Day to be constantly known and called by that
Appellation, and by Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Edict commanded it to be solemnly kept by all Persons. The short is, both in
the Apostles times (as the Scripture informs us) and in all succeeding Ages,
this Day has been unanimously observed by Christians, as being of Evangelical
Appointment. Thus the Gospel may be said to add to the Law in some New
Particulars, Christ has introduced some things peculiar and proper to the
state of Christians. But there were the same Constitutions before under the Law
in general. There were two Sacraments, the one to admit Infants into the
Church, the other to confirm the Adult. There were Laws of Ecclesias^ical
Discipline, there was a Time set apart for Divine Worship.

Prop. 2. All those things which our Savior forbids or commands in the Gospel,
are comprehended in the Law, if not expressly, yet virtually, and by true
consequence and rational deduction. Thus Killing being forbidden, Anger and
Wrath which stir up Men's blood, and cause them to thirst after the blood of
others, are forbidden. So Christ in his Sermon on the Mount lets them know (as
I shall show you anon) that not only this, but many (...) things were included
and contained in the Moral Law, which they acted contrary to, foolishly
imagining that they were to go no further, than the bare Letter of the Law.

Prop. 3. The Commandments and Duties of the Old and of the New Testament are
the same as to Substance, tho they differ as to Manner and Circumstances. The
Faith of the Saints under the Legal Appointment, and of those under the
Evangelical one, is (as has been showed before) the very same as to the main,
only they differ as to their Relation or Aspect, the one to Christ who was then
to come, the other to him already come. So praying to Christ, relying on the
mercy of Christ, desiring to depart and be with him, and the like Duties which
seem to be new, are so only in respect of the foresaid Relation or Manner. The
Messiah expected, and the Messiah come, solve the difference.

Prop. 4. As the Dispensation of the Law and the Gospel (being the same in
Substance) differ as to the Manner, so they differ likewise as to the Degrees.
Humility, and that which we call Christian Liberty, are reckoned by a Bp.
Tailor Ductor Dubit.
Learned Writer as New Duties introduced by Christ. But I conceive the
Substance of these was before; they are only more Improved and Inhanced by our
Blessed Lawgiver Christ Jesus. And this you shall see is made good of several
other^r Duties mentioned by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount. He has
made them more perfect than they were: and therefore in respect of them the
Gospel is styled a Perfect Law, Jam. 1. 25. Thus I have bri^fly showed you how
there are New Laws and Duties added by Christ, and how, not. Some few
Particulars are New, because the new State of things required it. Others may be
said to be New, because they are more Expressly set down, or in respect of
Circumstances, Manner, and Degrees. But still they are not New, but the same in
the general, besides that they are virtually the same, and as to the main, and
in the Substance of them.

It is scarcely worth taking notice what Institut. lib. 3. Sect. 2. cap. 1.
Episcopius suggests, viz. that there is no express Precept in the Law for
Praying unto God, and consequently it was not a Duty required in the Old
Testament, and therefore is a new Commandment of Christ. In which (as in some
other things) he agrees with the Smalcius de Divinitat. c. 5. and Disp. 7.
cont. Franc. C^te^. Rac. qu. 19.
Socinians, but is therein very palpably mistaken, for there are set Forms of
Prayer enjoined in the Old Testament: there are determinate Expressions
dictated there. Most of the Psalms are Prayers; and particular Prayers of Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Daniel are recorded. Praying is exp^esly commanded in Psalm. 50.
15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. The Temple was called the House of
Prayer, Isa. 67. 7. and Prayers were mixed with all the Sacrifices, as appears
from Luke 1. 10. How then can any Man have the confidence to say that Prayer is
a New Testament Precept only?

But here it may be alleged that Love is called a New Commandment both by our
Savior ( Ioh. 13. 34.) and by St. John (1 Epist, chap. 2. ver. 8.) therefore
there is this Commandment at least added anew by Christ to what was before. I
will reply to this, by explaining to you how Love may be said to be a New
Commandment. 1. I have suggested before that it may be called New because of
the New Motive annexed to it in John 13. 34. A New Commandment I give unto you
that ye love one another, as I have loved you. This latter Clause is New, tho
the former be Old. This is one Reason which a Isidor. Pelus. l. 3. Epist. 410.
Learned Writer gives why Love is called a New Commandment. 2. Another is
because it was Ren^wed by Christ, and urged on his Disciples afresh as their
particular badg. A New Commandment give I unto you that ye love one another,
said our Savior to his Apostles that night when he celebrated the Passover
with them, and instituted the Holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood, and when he
was taking his leave of them and the World: Now he seasonably presses what he
had exhorted them to before, now he calls upon them more especially to exercise
the Grace of Love. Thus it is a New Commandment because Christ repeats it anew.
3. Because Christ vindicated it (as you shall hear more by and by) from the
false Glosses of the Pharisees, and so made it as it were New. They thought
that Love was due only to those that were their Neighbors and Brethren, and
that ^ll who injured them were to be hated; but our Savior tells them they
must love their Enemies, he acquaints them that Jews as well as Christia^^ were
obliged to this Duty* that the Law required i^ as well as the Gospel. This was
a new Notion to the Pharisees and Jewish Doctors, and therefore on that account
Christ might say this was a New Commandment. 4. Although the same Love of
Neighbors was commanded under the Law that is our Duty under the Gospel, yet
the same Height of Love was not required then that is now; therefore it is
called a New Commandment. This is intimated in that place of St. John, 1 Epist.
Chap. 2. ver. 8. A New Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him
and in you (i. e. as I conceive, this Love is elevated to its greatest height
by our Savior, this exalted Charity was verified and exemplified in Christ,
who died for us his E^emies) because the darkness is past, and the true Light
now shines, i. e. Christianity now prevails, and is in full force; and, among
all its Laws* this of Love is the most advanced and sublimated, it never was at
such a high pitch before; there are greater degrees of it now than there ever
were under the Law. But still this is to be said, the Precept of Love was part
of the Moral Law, and obliged Persons in all Dispensations, and therefore is
justly called an Old Comman^ment.

CHAP. XII.
An Answer to an Objection from Mat. 5. 17. showing distinctly and particularly
what is the Law, and how Christ came to fulfill it. It is held by some that
Christ came to add New Precepts to the Moral Law. In confutation of which
Opinion it is proved that Anger is forbid by the Decalogue. So is a Lustful
Eye. So is all Rash and Profane Swearing. So is Divorce, unless in the case of
Adultery. So is Resisting of Evil. So is hating of our Enemies. It is largely
discussed whether it was lawful for the Israelites to hate the seven Nations
whom they were commanded to destroy. And whether the Command to destroy them
was Absolute. Objections from Deuteronomy. 13. 8, 9. and Psalm. 139. 21. answered. The
Nature of the Two Covenants, viz. of Works and of Grace, fully stated. The
Conditions on our part. How [do this, and live] is applicable to the Covenant
of Grace. The Covenant made with the Israelites at the giving of the Law on
Mount Sinai was the Covenant of Grace, though it seemed to resemble the
Covenant of Works. The Covenant of Grace was completed and perfected by
Christ's Coming, and not before. The Mediator, the Terms, the Seals of this
Covenant now fully manifested. It is proved that according to the Style of
Scripture the Old and New Covenant are the same Covenant of Grace.

BUt our Savior's words in Mat. 5. 17. are made use of by many to confront,
and (as they think) to confute this Doctrine. They maintain that there is a far
greater difference between the Precepts of the Old and New Testament than I
have asserted, and that Christ not only explained those Old Laws, but added New
Ones to them, for that (say they) is the meaning of Christ's words in that
place, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill. Because these words and the rest of the Chapter
which follows them, are alleged with great earnestness by the Patrons of this
Opinion, and because they boast that they are an irrefragable Proof of what
they say, I will enlarge upon them, and faithfully present you with the true
meaning of them, which you will ^ee is so far from Patronizing their Cause,
that it overthrows it, and lays it in the dust. To explain these words then,

1st. By the Law and the Prophets is meant whatever is contained in the
Writings of Moses or of the other Prophets of the Old Testament (for the whole
Scripture of the Old Testament is summed up in these two, the Law and the
Prophets) but especially what is contained in them concerning the Messiah, his
Person, his Undertakings, and his Kingdom. Now, Christ was so far from
destroying, baffling and nulling of these, that he came to fulfill them, i. e.
by his Coming he verified, made good and accomplished whatever was foretold or
promised concerning him in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets. Thence it is
that you so often read in the New Testament that such and such things came to
pass, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by this or that Prophet.
Christ came to perform and bring into Act, whatever was prophesied in those
Ancient Writings concerning him: and here in ver. 18. he assured his Disciples
and Hearers, that one jot or one tittle should in no wise pass from the Law
till all be fulfilled.

2 ly. When our Savior says he came not to destroy but to fulfill the Law,
even the Ceremonial Law may be compreh^nded here. And that he came not to
destroy this, but to fulfill it, is true in these two senses, First, this Law as
far as it concerned our Savior was obeyed and practiced by him; that may be
the meaning of fulfilling. He was Circumcised the eighth day, he was presented
in the Temple, and made his Offering there. When he entered on his Ministry, he
exactly complied with the Mosaic Injunctions, for he took not that Employment
till he was thirty Years of age, the very time when the Jewish Priests ent^ed
on their Function according to the Law. But yet more punctually he fulfilled
the Law in keeping the Passover; for whereas the Jews by their Traditions had
corrupted the Law concerning the Observation of this Feast, and kept it not
till the fifteenth day of the Month, our Savior kept it the day before, viz.
on the Mat. 26. 17. Mark 14. 12. Luke 22. 7.
fourteenth, and so observed the true time which was commanded by God at first,
Exodus 12. Thus Christ came to fulfill even the Ceremonial Law, and that with the
greatest exactness. On this account he says himself, it became him to fulfill
all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. Secondly, Christ fulfilled the Ceremonial Law as
he accomplished the Types and Figures of it. Most of the Iudaical Ceremonies
and Rites (as I have proved) shadowed forth the Messiah, they repres^nted some
considerable thing which belonged to his Kingdom. Therefore when the Messiah
came, and did acco^ding to what was prefigured of him, those Ceremonies and
Types were fulfilled. Christ who was the Substance and Consummation of those
Sh^dows, f^lly perfected what was before represented and signified by them.

3 ly. When our Savior faith he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets,
but to fulfill them, it is meant also of the Moral Precepts contained in the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets. These are they which are called
Commandments, ver. 19. and the observance of them is styled Righteo^sness, ver.
20. and the ^ollowing verses refer (as I shall show you) to the injunctions of
the D^calogu^. Christ came not to destroy this Law, for he never in the least
countenanced the violation of it in any person. But he came to fulfill it, i. e.
1. To Observe and Obey it, and that first in his own Person: He inviolably kept
the Law himself, he most strictly observed both the Tables of it all his Life.
Again, he obliged others to keep and obey this Law: He always inculcated the
use and necessity of it in Men's Lives. 2. He came to fulfill it, i. e. to teach
Men to observe the Full Design and Utmost Intent of the Moral Law. This is
first clear from the Context, ver. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments, shall be called least in the kingdom of Heaven, i. e.
he shall be a very despised and contemptible Person under the Christian
O^conomy who shall diminish any of the Precepts of the Moral Law. They must be
taken one with another. The Decalogue is full and comprehensive. Anger as well
as Murder is prohibited in the Sixth Commandment: and so in the rest the full
Virtue and Extent of the Law are to be observed. And not only he that breaks
the least of these Commandments, but he that teaches men so to do, (as it
follows in that verse) shall be called the least, etc. he shall not be reckoned
a person fit for the Evangelical Administration, he is a piti^ul narrow
contracted Soul. Such are the Scribes and Phari^ees, and the great Doctors of
the Law, they cramp the Decalogue, they rest in the Letter and Surface of it,
and remember not what David says, that Psalm. 119. 96.
the Commandments are exceeding broad. But I say unto you, says our Savior,
except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven, ver. 20. And
then in the remaining part of the Chapter our Savior proceeds to acquaint his
hearers particularly how these. Scribes and Pharisees, and those from whom they
received their Notions, had mistaken the true meaning of the Law, and had
perverted the genuine Sense of it by their false Glosses and Interpretations.

But not only the Context but this very word it self which is here used, leads
us to this thing which I am now offering to you. The known and common
signification of the (...) implere, perficere, absolvere.
Greek word which is rendered to fulfill, is to accomplish a thing fully, to
bring it to Perfection. The word is properly used when a Man does as much as he
can, and acts his best. Thus the Apostle says of himself, I have fully
preached the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 19. It is the same word which our
Savior uses here, when he says he came to fulfill the Law. How did St. Paul
fulfill the Gospel of Christ? He labored abundantly than the rest of the
Apostles, he traveled from place to place, from Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum (as he says in the same verse) he went his Circuit, he took
extraordinary pains wheresoever he came, he was careful to instruct people in
all the necessary Doctrines of Christianity, and to keep back nothing from
them. Thus he fulfilled, or fully preached the Gospel. And this is the sense of
the word in other places of the New Testament. You will find John 15. 11. Joh.
17. 13.
our Savior himself, and his Mat. 2. 17, 23. Luke 1. 20. Joh. 3. 29. Romans 8.
4. 1 John 1. 4. Phil. 2. 2.
Apostles and others applying this word to such things as are fully
Accomplished, and are become entire and complete. And so here Christ says he
came to fulfill the Law, the Precepts of the Moral Law dispersed up and down in
the Books of Moses and the Prophets, and summarily comprehended in the Ten
Commandments; he came to fulfill these not only by representing them to us
Entire and Perfect, by giving us a full and complete account of them, but by
supplying them and filling them up when they were diminished and impaired by
the corrupt Glosses of the Jewish Doctors. So that there are no New
Commandments added by Christ, but some of the Old ones which were corrupted,
and others which were quite taken away, are renewed and restored, and so the
Body of Commandments and Moral Precepts is perfected and consummated. This is
to fulfill: this is the plain and obvious sense of the word, so far as I
apprehend.

But others understand it thus, Christ came to fulfill the Law, i. e. to add
some New Moral Precepts to it, which were no part of the Law before, to
increase the number of the Commandments, and thus (in a sense different from
what was allowed before) to fill up the Law. Accordingly they hold that our
Savior in the fifth Chapter of St. Matthew is a New Lawgiver, and commands
things which were not commanded before. Christ, say they, opposed to Moses's
Moral Precepts some New and Contrary Precepts of his own, as about Swearing,
and Divorce, etc. Some of the Tertullian, Eusebius, Chrysostom who reads it [It
was said to them, of old] Mat. 5. 21, 27, 33.
Fathers were of this judgment, or at least have uttered some words which
favor it. But it is not to be denied that the Papists generally, as also the
Socinians expressly hold this. These Volkel. l. 4. C. 2. Smalc. de Divinit.
Christi cap. 5. Catech. Racov. de proph. Christi mun. cap. 1.
latter follow their Master Socinus, who in his Explication of the 5 th Chapter
of St. Matthew interprets (...) in the foresaid Sense, and tells us that
Christ's Sermon contains New Precepts which never were before. Some Antinomians
and Anabaptists (not to mention some others) plainly assert this, and that with
much concernedness. These all hold that Christ fulfilled or perfected the Law
not only by a clearer Explication of the Precepts of it, but by an Addition of
New Precepts. And this indeed follows on what was asserted by them before, viz.
that Christ's Laws in Matthew. 5. are opposed to Moses's. If there be an
opposition, then that is enjoined in one which is not in the other, then Christ
added to what was commanded by Moses.

But all this is a mistake: for the Opposition which is observable in Mat. 5.
is quite of another kind. Christ there opposes himself to the Scribes and
Pharisees, and his Interpretation of the Law to theirs. In this manner he
speaks, Ye have heard is has been said of the (...)
Ancients, or (as we translate it) those of old time, Thou shall not do this or
that; you attend to the sayings of the Ancient Jewish Doctors, who are the
Persons that have perverted the Law: and you tread in their steps, you espouse
their Opinions, you have learnt of them to misinterpret and corrupt the Law,
for you interpret those Commandments, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not
commit Adultery, of the outward Act only of Killing and of Adultery; and you
will not believe that Hatred and Malice are forbidden by the same Commandment
which forbids Murder, or that a lustful Eye is a breach of the Commandment
against Adultery: and so in other instances you miserably mistake and corrupt
the Law. This is the sense of our Savior in this Chapter. And hence it is
plain that here is no such thing as New Precepts, or any kind of Commands
contrary to those that were given by Moses. We do not hear Christ say, it has
been said by Moses, or you read it in the Law, but it has been said by them of
old; he quotes the (...) the Ancients, i. e. the Masters of Tradition, the
Scribes and Doctors of the Law, whom the Phari^ees at that day followed. These
wilfully mistook and depraved the Moral Law, and our Savior sets himself
against these, and their Doctrine. He does not oppose one Law to another, but
all that he does is this, he corrects and amends the Law as it was corrupted by
the Scribes and Pharisees; or rather, he does not correct and amend Moses's
Law, but the Phari^ees Expositions. In this Chapter Christ is not a Legiflator,
but an Interpreter, He expounds the Law a^ight, and takes off their false
Expositions: and gives the true and genuine sense of the Law. He acquaints them
that there is a farther meaning of it than they imagined: more is commanded in
the Pr^cepts of the Law, and more is forbidden than they think. And to convince
them thoroughly of this he proceeds to particulars, instancing in some Duties
which seem to be New and Proper only to Christianity; but he acquaints them
that they are not New, but Old Commandments: and so likewise he instances in
some Actions which are unlawful under the Gospel, and seem to have been made so
first of all by the Christian Laws: but the design of this Discourse is to let
them know that they were forbidden by Moses, and were sins long before the
Coming of Christ, al^ho by them of Old (the Ancient Depravers of the Law) they
were not thought to be so.

1. Anger is Murder by the Christian Law, and so it was by the Law of the Ten
Commandments. Ye have heard that it was said by the Ancients, Thou shall not
kill (restraining this to the External Act only) and whosoever shall kill,
shall be in d^nger of the judgment. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry
with his Brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment, he is
interpretatively a Man-^layer; Ver. 21, 22. You are to know that tho Imm^derate
Anger be not in express terms forbidden in the Law, yet it is inclusively and
by just Consequence forbidden. Of Cain it is recorded that he was very wroth,
Genesis 4. 5. and were read the Result of it, ver. 8. Cain rose up against Abel his
Brother, and slew him. Wrath is the Parent of Murder. He that is excessively
incensed against another is disposed to kill him: and i^ this inordinate
Passion be not checked, or some obstacle interpose, it will proceed to that
height. Therefore if Bloodshed be a sin, Anger is so too, and ought to be
suppressed, with the ordinary concomitant of it, viz. using of reviling
Language, as Raca, Fool, and the like.

2. An Unchaste Heart, and a Lustful Eye are Adultery and Fornication by the Law
of Christ, and they were no less by the Mosaic Law. And therefore when Christ
faith, ver. 28. Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery already with her in his heart, he does not declare this as a thing
contrary to what the Precepts of Morality require of us, but to what had been
dictated by the corrupt Glosses of the Jewish Doctors of old, and of the
Pharisees at that time, viz. that there is no such thing as the Adultery of the
Eye or of the Heart, and that these are not forbidden in the Seventh
Commandment. But our Savior lets them know that this is a great mistake, and
that he had not introduced a New Law, but only revived an old One. To look on a
woman to lust after her, was always sinful and unlawful. I made a Covenant with
mine Eyes, (says Job) why then should I think upon a maid? Chap. 31. ver. 1.
which argues that it was a sin in those times (even before there was any
written Law) to indulge either lustful Thoughts or Looks. And this I take to be
the Reason of the Law of Fringes given to the Jews, Number. 15. 38, 39. viz. that
these being constantly in their view might be a means to divert their thoughts
as well as sight; for so it is expressly said, that they were to entertain their
Eyes with looking on them, that they might not seek after their own Heart, and
their own Eyes, after which they used to go a whoring. We read afterward, that
it was the Pious King's Prayer, Turn away mine eyes from beholding va^ity,
Psalm. 119. 37. And that there is a Restraint to be laid upon this outward
Sense, and upon the inward Imagination which is wrought upon by it, is the
acknowledgment of the Wisest He^rew Doctors, among whom it is proverbially
said, Aspectus oculi initiusmest transgressionis.
the Eye is the Inlet to sin; and R. Ben. Mai^on says expressly De Idololatr.
c. 2.
that evil Thoughts were forbid by the L^w.

3. Swearing rashly is forbidden here by Christ, and so it was by the Third
Commandment. But this (as well as the other) was misinterpreted by the Scribes
and Doctors, and not understood in its full Extent. Whereupon our Savior
corrects their mistakes, saying, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. ver.
34. As much as if he had said, you make nothing of Swearing by Heaven, and by
the Earth, and by Jerusalem, and by your Heads, and this is a very common and
frequent thing with you; and you are persuaded that you act not amiss in doing
thus, for you think that the Commandment forbids only False Swearing and
Perjury: you have been told that these are the only breach of that part of the
Law. But I tell you another thing, that Law forbids not only False but Rash
Swearing; you violate that Commandment as often as you use any vain and
unnecessary Oaths, as often as you profanely swear by God's Name, as often as
you make use of other Names besides God's to swear by, as often as you swear by
Heaven, or by the Earth, etc. This is the true meaning of our Savior here.
Some have thought that all Swearing is forbid in this place by Christ, as
unlawful under the Gospel, although it was lawful to Swear under the Law: but if
you consider that it is a Religious Act, and is innocent and harmless in its
own nature, and sometimes becomes necessary (as in matters of Controversy
which cannot otherwise be decided) and is an Act of Charity and Righteousness
(when it is for the real advantage of the Community, or any of our particular
Brethren, and sometimes it is) and is approved of by the Example of St. Paul in
the New Testament, you will be induced to believe that Religious Swearing is
lawful even under the Gospel, and that there is no New Law given by Christ to
forbid it now. That which he forbids is Unnecessary and Profane Swearing; yea
moreover, he commands you to avoid all Swearing in common intercourse and
converse one with another, and as much as lies in them to abstain wholly from
an Oath. He would have them to be Persons of so holy and strict lives, of such
integtity and faithfulness, that no one should have occasion to require an Oath
of them, but that they might be credited upon their bare Words and Promises. He
would have them show such Truth and Honesty toward Men, that Swearing might
become useless. This is the true meaning of our Savior.

4. That a Man should not put away his Wife unless for Fornication or Adultery,
is a Law of Christ, and yet is no New Law, but an Old one Restored and Renewed
by him. This Law was corrupted by the Jews, which Malachi takes notice of, Mal.
2. 14, 15, 16. and he brings them back to the Primitive Law of Moses, Chap. 4.
ver. 4. So that our Savior does the same which the Prophet Malachi did before.
And as to the Law of Divorce in Deuteronomy. 24. 1. it was rather a Permission than a
Precept or Law: and so says Christ, Moses suffered you for the hardness of
your hearts to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so, Mat.
19. 8. This way of divorcing among the Jews was unlawful, being against the
Institution of God in the beginning, Genesis 2. 24. They two shall be one flesh.
But it was tolerated to avoid a greater Evil among that People, viz. that cursed
Husbands might not use their Wives inhumanely: It was for the sake of the Women
that this was permitted. Therefore it is clear that Christ does not correct or
alter the Law, but only removes the false Interpretations which were made of
it. That Matrimony cannot be dissolved, is a Christian Law, and it was also a
Mosaic one.

5. Resisting of Evil, or Retaliating is ^orbid by our Savior in this Chapter,
ver. 38, 39. and yet it is no New Commandment, but such as was obligatory under
the Law. Public Retaliation or Revenge, viz. in a lawful way, by the Authority
and Help of the Magistrate (who is an Avenger of Evil, and appointed for that
purpose) is intended by the Law, An Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a T^^th; but
the Jewish Interpreters of it stretched this even to the patronizing of private
Revenge, and returning Evil for Evil among themselves. This is that which our
Lord here complains of, as a gross perverting of the sense of the Law: and he
peremptorily commands his Followers that they resist not evil, that if any one
smit^ them on the right check they turn to him the other also; and that if any
tak^ away their Coat, they let him have their Cl^^k also, ver. 39, 40. By which
he declares against the Law of Retaliation among themselves, without going to
the Magistrate, whose Revenge is. Christ bids them rather suffer wrong than
revenge it so. Now* this private Revenge you will find ^orbidden by Moses's Law
long before, and consequently it is no New Law. In Lev. 19. 18. Moses expressly
forbids it; and the unlawfulness of it may be gathered from Prove. 20. 22. Prove.
24. 26, 29. Ezekiel. 25. 22.
other places of the Old Testament. If it be objected that these words of
Sampson authorize private Revenge, As they did unt^ me, so have I done unto
them, Judge. 15. 11. I Answer, he did it not as a private Man, but as a Judge, a
Magistrate, a public Person. Besides, he was divinely inspired, and
extraordinarily (...) up, which is a different case from ours. Thu^ Sampson
called unto the Lord that he might be avenged of the Philistines, Judge. 16. 28.
This Revenge then is not that which was spoken of in the places before cited,
and which our Savior here speaks against, and which St. Paul forbad, when he
left those Evangelical Rules with the Roman Christians, Recompense to no Man
Evil for Evil: Avenge not your selves, Romans 12. 17, 19. The S^cinians then and
some others who say Revenge was lawful under the Old Testament, but is not now
under the New, speak very unadvisedly and rashly, and have no ground at all to
make this Distinction: for the Writings of the Old Testament as well as of the
New, condemn all private Revenge and Resisting of Evil.

6. Loving our Enemi^s is another Command of Christ, ver. 44. and it was always
a Command of the Second Table, tho the Jewish Expositors of it thought not so.
Mark therefore our Savior's words, Ye have heard that it has been said, viz.
by them of Old, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy, ver. 43.
Whence it is evident, that Christ both here and in the verses before mentioned,
speaks not of what M^ses and the Law it self said, but of what the corrupt
Doctors and Scribes said. For tho Moses says, Thou shall love thy neighbor,
Lev. 19. 18. yet he no where says, Thou shall hate thy enemy. Therefore we may
conclude, that whenever Christ utters these words in this Chapter, It has
been said by them of old time, he understands not Moses and the Prophets, but
the perverse Teachers among the Jews who falsely expounded them. Moses's Law bid
them love their Neighbors, but it was their own false Inference that they
should hate their Enemies, I say unto you, therefore says Christ (and I say no
more than what was the Duty even of those who lived under Moses's Laws) Love
your Enemies, do good to them that hate you, ver. 44. That this was a Duty
before Christ's Coming is proved from Exodus 23. 4, 5. If thou meet thine
enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him
again. If thou see the Ass of him that (...) thee, lying under his burden, and
would^^ forbear t^ ^elp him, thou shall surely help with him. Tho it is true
the doing of these things were kindnesses to the Beasts, yet they were also
offices of kindness to the Persons who owned them: which shows that the L^ve
of Enemie^ was required then. Which may likewise be interred from those general
words in Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not (...) thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall
not hate him be he Friend or Fo, Native or Alien: every one is thy Brother, and
therefore thou must use him as such. And that these words of Moses are to be
taken thus largely, is manifest from what he says in Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Thou shall
not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy Brother: nay, it is added for the same
reason, Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian; tho thou were made a Bondslave by
that People, yet thou must not hate them; yea, being thy Br^thren, thou must
love them. The words of Solomon are to our present purpose, Prove. 25. 21. If
thine En^my be hungry, give him Bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him
Water to drink, i. e. in his distress and extremity entertain him courteously
and lovingly, tho he has not deserved such usage at thy hands. That Enemies
were to be loved is to be gathered from that Instance of Elisha, who advised
the King of Isra^l to feast and plenteously entertain the Syrians, who had
besieged Samaria, and to send them away in peace, 2 Kings 6. 22, 23. Thus we
see that even under the Law they were to be kind and loving to their En^mies,
and that not only if they were Enemies among themselves, i. e. if they were
Isr^^letes, but they were to show the like affection to Strangers and
Foreigners who had showed Enmity and Hostility against them.

But here we are to encounter a very formidab^e Objection, viz. that it was
lawful for the Isra^lites to (...) the Idol^^rous Nations, which a^pears from
this that they were commanded to kill them. As for the Seven Nations, who
possessed that Land which was promised to them, they were enjoined to destroy
them utterly without all pity. Destroying and Killing are more than Hatred: If
therefore they might kill and destroy those Heathens, they might hate them. How
then was the Loving of Enemies a Duty under the Law? To this I Answer, that to
make peac^ (and that sincerely and cordially) with Persons or People, and to
bear hatred to them at the same time, are inconsistent: and therefore if I
prove that the Israelites would have made peace with those Seven Nations, it
will follow that there was no Hatred in the case. I know that some Writers of
no mean Rank assert that the Cana^nites were utterly and absolutely to be
slain, and that the Peace to be offered was to them only who were without the
Land of Canaan. But this is a very great over^ight, and I will from plain
passages i^ the Sacred History show that it is so, and convince any Impartial
Reader that the Israelites offered Peace to the Ca^aanites as well as to other
Nations farther off. I will first produce those words in Deuteronomy. 20. 10, etc.
which seem to make against this, When thou come nigh unto a City, to fight
against it, then proclaim Peace unto it: and if it make answer of Peace, all
the People that are in it shall be Tributaries. But if it will make no Peace,
then thou shall bes^ege it; and when God has delivered it into thy hands, thou
shall smite every Male with the edg of the sword, but the Women and Children
and Cattle thou shall take to thy self. Thus shall thou do to (...) the Cities
which are very far off from thee, which are not of the Cities of these Nations.
But of the Cities of the People which the Lord does give thee for an
Inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breaths, but thou shall
u^terly destroy them. Whence some would infer that no Proc^amation of Peac^ was
to be made to the Cities of Canaan, for they were utt^rly to be destroyed. But
you must know that the words are Conditional, and are to be supplied thus, thou
shall save alive nothing that breaths, but thou shall utterly destroy them
unless they seek for Peace, or attend to the Offers of it, unless they engage
to become Tributary, and unless they renounce their Idolatry: for tho these
Conditions be not expressed in the 16, and 17 verses, yet the two first are
mentioned in ver. 11. and all three are intimated or expressed in other places
of M^ses's History.

First, that the Israelites might make Peace with the Canaanites if they sought
for it, is expressed in ver. 11. If any City made answer to them of Peace, and
opened to them, they were to make Peace with them. But some say that this was
the manner of the Israelites treating the Nations a^ar off, but not the
Canaanites; for this vast difference which was to be made between them is set
down in ver. 15, 16. Thus shall thou do to all the Cities which are very far
off, but of the Cities of these (...) which the Lord thy God does give thee for
an inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breaths. Here it seems to
be said that tho the Distant Nations were to be favorably used, and admitted
to Terms of Peace, yet the Cities of Canaan and others which were near, were to
be denied that favor, and to be utterly cut off without mercy. But these
apprehensions arise from the misapplying of those words, thus shall thou do,
which principally refer to what immediately went before, viz. that when God
has delivered a City into their hands, they shall smite ^very Male thereof
with the sword, but spare the Women and the little Ones, and the Cattle. Thus
shall they do unto them. But when they came to any City of the Seven Nations,
they were to deal otherwise, they were to spare neither Man nor Woman, Old or
Young, but utterly to destroy all. Here lies the Antithesis, this was the grand
difference which was to be made between their dealing with the F^reig^ Nations
and with the Canaanites. This is all the distinction that they were to make
between the one and the other. Whereas the one is to be spared in some sort,
thou shall show no ^uch favor to the other: thou shall devote them to utter
Destruction. But it is not said, thou shall not offer Peace to them first, thou
shall fall upon them without any warning. No: the contrary is said, When thou
come nigh to a City to fight against it, then proclaim Peace unto it: which
kind Tender reaches not only to the Cities of the Nations afar off, but to
those which were nearer. This may be gathered from other places, as Ios. 11.
19. There was not a City which made Peace with the Children of Israel save the
Hivite, the Inhabitants of Gi^eon: all others they took in battle. Which
implies that Peace was offered to them all, and that their Refusal was the
cause of their Ruin: for it would be ridiculous and impertinent (as I
apprehend) to register this, that no Cities made Peace, when they could not
make Peace if they had had a mind to it.

As to the Instance of the Gibeonites, Joshua was faulty in making Peace with
them rashly, without enquiring who they were, and whence. But as to the thing
it self, he was not faulty, for they had leave to make Peace not only with the
People that were remote (and such they took these to be) but with the
Canaanites. But these Gibe^nites had heard that they were to be most severely
dealt with, that they were to be utterly destroyed upon refusal; therefore they
seign'd themselves to be of the remoter Nations. What can be more evident than
this, that the Command of destroying the Canaanites was not Absolute but
Conditional, seeing the Oath made to the Gibe^nites (who were Canaanites) was
lawful? which may be proved from this, that God was angry, with Saul for the
violation of this Oath several years after. Now, if it was lawful to swear to
the Gibeonites (tho it was extorted by fraud and dissembling) that they should
be spared, then it follows that there was no Command from God to destroy them,
without offering Peace and Mercy to them. We read also that Rahab requested of
the Spies that she might be spared; and they would not have sworn to her that
they would Save her and her Fathers house alive (as they did, Ios. 2. 12.) if
they had known that there was no mercy to be showed to the Canaanites: but it
is plain that they were apprehensive of the contrary, and so engaged to spare
Rahab and her Kindred. And if the whole People of Ierich^ had humbly requested
the same Boon, they might have obtained it, for the Israelites were not bid to
destroy any People unless they were obstinate and refractory. On such
considerations as these Maimonides, quoted by Mr. Seldom de Jure Na^. and Gent.
l. 6. c. 13.
One of the most Judicious and Discerning Writers among the Jews, declares it
to be his Opinion that the Seven N^tions had offers of Peace, on condition they
would surrender themselves.

Again, that Clause (which contains the Second Condition offered to all Cities)
belonged to the Seven Nations as well as to the rest, viz. All the People that
is found therein shall be Tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee,
ver. 11. of Deuteronomy. 20. If the Canaanites would have owned the Israelites for
their Lords and Masters, they might have escaped Destruction. Which is the
import of those words in Ios. 16. 10. They drove not out the Canaanite that
dwelt in G^zer, but the Canaanite dwells among the Ephraimites unto this day,
and serves under Tribute. And the same you read in Josh. 17. 13. and Judge. 1.
29, 30. The Third Condition was this, the Jews might make Peace with the Seven
Nations if they would turn to the True God of Israel from their Idolatry, as
appears from Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. Thou shall make no Marriages with them, thy
Daughter thou shall not give to his Son, nor his Daughter shall thou take unto
thy Son, (which by the by, you may observe, supposes that they should not all
be destroyed) for they will turn away thy Son from following me, that they may
serve other Gods. This is given as the Reason here and in other places why
those Nations were to be destroyed, viz. because of their abominable Idolatry,
and that they might not Corrupt and Infect the People of God. Therefore the
Israelites are often forbid to Exodus 23. 32. and 34. 12, 15. Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
make a Covenant with them, which signifies to hold Correspondence with them in
Idolatry, to make such a League and Alliance with them as to suffer them to use
their Altars and Images, and freely to indulge them in their former
Abominations.

The short then is, that Conditions of Peace were offered to all the Nations
foreign and near, their Lives were given them if they would ask them: they
might be spared if they would become Tributary: they were not to be cut off if
they would turn from their Idolatry to the Living God, and embrace the Jewish
Religion, or (as the Hebrews tell us) keep the Precepts of the Sons of Noah.
But the Israelites had a Commission to fight all Nations that refused these
Conditions, they had a Command to ^lay them either with a universal Slaughter,
viz, the Seven Nations and the Amalekites, or only to destroy the males, as
they did to the other Nations. Now if this be the Truth of the Case, if the
Israelites were willing to make Peace with All, both Canaanites and Foreigners
(as I have endeavored to evince, and as several Maimonides, Junius, Grotius.
Learned Men have asserted) then the Objection which is pretended to be drawn
from the Practice of the Israelites, and from the very Command of God, falls to
the ground, and is of no value and weight: then it appears that the Israelites
were not bid to hate their Enemies, but that they were to love them, for
offering Conditions of Peace was a Sign and Token of Love.

But suppose I have not sufficiently proved what I undertook (which I refer to
the Judicious); suppose the seven Nations had no Terms of Peace offered them,
but they were utterly abolished; yet then I see not how this any ways
invalidateth my former Assertion, for they might be commanded to kill all the
Canaanites, and yet not be commanded to hate them: nor does it follow from
their killing them, that they bore a hatred to them. Judges and Executioners
punish Malefactors with Death, but without Hatred and Malice; or they ought to
do so at least.

This Answer will serve to take off other Objections which are made, as that
from the 13 th of Deuteronomy, where you read that all Persons who enticed
others to Idolatry, were to be put to death, and the nearest Relation or Friend
was not to be pitied or spared. Therefore if no kindness was to be showed to
Kindred and near Relatives in this case, much less was there any to be extended
to Enemies, and consequently it was lawful to hate them. And from the Law of
Retaliation they would argue after the same manner, viz. that God commanded the
Jews to hate those who wronged and hurted them; for if they were bid to punish
them, they were bid to hate them, the greater containing in it the lesser. But
the answer to these Cavils is the same which I gave before: the Jews might
prosecute Offenders, and the Magistrate punish them, and both might and ought
to be done with commiseration and love, and consequently without hatred. Indeed
they were not to pity them, i. e. so as to let them go unpunished, but
notwithstanding that they might have a brotherly compassion toward their Souls.
So we at this day are bound, by Law and Conscience, to prosecute Malefactors,
and to cause them to receive condign Punishment; yet all this may be done
without hatred, and it is a wonder that the Object^rs have not seen it.

Others make use of those words of David, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee? I hate them with perfect hatred, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. Therefore, say they,
hating of Enemies was lawful under the Old Dispensation of the Law; and by
consequence when Christ bids us love our Enemies, he gives a New Law. I answer
briefly, that David's hating of the Wicked is meant, 1. of his hating their
Company and Conversation; therefore he frequently declares how loathing and
detestable it was to him to associate with them. 2. Of his hatred of their
Vices, not of their Persons. Their ways and actions he perfectly abhorred, but
you hear him sometimes praying for their Conversion, which shows that he had
no Enmity, either against their Souls or Bodies, but loved both. And indeed if
we must love our very Enemies, it follows by natural Consequence, that we ought
to pray for them, and wish them well; therefore it is added here by Christ,
Ver. 44. Pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. These are
not New Injunctions, but were obligatory under Moses, and are indeed part of
the Moral Law. Thus I have showed, that even under the Law hating their
Enemies, i. e. their Persons, was not lawful, but on the contrary, they were
bound to love them: and consequently Christ's Command concerning loving of
Enemies, is not added as a New Precept to those of Moses. We must hate no Man
now, and it was sinful to do so then. Universal Charity was a Law even at that
time. In a word, it appears that Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it, because he established and confirmed this Catholic Love, which is
called by the Apostle the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 9.

Thus I have insisted on the Particulars mentioned by our Savior in this
Chapter, and you may be abundantly convinced thence, that Christ's words here
are not oppofed to Moses's, that he does command nothing contrary to the Law,
but that he vindicated the Law from the false and corrupt Glosses of the
Pharisees; you may be convinced, that Christ is here no New Legislator, but an
Interpreter of the Old Law; that he only explaineth and clears it, and more
fully delivers it to the World, and consequently that the Precepts of the
Gospel are the same in substance with the Decalogue; that Christ enjoineth no
New Virtue, as to the kind of it, that he has made no addition of New Laws and
Precepts to the Old ones, unless in those respects which I have before
mentioned: and on the account of them it is, that the Legal and Evangelical
Dispensation differ so much.

Being now employed in showing the Difference between the Old Dispensations
before Christ, and that which he introduced; I cannot finish what I intend,
unless I particularly handle that noted Question, What is the difference
between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; or between the Old
and New Covenant, and why they are called so? I have said something already
which may give light to this, but now I will purposely insist upon it. Indeed
the Discourse of the Old and New Cov^nant might have been inserted in the
beginning when I entered upon the General O^conomy of Grace, when I spoke of
the first Discovery made to Adam concerning the Mess^as: but then I must have
antedated some things which I have mentioned since, and I must have treated of
the Evangelical Dispensation long before it came in my way. It is therefore
pertinent and most proper to treat of the C^venants in this place, and to show
the true difference between them.

We must call to mind then what I said before, that God covenanted with Man: 1.
When he was in the State of Innocence. 2. When he was fallen. The former was
the Covenant of W^rks, the latter was the Covenant of Grace. As to the first,
it was properly a Covenant* for a Covenant is a mutual Agreement betwixt Party
and Party, with reciprocal Obligations of each other. So that Covenant was a
Contract between God and Adam (and in him with all Mankind,) wherein God
promised Everlasting Life and Happiness to Man, if he continued in his
Obedience to him. And Man (having a sufficient Ability given him by God)
engaged on his part to perform perfect Obedience, and to persevere in all good
Works without sinning, whence it was called the Covenant of Works. Upon this
Agreement God gave Adam a particular Commandment (as a trial of his Obedience)
that he should abstain from the Fruit of a certain Tree in the Garden where God
had placed him. But Adam soon broke this Covenant by eating the forbidden
Fruit, and so brought a Curse on himself and all his Posterity.

Hereupon the First Convenant, or Covenant of Works, was succeeded by a Second,
viz. the Covenant of Grace. This is that Covenant which God made with Adam and
his Posterity just after his Fall, when they were in a state of Sin and Misery.
Christ was promised forthwith; the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's
Head, Genesis 3. 15. As soon as this Promise was given and made, the Covenant of
Works expired, then began the Covenant of Grace, and so was in succeeding
Generations more and more revealed, till Christ came and fully revealed it.
This is called the Covenant of Grace, (as has been said before) because it
proceeded from mere Grace and Favor, and because a more abundant Grace and
Love are discovered in this Covenant for Man's restoring, than in the other for
preserving him.

Now a Covenant being a mutual Contract and Stipulation of both Parties (as
has been suggested) this Covenant as well as the other, was made up of
something on God's part, and something on ours. As God is tied to Man, so Man
is tied to God. God promised to send his Son to take our Nature, and to make
known to us the Will of his Father (thus he is a (...)), and also to satisfy
God for our Sins, and by this means to redeem us from Hell and Eternal
Damnation, and to obtain for us forgiveness of Sins, and the favor of God, and
Eternal Life and Blessedness. Sinners are justified, pardoned, and restored to
what they lost by (...)* they are reinstated in the Right and Privilege they
had before their Apostasy. This is done by Chrrist's Death; thus he is our
Priest, he offers himself a Sacrifice for our Sins. Further, he inables us to
discharge our Duty, by sending his Holy Spirit into our Hearts; he rules and
governs us, and so is our King. This is the Covenant on God's part. On ours it
is to hearken diligently to our Prophet, and to be desirous and ready to learn
his Will; to accept of, rely upon, and apply unto our selves the meritorious
Satisfaction of our Priest; and to be ruled by him as our King, to submit to
him, and to obey his Laws; which briefly are these, that we acknowledge his
Sovereignty over us, that we believe in him, and that we repent and forsake our
Sins. These are the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace on Man's part. Or take
the whole in a briefer way thus, To give Ability and Power to believe and
repent, and perform Acts of Holiness, is the New Covenant on God's part: But
personally to do these (by virtue of the foresaid Power) is the New Covenant on
Man's part, which yet God alone can make effectual.

It is said by some, that Faith and Obedience are not the Conditions of this
Covenant on Man's part, because they are promised in the Covenant; for the
Condition of the Covenant must be a distinct thing from the Covenant. But this
is a mere Nicety, for tho in the Gospel Covenant Faith and Repentance are
pr^mis^d, i. e. God has engaged to give us strength to exert these Graces; yet
so far as they are considered as our Acts, and coming from (...) (for God
cannot be said to believe and repent) they are Conditions. They are promised by
(...) upon (...) (as all that we are to do is promised); but since we on our
part engage and promise to do them, they are rightly styled, and really are
Qualifications, without which we shall never partake of the Divine Favor.
Neither do these Condition^ of Faith and Obedience which are required of us,
hinder the freeness of the Gospel Grace (as is objected,) for God promised
pardon of Sin and Eternal Life freely; and it is the same free Grace which
first appointed, and afterward accepts of these Conditions. It is mere Favor
and Good Will that God was pleased to give Salvation and Everlasting Happiness
by Christ, on condition of believing and obeying him.

But you will say, it is the Language of the Covenant of Works, Do this, and
live; whereas the Gospel says, Believe, and be saved. I answer, The Covenant
of Grace (as well as the Covenant of Works) requires doing, and so in effect
says, Do this, and live: But yet there is this threefold difference between
them, (which I request may be well weighed, because it will be of singula^ use
to rectify our Notions about the matter in hand, and to give us a true insight
into the Nature of the Covenants.)

1. The Covenant of Works says, Do this by thy own natural strength and power;
and if thou do so, thou shall live. For this is certain, that in ^he First
Covenant the Conditions were to be performed by Adam and Eve (and us in them)
by a natural Strength given in the state of Innocence. They were created with a
sufficient Power to do what God required of them: By their own Free Will they
might have stood. But the Covenant of Grace says, Do this by a supernatural
Assistance, by that Grace which is given through Christ Jesus. No Man is
naturally born with an ability to do God's Will, and to please him. There is a
new Birth whereby he is empowered to do this; there is a Divine Principle
superadded to his Nature, and by virtue of this he believes, repents, etc.
This is the first difference between the doing under the Covenant of Works, and
under the Covenant of Grace.

2. The Covenant of Works says, Do this, and for doing thou shall live: But
the Covenant of Grace says, Do this, and for Christ's Merits and Satisfaction
thy doing shall be accepted of God; for his sake thou shall liv^ and be happy.
There is another Cause, you see, viz. the meritorious Righteousness of the Son
of God, which makes an infinite difference between the one and the other. This
we must remember, that the Covenant of Grace is that whereby Man is recovered
and restored to happiness by the undertakings of another; whereas by virtue of
the Covenant of Works, a Man attained to Life and Happiness by his own Works
and Obedience. His personal Righteousness entitled him to Heaven by the tenor
of the first Compact; but now the terms are otherwise, that which procures Li^e
and Immortality under the Second Covenant, is the Obedience of Christ. There is
nothing we can do, that will be acceptable for our own sakes: but on the
account of the Messi^^ the Mediator, we and our Services are accepted. The
Covenant of Works required d^ing, as a p^^formance meriting Salvation and
Ble^^edness; but this other Agreement exacts of us doing only, as it is the
appointed way and means of Salvation. This renders the Difference very great
and wide between the one and the other.

3. The Covenant of Works ^aith, Do this; but be sure to do it without the
least ^ailing and imperfection, and thou shall liv^ if thou do it thus,
otherwise not. For this Covenant made with Ad^^ and his Posterity, was upon
condition of sinless Obedience, as we find by the Consequence; and as we can
prove from the Law, which was founded on the Covenant of Works, Cursed is he
that continues not in (...) things written in the Book of the Law to do them,
D^ut. 27. 26. Universal and entire Obedience is absolutely required. But the
Covenant of Grace says, D^ this; and though it be done on thy part
imperfectly, yet thou shall live. Thou shall be accepted for the perfect and
consummate Righteousness of Christ, although thy Services be mixed with weakness
and sin. The Difference then between the Cov^nant of Works, and that of Grace,
is not doing or not doing, keeping or not keeping the Commandments* but the
Difference is here, the Covenant of Works requires the keeping the
Commandments without sin^ing, whereas by the Covenant of Grace no such thing is
required. This is the Difference between the Covenants, and thence it is
manifest that the latter of them requires not only believing but acting; tho,
it is true, believing is the principal thing under the New Covenant, and
therefore we find this chiefly urged by our Savior and his Apostles. Faith is
the main thing inculcated in the Writings of the New Testament, and the
contrary is that which is mostly laid to men's charge. On this account it is
rightly said, that, Believe, and be s^v^^, is the Language of the Covenant of
Grace; but yet it is certain, that doing or working is not excluded; for we
find in the Evangelical Writings, that both Faith and good Works are made the
necessary Conditions in order to Eternal Life: He that believes shall be
saved, Mark 16. 16. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved,
Acts 16. 31. Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts
3. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the
Commandments of God, ^ Cor. 7. 19. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12. 14. And many other places of Scripture show that something is required
to be done by us under the New Cov^n^nt: Wherefore we need not be afraid to
say, that the Covenant of Grace is ^ Law, viz. on this account, that it
commands something to be done. So that one would wonder, that any Men of reason
and discourse should assert, and that with much confidence, that the Gospel is
not a Law of Faith and Repentance; and that there is no Sanction, there are no
Precepts, no T^r^atnings, no Pr^mises belonging to it, as I find some have
lately maintained, notwithstanding it is styled a Law by two Apostles, Heb. 8.
6. James 1. 25. And we need not be afraid to say, that there are Conditions
propounded, and to be performed under this Covenant. For what is a C^ndition*
Does not every one grant that it is such a thing required of (...), without the
performance of which we shall never obtain the thing offered and pr^mis'd? And
is not this applicable to the present Case? Are not Faith and Obedience
absolutely required antecedently to our enjoying the Benefits and Privileges of
the New Covenant that are offered to us? Does not the word Condition express
the manner of our partaking the Benefits of the Gospel Covenant? Does it not
signify that order and disposition of the Divine Grace, which are to be seen in
conferring Pardon and Happiness? God has appointed, that none shall reap this
Fruit of the Covenant of Grace, unless they first believe and repent. This is a
fixed and established Order, and without observing and performing of this
latter, we shall never have any Advantage of the former. It is evident then,
that believing, and repenting are Conditions, and no Man of correct thoughts
can boggle at the truth and certainty of it.

But perhaps it will be said, the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace was
exploded by the first Reform^rs; for Calvin and others are quoted for this,
that the Gospel promises not Eternal Life upon condition of Obedience. But I
answer, and that with sincerity and truth, that the Reformers speak thus in
opposition only to the Popish Interpret^tion of the word Condition; for those
of the Church of Rom^ make Faith and Good Works, such a Condition as gives a
right to Eternal Life, and inclu^^s in it Merit. In this sense they disclaimed
all C^nditi^ns; and so do we, because it is the Grace of God, and the
Satisfaction made by Christ, that give us right and title to Pardon, and Life,
and Eternal Glory. But none of the Ref^rmed Churches ever doubted whether Faith
and Obedience are Conditions of the Evangelical Covenant in the sense above
propounded, viz. that they are such things, without the performance of which we
shall never obtain the Blessings promised to us. And this is ingenuously
confessed by Dr. Owen of Justification.
one, who is thought by some to incline wholly to the contrary Opinion;
speaking of the true acception of the word Condition in this present matter, he
has these express words, If it be int^nded that these things (viz. Faith and
Ob^dience) tho promised in the Covenant, and wrought in us by the Grace of God,
ar^ ye^ Duties required of us in order to the participation and enjoyment of
the full end of the Covenant, it is the Truth that is asserted, i. e. they are
properly conditions. And thus in some respect the Covenant of Grace may be said
to be a Covenant of Works, i. e. so far as it requires certain Conditions to be
performed by us, tho not in the same manner that the Covenant of Works required
them; for they are not to be looked upon as a meritorious and impulsive Cause,
as they were then, but only as an Instrument or Means in order to Eternal
Happiness. But otherwise (as has been said) there is a vast difference between
the Covenant of Works and of Grace; for the tenor of the former was, that our
First Parents, and in them all Mankind, should, without the least defect and
transgression, perform the Law which God gave them; and that upon the sole
account of this performance they should purchase Happiness: But if they were
deficient in their Duty, they should perish without any hope of Mercy. There
was no provision of Forgiveness in case they should break God's Law; there was
no promise of being received into God's Favor again. But the terms of the
latter were, that God would not be exact with us, and require an Obedience void
of all sin; but that for the worth of Christ's sinless Obedience, for the value
of his perfect Righteousness, we should be rewarded with Life and Bliss. And
this Covenant allows of hearty Repentance, after we have transgressed the
Divine Law, and assures us that we shall be reconciled unto God, and be
restored to his Favor. For the sake of our Blessed Mediator, our Sins and
Failings shall be forgiven us, if we sincerely repent of them, and betake our
selves to the practice of the contrary Duties. This is the way and method of
Salvation under this Covenant: Instead of exact Righteousness, i. e. wholly
living without Sin, God accepts of our doing according to the utmost of our
capacity, and our acting with sincerity and uprightness: And the defect of this
personal Righteousness and Obedience, is supplied by the meritorious
Righteousness and Obedience of Christ Jesus. Thus you see how these two
Covenants differ, and that they answer to the different states of Man's
Innocence, and of his Fall; and that the Second Covenant was made, because we
cannot observe the strict Conditions of the First.

The Second Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, made with Adam first, was a long
time after that repeated to ^^ra^am, Genesis 22. 18. and afterward renewed, and
in a solemn manner confirmed to the Isr^^li^^s at the giving of the Law on
M^^nt Sinai. There was then this ^xod. 34. ^7. ^king^. 9.
Covenant made between God and them; God promised Life, and they Obedience:
therefore Moses who transacted this on the Mount, is said to be a M^di^t^r
between God and them. It is said, Mos^s took, the Book of the Covenant, and
read it in the ears of the people, Exodus 24. 7. which refers to all the words
of the Lord which Moses wrote, ver. 4. i. e. all those Laws, Precepts and
Judgments which God gave to the People, and which they unanimously accepted of,
and promised Obedience to. But the Decalogue was the Sum of this Covenant, as
appears from Deuteronomy. 4. 13. God declared to you his Covenant, which he commanded
you to perform, even ten Commandments.

Some hold that this Covenant made with the Israelites, was the Covenant of
Works, the same as to the main which was made with Adam before the Fall. I
grant there was a kind of a going back (as I have observed before) a seeming
reviving of the Old Covenant of Works; and so the Covenant of Works was, as it
were, after the Covenant of Grace; or rather the Covenant of Grace and Works
seemed to be at the same time. But this was not so in reality, but only in
appearance: There was an Evangelical Promise to Adam and Abraham, viz. that
they should be justified by the Messiah; and there was a Promise also to the
Jews, that they should live, i. e. be saved, if they performed the Law. But
these two Promises were not inconsistent, neither did the latter of these
abrogate the former, as the Apostle speaks in Gal. 3. 17. The Covenant of
Grace, which was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law, which was four
hundred and thirty years after, could not disannul, that it should make the
Promise (or Covenant) of none effect. But, as the Apostle subjoins, The Law
(which looked something like the Covenant of Works) was added to it because of
Transgressions, until the Blessed Seed should come, ver. 19. The Law was to be
serviceable to the Covenant of Grace, and to be a Schoolmaster to bring them to
Christ. Hereby they were to be convinced of Sin, and of their inability to keep
the Commandments. And the same Law denouncing Wrath and a Curse, stirred men up
to fly to Divine Mercy, and to beg Forgiveness, and the Assistance of the
Spirit, and so prepared them for the Gospel. God gave that People Precepts
about External Rites of Divine Worship, and also Judicial Laws for their
Commonwealth: And besides these, he writ in Tables the Moral Law, and caused it
to be promulged. All which he closed with those solemn Sanctions, This do, and
live: and cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written. Here was a very great resemblance of the Covenant of Works, and the
Law of Faith seemed to be laid aside: Or there might seem to be two Covenants
on foot together. But the Design of Heaven was only this, that hereby the Jews
might be brought to see their great Guilt and their deplorable State, that they
might be sensible that they lay under Wrath and a Curse, and that thence they
might be provoked to look for a Remedy; or, when it was of^e^ed to them, to
accept of it. This was the Reason why they were under the Law, which had some
affinity with the Covenant of Works. But the Covenant of Grace made with Adam
soon after his Fall was not laid aside, but still prevailed, and no other but
that. Even under the Law they were not justified by Works, but by Faith; they
obtained not Salvation by their own perfect Obedience, but by virtue of the
perfect Righteousness of the Messiah who was to come in the fullness of time. It
only seemed good to the Allwise God to obscure and disguise this Covenant in
part, that they might be fitted for the ensuing Dispensation of the Gospel, and
that this Dispensation might appear more bright and glorious.

Now it was that the Covenant of Grace most signally displayed it self: By
Christ's coming, and by the preaching of the Gospel, it was fully and amply
manifested, tho it had been in being ever since the Restoration of Adam. Now
at last the actual fulfilling of the Grand Promise of this Covenant, viz. the
Incarnation of Christ, was accomplished. He came on purpose to perfect that
Covenant which had been made and renewed before between God and Man. Never till
this time was there any complete discovery of this blessed Agreement and
Contract between God and us. In the Writings of the New Testament alone we find
this set forth. Here is plainly discovered the Mediator of this Covenant, Jesus
Christ the Righteous, the Eternal and only begotten Son of God, who vouchsafed
to assume our Humane Nature, to clothe himself with Flesh, to converse in the
World above thirty Years, to instruct Mankind by his Heavenly Doctrine, to
confirm and establish us in it by his Divine Miracles, to direct us to the
practice of it by his Holy Life and Spotless Example, and at length to die for
us to satisfy for our Sins. As the public and most solemn Covenants which we
read of in the Genesis 21. 27. Exodus 24. 6, 7, 8.
Old Testament, were made with killing and sacrificing, and effusion of Blood,
(by Divine Appointment without doubt): So here the Blessed Messiah, who was to
complete the Covenant of Grace, shed on the Cross his most precious Blood,
which therefore is called Heb. 10. 29.
the Blood of the Covenant.

Again, in the Scriptures of the New Testament, are plainly and expressly set
forth the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, i. e. what God has promised to do,
and what Obligations are upon us. Here Christ and his Apostles, and
Evangelists, proclaim Remission of Sins, the peculiar Benefit and Privilege of
the Covenant of Grace; and Immortality and Eternal Life are brought to light by
this Gospel; and the performance of all the precious Promises which concern
this Life and another, is ascertain^d to us here. And as it assures us that
God will fulfill his Promises, so it urges upon us the performing of our
Engagements. Christianity is an Obligatory Covenant, and this Obligation is
mutual. God will discharge his part, we must see that we perform the Conditions
which are required on our side. The Gospel acquainteth us, that if our Peace
and Reconciliation be not made, it is our own fault wholly; we will not leave
our Sins, and thereby we ^rustrate the Agreement and Contract of the Gospel.
This therefore calls upon us to undertake the Counter-part of the Covenant, i.
e. to be holy in all manner of Conversation, to deny all Ungodliness and wordly
Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in this present World; to
adorn the Gospel by a strict and circumspect walking, and to bring forth much
Fruit to the Glory of our Heavenly Father. In the Evangelical Writings the
Terms on our part, which are Faith, Repentance, and Ob^di^nc^, are more
distinctly set down than ever; especially the Nature of Faith, and the peculiar
Virtue of it are explained in that manner which they were never before: for
that by Works and Faith we are saved, but that by Faith alone we are justified,
is the Doctrine which St. Paul has abundantly asserted, proved and confirmed,
and it is established by the other Apostles: which shows the great
discrimination between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace. The
Gospel tells us how we are to find real Advantage by this Covenant and Law of
Grace; it ascertains us that we can reap the Benefit of it only by C^nv^rsi^n
and R^g^neration. It is therefore urged and inculcated, that we must be born
again, that we must be N^^ Creatures, that there must be a Ren^vation of our
Hearts and Lives.

Lastly, Christianity informs us what are the Seals of this Covenant of Grace;
and accordingly let us know, that by Baptism we are entered into Covenant with
God, and into the Church of Christ; and that at the Lord's Supper we repeat and
renew that Convenant. Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, instituted this
Federal Ordinance: and this is that Holy Supper at which he gives us his Body
to eat, and his Blood to drink, which he assures us is the Blood of the New
Covenant, which is shed for the Remission of Sins, Mat. 26. 28. The sum then of
what has been said is, That God pitied the Mi^ery of Mankind, and was pleased
to make a Second Covenant with him and his Posterity after they had broke the
First. This Second Covenant, tho it was made with Adam presently after his
Fall, yet it arrived not to its height and perfection till the coming of
Christ, and the preaching of the Gosp^l. Christianity is the Covenant or Law of
Grace in the best Edition.

The Answer then to that Problem, How the Old and the New Covenant differ? is
easily resolved from the Premises: for if you understand (as some do, but how
fitly you will judge from what I shall suggest by and by) by the Old Covenant
the Covenant of Works, and by the New one the Covenant of Grace; I have plainly
and distinctly set down the Particulars wherein they differ. Or, if you mean by
the Old Covenant the Mosaical and Legal Dispensation, and by the New Covenant
the Dispensation of the Gospel, (which both are but One Covenant) I have given
ample Satisfaction to the Question, by showing wherein these two differ; and by
letting you see that the Covenant of Grace began with Mankind soon after the
Fall, and afterward was continued in the Mosaic Dispensation, and at last was
completed by Christ's coming.

And here further to illustrate the Point, I will clear the Acception of these
Terms, the Old and the New Covenant, which so frequently occur in Holy Writ;
and I will make it evident to you, that in the whole Book of the Scrip^ures,
the Old Covenant is never applied to the Covenant of Works, but is a part or
degree of the Covenant of Grace. This then we are to know, that the Covenant of
Grace is twofold, Obscure or Manifest. The first was from Adam's Restoration
to our Savior's coming; the second is ever since. The former is called the Old
Covenant, the latter the New Covenant, and yet they are but one Covenant. This
you will find to be the style of Sacred Scripture, if you consult those two
famous places, the one in the Old Testament, and the other in the New, which
treat of the Old and New Covenant. The former is Jew. 31. 31. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel,
and with the House of Judah, not according to the Covenant I made with their
Fathers (the old Mosaic Dispensation); but this shall be the Covenant that I
will make, I will put my Law into their inward parts, and write it in their
heart; and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. -- They shall all
know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I
will forgive their I^iquity, and I will remember their sin no more: by which is
meant the Evangelical Dispensation, or the Covenant of the Gospel, which is
expressly called here the New Covenant; and the Covenant made with their Fathers
is to be understood of the giving the Law to the Jews, and consequently of the
Jewish Economy. But this will be morefully made good from the other place, the
8 th to the Hebrews, from the 6 th Verse to the end; where is set forth the
true Nature of the Old and New Covenant, as I have represented it. Christ, our
Eternal High Priest, says the Apostle, has ^b^ained a more excellent
Ministry, by how much also ^e is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was
established on better Promises, ver. 6. Here the Covenant of Grace under the
Gospel is called a Better Covenant, because on some accounts it is better th^n
it was under the Law, and particularly by reason of more evident and certain
Promises which Christ has added. On this Consideration it is called a better
Covenant, tho it be the very same as to substance. The Apostle proceeds, Verse.
7, 8. If the first Covenant had been faultless, (i. e. if the Legal
Dispensation had not been imperfect) then should no place ^ave been sought for
the second (i. e. there would have been no need of introducing the Evangelical
Administration) but finding fault with that, he says, Behold, the days come,
says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant, etc. The former being found
insufficient was taken away, and another brought into its room; tho (to speak
properly) it was not another, but the same in other Circumstances. For the
Covenant of Grace was under the Law; but because it varied as to some respects
when Christ came, it is represented as a Double Covenant, and accordingly the
Scripture calls the former the Old Covenant, and the latter the N^w on^. This
Reason likewise may be given, why the Covenant of Grace which was in the time
of the Law, is called the Old Covenant, and the same under the Gospel is called
the N^w Cov^nant, viz. because they are so comparatively, i. e. the Legal
Economy in respect of the Christian one, is Old; and this in respect of that,
is N^w. According to the different Administrations of the Covenant of Grace,
this Covenant is said to be Old or N^w. In the Old Testament the Covenant of
Grace was administered by Sacrifices, Puri^yings, and many other Typical
Ceremonies and Mystical Observances; and this ancient way of God's dealing with
his People, is styled the Old Cov^nant: but in the New Testament these things
were done away, and so the Covenant of Grace appeared New, and on that account
had its denomination. Thus tho the Old and New Covenant differ in the manner,
and way, and external Administration, in so much that the latter is eminently
called the Covenant of Grace, and the former in comparison of that is not the
Covenant of Grace; yet really they are the sam^ in substanc^, and there is no
opposition between them, for in both of them Free Grace, and Remission of Sins
through Jesus Christ are held forth to all the Faithful, therefor they are but
One Covenant. This is the truest Notion of the Covenants, tho some of the
Ancient Writers, but more of the Moderns, have mistaken this Point, confounding
the Covenant of Works, and the Old Covenant, and making them to be the same,
which has been attended with very gross Errors. For tho it is true, the
Covenant of Works may be called the Old Covenant because it was first, yet we
now confine our selves to the style of the Holy Scriptures, and are declaring
what is called the Old Covenant in the Language of those Inspired Writers; and
there you will never find it is applied to the Covenant of Works, but always to
the Covenant of Grace under the Old Dispensations: and the New Covenant always
refers to that Covenant, as it was renewed and made better by the Evangelical
Institution. And because the Covenant of Grace under Moses was dark and
imperfect, but when Christ came was clear and entire, therefore the Apostle
represents them as two distinct Covenant, a First and a Second, a worse and a
better. Thus you have the true Reason why the former Dispensation is called the
Old Covenant, and why the latter is called the N^w; and on this is grounded the
vast Diff^r^nc^ between the D^sp^nsations of the Law and the Gospel. But this
does not argue that there are any new Duties introduced by this means, and that
there is a real Addition to the former Precepts and Commands. No such thing can
rationally be inferred from the Distinction of the Old and New Covenant. So
much concerning the Particular Nature of this Evang^lical Disp^nsation, and how
it differs from the others; which was the first thing I undertook.

CHAP. XIII.
Tho we could assign no Reason why the Christian Economy was so late, and why
our Savior arrived no sooner in the World, this is sufficient to satisfy us,
that it was God's Pleasure it should be so. But for the sake of the
Inquisitive, such Reasons and Considerations as these are offered: 1. It must
be remembered that Christ appeared in the World even in the early times of the
Patriarchs. 2. The Benefits of Christ's Redemption were imparted to the
Faithful before he actually appeared in the flesh. 3. The World was not fit to
receive him sooner. 4. He delayed his Coming to make the World sensible of
their Misery. 5. That the Advantages of his Coming might be prized. 6. It was
congruous that so great a Prince should not arrive without solemn Harbingers
and Heralds of his Coming. 7. The necessities of Mankind called for him at that
particular time and juncture when he came. The Jewish Church grew worse and
worse. An enumeration of the several Sects and Factions which they were divided
into, viz. Essenes, Pharisees, Sadduees, Herodians, Samaritans, Galilaeans. 8.
God proceeds in a gradual Order and Method. The most perfect things are
reserved till the last.

II. I Am to acquaint you with the Reasons why the Christian Dispensation, as
to the actual exerting of it, took not place in the World before, and (which is
the foundation of this) why Christ Jesus the Messiah and Savior blessed not
Mankind with his Coming till that precise time wherein we are certified by the
Evangelical Records and other Testimonies that he was born, and why he came
neither sooner nor later. Indeed I might say here (as before) that we are to
rest satisfied with God's managing this matter, although we were not able to
assign a particular Reason. The Wisdom and Equity of God's dealing^ are
undeniable: He must be le^t to dispense his Benefits when he pleases: and most
certainly that is the best time which he chooses. It is the Glory of God
(says the Prove. 25. 2.
Wife Man) to conceal a thing, to hide the Causes and Reasons of his Actions
from Men, especially of the particular circumstance of Time, which is not of
such Concern to us as the Things themselves. Therefore we ought not to be very
inquisitive and scrupulous, but finally to resolve all into God's good Will and
Pleasure. Thus when the Primitive Christians were asked in a cavilling way by
the Pagans, why Christ came so late, they ingenuously answered, Non imus
in^icias nescire nos etc. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2.
We deny not that we are ignorant of the Reason of it: we cannot see and tell
God's secret Will, and how he orders his Affairs. He alone knows What is to
be done, and How, and at what Time. And again, thus In an Eternal and Infinite
course of Ages, where there is no beginning nor end, nothing can be said to be
soon or late. And St. Augustin's Answer to those that asked why Christ came not
before, was this, Quia nondum venerat plenitudo temporis, moderante illo per
quem facta ^unt tempora: sciebat enim quando venire deberet. Tract. 31. in
Johan.
Because (says he) the Fullness of Time was not yet come, according to the
appointment of Him by whom all Times are: for it was best known to him when
Christ ought to come. And in another place he gives the like Reason, why Christ
came just at that time, and no other, Novit quidem Dominus quid quando faciat,
qui in mensur^ and numero and pondere cuncta disponit. In Psalm. 118.
The Lord (says he) who disposes all things in Measure, Number, and Weight,
knows when he does any thing. It may suffice then to answer, that so it
pleased God whose Wisdom is infinite. He has his (...). his own times (for so
it should be rendered) Tit. 1. 3. When these come, he sets such and such a
Dispensation on foot. Tho this will not satisfy some, yet it ought to pass for
good Divinity with those that are wise to Sobri^^y.

But yet, tho we must not sawcily pry into the Secrets of Heaven, we are
permitted with modesty to enquire how far they may be discovered to us.
Therefore to give satisfaction even to the Curious, I will offer some
Considerations wherein are contained the particular Reasons of the Dat^ of the
Christian O^con^my, why Christ came not into the World till it was about four
thousand Years old, and why he came at that time rather than at another.

1. You are to consider that tho Christ was not Born of the Virgin Mary till
that very time, yet he appeared long before to some of the Patriarchs and
Saints under the Old Testament. The Angel that appeared to Hagar was the
Messi^^, the Son of God: therefore M^s^s calls him the Lord, or Ie^ovab, Genesis
16. 13. It was the Opinion of the Ancient Tertullian l. 3. contra Marcion.
Justin. Dialog. cum Tryph. Hilar. l. 4. de Trin. Athanas. Sermon. 3. cont. Arian.
Augustine. l. 2 de Trin. and alii.
Fath^rs that this Second Person in the Glorious Trinity appeared in human
Shape to Abraham, as he sat in the Plains of Mamre, Genesis 18. 13, etc. where he
is styled Iehova^, and afterward the God of Bethel, chap. 31. 21. And he
appeared to Jacob in the Form of an Angel, and wrestled with him; he is called
a Genesis 32. 24.
Man in the entrance of the Story, and Ver. 28.
God in the sequel of it; and the Prophet Hosea speaking of him, calls him God,
Chap. 12. 3. This is that Angel of the Covenant who appeared Number. 7.
ultIreneus, Tertullian, St. Austin, and most of the Ancients hold that it was
Christ who appeared as an Armed Man, and Captain of the Lord of Hosts, to
encourage Joshua, when he was to take Jericho, Jos. 5. 13, 14. And many of the
Fathers were of opinion that Christ was the Conducter of the Israelites out of
Egypt into the Land of Canaan, who led them through the Wilderness of Arabia,
and descended on Mount Sinai, and resided in the Tabernacle, and the Temple.
And that of Daniel, Chap. 3. 25. the Form of the fourth Person (who was seen in
the fiery Furnace) was like the Son of God, is interpreted by some of the
Eternal Son of God, who used to visit the Patriarchs, and now visibly bore the
three Children company in the Flames. And from several other places in the Old
Testament it may be gathered that Christ appeared to the Holy Men in those days
upon extraordinary occasions. So then he appeared sooner than is imagined: his
Incarnation was not the first time of his Appearance in the World: he actually
manifested and showed himself before his Birth. His early visiting of the
Patriarchs and Prophets was a Forerunner of his more signal Appearing in the
^ulness of time, when he took on him our humane Nature, and conversed with
Mankind.

2. If you consider that all the Benefits which accrued to Mankind by a
Savior, were imparted even before Christ was made Flesh, you will not think
that his Appearance in the World was late. He (as you have heard) was the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the World. The Covenant of Grace, that he who
repents and believes shall be saved, was made immediately after Man's Fall:
the Merit of the Messi^^ his Undertakings was valid from that very time, and
therefore the Promises of Mercy in Christ are contained, tho obscurely, in the
Books of the Old Testament. The Gospel is ancient: the Design of God in all
Ages tended to the consummating of this: which may take off our marvelling at
its being no sooner. It was in being long before as to the grand Efficacy and
Virtue of it. Have then this right Notion of the true Date of Christianity, and
you will not ask why Christ appeared not before.

3. Persuade your selves of this, that Christ would have actually appeared
sooner, and that in our Flesh, if the World had been fit to receive him before.
God acts according to the Nature of things, according to the Capacities and
Faculties of Mankind, according to the Condition and Frame of Men. Hence his
dealings with them are different and various, his Administrations and Methods
are not alike: but they are always most suitable and agreeable to the present
Circumstances. When Plutarch.
Solon was asked whether he had le^t the Athenians the best Laws he could, he
answered he had given them the best they were capable of. This is more
eminently true of the Laws and Institutions, the Discoveries and
Administrations which are from God the Great and Infalliable Lawgiver, they are
the most exactly fitted to the Capacities and Dispositions, the Inclinations
and Genius of the People who are to make use of them. He prescribes Laws not
according to what he is able to do, but according to our Ability to hear and
receive them. Hence it is that tho True Religion be but One, yet it has had
Different Discoveries and Mani^estations, according to the Different States and
Conditions of Men in the several Ages of the World. This argues not any
Changeableness in God, but his great Wisdom, and Care of his Church: as a
Prudent Master of a Family gives different Orders and Rules according to the
diversity of Persons and Times he has to do with. Thus our Savior was pleased
to fulfill all Omnem statum, Oecono^iam. Grot. in Mat. 3. 15.
Right^ousness, to comport with the present State and Economy, to allow of any
thing or Dispensation which God will have to be in the World, tho it may seem
to some not to be so fitting and decorous. This is sufficient that God acts
congruously to the nature of things, and that all along he administers every
thing for the greatest Good of Mankind, although in various Ways and Manners. This
is one Reason why the Evang^lical Dispensation was not introduced till other
Dispensations were past. The Indisposition of the former and first Times made
Christ delay his Coming: he knew they were not prepared to receive his Doctrine
and Miracles. This Reason is given by St. Epist. 49.
Augustine; and Eus^bius agrees with him, for treating of this very Question,
why Christ came so late, he renders this Account of it, Praefat. ad lib. 8. de
Demonstrat. Evangel.
The generality of the World was become like Beasts, and so were not fit to
receive Christ and his Doctrine. It was necessary therefore that the Way should
be prepared by Moses's Law, by the Doctrine and Example of Prophets and good
Men. Before this the World was incapable of Christ and the Gospel.

4. Christ came not till four thousand Years were expired, that Mankind might
see their Misery, and be ^ensible of it, and desire a Remedy; and in the mean
time more strenuously exercise their Faith and Hope. Especially, with respect
to the Jewish People, so many Ages had passed before the Messi^^ came, because
hereby God would let them see their want of a Messiah, that they might heartily
breathe after, and long for a Red^^m^r and Savior, that they might earnes^ly
expect and pray for a Deliv^r^r to rescue them from that intolerable Yoke which
they were under. This seems to be one Reason why God deferred the sending of
his Son. Which is implied in those words of the Apostle, Romans 5. 20. The Law
entered (i. e. the Mosaic Dispensation interposed between Abraham and Christ's
time, and thereby the Evangelical State was de^er'd a long time) that the
Offense might abound, that the heinous Transgression of the Law might be the
better discerned to be Sin, and that Men might be thoroughly apprehensive of it.
Then the Apostle adds, where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound, i. e. by
this means the Grace of God in ^ending his Son, and his pardoning of Sinners
through his Blood are the more fully displayed, and taken notice of. Which
leads me to another Account of this matter.

5. So far as we can apprehend the wise Designs and Purposes of God, we may
render this Reason why this Benefit was so long delayed, viz. that it might
thereby be Comm^nd^d to us, and that we might set the great^r Value on it. God
suffered the Darkness for so many hundred years, that he might bring forth a
more Glorious Light at last. From the opposition of these two the Divine Wisdom
is more manifest, and the Victory of the one over the other is more eminent.
Hence Mankind is more eager in embracing the Light of the Gospel, and all the
Advantages of it become more welcome and grateful.

6. It was not fit so Great a Prince and Savior as the Messiah should arrive
without Harbingers and Forerunners of his Coming. So that Pious Doctor of the
Church speaks, Per multam seriem temporum and annorum praedicendus fuit: non
enim aliquod parvum venturum fuit. Quant^ major Judex veniebat, tanto praeconum
longior series praecedebat. Augustine. Tract. 31. in Johan.
Christ was to be foretold many Ages before he came, because it was no little
and mean thing that was to come. The greater this Judge was, it was fitting the
greater should be his Equipage, and a longer Train of Messengers and Heralds
should go before him. Observe therefore, after the Types and Shadows were
vanished, after the Legal Services were expired, after all the Predictions of
the Patriarchs and Apos^les were accomplished, after the so often repeated
Promises concerning Christ were fulfilled, after the appearances of Angels, and
Visions and Revelations, and extraordinary Declarations from Heaven had made
way for the arrival of the Messiah, after he was generally expected by the
Jewish Nation, after all these Preparatives and Forerunners of his Coming were
fully past, then he actually en^^ed on the stage of the World, and manifested
himself in the Flesh. The Time appointed by the Father for the sending his only
begotten Son, or (as the Apostle calls it) Gal. 4. 4.
^^e Fullness of Time happily brought along with it Ephesians. 4. 13.
the Fullness of Christ, as the same Apostle speaks. It was Reasonable, Decorous
and Congruous that so great a Person, and so great a Blessing should not come
on a sudden, but that the World should be a long time prepared for so Glorious
a Dispensation.

7. The necessities of Mankind seemed to call for him at that very Time when he
came. This is the Reason which Orat. de Not. Christi.
Gregory Nazianzen gives why Christ came not before, but then, because the
World was more than ^ver corrupted, and the Degeneracy was greater; the Disease
was at its height, and then the Remedy was most proper. So Theodoret compares
Christ to those Physicians (...) Sermon. 6. con. Graec.
who reserve their strongest Medicines till the last, for having used Lenitives
first, they choose to administer more powerful Medicines afterward. The
corruption by Adam having miserably infected the World, God used fit means to
stop the growth of it, and to curb Sin and Wickedness. Besides the Law of
Nature implanted in Men's minds, which was a constant check to immoral and
vicious Actions, the Works of the Creation, which were continually before their
eyes, were servic^able to instruct them in the Wisdom and Power of God; and to
bring them to reverential Thoughts of him, and to induce them to serve and obey
the (...) and Preserver of all things. God swept away the Old World with an
universal D^luge, to make the poor remainder better, by reflecting on his
Severity against Sinners. And when the World increased again, and ^ultitudes of
People were spread on the face of the Earth, the Almighty God showed his
Displeasure against Sin, in confounding the Language of the Babel-Builders, in
consuming Sodom and Gomorr^^ with Flames from H^^ven, and in several other
Instances he let Men understand that he was highly incensed against Sinners;
which should have been a Warning to them, and was so designed by God, that they
might tremble at his Judgments, and abandon their evil ways. When God beheld
the obstinacy of Mankind, he was pleased to make ^uller Discoveries of himself
than before: he chose out a peculiar. People to impart his Will to, that they
(whatever others did) might serve and worship him in a more solemn and pure
manner, and that their exemplary Lives might have influence on the rest of the
World. He writ Laws with his own hand to deliver to them, he raised up Seers
and Prophets among them who daily admonished them of their Duty, and by
frequent dispensing of Mercies and Judgments he strove to make them sensible of
it, and to keep them firm to it. When for their crying Sins they were sent into
Captivity, God restored them again, and placed them in their own Land; but they
soon forgot his singular Kindness to them, and this extraordinary Favor of God
was not powerful enough with them to restrain them from the commission of the
most abominable Sins, and to cause them to have regard to that Holy Religion
which strictly forbad all such practices.

In every Age they grew worse and worse, and at last they arrived to the
height of Impiety, and their Sins seemed to be consummated. In Iudaea, the
Seat of this once beloved People of God, all Licentiousness, Lewdness and
Villainy prevailed. The greatest Jews were Atheists and Epicures, and not
ashamed to profess themselves such, as well as to live like Persons of that
Character. And the In Tract. Sanedrim.
Talmud might well say, When the Messiah shall come, wise Men shall be very
rare in Israel, but Impostors, Inchanters and Magicians shall be many; this
Sign having been exactly verified before the Coming of Christ, the design of
whose being manifested was to destroy those works of the Devil. The Disorders
and Wickednesses of the Jewish Clergy were very remarkable before our Savior's
Coming. The Ancient Order of Priests being extinguished by Herod, in their
places were put none but obscure, contemptible and unworthy Persons, who made
Religion a cloak for their Covertousness, and devoted themselves wholly to Gain
and Interest. The Temple was turned into a place of Merchandise: the High
Priests Places were bought, and a couple of that Order at a time were set up
because they both had been Simoniacal; which shows likewise that the Jewish
Magistracy as well as the Ministry was corrupted. There were great Corruptions
among the Jewish Students and Doctors, who neglecting the weighty things of the
Law, began to hunt after Niceties and Subtilties, and strove to cherish
Disputes and Controversies. Hence were the Noted Schools of Hillel and Shammai,
which were divided into two formal Parties, like Scotists and Thomists. Of
whose different and disagreeing Decisions concerning the Law of Moses the
Mishnah pretends to give an account.

The Jews were divided into three Religious Sects especially, the Essenes, the
Pharisees, and the Sadduces. These were unknown before the Babylonian
Captivity: but after that, and the building of the Second Temple, they sprang
up both Names and Things: but the two latter Sects began especially to appear,
and to be taken notice of about a hundred Years before Christ's Nativity;
either Sect endeavoring to bring their Kings (as long as the Regal Power was
in the Native Jews) to their Opinion, and accordingly great Factions arose by
their Dissensions. The Essenes among the Jews were a harmless sort of People,
they retired from the World, le^t the public, and betook themselves to a
Monastic Life, daily Devotion, and Hours of Prayer: you may call them the
Jewish M^nks. They came not to the Temple, neither brought Sacrifices thither,
but pretended to use at home more Holy Ceremonies, as I^s^phus speaks. They had
no Wives, counting the most peaceable way of Living to be alone. They had no
Servants, thinking it to be a reproach and injury to our Common Nature to be in
a servile Condition. They were all Equal, and mutually administered to one
another. This you will find in the Character which the foresaid Antiq. l. 18.
c. 2. De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
Antiqu^^y (if he be not mistaken concerning the Persons and Things) gives of
them. They are not any where mentioned in the Writings of the Gospel, because,
1. They affected a private and recluse Life. 2. They generally inhabited on the
Coast of the Dead Sea, remote from Jerusalem. 3. They were no bu^^ling Zealots,
they made no noise in Religion. 4. They were not forward in persecuting of
Christ. For these Reasons they are not spoken of by any of the Evangelists.

But the Pharisees, who were a busy Sect, and lived in the heart of Judea, and
were fierce Opposers of our Savior's Doctrine, are frequently mentioned in the
Evangelical Writings. Our Blessed Lord often encountered them, and openly
detected their (...) Pride and Hypocrisy, as also their fond Superstition in
enjoining Fastings, Washings, and other Ceremonious Practices of their own
invention. These were the Men who wretchedly perverted the Law, holding that it
enjoined only external Obedience, and that by that outward Observance of the
Law Men merited Remission of Sin, and were just before God, and Heirs of
Eternal Life. Their constant Custom was to corrupt the true meaning of the
Decalogue by their false Interpretations and Comments, as you may see in
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, where he explains the Moral Law, and vindicates
it from the corrupt Expositions which they had made of it, whereby they had
almost extinguished the true Sense of the Commandments. They had taken away the
key of Knowledge by depraving the true Doctrine which was contained in the
Written Law and the Books of the Prophets, and by adhering to that which they
called the Oral Law, the Constitutions, Traditions and Expositions of the
Rabbis, and by making them the Rules of their Faith and Manners. As to the
more particular Opinions, Notions and Practices of these Men, we may satisfy
our selves from the Account given of them by Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
One who was of that Sect himself, as he tells us in his Life. The genuine
Offspring of these Pharisees (as Buxt^rf observes) are now the (...)
Rabbanita, Traditionary Jews, or Talmudists, who stick not to the pure Text of
Scripture, but are for New Explanations or Old Traditions.

The next Sect was the Sadducees, who ran counter to the Pharisees, and opposed
all Traditions. The Jews at this day who answer to these (as before it was
observed, there is a sort among them that are the true Race of the Pharisees)
are the (...)
Karaeans, the Scripturists, who keep close to the written Letter, and reject
the whole Oral Law, i. e. the Expositions and Glosses of the Rabbis. They hold
only what is expressly delivered in the Law; and they are looked on by the other
Jews as Heretics and Apostates. But as to the Ancient Sadducees (of whom I am
now speaking) there were but few of this Sect, says the Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
forecited Author, but they were generally Persons of Wealth and Quality. This
was it which was faulty in them, that they curtailed the Holy Writings, and
rejected all the Books of the Prophets but Moses: the only Canonical Scripture
with them was the Pentateuch, as Tertullian, Origin, Ierom and other Writers of
good Account acquaint us. Tho I find Scaliver, Cunaeus, Hottinger.
some Men of Note among the Moderns, who endeavor to consute this, and to
prove that they received the whole Scripture, but they are not very successful
in this attempt. Moreover, they most impiously denied the Resurrection of the
Dead, and held that Men's Souls were mortal, yea they generally denied the
Existence of Spirits, Mat. 22. 23. These Men won some People to them, because
they were contrary to the strict and superstitious Pharisee; they took off the
burdensome Rites and Ceremonies which the others laid on. These two prevailing
Sects, the superstirious Pharisee and the profane Sadducee, differing so much
from one another both in Opinions and Manners, caused great Feuds and
Contentions, and unspeakably hindered the Practice of Religion among that People.

To these famous Sects might be added the Herodians (called the Leaven of
Herod, Mark 8. 15. by Christ) they were of the Religion of the Sadducees, and
therefore on that account (as Doctor Annotat. on Mat. 22. 16.
Hammond observes) may be said not to be a distinct Sect from them. See Mat.
16. 6. and 22. 16. Mark 8. 15. and 12. 13. But they were singular in this, that
they were much devoted to Herod and his Government, and consequently that of
the Romans: they were great upholders of Casar's Interest against the Pharisees
and other Jews, who looked upon Casar as an Usurper. Thus they were a different
Sect or Faction. Some thought and held that Herod was the promised Messiah:
these were the Herodians according to Tertullian, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and
other Fathers.

The Samaritans were another Sect among the Jews, and had been a long time:
these had their Name from Samaria the chief City of the Kingdom of Israel,
which fell off from Rehoboam, and took Jeroboam for their King. When the Jews
were carried captive into Assyria by Salmanasser, a Colony of Assyrians was
placed in this City, who being molested by wild Beasts desired an Israelitish
Priest to teach them the Religion of that Country where they were planted,
whereupon a Priest came and instructed them, and they partly observed Moses's
Law, and partly followed their own Idolatry and Superstition. From these came
the Samaritans, who were reckoned as rank Schismatics by the generality of the
Jews. Accordingly the Jews had no dealings with them, Joh. 4. 9. but maintained
an irreconcilable quarrel against them. Several Reasons concurred to keep up
this Feud and Antipathy, 1. The Samaritans were of the Race of the Assyrians
who carried the Jews captive. 2. They opposed and obstructed the rebuilding of
the Temple when the Jews undertook it, after the return from the Captivity,
Ezr. 4. 4. 3. They possessed a part of the Land which of Right belonged to the
Jews. 4. They received only the Pentateuch, and rejected the other Books as
Uncanonical; for when the Jewish Priest (mentioned before) was sent to them,
the Cannon of the Bible consisted chiefly of Moses's Writings, for all the
Historical Books were not extant at that time, and it is certain none of the
Prophets were. 5. They sacrificed not in the Temple at Jerusalem, but on Mount
Gerizim, where they had a king of a Temple peculiar to themselves, and was to
them as that at Jerusalem was to the Jews. It was built at first for them by
Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
Sanballat, two hundred Years after it was destroyed by I. Hircanu^; Herod,
when he rebuilt Samaria, made a Temple in it, but the Samaritans worshipped not
in it, but on Mount Gerizim. 6. They were averse to many of the Mosaic Rites
and Ceremonies, and differed from them in several parts of Worship: Some say
they were inclined to Idolatry. 7. They, as well as the Sadducees, held there
was no Resurrection or Future Life, which was directly contrary to the firm
Belief and Persuasion of the Jewish Church. For these Causes they were
extremely hated by the Jews, and were not admitted to Conversation or Worship
with them. Whence that common Saying, He that eats Bread with the Samaritans is
as if he eat Swines flesh. And another in use among the Jews was this, If a
Samaritan pronounce a Blessing, it is not lawful to say Amen after it. They
must neither eat nor pray with this People, but look upon them as Accursed.

There were the Galil^ans, Luke 13. 1. who were rather a State-Party or Faction
than a Sect. Their Principle was, not to submit to the Roman Government, for
they held it unlawful to obey a Magistrate that was a Pagan. Some think they
were the Followers of Judas the Galilaean, Acts 5. 37. Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
Joseph the Jew, after he had reckoned up other Divisions among the Jews,
mentions this, and tells us that they were as to the main Pharisees, but this
they had peculiar to themselves, that they most impetuously desired Liberty,
believing that God alone is to be esteemed and called a Lord and Prince: they
underwent the most exquisite kinds of Punishments, rather than they would
recede from this Opinion, and rather than they would give any mortal Man the
Name of Lord. It may be observed that the Ringleader of this Party is called
Simon by the foresaid Jewish Writer in his Lib. 2. cap. 7.
Book of the Jewish War, as well as Judas in his Book of Lib. 18. c. 2.
Antiquities, because perhaps he had both these Names.

Thus and much more was the Jewish Nation divided into Sects and Factions, thus
it was disordered and corrupted. Their Priests and People, their Church and
State, their Doctrine, Discipline, and Manners were all depraved. Religion was
decayed every where, Vice and Wickedness were predominant in all places among
them. And this was but a Specimen of what was more Catholic and prevailing in
the Empire at that time, to which the Jews were Tributary: for with the Empire
came in all Vice and Debauchery: nothing was approved of but Sensuality and
Intemperance, and all Exorbitancy; and the Virtue, Modesty and Sobriety of
Ancient Rome were laid aside. When the World was thus out of Order, and was
like to be worse, CHRIST the Redeemer arrived: he came to bless us with greater
Discoveries of God's Will, to inform and amend the erring and sinful World, to
give Rules of exact Holiness, and to commend Religion and Virtue by his own
Example. And besides, the World was at that time engaged in Wars and Tumults,
and frequent Battles, attended with confused noise and Garments rolled in
Blood; nothing but Disorder, Outrage and Slaughter insested the Earth: and lo!
at such a time as this the Prince of Peace visited the World, and brought with
him Tranquillity and Repose, and created a great Calm and Serenity in the
World. This shows how seasonable the Incarnation of Jesus was, and why he came
at that time, and wherefore Christianity was introduced at that very Season,
and not before.

8. and Lastly, God has always discovered himself to be a God of Order and
Method; he proceeds by certain Steps and Degrees. And this may satisfy us why
the Christian Dispensation took not place till other Dispensations had gone
before. God erected not this huge Fabric of the World in a moment, but
proc^eded leisurely and by degrees. The World began with a Chaos and Con^usion,
the Earth was at first a floating Bog, it was without form, and void, but in
six days time it grew to what it is. So was it with Religion, its first day was
in Adam, the second in Noah, the third in Abraham, the fourth in Moses, the
fifth in the Gentile Economy, and the sixth and last in the Messiah: thus it
gradually cleared up, and had its Consummation in Christ. Observe as God in the
Creation proceeded from things more imperfect to those that are perfecter;
Trees and Plants and all Vegetatives were created before Beasts that have a
sensitive Life; and at last he came to what was perfectest, Man, who has a
reasonable Soul, and is the most excellent of all God's Works in this lower
World; Man, the worthiest Piece of the Creation, was made last of all: So there
was the like Order and Method observed by God in framing and fashioning his
Church; it was set up first with weak and imperfect things. The Laws and
Constitutions given to the Sons of Men, were mean and low, and went no further
than Natural Religion: it was like their feeding upon Herbs and Plants only.
But afterward Religion was inhanced by extraordinary Revelations and
Discoveries, by positive Laws and Precepts: and by the Offering of Beasts, and
other such Legal Observances, the Sensitive and Animal Life (as I may so say)
the External and Bodily part of Religion was chiefly maintained. But at length
Religion was inspired as it were with a Rational Soul, it became Manly,
Spiritual and Refined: by the Gospel it came to be a Reasonable Service indeed,
an inward Principle, a Law of Liberty and Love. Christianity is the last, but
is the perfectest Dispensation in this Life.

What the Platonists hold concerning the several Powers and Faculties of Men's
Souls, that in due time and place they orderly awaken into act, and when a
lower Power is extinguished, a more extended and enlarged Capacity succeeds it,
a more divine Faculty and Life spring up and are envigorated; what these
Philosophers (I say) hold concerning human Souls, is true of Religion, and its
several Dispensations. There is a gradual Subordination of these ^everal
Oeconomies, and upon the Cessation and Extinction of one that is inferior, a
more Sublime and Perfect one arises in its Room: and it is God's Will and
Pleasure that these diverse Administrations shall take place in their Order, and
that one shall not anticipate the other. It seems good to the All-wise Creator
to reveal the knowledge of himself by degrees, to discover his Will as it were
by parcels. God dispenses not all his Favors together, not all at once: but
the mani^estations of his Will grow greater and greater successively. He
gradually instilled into the World the Notion of a Messiah: the Prophetical
Promises concerning him were higher and higher: by little and little the Sun of
Righteousness arose, and shined more and more unto a perfect Day. This is the
Divine Method, he proceeds from imperfect to perfect things, from the Shadow to
the Substance, from Types to Realities, from lesser to greater Discoveries. He
thought good to train up his Church in this manner, and by meaner
Communications to make way for the most complete delivering of his Will. Still
all along one Administration exceeded another, till at last Christianity
arrived, which was Highest of all.

Those words of the Apostle to the Hebrews are very remarkable to this purpose:
those under the Law, says he, received not the Promise (i. e. the full extent
of it in the Coming of Christ) God having provided some better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11. 39, 40. He gives here
the Reason why the Jews under the Legal Economy had not the Promise
completed, why Christ came not in those days, viz. because the Church was to
be perfected by Degrees. The condition of the Church before Christ was not to
be complete. They had their good things, but we were to have some better thing,
that it might be seen that God proceeds in a gradual and successive Way; and
that he will have things done in their due Season and Course: that we may take
notice of this, that the Frame and Fabric of Religion shall be reared by
little and little to its Perfection, that God intends to reserve the best
things till last; in short, that after Christ's Coming, Religion was to be at
its full Age, and that this Glorious Dispensation should crown all. Thus by the
different Stages and Progressions, the diverse Courses and Periods of the Church
in successive Ages, God has thought fit to show himself a God of Order, and
not of Confusion. And so I have finished the Reasons why the Christian
Disp^nsation was deferred so long, and why the Blessed Author and Founder of it
came no sooner.

The End of the First Volume.
POLYPOIKILOS SOPHIA.

A Complete HISTORY Or SURVEY Of all the Dispensations and Methods OF RELIGION,
From the beginning of the World to the Consummation of all things; As
represented in the OLD and NEW Testament.

SHOWING The several Reasons and Designs of those different Administrations;
and the Wisdom and Goodness of God in the Government of his Church, through all
the Ages of it.

The Second Volume.

In which The Certainty of the Christian Religion is demonstrated against the
Cavils of the Jews, Deists, etc.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, Ionath. Robinson, Andrew Bell, John Wyat,
and E. Harris. M.DC.XC.IX.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Volume.
CHAP. XIV.
THE Truth and Certainty of the Christian Economy, and consequently of
Christianity it self, evinced. That the Mosaic Dispensation was not designed
to be perpetual, is proved from, 1. The Prophesies concerning the enlarging of
the Church, together with the nature of the Jewish Observances. 2. God's
dispensing with the Mosaic Rites and Laws. 3. Their being neglected sometimes
by the Holiest Men. 4. God's disregarding them. 5. The Confession of the Jewish
Rabbis. An Objection, viz. that it is said the Mosaic Law shall be for ever,
dis^inctly answered. Prophesies which seem to relate to the Jewish Church are
to be interpreted concerning the Christian one. It is not necessary that there
should ^e a Formal Abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, because when the Reason of
a Law ceases, the Law it self cease. But yet, it is showed from sundry places
in the New Testament, that the Ceremonial Law is formally and expressly
abrogated. We are assured of the Truth of the Christian Religion from Humane
Testimony. The Testimony of the Outward and Bodily Senses is made use of, and
appealed to in the New Testament, as an Argument of the truth of Christianity.
St. John's Words, 1 Ep. 1 Chap. 1, 2, 3. ver. commented upon. There is no
certainty in Religion, especially in the Christian, if the Testimony of Sense
be not allowed of. The Apostles, and those who heard and saw the things done by
our Savior, were Credible Persons. The four Evangelists and other Writers of
the New Testament were competent Witnesses of what they relate. Their Personal
Qualities (which are particularly reckno'd up) render their Testimony worthy of
all acceptance. The Christians that succeeded them faithfully delivered things
to us. Their Lives are a proof of their Integrity. Their Sufferings and Death
are an undeniable Argument of their testifying the Truth to us. An Heap of
Evidences that we are not imposed upon by them. The very Jews bear witness to
the Truth of Christianity. The manner of their congratulating our Savior at
his riding into Jerusalem particularly considered. Heathens attest the Truth of
the Christian Religion. So do Infernal Spirits. P. 417.
CHAP. XV.
All the ways of Divine Revelation under the Mosaic Dispensation were made use
of under the Christian one. Voices. The Testimony of Angels. Visions. Dreams.
The Holy Spirit. The fulfi^ling of the Prophesies of the Old Testament is an
irrefragable Argument of the Truth of the New Testament. Prophesies concerning
the Birth of our Savior, Isa. 7. 14. cleared from the Cavils of the Jewish
Expositors. It is showed how these Words may have reference to something in
King Ahaz's days, and yet belong to Christ's Birth. Prophesies in the Old
Testament that relate to Christ's Life and Actions. Others that refer to his
Sufferings and Death. Some that foretell his Resurrection and Ascension. Other
more general Predictions concerning him. Several prophetic Passages concerning
the Branch proved to be spoken of Christ. The Hebrew Word for the Branch is
referred to in the New Testament. The two Zacharies agree. The Jews Objection,
viz. that the Messiah was to be another kind of Person than what Jesus of
Nazareth was, answered. Another Objection, viz. that the Messiah was to bring
universal Peace, answered. A third Objection of the Jews, viz. that their Sins
have hindered the Messias's coming at the promised time, answered. The Objection
raised from 2 Samuel 7. 13. removed by clearing the sense of the Text. Other
extravagant Fancies concerning the Mess^as, caused by their mistaking the
Prophesies of the Old Testament concerning Christ's Coming. The Conclusion;
that all the Prophesies concerning the Messiah are fulfilled in Jesus, and
consequently are a demonstration of the Truth of Christianity. p. 457.
CHAP. XVI.
The Miracles wrought by Christ. What those Baskets were which were filled with
Fragments. Christ not only fed, but healed the Bodies of Men. He did other
Miraculous Works. The Apostles, as well as our Savior, exerted many Miracles.
An Objection from 1 Timothy 5. 23. answered. Five Properties of a true Miracle.
Counterfeit and lying Wonders. The Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were
accompanied with seven peculiar Circumstances which prove them to be from God.
What were the Ends and Designs they propounded to th^mselves in working of
Miracles. An Objection from Mark 11. 14. answered. Several Interpretations of
(...) Words [ the time of Figs was not yet.] Why Christ cursed the barren
Fig Tree. Another Objection from Mat. 8. 30. answered. Two other Objections
answered. The Personal Qualities of the Apostles argue the Miracles which they
wrought to be true and real. A Reply to the several Cavils against the Miracles
of our Savior. An account of the wonderful things done by some Pagans,
especially Vespasian and Apollonius Tyanaeus. The Miracles which the Church of
Rome pretends to are proved to be Counterfeit. It is showed from Scripture, the
Confession of Jews and Pagans, and the nature of the thing it self, that
Miracles are a Testimony of the Truth of Christianity. Miracles were necessary
for confirming of the Gospel, on several Accounts. p. 491.
CHAP. XVII.
The wonderful prevailing and spreading of Christianity another proof of the
Truth of it. Some of the learned and wisest Jews converted to Christianity. A
Catalogue of knowing and learned Pagans in the five first Centuries that
abandoned Gentilism, and embraced the Christian Religion. Remarkable Instances
of the Power of the Christian Truth. The virtue of the Gospel far exceeds that
of Philosophy. Examples of great and rich Men converted to the Christian Faith.
This prevailed against the rage of the most powerful Persecutors. The more the
Gospel was oppressed, the more it flourished and prosper'd in all Nations.
Examples of God's remarkable Judgments on the Enemies of Christianity,
especially on the Nation of the Jews. This latter insisted upon, and showed to
be an Argument of the Truth of Christianity. Particular Inferences from this
part of the Discourse, viz. 1. Assent t^ the Christian Religion. 2. Assert and
defend it. More General Inferences from the whole Christian Dispenpensation are
such as these, 1. Admire the transcendent Excellency of it. 2. Be thankful for
it. 3. Learn ^ence our great obligation to Holiness and strictness of Life.
This enlarged upon. 4. If we live not sutably to this Dispensation, our doom
will be more intolerable than that of others under the foregoing Oeconomies. It
appears from the general behavior of Men that this is not thought of. 5. We
are to look upon this as the last Dispensation. This is the meaning of Ephesians. 1.
10. which words are fully expounded. This is inferred from the Gospel's being
called the New Testament. And from those Expressions [ the last times] [ the
last days]. Wherefore we must not expect any New Dispensation. P. 534.
CHAP. XVIII.
The several Ages of Christianity. It was in its Infancy in our Savior's time.
The Apostles knew little concerning his Sufferings and his Resurrection. The
effusion of the Holy Spirit was but mean in respect of what it was afterward.
The Church was in its Childhood in the times immediately after our Savior.
There are no Errors and Mistakes in the Writings of the New Testament. Some
necessary Points of Christianity delivered in the Apostolical Epistles that are
not in the Gospels and Acts. Some relics of Judaism remained in the Apostles
times. An Explication of the Decree of the Council at Jerusalem. It is
particularly proved that the Prohibition concerning the eating of Blood is not
obligatory under the Gospel. Yet in the first times of the Church many observed
it. The difference of Dispensations as to Abstinence from some sort of Food.
Judaism and Christianity were mingled together in the primitive Ages. An
enumeration of several Extraordinary Gifts that were in the Christian Church at
first. The Youth or riper Years of Christianity described. The cessation of
extraordinary Gifts argues the Progress and Growth of the Christian Church.
Miracles no part of this subordinate Dispensation. The Nonappearance of Angels
is a Proof of the Improvement of Christianity. The usefulness and necessity of
attending to the different Administrations of Religion, especially the
Christian. p. 585.
CHAP. XIX.
That Christianity shall arrive to Manhood or Full Age is proved by several
Arguments, 1. God's Method in the World. 2. The low ebb of Christianity
hitherto. 3. The number of those that perish. 4. The gradual Improvement of all
Arts and Sciences. The several Objections concerning the Decay and Senescency
of the World, made use of by Jewish, Pagan, and Christian Writers, fully
answered. That the World decays not as to Learning and Arts, is made good from
the Improvements of Navigation, the Inventions of Gunpowder and Guns, of
Printing, of Clocks and Watches, the preparing of Sugar, the Advances in
Anatomy and Physic, Astronomy, Arithmetic, Chemistry, Mechanics, the Style
of Writers. It is congruous to the Divine Providence and Wisdom that Religion
also should have its Improvements, as well as Arts and Sciences, and
accordingly it has been greatly advanced and increased by the Reformation.
From the Increase it has had already, we may gather that there will be farther
Accessions afterward. The virile and complete State of the Christian Church
prou^d from several places of Scripture, Mat. 24. 3. and 19. 28. Acts 3. 21.
Romans 8. 19, 20. Heb. 2. 5. and 9. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 8. From those
diverse Texts that we meet with in the Old Testament which make mention of the
Kingdom, and Reigning of the Messiah. A five-fold acception of the Kingdom of
Christ in the New Testament. The 1 Cor. 15. 25. urged. The Millenary Reign. The
Rise of the Ancient Opinions about it. It is proved that Christ shall not
personally reign upon Earth. The deceased Saints shall not rise again to reign
with him here. What is meant by the Souls of them that were beheaded for the
Witness of Jesus. What is to be understood by their living and reigning with
Christ. Two late Writers take it in a literal Sense, but without any ground.
Who are the rest of the Dead that lived not again. What are the first and
second Resurrection. The Reign of Christ a thousand Years is to be upon Earth.
By a thousand Years we are to understand a certain and definite Number. Some
Opinions concerning the Beginning and End of the thousand Years refuted. Mr.
Brightman's odd Fancy rejected. We have had some Forerunners and previous
Pledges of the millenary Kingdom. Mr. Mede's Opinion, which joins Christ's
Reign and the Day of Judgment together, considered. p. 609.
CHAP. XX.
The Millenary Reign is attended with the Destruction of Antichrist, i. e.
Papists and Mahometans. This proved from several Passages in Scripture. How the
Papal Antichrist shall be destroyed by the Spirit of God's Mouth. Another
Attendant of the Reign of Christ upon Earth, is the Conversion or Fullness of
the Gentiles. An Objection answered. A twofold Calling, or Conversion of the
Gentiles, Partial and Total. The Parable in Luke 14. speaks of this latter. The
Occasion and Manner of this Conversion. The Progress of Arts and Sciences has
imitated the Motion of the Sun. The like is observable of Religion. The General
Conversion of the Jews is a third Concomitant of the Reign of Christ. Whether
the Jews shall be fixed in their own Country again. The Author's Judgment
concerning the Texts of Scripture, which are alleged to prove the National
Conversion and Return of the Jews. Lev. 26. 38, 39, etc. is meant of the
General Return of that People. In Deuteronomy. 30. 1, etc. there is a Primary and a
Secondary meaning. The latter applied to the Ten Tribes. The future Restoration
of the Jews proved, from Isa. 11. 11. from Isa. 60. from Hos. 3. 4, 5. from
Amos 9. 14. from Zech. 12. 10, etc. from Luke 2. 30, 31. from Luke 21. 24. from
2 Cor. 3. 14, etc. from several Passages in Romans 11. What is meant by all
Israel. The 26, 27, 28, and 29 Verses particularly considered, and showed to be
Arguments for the Complete Conversion of the Jews. The 7. Rev. 4. speaks of
this. The Occasion, Manner, and Means of it (both ordinary and extraordinary)
enquired into. p. 673.
CHAP. XXI.
Universal Righteousness is another Attendant of this Last Dispensation. An
Objection doubly answered. It is not a Sinless State. Greater Knowledge than
ever, shall be at that Time. Religion shall then appear in its Native Purity.
The Influence of the Holy Spirit on Men's Lives, shall be more effectual than
formerly. Jesus shall in a more emine^t manner be exalted. Other Fruits of this
happy Reign. How these great things shall be wrought. Civil Magistrates shall
be made use of. Christ's Reign is not inconsistent with that of Kings and
Princes. Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Rulers shall be Instruments in this great
Work. All Persons are some ways capable of promoting it. Universal Peace is
another Blessing that att^nds this Kingdom of Christ. On what account it must
needs ^e so. Scripture attests it. An Objection o^viated. A Concurrence of all
manner of Temporal Blessings in this happy State. More especially Bodily
Health, and Long Life. Also a vast Increase of the People of that Time. The
Savage Brutes shall become Tame and Gentle. Th^se Earthly Blessings are but
Appendages of this Dispensation. They are Inconsiderable, in respect of the
Divine Blessings which constitute this State. The Author's Doubtings and
Reluctances. He is not positive as to Particular Circumstances. He cannot
determine concerning the Forerunners of this Revolution. The Freedom he uses
in a Point that is highly probable. He follows not some late Writers in
assigning the particular Time when the Millenary Reign shall c^mmence. The
punctual Date is not to be known. The Thing discoursed of is certain, tho the
Time as to us is not so. The Degeneracy of the present times is no obstacle to
this. The Author leaves a Testimony of his Wishes and Desires. p. 721.
CHAP. XXII.
The Last part of the Evangelical Dispensation, under the loosing of Satan out
of his Prison. Who are Gog and Magog. Not only the Mohammedan but the Roman
Power shall be revived. The last Days, before the end of the World, shall be
extremely Wicked. They shall be exceeding Perilous and Calamitous. Christ
comes to Judgment. The Conflagration of the World succeeds this, whatever some
have suggested to the contrary. A Particular Answer to a late Writer's
Arguments on this Subject. It is observed how be resembles Origin. A plain
Exposition of those Words, Nevertheless we look for New Heavens and a New
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. A farther Proof from the same Chapter.
The Nature and Design of the Final Conflagration. The Sum of the whole
preceding Discourse. p. 760.
Errata to the Second Volume.
Page 424. l. 28. r. indication. P. 505. l. 31. r. true nature of. P. 510. l.
17. r. were for. P. 518. l. 29. dele and consequently. P. 527. l. 12. r. the
most learned Bp. Stillingfleet. P. 536. l. 17. dele that. P. 543. l. penult.
before a insert who was. P. 560. l. 16. r. and it. P. 586. l. 16. r. ensuing
that. P. 630. l. 8. for on r. no. P. 631. l. 3. from the bottom, after all make
a full Stop. P. 675. l. 9. r. intensness. P. 676. l. 16. r. as the. P. 677. l.
17. dele only. l. 18. r. naturally. P. 697. l. 23. place yet after not. P. 770.
l. 23. r. s^ender. P. 772. l. 4. for Adverb r. Conjunction discretive.

A SURVEY Of the Various Methods and Dispensation^ OF RELIGION, etc.
VOL. II.
CHAP. XIV.
The Truth and Certainty of the Christian Economy, and consequently of
Christianity it self, evinced. That the Mosaic Dispensation was not designed
to be Perpetual, is proved from 1. The Prophesies concerning the enlarging of
the Church: together with the nature of the Jewish Observances. 2. Gods
dispensing with the Mosaic Rites and Laws. 3. Their being neglected sometimes
by the Holiest Men. 4. God's disregarding them. 5. The Confession of the Jewish
Rabbis. An Objection, viz. that it is said, the Mosaic Law shall be for ever,
distinctly answered. Prophesies which seem to relate to the Jewish Church are
to be interpreted concerning the Christian one. It is not necessary that there
should be a Formal Abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, because when the Reason of
a Law ceases, the Law it self cease. But yet, it is showed from sundry Places
in the New Testament, that the Ceremonial Law is formally and expressly
abrogated. We are assured of the Truth of the Christian Religion from Humane
Testimony. The Testimony of the Outward and Bodily Senses is made use of and
appealed to in the New Testament, as an Argument of the truth of Christianity.
St. John's Words, 1 Ep. 1 Chap. 1, 2, 3. ver. commented upon. There is no
Certainty in Religion, esp^cially in the Christian, if the Testimony of Sense
be not allowed of. The Apostles and those who heard and saw the things done by
our Savior were Credible Persons. The four Evangelists and other Writers of
the New Testament were Competent Witnesses of what they relate. Their Personal
Qualities (which are particularly reckoned up) render their Testimony worthy of
all acceptance. The Christians that succeeded them faithfully delivered things
to us. Their Lives are a proof of their Integrity. Their Sufferings and Death
are an undeniable Argument of their testifying the Truth to us. An Heap of
Evidences that we are not imposed upon by them. The very Jews bear witness to
the Truth of Christianity. The manner of their Congratulating our Savior at
his riding into Jerusalem particularly considered. Heathens attest the Truth of
the Christian Religion. So do Infernal Spirits.

111. I Am to show the Truth and Certainty of the Christian Economy, and
therein of the Christian Religion. And here first we must grapple with the
tenacious and stubborn Jew, for his Dispensation being so Ancient and
Authentic, he is loath to quit it. I must prove therefore (before I go any
further) that it is nulled, abrogated and superannuated. We need not say much
of the Judicial Law: It is the Ceremonial one which makes Judaism properly, and
is the most opposite to the Christian Administration. The Judicial Laws, so far
as they make for Peace and good Order in the Government, and so far as they are
suitable to the present State of Affairs, may be observed still; but then they
oblige not as part of the Mosaic Law, but as they are good Rules of Government
in themselves. But the main Part of the Judicial Law is not at this Day
practicable amongst the Jews themselves; they being dispersed, and no longer in
a Body, that Law cannot be made use of, and consequently does not oblige them.
And any one may see plainly that that Polity and Government was not to last for
ever, as they foolishly dream. For it was not fitted for the Tempers of all
People, not proper for all Countries, but was in most things calculated for the
Jewish Meridian only, and for the present Circumstances that People were in at
that time, and therefore it is evident that it was to be changed afterward.

I do not lay any stress on what may be observed of the different Manner of
delivering the three Laws, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, but only let it be
an occasion to suggest to us a right Notion concerning the different Nature of
them. The Ten Commandments or Moral Law was delivered on the top of the Mount,
in the face of the World, as it were to signify that it was of universal
Influence, and obliged all Mankind. But the Ceremonial L^w was received by
Moses in private, in the Tabernacle, which may hint to us that it was of a
peculiar Concern, it belonged to the Jews only, it was to cease when the
Tabernacle was down, when the Veil of the Temple was rent. And as for the
Judicial Law, it was neither so publicly and audibly given as the Moral Law,
nor so privately as the Ceremonial, which may intimate to us the Nature of that
sort of Law: it is of an indifferent kind, and may be kept up or not according
as its Rules suit with the Place and Government. It is then the Ceremonial Law,
wherein the Religion of the Jews (as distinct from other People) chiefly
consisted, which I am engaged more especially to speak of at present.

The first thing that I will undertake is this, to show that the Mosaic
Economy was not designed to be perpetuated, but that it was to be changed, and
to give way to the Evangelical one. If this be proved, it is a good step
toward the main Point, viz. the Truth of the Evangelical Economy.

1. That the Mosaic Dispensation was not to last always, is clear from the
many Promises in the Old Testament of enlarging Religion, and of extending the
Church to the uttermost parts of the World. Which is no ways consistent with
the Mosaic Economy, for according to the Law all the Males were to assemble
at Jerusalem, and to worship there thrice a Year. But when upon the Messias's
coming all Nations were to embrace the true Religion, how was it possible for
the remotest Nations of the World to come and sacrifice at Jerusalem, and
constantly to meet there at solemn Feasts? Jerusalem could not hold them, the
Temple would be too little for the Worshippers. This is a Sign that God
intended not to confine his Church to Judea, but that he designed a Religion
which should be Universal, and oblige the whole World. According to the Law
Sacrifices were to be no where but at Jerusalem: But it is said in Isa. 19. 19,
23. There shall be Altars and Sacrifices to the Lord in Egypt and Assyria: and
in Mal. 1. 11. From the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same,
my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be
offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering. Therefore the City of Jerusalem was
not to be the only Seat of solemn Worship and Sacrifice, but upon the coming of
the Messiah Oblations were to be all the World over. God says of his Church,
which is his House, that it shall be called a House of Prayer to all Nations,
Isa. 56. 7. Mark 11. 17. That is, the Church shall be open to all without
respect of Persons or Countries: which must needs be (and was always
acknowledged) a Prophesy concerning the spreading of Christianity, and its
being embraced by some of all Nations under Heaven. Therefore it is said by the
same Evangelical Prophet, in the last Days all Nations shall flow unto it, Isa.
2. 2. So in Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5. we find that Strangers and Eunuchs, Persons
incapable by the Mosaic Law of being of the Communion of the Jewish Church,
shall be admitted into it.

And that is yet more remarkable which you read in the same Prophet Chap. 66.
where after it was plainly foretold that the Gentiles should have a Holy
Church, and that there should be an Offering to the Lord out of all Nations,
ver. 20. this is added in the next Verse, I will also take of them for Priests
and for Levites, says the Lord. Observe it, there shall be Priests and Levites
taken from the Gentiles, which is absolutely against Judaism, for the
Priesthood amongst the Jews was tied to that certain Nation, yea to a certain
House and Family amongst them. Therefore it is evident that the Jewish Religion
was Temporary, and was to cease. This is obscurely intimated in Ezekiel's Model
of the Temple, Chap. 40. etc. There never was any such thing, no such
Dimensions and Platforms: it is a vast unwieldy thing: his Temple is as big as
all Jerusalem, and the Ground allotted the Priests and Levites equals all
Canaan. It is likely therefore that this prefigureth the Christian Temple, or
the Church under the Gospel, which was to be capacious and large. But I need
not make use of these obscure and mystical Places, after I have produced so
plain and evident ones as those before mentioned. It is undeniable that those
several Prophesies could not be accomplished if the Old State of the Jews was
to be perpetual: Jerusalem was too little, the Land of Judea could not serve
for those purposes which are there spoken of.

Here also it might be observed that the Passover, their great and most famous
Ordinance, was a Memorial of a particular Deliverance vouchsafed to the Jewish
People, and therefore was proper to them, and appertained not to other Nations.
Hence it was that the Jews themselves did not require of the Proselites a
Conformity to this Law, nor indeed to any other of the like peculiar Nature.
Yea, themselves were not obliged to observe some of the Mosaic Laws if they
were in other Countries, as those of First Fruits, Tithes, and the
Sabbatick-year, the Iubilee. In Canaan only these and other Constitutions were
to be kept, as is confessed by their own Writers. Their Laws concerning
Sacrifices, and Incense, and Feasts, are ceased at this day amongst them,
because they were confined to that place, and were not to be observed any where
else. Thus a considerable part of the Jewish Laws are now abolished by their
own Confession, they being dispersed into other Countries. This might convince
them that Judaism was to give place to Christianity, which is large and fitted
for all the World, which has God, the Church, Religion, and Salvation all in
common. This is a great Prerogative of Christianity that it is Universal, and
excludes no People or Nations, whereas the Religion and Worship of the Jews
was narrow and scant, and confined to themselves; which is a Demonstration that
it was Temporary, and that there was to be a change of the Mosaic Law and
Administration.

2. This appears if you consider likewise that God dispensed with the Mosaic
Rites and Ceremonies, and did not always exact the observance of them: which he
would have done if they had been perpetual Laws, and were designed to continue
to all Ages. Thus God dispensed with Circumcision, not only as to the Time
which was punctually assigned by the Law, viz. the eighth Day (for when the
Infants were sick, Circumcision was put off till they were well) but he
dispensed with the very Act, and Performance it self. All the time the
Israelites were in the Wilderness, (which was forty Years) they neglected to
circumcise their Children (and indeed there was no occasion for it, because
they then needed not to be distinguished from the Nations, being not mingled
with them, and besides, it was inconvenient in their Marches and Removals) as
may be gathered from Ios. 5. 2. Circumcise again, etc. and more plainly from
what follows, v. 5. The People that were born in the Wilderness by the way, as
they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. All that time the
Celebration of the Passover was omitted in the Wilderness, or it was celebrated
but once in those forty Years, Number. 9. 1, 2. Ios. 5. 10. All the Sacrifices and
Oblations, tho commanded and appointed them the first Year they came into the
Desert, were omitted all the time they were there, excepting some
Peace Offerings and Sin Offerings which you read of in Exodus 40. 29. But the
daily Sacrifice was not offered, and the constant use of all sorts of
Sacrifices prevailed not. And afterward, when they came into Canaan, God
dispensed with the Law Lev. 16. 21.
concerning Sacrificing only in the Tabernacle: for Elias sacrificed at Carmel,
and Samuel at Mishphat, (unless we shall say that the Law had not reference to
these Extraordinary Sacrifices) and more Instances might be produced of that
kind. As to the Resting on the Sabbath Day (which was a direct Injunction of
the Law) it was not observed when they besieged Jericho on that day. And other
punctual and peremptory Commands of the Mosaic Law were not observed.

And I could add, that many things commanded in the Judicial Law were dispensed
with by God, for he who enjoined them had Power to do it. A Bastard was not to
come into the Congregation, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. Yet Iepht^ah who was of that Character
was prefer^d, and that by Gods own Order, to be Judge of Israel. So the
Judicial Law was violated by letting Readiness Sons, who were hanged up, remain so
long a time on the Gibbets. Hence it appears that the Obligation of the Mosaic
Laws is not perpetual* for this relaxing and dispensing made way for annulling
them, and were a certain vindication that the Jewish Laws were to be laid aside.

3. You may take notice that as God himself dispensed with these Laws, so the
best Men were oftentimes very neglectful of them. Thus Gideon, Manoah and David
sacrificed not according to the strict direction of the Law. And the last of
these eat the Shewbread when he was pressed with extreme hunger: and Hezekiah
ordered the Passover to be celebrated otherwise than it was written in the Law,
2 Chronicles. 30. 18. So careless were they of precisely observing the Cermonial
Injunctions. And here it might be observed how the holy Men and Prophets
despised the service of Sacrifices, and all the other Duties of the Law in
comparison of inward Goodness, Virtue and Holiness, and spiritual Exercises and
Performances of Religion. The Psalmist speaks to God after this manner, Psalm.
51. 16, 17. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee; thou
delightest not in Burntoffering. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a
broken and a contrite Heart, O Lord, thou will not despise. The Son of this
Royal Prophet is plain and downright in this matter, to do Justice and Judgment
is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice, Prove. 21. 3. Whom Philo that
worthy Jew follows, saying, (...). De legib. special.
God is not delighted with the Flesh and Fat of Animals, but with the harmless
Disposition and pious Intention of the Worshipper. And not only this Writer,
but several R. Bechai in Leg. Maimo. More Nevoch. M. Ben Isr. Conciliator.
other professed Jews acknowledge that Sacrifices were but a secondary sort of
Service, they were not in their own nature good, nor required for their own
sake; but the primary and main part of divine Service and Worship, are Prayer,
Repentance and Obedience. As for Circumcision, it was not esteemed to be of
absolute necessity, and accordingly was not always performed by them. Some Jews
lived all their days uncircumcised, yea some of their very Pri^sts ministered at
the Altar tho they were never circumcised: For if the first, second and third
Son died of Circumcision (as sometimes happened) the Sons that were born
afterward were not circumcised, and yet were accounted true Israelites and
true Priests, as Dr. Lightfoot informs us. For, as one of their Rabbis says,
Israelites are not bound to perform the legal Precepts where Death will
certainly follow; for it is said, ye shall keep my Statutes and my Judgments,
which if a Man do, he shall live in them, not die in them.

4. Observe how God himself despises and vilifieth, rejects and hates these
legal Rites and Observances in themselves considered, and as abstracted from
real Virtue and Piety. The Psalmist brings in the Almighty speaking thus, Will
I eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High, Psalm. 50. 13, 14. Hear what
the Lord says by the Prophet Isaias, To what purpose is the Multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me? says the Lord. -- Who has required this at your hand?
Bring no more vain Oblations: Incense is an Abomination to me, Isa. 1. 11, 12,
13. and so in chap. 66. ver. 1, 3. Thus says the Lord, He that kills an Ox
is as if he slew a Man; he that sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs
Neck: he that offers an Oblation as if he offered Swines Blood: he that
burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol. God by another Prophet upbraids the
Jews ^hus, To what purpose comes there to me Incense from Sheba, and the sweet
Cane from a far Country? Your Burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your
Sacrifices sweet unto me, Jer. 6. 20. and again, chap. 7. ver. 22. I spoke not
to your Fathers, nor commanded them in the Day that I brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, concerning Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. But this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, and I will be your God, and you shall
be my People: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you. That in
the Prophesy of Hosea may be here inserted, I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice;
and the Knowledge of God more than Burnt-offerings, chap. 6. ver. 6. Acts of
Charity and Mercy are preferred by God before the choicest Performances of the
Mosaic Law. But that in the Prophet Amos is much higher, I hate, I despise
your Feast-days, and I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies. Tho ye offer
me Burnt-offerings and your Meat Offerings, I will not accept them: neither
will I regard the Peace Offerings of your fat Beasts. But let Judgment run down
as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, Am. 5. 21, 22, 23. Hither are
to be referred the Words of the Prophet Micah, Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? Shall I come before him with
Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a Year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? He has showed thee,
O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly,
and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Mic. 6. 7, 8, 9. From all
which places it appears that the Ritual Service of the Jews was in it self of
no Worth and Value: else it is certain God would not have thus slighted and
disregarded, yea loathed and abhorred it. And if the Ceremonial Observances had
no intrinsic Goodness in them; if Sacrifices, Circumcision, difference of
Meats, etc. were not enjoined for themselves; if the Matter of these Laws were
not really good, we may thence arrive to such a Conclusion as this, that there
is no such Excellency in the Jewish Religion as to give it a Perpetuity, and
that it is most reasonable to believe that these Rites and Constitutions were
to be repealed and cancelled in due time.

5. And Lastly, many of the learnedest Rabbis hold that the Law is mutable.
All Sacrifices shall cease in the Ages to come, but the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving shall never cease, says R. Kimchi on the 100 Psalm. It was a
Tradition amongst the Jews, says Abarbanel in Rosh Amanah, that in the times
of the Messiah the Jews should feed upon Swine, as well as other Animals. The
Talmud it self acknowledges that the Ceremonial Law is to last no longer than
till the Messias's coming, and that then Swines Flesh shall be lawfully eaten.
Again, they confess Omnia praecepta quae terrae Israelis sunt alligata, non
nisi in terra Israelis sunt observanda. Kidushin, cap. 1.
that all those Precepts which more immediately respect the Jewish Nation
(which make up the greatest part of their Law) shall not be observed in any
other Country. Further, they say, In Massecheth.
There are six hundred and thirteen Precepts of the Mosaic Law, but Psalm. 15.
David came and contracted them to eleven, then Isa. 33. 15.
Isaias brought them down to six, afterward Mic. 6. 8.
Micah reduced them to three, Isa. 56. 1.
Isaias brought them to two, at last Amos 5. 4.
Amos contracted all the Law into one. Thus they were willing to abate of the
number of the Laws: they saw there was no need of that Multiplicity of Precepts
and Injunctions, especially concerning external Rites and Ceremonies. And many
other Sayings and Intimations there are in the Rabbis which confirm this, and
which plainly show that they were of the Opinion that the Mosaic Rites were
not immutable, but that the time should come when they shall be abolished.

But we are accosted with this Objection, The Sacred Scripture it self
declares that the legal Ceremonies and Rites shall be perpetuated, for of the
Circumcision, the Passover, the Sabbath, and many other observances of the
Mosaic Law, it is said that they shall be Legnola^, and Gnad g^olam, Exodus 12.
17. Lev. 23. 14. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
for ever. I answer,

1. That the Hebrew Words which we translate (...) ever do not absolutely and
necessarily imply Perpetuity, but sometimes they only signify a long Duration.
Thus of the Jewish Servant it is said, he shall serve his ^aster for ever,
Exodus 21. 6. i. e. till the Jubilee come about* as it is interpreted in Lev.
25. So Hanna^ says she will bring her Son Samuel to the Temple, that (...) may
appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever, i. e. all his Life, 1 Samuel 1.
22. The Doors of the Temple are said to be everlasting, Psalm. 24. 7, 9. i. e.
the Temple it self and its Gates were fixed and permanent (in comparison of the
Tabernacle and Ark which were removed from place to place) and they were a
Fabric that were to last a long time. And in many other Texts it might be
showed that Gnola^ signifies a Finite, tho a long time. Wherefore those places
before referred to, which speak of the Mosaic Rites being for ever, must not be
understood of an endless Duration, but they only signify that that
Administration should last a very considerable time, and so it did.

2. These legal Rites and Ceremonies, as to any alteration from the Jews, were
to be for ever. They were not to change them in the least, none but God could
alter them, who designed to do so in due time: for he intended those Mosaic
Precepts should continue to such a certain period of time, and no longer. These
Words of Jeremiah are very observable, Chap. 3. 16. It shall come to pass in
those days, says the Lord, they shall say no more, the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord, neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they remember it,
neither shall they visit it, neither shall it be magnified any more; i. e. The
Mosaic Rites and External Ceremonies of the Law shall not be in request, as
they were before, Men shall not prize and value them as they used to do, yea
they shall lay the use of them aside: but this they must not do till they have
Authority from God. And God revealed to the Prophet Daniel that he would alter
the Law after a certain Revolution of Years: The Messiah shall cause the
Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, Dan. 9. 27. But it was unalterable in respect
of the Jews themselves.

3. The Promises and Predictions in the Old Testament (which are very many)
concerning the perpetual Duration of Jerusalem, and the Temple, and the Jewish
Worship, and their Polity and Government, are to be understood of the
Perpetuity of the Church of Christ and his spiritual Kingdom. And to this
purpose you may observe that in the Writings of the Old Testament, where the
Times of the Gospel are foretold, the Evangelical Worship and Service of God
are set forth by sacrificing, and other the like Observances commanded in
Moses's Law. By the Ritual Worship of the Jews is expressed the reasonable and
spiritual Service of the Gospel; and by those Expressions which seem to denote
the Perpetuity of the former, the Duration of the latter is signified and
ascertained to us.

This is a most certain Truth, and the observing of it will lead us to a right
understanding of a great number of Texts which speak of the Jewish Laws and
Government, as if they were to continue for ever, without any Limitation and
Restriction. We are to know that those places, especially the Prophesies in
Isaiah concerning the glorious things that shall befall Jerusalem and the Jews,
are to be interpreted of the State of the Christian Church: they are to be
understood of the Spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah, and the Times of the
Gospel. Sacrifices and the Temple signify Spiritual Oblations and the
Gospel Church: for the Evangelical Prophet is to be understood in an
Evangelical Sense. The Angels Words concerning Christ in Luke 1. 32, 33. The
Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign
over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, are
a plain Comment on all those places in the Old Testament, where the Perpetuity
of the Mosaic Laws and the Jewish Economy and Government is promised. They
show that they are all meant of Christ and his Kingdom, i. e. his Church both
here and hereafter, which was prefigured by David's Kingdom. From what this
Heavenly Messenger says here, we learn that the Prophesies concerning the
endless continuance of the Throne of David, of raising up to (...) David their
King, Jer. 30. 9. of raising up the Tabernacle of David, Am. 9. 11. of God's
setting up his Servant David, Ezekiel. 34. 23. are all accomplished in Christ. And
indeed the Jewish Commentators themselves acknowledge that the Messiah is often
styled David in these and other Prophesies of the Old Testament: nor are they
backward to confess that by David's Throne and Kingdom is meant the Messias's
Government, as is plain from Psalm. 132. 11. 2 Samuel 7. 12. 1 Chronicles. 22. 10.
where God promised David that Christ should sit on his Throne: which is taken
notice of, and applied not only in the forenam'd place in St. Luke, but in Acts
2. 30. For Christ is represented by David, and the Evangelical Dispensation is
expressed in Terms which relate to the Jewish Administration and Government. So
that it is no wonder this is said to be for ever, for it shall last to the end
of the World, and afterward Christ shall reign in the Kingdom of Glory to
eternal Ages. This, if duly considered, cannot but yield a satisfactory Answer
to the foregoing Objection, as well as give light to several Prophesies of the
Old Testament.

But here it will be asked, where has God formally abr^gated the Ceremonial
Law of the Jews? I answer, it is not necessary he should do this, for the Law
cease when the Reason of it cease. Now the Reason of the C^r^monial Law and
all its Observances was chi^fly to prefigure Christ, and the Gospel of which he
was the Institutor: and therefore they are now ceased, Christ being come, of
whom they were but Figures and Shadows. The Abrogation then of those Mosaic
Rites wherein the Religion of the Jews was placed, may be proved by this one
Argument, viz. that Christ was designed by the legal Rites, that the Ceremonial
Law was a Prefiguration of the Gospel Dispensation. Here it might be showed
that the Evangelical Economy was prefigured by certain Persons, as Abel, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, Melchisedec (about the last of whom the Author to the
Hebrews spends a whole Chapter:) these were Typical Persons as well as Moses
and Joshua, and some others afterward. And not only Persons but Things were
Typical, as the Pillar of a Cloud, the Red Sea, the Manna, and the Rock, which
two last were Symbols of the Evangelical Sacraments, the Eucharist and Baptism,
1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, etc. and the lifting up of the brazen Serpent signified
Christ's Crucifixion, John 3. 14.

But if I should speak of those that are properly Legal Rites and Vsages, it is
yet further evident that they were Representations of our Savior, and of the
grand things of the Gospel. As for Sacrifices, I have treated of them already,
and made it appear that they foresignified the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross. As for the Tabernacle and all the appurtenances of it, I have
particularly displayed their Typical Nature, and how they all pointed to this
Dispensation I am now speaking of. I might proceed to make this good concerning
the Ceremonious Washings and Purifications under the Law, that they typified
some greater Purity, they signified the Spiritual cleansing and sanctifying of
the Soul, and the abstaining from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. The
Apostle acquaints us that the difference of Meats and Drinks, observing of a
Holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days, were a shadow of things
to come, but the Body (of this Shadow) is Christ, Col. 2. 16, 17. The Truth,
the Solidity, the Substance are to be sought for in some higher things than
those were, even in Christ Jesus, and in the Benefits of the Gospel. Yea he
tells us that the whole Mosaic Law is but a shadow of good things to come,
Heb. 10. 1. All the things contained in it are but rude and imperfect
Delineations of that complete Frame of Religion which the Messiah was to
introduce.

This was the thing designed all along; the Ritual and Ceremonial Law with all
its external Rites tended to this pure and uncorrupted Model of Religion. It
was appointed that the Law should adumbrate the Gospel, that that Economy
should prefigure this. Therefore the Apostle says, the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; which shows the inferior Nature of the
Law, and that it was to endure but for a time, for the Authority of a
Schoolmaster over those whom he teaches is but Temporary. The legal Pedagogy
was to cease, and Christ was to be the end of the Law to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4. It is then evident from the Premises that the Jewish Law
is disannul'd: for when the Reason of a Law ceases, that is sufficient to
change the Law, because as it commenced upon Reason, so when that is taken
away, the Law it self is abolished also. This is the present Case: the
Ceremonial Rites and Types were designed to represent and foresignify Christ
and the Evangelical Benefits: Wherefore Christ being come, and having brought
with him those Benefits, the former mystical Representations and Figures ought
to have a Period. So that the Reason and Occasion of these Ceremonious
Observances being removed, this is sufficient to repeal and reverse those Laws,
especially when you consider that Christ's Miracles (of which I shall speak
afterward) were plain Evidences of God's Intention to repeal the Law.

But (to close this Point) we are not destitute of a Formal Abrogation of the
Jewish Laws, for such we may justly reckon our Savior's Words to be in John 4.
21, 23. The hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem worship the Father. The hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. Where first he
acquaints us that the public Worship of God shall not be restrained to one
particular place: which very thing is a cancelling of the Mosaic Law, which
gave Directions chiefly concerning the Temple-Worship. They shall not, says
he, be confined to Mount Gerizim where the Samaritans had fixed the Seat of
their worshipping, or to Mount Ephraim in Samaria where Shiloh was, the place
where the Tabernacle and Ark rested from the beginning of Joshua's time till
Samuel; nor shall they be confined to Jerusalem, whither the Tabernacle was
afterward brought, and at length converted into a Temple: nor in any other
place exclusively shall Men worship God, but every Place and Country shall be
alike, and God shall have Worshippers in every part of the World. This utterly
makes void the Jewish Ceremonial Service, which was tied to a certain place.
And our Savior adds this (which does yet further evacuate it) that the Worship
under the Gospel must be in Spirit and Truth, in contradistinction to the legal
Worship which was made up of carnal Ordinances, and mere Shadows and Types,
which were but Representations of that which is true and real. Thus he plainly
erases and abolishes the Mosaic Service, and calls those that worship God in
the Evangelical Manner the true Worshippers.

Again, the greatest part of the Epistle to the Hebrews is a direct and
downright repealing of it. Nay, we want not the formal Words of Abrogation, as
in Heb. 7. 18, 19. There is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going
before, (i. e. the Legal and Iudaical Economy, which he calls a carnal
Commandment, ver. 16.) for the Weakness and Unprofitableness thereof: for the
Law made nothing perfect. Here is an express disannulling of the Mosaic Law.
And moreover the Reason of it is rendered, viz. because it was weak and
imperfect, and had little Power to amend and reform Men's Lives. You will find
it also formally repealed in Heb. 8. 7, 8, 13. where the Apostle treating of
the Old and New Covenant (by which he means the Law and the Gospel, as I have
before showed) he thus concludes: If the first Covenant had been faultless,
then should no place have been sought for the second. For finding fault with
them, he says, Behold the Days come, says the Lord, when I will make a New
Covenant, etc. In that he says, a New Covenant, he has made the first Old.
Now, that which decays and waxes Old is ready to vanish away, or (according
to the Greek) it is near to vanishing. Certainly this (...) speaks as much, if
not more, than Abrogating. And in Heb. 10. 5, 9.
another pl^ce, where he speaks of the legal Worship which consists chiefly
in Sacrifices, and Offerings for Sin, and not in inward Holiness and sincere
doings of God's Will, (which is the Evangelical Service) he applies the
Psalmist's, or rather our Savior's words, Sacrifice and Offering thou would
not: Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will: this is inferred, that he takes
away the first, that he may establish the second; i. e. the Messiah abolisheth
the Iudaical Service, that the may set up and perpetuate the Evangelical one.

It can then be no longer questioned, whether the Jewish Law was abrogated, and
that in formal and express Terms. Those carnal Ordinances (as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 9. 10.) were imposed upon them only until the time of Reformation,
i. e. of the Gospel. When that came, they were made void, null, and dead: And
this Epistle to the Hebrews seems to be the Sermon which St. Paul preached at
their Funeral, or the Office of Burial on that occasion. Here is Ashes to
Ashes, and Dust to Dust, a fatal Period put to the Iudaical Rites, the Law
interred and intombed, never to rise again; but the Gospel springs out of those
Ashes, a new and a more noble Dispensation succeeds in its room. And thus I
have abundantly proved what I undertook, that the Law of Moses consisting in
Ceremonies was not to continue, but was in time to be nulled and dissolved, and
that by the coming of Christ they are accordingly nulled, dissolved and
abrogated.

Hitherto I have in a more remote manner proved the Certainty and Authority of
the Evangelical Economy, and consequently of Christianity it self. But now I
will approach nearer, and proceed to a more positive and particular Proof of
the Authority of the Gospel Dispensation. Christ succeeds Moses, the Gospel
follows the Law: but quo jure? There must be as great Testimony for the one as
there was for the other, or else it cannot be received on good Grounds. Let us
see then how this Dispensation will acquit it self. There are two kinds of
Evidence, Humane and Divine, the Testimony of Man, and the Testimony of God:
The first creates a humane Faith, the second a divine one in us. Both of these
we have in the present Matter.

First, we are furnished with Humane Testimony, i. e. we are assured of the
Truth of the Christian Religion by a sufficient number of credible Persons, who
have been either Ear or Eyewitnesses, or both, of all the Transactions
relating to Christ and Christianity. And here I will show, 1. That this sort of
Testimony is frequently made use of and appealed to in the New Testament, as a
sufficient Argument and Proof of Christianity. 2. That the Testimony of the
Apostles and other Christians who lived in our Savior's time was the Testimony
of credible Persons, and therefore ought to be reckoned by us a valid and
substantial Proof of Christianity.

1. The Testimony of credible Persons who have heard and seen what Christ did,
is often made use of and appealed to as a good Argument of the Truth of
Christianity. Thus St. Luke in the beginning of his Gospel, to conciliate a
Belief of what he was to deliver, declares he designed to record nothing but
what was delivered to him by such as Luke 1. 2.
from the beginning were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word, i. e. not
only those who saw Christ, and what he did, but were personally and actually
concerned in many of those things, as walking on the Sea, casting out of
Devils, etc. those who had a part in these great and miraculous Actions, those
who were not only Spectators but Actors. These I take to be the (...).
Ministers of the Word here meant, as the Original imports. So you see this
Evangelist lays his Foundation on the Testimony of Sense, he deems it good
Ground of Satisfaction, that what he writes concerning Christ and his
miraculous Doings is attested by those who were Eyewitnesses of them, and who
most sensibly conversed with our Savior, and shared in some part of the things
done by him. This he knew would cause them to be most surely believed among the
Christians, ver. 1. So to the Testimony of Sense St. Peter and St. John
appealed, Acts 4. 20. When the Rulers of the Jews sent for them, and commanded
them to preach no more in Christ's Name, their peremptory Return was this, we
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. As if they had said,
Gentlemen, what is this that you require of us? It is most strange that you
would have us to deny our Senses, and to give no Credit to our Ears or Eyes.
All of you, as well as our selves, can attest the things that have been said
and done by Jesus of Nazareth. Our Ears have heard his heavenly Doctrine, and
our Eyes have seen the Wonders he wrought in Confirmation of that Doctrine.
Would you have us believe and act contrary to our Senses? This was never
required by any reasonable Men, for they always thought that the Evidence of
Sense is valid and fully satisfactory.

St. Peter likewise in his Sermon, in Acts 10. builds upon this Rock, We are
Witnesses (says he) of all things which he (i. e. Christ) did both in the Land
of the Jews and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a Tree: Him God
raised up the third Day, and showed him openly, not to all the People, but to
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after
he rose from the dead, ver. 39, 40, 41. We Apostles accompanied Christ our
Master when he went about doing Good, and working Miracles; we were no idle and
remiss Spectators of the mavelous things he did in all places where the Jews
inhabited. And tho they maliciously put him to death, and thought that then
they had made an end of him, and that he should never appear again; yet we are
Witnesses that the same Jesus who died on the Cross rose again within three
Days, and appeared publicly to us all: we familiarly conversed with him, we
saw him and we heard him; and when one of our number was backward to believe
his miraculous Return from the dead, he bid him approach nearer to him, and
feel and handle him, that by that as well as other Senses he might be satisfied
of our Savior's Resurrection. We are certain therefore of it, and by
consequence of all the other Doctrines which we preach. We appeal to sensible
Demonstration: This clears us of all Imposture. And hear what the same Apostle
says in one of his Epistles, We have not followed (says he) cunningly devised
Fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty (2 Pet. 1. 16.) i. e. l, and
James and John saw such things at Christ's Transiguration which are an
undoubted Proof of his Divinity. And in the next Verse but one he adds that
they were Ear-witnesses also, for speaking of the Voice which came to Christ
from the excellent Glory, he says, This Voice which came from Heaven we heard,
when we were with him in the holy Mount, ver. 18. As much as to say, you have
no cause, Brethren, to fear any Imposture from us, you may be easily convinced
that we come with no Fables and Forgeries, because we give you assurance of
what we say from our own Eyes and Ears; we go upon sure Ground, our very Senses
report to us what we declare to you: therefore you may be confident of the
truth of it. St. Paul, as well as St. Peter, makes his Appeal to the Verdict of
Sense, in the matter of Christ's Resurrection. He was seen of Cephas, and then
of the Twelve: After that he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once;
after that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles, and last of all he
was seen of me also, 1 Cor. 15. 5, etc. He proves that Christ rose from the
dead, because the bodily Sight gave Evidence of it: This is one good Argument,
or rather Demonstration of the Certainty of the thing.

Many other places there are to the same effect, but I will mention but one
more, and that is of St. John 1 Epist. 1 chap. 1, 2, 3. ver. That which was
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life (for
the Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto
you that eternal Life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us)
that which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
Fellowship with us. Take this short Gloss upon the whole, That which was from
the beginning, those things that were destined from Eternity, and were of old
all along prefigured, shadowed and foretold by Moses^ and the Prophets,
concerning Christ and the Gospel; which we (who are Apostles) have heard from
God the Father, testifying and audibly speaking from Heaven, and by the
preaching of his Son Christ Jesus; which we have seen with our Eyes, viz.
Christ's many Miracles, and all the strange and wonderful things that happen by
his coming, these we have beheld with our bodily Eyes, with our own Eyes, not
relying on others; which we have looked upon, what we have narrowly pried into,
what we have often viewed, and not slightly and perfunctorily; and our Hands
have handled: Here the third Sense, the Touch, is concerned. Before Christ's
Death, and after his Resurrection we discerned him to be a true Man even by the
Sense of Feeling: And in many other things which happened this Sense was
interested, as in the Earthquake at Christ's Passion, and in the shaking of the
House where the Apostles were met, and in sundry other Occurrences. Thus our
Senses have been exercised and employed about the Matters which belong to the
Word of Life, i. e. Christ, who is called the Word, and the Life, and here (
ver. 2.) he is called the Eternal Life which was with the Father. Or by the
Word of Life are meant the things relating to the Gospel, which shows us the
way to eternal Life. For the Life was manifested, viz. by Christ's assuming our
Flesh, and conversing with Men on Earth; and the Grace of God in the Gospel
has appeared, and manifested it self to all Men by his coming. And we have
seen it, and ^ear witness: And again, that which we have seen and heard declare
we unto you. By all these ways the Doctrine of the Gospel is cleared and
manifested, and proved to be true. We have found it to be so by the Testimony
of our Senses, and accordingly we preach, we pro^laim, we testify, we declare
these things to you, and not only to you, but to all the World, that they may
be ascertained of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and come into the same
Fellowship with us, and heartily embrace the Gospel.

Thus the Apostles, tho divinely inspired, appealed to the rational Evidence of
Sense, for they knew that this was satisfactory to all sober and intelligent
Men, and that the highest Evidence that can be desired for Proof of Matter of
Fact is the Testimony of those Persons who were Eye and Ear-witnesses of it;
and that if the Testimony of the bodily Senses by not allowed, there is no
Certainty of Religion, or of Divine Revelation by which Religion was conveyed,
for this was by the Ministry of the Senses, especially Hearing and Seeing. Nay,
the Veracity and Faithfulness of God may justly be called in question if you
take away this Evidence, for how can we attain to Truth unless God communicates
it to us? But how can he do that if our Senses (being rightly disposed, viz.
when the Organ is sound, the Medium fitly qualified, and the distance of the
Object duly proportioned) be deceived, if when we are really persuaded that we
see and hear such things, we do not see them or hear them? Must we not hence
conclude that God deludes us, and that in a Matter which concerns his Glory and
our own Happiness, and consequently that his Sincerity and Truth are impaired?
Into this Blasphemy must they needs run who deny the Truth of the Senses given
us by God. And upon this it will follow that there are no credible Ear or
Eyewitnesses, and so no certain Testimony of Matter of Fact. If the Evidence
of our Senses be not to be made use of, and allowed as authentic, then all the
Passages recorded in the New Testament, concerning Christ's Birth, Life,
Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension are of no Credit: For these are to
be proved, as other Matters of Fact are, by Testimony of Witnesses who heard or
saw those things. In short, if our Senses be false, the whole Gospel is a Lie
and a Cheat, for ought we know: For it is impossible we should have any
assurance of the truth of any thing there unless God has given Men Senses
which are capable of discerning one thing from another, and unless the Persons
likewise who attested those things from the Verdict of their Senses were Men
that might be credited. And this is the present Case which we are concerned in,
as I shall make evident by the next Particular.

2. The Testimony of the Apostles and other Christians who lived when our
Savior was upon Earth, and^ heard and saw the things done by him, is the
Testimony of credible Persons, and consequently is an unquestionable Proof of
the Truth and Reality of those things which they attest. That they were
credible Persons will appear if you consider;

1. They had sufficient Means to acquaint themselves certainly whether the
things which they attested were true or no. This is the main thing which is to
be cleared, and therefore I will chiefly insist on this. That they were
furnished with sufficient Ability to know what they related, methinks should
not be denied by any one who considers that they were no Fools or Children,
they were not mad or senseless, they had a share of Understanding as well as
others, and their Ears and Eyes were as good as other Men's. The things which
they related might evidently be known by them, being Objects of common Sense,
and of general Cognizance. Can there be any reason then to think that these
Persons were not competent Judges, as well as others, of these Matters? But as
they were naturally capable of judging in these things, so I will make it
evident that they had all Means and Opportunities of informing themselves
thoroughly concerning those things which they delivered. Some of them were
Eyewitnesses, others Ear-witnesses of what they report, and sometimes both: or
else they certainly informed themselves of the truth from others who saw or
heard those things. What St. Luke professes of himself is true of all the
Evang^lical and Apostolical Writers, they had perfect understanding of all
things from the very first, Luke 1. 3.

As for the four Evangelists, two of them, Matthew and John, were of the number
of the Apostles, who were Persons particularly chosen out by Christ on purpose
to be Eyewitnesses of his Actions: and some have inferred from Acts 1. 21, 22.
that it was a necessary Qualification of an Apostle to be an Eyewitness. It is
certain that these two forenamed Persons were such: They lived with their
Master, and were (...). Theodoret.
present at his Miracles, and saw what they writ. The latter of these
especially was made more than ordinarily conscious to Christ's Words and
Actions, and was his Familiar and Intimate. The other two Evangelists were not
Apostles, but they inhabited and conversed in the same Regions where Christ did
these things, and at the same time when he acted them. Herodotus, Plutarch, and
other Historians writ of things done in former Ages, and afar off in other
Countries and Kingdoms, which makes their Relations to be suspected sometimes.
But these Men lived in the Places and Times, where and when the things were
done, and therefore they could easily attain to a true and impartial Account of
them. I cannot say, with Praesat. in Matthew.
I^rom, that St. Mark and St. Luke did not see our Savior, but I grant that
most of the things related by them were not within their own sight or hearing.
Yet this is certain, that they received what they writ from those who were both
Ear and Eyewitnesses. St. Mark was a Disciple of St. Peter, who was intimately
acquainted with Christ's Actions, and could inform him concerning every
Particular of his Doctrine, Life and Death. St. Luke had St. Matthew and St.
Mark's Writings to direct him. And he professes moreover ( chap. 1. 1, 2.) that
he received all he writ from those very Persons who were Eyewitnesses.
Besides, he was a constant Companion of St. Paul, who had all those things
revealed to him by God in Heaven, which is as much as if he had seen and heard
them. As for the Acts of the Apostles, St. Luke could not but give a full and
perfect Account of the Actions related there, because he was an inseparable
Attendant and Associate of St. Paul, about whom most of that Book is spent. The
Epistles contain chiefly holy Doctrines, divine Counsels, seasonable Reproofs,
and pathetick Exhortations, but they are not wholly destitute of Matter of
Fact. They were writ either by those that were properly styled Apostles, as St.
Peter, St. James, St. John and St. Jude, who therefore could not be ignorant of
what they delivered concerning Christ and the things he did: or they were writ
by St. Paul, who was an Apostle extraordinary, immediately called and sent by
God to preach the Gospel, being first fully instructed in all Matters relating
to Christ and it by divine Revelation.

It might be yet further made evident that the Writers of the New Testament had
perfect knowledge of what they writ, and that they were sufficient Witnesses of
what they relate, because the Matters of Fact were so frequent, and so often
repeated, as also because they were done near them, and not far off, and so
they could easily know the truth of them: moreover, because they were done
publicly, and in the open Light, and not in a Corner: because they were done
before so many Witnesses, before Apostles and Disciples, and thousands of the
People, who were Spectators and Auditors of what happened. I might add that the
Evangelists published the Stories of Christ and his Doings when thousands were
alive who knew the Facts, and might have oppugned them if they would: but they
did not. Especially St. Matthew published his History while yet the Persons
lived on whom Christ's Miracles were wrought, and innumerable others who were
Witnesses thereof were then surviving. Hence it appears that it was difficult
for the Evangelical Writers to conspire and combine together in a Lie, and to
deceive the People, if they had had a mind to it. They might soon have been
confuted if the things they attested had been false. The Cheat was easily to be
found out amongst so many Witnesses, and in things so often acted, and in the
Face of the World. Therefore it is morally impossible that there should be a
Cheat and Delusion, these things being thus.

2. The Personal Qualities of the Evangelical Writers and other Christians who
attested these things argue that they were credible Witnesses, and that their
Testimony was worthy of all acceptance. This is clear from such Considerations
as these, viz. that most of them were simple and unlearned Men, and so were not
fit Persons to devise these things. It is no ways probable that they could
invent such high and mysterious matters, yea indeed no humane Wit was able to
do it. This shows that they were not deceivers, and that they did not
voluntarily deliver a falsehood. Likewise, it is to be remembered that they were
no idle and loose Persons, but were of an honest condition and way of Life,
they were poor Tradesmen and Fishermen that lived on their work and lawful
callings, and therefore it is altogether improbable that they were designing
Men, and that they made it their business to cheat, and impose upon the World.
Again, their Integrity, Candor, and Simplicity, appeared most signally in their
Writings, seeing they relate their own failings, and impartially set down the
grossest miscarriages of their Brethren, as Thomas's Infidelity, Peter's
denying of his Master, the Apostles flying from Christ at his Passion, and many
other things: which none but Honest, Plain and True-hearted Men would have
recorded and transmitted to Posterity. Further, what they did was not out of
Ambition and Love of Honor: for Pride, self-seeking, vain Glory, over-valuing
of Men, crying up Paul and Apollos and Cephas were Vices and Practices which
they both preached and writ against. And to let you see that this was not
counterfeit, their Lives answered to what they professed: in their Carriage and
Behavior none were more humble and self-denying; which proves that they acted
not out of Applause, and Affectation of Honor from the People, but were
sincere and faithful in what they did. Nor could they speak or act for Gain and
Wordly Profit, for they were Men that despised Riches as much as Honor: They
lived meanly and poorly, and were beholden to the Charity of others for a
subsistence. Which shows that they had no design to enrich themselves, and to
grow great in the World. They foresaw, and knew, and persuaded themselves of
this beforehand, that their Profession would expose them to the greatest
Dangers and Hazards, and that Bonds, and Imprisonment, and Death it self would
attend them; yet notwithstanding this they resolved to preach the Gospel, and
to follow their Master whatever befell them. And lastly, to give you an
irrefragable Demonstration of their Integrity and Sincerity, most of them laid
down their Lives to testify and confirm what they had delivered: they sealed
the Gospel with their Blood, they died for what they preached and writ. This is
a sign they were in earnest. Thus if you consider the Personal Qualifications
of the Apostles and Evangelists, who were Witnesses of Christ's Actions, you
must necessarily grant that they were Persons to be believed, that their
Evidence is authentic, and we have no reason to think they were deluded
themselves, or deluded us. For the Proof of Fact consists chiefly in
Witnesses, who must be knowing and honest Men. This makes them to be credible
Persons; and such were the Relators of those things which concern our Savior.
Wherefore, to have them attested by a sufficient number of Persons of that
Character, is enough to assure the Truth of them. We have no cause to dispute
whether those things were so or no: but on the contrary we have good Foundation
for a firm Assent to them.

But tho the Disciples and Apostles did not cheat us, yet perhaps we are
deluded by th^se that came after them. It may be they have not truly delivered
things to us. How can we depend on their Words? Reports are oftentimes false.
There are untrue Representations of things which are very near to us: much more
may there be of Actions which are so far off, and were so long ago. How then
shall we credit History and Tradition, i. e. the Church's delivering these
things to us? I answer, we may and we ought to believe the Persons who received
these things from the Apostles, viz. the pious Teachers, Fathers and Bishops of
the Primitive Church, and the Godly and Faithful Christians of those days; we
ought (I say) to credit these as well as the Apostles themselves: for we have
the most cogent Reasons to persuade us that they truly and faithfully delivered
down to us those things. This I will make good from the Consideration; 1. Of
the Persons that transmitted these things. 2. Of the Evidence of the Cause.

First, as to the Persons, I will consider both their Lives and their Deaths.
Their Lives are sufficient proofs of their Integrity in delivering the
Scriptures of the New Testament to us, and of their confident belief of the
Truth of all that is contained in them. The Primitive Christians lived after
another rate than we do now: They did not wrangle and quarrel as we do, they
did not ^ight, and devour one another, as the manner of too many is of latter
times, but they were remarkable for their mutual Love and Concord, for their
Humility, Meekness and Condescension to one another: and they were admired for
their Gravity, Sobriety, Self-denial and Patience; they were eminent for their
Piety toward God, and their Innocent and Righteous dealing with all Men. The
Ministers practiced what they preached, and the People were ambitious to
imitate their Preachers; and both were singularly Good and Virtuous. This was
it which gained so many Proselytes to Christianity in those first times, this
brought them to a persuasion of the Truth and Reality of Christ's Doctrine.
Therefore when Origin had excellently proved the Truth of Christianity to
Alexander Severus, that noble Emperor ingenuously confessed that he was more
convinced of the Truth of that Religion by the humble and loving carriage of
Christians than by all Origen's Arguments. The exemplary and blameless
Conversation of those Primitive Professors argued that the Doctrine and
Principles of their Religion were real and certain. For how can it enter into
any sober Man's thoughts that such holy and upright Men (true followers of the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ) would have constantly confessed and owned the
Christian way, unless they had been thoroughly convinced of the Truth of it, and
that it was the very same which was confessed and acknowledged by the Apostles
themselves? These Holy and Godly Men made Conscience of a Lie, and counted it a
heinous Crime to falsify: yea, they esteemed it no less than a damnable Sin to
disbelieve or misreport those things concerning Christ and the Christian
Doctrines. They were really persuaded in their Minds that their Salvation lay
at stake, that their Eternal Welfare or Everlasting Ruin were concerned in
these things: And can you imagine then that they would report them falsely, and
impose upon the World by delivering things which were counterfeit?

Again, as the Lives so the Suffering and Death of the Saints in the Primitive
Days, and in the succeeding Ages are an undeniable Argument of the Truth of
what was delivered to them, and of what they conveyed to us. They underwent the
most exquisite Pains and Torments with ineffable Courage and Constancy, and
nothing could prevail with them to renounce the Christian Religion: insomuch
that when the Pagan Adversaries in those days would express any thing to be
impossible, they did it thus, (...). Galen.
Ye may sooner make the Professors of Christ quit their Masters^ Doctrine. This
was a thing not to be effected; for those Persons first of all forsook their
worldly Goods, and then parted with their Lives to hold fast their Religion.
This patient Suffering and undaunted Dying of so many thousands is an
unquestionable Proof of the Truth of Christianity. For those enlightened and
sanctified Men would never lay down their Lives to maintain a Falsehood, and to
perpetuate a Lie. No: they knew whom they believed in, and for whom they
suffered, and that made them so courageous. We may conclude then that the
Christian Doctrine is confirmed by the Blood of those Worthy Men: those
expiring Saints did testify the Truth of Christianity, and therefore they are
styled Martyrs.

Secondly, The Evidence of the Cause is an impregnable Argument of the Reality
and Truth of these things which I am speaking of. There is this following heap
of Evidences. 1. A great Presumption, arising from just Causes and
Circumstances, yea and from a multiplicity of them: which in all Courts of
Judicature is of considerable weight and value with understanding Judges. This
first, but lowest sort of Evidence the Christian Church since our Savior has
not been destitute of, for there were never higher Presumptions in any Cause
under Heaven than there were in this. But we need not mention this, when we
have, 2. The Notoriety of the Facts, i. e. when the things in trial are openly
and commonly known, when they are avouched by public Fame, and the universal
Vogue of Men. And that this was the case of Christianity ever since Christ left
the Earth, cannot be denied by any Man of Modesty and Truth. 3. The Succession
of Christians and Churches in the World is a plain Proof that they verily
believed those things which made them Christians and Churches. Hereupon they
delivered to us those Writings which they received from the Hands of the
Evangelists and Apostles: by their transmitting them to Posterity they show
that they believe them to be sacred and certain Verities. 4. The Succession of
Bishops and Pastors is an other Evidence, for it was their Office to read
publicly the Scriptures of the New Testament, and to preach the Doctrines
contained in them, and consequently to own them to be Truth; which is a good
Motive to us to do the same. 5. The frequent Disputes which Christians in all
Ages have held with those who opposed the Scripture and Christianity, are no
mean Testimony in this Cause. 6. To these may be added the famous Writings of
the Christians in the several Centuries, their Apologies, Dialogues, Sermons,
Homilies, Orations, Commentaries, Histories: All which proclaim their serious
and firm Belief of what they have conveyed down to us. 7. All Christian
Churches have delivered to us certain Symbols or Articles of Belief, which they
reckoned to be the Standards of Evangelical Faith and Truth. 8. The Constant
Communion of the Church, and the public Worship of God in the solemn
Assemblies of Christians ever since the days of the Apostles, the setting apart
a Day for that Worship, the reading of the Scriptures at such times, the
instructing the People out of them, the celebrating the Lord's Supper, the
constant custom of openly rehearsing and pro^essing the Christian Belief, the
Prayers and Praises offered to God in the name of Christ, the yearly
Commemoration of the Birth, Death, and Resurrection of our Savior, the
Sacrament of Baptism which acknowledges the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. 9. The sundry Decrees and Canons of Synods and Councils held in the
Christian Churches. Lastly, the many Laws and Edicts of Christian Emperors and
Princes in defense and confirmation of our most holy Religion.

These and all the rest before-named are clear Proofs and Evidences that the
Evangelical Writings, which contain the Doctrine and Actions of our blessed
Lord, were rightly and truly conveyed to us, and that we are in possession of
the same Faith and Religion which Christ himself founded, and delivered to his
Apostles and Disciples. The Tradition of these things is true and certain, and
we may safely rely upon it. For tho the Authority of divine Truth depends not
wholly on the Testimony of the Church (for then the Authority of the Scripture
would not be Divine but Humane, and consequently not the Word of God, but of
Man) yet the Church does yield its Testimony to the Scripture, and that
Testimony or Tradition is a good Ground of Belief. For Tradition is one way of
communicating Matters of Faith and Fact to us. By it we have them transmitted
to us, but this is neither the grand Motive, nor the Rule of our Faith: yet it
is the Medium or Channel to convey the Belief of such things to us: and we are
to use it and prize it as such, and to thank God that we have this (among other
Means) to establish us in the Truth of the Gospel.

Hitherto I have considered the Testimony of Friends. I will show you in the
next place that even Strangers and Enemies, viz. Jews and Heathens bear witness
to the Truth of Christianity.

First, as for the Jews, if Christ had not been thought by them to have been
some extraordinary Person, yea to be of the Holy Ghost miraculously, why did
they not prosecute Mary for an Adulteress? The Sin of Adultery was severely
punished by their Law, and it was a very reproachful Crime. You may be sure
they would have urged this hard, to the disgracing of the Son through the
Mother. But tho Joseph denied him to be his Son, and consequently she fell
under the Law, yet you read no where that the Jews made use of this against
her: which shows their tacit approving of Christ, and that his Birth was
extraordinary and divine. On the Word (...).
Suidas tells us that Christ was chosen one of the Priests of the Temple at
Jerusalem, upon the death of one of the two and twenty, for his singular Piety
and excellent Doctrine. Josephus his Testimony of Christ is well known; and St.
John Baptist, his forerunner, is made mention of by most of the Hebrew Writers
with exceeding Praise and Admiration of his Holiness. But I will con^ine my
self to those Instances which are recorded by the Evangelists. St. Luke
observes that when he taught in their Synagogues, he was glorified of all, Luke
4. 15. And in the following Verses he subjoins a particular Instance of his
preaching in one of their Synagogues at Nazareth, and then adds, all bare him
witness, and wondered at the gracious Words which proceeded out of his Mouth,
ver. 22. Even some of the Jewish People who believed not in Christ, cried out,
he is a good Man, John 7. 12. Others said, of a truth this is the Prophet, ver.
40. And others, this is the Christ, ver. 41. And the Jewish Officers who were
sent by the High Priests to lay hands on him, admired his wise Deportment and
excellent Discourse, and freely declared that never Man spoke like this Man,
ver. 46. No one ever spoke Matters of greater moment and concern, and with that
Simplicity and Plainness, that Authority and Efficacy which he did. When Herod
harangued the People, they cried out, It is the Voice of God: But it was only
the flattering Voice of the Multitude which made his such. Here it was
otherwise, it was the real Voice of the true God, and his very Enemies attest
the unparalled Efficacy of it.

Christ was confessed and owned by the Jews in a most signal manner when he rid
into Jerusalem on an Ass, and when they strewed the way with Palm-branches, and
when all the People applauded him, and treated him as some great Conqueror or
mighty Prince, Mat. 21. 8, etc. For they were wont to congratulate the coming
of such Persons to a place after that manner. So the valiant Simon was received
after his Military Success, 1 Mac. 13. 51. So the Old Grecians in their
Olympic Games after Victory wore wreaths of Palms, as a reward of Conquerors.
And sometimes they bore the Branches of Palm Trees in their Hands as the Emblem
of Victory, because the Branches of this Tree grow straight and stately, as the
Palma, whence the Tree has its name.
Hand extended; and tho they be loaded with much weight, yet they bear up
against it, and shoot upwards. Hence it was that this Honor of bearing
Palm-branches (and sometimes Branches of other Trees besides the Palm) was
given to Princes in Triumphs. Thus Heliodorus says that Hydaspes the King sent
before him Harbingers of his Victory, shaking Boughs of Palm in token of it.
Hence he that was generally applauded, and received publicly with the
Acclamations of the People, was called (...), because they did not only strew
Boughs but Leaves and Flowers in his way: which sort of Honor was styled (...)
and (...). Nor were they contented with this sign of Favor, but they used to
affix on the Doors of great Men the Boughs of Palm especially: which Honor
(...). In Rhetor, doctore.
Lucian takes notice of, telling us that green Palm-branches were set up at the
Doors of the Rhetoricians. Many more Testimonies might be alleged to this
purpose. And I could add also that this bearing of Branches was used in the
Worship of the Pagans, it being a Testimony of Honor to their Gods. How fitly
then did it come to pass by the overruling Hand of Providence that the
Messiah, who was truly God and King, was received by the People with
Palm-branches? He came in this triumphant manner into Jerusalem, and was
saluted with Cries of Hosanna, and with that Gratulatory Benediction, Blessed
is the King of Israel that comes in the name of the Lord (John 12. 13.) to
testify that his Kingdom was come, that he was to be victorious over Death and
Hell, and that he was to be a mighty Savior and Deliverer. I will briefly add
two or three other Testimonies of the Jews: Caiphas the High Priest prophesied
of Christ, John 11. 50, 51. One of the Thieves on the Cross (if he were a Jew,
which some have questioned) acknowledged Christ, and cleared him; This Man,
says he, has done nothing amiss, Luke 23. 41. And even Judas who betrayed our
Savior confessed his Innocence, I have sinned in betraying innocent Blood,
Mat. 27. 4. Secondly, Heathens bear witness to Christ and the Truth of the
Christian Religion. He was acknowledged and adored by the wise Men that came
from the East. Tho he was condemned by Pilate, yet he was first acquitted by
him, he declaring that he found no fault in him at all, John 18. 38. And his
Wife sent to him, when he was on the Bench, to have nothing to do with that
just Man, Mat. 27. 19. When a Title was to be set over the Cross, Pilate wrote
Christ the King of the Jews, and would not alter it tho he was told of it, John
19. 22. The Centurion who had at that time the Sheriffs place, and was to see
the Execution performed, when he saw what happened uttered these words, Truly
this was the Son of God, Mat. 26. 54. He being a Pagan did not mean that
Christ, the Person who then suffered, was the Son of God by eternal Generation.
It is not the same Testimony with that of St. Peter concerning Christ, of a
Truth thou art the Son of God, Mat. 14. 33. nor of the Disciples, we believe
that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Mat. 16. 16. But he meant he
was a brave and excellent Person, a holy and good Man, unworthy of that which
he underwent, one who had deserved nothing of what he suffered. And that this
is the meaning is plain from St. Luke, who relates this Passage of the
Centurion thus, certainly this was a righteous Man, Luke 23. 47. So he explains
St. Matthew.

Pliny, a Heathen Governor under the Roman Emperor, speaks honorably of the
Christians, and he has left a particular Testimony of their fair and peaceable
Demeanor, as well as of their early Devotion, in a Letter which he writ to
Trajan. The Public Archives at Rome, and the known Writings and Monuments of
the Heathens preserved the Memory of many notable things relating to Christ.
Therefore Tertullian in his Apologies for the Christians often appeals to
these, and bids them consult the Censual Tables and other public Records which
testify of those things. In brief, Profane History relates many things of our
Savior, his Person, his Actions, his Death, the Prodigies that accompanied it,
the great Changes made by that Religion in the World, and many other things
appertaining to it, of which I shall largely speak in another place. Thus God
directs the Hearts of Enemies to testify the Truth of the Gospel. And certainly
this sort of Testimony is very considerable and convincing: (...). Isidor.
Pelus. Ep. l. 4.
The Confession of Adversaries is ever looked upon as such, this is deservedly
thought to be authentic.

Nay, I could proceed further, and show you that the Infernal Spirit, who is
emphatically styled the Adversary, and has showed himself the most implacable
Enemy of Christ and his Cause, has yet born witness to the Truth of them. Our
Savior is attested by Satan: the Devils acknowledge and confess him to be the
Son of God, Mat. 8. 29. and at another time they confess they know who he is,
the Holy One of God, Mark 1. 24. The very impure Demons set forth the Praises
of Christ's Followers, Acts 16. 17. These Men, say they, are the Servants of
the most high God, who show unto us the way of Salvation. We read that one of
the Pagan Oracles owned the Child Jesus: and if that were true which some
think, that the Sibyls were acted by an Evil Spirit, there is further proof
that the Devil bears Testimony to the Holy Jesus, and that that lying Spirit
voucheth the Truth of the Gospel. But here I must confess I have digressed, and
not observed the Bounds which I set my self, for I propounded to speak only of
Humane and Divine Testimony. The former I hope I have finished to the
satisfaction of sober and considerate Persons. I have evinced the Truth of
Christianity by all these Proofs and Evidences, viz. by the attestation of our
Senses, by History, by Tradition, by Tongues and Pens, by Speeches and
Writings, by the Church and the World, by Friends and Enemies, and by all
things that prove any other Relations, or give Evidence concerning any other
matters of Fact. So much concerning Humane Testimony, which is able to create
in us a Moral Certainty and the strongest Humane Faith imaginable, and which is
very serviceable to sit and prepare us for the Divine Testimony, which I am
next to speak of.

CHAP. XV.
All the ways of Divine Revelation under the Mosaic Dispensation were made use
of under the Christian one. Voices. The Testimony of Angels. Visions. Dreams.
The Holy Spirit. The fulfilling of the Prophesies of the Old Testament is an
irrefragable Argument of the Truth of the New Testament. Prophesies concerning
the Birth of our Savior. Isa. 7. 14. cleared from the Cavils of the Jewish
Expositors. It is showed how these Words may have reference to something in
King Ahaz's Days, and yet belong to Christ's Birth. Prophesies in the Old
Testament that relate to Christ's Life and Actions. Others that refer to his
Sufferings and Death. Some that foretell his Resurrection and Ascension. Other
more general Predictions concerning him. Several prophetic Passages concerning
the Branch proved to be spoken of Christ. The Hebrew Word for the Branch is
referred to in the New Testament. The two Zacharies agree. The Jews Objection,
viz. that the Messiah was to be another kind of Person than what Jesus of
Nazareth was, answered. Another Objection, viz. that the Messiah was to bring
universal Peace, answered. A third Objection of the Jews, viz. that their Sins
have hindered the Messias's coming at the promised time, answered. The Objection
raised from 2 Samuel 7. 13. removed by clearing the sense of the Text. Other
extravagant Fancies concerning the Messiah caused by their mistaking the
Prophesies of the Old Testament concerning Christ's coming. The Conclusion,
that all the Prophesies concerning the Messiah are fulfilled in Jesus, and
consequently are a demonstration of the Truth of Christianity.

IN the next place then the Christian Economy and the whole Institution of the
Gospel are confirmed by Divine Testimony. We are certain that the Christian
Religion is from God, and consequently is undoubtedly true, because it is
attested, 1. By all the ways of Divine Revelation used heretofore. 2. By the
fulfilling of all the Prophesies of the Old Testament. 3. By the exerting of
Miracles. 4. By the strange and stupendous prevailing of the Gospel. 5. By the
Judgments which God inflicted on the Enemies of it.

First, I will show that by all the ways whereby God spoke under the Mosaic
Dispensation, he spoke likewise under the Christian one; and this being after
that, it will at the same time convince the I^ws that their Dispensation is
abolished, and confirm Christians in the belief of the Divine Authority of the
Dispensation which they are now under. The Revelations, I say, under the Gospel
are of the same kind with those before. I will reduce them to these following
Heads.

1. The Jews had their Bath Kol, i. e. an Audible and Articulate Sound or Voice
from Heaven, and so have we Christians. Our Savior had this Divine Testimony
thrice, first at his Baptism, Lo, a voice from Heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. God the Father again by a
Voice bore witness to him when he was on the Mount with Peter, James and John,
and was there transfigured; Mat. 17. 5. Mark 9. 1. Behold, a Voice out of the
Cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: hear him.
Of which you will find St. Peter speaking in Epist. 2. Chapter 1. v. 17. And
thirdly, at his Passion, when he was praying to his Father, there came a Voice
from Heaven, and testified that his Prayer was heard: and the People that stood
by and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, an Angel spoke to him,
John 12. 28, 29. Thus Christ was signally glorified by his Father, and declared
by him to be the Messiah, the Son of God, by a Voice from Heaven, attended with
a kind of Th^nder. To this we may annex God's speaking in a rushing mighty
wind, on the day of Pentecost, Acts 2. 2. And Christ Jesus himself, being in
Heaven, spoke to Saul thence by a Voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? Acts 9. 4. St. John in the Apocalypse makes frequent mention of a
Voice speaking to him, and revealing great things to him: where it is
observable that Thunders and Voices go together, chap. 4. 5. and 8. 5. Thus the
New Testament as well as the Old had the benefit of that Divine Oracle which
the Jews styled the Daughter of a Voice, i. e. a Voice from Heaven declaring
the Will of God to Men. Afterward, we are told in Ecclesiastical History that
those who were set on work by Julian the Apostate, to rebuild the Temple at
Jerusalem, were defeated by Thunder, and a TERRIBLE VOICE that accompanied it
from Heaven, thereby bearing witness to the Cause of Christianity.

2. The Jews had the Testimony of Angels, and so have Christians to confirm
this Economy. By these Heavenly Messengers Zacharias had notice given him of
the approaching Birth of John the Baptist, and the Virgin Mary had tidings
brought her of the miraculous Conception of the Holy Babe Jesus in her Womb:
and these were the Heralds that proclaimed the News of his Birth to the
Shepherds. One of this Celestial Order appeared to Joseph, and warned him to
fly into Egypt with the Blessed Infant. These glorious Spirits gave notice of
Christ's Resurrection: and when he ascended up to Heaven, another of this
Celestial Hierarchy addressed himself to the Apostles, and assured them that in
the like manner Jesus should come again to Judgment. Another of these
Ministering Spirits came to the devout Cornelius, and bid him send for Peter
that he might be the great and happy Instrument of converting him to the
Christian Faith. The Angel of God stood by St. Paul in the Night, when he was
on his dangerous Voyage, and ascertained him of his safety, Acts 27. 23. And
sundry other instances there are of Angels making known the will of God unto
Men in those early times of the Gospel, and thereby attesting the Truth of
Christianity.

3. The Jews had the Mosaic Dispensation attested by Visions, and we have the
same way of Revelation to ascertain us of the Truth of Christianity. Thus
Zachariah saw a Vision in the Temple relating to the forerunner of Christ, Luke
1. 22. The Apostles who were at our Savior's Transfiguration had the same
manner of discovery, Mat. 17. 9. The Lord spoke to Ananias in a Vision, Acts 9.
10. You read of St. Peter's Vision, whereby he was taught not to despise the
Gentiles, Acts 10. 10, etc. A Vision appeared to Paul in the Night, Acts 16. 9.
And again, the Lord encouraged him in a Vision, Acts 18. 9. Of St. Stephen it
is said that he looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God (the
Divine Shekinah) and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7. 55. And
we read in the Book of the Revelation, that St. John had frequent Visions. And
hither may be referred those visible representations spoken of in the New
Testament, as the Holy Ghost's descending on Christ in the shape of a Dove,
after he was baptized: The appearance of Cloven Tongues, like as of fire, over
the Apostles heads: The Light from Heaven which shone round about St. Paul at
his Conversion. All these appertain to the Shekinah, the Glorious Presence and
Luster of the^ Heavenly Majesty. And hither may be referred the Radiant Presence
of Christ, the bright and glorious Manifestation of his Person, which is often
mentioned by the Evangelists, Mat. 17. 2, 5. Mark 9. 3. and Rev. 1. 16. He
dwelt among us (he was the true Shekinah) and we behold his Glory, as the Glory
of the only begotten of the Father, John 1. 14.

4. Dreams were another sort of divine Revelations among the Jews, and these
also were not wanting to confirm the Truth of Christianity. For we read that
Joseph was warned once and again in a Dream concerning Mary whom he had
espo^sed, and concerning the blessed Babe, Mat. 1. 20. chap. 2. 12, 13, 19. And
Pilate's Wife suffered many things in a Dream because of Christ, who was then
standing at the Bar before her Husband, Mat. 27. 19. But because these
Operations on the Imagination by Dreams are more liable to mistakes than
Visions and other kinds of Revelation, we have but few Instances of this.
However, we are not wholly destitute of this Testimony under the Gospel.

5. There was among the Jews that which they signally called the Holy Spirit,
viz. when Men were wonderfully and extraordinarily stirred up to deliver the
Will of God, to make some divine Discoveries to the World, and to assert their
holy Religion. This was in Christ himself, Luke 4. 1. Acts 1. 2. and 10. 38.
and in the Apostles, Acts 2. 4. and 5. 8. and 6. 3, 5. and 7. 55. and 11. 24.
and 19. 6. and in all the holy Men that were sent by him to preach the Gospel.
By this they were enabled to speak without any premeditation before Rulers and
Kings, Mark 13. 10, 11. for our Savior tells them, it is not ye that speak,
but the Holy Ghost. With this the Apostles were all filled when they met
together on the Day of Pentecost, and uttered such divine and heavenly things.
By this Prophetic Afflation or Inspiration the Evangelists penned the
Scriptures of the New Testament: for tho these Writings may be said to be
humane Testimony as they were writ by Men, yet these Persons being inspired by
the Holy Ghost, and not speaking of themselves, but by extraordinary
Assistance, their Writings and Testimony are Divine. This is part of that more
sure Word of Prophesy spoken of by St. Peter, Ep. 2. chapter 1. ver. 19. which in
the next Verse he calls the Prophesy of the Scripture. By this Divine
Inspiration the Prophets and Apostles saw and foretold what should come to pass
afterward. By this inward Afflation the Apostles, tho mean and illiterate
Persons, preached the Gospel with that Authority and Evidence which some of
their most implacable Enemies were not able to resist. These are the Divine
Witnesses of the Truth of the Gospel Dispensation and of the Christian Religion.

Yea, even at this Day, and to the Worlds end, this last Testimony, viz. of the
Spirit, is useful and necessary. I do not mean any Miraculous gift of the
Spirit, but a special and peculiar assistance of it, such as all regenerate
Persons have experience of. That we may be thoroughly certain that this or that
was delivered by God, that we may assuredly know that such things were of
Divine Revelation, there is need of this help of the Spirit, the internal
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, such a hidden but powerful Operation of that giver
of all Grace whereby a firm Faith and certain persuasion of the Truth of those
things are wrought in us. For, that we may be certain of Divine Truth, first it
is requisite that we be outwardly helped, that we make use of Moral Arguments
and Evidences, that we attend to Reasons and Proofs; that we weigh especially
the several particular Testimonies in the Word of God, the Scriptures of Truth.
These in a moral way will make it evident to the mind that this or that which
is propounded to us is Divinely revealed, and can proceed from no other but
God. But then besides these outward means, we must have our minds inwardly
illuminated by the Holy Spirit: for it is this alone which can enable us
effectually to see and discern the Light, and to take the force of the
Arguments which prove the several Truths, and to turn the Moral Evidence into
Divine Demonstration.

Lastly, as I mentioned among the diverse ways of Revelation under the former
Dispensations, the Divine Impulse, whereby Persons were instructed and excited
to undertake and atchieve great things, so at the erecting of the Gospel there
was not wanting this way of communicating the Divine will and pleasure. By such
an Impulse as this, Christ himself whipped the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple; by this powerful Afflation his Apostles and Followers were stirred up to
do strange and extraordinary things, several of which are mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles, and many more in Ecclesiastical History, which nothing but
this Divine Motion could legitimate, it being immediately from the Spirit,
whereby they were instructed as well as enabled to effect these wonderful
things.

Secondly, The next Divine Testimony of the truth and certainty of the
Christian Economy and Religion is the fulfilling of the Prophesies of the Old
Testament, which had respect to the New. I have already in another place (when
I proved the Authority of the Holy Scriptures) insisted upon the fulfilling of
the Prophesies of the Old and New Testament as they are an attestation of the
Truth of those Sacred Writings. But at present I am to mention only the
Prophesies of the Old Testament, and among them only those that relate to the
Messiah, and the circumstances which more nearly and peculiarly appertain to
him. And the producing of these, and showing how they were exactly fulfilled,
will be a clear and demonstrative Argument of the Truth of Christianity. For
though Spinosa would persuade Men that all the Prophesies in the Bible were the
mere result of a brisk Fancy, that there was no foundation in the things
themselves, but that Imagination made all, yet surely the bold and impious Man
would not have gone so far as to have asserted that the actual fulfilling of
the Prophesies is nothing but Fancy. No certainly, he could not have the face
to deny that the completion of those Predictions is some real thing, and not
founded on Imagination. For here is matter of fact, which carries reality and
certainty with it, and therefore is a convincing proof, not only of the Truth
of those Prophesies, but of Christianity it self. This then is that which I
will now enter upon. The Prophets of the Old Testament speak frequently of the
Messiah, they have described and characterized him: nothing almost was done by
Christ but they predicted it: every particular act, circumstance and accident
of Importance that should happen about him was foretold. Now all these were
actually verified and fulfilled; as namely what related to his Birth, his Life,
his Death, his Rising again. First, what related to his Birth, as that John
Baptist should be his Forerunner, and make way for him. Behold! I will send my
Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, Mal. 3. 1. And chapter 4. v. 5.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and
dreadful Day of the Lord. Compare these places with Mat. 11. 10, 14: Mark 1, 2
and 9. 11. Luke 1. 17 and 76. and 7. 27. and you will not question their
Accomplishment.

And the Birth it self, and the Conception which was in order to it were
plainly prophesied of many Ages before. As that in Ier. 31. 22. is thought to
be a Prophesy concerning the Conception of Christ, the Lord has created a new
thing in the Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. Some indeed have interpreted
it thus, the Church tho weak as a Woman shall compass and besiege her Enemies,
and take them Captive. But this is very flat and frigid, especially if you
observe the Preface to the Prediction, the Lord has created a new thing in the
Earth. It is no new thing that the Church gets the better of her Enemies: there
are many Instances of this in the History of the Israelities. So that something
else is justly thought to be the meaning of the words. And what should it be
but this, that Christ who was made of a Woman, should be encompassed and shut
up by her in her Virgin-Womb? Her compassing a Man expresses the conception of
him. The word Sabab circumdedit agrees very well with it, for the Mother
encompasses round the Faetus with her Womb. And the Greek ^itly answers to it,
(...), Mat. 1. 23. and (...), Luke 1. 31. The plain meaning then is, that a
Woman (Nekebah, not Ishah) one that is no Wife, but a Virgin, shall conceive a
Man-child in her Womb. And the Woman here meant is the blessed Virgin Mary, and
the Man is Christ, who is God and Man. See Dr. P^c^ck in Not. Misc^l. in Port.
Mos. And this Interpretation is the more remarkable by reason of the Geber.
Hebrew word which we here translate Man. It denotes not barely one of the
Male kind, in contradistinction to one of the other Sex, but it properly
signifies a Man of Power and Might: and so it is fitly applied to the Messiah
who is Omnipotent. Yea, the ancient Jews (as Abarbinel, one of their own
Rabbis, Pocock Not. Miscel.
testifies) understood by this word here God himself, to whom Power more
peculiarly and eminently belongs. It is no wonder therefore that the Fathers of
the Church generally interpret this place of the Virgin Mary bearing Christ in
her Womb, in which he may properly be said to be encompassed and infolded by
her. This was a new thing indeed, there never was the like before, nor shall
ever be afterward. And therefore a Mr. Calvin on the place.
worthy Writer is here to be blamed, who unadvisedly says the Jews might
justly laugh at this Interpretation.

The Delivery and Birth of the Messiah thus shut up in the Womb is expressly
foretold in Isa. 9. 6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder. It is true some of the Jews say Hez^kiah
is spoken of here: but they are confuted hence that the Epithets here given
belong to no mortal Man: for he shall be called the mighty God, the Everlasting
Father: and of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end,
ver. 7. which is parallel with the Words of the Angel concerning our Savior,
Luke 1. 32, 33.

All the Circumstances relating to the Birth of the Messiah ^re particularly
specified in the Writings of the Prophets; as that his Ancestors should be of
the Tribe of Judah, and the Family of David, and consequently that he should be
of that stock, Mic. 5. 2. Isa. 11. 10. Ier. 23. 5. And it is observable that the
Targum on these three places understands them of the Messiah. Therefore when
Christ asked the Scribes and Doctors of what lineage and race the Messiah was
to be? They answered he was to be the Son of David, Mat. 22. 42. It was a
thing, it seems, well known. Accordingly the Genealogy of both Joseph and Mary
is deduced by the Evangelists, St. Matthew and St. Luke, from Abraham along by
David. As to the Place of his Birth, it was prophesied he should ^e born in
Bethlehem, Mic. 5. 2. Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, tho thou be little among the
Thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be
Ruler in Israel. Some obstinate Jews say Zorebabel is meant here: but they are
silenced by others more learned of that Nation, who confess that he was not
born at Bethlehem, but Babylon. Besides, they contradict the Opinion of the
Chaldee Paraphrast, and of the Rabbis, who generally by Moshel.
the Ruler in Israel here understand the Messiah. Wherefore the Jewish Doctors
and Scribes being asked of Herod where the Messiah was to be born, said without
hesitating in Bethlehem Judah, they having learnt this out of the Prophesy of
Micah.

Again, it is foretold in the Old Testament that he shall be born of a Virgin,
Isa. 7. 14. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, a Virgin
shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. The Jews, to
evade this place, say that the Hebrew word which we translate a Virgin,
signifies a Woman in general: But those that are acquainted with that Language
know that they show themselves very perverse in this, and that the Hebrew word
Gnalmah properly signifies a Virgin, i. e. a Maid not known by a Man. For
whereas there are Bethulah, Nagnarah, Gnalmah.
three words in the Hebrew for a Maid or Virgin, this only signifies a pure
untouched Virgin, nor is otherwise understood in any Text of Scripture where it
is mentioned (as it is to be found but in Genesis 24. 4^. Exodus 2. 8. Psalm. 68.
25. Prove. 30. 19. Cant. 1. 3. Cant. 6. 8.
six places besides this of Isaiah.) Therefore the Septuagint, who well
understood the force and signification of the Hebrew word, translated it by a
(...): which is (...) reponendo, being retired, hid: as ( inalmah from gnalam,
abscondita fuit.
Greek one which signifies a Virgin properly so called, whereas they might have
used (...).
other words. And the Hebrew word is with a Hagnalmah.
demonstrative Article before it, which makes it emphatical, and denotes some
certain, definite and peculiar thing or Person. It is found but thrice in the
Bible with this prepositive Article, viz. in Genesis 24. 43. and in Exodus 2. 8.
and in this place of Isaiah. In the two first it points at particular Persons,
and signi^ies a pure Virgin, not known by Man: Why should we not think it does
so in the third? Moreover, it is said, The Lord shall give you a sign, behold!
Here is then some strange and wonderful thing spoken of: Therefore it cannot be
meant of a Woman conc^^ving, i. e. of a Woman that is no Virgin. For (as an
Origin. contr. Celsum.
ancient Father observes) what wonder had it been for a young Woman, not a
Virgin, to conceive? And indeed the Old Rabbis, who believed the Messiah was
to be born of a Virgin, have signalized this word in the Hebrew. In the Cabala,
and Ionathan's Targum you will find that it is written with a Men Clausum in
the middle, to signify something extraordinary here meant, to intimate that it
was a Virgin, shut up, to denote the wonderful Mystery of the Virgin Mary's
Conception*

If it be said (what R. Kimchi and other Modern Jews suggest) that this 7 th
Chap. of Isaiah, and this Verse more particularly refer to the Times of King
Ahaz, and so belong not to the Birth of Christ which was about 700 Years
afterward, I answer by denying the Consequence: For this Chapter and Text may
have reference to King Ahaz's Days, and likewise point at something done a long
time after that. The reason of this Assertion is because there is oftentimes a
double Sense in Scripture. Any one that is conversant in the holy Book is not
ignorant of this, and the Jews themselves acknowledge a literal and mystical
Sense of Scripture. So then these words a Virgin shall conceive, were verified
in the first and literal Sense in Isaiah's time, a Virgin bringing forth a
Child it may be in the presence of the King of Judah, to be a Sign and
Assurance of the deliverance of Judah from the Oppression of the Kings of Syria
and Israel. This Virgin it is likely was afterward Isaiah's Wife, and at that
time betrothed, or to be betrothed to him, and is the same with the Prophetess
spoken of in the 8 th Chapter. Of this Child it is said, Butter and Honey shall
he eat, that he may know how to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good. For before
the Child shall know to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good, the Land that thou
abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings, ver. 15, 16. That is, this Child
shall be nourished and brought up as Children are used to be (Butter and Honey
being the Food of these little ones, to eat these is as much as to be used as a
Child: Whence the Ancients gave these to Children at Baptism to taste of, as
Tertullian and Ierom testify) this Child shall fare as other little ones are
wont to do, and we shall all of us in this Land live in Peace and Plenty, and
shall not be disturbed by the Kings of Syria or Israel: for before the Child
shall know to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good, in as short a time as this
or any other Child shall be grown up, they shall both of them forsake this
Land, which they now threaten, and they shall die in their own Kingdoms. This
you shall see happen before the Child comes to Age, or Years of Discretion
(that is meant by refusing the Evil and choosing the Good.) And accordingly it
happened, the two Kings Rezin and Pekah were destroyed before that Child came
to Years of knowledge, 2 Kings 15.

This is the simple and first Sense of the words. But there is also another and
mystical Sense (or it may be called a secondary literal Sense) of them, and so
they are meant of Christ; and the Holy Ghost intended that this Prophesy should
be applied to him, But how could the Birth of Christ, which was some Ages
after, be a Sign of that which was to happen then? I answer, the Sign does not
always go before the thing signified, as you may satisfy your selves from
perusing Exodus 3. 12. and 37. Isa. 30. 43. Ier. 9. 10. and 51. 63, 64. from
which Instances it is undeniably plain that things to come are Signs, and given
as so, to encourage Persons to something for the present. It is not necessary
then that this Sign should precede the deliverance from Rezin and Pekah: It
might come after it; and so it did when a Virgin conceived, and bore Christ.
The Virgin then in Isaiah's time was a Type of the Virgin Mary, and her Infant
a Type of Christ born of the Virgin: and her being delivered was a Sign and a
Type of the spiritual Deliverance by Christ. The Lord shall give you a sign,
and behold, a Virgin shall conceive, etc. as much as to say, you think that God
is not powerful enough to deliver you from these two Oppressors and Invaders,
Rezin and Pekah: but you are deceived; for God will give to your Posterity a
far greater Argument and Proof of his Power, for he will bring it to pass by
his miraculous and omnipotent Arm that the Messiah shall be born of a Virgin,
and he shall be a Mighty Savior and Deliverer, he shall rescue you from worser
Enemies than those Kings of Syria and Israel, he shall save you from your Sins,
he shall deliver you from Satan, from Death and Hell, and Eternal Destruction.

Secondly, what relates to Christ's Life and Actions was foretold in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, and exactly fulfilled in the New, as his
flying into Egypt, and his returning thence, Isa. 16. 7. Hos. 11. 1. the Murder
of the Infants in Bethlehem, Ier. 31. 15. the presenting of him in the Temple,
Mal. 3. 1. his working of Miracles, and particularly his healing of Diseases,
Isa. 35. 6. his Preaching and Doctrine, Isa. 61. 1, 2. compared with Luke 4.
21. his riding into Jerusalem on an Ass, Zech. 9. 9. which place In San^drim.
Rabbi Joshua and other Learned Jews interpret of the Messiah. Nay In Zech. 9. 9.
R. Solom^n confesses that it is impossible this Prophesy should be interpreted
of any but him.

Thirdly, the things relating to his Sufferings and Death were predicted by the
Prophets of the Old Testament, and are found accomplished in the Evangelical
Writings, as those Affronts and Abuses put upon our Savior by the Jews, Isa.
53. 3, etc. his being betrayed by his Disciple and pretended Friend, Psalm. 41.
9. their selling him for thirty pieces of Silver, Zech. 11. 12. the scoffing of
him when he hung on the Cross, Psalm. 22. 8. Mat. 27. 43. the piercing of his
Hands and Feet, Zech. 12. 10. Mat. 27. 35. That of the Psalmist, Psalm. 22. 16.
can be applied to none but Christ, for in those Days in which David lived there
was no such custom of Punishment wherein they pierced the Hands and Feet, from
whence David could borrow that Phrase. And as for what Calvin says, that it is
a Metaphorical Expression of David's Sufferings and Calamities, it is not worth
attending to. For David here (as in some other Psalms) speaks in the Person of
Christ, and utters such things as agree not fully with his own particular
Condition: as when he adds, ver. 18. They parted my Garments amongst them,
and upon my Vesture did they cast Lots. Which is a prophetical account of that
part of the History of Christ's Sufferings which is recorded by the
Evangelists, Luke 23. 34. John 19. 24. This likewise Calvin says is a
Metaphor, and only signifies that David was a prey to his Enemies, and was
despoiled and robbed of all. But this is the usual course of this Learned
Writer, as I have observed elsewhere: All or most of the places in the Old
Testament which are mystically meant of Christ, and which were so understood by
the ancient Fathers of the Church, are interpreted by him in a literal Sense
only, which is a great fault in this learned and worthy Re^ormer, for in thus
doing he extremely favors the Jews in those Texts, and is thereby a Patron of
Judaism. Christ's thirsting, and their giving him Gall and Vinegar were
foretold, Psalm. 69. 21. and St. John particularly takes notice of its being
fulfilled, John 19. 30. his being crucified among Thieves was the
accomplishment of what was said in Isa. 53. 12. and therefore is particularly
taken notice of in Mark 15. 28. that his Legs should not be broken (as those of
the Malefactors that suffered with him) was foretold in the Law of the Paschal
Lamb, Exodus 12. 46. and is accordingly applied in John 19. 36.

The whole 53 d Chapter of Isaiah is a Description of the Messias's sufferings:
which though the Jews usually interpret concerning the People of Israel
afflicted with Captivity and then delivered, yet any one may see that the
expressions cannot agree in any tolerable way to the Jewish People and their
Condition. But they are most easily appliable to Christ, and to none else: and
it is certain that the Ancient Rabbis understood them of the Messiah. So all
of them conclude that he was to be put to death, from Dan. 9. 26. After the
threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself. And
that this and other Texts before named foretold Christ's sufferings is taken
notice of by himself, Luke 24. 26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things? and again, v. 46. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer. Briefly, the Death and Passion of our Savior were evidently predicted,
and as plainly accomplished, according to that of St. Peter in his Sermon, Acts
3. 8. Those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled. And concerning St.
Paul, we read that he said no other things than those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come, that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the
first that should rise from the dead, Acts 26. 22, 23. Which is the next thing
you are to take notice of.

Fourthly, Then, Christ's Resurrection and the happy Consequences of it were
long since foretold: David speaks concerning him, thou will not leave my Soul
in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10.
Acts 2. 25, 27. The Apostle tells us that Christ not only Died and was Buried,
but also Rose again the third Day according to the Scriptures (1 Cor. 15. 4.)
i. e. according to this place of Scripture now mentioned, and according to the
History of Jonas his being three Nights and three Days in the Whales Belly;
which was a Type and Presignification of our Saviors lying in the Grave part
of three Days. The Ascending of Christ into Heaven, was the consequent of his
rising from the Dead, and that also was foretold, Ps. 68. 18. Thou have
asc^nded on high, tho^ have led Captivity Captive, etc. which you will find
applied to our Savior in Ephesians. 4. 8. And so his sitting at the right hand of
God (which is another effect of his Resurrection) is expressly spoken of by the
Psalmist, Ps. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thy foes thy footstool: which St. Peter takes notice was
fulfilled, Acts 2. 34. And indeed the Ancient Rabbis generally interpreted the
110th Psalm of the Messiah. And that they had reason to do so is plain from
Christ's Question to the Pharisees, Matthew. 22. 43. How does David in spirit call
the Messiah Lord? which would have been frivolous and to no purpose if this
Psalm were not to be understood of the Messiah, yea, if it was not so
understood by the Pharisees. They might have denied that Hypothesis of his, and
have reproved him for misinterpreting the Psalmist's words. But you see they
were so far from doing so that they sneaked away in silence, being not able to
answer him a word, ver. 46. they knew full well that they were gravelled with
our Savior's Query, and that that Psalm was one of the clearest Prophesies of
the Messiah, and his Kingdom and Offices, that is in all the Old Testament.
Thus all the remarkable Passages concerning our Savior were foretold, his
Birth, Life, Doctrine, Conversation, Miracles, Death, Burial, rising again, and
ascending into Glory: and we cannot deny but that they were as punctually
fulfilled, and thereby the Truth of Christianity is abundantly declared.

Many other Predictions concerning Christ might be mentioned, as that first and
most early one of all, in Genesis 3. 15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpents Head: which in St. John's Language is no other than this, that the Son
of God was to be manifested to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 Ep. chapter 3. v.
8. Afterward, that Message of the Angel to Abraham (in Genesis 22. 18.) was a
Prediction concerning Christ, in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed, which cannot be understood of any but the blessed Jesus, who is a
universal Blessing, a Catholic Benefit to the World. Of his coming Moses his
words are to be understood, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto
thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him
ye shall hearken. There never appeared any Prophet like unto Moses but Jesus
the Messiah, the Parallel between which two Praepar. Evang. l. ^.
Eusebius has excellently showed in sixteen or seventeen particulars. Yea,
Christ far exceeded Moses in all great and miraculous Actions, as well as in
his Doctrine. This latter is spoken of in Isa. 2. 3. Out of Sion shall go forth
the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; signifying that Christ was to
change the Law of Moses as to many considerable things, and to establish one
which should be more excellent, and more lasting.

That also is a most pregnant place, Hag. 2. 7, 8, 9. I will shake all Nations,
and the desire of all Nations (i. e. the Messiah) shall come, and I will fill
this House (this second Temple) with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The Silver
is mine, and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts (with these I could
adorn and enrich the Temple, but it shall be dignified with some greater thing,
viz. the appearing of the Messiah in it: upon this account) the Glory of this
latter House shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts, and
in this place will I give Peace, says the Lord of Hosts. Here it is plain that
the Messiah was to come before the second Temple of Jerusalem should be
destroyed by the Romans, for the second Temple is said to be more glorious than
the first (though in it self less glorious) because Christ came into it in the
days of his Flesh, and honored it with his Presence. If you look to the second
Temple it self, which was built by Zor^babel, and afterward adorned by Herod,
and compare it with the first Temple built by Solomon, it was far less glorious
than that. It was not so rich and sumptuous a Fabric, and it wanted several
things which were in the other, as the Ark with the Mercy-seat, and Cherubims,
the Holy Fire from Heaven, the S^ekinah or Presence of the Divine Majesty, the
Holy Ghost, and the Vrim and Thummim. Thus they are reckoned up in the Talm^d:
tho others say some of these were not lost in the Captivity, as the Ark and the
sacred Fire, but were preserved, and were placed in the Temple a^terwards.
However, (granting this to be true) the loss of those other things rendered
this Temple much inferior to the former one. Therefore for this reason alone it
is that the Glory of the second Temple is greater than of the first, viz.
because of Christ's Presence there. This is expressly mentioned by the Prophet
Malachi, the Lord whom you seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, Mal. 3. 1.
And further you may observe that it is said here, the desire of all Nations (i.
e. Christ or the Messiah) shall come: which denotes this to us, that the
Messiah came at that time when he was expected and desired by the Nations, by
both Jews and Gentiles: and that was the very time when he was born, as I shall
show afterward.

Again, those Prophesies are remarkable where the Branch is promised. Thus the
Prophet Isaia^ treating of Christ's Kingdom in the 4 th Chap. of his Prophesy
has these words, In that Day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious, ver. 2. Or, you may read it, Ts^mach Jehovah.
the Branch the Lord, i. e. the Branch who is the Lord Jehovah, viz. the
Messiah, who is God as well as Man. Of him the same Prophet speaks again in
chap. 11. ver. 1. There shall come forth a Rod ^ut of the Stem of Jesse, and a
Branch shall gr^w o^t of his Roots. Which it is evident by the Character that
follows can be meant of none but the Messiah: So likewise I^r^miah prophesying
of the times of the Gospel speaks thus, Behold! the Days come, says the Lord,
that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute I^dgment and Justice in the Earth. In his Days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his Name wh^r^^y he
shall be called, the Lord our Rig^teousness, Jer. 23. 5, etc. And with a little
variation he repeateth the same in chap. 33. ver. 15, 16. which, if you consult
the Context in both places, cannot be understood of any but Christ the Lord.
Nor can that of Z^chary be taken otherwise, Be^old! I will bring forth my
Servant the Branch, chap. 3. ver. 8. And again, chap. 6. ver. 12, 13. Behold!
the Man whose Name is (...) Branch, and he shall grow up (or branch up) out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even (...) shall build
the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the Glory, and he shall sit and rule
upon his Throne, etc. which last Clause is according to the style of the
Proph^ts in other places, prophesying concerning the Messiah, for they set him
forth as a King and Rul^r, and one that shall bear Dominion. For which reason
Abarbanel acknowledges it cannot be meant of Zer^babel, (as some Jewish Writers
had fancied) because (...) was not a King. But supposing it were meant of him,
yet it follows not thence that Christ is not also meant. For he was a Type of
our Savior, as Iosuah the High Priest also was. But it is observable that in
the Targum of Jonathan the Branch is explained by the Messiah, for he renders
that word by this, to let us understand that this and all the other Prophesies
concerning the Branch relate unto Christ. For he was truly the Branch as to his
humane Nature, he grew from the Root of I^ss^, he sprung from D^^id, therefore
it is said, The Lord will raise up to David a righteou^ Branch. And he is
properly styled the Branch as to his Divine Nature, for he is the Branch of the
Lord, and he is himself the Lord God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds,
very God of very God.

Further, I am to observe to you that the forementioned Prophesies of the
Branch are referred to in the N^w Testament, and applied to Christ, which is
fully to my purpose. Some have thought that St. Matthew's words, he shall be
called a Nazarene, chap. 2. ver. 23. have respect to Christ's being so often
called the Branch, the Syriack Natzeroth being derived from Netzer, a Branch or
Twig. But it is plain that those words in St. Matthew have reference to another
thing, viz. Christ's dwelling in the City of Nazareth, and therefore they are
foreign to our present Matter. But that which I shall suggest is not so, for
this is the thing which I am to observe that in all those places where the
Hebrew word used for the Branch is found, it is rendered according to the (...)
Greek Interpreters and the (...).
Latin Version, the East or Sunrising, or Day^ spring. The reason of which I
apprehend to be this, that the (...)
Hebrew word is derived from a Theme which gives occasion for both
Translations, for it signifies both to branch out, and to ris^. And so the
Greek word (...) is both germinare and oriri. And besides, there is a great
Analogy and Affinity in the things themselves, for as Branches are to the Tree,
so the Beams and R^ys of Light are to the Sun. These latter are as 'twere so
many Branch^s and ^ough^ of Light issuing and springing from that great
Luminary. The Septuagint therefore might well translate Tsemach, (...), i. ^.
instead of the Branch use a word which signifies the ^ising of the Sun or
Stars, the spreading of the Rays of Light. And, the New Testament following the
Greek Translation of the Seventy, it is no wonder that the Sense of the word
which they use is referred to in these Evangelical Writings.

Thus Zachari^^ prophesying concerning the coming of Christ, which was then
approaching, blesses God for visiting and redeeming ^is People, and for
raising up ^ Horn of Salvation in the House of (...) Servant David, (...) h^
spoke by the mouth of his Holy Prophets: and at last, with reference to some
ancient Prophecy, he adds, (...), Luke 1. 78.
the Dayspring from on high ^ath visit^d (...), to (...) light to them that
sit in darkness, and in the (...) of death, and to guide our feet into the way
of peace. In which words I conceive this inspired Person alludeth to those
Propheies of the Old Testament, where, according to the Hebr^w, Christ is
called a Branch, but according to the Greek the Dayspring, or the (...) Light.
This Zac^^rias of the New Testament, who calls our Savior the Dayspring,
agrees with the Old Testament Zachary, who says his Name is the Branc^, Luke
1. 78. is a parallel place with Zech. 3. 8. and 6. 12. and with that in Mal. 4.
2. Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, This Sun of
Righteousness and the Righteous Branch are the same. And I observe that these
two are joined together in one place, Rev. 22. 16. I am the Root and the
Offspring (or Branch) of David, the bright and the Morning Star, which makes
way for the Sun. And so St. Peter styles him, the Day Star which arises in the
Hearts of the faithful, 2 Pet. 1. 19. All these places are parallel with those
Texts of the Branch, which in a larger Sense signifies the spreading forth and
branching out of the Light of the rising Sun or Stars, and is rendered according
to that acceptance by the LXX; and therefore is properly attributed to Christ,
who is God of God, Light of Light.

There is another Prophesy which might be insisted upon, viz. Hos. 3. 4. The
Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince,
and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and
without a Teraphim. The Jews shall cease to be a Nation and Body Politic, they
shall be without Head and Ruler; both Church and State shall be destroyed,
Ecclesiastical and Civil Government shall be dissolved; yea, not only the
Mosaic but all Idolatrous Worship (which they were before addicted to) shall
cease among them. This is now fulfilled, and has been several hundred years,
and that according to the Confession of R. David Kimchi in loc.
one of their most Celebrated Doctors, who has these remarkable words on this
Prophesy, These are the days of exile in which we live at this day: we have
neither King nor Prince of Israel, but we are under the power of the Gentiles,
and under the power of their Kings and Princes. There are two other famous
Predictions, that in Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart, etc. and that
other in Dan. 9. 24, 25, etc. concerning the Seventy Weeks, both which are
exactly fulfilled in the coming of Christ: but I have heretofore undertaken the
Explication of these notable Texts, and I will not now repeat what I said.

Thus I have endeavored to show, from the fulfilling of the Predictions and
Promises concerning Christ, that he is come, and that he is the true Messiah.
Moses wrote of him, John 5. 46. and to him give all the Proph^t's witness, Acts
10. 43. All things that (...) written by the Prophets concerning the Son of Man
ar^ accomplished, Luke 18. 31. The Prophets of the Old Testament (as St. Peter
tells us) prophesi^d of the Grace which should come to us, 1 Pet. 1. 11. and
those Prophesies are really performed by the arrival of Grace and Truth by
Jesus Christ. All the Descriptions of the Messi^^ in the old Testament agree to
him, all the Conditions and Qualifications mentioned there are to be found in
this Christ, who was crucified at Jerusalem. And (which is yet further
considerable) those very Prophesies and Passages are owned by the Sea Buxtorf,
and (...) de Not. J. Christi.
anti^nt Rabbis to be spoken of the Messiah, and not of any other Person, as
the modern Jews object. Particularly the three Chald^^ Paraphrasts expressly
inser^ the word Messiah into the chief of those forecited Places which speak of
Christ: especially those that are dark and obscure are explained and plainly
interpreted concerning that Messiah, who is our blessed Jesus. In short then,
whatever the Scriptures of the Old Testament so long ago foretold concerning
our Savior are exactly verified and fulfilled, and acknowledged to be so by
the I^ws, which is an undeniable Argument that the M^ssia^ is come, and that
Jesus was that M^ssia^.

But here the Jews come upon us with such Objection^ as these. 1. The Messiah
was to be another kind of Person than what Jesus of Nazareth was: he was to be
a glorious Prince, he was to come with Royal Majesty and Pomp. For he is
frequently styled a King in the Writings of the Prophets, and particularly
Zechary foretells that his Dominion shall (...) from Sea to Sea, and from the
River even to the ends of the Earth, Zech. 9. 10. And some of the Jews
confidently assert that the Messiah shall marry, and the Kings of the Earth
shall give their Daughters to him: Several Concubines he shall have, and his
Children shall succeed him in the Kingdom: Health, Wealth, Prosperity, external
Glory and Felicity shall attend him. But Jesus came not in this manner,
therefore he was not the Messiah.

I answer, as for the Character they frame of the Messiah, of being a great
Secular King, etc. it is clearly against the Description of the Messiah, whose
Humility and Sufferings we read prophesied of. The Old Testament represents him
as a Person despised, rejected of men, a man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief, etc. he was indeed a King, but he tells us that his Kingdom was not of
this World, it was a spiritual Dominion and Sovereignty which he came to erect;
he came to rule in the Hearts and Consciences of Men: And thus his Kingdom
reached even to the ends of the World, the Gospel being preached, and he being
acknowledged in all places under Heaven. But the Jews look only for a carnal
Messiah, their thoughts run wholly on some great and successful Warrior, some
eminent Personage that atchieves mighty things in the World. And therefore (if
we may give credit to a Mo^sieur Ague^et 's History of O. C.
late Writer) the Asian Jews were inclined to take Oliver Cromwell for the
Messiah, and sent Messengers hither on purpose to enquire of his Extract and
Lineage. For he having done strange things at home, and being dreaded abroad,
they thought he might be able to do them a kindness, to deliver them from their
Pressures, and to restore them to their Land again. If the Great Turk would do
this, and make them great and glorious, some of them would be apt to take him
for the Messiah, and all the Prophesies of the Old Testament should be brought
to speak for him. Tho the Jews are dispersed, and are a forlorn People, yet
they nourish hopes of a Messiah who will enable them to throw off their Rags,
and will bless them with Riches and Abundance, and with the Confluence of all
worldly Prosperity. The ancient I^ws before Christ talked not after this rate:
But People are wont to wish for and fancy what they most want. Their low Ebb
and poor Estate make them promise themselves a Messi^^ who shall come with
outward Pomp and Magnificence, who shall be great and potent, and prefer them
to places of Honor and Profit. But this is dreaming, and therefore is a
sufficient Confutation of it self.

2. It is objected by the Jews that the Messiah is not come, because it is
foretold that universal Peace shall be the fruit of his coming, Is^. 11. 6,
etc. Isa. 65. 25, etc. but these things are not fulfilled, Quarrels and
Divisions have not left the World since Christ appeared, yea rather they have
been augmented; therefore the Messiah is not arrived. I answer briefly, first
these Predictions were literally and historically fulfilled at our Savior's
coming into the World; for there was an Universal Peace at that time. The
Emperor Augustus, under whom he was born, had hushed and stilled the Civil
Wars and Commotions at home; and all Nations abroad submitted to the Roman
Empire, Egypt became a Roman Province, AEthiopia sued for Peace, India entered
into League with Caesar, the Parthians trembled at him; the Cantabrians,
Rhetians, Pannonians, Germans yielded to his Arms. When he had thus by Victory
or Terror purchased Peace, when all the World lay submissively at his Feet, he
shut up Ianus's Temple, which was a sign of a general Repose and profound
Peace; and then the Prince of Peace came into the World. Yea, in those
Countries which at that time were not under the Power of the Roman Empire all
was quiet and still. In Denmark and Norway and those other Northern Regions,
there were no Wars, no Enemies appeared. And afterward T^rtullian appeals to
the R^mans themselves in justification of this Truth, that Si pristinas clades
comparemus, leviora nunc ^ccidunt ex quo Christianos a Deo orbis accepit. Apol.
c. 40.
since the World has been blessed with our Savior's Arrival, Wars and
Slaughters have been very much allayed. With whom another Apologist agrees,
telling the Pagans that Non tant^m non aucta, verum etiam majore de p^^te
furiarum compressio^ibu^ imminuta. Ar^ob. lib. 1.
Wars and Hostilities were so far from being increased since Christ's coming,
that they were exceedingly diminished and suppressed. Thus the Prophesies were
accomplished. Secondly, the Design of the Gospel which Christ and his Apostles
preached was to introduce Peace: The Christian Religion dictated no less, and
directed Men how to practice it. Therefore observe the Reason adjoined to the
Prophesy concerning Peace, Isa. 11. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy Mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as
the Waters cover the Sea, i. e. the knowledge of Christianity and the excellent
Rules of it are in themselves subservient to Peace and Unity, in their own
nature they promote this Blessing in the World. Thirdly, the time shall come
when this Promise shall be compleately fulfilled. Tho it is spoken of the time
of the Messiah, yet it is not said that it shall presently be fulfilled, and
that in the height of it. Christianity has brought Peace into many Kingdoms
and Countries, and has expelled Wars thence. This cannot be denied: there is
History enough to make it good; which might be a sufficient answer to the
Objection. But moreover, the Gospel of Christ in due time will have a greater
and larger Effect; and universal Peace, Amity and Concord shall obtain in all
the Churches of Christ, as I shall prove when I come to treat of the last
Dispensation.

3. Whereas we have proved, and the Jews themselves have confessed that
according to the Prophesies of the Old Testament the Messiah was to come before
this time, they reply (in way of Objection) that their Sins have hindered the
Messias's coming at the time prefixed. It is said in the Talmud, the Messiah
shall reign two Thousand Years, but because of o^r Sins t^ose Years are already
past; and Rabbi Elias is quoted for it. In answer to which sorry Shift, first I
ask what Sins have they committed these Sixteen hundred Years, for which this
Promise and Appointment of God are still delayed? They were grievous Idolaters
heretofore, and consequently were the worst sort of Sinners, and yet this Guilt
did not hinder the accomplishing of other Prophesies and Predictions in
Scripture which concerned them. How comes it to pass that all this time, in
which they have not been (in their own opinion) so great Sinners as they were
formerly, the fulfilling of the most important Promise that ever God made is
deferred? Besides the Sins of the Jews were so far from being a hindrance of the
performing this Promise, that they should rather have hastened it, for the end
of the Messi^^'s coming was to take away Sin, to finish the Transgression, and
to make an end of Sins, as that Prophesy in Daniel expressly foretells: Therefore
it is groundlesly alleged by the Jews that the coming of the Messi^^ is
delayed by reason of their grievous Sins. Again, if their Sins have for so many
Ages hindered the Messias's coming, if God has deferred that Blessing merely
because of their Iniquities, why may he not put it off for ever for the same
reason? And by consequence there shall be no coming of the Messiah, which some
Jews have not been backward to say. Further I add, who ever thought that the
Prediction or Promise concerning the Messiah was conditional, that is, wholly
depended on the Qualifications of the I^ws? And yet this is implied plied in
the Objection: Nay, the Jews freely confess the fullness of time was come for
the sending of the Messiah, but God being angry with them for not performing
the Conditions of that Promise, viz. Repentance and Amendment of Life, put off
his coming. Thus R. In his Conciliator.
Manasse ben Israel plainly declares that God promised the Tribe of Judah that
the Scepter should not depart from it, but be continued with it till the coming
of the Messiah; but that he promised this to Judah in the same manner as he did
to David, that his Kingdom should be for ever, viz. if his Posterity did not
provoke God by their Sins to put a Period to the Kingdom and Government.

But this Rabbi is much mistaken in the Interpretation of that Promise made to
David; for first, if you consult 2 Samuel 7. 13. (the place whence the Objection
was raised) you will find that that Promise was not to be made void by any
means, no not by their Sins. Ver. 14, 15, 16.
If he commit Iniquity, I will chasten him with the Rod of Men; but my Mercy
shall not depart away from him: and thy House and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee: thy Throne shall be established for ever. And
more fully in Psalm. 89. 30, etc. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not
in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my commandments: then
will I visit their Transg^^sstion with the Rod, and their Iniquity with
Stripes. Nevertheless, my loving Kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my Faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my Lips. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I
will not lie unto David. His Seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the
Sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful
Witness in Heaven. Selah. From all this it is undeniably evident that the
Promise made to David concerning the perpetuity of his Kingdom, was not
conditional, but absolute; and that it was impossible for David's Posterity to
frustrate it by their Sins. For, Secondly, this Promise is to be understood of
Christ's Kingdom, who was the Son of David. Thus it is applied by the Angel who
brought Tidings to the Virgin Mary of the Conception of Christ, saying, He
shall be great, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom
ther^ shall be no end, Luke 1. 32, 33. This is the Kingdom which was promised
in those foregoing Texts, and therefore the Objection is fond and foolish. It
is clear that the Promise of the Messiah was no conditional thing: and the
contrary assertion of the Ie^s is profane and blasphemous, for they do in
effect say that the Promise was grounded on their Righteousness and Worthiness,
and that Gods Word and Truth were nulled by their Infidelity and Wickedness.
This is the result of the foregoing Assertion, and it is sufficient to dissuade
us from embracing it.

When they cannot effect what they design by these foregoing Objections, some
of them fly to such extravagancies as these, viz. the Messiah is come,
according to the Prophesies and Predictions of him, but because of their sins
he is not yet revealed, he lies hid somewhere. This is a common Opinion among
the Jews, says Buxtorf. And he adds, that they dispute about the place where
he hides himself, some saying he is in Paradise, and others feigning other
Fables; but they expect that he shall appear and show himself in the World in
due time. This Opinion of the M^ssias's absconding is such a wild and
groundless Fancy that it calls for no other Refutation but Laughter and Scorn.
Therefore I will pass this by, without endeavoring ^o give a formal answer to
it. Vide Buxtor^ Synag^ and Pocock's Appendix to his Commentary on Mica^.
Others tell us that there are two Messiasses, one the Son of Joseph, of the
Tribe of Ephraim, poor and vile, who was to die; the other the Son of David,
who is to rule and govern, and shall be a great Conqueror, and lead them into
Canaan, and be their King there. Tho the former of these be come, yet the
latter Messiah, whom they are most concerned for, is not come: but they daily
expect him, and even languish with looking for him so long. This Messiah, when
he comes, invites all the Jews to a Feast, the greatest and most sumptuous that
ever was, and according to their Bill of Fare Behemoth and Leviathan are the
two main Dishes. Thus these poor People cheat themselves with the Notion of a
double Messiah, which has no Foundation but their own Fancies. And so they
will delude themselves by keeping up the imagination and hope of a Messiah yet
to come.

Sabbatai Sevi who appeared in the Year 1666, was the twenty fifth Pretender to
the Messiaship, as it stands in their own Records. He was the Son of Mordecai
Sevi, an Inhabitant of Smyrna, and a Broker to an English Merchant in that
place. His Son Sabbatai addicted himself to study, and became a notable
Proficient in Hebrew and Metaphysics, and at length gave out to those of his
Nation that he was the Messiah, Nathan another Jew having a little before
proclaimed himself Elias. What became of this latter I know not, but we are
told that the former threw down his Pretenses to the Messiaship, and turned
Turk before the Grand Signior. And still the Expectations of these People grow
higher, and they are ready to embrace any bold Impostor who will lay claim to
the Title of Messiah. And thus it will be as long as they mistake the
Prophesies in the Old Testament concerning his coming, and will not be
persuaded that the time of it is past. But shall we take the meaning of
Scripture from Them from whom God has taken away for so many Ages all
Understanding and Knowledge? Shall we give credit to them who are blinded and
besotted, and have abandoned their Reason, who are most palpably erroneous in
Chronology and History, (as the Learned Isaac Vossius has showed) and who in
giving the Sense of Scripture are most apparently deluded? No surely, nor are
we to mind what they say when they tell us that Maimonid. H. Melachim. c. 12.
no Man ought to be so bold as to compute the time of the coming of the
Messiah. We know the reason of this; the Jews cannot endure now to have the
Prophesies looked into, and the times of the Messias's arrival reckoned up.
Since Christ is come, they see that the Times spoken of by the Prophets
concerning him are past, and therefore they anatbematize all that undertake to
compute them. They wish that those who curiously enquire into them may Rumpatur
prae tumore spiritus eorum qui computent sines temporum. Buxtorf. Lex.
perish. But the Curse will rather light upon themselves, because they wilfully
discern not the Times.

We may then, notwithstanding all the Objections, Cavils, Evasions, and
perverse Interpretations of the Jews, hold fast our Proposition, that all the
Prophesies in the Old Testament concerning the Messiah are really fulfilled.
Yea, the Prophesy concerning the Jews not believing these Prophesies is
accomplis'd: for it was prophetically set down as Isa. 53. 1, 2, 3. compared
with Mark 9. 12. John 12. 37, 38.
one Mark of the Messiah his coming, that the Jewish Nation should refuse and
reject him. So that you see the Jews Incredulity and Obstinacy are one great
Argument that Christ is the true Messiah. We have abundant reason then to
acquiesce in the Spirit of Prophesy, which is the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19.
10. This bears witness to him, and to the Truth and Certainty of Christianity.
This Spirit of Prophesy witnessed concerning Christ four Thousand Years before
he came, for so long it was from the first Promise in Genesis 3. 15. Many other
things were foretold concerning him three Thousand Years before, some two
Thousand, and some a Thousand before he was manifested in the Flesh. Now, our
Argument runs thus, he that was so many Years before foretold to come as the
Messiah or Savior is certainly the true Messiah and Savior: But Jesus was so
foretold, therefore he was certainly the true Messiah and Savior. The first
Proposition is built on the Truth and Faithfulness of God, and is granted us by
the Jews themselves. The second is that which we have been endeavoring to
prove, and I hope I have effectually done it; for I have plainly demonstrated
that it was Christ our Lord who was foretold so many Years before in the Old
Testament, and that it can be no other than him. Therefore it cannot be
questioned by any rational Person whether he was the true Messiah who was to
bring Salvation to Mankind.

Thus you see Christianity is founded on the Old Testament; here it is
prophesied that Christ should come in such a manner; and the very manner we
find particularly recorded in the New Testament; Malachi and Matthew join hand
in hand, and so do the rest of the Prophets and Evangelists: Therefore we
embrace Christianity. The truth of it is proved from the Prophesies concerning
the Messiah. If we believe these (as we cannot but do, because they are divine
and from Heaven) we must believe Christ is come: for they are an absolute
Demonstration of this grand Point, that Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, whom
the Jews put to death at Jerusalem, was the Son of God and the true Messiah.
Whereupon it will irrefragably follow that the Faith and Doctrine which he
introduced are from Heaven, and that the Christian Economy wants not divine
Attestation.

CHAP. XVI.
The Miracles wrought by Christ. What those Baskets were which were filled with
Fragments. Christ not only fed but healed the Bodies of Men. He did other
Miraculous Works. The Apostles, as well as our Savior, exerted many Miracles.
An Objection from 1 Timothy 5. 23. answered. Five Properties of a true Miracle.
Counterfeit and lying Wonders. The Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were
accompanied with seven peculiar Circumstances which prove them to be from God.
What were the Ends and Designs they propounded to themselves in working of
Miracles. An Objection from Mark 11. 14. answered. Several Interpretations of
those Words [the time of Figs was not yet.] Why Christ cursed the ^arren
Fig Tree. Another Objection from Mat. 8. 30. answered. Two other Objections
answered. The Personal Qualities of the Apostles argue the Miracles which they
wrought to be true and real. A Reply to the several Cavils against the Miracles
of our Savior. An account of the wonderful things done by some Pagans,
especially Vespasian and Apollonius Tyanaeus. The Miracles which the Church of
Rome pretends to are proved to be Counterfeit. It is showed from Scripture, the
Confession of Jews and Pagans, and the nature of the thing it self, that
Miracles are a Testimony of the Truth of Christianity. Miracles were necessary
for confirming of the Gospel, on several Accounts.

Thirdly, MIracles are another Divine Testimony of the Truth of Christianity.
Here I will first set before you the particular Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles: Secondly, I will prove that these were true Miracles: Thirdly, I will
show that these are an infallible Testimony of the Truth of Christianity.

1. I will set before you the particular Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
recorded in the New Testament. Here I might mention his Conception, which was
by the Holy Ghost, and by himself as he was God, and his Birth which was of a
Virgin, both which are Miraculous; and I might recount how he was ushered into
the World by a Miraculous Star. But I will confine my self to those Miracles
which he personally did in his Life, at his Death and afterward* One of the
first he exerted was at Galilee, when he turned Water into Wine, John 2. 11. He
that could fast forty Days and forty Nights in the Wilderness, ( Mat. 4. 2.)
which is to be reckoned as a Miracle also, thought good to demonstrate his
Divine Power at a Feast, and to cheer and refresh the Guests with no less than
a Miracle. Then (but I shall not observe the exact Order of his Miracles) we
read that about Meat (as well as Drink) he exercised his Omnipotent Virtue: for
when the multitude which followed him wanted food, he had compassion on them,
and satisfied four Thousand Men with seven Loaves and a few Fishes, at which
time seven Baskets of Fragments were left, Mat. 15. 34. At another time he fed
five Thousand, besides Women and Children, with five Loaves and two Fishes, and
after all twelve Baskets full remained of Fragments, Mat. 14. 19, 20.

This was a most acceptable Miracle to those poor hungry half starved Jews, who
went up and down with their Baskets, on purpose to pick up any thing they could
light on. This beggarly Rabble was known every where by their Coffins or
Baskets made of Osiers, an old Relic perhaps of Jewish Superstition, a
remembrance of Moses's being exposed on Nil^^, shut up in a Basket of
Bull-rushes, which now are imitated by those of Wicker. They used these
Baskets, with Hay at the bottom, to put those things in, which any would hire
them to carry. Therefore I^venal speaking of these poor Jews says, Sat. 3.
-- Quorum cophinu^ foenumque supell^x.
It was their custom to go abroad with these, (which they carried in their
hands or on their heads, for this latter was the way of old, as we read in Genesis
40. 16, 17.) and therein they lodged wh^^ they gathered up in the Streets of
Rags, Chips of Wood, Skins, Straws, perhaps an old badg of their gathering
Stubble or Straw in Egypt, to which the word f^^num (taken in a large sense)
may refer. Or, it was a Symbol of their servitude there, when they were
compelled to be the worst of Scavengers, when they cleansed the Streets,
gathered up all Dirt, Dung and Filth, and carried it away in Baskets, to which
some think the Psalmist alludes in Psalm. 81. 6. which according to the vulgar
Latin is thus, manus ejus in ^ophin^ servi^runt. Hence the Lib. 5. Epigr. 17.
Epigrammatist taxes a vain proud Dame (who bragged of her Birth and Lineage)
for marrying a poor Jew, a Basketeer; -- Nupsisti, Gellia, cistifero.
It was this sort of begging Jews that ran after our Savior into the Desert,
and according to their old fashion carried their Maunds, their Baskets with
them. Both these and their empty Bellies he filled by a prodigious multiplying
of the Loaves and Fishes. These grew in their Hands while they were handling
them, or between their Teeth while they were eating them. Yea, behold a Miracle
upon a Miracle! the very Fragments amounted to more than the entire Provision,
they carried away more than was set before them at first. I know not when the
Proverbial saying was more fully made good, a part is more than the whole.

And our Savior did not only Feed but Heal the Bodies of Men in a Miraculous
manner. There is a Ader, in Enarrationibus de morbis Evangelii.
Writer who maintains that all the Diseases which Christ cured were naturally
incurable. Whether they were all so, I will not nicely enquire; but it is
probable that most of them were so: for we read that he cured such as labored
under those Diseases which bassled the Art of the best Masters of Medicks, he
usually incountred the Opprobria Medicorum, the Distempers which puzzled and
non-pluss'd the Physicians. Thus, a certain Woman which had an Issue of Blood
twelve years, and had suffered many things of many Physicians, and had spent
all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, was
sorthwith cured by Christ, Mark 5. 25, 26. Another Woman, which had a spirit of
infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
her self, was immediately loosed from her infirmity, and made straight, Luke
13. 11, 12.

Nay, the same Omnipotent Arm cured a Man who had an infirmity thirty and eight
years, John 5. 5. From which duration of the Disease we may infer that it was
naturally past Cure: it was impossible by Art to master an infirmity so Old and
Chronical: the Distemper might plead Prescription after so many years. And in
the 7 th v. you may observe the poor Man's Case was so much the sadder, because
he was not in a capacity to further and promote his recovery, such was his
impotency and inability. He lay at the Waters, and was there tantalized,
disappointed, and wholly fr^strated of hi^ daily Hopes and Wishes. And there
perhaps he lay repining at his Destiny which had given him some hopes, only to
make his Infirmities the more insupportable. He was condemned to live, and to
bear the Burden of a lingering Disease. You may suppose that oftentimes out of
hope of regaining his Health he almost lost his Life in the Press and
importunate Crowd. The good Angel that used to trouble the Waters of B^thesda
would not step aside to take him in: and he had no Friend there that would make
way for him to the Pool. His Neighbors, that brought him to the place in
expectation of a Cure, proved in the Event cruel to him, and preserved him only
to torment and vex him. At last he met with the Angel of the Covenant: the
blessed Jesus (who came to save Men's Souls and Bodies) pitied his Case, and
healed his Distemper even when it was thus grown habitual and inveterate, so
that no Drug or D^vice of Art could reach the Root of it, nor perhaps the
sa^a^ive Streams of (...) wash it away. The holy Jesus, I say, beholding this
Person in so forlorn a Condition had compassion on him, bid him rise forthwith,
and take up his Bed, and walk; which immediately he did.

Our Savior likewise restored sight to the Blind (even those that were born
so), hearing to the Deaf, sp^^ch to the Dumb, strength to the Lame. He cured
Fevers, Palsies, Leprosies, and all manner of Diseases whatsoever, whether
Acute or Chronical. No Distemper overcame his Power, but he healed those that
were most difficult and obdurate, and that could be removed by no humane Skill.
Among his other Miracles, we must not forget his wonderful Dispossessing of
Devils, nay of a Legion of them at one time. He cast out Deaf and Dumb and
Blind Devils, i. e. those evil Spirits which made the possessed so: and in Mat.
12. 22. it is recorded that he ^cured a possessed Person who was both Blind and
Deaf. Thus he expelled Diseases and Devils together. On the Sea as well as on
the Land he displaied his Miraculous Power; he commanded the Inhabitants of
that Element to surrender themselves at his pleasure. He sent Peter to fish for
Poll-money, and accordingly he found it in a Fishes mouth. Seeing from a Mount,
where he was praying, his Disciples at Sea laboring with a Tempest, he came to
them walking on the Waters, and gave St. Peter power to walk there safely; and
then coming into the Ship, he presently silenced the Wind, allayed the Storm,
hushed the Tempest which threatened no other than sudden Shipwreck.

He did things far greater than all these, he raised the dead, which is the
height of Miracles, and is the most remarkable Attestation of Divine and
Supernatural Power. Thus he raised Lazarus from the Grave, he called to Life
again the Daughter of Iairus the Ruler of the Synagogue: Afterward in the Town
of Naim he restored to Life the only Son of a Widow. These Persons, say some
Atheists, were not dead, but only in an Ecstasy. But we say that they were
really dead, or else there is no way in the World to know and judge when any are
so. And if this be granted (as it needs must) we have more reason to assert the
Affirmative than they the Negative. Paracelsus philosophically attributes this
Resuscitation to the mixture of a certain heat in the corrupted dead Matter; as
Frogs (says he) are generated of Slime by the heat of the Sun. This is his
Blasphemous Nonsense, which all Men of sober Reason deride, and unanimously
acknowledge that the restoring of the dead to Life is an Act of Supernatural and
Divine Power, and that the Key of the Grave (as the Jews say) belongs to God
only.

And now to approach toward our Saviors Death, a little before which he
repeated that Act which he had once before done, i. ^. the driving the Buyers
and Sellers out of the Temple, which may be justly reckoned amongst his
Miracles, for he could not have expelled so many Men out of that place, which
they had made the place of their Merchandise and Gain, without an extraordinary
and omnipotent Arm. And by the same Almighty Power he struck to the Ground
those that came to apprehend him. Afterward, when he was on the Cross he
converted one of the Thieves even just before his leaving the World, which was
a Miracle, and a great one. At the same time he caused a miraculous Eclips^,
for it must be reckoned as such because it happened not after the natural and
usual way, which is by the Moons interposing between the Sun and the Earth,
which falls out only in the New M^on; whereas when Christ suffered it was F^ll
Moon, viz. the 15 th Day of the Month Nisan, the Passover-day. And at his Death
the Earth quaked, the Veil of the Temple was rent asunder, the Graves ^ere
opened, and the dead arose, which was the forerunner of our Savior's
Resurrection, which followed soon after. He that raised others raised himself
from the dead the third Day, which was a Confirmation of all his former
Miracles. And after he had visibly conversed with his Disciples for a time, he
ascended up to Heaven, and conveyed himself through all the Regions of the
upper World even to the Mansions of Glory. These were some of the Miracles of
our Savior: But there were innumerable more which are not recorded; which
occasioned that great Hyperbole used in John 21. ult. Indeed, Christ did so
many and so great Miracles, that the Unbelief and Obstinacy of the Jews,
notwithstanding all of them, may seem to be as great a Wonder and Prodigy as
any thing that happened.

Secondly, the Apostles as well as our Savior himself, exerted many Miracles,
the holy Spirit being sent to them, according to Christ's Promise, to enable
them to do them. ^hey cured all manner of diseased Persons that were brought
before them; yea, they could cure at a distance, and by proxy. By St. Peter's
Shadow and St. Paul's Handkerchief a sanative Virtue was conveyed to the Sick,
and their Diseases departed from them, Acts 15. 15. Acts 19. 12. This was a
Gift which was equally wonderful and useful, by virtue whereof Maladies were
cured without any cost, and the poor Patient needed not to fear a Relapse soon
after from the sight of an Apothecary's Bill. If it be objected that St. Paul
left Trophimus at Miletum sick, 2 Timothy 4. 20. and he cured not Timothy of his
weak Stomach without drinking Wine, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Therefore the Apostles had no
absolute Gift of healing: I answer, 1. The Gift of healing was for the
Confirmation of the Truth, and for the Conversion of Heathens rather than for
the recovering of Christians, and therefore it is no wonder that they could not
work this Miracle always, and that some were healed, not all. 2. Miracles were
not designed to make Men immortal on Earth. Sicknesses and Diseases were not
always to be cured, for then none should die: But it was sufficient that
sometimes the Power of Healing was exerted, that thereby it might be seen that
the Apostles were enabled from Heaven, and that a divine Power went along with
them. But it pleased God that at ordinary times Diseases should be cured by the
use of Means, and that an extraordinary Power should not be made use of. 3.
Those very Instances (or any the like) are a great Proof that God bore witness
to the Apostles: for hence it appeared that this Power was at Gods pleasure and
disposal, and not at their own, they could not do what they pleased, there was
a certain Limitation, which shows it was absolutely a divine and supernatural
Power by which they healed Diseases.

Again, another miracul^u^ and extraordinary Gift conferred on the Primitive
Church, to corroborate the Truth of Christianity, and to convince the
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, was speaking with diverse Tongues, which was
more especially serviceable to this end; because hereby they could be
understood by Persons of diverse Countries and Languages, and so by this Means
the Propagation of the Gospel was furthered. Thus by the same way by which the
building of the Tower of B^b^l was hindered, did the Apostles afterward pull
down the strong Holds of Satan, and build up the Christian Church. Of this
extraordinary Gratuity the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 10. To another, says he,
(...) given diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the interpretation of Tongues,
i. e. one had the Ability to speak strange Languages, and another was enabled
to interpret them, and make them intelligible. So that it seems these two Gifts
did not always concur in the same Person, at least at this time in the
C^rint^ian Church: But, however they were both of them the effects of a
supernatural Power. And by this Miraculous way the Apostles frequently
dispossessed Devils, who in those days tormented the Bodies as well as Souls of
Men. They had power also to raise the dead, which was seen in St. Peter's
raising of Dorcas. Nay, the Miracles which the Apostles did were greater than
Christ's: and so he himself had promised, John 14. 12. He that believes on me,
the works that I do shall he do also, and greater Works then these shall he do.
The Apostles were able to speak strange Languages which they never learned, a
Miracu^ous Gift which our Savior never exerted, the he could. But this is the
main Reason why the Wonders which the Apostles wrought are said to be greater
than those of our Savior, because they were more large and extensive, they
were done in all parts of the World where the Apostles preached. Besides, the
Fruit and E^^ect of them were greater, their Converts were more numerous, they
won by them far greater Multitudes of Souls to the Christian Faith. Thus you
have a sho^t account of the various Miracles both of Christ and his Apostles.

2. ^ am to show that these Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles were
really true, and not counterfeit Miracles. Here I have two things to do. 1. To
show you what are true Miracles, and how they differ from ralse ones. 2. To
prove that the Miracles of our Savior and his Followers were such. First, Let
us enquire into the true Nature of a Miracle, These are the five grand
Properties of it.

1. It is such an Act as is above natural Force and Abili^y, and is done wholly
by virtue of an omnipotent Power. There is a Physical Virtue and Agency given
to all Creatures at their first Creation: Their natural Properties and
Affections are settled in them by God at first, and according to these they
constantly act except he who created them changes their course, immediately
influencing on them. When the Creator thus alters their natural Course and
Agency, and when the Effects are contrary to their natural Power, there is a
Miracle wrought: for Miracles are Actions that are against natural Efficiency.
This is opposed by Mr. Hobbs, who holds that there are no real Miracles,
because all is by natural Causes: only they seem to the Vulgar to proceed from
extraordinary and supernatural Causes. On this ground he endeavors to vilify
the Miracles wrought by Christ. And Spinosa would fain thrust upon us this
Proposition, that whatsoever the Scripture affirms to have been done, did
necessarily come to pass according to the Laws of Nature, and no otherwise; and
consequently that those things which go under the Name of Miracles have only
natural Causes, tho unknown to us. And he conceits this to be a sufficient
Reason of what he says, viz. Tractat. Theologico-Polit. cap. 6.
that God and his Decrees are unchangeable, and therefore the Laws of Nature
cannot be altered, and so there are no Miracles, because these are said to be
Interruptions or Vi^lations of the course of Nature. But if the altering the
course of Nature be contained in the divine Decrees, as most sure it is, then
what will become of his Argument? It is a mere Fallacy, and contradicts several
Discoveries which God has made of himself and his doings in the sacred Writ;
where we find that there are such Actions as cannot be done by the mere Power
and Energy of Men or Angels (either good or bad) or of any created Beings. It
is of the Essence of a Miracle to exceed all natural Power: A Miracle always
supposes the Virtue by which it is produced to be Divine.

2. This is another property of a Miracle (which follows necessarily on the
former) that it is Unaccountable. We cannot solve it, we cannot show any reason
why it is so. It is above our apprehension, for it being a thing above natural
Power, it is impossible that natural Reason should tell how it is done. A
Miracle is such a work of which no Physical Cause can be assigned: therefore it
is no wonder that it is beyond our Conceptions, and that we cannot apprehend
how it is performed.

3. It is also something done rarely and unusually. It is a saying of the
Rabbis, and a true one, Megilla.
A Miracle does not happen every hour. It is an uncommon thing, and Rarity is
of the nature of it. For the design of a Miracle was to beget Faith by its
being rare: and therefore if you could suppose it to be perpetual, the end of
it would be lost, which is to stir up Men to believe by the uncommonness of
what is done. Divine works that are done daily and ordinarily are not Miracles:
thus to justify Sinners, to convert them, to save them, etc. are not called
Miracles. So Gods preserving and upholding the World, is the work of Divine
Power only, but it is not called a Miracle because it is every moment. Not.
Hist. c. 107.
Pliny declares that it exceeds all Miracles that any one Day passes, and all
the World is not set on Fire, because of the innumerable subterraneous fires,
and by reason of the infinite number of Stars, and the vast heat in the Sun,
and the inbred fires in Clouds, etc. But this is no rar^ and strange thing, and
therefore is no Miracle. The gravity of bodies, the strange Operation of the
Loadstone, the reciprocal motion of the Sea are Phaenomen^ that depend (as I
apprehend) on the particular and immediate influence of a supernatural cause,
and yet, because they are common, are not Miracles. God, the All-wise Governor
of the World, has his usual and ordinary ways, but these oftentimes are
neglected and despised because they are common: wherefore he thinks good to use
another method, he exert^ other acts, and these are unusual and extraordinary,
and excite a greater regard and reverence in Men, and have the name of Miracles.

4. It is the qualification of a Miracl^ not only to be supernatural,
unaccountable, and rare, but also to be something visible, at least very
evident and discernible. The Egyptians saw Moses's Miracles, the Priests of
Baal saw what Elijah did. And whatever Miracles are really done, are done in
the sight of People, or the effects of them are to be plainly seen. The reason
is because they are exhibited to the World on purpose that they may be observed
and taken notice of. Wherefore a Miracle is such a Divine Work as is evident
and apparent, and thence this kind of Operations are frequently called Signs,
i. e. outward and open representations of the Almighty Power of God.

5. And lastly, they deserve the name of Miracles because they stir up Men's
minds to admire them: they cause amazement and wonder: they are such works of
God as create astonishment in all that seriously consider them. And this proves
what I said before, viz. that it is against the nature of a Miracle to be
constant and lasting, and always continuing: for if it were so, it would not be
wondered at, and then it would cease to be a Miracle. These are the inseparable
properties and qualification of true and real Miracl^s: but the first is the
main, and the only essential one; for some other things are unaccountable (we
being ignorant of the extent of Nature's Sphere) and unusual, and wonderful,
but they are not against and above the power of natural causes, therefore they
are not properly Miracles: for a Miracle is a thing that cannot be done but by
Supernatural and Divine strength.

Consequently, a Miracle cannot be done by the Devil, or any of his Ministers
and Agents. These indeed can do strange and wonderful things, that is, either
such as are really so, but then they rise only from occult natural causes and
means; or such that seem to be so, they appear only, and are not, and then they
are mere Jugglings and Tricks of Art. Thus far evil Spirits and their Agents
are able to go, and no further, they can counterfeit Miracles, but they cannot
work one true Miracle. Thus the Egyptian Magicians did wonderful things, they
did not only make their Rods to appear, like that of Mercury, with Serpents
twining about them, but (which is greater) they by their Enchantments turned
their Rods into Serpents, or seemed to do so. That the worst Men may have power
to work such signs and wonders is plain from Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. And the reason why
God suffers false Proph^ts to work those seeming Miracles is suggested in v. 3.
The Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with
all your Heart, and with all your Soul. It is to try Men whether they will
adhere to God, or forsake him: it is to make an experiment either of their
Stedfastness or their Hypocrisy. We have it from the mouth of our Blessed
Savior, that there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, so great that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very elect, Mat. 24. 24. And St. Panl lets us know that the Man of
sin, the Son of perdition, shall come with all power, and signs and lying
wonders; which last words lying wonders seem to have a very large
signification: for as this may be one meaning of them, that though the actions
they shall do shall be real and true, though the things shall be really done,
yet they are but lying wonders, because thereby the Devil impo^^th on Men, and
leads them into error and falsehood, or because these wonders are to attest a
lie, to maintain false and erroneous Doctrines; so it is probable likewise they
are called (...).
lying wonders, because they are false and counterfeit, and seeming only,
although they are pretended to be true Miracles.

So it is foretold in Rev. 13. 13, 14. that the Grand Impostor of the last
Times shall do great wonders, so that he makes Fire to come down from Heaven
on the Earth, in the sight of Men, and deceives them that dwell in the Earth
by the means of those Miracles (or Gr. (...)
Signs) which he has power to do. True Miracles cannot be wrought by Satan or
his Instruments, but he can do wonderful Things and lying Miracles; and such
are these here mentioned which false Prophets and Seducers are able to effect.
They either exceed not the course of Nature, and are the Effects of natural
Causes tho they be hid to us; or else they are mere Cheats, Deception of Sight,
and Delusions of the Senses, and so they are only seeming Miracles and lying
Wonders. This is an undeniable Truth, that tho Evil Spirits and wicked Men are
permitted to do things prodigious and strange, yet they cannot work true
Miracles: for a Miracle is something above, yea contrary to the course of
Nature. Now God alone can alter this established Order: This is proper to him
only; no Creature can effect it. The Author of Nature can only change it: He
that first made all things of nothing can alter the Propriety of things. Thus,
as the Psalmist speaks, God alone does gre^^ Wonders, Psalm. 136. 4. Miracles
are wrought by a divine Power wholly.

Having showed you what is the true Natural Miracles, I am to prove that those
Acts of our Savior and his Apostles which we call Miracles are really such,
and are not counterfeit, but true. This is evident from what I have said
already, for those things which they did were above the power of Nature, as
healing all sorts of Diseases, tho in themselves incurable, feeding Thousands
with a small Portion of Food, and yet so that they carried away more than was
first provided; restoring People to Life after they were really dead, and the
like. These things exceeded the Virtue of natural and created Agents, and
therefore must be acknowledged to be Divine and Heavenly, and by consequence
were true and proper Miracles. But moreover, I will prove that these Miracles
of Christ and his Apostles were accompanied with such peculiar Circumstances as
spoke them to be of divine Original. As,

1. The simple and plain way of doing their Miracles is very remarkable. Christ
cured some by laying his Hands on them, others by prayer and invoking of his
Father, others by a mere touch of his Hand, as the Leper, Mat. 8. 3. Others by
their only touching the Hem of his Garment were made perfectly whole, Mat. 14.
36. Multitudes were cured of their Diseases with a bare word; yea, with a word
he raised the Ruler of the Synagogue's Daughter, only saying to her, Maid,
arise, Luke 8. 54. He cured a Noble Man's Son, so likewise a Centurion (...)
Son at a distance, John 4. 46. Mat. 8. 5. which could not be with application
of Medicines, or using of any Means. Other Methods he made use of sometimes, as
when a blind Man was to be cured, he anointed his Eyes with Clay macerated with
Spittle, and also bid him wash in the Pool of Siloe. The ten Lepers were not
presently healed, but he bid them repair to the Priests, and as they went they
found their Cure. At the raising of Lazarus he shed Tears, groaned in his
Spirit, and called him out of his Grave with a loud Voice. But these and all
his other Miracles were wrought without Formality and Ceremony, without any
superstitious Rites and Observances, without either Natural or Artificial
Applications, which is a great Argument that they were true Miracles, and no
Impostures; for these latter are always done with Ceremony and Pomp, with
strange words, and as strange Gestures and Actions.

2. The Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were not obscure, but evident, not
done in a corner, but in the open light; and so if there had been any Cheat and
Forgery in them, they might have been observed: and they would most certainly,
for Christ and his Apostles had subtle Enemies about them, who were busy in
prying into all the Circumstances of their Actions. When Christ cured the Man
that had had an Infirmity thirty eight Years, it was at a public Meeting, at
the great Feast, Luke 4. 33. He dispossessed a Man of a Devil in the midst of
the Synagogue, John 11. 45. The Man was cured of the Palsy before the
Multitude, Mat. 9. 8. the Widow's Son was restored to Life before much People,
Luke 7. 12 and most of his other Miracles were wrought publicly, so that there
were many Spectators and Observers of them. And it is certain that among these
neither Wit nor Malice were wanting to find out the Errors and Deceits, if
there were any. Yet we know that the Miracles of Christ were published by the
Evangelists, especially St. Matt^^w, whilst yet the Persons were alive upon
whom they were wrought, and whilst innumerable Persons, who were Witness of
those things, were surviving.

3. Whereas one or two are said to have been cured in the Heat^en Temples, and
Impostors have been cried up for a few wonders they have done, it is to be
taken notice of and remembered that Christ cured v^ry many, and the number of
other Miracles which he did was exceeding great. The Multitude of them is an
argument of their Truth and Reality, for it shows that it was not a thing by
chance; besides, when so many Miracles were done, there can be no suspicion of
doing them in a fraudulent manner, for it had been easy at one time or other to
discover it.

4. Christ's Miracles were not only many and various, but often repeated, and
done several times over. Both he and his Apostles did those extraordinary
things daily, and one Miracle was wrought by them to confirm another: which
gives us further Assurance that they were not counterfeit and false, for then
by frequent reiterating them they would have been found out.

5. Miracles were done in all parts of the World, and not confined to Judea
only. The Acts of the Apostles relate what Miracles they exerted in several
Countries where they went; and afterward the whole World was visited by one or
other of them; and yet we never read that they were proved to be Impostors. But
on the contrary, we are credibly informed that their Miracles were owned and
approved of not in one place only, but in all places where they came.

6. These Miracles were wrought, these Cures were done, and the strange
Languages were spoken amongst them for many years together, whereas Ficta cito
in naturam suam recidunt, Sen^c* de Clem. Lib. 2.
what is counterfeit holds not long.

7. These Miracles were not controlled and checked by any greater, as the
Wonders of the Egyptian Sorcerers were by Moses. You may observe that those
Magicians could not plague Men and Cattle with Boils, they could not restore
the Waters to their former quality: tho they could gather the Frogs together,
yet they were not able to kill them. They could not counterfeit the Miracle of
Fleas and Lice, tho they did those of the Serpents, Blood, and Frogs. Here was
some restraint; the Devil was overpowered: But that was not all: They had not
been suffered to effect so much as they did but that Moses was there ready to
countermand them, and to baffle their Delusions. They turned the Rods into
Serpents, but Moses's Rod devoured theirs, i. e Moses's true Serpents devoured
the Magicians counterfeit Ones. But Christ and his Apostles wrought Miracles,
and there was none to countermand them, which shows that they were real
Miracles. Thus true Miracles may be known by their manner and circumstances.

Again, These may be known to be such from the Ends and Designs which Christ
and his Followers propounded to themselves in exerting them. First, True
Miracles are always for the Confirmation of the Truth, but seeming and
counterfeit Ones are wrought on purpose to maintain some false Doctrine.
Therefore if a Pretender to Miracles teaches any thing derogatory to
Providence, and to the Nature of God and Religion, we must look on him as an
Impostor; for Miracles that are true never contradict the Divine Testimony, and
the Truth recorded in Holy Writ. This then you must know, that as Miracles
confirm a Doctrine, so they are authorized by the Doctrine. We must not rest in
Miracles alone, but to the Word and to the Testimony we must appeal. Christ
says, the Works I do bear witness of (...), John 5. 36. but he adds, ver. 39.
(...) the Scriptures: they are they which testify of me. By this then we may
ascertain our selves of the Authority of those Miracles which our Savior and
his Apostles wrought when they were upon Earth: They were done to attest a
Doctrine, which as it contradicted no part of Moral Religion, nor the natural
Notions of Reason, so it was conformable to the written Word of God, and all
the Truths in the Old Testament.

In the second place, True Miracles tend to the overthrowing of Satan's Kingdom
in the World: they never confirm and abet Sin and Profanation in those that do
them, or in any one else. As we observed before from Deuteronomy. 13. 1. that God some
times permits false Prophets to work Signs and Wonders among his People, so the
Verses following tell us how we may know them to be lying Wonders, viz. if the
Prophet makes use of them to entice Persons to g^ after other Gods, and to
serve them. If the Signs and Wonders were intended to seduce them to a false
Worship, to persuade them to Idolatry, and forsaking the true God, they were
not to be credited, they were to be looked upon as no true Miracles, but
counterfeit ones. For it is not a sufficient proof for the truth of Miracles
that they are for attesting the Orthodox Faith, unless they also uphold a Holy
Life.

In the third place, Our Savior's Miracles were such as were beneficial to
others, and was for the good of Mankind. He procured Food for Multitudes of
Persons, when they were almost ^amished; he cured the Lame and the Blind, he
ejected troublesome Devils out of Men's Bodies, he relieved the most impotent and
distressed. But the Signs and Wonders which are done by Impostors are rather
harmful than advantageous. It is not unworthy of our Remark (what was partly
suggested before) that the Egyptian Magicians turned the Water into Blood, but
they could not reduce it to its Nature again: they brought up Frog^, but they
could not clear the Houses of the Egyptians of them. They could bring Plagues,
but they could not remove them. And it may be observed also of Impostors, that
if what they do is not harmful, yet it is oftentimes fruitless and
unprofitable, it is vain and trifling, and fit only to entertain fond and
scrupulous Minds.

But here it may be objected, that all Christ's Miracles were not beneficial;
for his ^ursing the Fig-^ree, Mark ^1. 14. and his sending the unclean Spirit
into the Gaderens Swine, Mat. 8. 30. were not so. As to the first, viz. Christ's
cursing the Fig Tree, it was a Symbolical Act figuring the Judgment of God
against the unfruitful Religion of the Jews: and being thus considered, it was
of great use and benefit. Some indeed have thought it strange that our Savior
should do thi^ when he himself says, the time of Figs was not yet, v 13. as if
it were unjust to blast the Tree for not bearing Fruit before the time of
bearing was come: but they mistake the meaning of those words, which is no
other than this, that it was not the time of Figs with that Tree, but it was
with others. The year was not unseasonable for Figs, but this Tree bore nothing
but Leaves; therefore our Savior dealt thus with it. This I take to be the
plainest and clearest Interpretation of the Place, and then the Objection
vanishes, for who will be concerned at the wit^^ring of a Barren Tree?

I know there are other Solutions of the place, but none of them seem to me to
be genuine. That of Resp. ad Quest. Theolog. 9.
Episcopius is not to be allowed of, viz. that when Christ cursed the Figtree,
and said, the (...) of Figs (...) not yet, he did not know that it was not time
of Figs. A Dr. Lig^ts^^t's Harmony.
learned Writer of our own has this peculiar Notion, that Christ looked for
Figs, and yet says, the time of Fig^ is not yet, because he looked not for any
Figs that he thought could be ripe and fit to eat that Spring (it being about
that time) but he looked for those that grew the last Summer, and had hung on
the Tree all Winter. But tho Iud^^ was a very fruitful Country, and had in it
several things different from other Soils, yet it is to be questioned whether
there were Fig Trees in the Field of this nature, and whether the Jewish
Writings (which this Author refers to) speak of this sort of Fruit. Besides, if
this Tree bore Figs (as the Author supposes) it is not material whether they
were old or new, whether they were Figs of the last years growth or of the
present one; why then did our Savior curse it? Some interpret the Words of the
time of gathering of Figs, but this makes the bearing of Figs, and the
gathering of them to be the same, which is a straining of the words.

A learned Critic reads the Text thus, (...), ubi enim (...) tempus ^^cuum, i.
e. ibi erant maturae ficus. Heins. in loc.
Where was the time of Figs? i. e. says he, there was the time, in that place
where Christ then was, viz. near Jerusalem it was the Season of Figs: and
because this one particular Tree bore no Fruit when the rest did, Christ
deservedly cursed it. This Interpretation amounts to the same with what I
before propounded, but I cannot approve of the Alteration made in the Original
Sir N. Kn^^chbull in loc.
An other late Critic comes somewhat nearer to this, and by changing the
Accent, and doubling the Verb reads it thus, (...)
where he was, was the time of Figs. But I conceive this Learned Gentleman is a
little too bold here (as well as in some other places) in his changing the
Greek Text where there is no occassion for it: and therefore I keep to the
received reading, which according to the Greek is exactly thus, for it was not
the time of Figs (yet being redundant in our English Translation) i. e. it was
not the time of Figs with this Tree. Tho according to the time of year other
Fig Trees bore Fruit, yet this degenerated from them, and had no Fruit at all
on it, only Leaves; whence our Savior took occasion to curse it.

And this he did for the sake of the Jews, that they might look on the Tree,
and be admonished that they might be sensible of the danger of their
Vnfruitfulness at such a Season, when the greatest furitfulness was required of
them. Or, according to a Dr. Henry More's Mystery of Godliness.
worthy Person, the meaning of Christ's cursing the Figtree was, that the
acceptable Fruit of everlasting Righteousness was not then found in the
Judaical Dispensation: this Tree did not bring forth such excellent Fruit, but
only the fair Figleaves of an external and ceremonial Righteousness, and legal
Morality. Christ therefore came to exprobrate to them the want of more perfect
Fruit, and to put a Period to the Dispensation of the Jews, so that it should
quite wither away and be nulled. Thus you see there is ground for what our Lord
did: which makes me a little wonder why that Learned Critic whom I named last,
and some other Expositors are so much concerned at Christ's cursing the
innocent Tree, as they call it. I do not see any cause why they should be so,
for if we could assign no Reason at all of this Action of our Savior, we ought
to be fully satisfied with it, because he was arbitrary as to this, and all
other Actions of the like nature: by virtue of his Sovereign Power he could in
these matters do as he pleased. But we need not insist upon this, because I
have offered a sufficient Reason why he thought good to show a Miracle on a
fruitless Tree, which had nothing but leaves to be destroyed by his Curse.

As to the latter Instance, viz. Christ's suffering the Gadarens Swine to be
driven by the Devil into the Sea, I answer, 1. It was not so much our Savior's
Act as his Permission, for so the word (...) sometimes imports. 2. It was not
done of his own accord, but upon the importunate Outcry of the disturbed
Friends, whom Christ saw it was best to lodge in the Deep. 3. The Persons who
sustained this Loss deserved it, as we may gather from their carriage toward
our Blessed Lord. Here then was no unjust thing done by this miraculous Power
of our Savior, nor was it a hurtful thing to punish Offenders according to
their deserts.

But further, it may be Objected, If Christ designed to benefit People by his
Miracles, why did he not do them when they most desired them, as in the Case of
Herod; and when there was the greatest need of them, as when our Savior hung
on the Cross? For the first, we read indeed that Herod was desirous to see
Christ of a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped
to have seen some Miracle done by him, Luke 23. 8. Yet when Christ came before
him, and was questioned by him, he answered him nothing, ver. 9. he spoke not
one word, he did not one Miracle. The Reason was, because Herod had sufficient
opportunities before of hearing Christ's Sermons, and seeing his Signs, but he
was negligent and careless; yea, he slighted and despised those things. This is
evident, because otherwise he would have gone to our Savior, or sent for him,
and treated him with Respect and Reverence. This great Man having thus
neglected the Season of Grace, he is justly debarred for the future by Christ
himself. Miracles are denied him after a wilful refusing both of them and other
means.

As for what we read in Mat. 27. 42. that the chief Priests and Scribes
declared they would believe in Christ if he would come down from the Cross; and
yet our Savior would not gratify them by his miraculous descending thence:
Here I have these three things to say, 1. We may gather hence that Miracles are
a certain and infallible Argument. All Men are agreed to be concluded by this:
the Priests and Scribes declare that on these Terms they would believe in
Christ, and take him for the Messiah: they desire no better Proof than a
Miracle. 2. I say this, Miracles (the mighty and extraordinary Works of God)
are not lavishly to be thrown away. The Persons had Miracles enough before, but
they disregarded them. and the Author of them: they must not therefore now,
when they think sit, call for those divine Testimonies from Heaven. It is not
meet that Heaven should be thus at their beck, and that Miracles must be done
when they please. 3. The main thing I offer is this, that a greater Miracle
than this which they now call for was showed within a little time afterward,
(for rising from the Dead was more than coming down from the Cross) and yet
they were not wrought upon by it. So that if our Savior had come down from the
Cross, they would not have believed: which He who knew all things knew full
well, and therefore would not comply with their unreasonable desire. We may
then, notwithstanding these Instances alleged, assert that our Savior
intended the Good and Welfare of Men by the Signs and Wonders which he wrought,
and that all the exertments of his miraculous Power were for the Benefit and
Advantage of the World: which is one Difference between True and False Miracles.

Moreover, if we inquire into the Persons who generally wrought these Miracles,
we shall be fully satisfied that they were True. Not to speak now ofour
Savior, the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who were the mediate Authors of
them, were Men of great Simplicity: they approved themselves to be void of all
secular and (...) de^igns, much more of all malicious and mischievous purposes.
They were plain honest Men, who did not these things for vain Gloty and
Applause, for Credit and Repute in the World, not out of Pride, Arrogance, or
Ostentation. And it is as clear that they did not act for worldly Gain and
Profit: otherwise they would not have left all, and followed Christ. It is to
be considered also that the Persons who wrought these Miracles were Just and
Charitable, Holy and Good Men; and even by the confession of their Enemies they
lived well, and were of exact Conversations: whereas false Boasters of Miracles
were infamous for some Vice or other, and by this it might be known and
discerned that they were Cheats. Thus from the consideration of the Manner and
Circumstances of the Miracles recorded to have been done in the New Testament,
and likewise of the Ends and Designs of them, and of the Quality of the Persons
who did them, we may conclude that they were True and Real Miracles. Thus you
may distinguish between the Wonders wrought by the Infernal Spirits, Magicians,
Antichrist, and all sorts of Impostors, and those Wonders and Miracles which
were done by Christ, and by his Apostles, and other Christians in the next
succeeding Ages of Christianity. Thus you may know the former to be Lies and
Forgeries, and the latter to be the sole effects of Divine Power.

By virtue of the Premises we may also correct the Lies and Blasphemies of
those Wretches who have defamed the Miracles of Christ and his Followers. The
Pharisees could not deny the Miracles themselves; and so afterward,
Porphyrius, Celsus, Hierocles, Trypho, Julian did not deny the Reality of those
Miracles recorded by the Evangelists, they confessed the Matter of Fact, and
pretended not to boggle at it. But tho they acknowledged these things to have
been really done, yet they maliciously calumniated them. It was most impiously
said by the Pharisees in our Savior's time that he did his Miracles by
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. And it has been ever since constantly
affirmed by the Jews that Christ wrought those great things (...)
by Magic Art. Or, others of them (to mitigate this) attribute his working of
Miracles to the Cabalistick Art; for they hold that in the Hebrew Letters,
Points, Accents, Numbers, Names, the signification of the greatest things is
contained, even the Nature of all things Divine and Human. By this all Wonders
are wrought; Moses, and Elias and Elisha did all by virtue of this. Hebrew
words include in them all Proprieties of things, and those that are skilled can
tell all things by them: especially the knowledge of the Virtue of the
Tetragrammaton is effectual to produce the greatest Wonders in the World; and
by the Power of that Name Christ, they say, did all his Miracles. The Calumny
of Pagans against Christ's Miracles was something like this, as we learn from
an Magnus fuit, clandestinis artibus omnia ille perfecit. Egyptiorum ex adytis
Angelorum potentium nomina and remotas furatus est disciplinas. Arnob. adv.
Gent. l. 1.
Ancient Writer, who acquaints us that the sense of the Heathens was that
Christ was a Sorcerer, and performed all by clandestine Arts, that he stole
from the Mysteries of the Egyptians the Names of some powerful Angels, and made
use of the most abstruse and mystical Rites of that People for the effecting of
his Miracles. Celsus (as we learn from Origin against him) attributed the
Apostles Miracles to Magic, and pretended that they had Magical Books from
Christ to that purpose. Julian declared that St. Paul was the most skilful
Magician that ever was; and St. Peter according to him was addicted to that
Art, as we are informed by Cyril of Alexandria, Books 3, and 9. Vaninus,
Pomponatius, Cardan, and others Atheistically disposed, impeach not Christ of
Diabolical Magic (for perhaps they holding no God, deny all Devils) but they
declare that his Miracles were done by natural Magic. Some imputed the
Miracles of the Apostles and other Christians to the force of their
Imagination, to their exalted Fancy. Thus Avicenna, a great Arabian Philosopher
and Physician, was of the opinion that an Intense Thinking operated all. At
other times they assert that Christ wrought all his Miracles by the virtue of
the Stars and the Heavenly Positions, or by the Power of Herbs and Plants, or
of Precious Stones, or by a particular Temper of his Body made to heal; that
is, his Body was composed of some particular Ferments, the effluvia whereof
restored the Temperament of debilitated parts, envigorated the Blood,
dissipated all heterogeneous Ferments, and so the Cure was wrought.

But any unbiassed Person may perceive that all these are mere Fetches and
Artifices to give some color to their Atheism, and to uphold their obstinate
prejudices against the Divinity of Christ and the Authority of the Christian
Religion. For from what has been said before it is evident, that the Miracles
mentioned in the New Testament surpass all finite Power, not only that of Man
but of all other Creatures. And therefore it is plain that the wonderful Things
by which Christ did prove his Divinity, and the Truth of the Christian
Religion, they being Works not only above, but against Nature, and consequently
are not effected by a created Being. And as for those who ascribe Christ's
Miracles to Diabolical Magic, our Savior himself has answered them long ago,
Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation. And if Satan
cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how shall then his Kingdom
stand? Mat. 12. 25, 26. Christ, as appeared by his Doctrine and all his
Actions, designed the overthrow of Satan's Kingdom, therefore it cannot be
believed that Satan would join with Christ to ruin himself; which certainly he
must do if he helped him to work Miracles, which were the great Confirmation of
the Christian Religion. Besides, Magical Cures and other such Operations were
always done with Charms and Spells, with the use of Herbs and Drugs, with much
Ceremony and ridiculous Words and Actions. But our Savior's Miracles were
effected without any of these: they were simply and plainly performed, which
evidenceth that they were no Magical Prizes. It might be added that Diabolical
Wonders do not use to be done by Men of Holy and Godly Lives, who are Enemies
to the Devil and all his Works. And such was our Blessed Master, and such were
his Apostles: therefore it is impossible that their Miracles should be from a
Diabolical Power, and that they should do those Wonders by familiarity with
Evil Spirits. The cursed Demons will never help and favor such Persons as
they were.

The other Objections and Cavils scarcely (even according to the judgment of
some Persons who are no Friends of Miracles) deserve any Reply. All sober Men,
who are not affected with the Dreams and Dotages of the Jews, look upon the
pretense of the Hebrew Alphabet, or even of the Tetragrammaton, as a mere Sham,
as having no show of Reason or probability to support it. For to say that
Christ turned Water into Wine by the help of some Constellation, or that St.
Peter was enabled by the Stars to walk safely upon the Waves, are assertions
that are only to be hissed at. As for natural Magic, it is gross folly to
alledg that here, seeing I have already proved that True Miracles surpass the
Power and Efficacy of Nature. To impute them to Imagination is yet more wild
and extravagant, as if Fancy could fill above five thousand hungry Peoples
bellies with five Loaves and two Fishes, or as if it were possible to raise the
Dead by merely imagining such a thing

From the Premises likewise we may be taught how to return Answer to those
Instances of Cures and other wonderful things done by some Pagans, which seem
to vie with the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles. Plutarch in the Life of
Pyrrhus tells us that he cured some Diseases, especially the Spleen, by
touching the respective Parties with the Toe of his right Foot. But what great
matter is this? Here is no sign of a Miracle, for the Kings of England, and
those of France too, are thought to have a Virtue to cure the Scrophulous
humor with a Touch. And with these Royal Touchers may be reckoned the famous
Stroker, Valentine Greatareck, who had a Faculty of chasing Pains and Aches out
of the Body through the Toes and Fingers ends. Here is something that is Rare
and Unusual, but I have suggested before that this is not sufficient to make a
Miracle: it must be something that transcends human Power, and that can be no
way effected by it. Which cannot be said of these above named Instances, for in
the former sort the Fancy being envigorated by receiving the Honor of a Touch
from a Great Commanders Foot, or from the Hand of a Great Monarch; and in the
latter a Laborious Friction and Stroking being used, and that for a
considerable time, and in some particular Pains only, are sufficient to solve
the Phenomenon without having recourse to a Miracle. Especially if you
consider that the Cures reached but to some Persons, and to some Times, as well
as to some Maladies: which ought not to be compared with the healing of all
Diseases, in all Persons, and at all Times without the least failing.

But stranger things are attributed to Vespasian by Histor. lib. 4.
Tacitus and In Vespasiano cap. 7.
Suetonius. These tell us that at Alexandria he cured the Lame and Blind, by
the direction of Serapis a famed God among the Egyptians. This makes a great
noise among some Men, and therefore we must give some account of it. There are
some very worthy Persons who think this Relation of the foresaid Historians is
true, i. e. that Vespasian did really do those Cures, and that by an
extraordinary and divine Assistance. In those Cures, says Vol. 1. Book 1.
chap. 23.
Dr. Iackson, there was the Finger of God pointing out Vespasian to be Christ's
Right Hand appointed for some extraordinary and peculiar Service, even to
inflict the Plagues foretold by him upon those Jews who had reviled and
crucified the Lord of Glory for the like and other infinitely far greater
Miracles wrought among them. And Dr. Hammond Annotat. on Mat. 23. 3.
another Great Man goes yet further, telling us that Vespasian was a
Representative of our Savior, and thence his Coming to destroy Jerusalem is
often called Christ's Coming. And he endeavors to show in several particulars
the Parallel between Christ and Titus Vespasian, and between the Coming of one
and the other. And thence it is thought probable, that what the foresaid
Historians say of Vespasian's healing the Blind and Lame was really true; for
he being such an extraordinary Person, it is not incredible that he was blessed
with the Gift of Healing.

But, with submission to the Judgments of these excellent Men, I think we need
not take this course, and exalt this Pagan Emperor to such an height, merely
because a couple of Historians, his own Countrymen, tell us such things of him.
I rather choose to satisfy my self and others about this matter by such offers
as these.

1. It is not improbable that it was in flattery to Vespasian that this was
reported of him: for you will find that these very Authors flatter this Prince
in as high a strain on another account. They Tacit. Hist. l. 5. Suet. in
Vespas. cap. 7.
tell us that the Prophecy which was abroad of one to come out of the East, who
should rule over all the World, was meant of this Emperor, and Apollonius the
Tyanaan (as Philostratus relates) labored to persuade him of the same. And
truly they might be pardoned for so doing, when De bello Judaic. l. 7. c. 12.
Josephus the Jew out of servile Flattery did the like, and would in a manner
persuade him he was the Messiah. Thus you may easily be induced to believe that
in a fawning way they gave out that this Great Prince could cure the Blind and
Lame: and this would fill the Peoples heads with a Conceit of the Divinity of
the Emperors, which they were very ambitious of.

2. Supposing there is some thing of Truth in the matter of Fact, yet there
seems to be in it an affected Imitation of our Savior; for as he restored a
blind Man to his Sight by using of spittle, so the Emperor would attempt to
heal a blind Man with spitting on his eyes, as Suetonius testifies. This looks
like a fond aping of our Lord, which renders the thing suspicious, and shows
the Cure to be counterfeit.

3. It is observable that there was only this one blind Man on whom the
pretended Cure is said to be wrought: and they tell us but of one lame Man that
was healed by this Emperor: which shows the vast difference between this and
our Savior's Cures, which were many and frequent, and daily exposed to view;
which is no small Argument of their being real and true: whereas Cheats dare
not venture above once or twice for fear of a Discovery.

4. It is to be remembered that Vespasian was a great Favourer and Friend of
Apollonius of Tyana; and they were both together present at the same time at
Alexandria, when this Cure is said to be done, says Philostratus. Hence I
gather that Apollonius did the Feat, tho it was ascribed to the Emperor for
the Reason aforesaid. If any wondrous thing was effected, it was by that
Apollonius's Art: therefore of him and his Pranks I will speak next.

This Person, who was a Grecian Philosopher, and of the Pythagorean Sect, is
much celebrated in History; and his Exploits are exceedingly cried up by
Philostratus, who writ eight Books of the History of this Man, and by Damis who
was his perpetual Companion, and wrote his Life. Hierocles took this Apollonius
to be as Sacred a Person as Christ, and in his Writings compares him with Him,
yea exalts him above Him. But the admirable Eusebius has learnedly baffled
this Hierocles, and those two others who writ the Legend of Apollonius's Life.
He freely grants that this Apollonius was a Great and very improved
Philosopher, and that he had brave and excellent Notions, and talked above the
Rate of a common Philosopher. But then he gives him his Due on the other hand,
he shows how foolish, absurd, and ridiculous most of his Actions were. In
answer to Damis and Philostratus he lets them know that their Testimonies of
him are Fabulous and Incredible, as namely when they write that he perfectly
understood Languages which he never learned, that he cured all Diseases, that
he knew Men's Hearts and Thoughts, and foresaw all Futurities. They should not,
says he, have said so high things of him, if they would have been believed:
they have outdone the thing they undertook, for since they hold Apollonius to
be no more than a Philosopher, they had no Reason to ascribe such Great and
Prodigious things to him. Whereas it was reported that this Apollonius fetched
a Woman to Life, as she was carried to be buried, Philostratus himself thinks
she was not dead. It is incredible even to him, and therefore he only says,
she (...) lib. 4. c. 16.
seemed to be dead. In brief, Eusebius shows that most of the Prodigious and
Portentous things related concerning this Man are Cheats and Forgeries, and the
rest are the effects of Magic and Witchcra^t. Philostratus does not deny that
it was reported he studied Magic, and to that purpose conversed with the
Egyptian Gymnosophists and Indian Bracmans in his Travels. And tho he
endeavors to disprove it, yet there is enough in that very History to make it
appear that Apollonius gave his mind to that sort of unlawful Study, and was a
great Wizard and Necromancer. He was a Person so noted over all the Roman
Empire for his Magical Enterprises, that Grotius and Hammond think These are
spoken of in Rev. 13. 11. To his Magic we must impute not only all the great
Wonders he did in his Life, but what happened in the close of it: for (as those
forenamed Authors write) when he was arraigned before Domitian (who hated him
as much as Titus loved him) he bragged that he was not to be hurt, and that he
was Immortal: and soon after that he vanished in the midst of the Court, to the
amazement of the Emperor and the rest of his Judges. Thus this great Sorcerer
made his Exit. Now, from what I have laid down before, it is evident that these
strange and wonderful Actions of his were not True Miracles: for I have proved
such cannot be done by the help of Devils and Evil Spirits. Diabolical Wonders
are to magnify the Author of them, the Devil, and to promote Superstition and
Idolatry in the World, as these did: therefore they cannot be from God, and
consequently they are no Real Miracles, for such are always exerted by a Divine
Power.

Lastly, we may from the foregoing Discourse judge of the Miracles which the
Church of Rome pretends to. There is great Reason to determine that they are so
far from being True Miracles, that they are downright Forgeries and Impostures.
For I. Some of them are no other than what Impostors in all Ages were permitted
by God to do, as appears from what has been delivered. 2. Many of them are
only Seeming Wonders, and such as Greek and Latin Historians are full of, but
never thought them to be the effects of Divine Power. Lib. I. cap. 6.
Valerius Maximus has gathered some of them together. 3. Many of the Popish
Miracles are frivolous and impertinent, vain, trifling, and ridiculous; witness
the fantastic and Romantic Stories of the Exploits of the Virgin Mary, St.
Francis, St. Dominick, and several others. Any unprejudiced Person that reads
them will say, that they are unworthy of a Divine Author, and therefore they
must be excluded from the number of True Miracles. Once upon a time Lib.
Conformitat.
when St. Francis was preaching in the fields, there came an Ass, and made some
disturbance among his Auditors, which caused St. Francis to speak thus to the
Brute, Brother Ass, be quiet till I have ended my Sermon: whereupon upon the
Ass presently came and laid him down very peaceably at the Preacher's feet: to
tell the World they must all be such Asses, and come and crouch to the Church
of Rome, and lie prostrate at the Priest's Feet. 4. There is ground to believe
that several of the Miracles of the Church of Rome are the effects of
Diabolical Magic. Platina and others who have writ the Popes Lives tell us
very plainly, that some of them studied and practiced Magical Arts, and were
very great with the Devil: or else some of them had never arrived to the Triple
Crown. Whilst that Church lays claim to Simon Peter, they are no strangers to
the Practices of Simon Magus. It is well known that sundry of their Priests
deal with the Diabolical Spirits, and thence we may justly conclude, that many
of their pretended Miracles are Specimens of the Black Art. 5. Let it be
remembered that it is foretold in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. that their Friend Antichrist
shall do Miracles. Such are theirs, yea they are the very same, and are
permitted by God to be done among them for the same purpose, viz. That they
should believe a Lie, (i. e. their Religion) and that they all might be damned
who believe not the Truth, i. e. the Christian Religion in its Simplicity and
Purity. 6. Seeing Miracles are for begetting Belief, and they look upon us as
Heretics, who with them are as bad as Infidels, why do they not come among us,
and before our faces work Wonders and Miracles? Let them not be done in Spain,
Portugal, or Italy, but openly here in England, or in some other Protestant
Country, where we may behold what they do. That Miracle-working faculty which
operates only at so great a distance from us, will gain little credit. Or, let
not a sorry Friar, but the Pope himself do some Great Miracle where he is. Till
then we have cause to look upon them as Counterfeits.

Again, 7. This is to be thought of, that their own Authors give them the Lie;
as for Example, whereas they talk and write of Xaverius's Miracles in the
Indies, De salute Indiarum, 1. 6. c. 4.
Acosta the Jesuit acknowledges that they did no Miracles there, and he adds
that there was no need of any. Nay, Xaverius himself in his Letters which he
wrote concerning his Travels and Undertakings in these Parts, makes no mention
of them. So some of the Miracles attributed to Ignatius Loiola are confessed by
those that write his Life to be uncertain and incredible; and by others of the
Roman Party they are said to be forged after his Death, as Dr. Stillingfleet
(now Bishop) shows in his Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, p. 118, etc. And
even St. Francis's Miracle of the Five Wounds imprinted on his Body, was looked
upon as a Fable by Pope Gregory the Ninth. We may then justly disbelieve the
Stories of Ignatius and Xaverius and St. Francis's Miracles, and of the rest of
that Persuasion, and be convinced that they were Falsehoods, to magnify the
Cause, and to extol their Church. 8. Many of these Popish Miracles have been
actually discovered to be Cheats. It has been manifestly proved (and there are
several Records of it extant) that they were the mere contrivance of their
Priests: And such particularly were some of those Miracles which were pretended
to be done by the Virgin Mary at Loretto, and by St. James at Compostella. I
could show that the Miracles of the Papists are questioned by themselves, their
Truth is doubted of by Cajetan de Concept. Virg. Espencaeus in 2. Tim. 4. and
others of that Communion. 9. We may with Reason suspect the Roman Miracles,
because our Religion was proved and confirmed by Miracles long before. It is
not requisite they should be repeated and reiterated afresh. There is no more
need of New Miracles than there is of New Revelations. They were wrought to
confirm the Truth which we hold at this day: therefore since we have the same
Truth that was confirmed by those Miracles of old, what need is there of any
farther Confirmation? Lastly, the Popish Miracles are no True Miracles, because
they are exerted to maintain a false Religion; for such is that of the Church
of Rome, consisting of damnable Doctrines, Superstition, Idolatry, and all
manner of Ungodly, Lewd and Profane Practices. We cannot think then that God
will by Miracles attest and allow of such Abominations. If then they still
insist on the Miracles wrought by some of them among the Indians, as they
pretend, I say this, that if it can be proved they were done among those
Infidels, it was to confirm the Christian Religion, not the Popish. Thus you
see that these Boasters of Miracles, and who make them a Note of their Church,
are found to be but Pretenders, and can lay no claim, as they are of that
Church, to those Miracles which are Real, Ge^uine and True, and which only are
the certain Testimonies of the Truth of Christianity. Which brings me to the

3 d and last thing I undertook, viz. To evince that these Miracles are, and
ought to be looked upon as an Infallible Testimony of the Truth of
Christianity. To these Christ himself appealed as a Proof of his Divinity and
Messiahship, Mat. 11. 4, 5. To that Question, Art thou he that should come, or
do we look for another? the Answer was, Go and show those things which you hear
and see; the Blind receive their Sight, the Lame walk, andC. So when the Jews
were earnest with him to declare who he was; If thou be the Christ, say they,
tell us plainly: Jesus ^nswer'd them, The Works which I do in my Father's name,
they bear witness of me, John 10. 24, 25. These are a sufficient Attestation of
my Divine Authority. Therefore he says in John 15. 24. If I had not done
amongst them the Works which no other Man did, they had not had Sin, i. e.
their Unbelief had been no Sin: for if those Works were not a Proof of my
Divine Commission, they were not bound to believe me. But on the contrary,
those miraculous Works being undeniable Evidences of his acting by a Power from
Heaven, it was a grievous and damning Sin to disbelieve him. So the Apostles,
when their preaching the Gospel was opposed and contradicted, thought they
sufficiently disproved the Gainsayers by showing that Jesus of Nazareth (whom
they preached) was a Man approved (or (...).
demonstrated) of God among them by Miracles and Wonders, and Signs which God
did by him in the midst of them, as they themselves also know, Acts 2. 22.
Christ's Miracles were a Demonstration of the Truth of his Doctrine, and
consequently of that of the Apostles, because it was the same. Thus St. Paul
argues the Truth of Christianity from the miraculous Indowments and Gifts of
the Apostles, and declares to the Hebrews that it is extreme dangerous to
neglect that Doctrine, and that Salvation which at the first began to be spoken
by the Lord himself, and was afterward confirmed unto them by them that heard
him, God also bearing them witness both with Signs and Wonders, and with
diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 3, 4. Here is the just
Method of the Progress and Proof of the Gospel, here is first the Author and
Founder of it, the Lord Christ Jesus who at the first began to speak and
deliver it: Secondly, the Evidence of its delivery, it was confirmed by them
that heard it, i. e. by the Apostles, who were Ear-witnesses of this Divine
Doctrine: Thirdly, the Truth and Certainty of the Apostles Testimony concerning
Christ and his Doctrine, God bore them witness with Signs and Wonders, and with
diverse Miracles, which are as great a Confirmation of what they delivered as
can possibly be desired.

Yea, Miracles have been always accounted such, even by those who were not very
forward to embrace our Savior and his Doctrine. The Common People, when they
had seen the Miracles that Jesus did, could say, this is of a Truth that
Prophet that should come into the World, John 6. 14. This was the reasoning of
the Man that was born blind, and was restored to his sight; Since the World
began was it not heard that any Man by his own Power opened the Eyes of one
that was born blind. If this Man were not of God, were not assisted with an
infinite Power, he could do nothing of this nature, John 9. 32, 33. And not
only the simple and illiterate, but the wise and learned argued after this
manner. Nicodemus, a Ruler of the Jews, came to Christ with this
Acknowledgment, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no Man can
do these Miracles that thou do except God be with him, John 3. 2. Here he
confesses it as a known Truth that Miracles are sufficient to attest a Person
or Doctrine to be from God: and consequently they are good Arguments of the
Truth of what our Savior taught, and they prove him to be the Messiah. And the
Chief Priests and Pharisees could say, this Man does many Miracles: if we let
him thus alone, all will believe on him, John 11. 47, 48. This strongly implies
that Miracles are able to create Belief, and so unawares they acknowledge that
the Miracles which Christ and the Apostles wrought are good evidence that their
Doctrine was from God, and that it was to be believed and embraced. The Jewish
Rabbis in their Writings speak much of the Miracles the Messiah shall do;
which is an Argument that those Men were really persuaded that Miracles are a
Proof of a Divine Commission, and that they are to seal the Truth of God.

This was the very Notion and Sense of the Pagan World, as is plain from that
Passage recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 14. 8, 11, 12. When Paul
cured a certain Man at Lystra impotent in his Feet, being a Cripple from his
Mothers Womb, who never had walked, the People of the place seeing this Miracle
presently lifted up their Voices, saying, the Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of Men. Their natural Reason dictated to them that this was done by
Divine Power, and could not be done otherwise. The Workers of Miracles are by
these poor Heathens reputed as Gods. St. Paul was taken by them for Mercury; he
that could give motion and nimbleness to the Lame Man of Lystra was thought to
be the God with the winged Feet. But the Reason assigned in the History why St.
Paul was taken for Mercury is because he was so excellent a Speaker. Barnabas
said little or nothing, and so passed with them for Grave Jupiter, who had his
Interpreter. And this was St. Paul, he was Mercurius, a good Spokesman indeed,
one of an admirable Tongue that could persuade the Lame to walk, and a Cripple
to use his Feet. However these ignorant Heathens were mistaken as to their
making Gods of Men, yet in the main they were in the right, viz. that that
miraculous Healing argued Divinity, and that none could do such things but
those who are authorized by Heaven.

And as this is the sense of Mankind, so indeed it must be thus in the very
nature of the thing it self: for what is above created Power proceeds from God,
and what is from him is to some great end and purpose, worthy of him; thus
Miracles, exceeding the Power of Nature, are the Attestation of God himself,
and are designed to evidence that Truth, and to authorize that Doctrine which
is from God, which are very great and excellent Ends, and becoming the Author
of them. Accordingly the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought were
intended to confirm and establish the Gospel which they preached, and to
demonstrate to the World that that Gospel is true. For God would not throw away
Miracles; much less would he use them to confirm a false Doctrine. We may be
assured of this, that God's infinite Wisdom and Goodness would not give up the
World to such an unavoidable Deceit, as such a Multitude of Miracles would lead
Men into, if they were used to attest an Imposture, to confirm a Lie. If I
cannot know the Messiah to be sent of God when he raised the Dead, wrought all
other sorts of Miracles, and rose himself from the Dead, I have no possibility
of knowing who speaks from God, or whether I am deceived or no, or whether
there be any truth and reality in things or no. This then we may build upon;
there being Truth in the World, Miracles undeniably point us to it, for they
being a Testimony from God, they cannot attest Falsehood, but must necessarily
direct us to and confirm us in that which is true. Our Christianity being
founded on Miracles cannot but be of divine Allowance, it is impossible but
that it should be from God. Christ and the Apostles could not have had Power to
work true Miracles if their Doctrine had not been true; for God would not, and
cannot maintain a Lie by a Miracle, for then he is no God. We cannot then
expect a more convincing Evidence of Divine Authority than this, viz. that our
Savior spoke great and excellent things, and that he wrought Miracles to
confirm what he said. What would you have more? It was necessary, that he
should confirm the Truth of his Doctrine by his Miracles: and now they are
wrought, there is a necessity, in order to our being Christians, that we
heartily believe them.

I say, Miracles were necessary for confirming the Gospel, because the Gospel
was looked upon as a thing new and unheard of, as you may remember the
complaint of the Athenian Philosophers against St. Paul was that he delivered a
New Doctrine, and brought strange things to their Ears, Acts 17. 19, 20. They
were long accustomed to other Notions, and so there was a vast Prejudice on
their Minds: Wherefore Miracles were necessary to gain Credit to the Christian
Faith, and to bring them off effectually from their former Sentiments. Again,
many things in the Gospel were above the flight of Humane Reason, and on that
account were not easily entertained: which made it requisite that they should
be declared to be true by extraordinary Signs and Wonders. Likewise, because
the Persons who preached and professed the Christian Religion were poor
inconsiderable Men, it was necessary that they should bring Credentials from
God to attest what they delivered. When they showed this Seal, this broad Seal
of Heaven, none could question their Commission. Besides, the World was then
full of Idolatry and false Religions, which could not be rooted out but by such
a strange and unusual way as this, viz. the working of Mighty Signs and
Miracles, even such as outvie the Power of Nature and the Pranks of Magicians.

Lastly, the Mosaic Law and Economy having been before established by
Miracles, it was neeessary that the Evangelical Law and Dispensation should be
attested in the like manner. God himself had constituted several things before,
which now were taken away by Christ; therefore he taking them away ought to
show his Authority, which he did by working of uncontrollable Miracles. And to
show that the Law was to give place to the Gospel, he and his followers wrought
far greater Miracles than any that were done before to attest the Mosaic
Religion. Therefore he told the Jews that he did among them the Works which
none other Man did, John 15. 24. And as they were greater, so they were more in
number than those of Moses and the Prophets: which was also necessary to take
away all scruple from Men's Minds, and to beget in them a hearty and full Belief
of Christ's Doctrine. For this was the end of their being wrought, viz. to
confirm the Belief of the Gospel, and to ascertain Men, even us at this day,
that God himself bears witness to what Christ and his Apostles delivered. The
use of these Miracles, I say, extends to us, and to all Ages of the Church: tho
we saw them not, yet their Virtue comes down to us. All the Miracles done by
our Savior and his Apostles are as forcible and convincing now as if they were
done in our Days: they are still, and ever will be an infallible Proof,
Evidence and Demonstration of the Truth of Christianity. To shut up this head,
if the Christian Religion be founded on the Mighty Miracles of our Lord and his
Apostles, the Scripture is true, and our Religion is true: but if these are
not, take notice (to confound the Folly and Sottishness of such Supposers) it
is the greatest Miracle of all (if I may so say) that Christianity was received
and believed without Miracles. So much concerning the Divine Testimony of
Miracles.

CHAP. XVII.
The wonderful prevailing and spreading of Christianity another proof of the
Truth of it. Some of the learnedest and wisest Jews converted to Christianity.
A Catalogue of knowing and learned Pagans in the five first Centuries that
abandoned Gentilism, and embraced the Christian Religion. Remarkable Instances
of the Power of the Christian Truth. The virtue of the Gospel far exceeds that
of Philosophy. Examples of great and rich Men converted to the Christian Faith.
This prevailed against the rage of the most powerful Persecutors. The more the
Gospel was oppressed, the more it flourished and prosper'd in all Nations.
Examples of God's remarkable Judgments on the Enemies of Christianity,
especially on the Nation of the Jews. This latter insisted upon, and showed to
be an Argument of the Truth of Christianity. Particular Inferences from this
part of the Discourse, viz. 1. Assent to the Christian Religion. 2. Assert and
defend it. More General Inferences from the whole Christian Dispensation are
such as these, 1. Admire the transcendent Excellency of it. 2. Be thankful for
it. 3. Learn hence our great obligation to Holiness and strictness of Life.
This enlarged upon. 4. If we live not sutably to this Dispensation, our doom
will be more intolerable than that of others under the foregoing O^conomies. It
appears from the general behavior of Men that this is not thought of. 5. We
are to look upon this as the last Dispensation. This is the meaning of Ephesians. 1.
10. which Words are fully expounded. This is inferred from the Gospel's being
called the New Testament. And from those Expressions [the last times] [the last
days]. Wherefore we must not expect any New Dispensation.

Fourthly, THE wonderful prevailing of Christianity is another Testimony no
less than Divine of the Truth of it. Observe the marvelous spreading and
increasing of it; at first Christ began with twelve Apostles and seventy
Disciples: after his Death, the number of the Names of the Disciples is said to
be about a Hundred and Twenty, Acts 1. 15. Soon after; three Thousand were
converted to Christianity, Acts 2. 41. and afterward five Thousand more, Acts
4. 4. Then we read that a great Company of the Priests were obedient to the
Faith, Acts 6. 7. And of honorable Women not a few believed, Acts 17. 12. And
several more at other times, till Christianity in a short space of time got a
considerable footing in the World. The elder Pliny, who was Proconful under the
Emperor Trajan, and therefore knew very well upon diligent enquiry the numbers
of the Christians at that time, acquaints us that even then, which was less
than fourscore Years after Christ's Passion, that Multi omnis aetatis, omnis
ordinis, utriusque sexus etiam, vocantur in periculum, and vocabuntur. Neque
enim civitates tant^m sed vicos etiam atque agros superstitionis istius
contagio pervagata est. Epist. ad Trajan.
Multitudes of all Ages, and Orders, and of both Sexes embraced the Christian
Religion, and that not only Cities but Country-Towns and Villages were stocked
with the Professors of it. We may well then give credit to what the Christian
Writers say afterward, viz. that all Places and Offices were filled with
Christians, as Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia,
conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, ^orum. Apol.
cap. 36.
Tertullian tells the Roman Senate. It is now about two hundred and forty Years
since the days of Christ the Redeemer, said De Duplici Martyrio.
St. Cyprian, and lo, in this time the Church has spread out her Branches
wider than the Roman Empire. At last Christ's Gospel broke in pieces Gentilism,
and within much less than a Century cast the Empire into the Lap of the Church.
This quick Advance of the Christian Church, this strange progress and success
of the Faith of the Gospel proclaim it to be from God, and him alone.

This wonderful increase of Christianity in so short a time was signified in
our Savior's Parable, in the 13th of St. Matthew, where the Kingdom of Heaven
is compared to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which increases to a Tree in a short
time. So the Gospel at first was little and mean, a few contemptible Men came
to Christ and owned his Doctrine, but their Numbers grew greater and greater,
and in few years the Christian Religion spread it self over the World and all
the Kingdoms of the Earth. In the same Chapter the Gospel is compared to
Leaven, which spreads it self through the whole Mass: so the Evangelical
Doctrine diffused it self of a sudden, and was seen to be dilated into a very
spacious Circumference in a little time. Christianity so overran the Empire,
that those who before were named Ethnicks and Gentiles were now called Pagans
because they lived in poor Country Towns only. The In^idels were now but few
and of mean Quality: the chief Cities and Towns were filled with those that
professed the Christian Religion, though (as was said) the Country was not left
empty of them.

But by what means was this done? Was it by deep Policy or mighty Force? No.
Christianity prevailed not as Mahomets Sect did: that got up by Military
Success, by Sword and War, and force of Arms. But the Christians never struck
one stroke for their Cause, unless you reckon that of St. Peter when he cut off
the High Priest's Servant's Ear: but then he was commanded by his Master to put
up his Weapon, and they never drew it afterward. Christianity was not
acquainted with Martial Discipline and the Law of Arms: there was no use of
these harsh Methods in the propagating of it. Again, Mahometism prevailed in a
rude and illiterate Nation: that Impostor was witty, and knew how to cajole the
ignorant People. But Christianity grew up in the most civilized parts of the
World, where there was the greatest Knowledge and the most Arts: and we have
Examples of the profoundest Philosophers and Sages that embraced the Christian
Faith. I wave the mentioning of others besides Mahomet, who had a Martial or a
Politic Spirit to help them in their Enterprises, and to carry on their
designs. I only observe to you the marvelous Power and prevalency of
Christianity, which is seen in this, that tho it made no use of these Means,
yet it daily increased, and was every where propagated. From low and mean
beginnings it grew up to a vast Proportion, and at length it arrived to the
Sway and Sovereignty over the greatest Kingdoms. Here I will insist on these
two Heads. 1. That in the propagating of Christianity the Ignorant prevailed
against the Learned and Wise. 2. That the Weak prevailed against the Strong and
Powerful: both which are no mean Arguments of the Truth of Christianity.

First, the Ignorant prevailed against the Wise. For what were the Apostles?
Were they any other than ignorant and unlearned, simple rude Men, not bred up
in the Schools of Learning, not acquainted with Arts and Sciences, wholly
Strangers to Philosophy and the fashionable Learning of those days? What were
the Apostles but poor despicable Mechanics, who knew nothing but their sorry
Boats and homely Cottages? And what were the Men that these illiterate Persons
opposed? They were the Learned Doctors and Rabbis, the Scribes and Pharisees,
who were the wisest Clerks and Scholars amongst the Jews. Yet we read that some
of these knowing Men attended to the Doctrine of the Gospel preached by Christ
and his Apostles: some of these owned Christ and Christianity. When Jesus was
presented in the Temple, Simeon, a Grave and Reverend Person, one of singular
Wisdom and Sanctity amongst the Jews, acknowledged him publicly to be the
Messiah and Savior, foretelling also many things of him. Christianity was
favored by Joseph of Arimathea a wise Counselor, by Nicodemus a Doctor of
the Jewish Law, and afterward by Gamaliel another Learned Doctor of the Law,
who by the Acts 5. 34.
advice he gave may be thought to have been a Friend of Christianity. Saul, a
Man of great Learning and Abilities, brought up at the feet of this or another
Gamaliel, and Apollo of Alexandria very knowing and powerful in the Scriptures,
were converted to Christianity, and submitted themselves to the Faith of
Christ. So in the next Ages, although the Jews out of malice and hatred to
Christianity (as Justin. Martyr. Dialog. cum Tryph.
one tells them to their Faces) sent out their Emissaries, and those of no mean
Abilities, into all parts of the World, to persuade People against that
Religion, and to make them believe that the Professors of it were guilty of
Atheism and all Impiety, yet this had but little effect upon them, and several
Men of good Understanding and Knowledge embraced the Christian Faith, and lived
and died in it.

And as some of the learnedest Jews were converted by the preaching of the
Gospel which they once counted foolishness, so among the Gentiles some of the
wisest Philosophers and wittiest Orators and skilfulest Artists (for the Arts
as well as Empire were at their height when the Gospel appeared, when Christ
came) acknowledged the Truth of Christianity, and heartily espoused it. These
Men, who were of considerable Learning and Parts, quitted their beloved
Sentiments and Principles, and freely embraced the Evangelical Doctrine. The
early Trophies of the victorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
among the Learned Pagans were such as these, Luke the Physician, Zenas a
Learned (...)Tit. 3. 13.
Advocate of the Civil Law, (for he was no Scribe or Doctor of the Jewish Law,
who in other places is indeed styled (...) But (as our own Learned Annotatour
has made it probable) he was one that practiced the Primitive Roman Law, which
prevailed not only at Rome but in all places which were under the commands of
the Emperor.) Likewise a vast number of Learned Men at Ephesus, Acts 19. 19.
who were Professors of curious Arts, but being converted forthwith committed
their Books to the Flames, although they were valued to be worth fifty thousand
pieces of Silver. Dionysius the Ar^opagite, i. e. a Learned Philosopher and a
celebrated Judge in the highest Court of Judicature at Athens, was Acts 17. 34.
brought to the Profession of Christianity by St. Paul's preaching of the
Gospel there, and, as Ecclesiastical Writers report, was made the first Bishop
of the Christian Church at Athens. The famous Polycarp bid adieu to his Pagan
Rites, and resolutely admitted himself a Disciple under St. John, and
afterward was deservedly constituted Bishop of Smyrna. With him I may rank
Ignatius. who abandoned his former Persuasions, and embraced the Doctrine of
the crucified Jesus, and afterward arrived to the Episcopal Chair at Antioch,
whose ancient and godly Epistles are of great Note and Eminency in the Church,
and have been justly vindicated by one of our learned Prelates. Some would
rank here Clement the Roman who became a Convert to the Christian Faith, and
manfully undertook the Defense of Christianity, and has left us many noble
Discoveries of Primitive Actions, especially that rare piece of St. Peter's
Life.

Who has not heard of Irenaeus (for now I will step into the second Century)
that most eminent and noted Enquirer after Truth, who submitted at last to that
of the Gospel, and made it his particular Employment to rehearse, and at the
same time to confute the several Heretics that confronted any Articles of the
Christian Belief? Aristides, an eloquent Philosopher of Athens, changed his
Religion, and presented an Apology for the Christians to the Emperor Adrian.
Athenagoras, another excellent Athenian Philosopher, and famous for all sorts
of Heathen Learning, must not be omitted here, who, bidding adieu to his former
heathenish Life and Institution, undauntedly maintained that of the Christians.
Theophilus of A^tioch was another converted Philosopher: and so was Tatianus,
who, when he had abandoned the Pagan Religion, writ an excellent Orationagainst
the Greeks, wherein he apologizes for Christianity, and confutes Heathenism
(tho he mingled some Errors with his Doctrine afterward.) Pantanus, who was
afterward Catechist at Alexandria, was a Christian Convert from the Stoic
Philosophy. I must by no means forget Clement, the great Philosopher of
Alexandria, who being converted to Christianity endeavored by his Writings to
promote that Cause, and accordingly put forth an (...)
exhortatory Oration to the Gentiles, wherein he discovers the Folly and
Falsehood of Paganism, and earnestly persuades them to embrace Christianity. And
he writ a Body (...)
of Christian Ethics, in which he informs the Manners of a newly converted
Christian: and he adds (...)
another Treatise full of variety of Matter, made out of diverse Authors sacred
and profane, wherein he supposes the Convert arrived to some Perfection, and
therefore lays him down greater and higher Rules. With this worthy Convert I
will rank Justin, who (as Dialog. cum Tryph.
he tells us himself) had run through all the Families and Sects of Philosophy,
having been first a Stoic, then a Disciple of the Peripateticks, afterward a
Pythagorean, and pitched at length upon Platonism, and became a professed
Assertour of it a long time. But at last an ancient Christian^ man, he says,
met him as he was walking by the Seaside, and gave him some account of
Christianity, from which time he had a Fire kindled in his Breast, he felt a
Love of the Prophets and Apostles, and Followers of Christ: and seriously
reflecting on that Man's discourse, he found (after all his tedious Searches,
and the long Risque of Philosophy which he had run) that Christianity (...).
Dialog.
was the only safe and useful Philosophy. Here he found Certainty and Profit,
which two things he never met with before. Hereupon he was studious to advance
the Christian Religion, and to that end writ and Admonitory piece to the Greeks
against Gentilism, and two incomparable Apologies for Christianity, with a
Defense likewise of it against Judaism in a Dialogue with one Trypho a Jew: and
at last suffered Death for the Christian Cause, and thence justly purchased the
Surname of Martyr.

But I will pass to the third Century, and there mention Cyprian, who was
converted from Paganism, and afterward was made Bishop of Carthage. He became
the most zealous Assertour of Christianity, and in his Writings acquitted
himself with so great a Courage as can never be expressed. He manfully wielded
his Pen against the N^vatians, and against Apostates from Christianity in time
of Persecution: he suffered much, and at last was honored with the Crown of
Martyrdom. I must add Tertullian, a Native of Africa, who of a Civil Lawyer
commenced a solid Advocate and Maintainer of Christianity. This is that
Tertullianus, according to some, who is mentioned in the Digests, and has some
Consulta of his set down there. And indeed he that observes his style shall
find many Law-terms, as his Prescriptions against Heretics, etc. which are
borrowed from the Civilians, or old Roman Lawyers, though I know the learned
Grotius of the same faculty denies it utterly. But against Grotius I set
Eusebius, who tells us that Tertullian (...). Eccle^. Hist. 1. 2. c. 2.
was most accurately skilled in the Roman Laws, and then it is no wonder that
he uses several Forensick words, and particularly Praescriptions, which (as we
learn from Quintilian, Vlpian, and the Pandects) were the Defendents Replies to
the Plaintiffs Action. Besides, it might be proved that several great
Professors of the Imperial Law were well-willers to the Christian Institution,
and some of those Iuris sacerdotes (as the R^man Law styles them) became
Christian Priests. I have already mentioned an early instance of a Convert of
this rank, I mean Zenas; to whom we may now add Minutius F^lix, an eminent
Roman Lawyer, who afterward turned Christian. And to him may be joined
Arnobius, and La^tantius (his Scholar), notable Rhetoricians, all three witty
and solid Defenders of Christianity against Paganism in which they had been
bred up. To whom may be added Julius Firmicus, a Pagan first, and then gave his
name to Christ, and writ a Book of the Error of Profane Religions.

Afterward in the fourth Century we may reckon Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea,
commonly called Thaumaturgus, in the Catalogue of learned Pagans converted to
the Christian Faith, as also Nemesius a Philosopher in Gregory Nazianzen's
time. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, was a Heathen at first: so was Victorinus a
Do^^issimus senex, and omnium liberalium doctrinarum pe^^^ssmus. Aug. Confess.
1. 8. c. 2.
learned Rhetorician of Rome (though an Afric^^ by Birth) but in his old Age he
renounced the Pagan Religion, and became a zealous Christian: the manner of
whose Conversion is set down by St. Augustine. And in the fifth Century there
was Synesius, originally of Cyrene in Egypt, first a Heathen Philosopher, and
afterward a Christian, and Bishop of Ptolemais in Africa, known by his
excellent Writings. Sulpitius Severus, a learned Frenchman, of a noble
Extraction, and famous at the Bar, forsook his Pagan Principles and Practices,
and betook himself to Christianity, and was a zealous Defender of it, and in
part vindicated it with his eloquent Pen. All these great Scholars, these
Masters of Arts and Reason (with many more besides in those first Ages of the
Christian Church) fell down before the Simplicity of the Gospel, and were
captivated by it. These Persons of great Endowments and Acquirements, and the
most zealous admirers and followers of Paganism, became greedy Proselytes to
the Christian Faith, which certainly is no small Demonstration of its wondrous
Power and Energy. Questionless it was one great and notable Miracle that
Christianity was received in the World, and was entertained by the Persons we
have been speaking of, who had by their Principles and Education the highest
prejudices against it.

Lib. 1. cap. 5.
R^finus and Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Sozomen report that Alexander Archbishop of Constantinople, being present at
the Council of Nice, with a word struck Philosophers dumb. But that is a more
notable Instance which we meet with in the foresaid Lib. 1. cap. 17.
Sozomen and in Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Socrates, viz. that one Spyridion, an old Disciple of Christ, who had suffered
under Dioclesian for his constant maintaining the Christian Faith, and was
grown lame and blind with his Sufferings and with his Age, this weather-beaten
Champion lived so long, I cannot say as to see the great Convention at Nice,
but as to be present at it, and particularly interested in the Debates of it.
More especially it was taken notice of how this tattered Confessor, this almost
Emerit and disabled Soldier of Christ rallied his Forces afresh, and with a new
and as it were a divinely inspired vigor engaged the Enemies and Opposers of
the Christian Faith, that is, some Captious Philosophers who came on purpose to
show their Parts and Wit at that great Assembly. But this ancient Worthy
grappled with them with a mavelous and almost incredible Vivacity: he beat
back their Cavils, he baffled their Sophistries, he defended the Christian
Cause, and gained upon some of its very Adversaries to own the same. And
particularly, when a famous Philosopher disturbed the whole Council with his
Disputes, he only standing up and barely propounding the main Christian Truths
to him, and bidding him in the Name of Jesus attend to them, made him become
mute, and leave off his Logic and wrangling, and confess before them that he
believed those things to be true, and that there came Force and Virtue out of
the Mouth of this aged Saint and Confessor which he was not able to resist.
Here was seen the Virtue and Power of the Christian Truth. By its own native
strength and efficacy it gained these mighty Conquests. It pretended not to
Mathematical Demonstration, it boasted not of skill in Arts and Sciences, and
yet it baffled all these, and confounded the wisest Philosophers, and prevailed
upon the Men who were cried up for the most excellent Seize.

This is wonderful indeed: and therefore you read that when the Jewish
Sanhedrim Acts 4. 13.
perceived that the Apostles were unlearned and ignorant Men, they marvelled;
and well they might when they saw what was done by these silly illiterate
folks, void of all Arts and Imbellishments. These sorry Creatures (as they were
then deemed by the wise Men) prevailed upon the World when it was most Learned
and Improved, as all History assures us it was at that time. Not only some of
the Rabbis of Jerusalem, but the Philosophers of Rome and Athens sat at the
feet of the despised Apostles, who were Persons of mean education. The most
knowing and cultivated Spirits submitted to the Sermons of the Ignorant and
Artless. Which undoubtedly is a proof of the eminency of Christianity above all
Philosophy. Which made the Apostle not only start this Interrogatory, I Cor. 1.
20, etc.
Where is the Scribe? i. e. the Man versed in the Jewish Law, but demand
likewise, Where is the Wise? i. e. where are the Professors of Arts and
Sciences, especially the Moral Philosophers, the Dictators of Ethics, who were
signally styled (...) Wise Men. Where is the Disputer of this World? the
natural Philosopher, the Man of Physics, that acquaints himself with the
Fabric of this World? Where is the (...) the Questionist, the busy Diver into
the profound Mysteries of Nature? Or, where is the Politician, that great
Searcher into the Intrigues of the World? where are all these? What have they
done by all their Lectures? Have they reformed Men's Lives as the Christians
have done? Do their Principles make such a Change in Men's Manners as the others
have done? Has not the Gospel effected far greater things than all the
Dictates of Philosophy ever did? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
World? Yea, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching (i. e. by that
Ordinance of Preaching which by so many of the Learned and Wise Philosophers is
reckoned as Foolishness, by this Method and Means it pleased the Divine
Providence) to save them that believe.

It is true, the Greeks seek after Wisdom, as the Apostle adds, i. e. the
Philosophers will have all proved by natural Causes, they judge all by the
Verdict of Reason, and run all things up to the strict Laws of Nature:
therefore it is no wonder that the Doctrine of Christ was to these Greeks
Foolishness. But we, says the Apostle (in behalf of himself and his
Fellow Laborers in the Gospel) preach Christ crucified, to the Jews indeed a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, but unto them that are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God. And this
very Preaching is as great an Instance as can be of this Power, and this
Wisdom. Here you may behold and admire the strange Efficacy of the Gospel.
Ignorant Men confuted the Philosophers of Grec^^ the very Athenian Sages. And
the most illiterate Men were too hard for the sublimest Statesmen, and the most
Eloquent Orators in the Roman Empire. They found that Promise of Christ true,
that he would give them a Mouth and Wisdom which all their Adversaries should
not be able to gainsay or resist, Luke 21. 15. They let us know that the
Success of the Gospel is not to be ascribed to the Skill and Learning of the
promulgers of it, for it had no commerce with human Arts and Sciences. Herein
therefore the mighty Power of God is most signally declared, the Finger of the
Omnipotent is most plainly seen, and at the same time the Authority and
Divinity of the Gospel are ascertained to us. To this end Christ chose Ignorant
and Untaught Men to be his Apostles, (...). Mic. Glyc. Annal. pars 2.
that whatever was excellently said or done by them, should be attributed
wholly to the Divine Power and Wisdom. Here then we have an unquestionable
Proof of the Efficacy and wonderful Virtue, and withal of the undeniable Truth
of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, The Weak prevailed against the Strong and Mighty. For what were the
Apostles and Folllowers of Christ but poor weak contemptible Persons? Were they
not pitiful Fishermen and Tentmakers, and such sorry Traders as these, who made
no Figure in the World? Nay, some of them were taken out of the number of the
vile and infamous, as Matthew and Zacheus, a couple of Publicans or
Taxgatherers, which was a scandalous Employment at that time, as Celsus Origin
contr. Cells.
objected to the Christians. And what were the Persons who were Enemies to
Christ and his Followers? They were Men of the greatest Note, Persons of Repute
and Honor; they were Rich and Wealthy, Great and Mighty. But, as I proved
before under the former Head, that the foolishness of God is wiser than Men, so
now, according to the same Apostle, I will let you see that the Weakness of God
is stronger than men. The Son of Man with his poor despised Apostles prevailed
against those who were of the greatest Power and Authority. This was made good
in the wonderful Conversion of Persons to Christianity: for as we presented you
before with a List of Converted Philosophers, so here we might produce a
numerous Catalogue of the Great and Rich Men who were converted to the
Christian Faith. For tho the Apostle says, not many Wise Men after the flesh,
not many Mighty, not many Noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. i. e. the Number of
these is far short of those who are called of another Quality; yet I have
showed you already that some wise Men after the flesh have been called and
converted; and now I will mention some of those Mighty and Noble who were
called to the same Faith in Christ.

There was Joseph of Arimathea, an Honorable Counselor, and Nicodemus a
Master in Israel, and Dionysius one of the Judges of Areopagus, (for these are
to be mentioned here as well as before, because they were eminent for their
Place and Dignity as well as their Knowledge and Learning) there was the Rich
Lazarus, with his Sisters, spoken of in John 11, and 12. who were Persons of
Note and Quality. There was Chuza, King Herod's Steward, Luke 8. 3. (the same
perhaps with the (...) the Courtier, the Nobleman, John 4. 46.) and his Lady
Ioanna, who with their whole Family believed in Jesus, John 4. 53. If we may
credit Baronius and some other Ecclesiastical Writers, the Centurion the Great
Officer that attended at our Savior's Passion, and owned him to be the Son of
God (Mat. 27. 54.) became a complete Convert, and was a very eminent Asserter
of Christianity, and died a Martyr. I might mention the Elect Lady and her
Children, to whom St. John writes; also Theophilus of Antioch to whom St. Luke
dedicates his Acts, and the Great Chamberlain of the Queen of Ethiopia,
mentioned in Acts 8. 27. Sergius Paulus the Deputy or Proco^sul of Cyprus, who
was won to the Christian Persuasion notwithstanding the high Place and
Authority which he held in that Pagan Country, Acts 13. 7, 12. Some reckon
Publius, the Governor of the Island Melita, who showed himself extremely
courteous to St. Paul as he was on his Voyage to Rome, Acts 28. 7. But we are
certain that when the Gospel afterward spread it self further, the number of
the Rich and Mighty who were converted to Christianity was exceedingly
increased. In Domitian's Reign Flavius Clemens the Consul, the Emperor's
Cousin-German, and his Wi^e Flavia Domitilla, nearly related to the Emperor
likewise, were Proselites to the Faith, and so was Acilius Glabrio who was also
Consul: Dio Cas^. 1. 67. In Commodus's Reign several of the first Rank at Rome
turned Christians. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 21. Not only the common People,
the Mob (as some of late phrase it) the poor Mechanics and inconsiderable
Corydons, but the Great Men, Nobles and Potentates, Persons of the greatest
Fame and Authority, embraced the Gospel in the succeeding Reigns, and at last
the Christian Cross was set upon Imperial Crowns. Here the Power of
Christianity is to be seen, viz. in the Conversion of these Persons who were
the most averse to the Religion of Jesus, for they were generally more addicted
to Sensuality than others, and therefore it was the more difficult to bring
them to so Strict and Holy an Institution. Yet it seemed good to the Divine
Disposer of all things to conquer the indispositions and reluctancies of these
Persons, and to win them to the Christian Faith.

But I proceed further to make good my Assertion, that in planting and
propagating the Gospel the Weak prevailed over the Strong. This is abundantly
evident from what we learn from the History of the Church, viz. that
Christianity prevailed against the rage and fury of the most powerful
Persecutors. From Nero's time to the end of Dioclesian's Reign, abating some
Intervals, the Christians in all parts of the World whither the Roman Empire
extended, were miserably harassed, severely punished and tortured, and
underwent all manner of cruel Deaths; yet all that time the Cause of Christ
flourished, and Christianity prevailed against the Power of Princes and States,
against the utmost Violence, Persecution and Bloodshed. The Roman Emperors
could subdue the mightiest Kings, and make the Persians, Scythians and
Armenians stoop to their Power, and they erected many Trophies as
Demonstrations of this their Universal Prowess; yet these great Ones could not
baffle the attempts of the poor weak Servants of Jesus: but the more
Christianity was persecuted, the more it increased, the more it flourished; and
in the midst of all Disadvantages, Oppositions and Oppressions it gained
Ground. Thus Nec quicquam proficit exquisitior quaeque crudelitas vestra:
illecebra est magis sectae: plures efficimur quoties metimur ^ vobis. Semen est
sanguis Christianorum. Apol. cap. 49.
Tertullian boldly told the Roman Persecutors that their barbarous Cruelties
were to no purpose, they were an Inticement rather than a Discouragement to
Christianity, and that when they come to take a view they should find the
numbers of Christians increased by their murdering of them: for the Seed of
this wonderful Increase is the Blood of Christians. And (...) Theodor^t. de
legib.
another very excellently says, the Blood of the slain Christians is but the
watering of the new Plants, i. e. the new Converts to Christianity are daily
increased and thrive by the bloody Persecutions which are raised against them.
Out of the Ashes of the dead Martyrs spring up new Advocates for Christianity.
And those elegant Words of Hac tempestate omnis fere sacro Martyrum cruore
orbis infectus est, quippe certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur, multoque
avidius tum Martyria gloriosis mortibus querebantur quam nunc Episcopatus
pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Nullis unquam bell's mundus magis exhaustus
est, neque majori unquam triumpho vicimus quam cum dece^ annorum stragibus
vinci non potuimus. Sulpit. Sever. Sac. Hist. 1. 2.
another Author are very remarkable, who speaking of the Persecution under
Dioclesian, says thus, At that time the whole World almost was dyed with the
sacred Blood of Martyrs, for they strove who should run fastest to those
glorious Prizes. Martyrdom by glorious ways of dying was more greedily courted
in those days than Bishoprics are now hunted after with wicked Ambition. The
World was never more exhausted by all its Wars, nor did we Christians ever
conquer with more Triumph than when we could not be conquered by ten years
bloody Persecutions.

Here is to be discerned the Power and Efficacy of Christianity, and from
thence we may infer the Truth of it. For, as Nullum est efficacius testimonium
inter mortales quam ^anguinis. Erasin. Meth. Theolog.
One says well, there is not a more powerful and convincing Testimony in the
World of the Truth of Religion than dying for it. And this is the Testimony
which is abundantly given to Christianity. Thousands of Martyrs have confirmed
the Truth of it with their Blood. And that Blood was the Advancement of
Christianity; this thrived and prospered upon it, and Proselites were
continually gained to it by their observing the patient Sufferings of the
Servants of Jesus. Thus it was even in the very beginning, great multitudes of
People flocked to the Baptismal Waters, and entered themselves into
Christianity, because they beheld the undaunted Courage of the Professors of it
even at their dying hour, and were moved thence to embrace the Faith which they
saw them so zealously maintain even unto death. These were the baptized for the
dead, whom St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 15. 29. as I have showed in another
place, where I have proved that the words are meant of the Baptism of Water,
and that the Preposition (...) which our Translators render for, is as much as
because of, or by reason of, or for the sake of; and consequently the genuine
purport of the words is, that several were converted to Christianity, and were
admitted into the Church by Baptism, by reason of those Martyrs who died in
defense of the Christian Cause. They were so far from being discouraged, that
they were excited to Christianity by their beholding the deportment of the
suffering Saints. And thus it was afterward, the Blood of the Sufferers
brought in great numbers of Converts to the Evangelical Faith, and thereby the
Cause of Jesus was mightily advanced. They are remarkable words of one of the
Ancient Christians, who was afterward crowned with Martyrdom, (...) Just.
Mart. ad Orthodox.
The Torments which the Pagans used, faith he, in hopes of preserving
themselves and their Paganism entire, were not only the cause of the
destruction of Paganism, but of the establishment of Christianity. And in
another place, (...) Ad Diognet. Epist.
Do you not see, says he, that the more numerous the Punishers are, the more
the number of others increases? which appears to be a thing that is not a human
Work, but wholly from God, and demonstrates his Power. And certainly it is one
of the greatest Proofs of the Verity of the Christian Religion, and therefore
is made use of by the generality of the Ancient Fathers of the Church: and
particularly by St. Chrysostom in Exposit, Psalm. 44. Contra Gentes. Contra
Judaeos. Orat. de Babyla. Lib. quod Christus sit Deus.
several places it is insisted upon and urged most pathetically, that the
Church was miraculously established notwithstanding the universal Opposition it
met with, and that at last the Patience and Constancy of Christians made a
final Conquest, and gloriously triumphed over all. Thus I have showed that the
Unlearned and Weak got the better of the Wise and Potent; and we see the Truth
of the Apostle's words, God has chosen the foolish things of the World to
confound the wise, and weak things to confound the things that are mighty, 1
Cor. 1. Christianity prevailed against Policy and Power, against the Wisdom of
Statesmen, against the Eloquence of Orators, and the Sagacity of Philosophers;
against the Edicts of Princes, the Decrees of Senates, and the Forces of
Emperors. The more it was struck at, the stronger it grew; the more furiously
it was opposed either by the inward Indisposition and Antipathy in Men's minds
to receive it, or by the outward Endeavors of the World to silence it, the
more did it prosper and flourish.

No Lawgivers could ever bring it to pass that other Nations should receive
their Laws: neither among Greeks nor Barbarians could this be done, tho they
endeavored what they could to effect it: so Origin discourses in his
Philocalia. But the Laws of Christ were received by many Nations: both Greeks
(...) Barbarians renounced their own Laws and (...) and embraced the
Institution and Discipline of our Blessed Savior. And although the Sacred Script
ures, especially those of the New Testament (which contain the Christian Laws)
were sought for by the^ Emperors, especially by Dioclesian (as Eccles. Hist. 1.
8. c. 2.
Eusebius who was an Eyewitness of it testifies) and were brought into the
Marketplaces, and there committed to the Fire (as I Mac. I. 56.
Antio^^us before labored to destroy the Writings of the Old Testament in the
same manner) and although the Christians themselves were forced to deliver up
their Bibles to be burnt, yet these Ho^y Writings were not extinguished, but
were in many places preserved with great care and diligence, and by the
Providence of God kept out of the hands of those who designed their utter
extirpation. Yea, the more this Holy Book was hunted after by the Enemies of
Christianity, the more it was prized by the Christians, the more its Divine
Truths were admired, loved and embraced. And the more Christianity it self was
depressed, the higher it rose, and lifted up its glorious Head above all its
Persecutors. In a word, like some mighty River, the more it was stopped in its
course, the higher it swelled, and with its impetuous Waves carried all before
it. This wondrous prevalency of the Gospel against the Wit and Wisdom, the
Strength and Power of the World, is a Divine Testimony of the Authority and
Truth of Christianity, and plainly shows that it is not the Device and
Invention of Man, but that it is from God, and from him alone.

Fifthy, Let me add the severe hand of God in remarkably markably punishing the
Enemies of Christianity, as another Divine Testimony to the Truth of it. King
Herod sirna^ed the Great, who sought for the young Child Jesus to d^stroy him,
and murdered the Infants at Bethlehem, for his sake, felt a particular Judgment
from Heaven upon him; for (as Antiq. l. 17. c. 8.
Josephus acquaints us) he was ulcer'd^ in his Bowels, and pestered with Worms,
which crawled out of his rotted flesh; and in the midst of Con^ulsions and
exquisite Torments over his whole Body ended his miserable Life, to begin one
more miserable. Judas who had been a seeming Friend, but proved at last a real
Adversary to the Christian Cause, and perfidiously betrayed the Lord of Life,
^as by Divine Vengeance punished with a triple Death, as I have showed in the
Exposition of Mat. 27. 5. The Sacred Records acquaint us that Elymas, a
Sorcerer, who opposed the Christian Faith, was struck blind by St. Paul, Acts
13. 11. Clement the Roman, Arnobius, Epiphanius and others, relate how Simon
the Magician, an Apostate from Christianity, and one who openly defied that
Religion afterward, was defeated in his bold Attempt of flying in the Air, and
was struck down to the ground by St. Peter. Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee,
who beheaded John Baptist, and under whom Christ suffered Death, was afterward
condemned by Caligula to perpetual Banishment, where he died miserably.
Caiaphas was the same time disgracefully removed from the High Priest's Office,
and Jonathan was set in his Place. Pilate, who condemned our Savior, was
accused at Rome, put out of his Place, and then banished to the Town of Lions,
and at length slew himself. Herod Agrippa, Nephew of Herod the Great, who
stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Christian Church, and
particularly killed James the Broth^r of John with the Sword, and proceeded
further to take Peter also and put him in Prison, intending after Easter to
bring him forth to the People, to be executed as James was; this execrable Man
who thus thirsted after the Blood of the Christians, and designed a plentif^l
effusion of it, was on a sudden cut off by the just hand of God, and that in
the midst of those profane Ap^plauses which he received from the People; the
Text says, he was eaten of Worms, Acts 12. 23. It may be observed that most of
the Roman Emperors and Tyrants, who imbrued their hands in the Blood of
Christi^ans, died violent Deaths: some of them laid hands on themselves, and
the rest in some other manner miserably closed their days. Of the twelve first
Roman Emperors there were but three that died natural Deaths; and of the forty
Pagan Emperors of Rome (for so many were from Julius Caesar to Constantine the
Great) there were few that died in their Beds. See Lactantius de M^rt.
Persecut. who undertakes to show that all the E^mperors and Tyrants that
persecuted the Christians ^had tragical ends by the visible hand of God upon
them: and he particularly recounts the Signal Judgments which they were
deservedly visited with. And as for Julian, who was a Flatterer of the
Christians, and ^^sed a way quite contrary to what the foregoing Caesar^s had
done (for by Bribes and Preferments he endeavored to pervert the Christians,
and at other times he attempted to jeer them out of their Religion) this Man in
the very beginning of his Reign was taken off in a very strange and surprising
manner. He who vowed to sacrifice to his Gods the Blood of the Christians, when
he returned in Triumph from his Persian Expedition (as St. Ierom, Theodoret,
and Orosius relate*) met with a bloody Stroke which defeated his purposes.
Whence the Truth of what a Christian told ^^banius was manifest, viz. that the
Carpenter's So^^ was making a Coffin for I^lian. Who gave him his wound, is not
known to any to this day, said the Theodoret. l^. 3. cap. 20.
Ecclesiastical Historian; but (as he adds) whether it was a Man or an Angel
that inflicted it, it is certain he was the Minister of the Divine Will* And
the desperate Behavior of the perishing Emperor is mentioned by the same
Writer, viz. that he fi^l'd his hand with the Blood that iss^ed from the Wo^nd,
and threw it up into the Air with a (...). This Author tells us moreover that
his Em^press, a Pious and Religious Lady, seeing him thus punished, seasonably
reminded him of his Guilt, and plainly told him, that he would not have known
who it was he had so fiercely opposed, unless this Stroks from God had been
inflicted on him. I might have observed before out of the Lib. 1. cap. 50.
Life of Constantine the Great, that as soon as Maximian persecuted the
Christ^ians, the Divine Vengeance seized him, and his sec^et Parts and his
Bowels were ulcerated. And there likewise we find the Emperor declaring that he
had himself taken notice of the strange Exits of some that had troubled the
People of God (i. e. the Christians) with their wicked Edicts. l. 4. c. 12. I
could go bac^ and observe that Ad Scapus^^^, cap. 3.
Tertullian propounds to Scapula, the African President, several particular
Examples of the Mischiefs and Plagues that befell certain of his Predecessors
and others that vexed and disturbed the Christians. But among all the Judgments
of G^od on the Enemies and Persecutors of Christianit^, I may reckon his
Vengeance on the Jewish People and Nation as the most observable and notorious.
According to our Savior's Prediction they heard of W^ars and rumors of Wars,
and soon felt them; there was great distress in the Land, and wrath upon this
People: they fell by the edg of the Sword, etc. Nero sent Vespasian to reduce
these Rebels, who for six Years together miserably destroyed them and their
Country with Sword and Fire. Then upon Nero's Death Ves^asian, who succeeded
him, sent his Son Titus thither, who bent all the Force of the War against
their Capital City, and closely besieged it. Yet, as the De Bello Jud. in
Prolog. Jewish
Historian himself acknowledges, this merciful Prince acted this Tragical Part
unwillingly: he all the while pitied the Jews, and testified it by his Tears;
he deferred from time to time the Destruction of Jerusalem, and kept up the
Siege the longer, that the Jews might repent of their Doings, and submit
themselves to his Arms. But when he saw they were obstinate, and would by no
means make good use of his Forbearance, he resolved to punish their
Incorrigibleness, and accordingly he fell upon them with an unusual severity,
and woefully sacked and destroyed the City, and burnt both it and the Temple to
the ground. No less than eleven hundred thousand were killed by Fire, Sword,
Famine, and civil Discord in the time of the Siege; and ninety seven thousand
were taken Captives at the sacking of it, there being then a vast confluence of
Jews from all parts to celebrate the Passover: for as this was the time when
our Savior was crucified, so at this very Season the Jews were remarkably
punished for crucifying him. An innumerable company of that miscreant Nation,
which sold Christ for thirty pieces of Silver, were exposed to sale at a far
cheaper Rate; for (as this Author affirms) the Market ran so low that twenty
Jews were sold for a penny. The whole City and Temple were utterly demolished
to the ground. And this was done by him who was styled the Darling and Delight
of Mankind, as if the Jews were not of Human Race. And further it is
remarkable, that this People endeavored in the Emperor Adrian's Reign to
restore and reedifie their Temple, but were forced to desist from it. And
afterward when Julian out of hatred to the Christians set them about that
Work, as they were laying the Foundation, an Earthquake shattered all they had
done, and Fire flashed out of the ground wherewith many thousands of the Jews
were destroyed, as is testified not only by several Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. cont.
Julianum. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Matthew. Sozomen Eccl. Hist. l. 5. cap. 21.
Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Christian Writers, but by Lib. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus who was a Heathen. But (by the way it may be observed)
when the Christians built a Temple in the same place, they were not molested,
but finished it, and made it the Patriarchal Seat, and flourished five hundred
years, till the time that Jerusalem was taken by the Saracens.

This Jewish People now have neither Temple nor Priest, Altar nor Sacrifice;
their Rites and Ceremonies are ceased, their Tribes are confounded, their
Prophets are extinct, they have no certain State or Commonwealth, no Laws, no
Prince, no Governor of their own: they are scattered over the face of the whole
Earth, and are a despised and loathed People. This cannot but be thought to be
the just Judgment of God upon them for their murdering of Christ. And there
cannot be a more visible Evidence of the Truth of Christianity than this, viz.
the Destruction of the Jewish Poli^y, and the miserable Dispersion of that
People for these sixteen hundred years. It was observed by the Enemies of the
Jews heretofore how they prosper'd above all other People: (...). Dio Cass.
Hist. Romans l. 36.
They are a certain sort of Men, says an Historian, who tho they have been
often diminished, yet they have so increased that they have been too hard for
the Power of the Roman Laws, and they have almost arrived to the Confidence and
Liberty of making Laws for the rest of the World. But this singular Providence
of God toward the Jews is long since changed, and they have been through many
Ages the remarkable Example of Divine Justice and Vengeance, such as no Story
can parallel. Tully is not to be regarded, when speaking of the Jews he says,
Quam chara Diis immortalibus gens esset docuit quod est victa, quod elocata,
quod serva. Orat. pro Flac.
That Nation does sufficiently declare by its being conquered, and made
Tributary, and by being reduced to the utmost Servitude, how dear it was to the
Gods. He speaks this after his Pagan manner. But Sulpitius Severus, who was a
better Judge of Religion, and of the Issues of it, speaking of the Destruction
of Jerusalem by Titus, and of the dispersion of the Jews thereupon, gives us
this Remark, Haec ultima templi eversio, etc. Sacr. Hist. lib.
This last overthrow of the Temple, and Captivity of the Jews, whereby they are
banished from their Country, and are daily seen to be scattered over the whole
Earth, are a Testimony to the World that this Punishment has befallen them for
no other cause than for laying their wicked hands upon Christ* for when at
other times this People were delivered to Captivity for their Sins, they never
underwent that slavery beyond seventy Years. But now these Persons, who were
the Dear Offspring of those that were the Darlings of God Almighty, the Beloved
of the Lord, his Chosen People, his peculiar Charge, and the singular Care of
Heaven, have been for sixteen Centuries forsaken of God and all Men, and are
the very Offscowring of the World. This utter Extermination of the Jews is an
unanswerable Argument against them, and shows that they lie under the Curse of
God for their rejecting the Savior of the World, and for putting to Death the
Messiah. Luther Colloq. Mensal.
Two of their Rabbis seriously pondering this Argument urged upon them by
Luther were convinced of their gross Error and Sin, and were the day after
baptized at Wittenberg in the face of the whole University.

And truly this must be said that the total dispersion of the Jews can never in
all its Circumstances be reconciled with the Providence of God, his Goodness,
Wisdom, and Promises, if they continue the People of God still, and are in
favor with him. For can it be imagined that God would leave his Beloved People
so long, and wholly disown them? Is it worthy of God, and agreeable to his
Wisdom and Mercy, which are interested in the Salvation of Men, to let the True
Religion (so they count Judaism) fall to the ground and be utterly abolished,
and to set up another, a False one (so they reckon Christianity to be) in its
place? This is plain and convincing, I think: It is harsh and incredible that
the God of Order and Righteousness should deal thus, that he should cause this
Confusion in the World, and throw down and even break in pieces a Religion
which is the only True one, according to them. It cannot enter into any
Reasonable Man's mind that God would let his own Religion and People be thus
confounded. It is evident therefore that the Jewish Religion was but for a
time, and that the Christian Religion was to succeed that, and that this is the
True Religion; likewise that God sent this severe Punishment on the Jews for
their refusing of Christ the True and Only Messiah, and for their Opposing and
Persecuting, and at last Crucifying this Holy One. Thus the Christian Religion
is attested and vouched by the dreadful Plagues and Judgments on the Persons
and Nations that opposed it. Vengeance has pursued the Enemies of the Gospel.

Lastly, from the Excellency of the Christian Religion, and of all the
Principles, Doctrines and Truths that belong to it, I gather the Reality and
Certainty of it. This is another Divine Testimony which might be enlarged upon.
Never was Holiness so strictly urged as now, never was there an Institution
that was so Heavenly and Sublime as this; never was there any that directed Men
to such Noble Ends, and afforded them such Joys and Solaces. Wherefore it
cannot proceed from any but God. A Religion that so immediately leads to him
must needs come from him. Since Christianity does fit us for Heaven, we have
Reason to believe that it came from thence. But because I had occasion to
insist largely upon this Particular when I undertook to assert the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, and afterward when I demonstrated the Excellency
and Perfection of them, I will say no more of this last Argument of the Truth
of Christianity.

And thus you see the firm Basis of it. These ar^ the Testimonials to prove the
Truth of our Religion, and that it is a Dispensation different from all the
rest. These are the Proofs whereon we found this Economy, and there is no
other evidence that a Reasonable Man can desire. I say, no other, because here
are all kinds of Evidience; Christianity is proved by the Witness of credible
Men, and by the Attestation of God himself. It is proved by Natural and
Supernatural Arguments, by Reason and by Faith. We have the Certainty both of
Human and Divine Testimony, which may be called a Demonstration: for a thing is
demonstrated when it appears that there is an absolute Impossibility that the
thing should not be thus, and when there is a Contradiction involved in the
Matter otherwise. So here is a Moral Impossibility that it should be otherwise:
take all things together, and it is not possible but that it should be thus;
and the contrary implies a Contradiction to Sense, Reason, and Scripture.

I should now proceed to the last Thing I propounded to speak of, viz. the
Degrees of the Evangelical Dispensation: but this b^ing the Administration
which is peculiarly ours, and wherein we are most concerned, I will (before I
go any further) offer such Rational Deductions to you as this part of our
Discourse naturally affords.

1. Assent to the Christian Religion. Which is a very Reasonable Inference, for
Assent or Belief naturally follows on the Clearness of Evidence; and the more
Clear and Demonstrative the Evidence is, the Firmer and Stronger will the
Belief be. For as the Testimony is, such must this needs be: and therefore if
the former be not only Human but Divine, and consequently be Infallible, the
latter must be proportionable. (...). Max. Tyr. Diss. 3.
What is Divine, says an Excellent Writer, does by its Excellency conciliate
Belief, and by its Truth gain Authority. For this Reason no Art or Science can
pretend to that Certainty which is in Divinity. Politics are fallible,
Philosophy goes upon contrary Hypotheses, Medicks guess rather than know the
inward Causes and Springs of Diseases. The Lawyer has his Ieofail, Law it self
is very Uncertain and Arbitrary, if you consider the infinite Disagreement of
diverse Nations even about the same thing. Yea, even Mathematics (if we may
believe those that best understand them) are mixed with Uncertainties and
Falsehoods: there are Fallacies and Paralogisms in Geometry: all is not plain
downright Demonstration, as appears from the Quarrels and Contests among
Mathematicians themselves. But Divinity is truly a Science, and surpasses all
others, because the Ground of it is supernatural Light, and the very Testimony
of God himself. Particularly the Articles of Christianity are founded on Divine
Revelation, and therefore are unquestionable. The Doctrine of the Gospel is
built on this Rock, this Stable and Impregnable Rock. The Foundation of God
stands sure, it continues the same, and cannot be moved. Christian Theology
is founded on a sure Bottom; Christ Jesus the Son of God (and who is himself
God) having fixed it. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but this Word shall not
pass away.

With relation to this, Mr. Boyle's Treatise of the Excellency of Theology
compared with Natural Philosophy is well worth our perusal. That admirable
Person, so well skilled in the Study of Physiologie, shows the Preeminence of
the Study of Divinity above it on this account, that Theological Truths are
evidenced by Divine Testimony, and therefore we may firmly acquiesce in them,
and require no further or greater Proof (as indeed there can be no greater)
tho, as I have showed, they are not destitute of other Evidences. The
Evangelical Truths especially are the True Theology (That of Plato and
Aristotle and other Philosophers, to which they were pleased to vouchsafe This
Name, being but a sorry and ill contrived Rhapsodie) therefore the Christian
Church gave the Title of (...) to St. John, because he, above all the rest of
the Evangelists, so expressly ^^clared the Divinity of the Son of God, which is
the Noblest and Sublimest Point of Christianity, and is matter of pure Faith,
and Divine Revelation. Be convinced then of the True Grounds of your Christian
Belief, of the solid Foundations and undeniable Evidences which Christianity is
built upon. Know this, that God could not have done more for the begetting of a
strong Faith and Assurance.

2. Assert and defend, maintain and hold fast your Religion, and let nothing
shake your Faith and Confidence. Indeed it is a wonder that such strong
Supporters of the Christian Religion should be struck at by any: but so it is,
Heretics, Jews, and Pagans of old, and high-flown Enthusiasts, Deists,
Atheists, Lewd and Dissolute Christians of late, have endeavored to shake
these Foundations. Be you therefore the more Zealous in the defense of
Christianity, knowing that it is no Shadow or Phantom, it depends not on
Imagination and Conceit, but is certainly True, beyond all the subtle evasions
and subterfuges of Sophisters. It is an Excellency in a Man's Life to be upon
sure Grounds, and consequently to know what to do. You have this Advantage in
the Christian Religion, it being something which is certain and fixed: and
therefore this should make you constant in the Profession and Exercise of it:
this should make you steady in your Resolves and Actions. Your Religion being
so Firm and Certain, you ought to stand to it, and to suffer none to rob you of
it, but to part with all for it.

These are the two Particular Inferences from this last thing I have discoursed
of, viz. the Truth and Certainty of the Christian Religion. There are more
general Deductions to be made from the whole Dispensation, and they are these:

1. Let us take notice of and admire the transcendent Worth of the Christian
Religion. I have traced Religion through all its several Stages, I have let you
see the whole entire Progress of it: and you cannot but observe that all the
former Dispensations made way for this of Christianity. It must then be a very
admirable Thing to which all that went before in God's own Oeconomies was but a
Prelude, a Preface, a Preparative. All before were but rude Draughts and
imperfect Models. They were a Foil only to set this off, they were but as the
dusky Twilight to the brighter Day. All that went before was but Infancy and
Childhood: This is Manhood and full Age. This one Consideration is sufficient
to convince us of the Greatness and Majesty of the Kingdom of Christ under the
Gospel. Tho the Law (which immediately preceded it, and was the choicest of all
the former Dispensations) had some Luster in it, yet in comparison of the
Gospel it had none: its Glory vanished as the Light of the Stars when the Sun
appears. They saw in a Glass darkly, they had but short and dim
Representations of things: they had none of that Clearness and Certainty which
we under the Gospel have attained to. Notwithstanding what was said before,
that they had many Ways and Rules to judge of True Prophets by, and to know them
from False ones, yet this must be added that it was very difficult. Prophecy
might be easily counterfeited: Fancy and Imagination made strong Impressions,
and deceived many: they frequently had delusive Dreams and Visions. In most of
the Differences between the True Prophetic Spirit and the Enthusiastic
Impostures of Pseudo-Prophets, as they are set down by the Jewish Writers, I
find little satisfaction, nor can any one who looks for Rational and Solid
Accounts. But the Prophecies and Revelations under the Evangelical Dispensation
are Satisfactory and Certain. We have now a more sure Word of Prophecy. The
excellent Discoveries made to the World by the Sacred Oracles of the Gospel are
Plain, Evident, and Undeniable.

Let us then be sensible of the Goodness of our Condition, and of the
Eligibility of it before that of those who lived before this fullness of time
came. Whereas the Jewish and Gentile Religion were defective and corrupted, and
Ignorance and gross Mistakes had invaded Men's minds, and the True Worship of
God was enervated and destroyed by Atheism and Superstition, God was pleased to
restore and new model Religion, and to give Men a perfect and exact Rule
whereby they might reform their Lives, and be conducted to Blessedness. And
this is the Christian Institution, which every way surpasses both Judaism and
Philosophy; it discovers the most absolute Worship of God, and dictates the
most accurate Precepts of Morality, and directs us to the only Means of
Salvation. This is the sole Prerogative of Christianity, and we owe it to the
immediate Revelations and Dis^overies made by God himself. Most Men that style
themselves Christians, know little or nothing of the Excellency and
Pre-eminence of the Dispensation that bears that Name. But let us endeavor to
be of the Number of those who both understand and admire the superlative
Excellency of the Christian Economy which we are under.

2. Let us not only understand and admire it, but let this most Blessed
Dispensation stir up our most thankful Resentments. Behold with grateful minds
how our Condition is unspeakably better than that of the Persons who lived
under other Dispensations, and particularly than that of the Jews, who were
under the Dispensation which was immediately before ours. We have cause to
thank the Merciful Lord of Heaven and Earth that our Lot is cast into such
Times, that we were reserved for this Best of Dispensations, that we are
blessed with a most Excellent and Worthy Religion, a Religion that is in it
self Reasonable, and every ways adapted to our rectified Faculties and
enlightened Minds, a Religion that has the most lively Principles to actuate
and inform us, the comp^eatest Rules to guide and direct us, and affords us the
most effectual and powerful helps to Virtue and Godliness: a Religion that
holds forth the dreadfullest Punishments to deter us from Vice, and assures us
of the Highest Rewards to animate and as it were to bribe us to Virtue: a
Religion that comprehends in it all the Excellent Things which the most
improved Philosophers talked of, and innumerable more not to be paralleled by
any Model of Religion whatsoever: a Religion that contains nothing in it but
what is of great Moment and Importance, and is admirably serviceable to the
best and most advantageous Purposes. Let us account it an unspeakable Mercy and
Favor that we are the Disciples of so worthy and excellent an Institution. Let
us la^d the Divine Goodness that we have these Infallible Oracles to guide us,
that we are taught of God, and that Jesus Christ is our Instructor. This is
sufficient to raise our Esteem and Value of this Dispensation. By this we have
the Advantage of all that went before us, and this it self is the greatest
Advantage. For now the Word has been made Flesh, and has pitched his
Tabernacle on Earth, and has dwelt amongst us, and all the Benefits and
Privileges of his Coming are offered to us. It seemed good to God to confer
this singular Honor upon Us: We see Christ's Day, and hear his Gospel; we have
the Completion of all the Mosaic Types and Representations, and all the
Prophecies and Promises are fulfilled before our Eyes. We cannot complain that
our Religion is harsh and difficult like that of the Jews, for all those
troublesome Observances are removed, and no burdensome Service, no intolerable
Homage is required of us. Our Service is perfect Freedom: wherefore we are
engaged to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Now
since the Woman the Church is clothed with the Sun, she has the Moon, the old
Mosaic Laws and Ceremonies (which shined with a faint and borrowed Light)
under her feet. Let us disregard those old dark Types and Shadows in comparison
of the clear Light of the Gospel, and let us heartily bless God for so great
and matchless a Mercy as the New Dispensation of Christ Jesus.

3. I infer as the Meliority of our Condition, so our greater Obligation to
Holiness and strictness of Life. Old things are passed away, and behold all
things are become New under the Gospel-Dispensa^tion. Let not our Lives be the
only exception to it. Let the Manners of Christians speak the Transcendency of
the Gospel above Philosophy. Let us live better than the wisest Heathens, in as
much as our Rules of Living excel theirs. Let it never be said that the
Behavior of Pagans outstript that of Christians, and that the Gentile Religion
made better Men than the Gospel does. It is true, Semper adversus sua vitia
facundi -- Non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus. Minut. Fell.
the Pagan Moralists spoke highly against Vice, and always rhetoricated in
their Declamations against it; but the Business of Christians is to live those
Great things which they discoursed of. Let there be observed not only a great
Elogium of Virtue in our Words and Professions, but let us take care that all
Men may read the Excellency of our Religion in our Lives, and thereby discern
plainly the vast difference that there is between a Christian and a
Philosopher. Let us urge it on our Minds and Consciences, as our indispensible
Concern, to yield impartial Obedience to our Master's Commands, and to govern
our Lives by the unerring Rules which he has given us. Let us not bear the
Noble Title of Christians without the true Badges of Christianity. Let us not
profane this Name by acting contrary to it. Either let us lay aside this
glorious Character, or do things worthy of it. We have a Holy Religion,
therefore our Conversations should be so too. Here our Savior's words are to
be remembered; Unless our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, of the most strict Pretenders to Judaism as well as Philosophy,
unless we live more Heavenly Lives, and under a greater Sense of Religion, we
must not expect to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, we shall never attain to
Happiness. For the Gospel-Oeconomy requires greater strictness than that of the
Law, as well as of any other Dispensation, because the Means of Grace and the
Methods of Salvation are much more powerful now: and we ought to find and feel
that Power in us.

Let us then think, speak, and live as those who have such clear and plain
Discoveries of God's Will, such Divine and Heavenly Truths made known to us,
with a prospect of such glorious Things hereafter as may effectually encourage
us to embrace those Truths, and to frame our Actions according to them. How
shameful will it be that so admirable a Religion should produce nothing but
empty Shows and Formalities, fair Words and goodly Appearances? that it should
make us Christians only in Title and Profession, and leave us worse than
Infidels in our Manners? Is our Religion the best? why are not we so too? If it
surpasses all others, why do not our Lives ex^el those of others? If we have so
Holy a Doctrine, why do we not reduce it to Practice? If our Religion be so
excellent, why do we not obey its Laws, and why do we not discern the
Advantages we have above all others to do well and worthily? If in the
Apostle's time Romans 13. 11.
the night was far spent, and the day was at hand (i. e. the times of Ignorance
were gone, and the Gospel was come) then surely now the night is vanished, and
it is broad Day, and we are obliged to walk as Children of Light. I pray
seriously consider of the great Change of Affairs in Religion by the Coming of
our Savior: remember that it is now unspeakably Advanced and Exalted, in so
much that that which was reckoned Religious and Pious in the Jewish Economy,
is not accounted the same in this great Alteration of things. If you weigh this
you will be convinced that you are obliged to a stricter Life and Behavior
than what would have served under the Mosaic Law. At that time Men stumbled
and staggered, they made imperfect Discoveries of Truth and of their Duty: they
could not see distinctly, and they were excusable because the Medium was
defective, the Judaick Shadows and Mists hindered their sight. But the
Dayspring from on high has visited us, all is clear and conspicuous, all
Truths as well as Duties are plain and intelligible, all the parts of our
Religion are fixed and determined: we cannot mistake unless we will, and if we
are Vicious it is not from Ignorance, but our wilfulness and stubborness.

But we who have this redundant Light are concerned to walk worthy of it, and
to conform our Lives and Manners to it. Certainly this is our proper Duty, and
we must first extinguish our Reason before we can disown this to be our
Interest. It is absolutely undeniable that a greater accuracy of Life, a more
exact Course of Virtue is required of us than of those who lived under the
former Dispensations, and were unacquainted with the Laws of Christianity. A
Pagan Historian tells us that those who piously embraced the Christian Faith
(...). Zosimus.
were presently put into a State free from Sin. However he understood it, it is
certain that Christianity ingageth men 2 Cor. 7. 1.
to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and to
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, to act according to the admirable and
matchless Rules of so Transcendent a Religion, and to live according to that
great measure of Grace which is vouchsafed them. A Pious Writer of the
primitive times speaking of the Profession of Christianity, and displaying the
true Nature of it, lets us know what was then judged to be the genuine Efficacy
and Power of it, viz. its being effectual to root out all unlawful Da mihi
Virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, e^^raenatus, paucissimis Dei verbis tam
placidum quam ovem reddam. D^ cupidum, avarum, etc. Lactant. l. 3. c. 26.
Anger, Evil-speaking, Licentiousness, Lust, Covetousness, and to implant the
contrary Virtues and Graces of the Spirit. And in another place he sums up
Christianity in short thus, Cujus omnis religio est sine scelere and sine
macul^ vivere. lib. 5. cap. 9.
It consists wholly in this, to live without wickedness and defilement. On
which account it is observed by him that Morality came short of Christianity:
it had not that Power and Energy on Men's minds that this has. It smoothed
their Tongues, but reformed not their Lives. Or, if it in some measure reformed
their outward and public Actions, yet their more retired and private ones were
not taken care of, and their Principles were unsound and corrupt. But this is
the singular Benefit of Christianity, that it does not only rectify Men's
Principles, but teaches them to order their Conversations aright. A Christian
is not only a Knowing Man (whence Clement of Alexandria gives him the name of
(...) in his Stromata) but he is one of a holy Life and Practice, as that
Excellent Person characterizes him: his Manners are answerable to his Knowledge.

This then is the Catholic Concern of us all, to add to our Knowledge and
Profession of the Christian Truth a Holy and Religious Life; that our Behavior
may speak the Excellency, and demonstrate the Efficacy of the Evangelical
Principles; that it may be seen that those who are blessed with true and right
Persuasions, live better than the deluded and erring World. (...). Isid. Pel.
Epist. lib 4.
If we excel Heretics, Pagans and Jews in the Orthodoxness of our Opinions, it
is fit we should also surpass them in the Eminency of our Actions, as one of
the Ancients religiously speaks. Let us not dare to hold the Truth in
unrighteousness, but let our hearts be mightily affected, and our Lives wholly
governed by the great Truths of the Gospel, by the indispensible Laws of
Christianity.

4. Let us assure our selves that if we live not thus, the final Doom of us
Christians will be more intolerable than that of all other Men. You know who
said it, John 3. 19.
Light is come into the World (for in respect of the times of the Gospel all
the World before was in Darkness, but Christ Jesus brought Light with him, a
Light so Great, so Powerful, that tho we shut our Eyes never so hard, yet it
glares through our very Eyelids) but he adds, This is the Condemnation, that
notwithstanding this Light is come, Men love Darkness rather than Light, they
wilfully indulge themselves in the ways of Sin, and mind not the Discoveries
which are made by the Gospel. This, this is that which shall Condemn them: for
as their Means are greater, so their Accounts will be higher. Their Reckonings
will bear proportion to their Receipts: their Final Sentence will be adjusted
to their present Helps and Advantages, according to that of our Savior, If I
had not come and spoken (and spoken so plainly, so evidently, so powerfully) to
them, they had not had sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin. John 15.
22.

That this is little thought of in the World we may gather from the Behavior
of Men. How Strangely do they forget themselves and their Duty, the End both of
their Creation and Redemption? They run counter to all the Undertakings of
Christ Jesus, they confront all his Designs, and labor to undo all that he
came to do. They disparage the Wisdom of God in finding out the way of our
Salvation, they despise his Goodness in offering them the Means of being happy.
They uphold and maintain that which Christ came to destroy; for whereas the
purpose of his wonderful Manifestation was to beat down Satan's Kingdom, they
set it up as fast as they can. Which is a plain contradicting of Heaven, and a
bidding defiance to the Almighty. He that views the Lives and Manners of Men at
this day, and takes notice of their open Profaneness and Debauchery, would be
apt to persuade himself that they really think that Christ's Coming into the
World was for no other end than to indulge them in their Follies and Vices, and
to give them a License to be as lewd as they pleased. So fond and groundless
are the Imaginations of a great part of the World, that they fancy a
Supersedeas given to a strict and severe life by the merciful Appearing of the
Messiah: they make bold to turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and abound in
all manner of Vice, because the Divine Goodness and Favor have abounded
toward Mankind. It pleases them hugely that they are enfranchised from the
Rigor and Severity of the Legal Dispensation, and that now under the Gospel a
Court of Chancery is erected, and nothing but Equity and Mercy, Clemency and
Indulgence take place. The bare Name of Christians is, they think, a sufficient
Amulet against the Vengeance of Heaven, and the Cross of Christ is a powerful
Charm against Hell and the Devil.

O when shall these vile mistakes, these wilful misinterpretations of the
Design of Christ's Coming and Appearing in the World be rooted out of Men's
minds? When will they understand themselves aright, and be convinced of the
heinousness of sinning against the Gospel^ Dispensation? Why do they not ponder
those words of the Apostle which I before mentioned? If every Transgression and
Disobedience (under the Law) received a just recompense of Reward, how shall we
(under the Gospel) escape if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 2, 3. If
God did so severely animadvert on those that disregarded the Mosaical
Injunctions, what severity will he show toward them that live in the constant
violation of the Evangelical Law? They must needs be inexcusable that wilfully
offend against this, because it is a more excellent Institution than the other,
because by this we have a greater knowledge of God's Will, and consequently
greater Conviction of Sin, because we have greater evidence of God's
willingness to forgive our Transgressions through the Merits of the Messiah
upon our hearty Repentance, because the equity and reasonableness of
Evangelical Faith and Obedience are greater than those of any Duties under the
Law. Upon these and several other accounts the neglecting this so great
Salvation is the greatest Sin (except the unpardonable one) that can be
committed against God, and consequently the heaviest Penalty attends it.
Heretofore it was said, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that
does Evil, of the Jew first, Romans 2. 9. but we may now say of the Christian
first: for he of all Persons under Heaven is the most grievous Criminal,
because there is this high Aggravation of his Guilt, that he sins against the
Evangelical Laws. I wish the Christian World would attend to this, and
understand their true interest, i. e. to be very exact and circumspect in their
Lives, for God expects we should live according to the Dispensation we are
under, according to the proportion of that Grace which is bestowed upon us. We
must remember that Christianity engages us not only to root out all false
Notions, but to banish all vicious and ungodly Practices, and to live according
to the admirable Rules of the Gospel. Our Knowledge and Judgments should
influence upon our Conversations, and our Manners ought to be proportionable to
our Light. Otherwise it is certain our Knowledge will increase our Guilt, and
our abundant Light will thrust us into utter darkness.

5. Be ascertained that this is Last Dispensation, and expect no other. God
spoke at diverse times, and in sundry manners, he revealed himself by degrees,
and successively; whereas now he has discovered to us all at once, that is,
all that is substantial, all that is essential to that Religion which he
requires of us; for otherwise (as you shall hear afterward) this Economy
admits of considerable Digrees. Since God has spoken his Will by his Son,
since the Gospel is left on Record, we must not look for any other Discovery of
Divine Truth. No more is to be revealed to the end of the World, I mean as to
any New Doctrine concerning the way of Salvation: tho Revelations concerning
some things which may be for the safety and welfare of the Church, or of some
choice Persons in it, may perhaps be communicated by God on great occasions.
Besides, I deny not that clearer Discoveries may be made of some Points
afterward: the same Truths which we now have may be more illustrated; but no
New Doctrines, no New Precepts are to be thought of. We have so much of saving
Truth discovered as was intended should be sufficient for us till the
Consummation of all things. Now our Religion is fixed: the Faith has been once
delivered to the Saints, and it shall never be delivered again with Additions
or Alterations. God added to the Discoveries which he made to Adam, and to
Noah, to the Patriarchs, and to the Jews: but now he has done adding. All our
Duty is taught us: All things that are to be believed or to be done by us are
revealed by Christ and his Apostles. You hear him thus declaring to his
Disciples, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto
you, John 15. 15. The Apostle St. Peter peremptorily determines that there is
not Salvation in any other: for there is no other Name under Heaven given among
Men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. And the other great Apostle is as
definitive when he thus pronounces, Tho an Angel from Heaven (if you can
suppose such a thing) preach any other Gospel unto you than that we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. The same Apostle tells us
that the Church is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians.
2. 20. and the Foundation of a Building is not a thing to be removed. Therefore
he calls the Gospel the ministration which remains or endures, 2 Cor. 3. 11.
This is the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. because it is never to be altered,
never to be amended by a more complete Body of Laws. So that the Everlasting
Gospel answers to Everlasting Righteousness, or the Righteousness of Ages,
(Dan. 9. 24.) which shall admit of no Change. Religion was perfected and
consummated by Christ: he has in the Gospel given us all that he ever intended
to give. This is the perfectest Rule, this is the last System of Religion.

To this purpose the Apostle's words are remarkable in Ephesians. 1. 10. That in the
Dispens^t^o^ of the fullness of time (i. e. in the Evang^lical (...)) he might
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven and on
Earth, even in him. The (...)
Greek word which is here rendered to gather together in one is used sometimes
in a milit^ry Sense, and signifies to gather dispersed Soldiers together into
one Troop or Company. This Sense of the word, says Grotius, suits best with
this place. He who is the Lord of Hosts rallied all dispersed Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, Jew^ and Gentiles, Bond and Free, and united
them in one, even under Christ their Captain. Ephesians. 3. 15.
The whole Family in Heaven and Earth (as the Apostle expre^^eth it) now meets
together. The whole World (which is after the Hebrew manner expressed h^re by
Heaven and Earth) becomes one Family or Household as it were: all the
Inhabitants of the World, who were scattered and divided before, are now
brought under one Head and Governor, one Supreme Catholic Ruler, as St.
Chrysostom expounds the place. All Nations divided before by false ways, are
now united in Christ the Way and the Truth. He brings all the Severals into
One, and makes up a full Church, Militant and Triumphant, whereas before there
was a dispersion. Thus Heaven and Earth are happily joined. Again, the Greek
word sometimes signifies to restore or repair, and accordingly is rendered by
the Instaurare.
Vulgar Latin: and then the meaning of the Apostle is, that all things in
Heaven and Earth are restored and renewed by Christ and his Coming. There is a
happy Restoration of Man's Nature by the Incarnation of the Blessed Jesus, the
former State of Integrity is now renewed, and Man is in a far better Condition
than he was at first. And as for Angels, their State also is much amended, they
are now confirmed in their Integrity and Happiness. Thus, according to
Theodoret's Interpretation of the place, the things in Heaven and on Earth are
Restored, Renewed, Reformed by the Evangelical Dispensation.

But there is a third, and that the most probable Interpretation of the words,
which is this, (and the Margin in our English Translation takes notice of it)
that in the Dispensation of the fullness of Time, or the Dispensation of the
Gospel, God was pleased to sum up all things in Christ. Which may refer to
Arithmetical Computation, or bringing all Numbers into One; and so here is
signified that all the former Dispensations being cast up and briefly
collected, are reduced to this of the Gospel. This is the Sum total, Christ is
all and in all, Col. 3. 11. Or it may refer (as St. Ierom on the place thinks)
to the way of Orators and Pleaders, who in the close of their Speeches and
Declamations briefly repeat and recapitulate all the foregoing particulars, and
represent the whole Cause in short. In like manner, what had been spun out and
prolonged in diverse foregoing Dispensations, is now under the Gospel briefly
gathered and summed up in Christ Jesus. This is the time wherein God has made
an (...), he has drawn into one all that went before. He has finished the
account (for so (...) may be rendered) or the Work, and cut it short in
Righteousness: because a short Account or Work will the Lord make upon the
Earth, Romans 9. 28. which (as you will ^ee by consulting the Context, and the
place in Isaiah from whence it is taken) is meant of the Gospel. This is that
(...) that abbreviated word, or short Account, or (because a word and a thing
or work are frequently convertible among the Hebrews, whence this is borrowed)
short work which God has made upon the Earth. The Law was tedious with its
multiplicity of Observances, but Christ comes in a compendious way, and
requires none of those long Undertakings which Moses exacted. This, says
(...). Theophylact.
one of the Fathers, is the short word that is here meant, the brief words of
Faith. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, is the
concise way of the Gospel. This comprises the greatest things in short: Christ,
the Incarnate Son of God, is the Sum and Substance of all the Old Testament,
and of all the different Oeconomies from the beginning of the World. The
Evangelical Dispensation is the Recapitulation of all the preceding ones. All
is to be shut up with this, nothing more is to be expected, this being the
Upshot and Conclusion of all the Administrations that are upon Earth.

I might argue likewise from the Gospel's being called the New Testament; for
the (...), Foedus and Testamentum.
Greek Word signifies both a Covenant and a Testament. Sometimes even when it
is rendered a Covenant, in the Margin it is translated a Testament. But by the
very import and scope of the Text we are forced to render it a Testament in
some places, as in Heb. 9. 16, 17. The Chri^tian Institution and the New
Covenant of Grace therein contained, are the Will and ^estament of our Savior,
wherein he has set down what he would have done after his death (^or
Testamentum est voluntatis nostrae justa sententia de eo quod quis post mortem
suam (...) vult. F. l. 1. de Test.
that is the true notion of a Testament.) Christ the Testator died, and
bequeathed us the Gospel: this his Last Will must stand, and that only;
therefore no other is to be looked for.

Moreover, I might argue from this, that the time of the Gospel is called the
last Time. I grant that sometimes the last Day* and last Times, and the end of
the World are understood of the Day of Judgment; and particularly the last Day
is applied no less than four times in the 6 th Chapter of St. John to the time
of the last Resurrection, or the Day of Judgment. Some Grotius, Hammond,
Lightfoot.
modern Writers understand the last Times, and the end of the World of Christ's
coming to destroy Jerusalem: and it is certain they may in some places be
understood so. But for the most part they are taken otherwise, and those
Learned M^n who defend the contrary show too plainly their Prejudice and
Partiality in asserting a Notion which they have once taken up. But nothing is
more evident than this, that the last Times, and the last Days (which latter is
different from the last Day in the singular Number) are generally meant of the
Gospel Disp^^sation, which is last of all. This I prove from such places as
these both in the Old and New Testament, Isai. 2. 2. It shall come to pass in
the last days that the Mount of the Lord's House shall be establi^^ed on the
top of the Mountains: and so in Mic. 4. 1. where by the Consent of all
Interpreters the last Days signi^ie the time of Christ's Coming, the Appea^ing
of Christianity in the World: and in other Prophets this is expressed after the
same manner. The Apostles use the same way of speaking, and all the time from
Christ's Coming to the Day of Judgment is called by them the last Time and the
last Days, as in 2. Tim. 3. 1. Heb. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 20. 1. Pet. 3. 3. 1 John
2. 18. and in other places the Time of the exhibit^ng of Christ in the flesh,
or of the Reign of the Messiah i^ thus expressed. It is also called the end of
the World by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, who says Christ
appeared in the end of the World to put away sin, Heb. 9. 26. This Consummation
of Ages (as according to the Greek it may be most fitly rendered) this Close or
Shutting up of the former Dispensations, especially of the Jewish one, is
called by the same Holy Writer the World to come, Heb. 2. 5. And the very
Jewish Writers fre-frequently give Gnolam habba, in contradistinction to gnolam
hazzeth.
this Denomination to the time of the Messiah. This according to Daniel is the
time of sealing up the Vision and Prop^ecy, Dan. 9. 24. i. e. of ratifying and
verifying all the Visions and Prophecies concerning Christ and his Kingdom. The
Seal is set upon them, there are no other Visions or Prophecies of this nature
to be looked for afterward.

From all which it appears that the Evangelical Dispensation is the last of
all. We have now the perfectest Edition of God's Will, and we must look after
no other. Thus Tertullian acquaints us that this was the great and prevailing
Rule among the Christians, Non esse quod ultra credere debeamus. Lib de
Praescript. adv. Ha^r. cap. 8.
No more is ever to be believed by us, than what is now delivered to us by
Christ and his Apostles. We have all our Belief given us, God's whole Will is
set down. You see how divine Providence has as it were gone about in the
several former Ages of the World, it has been all along upon the Reserve. The
times before Christ were more or less moving and growing on to Christianity:
they all the while looked toward this, and were Ushers to it, to prepare the
way. But when our Savior came, he sell closely to the business without any
further ambages; he alone had the honor Christo servabatur omnia retro occulta
nudare, dubitata dirigere, praelibata supplere, praedicata repraesentare.
Tertul. de Carne Christi, cap. 2.
to lay open and rev^al all those things which were before hidden, to set those
things straight which were before dubious, to give us a full discovery of those
things which we had but a taste of, and to set before our eyes those Mysteries
and Truths which were but told us before, as that Father speaks. Therefore they
think not aright of the Gospel Dispensation who pretend to bring Tidings of a
New Edition of Religion, who talk of New Lights, but despise Old Truths. They
are vain Men, and intend nothing but Imposture, who hoise up Sail for the
Discovery of an unknown Continent, some new Plantation in Religion. We must
expect no Columbus to discover new Worlds and Treasures to us of that kind. Our
Religion has been professed in the World very near seventeen Centuries of
Years, and it is still the same, and will never be superannuated, and out of
Date, but will continue to the end of all things: for it is the Top and Flower,
the Crown and Perfection of all Divine Institutions: it is the most Consummate
Administration of all that ever were in the World, and for that Reason it is
the Last Revelation that God will make to Mankind. But although this be the Last
Dispensation, yet there are great Varieties in it, which brings me to the next
thing I propounded.

CHAP. XVIII.
The several Ages of Christianity. It was in its Infancy in our Savior's time.
The Apostles knew little concerning his Sufferings and his Resurrection. The
effusion of the Holy Spirit was but mean in respect of what it was afterward.
The Church was in its Childhood in the times immediately after our Savior.
There are no Errors and Mistakes in the Writings of the New Testament. Some
necessary Points of Christianity delivered in the Apostolical Epistles that are
not in the Gospels and Acts. Some relics of Judaism remained in the Apostles
times. An Explication of the Decree of the Council at Jerusalem. It is
particularly proved that the Prohibition concerning the eating of Blood is not
obligatory under the Gospel. Yet in the first times of the Church many observed
it. The difference of Dispensations as to Abstinence from some sort of Food.
Judaism and Christianity were mingled together in the primitive Ages. An
enumeration of several Extraordinary Gifts that were in the Christian Church at
first. The Youth or riper Years of Christianity described. The cessation of
extraordinary Gifts argues the Progress and Growth of the Christian Church.
Miracles no part of this subordinate Dispensation. The Nonappearance of Angels
is a Proof of the Improvement of Christianity. The usefulness and necessity of
attending to the different Administrations of Religion, especially the
Christian.

THe fourth and last thing I undertook, was to show you the several Degrees of
this Evangelical Economy. This Gospel Period, which began at Christ's Coming,
and continues to the end of the World, has four distinct Partitions, which
differ much from one another, 1. The primitive Partition or Period, which is
past. 2. The Period ensuing that which is now present. And there are two
Periods yet to come. I might divide them according to the several Ages of Man,
for there are, as of Man, so of the Christian Religion, four distinct Ages. It
had its Infancy and Childhood at Christ's first Coming, and some years after:
its Youth since that, to the present times. It shall have its Manhood or full
Strength, which is to come in a short time, we hope: and there shall be the Old
Age or Declension of Religion a little before the World's end. I have not met
with any Writers that have duly observed this Distinction in the Gospel
Economy: the neglect of which has caused several ^alse Notions about this
Last Administration of Religion. But the Inquisitive and thoughtful Reader will
find that these things which I have suggested, and shall now proceed to
explain, are absolutely necessary for the framing of a right Idea of the
Evangelical Dispensation.

1. I begin with the first and tender Years of Christianity, in which are
comprehended, 1. The Time when our Savior was on Earth: 2. The Times which
immediately succeeded that.

First, it is evident that in the days of our Savior the Christian Church was
in her Infancy and Minority, and that she was not grown up to a sufficient
Knowledge and Understanding. When Christ first preached concerning the Calling
and Converting of the Gentiles (Luke 13. 29. Mat. 22. 9, 10.) his Apostles and
Disciples understood not his meaning. They knew not that both Gentiles and Jews
should be preached to under the Evangelical Dispensation: and therefore
afterward St. Peter was convinced of it by no less than a particular
Revelation, Acts 10. 14. Even the Apostles were ignorant of the spiritual
Kingdom of the Messiah and looked for an outwardly glorious and magnificent
one. When Christ told his Disciples, as he was on his journey with them to to
Jerusalem, what grievous things he was to suffer, they, notwithstanding this
Admonishment, thought he was going thither to be made King; and the Sons of
Zebedee made their Suit to him by their Mother that they might have the first
Place in the Kingdom, which the other Apostles took ill; Mat. 20. 20. Luke 19.
11. St. Peter the prime Apostle, was ignorant of the Method of Man's Redemption
by the Sufferings and Death of Christ; which appears from this, that he would
fain have prevailed with him to spare himself, and not to suffer at Jerusalem,
Mat. 16. 22. And the rest of the Apostles were infected with the same common
error and mistake. They persuaded themselves that they should enjoy Halcyon
Days, and that their Master should be a very Great Earthly Prince. You read
therefore in Luke 18. 31. that when Christ spoke to them of his Passion, they
were at a loss, they understood none of these things; and this Saying was hid
from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken, ver. 34. In so great
Darkness and Ignorance were the Disciples for a time, such Prejudices had they
on their minds that they could not conceive the meaning of our Lord, and they
durst not ask him concerning those things. It was not as yet revealed to them
by what means the Messiah was to deliver them: they dreamt of an Earthly
Kingdom (as the blinded Jews at this day) they promised themselves much
temporal Prosperity and Grandeur in the World.

Neither could the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection gain assent with them; for
we read that when he spoke of it to the three Apostles before whom he was
transfigured, they questioned one with another what the rising from the dead
should mean, Mark 9. 10. And afterward, when he told the other Apostles as
well as these, that he should rise again the third day, they understood not
that saying, Mark 9. 31, 32. That our Savior's Friends believed not his
Resurrection, appears from their dressing his dead Body with Aromatic Gums and
Spices, which were designed to preserve it. It had been vain to use these
glutinous Gums and Persumes if they thought he was in a short time to rise
again. And when he was risen, they would not believe it, as appears too plainly
from that Speech of Cleophas, one of those whom Jesus talked with presently
after his Resurrection, tho then he passed incognito, We trusted (says he)
that it had been He who should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24. 21. Still he
doubted, tho he had heard of the Lord's Resurrection: in saying, we trusted, he
discovered his distrust, and impli'd that Jesus could not be the Messiah who
was to redeem Israel. Tho the Apostles were certified of Christ's Resurrection
by those that saw him, yet their words seemed to them as idle Tales, (Luke 24.
11.) and they would not be persuaded till they themselves saw Christ among
them. Nor did they know that he was to ascend; for just before he left them
they put this question to him, Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? Acts 1. 6. Will thou repair the Jewish State, and recover its pristine
Splendor, yea raise it to a higher Dignity than ever it arrived to, as we
expect should be done by the Messiah? So likewise it might be proved that some
of them were in an Error about the End of the World, for they believed it would
be about that time. By these and other Instances, their Ignorance and Mistake
were apparently discovered: they had very false apprehensions and conceptions
of things, and some of the chief Articles of the Christian Belief were not
credited by them.

Here I might add, that in our Blessed Savior's time there was not such an
effusion of the Holy Spirit as there was afterward: John 7. 35. The Holy Ghost
was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. For this Reason
several things were not disclosed to them, but were reserved till a further
communication of the Spirit: for tho Christ had said, All things which I have
heard of my Father, I have made known unto you; yet he adds, I have yet many
things to say unto you, but you cannot hear them now. Howbeit, when the Spirit
of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, John 16. 12, 13. As much as
if he had said, there is no new Truth or other Doctrine to be preached to you
than what you have received from me already; but the time is coming when there
shall be a greater Manifestation of those things to you: tho the Truths as to
the main shall be the same, yet your Understandings and Capacities shall be
greater; you shall then comprehend those matters which before you could not, as
the calling of the Gentiles, the Spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah, etc. And
moreover, the Holy Spirit shall increase your Love and Zeal to God and all
Truth, so that you shall be enabled not only to preach it to all Nations, but
undauntedly to suffer Pers^cution, and even to lay down your Lives in the
defense of it. By this it is evident that Christianity was revealed by degrees,
as well as the other former Dispensations of Religion. Their knowledge in the
Christian Institution was gradual: they were not to know all together: neither
were their Zeal and Courage of the same proportion that they were afterward.

Secondly, in the Times and Ages immediately succeeding our Savior's being
upon Earth, the Church was but yet in its Childhood and State of Infirmity, It
is true, they were much increased and advanced in their knowledge of spiritual
Truths, this being the Accomplishment of our Savior's Promise as well as
Prediction, that the Holy Spirit should guide them into all Truth. By a more
immediate and special Direction of this Holy Guide, the Evangelists and
Apostles indicted and penned the Books of the New Testament, so that there are no
Errors and Mistakes in them of any kind. Therefore what a H. Grotius in
Annotat. in (...)
Learned Writer says on 1 Cor. 15. 51. and 2 Pet. 3. 11. and other places in
St. Paul's and St. Peter's Epistles, viz. that these Apostles verily believed
the day of Judgment was at hand, and consequently were under a mistake, is not
to be admitted, is by no means to be credited; for these Persons (as well as
the other Penmen of the New Testament) being immediately inspired by that
Infallible Guide and Director, could not possibly commit any Errors in their
Writings, whatever their misapprehensions were at other times. When therefore
they use those Terms, with respect to the last Day, We and Ye, as if they of
that Age should survive to see that Day, we must remember that they speak not
of themselves particularly and definitively, but of the whole successive Body
of Christians in several Ages, who will be expecting the last Day. This is the
meaning of those Expressions, as is plain from their using them on 1 Cor. 6. 2,
3. and 15. 51, 52.
other occasions. We have no Reason then to think that the Apostles were
deceived about the Day of Judgment, or any other matter that they writ of and
delivered to the World. Here is no weakness, no defect as to any thing of this
nature.

Nay, there was a great Advance and Accession in respect of what there was
before, in the foregoing part of this Dispensation, viz. in the time that our
Savior lived upon the Earth. For the Doctrines of the Gospel (of which I speak
now) were gradually delivered, and consequently the Apostles attained now to
more than was discovered in Christ's time, he having not thought fit then to
communicate all in so evident and plain a manner as we find it was afterward
done. Therefore that late The Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
Writer is under a great mistake who declares that the Apostles Epistles are
only occasional, and that we can find no necessary Points of Divinity delivered
there which were not delivered before in the Gospels and Acts; whereas the
Truth is, the Epistles contain the most perfect and complete Doctrines of the
Gospel, for by degrees the Evangelical Truth displayed it self. All the
necessary and fundamental Articles of Christianity are explained here, the
grand Points of the Christian Belief are here set forth in a clearer Light than
before: they are proved and confirmed in these Writings. Yea, several great
Truths and weighty Doctrines of the Christian Faith are mentioned and
illustrated here, which neither the Gospels nor the Acts speak of. Especially
St. Paul's Epistles (which are thrice as many as any of the other Apostles
writ) are fraught with extraordinary Discoveries of Divine and Heavenly
Mysteries. And we could not expect less, for this Apostle was the only Person
of them all that had the Privilege to be taken up into the third Heaven, the
Seat of Glory, where he was in a more especial manner enlightened, and had those
sublime Points of the Trinity, etc. (as his Writings abundantly testify)
revealed and opened to him (so far as the matters were capable of it) which the
Evangelists and other Apostles knew but little of: which makes his Writings
more eligible and valuable than all the rest. This is so plain and obvious,
that it is wonderful that any Man who has read and perused his Epistles can
contradict it, and (which is worse) undervalue them as if they were writ only
by the by, and were not designedly indicted to instruct us in the most necessary
Articles of our Religion. We cannot believe this when we consider the
extraordinary Revelations which this Apostle was honored with, and when we
observe the gradual Discovery of the Truths of the Gospel.

But still the Gospel was in its Childhood and Inferior State, which is the
thing I have now undertaken to make good. This Dispensation of Christianity,
under which the Apostles were, was not arrived to a very considerable Pitch.
There were some Relics of the Jewish Economy still remaining: they had not
quite laid aside the Ceremonial Law and Mosaic Rites. St. Paul when he was
among the Gentiles, or writ to them, as to the Galatians, declared against all
Mosaic Observances whatsoever: but the other Apostles when they were among the
Jews, did no such thing: yea St. Paul himself, to comport with the Jews or
Gentiles, as he saw occcasion, used or used not the Jewish Ceremonies. Thus he
circumcised Timothy, but not ^itus. And so without doubt the other Apostles
behaved themselves according to the people they dealt with. They kept the first
Day of the Week, the true Christian Sabbath, Acts 17. 7. and 20. 7. and 25. 66.
1 Cor. 16. 2. and they observed likewise the Jewish one, Acts 13. 14, 42. and
16. 13. for they found it convenient to comply with some because of their
weakness; therefore for the sake of the converted Jews they observed the
seventh day Sabbath, tho with the converted Gentiles they celebrated the first
Day of the Week.

We find that two or three Jewish Ceremonies were kept up by the Apostles when
all the rest were abrogated, Acts 15. 28, 29. It seems good to the Holy Ghost
and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; that
ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from Things
strangled, and from Fornication. Here St. James the Bishop of Jerusalem, and
St. Peter, and St. John Apostles, and others of the Church determine what the
Gentile Christians shall do in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia as touching the
Jewish Rites and Ceremonies. They are not to be Circumcised but it is required
of them (as of all Proselytes of the Gate) that they observe the Precepts of
abstaining from things offered to Idols, etc. This is the Decretal Epistle, or
you may call these the Canons of the Apostolic Council. And these things are
enjoined for no other end but to comply with the believing Jews, that in some
Observances those Gentile Converts might agree with them. Besides, as Dr.
Spencer de Legib. Hebr. l. 2. c. 3.
One observes, these things named in the Decree, and forbidden by it, were such
as the Pagan Idolaters chiefly observed and practiced. They are four grand
Marks of Gentilism, and therefore those Gentiles who were converted to
Christianity ought to renounce all those things as Idolatrous. Especially as to
Fornication, they were bid to abstain from this, not as if it were of the same
nature, and as indifferent in it self as the other things mentioned, but they
are joined together, because the Gentiles thought Fornication or Whoredom an
indifferent thing, and they usually allowed themselves in it.

A Dr. Lightfoot Hor. Heb^.
Learned Man of our Nation is of Opinion that by Fornication is meant Poligamy,
a sort of Fornication (as he calls it) among the Jews which seemed to them
lawful: and marrying within the prohibited degrees is, he thinks, here
forbidden likewise. But if we remember that what the Synod decrees here is for
the sake of the Converted Gentiles, not the Jews, we shall rather believe that
Fornication properly so called is here forbid, especially if we consider that
the Pagans had no positive Laws among them against this, tho they had against
Adultery. Wherefore this Practice which was looked upon as an indifferent thing
among them, is here directly cautioned against, and hence you see the Reason
why this is ranked with the rest. And the abstaining from these things is
mentioned as necessary; not as if they were all unlawful in themselves and
their own nature (for Fornication only was so) but the rest were for that time
and juncture necessary. (Otherwise they are called a burden, and therefore not
morally good, and consequently not Necessary in themselves.) Yet they were, I
say, Necessary, tho not to all Christians, yet to all Proselytes of the Gate,
and for that time only, because it was requisite to symbolize with the
Iudaizing Christians who urged some Ceremonial Observances: and this was the
way to unite both converted Jews and Gentiles, who then were mixed together.
But when Christianity prevailed, and there was no fear of giving offense to the
weak, the Obligation of this Decree ceased, and these things were not observed
in the Church.

But one of these, viz. abstaining from Blood, has not so soon and so easily
been laid aside as the others. The Reason of which I conceive was this, this
was an early Prohibition, this was a Law given to Noah, Genesis 9. 4. Flesh with
the life thereof, which is the Blood thereof, ye shall not eat: and thus having
the start of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, they might think it forbad something
which was morally Evil, and that as it obliged before Moses's Law, so it ought
to do afterward, and that therefore there lay an obligation on Christians to
observe it. But several things I will here suggest: 1. It should be considered
there were Ceremonial Laws and Rites prescribed before Moses, that are
universally acknowledged to have no obligation under Chris^ianity, and
therefore this may cease as well as they. 2. It should be remembered that when
this Law was delivered to Moses, the Reason annexed to it was this, The life of
the flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make
an Atonement for your Souls; for it is the Blood that makes Atonement for the
Soul, Lev. 17. 11. Now, this Reason ceases under the Gospel, since all the
Jewish Sacrifices and Effusions of Blood on the Altar are abolished. The Blood
of Animals was made typical and representative of Christ's Blood; but he being
come, and having shed his Blood what have we to do with the Blood of any
Animals, what reason have we to have regard to it? 3. In the Law which forbids
eating of Blood, you may observe that Blood it self is not absolutely forbid,
but living Blood, i. e. the Blood of the Beast before it be quite dead:
therefore eating of the Blood of a Beast when he is deprived of Life, is not
unlawful according to that Law. When the Blood is boiled, or roasted, and any
ways so altered that the Life is gone from it, it may be eaten notwithstanding
that Law. 4. Let the Law be understood of what Blood you please, our Great and
Infallible Law giver has decided the Controversy by taking away all
distinction of Meats. There is nothing from without a Man that entering into him
can defile him, says our Savior, Mark 7. 15. Here the Ceremonial Rite of
abstaining from the eating of Blood is abolished by Christ; for if no food that
enters into a Man defiles him, then Blood cannot, and Consequently it is lawful
to eat it. But for certain Reasons the Apostles at the Council at Jerusalem
ordered this old Rite to be continued for a time, viz. till the greatest part
of the Jews were converted; and then it was to be laid down. And that it ought
to be so, is not only the Determination of Christ but of his Apostles, I know
and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self,
Romans 14. 14. And the same Apostle declares it lawful to feed even on thing
offered to Idols, if no weak Brother be offened by it, 1 Cor. 10. 25.
Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no question for Conscience
sake: and ver. 17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, i. e. it does not
consist in using this or that particular sort of Food, for under the Gospel all
are alike. Therefore he says in Col. 2. 16. Let no Man judge you in meat or in
drink. And again, Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 4. Thus tho it was not absolutely
necessary that we should have a particular revoking of the Law, for it is
enough that the Reason of it cease; yet we find that it is more than once
revoked and repealed in a very formal and express manner, and that after the
Decree of the Synod at Jerusalem. So that now there is no intrinsic Evil and
Turpitude, no Unlawfulness and Sin in eating of Blood.

But this was not practiced in the Apostles times, nor universally obtained a
long (...) after, but they very carefully refrained from eating of Blood for
the Reason before mentioned, viz. out of compliance and condescension to the
Jews who were turned Christians. And for this Reason the Christians in the
Second and Third Century generally observed the Canons of this Apostolical
Synod, and they were confirmed by several Con. Gangr. Can. 2. Syn. Trull. can.
67. etc.
Councils. Particularly, that the Christians of those days abstained from Blood
and things strangled, is attested by Dialog. cum Tryph.
Justin Martyr, Lib. 8. cont. Celsum.
Origin, Ad Uxorem I. 1. and Apolog. cap. 9.
Tertullian, Tantum ab humano sanguine cavemus ut nec edulium p^^orum in cibis
sanguinem noverimus.
Minutius Felix, and Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius. Tho it appears likewise that this was not a universal Observance,
but some did eat Blood whilst others abstained. The Greek and Ethiopick
Churches to this day abstain from things strangled, and from Blood, by virtue
of the Decree of that first Council in Acts 15. And among the modern Writers
Christianus Becman in Exercitat. 26. Curcellaeus in Diatrib. de esu Sang.
some of no mean Learning have espoused this Opinion and Practice, and the
Learned In Acts 15. 20.
Grotius seems to favor them. These Persons were drawn into this Sentiment by
having an eye to the Practice of the old primitive Christians, and by not
considering the true Reason why that Canon of abstaining from Blood prevailed
in some parts of the Church, viz. because the Christian Church was not wholly
gathered in those Parts, and several Jews (who abhorred Blood and things
strangled) might have been kept from embracing Christianity, if there had not
been a compliance in this matter. This was the occasion of this Canon of the
Apostles, says Cont. Faust. l. 32. c. 13.
St. Augustine, and this he says was the Judgment of the Christians in his
days. He adds, that there were but a few in his time that abstained from eating
Blood, and they were laughed at by the rest as too nice and scrupulous. Nor did
those Men attend to the foregoing Reasons and Proofs of the Abrogation of this
Decree: which if they had done, they would have found it to be a temporary
Injunction, and that it was obligatory so long as any Gentiles were mixed among
the Churches, but that afterward it was to be quite cast off: for the
observing of this and other parts of the Decree were kept up only by reason of
the Churches Weakness.

To conclude this Subject, let us sum up the difference of Dispensations, as to
this particular of abstaining from some Food. At first there was a Restraint as
to this, nothing but the Fruits of the Earth were permitted to be eaten, at
least generally and usually. But after the Flood their Commons were enlarged,
for Flesh was allowed; yet with this Restriction, not to eat Flesh with the
Blood or Life in it. Then afterward, among the Jews, a Law restrained them
from some sort of Food; some Animals only were permitted, the rest being
pronounced unclean. But when Christ came, this Restraint was removed, yet so as
the Liberty did not totally prevail, for by an Apos^olical Council they were
bid to abstain from Things strangled and from Blood. And afterward, in some
Christian Churches this Abstinence was yet observed. But at last, the Christian
and Evangelical Liberty took all Restraint away, the Jewish Rites and Usages
having had time enough to wear off.

From other Instances in the Christian Church in those first Times it might be
proved that whilst they were not all grown up to the like knowledge and
perswasion^, both Judaism and Christianity were often twisted together. Even in
the second Century the Christians in the East, following the Example of St.
John and St. Philip, observed Easter on the very time the Jews did their
Passover: but those in the West imitating the Practice of St. Peter and St.
Paul, kept Easter on the Lord's Day, the Day on which Christ arose. Victor, the
Bishop of Rome, endeavored to bring the Churches of Asia to his Opinion,
designing to excommunicate all those who disagreed with the Roman Churches; but
he was dissuaded at last from prosecuting that Design, and the celebrating of
Easter remained free till the Nicene Council, where the Western Churches got
the better, and they that refused to keep that Feast on Sunday were branded
with the Name of Quartodecimani.

I might further prove this mixture of Jewish and Christian Observances in the
first Ages: Tertullian, who flourished in the beginning of the third Century,
frequently joins Christianity and Judaism together; and particularly in his
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, he declares there is Salvation in both. There
were the Coelicolae, (mentioned in the Code) those that worshipped God as Ut
coelitus pra^ceperat.
he had commanded from Heaven, i. e. according to the Precepts and Rites of the
Mosaic Law, and according to the Precepts of the Gospel: for they held that
Heaven, i. e. God was the Author and Institutor of both, and intended that both
should be observed. Thus the Mosaic Law and Ceremonies were a good while going
off, they gradually and gently vanished away: for the Church was then but in
its Childhood, and was tenderly to be treated. It is not to be denied that the
Jewish Rites were nailed with Christ to the Cross, they died when he gave up
the Ghost. But tho they were dead, and were of no efficacy, yet Men were left
free to use or not use them, as they saw fit. After their decease they were not
presently buried, but (as one of the Fathers speaks) were to have an honorable
Interment. In brief, Judaism staid some time with Christianity, and then took
its leave.

Here it must be observed in the next place that extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit were peculiar to this Period of the Christian Church, which is a certain
Argument of the weak State of it, and that it had not outgrown its Childhood,
but that Knowledge and Faith were feeble in many, and that Unbelief had wholly
possessed others, and there was need of some very great Power, which was in
those days exerted in a wonderful manner. Among the extraordinary Endowments of
the Holy Ghost which were then bestowed, Prayer was one, i. e. an infused and
supernatural Gift of Prayer was given to the Apostles and primitive Christians,
which is called Praying with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 15. and those who were
blessed with this singular Gratuity, had Matter and Words dictated to them by a
special Afflation or Inspiration from Heaven. Prophesying was also after an
extraordinary and supernatural manner, as the fourteenth Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians will inform us. It was a Power to interpret and
explain the darkest Scriptures, to unriddle all sacred Mysteries, to urge with
great efficacy the Duties of Christianity on the Consciences of Men, and
sometimes to foretell Futurities of great Importance: all which was effected by
the immediate Influence of the Spirit. This Gift expired soon after the second
Century. After which they tell us there is little or no mention of the
Prophetic Spirit in the Christian Church. To which perhaps that passage of the
Apostle relates, and is Prophetic even of the expiration of Prophecy, 1 Cor.
13. 8. whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail. And as there were in the
first Times inspired Prayers and Prophesyings, so there were inspired Hymns;
which is called singing with the Spirit, ver. 15.

But the working of strange and wonderful things above the Power of Nature,
which is most properly doing of Miracles, was a great part of the Dispensation
of those Days. Not only the Apostles, but their Followers in the Ages
immediately succeeding, were endued with this Power. Hence Lucius, King of this
British Island, hearing of strange things done by Christians in many places,
about the end of the second Century sent to Eleu^herius, Bishop of Rome, to
receive the Christian Faith of him, and was the first Christian King in the
World. From Justin Mar^yr, Tertullian, and Cyprian's Writings, it is evident
that Miracles were frequently wrought in the Church, and these Persons appeal
to them as things that were of common notice, and could not be denied. Gregory
Bishop of Neocaesarea (who lived in the third Century) purchased the Title of
Thaumat^rg^^ by the miraculous Acts which he did. Even in the next Age Miracles
were done by many, as is testified by Ruffinus, Theodoret and Sozomen. From
Lib. 1. (...). Homil. 6. in 1 Cor. 2. Sermon. 1. in Pentecost.
several passages in Chrysostom's Writings it may be gathered that they ceased
in his time, more especially from his 32d Homily on St. Matthew, where he
replies to the Objections of the Pagans against the Christians, viz. that they
did not confirm their Doctrine by Miracles. And so again in his 40 th Homily on
the Acts he gives the Reason of the cessation of Miracles. But tho he does
this, he must be understood of the common and ordinary use of them; for
sometimes, and rarely, Miracles were wrought in that Age, or else St. Augustine
and other Fathers misrepresent those Times. Particularly De Ci^. Dei l. 22. c.
8.
St. Augustine (who lived in St. Chrysostom's time) bears witness that Miracles
were wrought at the Monuments of the Saints in those days. But yet from this
Father's own words in De ver^ relig. cap. 25.
another place we may gather, that Miracles were then at an end in some parts
of the Christian Church. The short is this, that for three or four hundred
Years, in one place or other, Miracles were generally done in confirmation of
the Christian Faith, viz. as long as the Church was in her tender and childish
Years.

And it may be observed further, that there was a Power in the primitive Times
bestowed on the Church of punishing the Disobedient in a strange and dreadful
manner, viz. by in^^icting sudde^ Diseases, nay Death it self sometimes upon
Offenders, as is evident in the Relation concerning Ananias and Saphira, Acts
5. 1, etc. And some such thing as this it is likely is meant by those (...)
done by the Apost^les, Acts 2. 43. And indeed it was necessary that in those
primitive Times they should have such a power of inflicting extraordinary
Judgments on Criminals, if you consider the state of things then; for the
Magistrates, being at that time Heathens, did not animadvert on those who
offended against the Christian Laws, on which account likewise the Condition of
the Church was weak and low. And it may be further observed that in order to
this Gift or Ability of striking with bodily Maladies or Death those that were
gross Offenders, there was another Gift bestowed, viz. Discerning of Spirits, 1
Cor. 12. 10. by virtue of which the Apostles had an insight into the Secrets of
Men's minds, and could tell whether their hearts were right toward God. Hereby
it was that they could make a discrimination between true and counterfeit
Professors of Christianity, and thence accordingly received or rejected them,
and if they saw occasion, punished the latter. This was a requisite Gift in
those days, because it was suited to the nature of that Dispensation at that
time, wherein Christianity was not grown to any perfection, and therefore there
was need of these extraordinary Means to nourish and uphold it; it wanted these
adventitious Aids to support its weakness.

2. The Christian Church proceeded from Childhood to Youth. This is the Second
subordinate Dispensation of the Gospel, or the present Period we are now under.
This began when all the Legal Ceremonies and Jewish Observances were laid
aside, when the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost ceased, when immediate
Inspirations were withdrawn, and when Signs and Wonders, and working of
Miracles were out of use. From the time of the cessation of these we are (as I
conceive) to date the Youthful and Stronger State of Christianity. Then it
began to be entire, when it was no longer blended with Judaism, when there were
no more Typical Ceremonies in the Christian Service. In the place of the
Extraordinary Gifts of Praying and Prophesying there succeed now in the Church
those Religious Exercises of Praying and Preaching which (tho they are never
rightly performed without the help of the Spirit, yet) proceed not from
immediate Illapses and Inspirations. The Apostles and first Christians were
extraordinarily taught of God: but we must make use of the Means and Helps
which are given us in order to attaining the Knowledge of Him and of our Duty.
We must arrive to this by God's Blessing on our Studies and Industry. Knowledge
is not purely infused now, but the Spirit of God cooperates with our
endeavors. Scholarship was not necessary for the first founding the Gospel,
because the effusion of the Spirit was then extraordinary. But when this
ceased, human Learning became necessary in those who are to instruct others,
and to confute Gainsayers.

Therefore in the Disputes between us and the Quakers and other Sects about
these Matters, we must urge this, that there is now an Economy different from
that in the times of the Apostles. When they talk of doing all by immediate
Impulse of the Spirit, and despise outward Means and Helps, and cry that they
are above Ordinances, we must let them know that they are forgetful of the
different Dispensations of times, and thence proceeds their Error. They do not
observe that there are subordinate Oeconomies even in this one grand Economy
of Christianity; and the want of seriously attending to this, leads them into
very extravagant Opinions and Practices. When there were extraordinary Gifts in
the Church, a Fisherman, any illiterate Person was as able as any one to
preach. For as in that time those were able to heal all Diseases who had never
studied Physic, so there were those that could speak to the People with all
Tongues who had never been taught any. For the speedier propagating of the
Gospel, some of the commonest Christians had Ability to do this. But it is not
so since: those supernatural Gifts are ceased, and now Learning is requisite in
a Minister of the Gospel: Schools and Universities, Skill in Arts and Languages
(which can be gained only by Study) are become necessary. For, as an ancient
Writer of the Church says well, Coepit alio ordine and providentia gubernari
Ecclesia. Ambros.
After the Apostles time the Church began to be governed by another Order and
Management of Divine Providence. As for the Spirit of Prophecy we know it was
an immediate extraordinary Gift, whereby Persons were divinely enlightened
themselves, and had ability to reveal things in an extraordinary manner to
others: which was frequent among the Jews in the Old Testament; but even that
failed at last, there was not a Prophet between Malachi and John Baptist,
(whence it was that the People ran out of all the Regions round about to see
the Baptist, a Prophet being a very rare Sight.) But Prophecy was restored by
Christ, and by his Apostles in a most eminent Degree afterward; yea Justin
Martyr, who lived in the middle of the second Century, tells us in his Apology
for the Christians that the Gift of Prophecy was then in the Church: but after
that there is no mention of it, because it ceased. And so as for other
immediate of extraordinary Revelations, as Dreams and Visions, and such like
ways by which God used to communicate his Will unto Jews and Christians
heretofore, they are now laid aside, or are very rare and unusual. And the
Reason is, because Christianity is out of its Childhood, it has gathered more
Strength, it is youthful and vigorous.

I know that others have different Notions of this matter. The Learned De usu
Patr. l. 1. c. 1.
Daille expressly says, Christianity was in its height and perfection in the
time of the blessed Apostles; tho, so far as I can perceive, he himself soon
after partly retracts this Assertion. It is generally thought and said that
those extraordinary Endowments before named in the Christian Church, are an
Argument of its Manhood and Perfection: and because those Gifts in the
primitive Times were so great and venerable, far exceeding what we have at this
day, they reckon all Christians since those times to be but puny Christians.
But I cannot give my suffrage to this, yea I look upon it as a great mistake;
for if a Man rightly considers things, he will find that these splendid Gifts
were bestowed on purpose for the propagating of the Gospel at that particular
time, and that the Weakness and Unsettledness of the Church were the only
occasion of them. Christianity wanted (at its first Rise) confirming and
corroborating by such wonderful Methods and Expedients as these. And therefore
if we understand the true Nature of them, we cannot but confess that they were
Proofs and Evidences of the imperfect State of the Christian Church in those
days. Now those extraordinary Gifts are vanished, the inspired Men are gone,
but the Holy Scriptures which were written by Divine Inspiration are left with
us, to be the great Standard of Truth, and the Rule of our Actions. God has
raised up eminent Men to open and explain that Holy Book, and to instruct us in
all the great and necessary Points of it. We have now a more settled Knowledge of
Religion, and there is a greater Progress in Christianity. The Economy has
received some Alteration; and we need not extraordinary Helps when God
vouchsafes us those that are ordinary.

And as for Miracles, they are not of this part of the Christian Dispensation,
and therefore are not to be looked for now. Those mighty Wonders are for a
sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 14. 22. Therefore they were proper in the first Ages, to
convince the unbelieving World, and for the propagating of Christianity. But
now they are become useless, and more regular and ordinary Methods are used.
The Gospel being sufficiently promulged among us, and the Authority of it being
proved by those mighty Works which have been done, we are not to expect any
more of them. Ordinary Means now serve us, tho we have the Benefit likewise of
those extraordinary ones which were before. I do not say Miracles are so
creased that there shall never be any wrought again: for a Power of doing
Miracles is indefinitely promised in Mark 16. 17. It may still remain, so as to
be exerted on occasion, viz. when Heathens and Infidels are to be converted.
But that belongs not to this Part of the Evangelical Dispensation which I am
now speaking of, but to that more perfect one which is to succeed, in erecting
of which perhaps God may enable his Servants, in order to the complete
enlarging of the Church, to work Wonders. But at present this way of Divine
Attestation is unnecessary, for Christians have sufficient Means, with regard
to all the ends of Religion and Salvation, among themselves: there is no need
of any greater at present. Nay, the cessation of those extraordinary, visible
and sensible Means, is an Argument of the meliority of our Condition. Blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, says our Savior, John 20.
29. The meaning is they are more blessed, i. e. their Faith is more excellent
and laudable, and they shall have a greater Reward. It is a more blessed and
eligible State to believe without such forcible and violent Means than with
them.

Other things might be here mentioned; as under the Law and before that time
there was scarce any thing done without the ministration of Angels, so in the
first times of the Gospel the Appearance of these glorious Spirits was common:
but after Christ's Ascension, and to this very time the Church is a Stranger to
this particular Dispensation, and is not to expect the Attestation or
Confirmation of any Truth in this Way. The Reason is, because the Scriptures of
the New Testament being now given us, that former way of Revelation, which was
a Sign of an imperfect and weak State, now ceases. There is no need of these
Divine Admonitors, seeing we have the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles
which are a certain standing Rule, and an infallible Direction to us. And in
several other particulars (if it were requisite) it might be showed that the
State of Religion is altered and improved since our Savior's time, and the
times after the Apostles.

And now in the close of this Head, we cannot but take notice of the Usefulness
and Necessity of attending to what has been suggested concerning the different
Administrations of Religion, and particularly of the Christian. We cannot frame
right thoughts concerning the Nature and Model of it, unless we carefully
observe the several Degrees and various Modifications of it before mentioned:
for tho there be the same general Dispensation, yet there is an Alteration as
to the particular Scenes of it. That which we are under at present differs much
from those which were in the first and early Ages of Christianism: and
therefore it is unreasonable to require now the very same things in the Church
of Christ that were then. There are some sober and well meaning Persons that,
attending not to this, persuade themselves that there ought to be as to every
particular the same Face of Administrations at present that there was at first,
and thence they look to the primitive State of the Church, and examine every
thing by that. But this is not right, for there has been a Change of things in
the Christian Church: and this Change was by the particular Superintendency and
Disposal of the Divine Providence and supreme Director. Hence it is that we are
not to expect that all things should be now as they were in the Beginning, God
himself having been pleased to alter the Dispensation in part. Let us then
remember the particular Division of the Economy we are under, and let us be
concerned to do what is fitting and proper to it: and thereby we shall help to
promote and hasten the next and better one, which I am now to speak of.

CHAP. XIX.
That Christianity shall arrive to Manhood or Full Age, is proved by several
Arguments, 1. God's Method in the World. 2. The Low ebb of Christianity
hitherto. 3. The number of those that perish. 4. The gradual Improvement of all
Arts and Sciences. The several Objections concerning the Decay and Senescency
of the World, made use of by Jewish, Pagan and Christian Writers, fully
answered. That the World decaies not as to Learning and Arts, is made good from
the Improvements of Navigation, the Inventions of Gunpowder and Guns, of
Printing, of Clocks and Watches, the preparing of Sugar, the Advances in
Anatomy and Physic, Astronomy, Arithmetic, Chemistry, Mechanics, the Style
of Writers. It is congruous to the Divine Providence and Wisdom that Religion
also should have its Improvements, as well as Arts and Sciences, and
accordingly it has been greatly advanced and increased by the Reformation.
From the Increase it has had already, we may gather that there will be farther
Accessions afterward. The virile and complete State of the Christian Church
proved from several places of Scripture, Mat. 24. 3. and 19. 28. Acts 3. 21.
Romans 8. 19. 20. Heb. 2. 5. and 9. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 8. From those
diverse Texts that we meet with in the Old Tastament which make mention of the
Kingdom and Reigning of the Messiah. A five-fold acception of the Kingdom of
Christ in the New Testament. The 1 Cor. 15. 25. urged. The Millenary Reign. The
rise of the Ancient Opinions about it. It is proved that Christ shall not
Personally reign upon Earth. The deceased Saints shall not rise again to reign
with him here. What is meant by the Souls of them that were beheaded for the
Witness of Jesus. What is to be understood by their living and reigning with
Christ. Two late Writers take it in a literal Sense, but without any ground.
Who are the rest of the Dead that lived not again. What are the first and
second Resurrection. The Reign of Christ a thousand Years is to be upon Earth.
By a thousand Years we are to understand a certain and definite Number. Some
Opinions concerning the Beginning and End of the thousand Years refuted. Mr.
Brightman's odd Fancy rejected. We have had some Forerunners and previous
Pledges of the millenary Kingdom. Mr. Medes's Opinion, which joins Christ's
Reign and the Day of Judgment together, considered.

THe ^^ird and most eminent Part of the Evangelical Economy, is that which I
called the Manhood or full Age of the Christian Church. Before I enter upon the
Description of this, I will give you some account of the Truth and Reality of
such a State; by showing that Christianity shall arrive to a greater Height
and Perfection than it is at present. It is very observable what one of the
Ancient Writers, who was a great Judge of the Nature and Genius of Christianity,
says of this matter. Crescat igitur oportet, and multum vehementer^; proficiat
^am singulorum quam omnium, tam unius hominis quam totius Ecclesiae, atatum ac
seculorum gradibus, intelligentia scientia, ^apientia, Vincent. Livinens.
Commonitor. 1. adv. haeres. (...) 28.
The Understanding, Knowledge and Wisdom of single Persons, as well as of whole
^odies, of every individual as well as of Churches in general, shall hugely
increase, and be exceedingly advanced, according to the gradual Successions of
Times and Ages. But, as he explains himself, this Proficiency shall be in the
same kind, in the same Persuasions, in the same Sense and Judgment, so that the
Christian Faith shall still remain the same as to its Substance, tho it shall
be much better explained and known than it is no^. And he uses the same
comparison that I have expres'd this matter by, for he distinguishes between
the younger and the riper Years of Christianity: he holds the former to be the
first Ages of the Gospel, the latter those that succeed. And yet as it is in
the growth of human Bodies, tho the Strength and Stature of them be altered,
yet the same Nature and Persons remain in the mature Years that were before: so
it is here, says he, Christianity is consolidated by Years, it is enlarged by
Time, it is sublimed by Age, but still it continues incorrupt and entire. And
afterward, cap. 29. It is ^itting, says he, that the heavenly Philosophy (for
so he styles the Christian Religion) which was sowed in the Church by the
primitive Fathers, should afterward grow up, flourish and be cultivated by the
Industry of their Sons, that by process of time it should become more polished,
but yet that it should retain the same Plenitude, Property and Integrity, that
it had as to its Substance at first. Thus that excellent Writer. And I was very
glad to find my Notion of the last Time* confirmed by a Person of so much
Judgment and Sagacity, and of so great Repute in the Christian Church. The Sum
of what he says is, that Christianity shall be improved by succession of Time,
and at last this Beauty shall receive its finishing stroke.

Now this I will endeavor to make good from Reason and Scripture. It is
reasonable to believe that there shall be a better State of Religion, because
this is founded on the constant Method of God in the World. We find that it is
his Way and Course to proceed in a gradual manner, and that not only in the
things of Nature (as at the Creation of all ranks of Beings) but in those of
Religion, as I have showed in the several Stages of it since it began.
Wherefore it is reasonable to conclude that it will be thus in Christianity,
that as it has had already its different Steps, Measures and Gradations, so
there is a greater yet to come, and that it shall arrive to the height of its
Glory in this World.

Again, it is reasonable to believe that great things are to come, because so
little is done hitherto. The unbelieving part of the World is very vast and
large. The greatest Kingdoms of the Earth are those of the Tartars, the
Indians, the Chinoise, the Persians, the Turks, all which are Strangers to the
Religion of Jesus. Divide the World into three Parts, and it will appear that
two of them are inhabited even by professed Pagans. Or, if we divide it into
six parts, we shall find that five of them at this day know not Christ, but are
either Idolatrous Pagans, (which are the greatest number) or Jews, or
Mahometans. And of the sixth Part, how few of those that outwardly make
Profession of Christ have true Faith, and deserve the Name of Christians?
Popery (which can scarcely be reckoned as a part of Christianity) has spread
it self through the most flourishing Kingdoms in E^rope, and has got footing
in Asia, and is not wholly a stranger in some parts of Africa, and has found
its way even into America. Among the Churches which disown Popery, some of them
are grossly ignorant, erroneous, and superstitious, as the Muscovian, Abyssine
and Greek Churches generally. And even among the Reformed Churches what
Divisions and Dissentions, what unchristian Feuds and Animosities are there?
What variety of Opinions is there amongst them? How unsettled are they in their
Notions and Apprehensions? How little of the true Virtue of Religion and Power
of God^iness is to be observed among them? How is the Satanical Kingdom kept up
and maintained every where? How industriously is it recruited and established?

Whereas Christians should live better than all the World beside, it is sad and
deplorable that their Words and Actions bid de^iance to every thing which
appertains to so Sacred and Honorable a Title. They profess the best Religion
in the World, and do things that are the worst. Some that bear this venerable
Name are as wicked and pro^ligate as any other sort of Men upon Earth: the
gros^est Enormities of Barbarians are acted by them. It is too apparent a Truth
that many who go under the Name of Christians conspire against the Religion
which Christ has set up in the World, as well as Jews, Turks and Pagans. In
fine, look where you will, and you will have cause to say, how short is
Christianity of its full Arcomplishment? What slender effects are there of it
in the Lives and Manners of Men? How little Progress has it made in so many
Ages? How narrow is its Kingdom? How ineffectual are its Laws in most places?

Whence it is rational to infer that there must be some greater Work effected
both in the Kingdoms of the World which have no notice of Christ and the the
Christian Faith, and also in that part of the World which is already Christian.
A farther O^c^nomy, or rather a farther Exaltation of this Evangelical Economy
which we are under is to be (...) hoped for. We should be tempted to think
(...) God's Providence, if there be no more to be done, if Christianity attains
not to a greater height than hitherto it has.

It is a very surprising and amazing Problem (abstracting from the di^ine
Destinies concerning it, and the Predictions of it in the Holy Writings) that
(...) Kingdom of Satan in all Ages of the World (...) greater numbers of
Subjects than that of Christ. It ^^ems very harsh and dismal that so many
should perish, that among Heathe^s, Jews, Mahom^tans, and even Christians,
Satan should have such a Ha^ve^t. But now this is soon answered by what I have
suggested: this which I o^fer is a very clear and ea^ie solution of the
Difficulty, for there will be mo^e Saints in the space of the thousand Years
which I shall afterward describe, than there were wicked and impenitent
Sinners in all the other thous^^ds (...) preceded this Dispensation. There will
be such a (...) of general Conversion and universal Sanctity through all the
Regions of the World, that the number of the saved shall at last surpass that
of the damned. This will plainly appear from what I shall propound in the
s^quel of this Discourse, and it will give us a fair and comfortable Idea of
the Divine Philanthropy, it will let us see that the Scales of Providence hang
even, it will clear up the dark Proceedings of Heaven, and fully satisfy u^
about the Wisdom of God in the Conduct of the World.

Another Argument that I shall make use of shall be from the gradual
Improvement of all Arts and Sciences in the World. It was well noted by one of
the Ancients, and that with reference to the Dispensations of Religion, that
Cyril Alex. cont. Julian. l. 4.
the commencement of Sciences is defective and im^^rfect, but by little and
gradual Additions they come at last to their complete pitch. Nothing is more
observable than that Learning has had its noble Accessions in the several
successive Generations of Mankind. Which was foretold by Seneca long ago, who,
speaking of the Ph^nomena of Comets, and the like Philosophical Disquisitions,
prophetically utters these words, Veniet autem tempus quo i^^a quae nunc latent
in lucem diesextrahat, and longioris ^vi diligentia: veniet tempus quo posteri
nostri tam ap^rta nos nescisse mirentur. Not. Quaest.
The time shall come when a brighter Day, and the Industry of a farther Age
shall bring to light those things that now lie hid in darkness. The time will
come when our Posterity shall wonder, that we were ignorant of things, which
were so plain and intelligible. This Prediction is now fulfilled; we have a
clear Discovery of many Secrets which were kept from former Ages; we have fresh
Experiments by which the Stock of Notions is greatly improved and advanced.
Diligent Researches at home, and Travels into remote Countries have produced
new Observations and Remarks, unheard of Discoveries and Inventions. Thus we
surpass all the times that have been before us; and it is highly probable that
those that succeed, will far surpass these in all manner of human Literature.
And why a proportionable Improvement in Divine Knowledge, and in Moral and
Christian Endowments may not be expected, I confess I don't understand. Can
there be any Reason given why God should not prosper Religion as well as Arts?
Why we may not look for increase of knowledge in the Church, as well as in
matte^s that relate only to Nature? Why there may not be a Perfection of
Understanding in the one, as well as in the other?

I am sensible that it will be said here, (and that with Truth) that the daily
decay of the World as to intellectual and moral qualities, is believed and held
by some very great Men; yea, they tell us that the natural Frame and
Constitution of it wax old. It is certain that the Jews had this apprehension,
2 E^d. 4. 10.
The World has lost its Youth, and the times begin to wax old. And again, ver.
17.
The World shall be weaker through Age. The Hebrew Doctors and Rabbis cry out
that the Generations grow worse every Day, and Knowledge is more and more
decreased. And what a vast difference they make between the Ancients and
Moderns may be seen in another Proverbial Saying, In Joma.
One mail of our Forefather's Fingers, is better than the main Body of them
that come after them. And we may learn from another Adage of theirs, how
exceedingly they prefer the former days before the latter; The Heart of our
Predecessors (say they) was like the Gate of the Outward Court in amplitude,
but the Heart of their Successors is like the Gate of the Temple, which was far
less: but ours is like the eye of a Needle, least of all. And several Melior
est racematio veterum vindemi^ recentiorum. Elegantior est Sermo familiaris
Patrum quam Lex ^iliorum. Prisci fuerunt filii Regum, nos sumus filii
plebeiorum, aut si presci fueru^t filii plebeiorum, nos sumus plane instar
asinorum. Shab.
other Sayings they have to this purpose, that the World is impaired and grows
worse and worse; and that the further we are removed from the beginning, the
more we decline. But who knows not that has conversed with these Gentlemen,
that they are very fanciful and capricious, and that they either out of
prejudice or discontent pronounce what they please of any thing? so that their
approbation or dislike is not to be a Standard to any Man's thoughts and
sentiments. And as to the Texts before cited, they refer to the Iweish State,
which is foretold to be mean and low, and running to decay, and therefore no
general Judgment can be made thence.

Among some of the Pagans likewise there was this Notion, that the World was
decaying as to Men and Manners.

Horat. l. 3. Ode 6.
Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
AEtas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
And they particularly alledg the Stature of Men to confirm their Opinion: thus
Lucretius, Iamque ade^ fracta est ^tas, eff^tque tellus,
Vix animalia parvacreat, qu^ cuncta creav^t
S^cla, deditque f^r arum ingentia corpora partu.


According to him all Animals, as well as Man himself, were at first formed out
of their Mother Earth, but since that time the procreative Virtue of the Earth
is worn out, and the kindly heat and moisture are gone, and Nature is grown
feeble, and therefore Men and other Creatures have not that bulk and size,
which they were famed for in the days of yore. So Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
Pliny the Naturalist had a Conceit of the Senescency of the World, and the
declension of Nature, and he instances in the Stature of Men. The same does
Aulus Gellius, and complains of the Nunc qua^i jam mundo senescente rerum
ataque hominum decrementa sunt. Noct. At. l. 3. c. 10.
Decrescency and Wearing away of Things and Men. This was founded on what they
had heard or read concerning Giants heretofore, the notice of whom might be
derived to them not only from their own Authors, but from the Sacred Writings,
which mention Og King of Bashan, and Goliath of Gath, and the Zummim, Zanzummim,
Anakim, Emim, who were of a vast Procerity. Whence they gather that the World
is decayed, because we see no such People now adays.

But such consequences are easily silenced, if we consider first that some of
their own Authors are of little Credit or Repute, and many reports of Giants
are Poetical Inventions. So if you will believe Geoffery of Monmouth, and some
other fabulous Writers, Albion (now called Britain, the Isle which we inhabit)
was kept only by a Remnant of Giants. Secondly, those Writers that we can
depend upon, especially the Sacred Penmen, tho they assure us that there were
such big and tall Men, yet they represent it as a very rare and uncommon thing;
they give us to understand that the number of those huge Persons was very
small; whence we gather that tho there were none such now in being, it does not
alter the case of the World considerably. But thirdly, it appears that since
those times spoken of by ancient Historians there have been, and even at this
time are some of that large ^ize. Modern Travelers of good esteem and credit
ascertain us that there are Giants in some particular Countries; which
overthrows the vain Conceit of those that found the Decay of the World on a
supposal that none but the former Ages afforded Gigantick Folks. But the truth
of the matter is this, that tho Countries differ as to their size of Men, nay
tho some are in the same Country of a large, others of a lesser Proportion, yet
the Stature of Men was not generally higher and bigger heretofore than it is
now. All People are for the most part of the same height and breadth that they
were three thousand Years ago and upwards, as is demonstrated by Doctor
Hackwill and others, from the Vrns and Rings and several other Antiquities,
which have been derived to after-Ages. There is no Decay then as to this.

I might observe further, that some of the Christian Persuasion, as well as
Jews and Pagans, have asserted and defended Nature's universal Decay. Some of
the Ancient Writers of the Church have inclined this way, but Cyprian is very
positive, Illud primo loco scire debes senuisse jam mundum, non illis viribus
stare quibus pri^s steterat, nec vigore and robore ^o pravalere qu^ antea
praevalebat. Epist. ad Demetrian.
You must know this in the first place, says he, that the World is now arrived
to its old Age, it has not that force and virtue, that strength and vigor
which it was endued with heretofore. And he goes on to instance both in natu^^^
and moral things, wherein he thinks this Def^ction and Failure may be seen.
Among some of the Moderns this Sentiment has prevailed, and I will mention
only two of them, and they are of our own Nation. The first is that learned
Knight who wrote the History of the World; he there, speaking of the Giants in
former times, and proving that there were really Men of that Statu^e, adds on
this occasion, that Sr. W. Raleigh's H. W. chap. 5. sect. 8.
the great Age of Time has in^^ebled, and almost wore out the virtue of all
things. We now live in the withor'd Quarter, and Winter of the World. The other
Great Man that has lately espoused this Opinion, is the Learned Au^hor of the
Essay on Ancient and Modern Learning, where he often declares that the World of
Learning grows old, and that there is a Decay as to Men and Arts, and brave
Accomplishments; and accordingly he laments (but without tears) our Ignorance,
and our faint Imitation of the Ancients, and our being but an imperfect Copy of
that exact Original. These Gentlemen fancy that all things were best at first,
and that since all are grown worse and worse. It is something like that
Philosophic Dream of a witty Author, that there was at first nothing but Suns
and Stars, that there were no Earths or Planets; particularly that this Earth
which we inhabit, was once a glorious Sun, but in process of time degenerated,
and became what it is, a dull opake Body. After the same rate do these Persons
talk, they tell us that Knowledge and Arts were once very bright and gay, and
shone forth with a Luster worthy of Men's eyes, but in these latter times they
are overrun with scum and crust, and are miserably absorpt into Darkness and
Barbarity. To raise the Reputation of the past Ages, and to depress that of the
present, they cry out that we live in the dregs of Time, in Natures Declension,
in the old Age and Dotage of the World. All was great and brave heretofore, but
now every thing is dwarfish, mean and dwindling. Our Forefathers have exhausted
all the generous Wine, and left us nothing but Lees.

But we may justly think that such Apprehensions as these favor more of
Prejudice than Truth, and are the Product of Imagination rather than Reason.
For let a Man, free from the steams of Melancholy and the Tincture of
Prepossession, consider things impartially, and he will find that there is no
ground for such Complaints. Indeed as to the Age of Men there is some
variation, for they lived much longer before the Flood than they do now: but
one would think this is sufficient, that People live as long now as they did in
King David's time, (for he confines Man's Life to seventy or eighty Years) and
some Men's days are extended to a greater length. Wherefore they that maintain
the Hypothesis of Nature's general Declining, must hold that the World grew old
betimes, that it was aged in its Youth, which a Rational Man would think harsh
and absurd. And besides, if it began to wax old so soon, it would have been
quite decrepit before this time, it would have been worn off its legs, and
wholly extinct. But seeing the contrary is evident, we have Reason to think
that the World does not decline in the least as to its natural Virtue, tho
there is, by the Will of Heaven, some defalcation of Men's years. Nay, if Men
can do as great, or greater things now in a shorter time than they did
heretofore, this argues they are rather more vigorous now than in past Ages. If
any object the Loss of some little Arts and Inventions which were known
heretofore; there cannot be a more satisfactory Answer than this, that when any
Invention has been sunk, another of as great usefulness has succeeded in its
place. Pancirol tells us of some things found, as well as of others lost. And
we can inform our selves that tho some Discoveries have been unhappily forgot
or imbezled, yet, for a compensation, there have been fresh ones that have
proved serviceable to the Life of Man. And as for the latter Ages of the World,
they have abounded in useful Inventions, which were wholly unknown to former
times; and they have marvelously improved those Arts which were but then
imperfectly begun.

If I spend some time in offering to the curious and inquisitive Reader a short
Demonstration of this, I hope it will be excused as a pardonable Digr^ssion; if
it shall be thought to be a Digression when it is so serviceable and proper to
my present, purpose, viz. To show that there is a great probability of the
World's increasing in Knowledge hereafter, because we see it has done so
already. The thing then I undertake now is, to show that Learning has been
improved in these latter Ages of the World, and that there is no Decay as to
ingenious Inventions. Even that very Author before mentioned, who is the latest
Defender of the contrary Opinion, is himself a Confutation of it. Whilst he
argues on the other side, he pleads for us; for his own vast Learning,
flourishing Parts, and all kinds of excellent Accomplishments disprove the
Doctrine of the World's Defection. Whilst he defames the Knowledge of the Age he
lives in, he is one of the greatest Glories of it himself. And if he had been
pleased to have looked off of himself, and to have taken a view abroad, he
would have found that as the former Times had their Discove^ies, so the latter
have not wanted theirs which surpass them: and moreover, we have added others
of a different Nature. It cannot be denied that we have been so far from coming
short of the foregoing Times in all respects, that we have palpably exceeded
them. And because Solomon tells us that Prove. 8. 12.
Wisdom finds out the knowledge of witty Inventions, it will not be unbecoming
the Sons of Wisdom to recount some of them, especially when this comes so
directly in our way; to show that the World decays not as to Knowledge and
ingenious Discoveries, and therefore we may rationally thence hope that Divine
Learning (which is the choicest of all kinds of Knowledge) will be yet further
advanced.

I will begin with the Sea-Compass, and the applying the wonderful Virtues and
Use of the Loadstone to Navigation, which was not the Attainment of the
Ancients; for it was not invented, at least not practiced till about three
hundred Years ago. Albert. Magn. Nich. Fuller. Miscell. l. 4. c. 19.
Some have thought that it was known to the Tyrians of old, who were great
Seamen, but I don't see that they give any Proof of it. Others have thought
that this was a very ancient Invention, because by the help of this King
Solomon's Navy sailed to the Indies, (some say the East, others the West:) but
there is no foundation for this surmise, for I have on Of the Excellency and
Perfection of the Holy Scriptures. Chap. 4. p. 195.
another occasion made it good that some part of Afric was that Ophir which is
mentioned in the Sacred History. They knew no great Sea but the Mediterranean,
they traveled no further than Hercules's Pillars, or the Streights of
Gibraltar: and this they might perform without the Invention of the Mariners
Compass, for they might coast along by the Shores. Some tell us the Chinois had
the use of the Loadstone and Compass for Navigation about two thousand Years
ago; but this has been proved to be false Antiquity, and it is much like their
having Writers among them antienter than Moses, as Deatate Mundi.
Isaac Vossius reports. If I should grant what some assert, that the Chinois
long ago knew the virtue of the Loadstone so far as it directed them to the
North Point, and that the Saracens received this Secret from them a very
considerable while ago, yet it is certain that the Europeans came not to the
knowledge of it till about three Centuries since: and it is as certain that by
this excellent Invention Shipping and Navigation have been improved to a
wonder; and they were never so before in any Countries of the World. This
Mystery was found out and managed, and the Compass contrived by Flavio Goia of
Amalphis in Naples about the Year of our Lord 1470.

A most admirable Invention! of great use and advantage to Mankind: for hereby
they are enabled to visit the spacious World, and to be acquainted with the
Customs and Manners of foreign Cnuntries, and by that Means to furnish
themselves with useful Observations for the cultivating their Minds, the
augmenting of Sciences, and even making the whole Universe some ways
serviceable to every particular part of it. Hereby Trade and Commerce are
infinitely increased, all kind of Traffic and Merchandising is advanced, the
Riches and Treasures of the most remote parts of the World are brought home to
us, and that Wealth which others knew not what to do with, we convert to proper
uses, and benefit Mankind by it. Yea, Religion as well as Trade is promoted by
this Art: for hereby we not only come to be acquainted with God's Works over
the whole face of the Earth, which administers abundant matter of Praising and
extolling the Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Mercy; but by the help of this
Invention we have the Advantage of propagating the Gospel, and spreading the
saving Knowledge of the True God, and of his Son Jesus Christ throughout the
World. The Improvement of Navigation may be serviceable to this great and
excellent End; yea, we hope it is partly so already, the New Voyages and
Discoveries being a happy Introduction to the Conversion of the Gentiles. By
means of this Art a New World has been the Invention of the latter Age: for
tho the Ancients were not altogether ignorant that there was such a Country
Westward as this, witness the vast Isle Atlantis which the Egyptian Priests
Plat. in Timaeo.
told King Solon of, and that vast Island which the Phoenicians had some notice
of on the West of Africa: yet these were but faint Attempts and Essays. The
Discovery of the Western World to real purpose, and the being actually
acquainted with it, and taking possession of it, were reserved to be the
Achievement of these latter times, and accordingly it was first discovered in
the Year of our Lord 1492. by Christopher Columbus a Native of the Republic of
Genoua. Tho, to speak the exact Truth, it was (as De la Vega rightly informs
us) one Sanchez, a Native of Helva in Spain, that first found out those
Regions. He used to trade in a small Vessel from Spain to the Canaries, but it
happened that by a long and tedious Tempest he was driven upon those Western
Countries: and at his Return he gave Colon or Columbus Information of what he
had seen, and died soon after he had done so of a Disease that he had got by
his dangerous Voyage. Afterward, A mericus Vesputius, a Florentine, made a
farther Discovery, A. D. 1497. and gave the Country the Name that it now bears.
Ferdinando Magellan found out the South Limits, A. D. 1520. Drake and Candish
added more: Furbisher and Davis the East Side of it: Willoughby and Buroughs
made enquiry into the West. And by the whole, unspeakable Advantages have
accrued to Mankind, the World is made open and wide, its State and Condition
are well known, Commerce and Traffic are increased, Religion is propagated,
and the Name and Worship of Jesus are carried to those remote parts which knew
nothing of them before. Thus what has been already found out is very wonderful
and surprising, and we may hope to be acquainted in due time with what is more
so; we may expect daily to hear of great discoveries about that vast Continent
toward the Antarctick Pole.

From Places I proceed to Things, and here the modern Inventions are very
considerable. The first which I will take notice of is that of Gunpowder and
Great Guns: which tho See Isaac Voss. de Artib. Sinarum.
some have thought was known in China 1500 Years ago, and See Isaac Voss. de
Artib. Sinarum.
others have asserted that the City of the Oxidrakes in India was acquainted
with it, yet there is little ground for any such suggestions. It is more
probable that it was wholly a late Discovery, and that the use of Gunpowder
(the Ingredients of which are Brimstone, and pulverized Charcoal, from whence
it takes fire, and SaltPetre, whence come the force and noise) was found out
about 300 Years since by Barthold Swartz a German Monk. Some have fancied that
this is meant by Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone, Rev. 9. 17. which is foretold to
be used in the Turkish Armies; for by the shooting of Gunpowder the Air is as
it were set on fire, and becomes of a Iacinth color (for that also is
mentioned there) by reason of the blew Smoke, and at the same time the scent of
Sulphur is smelt: wherefore Fire-Guns and Pistols are thought to be meant, and
the place is to be understood concerning these latter times, wherein that
Invention has been used. And by the by, here it might be observed that it is a
kind of an Imitation of Thunder, and that since the Invention of it the Nature
of that Meteor (which has those two properties, Light and Noise) is easily
explained; as on the contrary an inquisitive Person has well noted that Dr.
Brown's Vulg. Err. Book 2. cap. 5.
one Reason why the Ancients were so imperfect in the Doctrine of fiery Meteors
was their Ignorance of Gunpowder and Fireworks, which best discover the Causes
of many Phenomenon thereof. Tho Gunpowder and Guns seem to be Instruments of
greater Cruelty than those which were formerly used in War, yet if we consider
things aright, we shall not find them to be so. There are not so many killed in
Battle since these were made use of as there were of old. This you may know by
the vast Numbers that were brought into the Field then: and the Number of those
that were ^lain was proportionable. They went out to Battle with almost
incredible Multitudes heretofore. King Jeroboam brought eight hundred thousand
chosen Men into the Field, mighty Men of War, 2 Chronicles. 13. 3. And King Abijah
who fought with Jeroboam slew five hundred thousand of these Men, ver. 17. You
read in no Story of such a ^laughter in one Field. The Ethiopians brought a
thousand Thousand against King Asa's Army, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. Iehoshaphat had
eleven hundred and threescore thousand in Arms, 2 Chronicles. 18. 14. Darius's Army
which came to Battle in the Fields of Marathon consisted of six hundred
thousand. But Xerxes's Army which he brought into Greece exceeded all that ever
we read of, for it consisted of two Millions of fighting Men. But Herodotus
makes the number somewhat less, Seventeen hundred thousand on Land, and two
hundred and fifty thousand at Sea. And we read of very great numbers in the
Ages afterward. Tamerlan the Scythian came with nine hundred, some say with
twelve hundred thousand Men into the Field against Bajazet the Grand Seignior,
who had five hundred thousand on his side; and in this Battle the fortunate
Tartar took not only Bajazet, but slew two hundred thousand of his Soldiers.
But now there is no need of such vast numbers of Men as heretofore: and the
numbers of the slain are not as they used to be of old. We have a more
compendious and speedy, a more thrifty and frugal way of killing our Enemies
than by Bows and Arrows, by Javelins, Battel-axes and Speers. The modern
Mortar-pieces will end the Quarrel sooner than the Roman Battering Rams. A
Tempest of Bombs and Grenades will dispatch the Business more easily than a
Shower of Arrows. A Broad Side will do quicker Execution on a Navy than
Archimedes's Burning-Glasses did. Yea, we have now the advantage by our late
Invention of Gunpowder either to beat down or blow up our Enemies. Seeing then
there will be in this World, till it be better, occasion of War, and
Controversies cannot be decided but by Blood, it is well that there is now a
way whereby Victory may be got with less expense of Time and Blood than
formerly: which is the Fruit of this Invention of Gunpowder and the Engines
that convey and discharge it. Which things if Wencestaus the German Emper^ur
had foreseen, he would not have caused the ingenious Inventer (as it is said)
to be executed. We might add here that the Military Art is in^initely improved
as to Sieges, Fortifications, etc. which are entirely the discovery of these
latter times.

So was the Art of Printing, of which I will speak next. For I attend not to
what Maffaei Hist. Indic. l. 6. Vossius de Artib. Sinar.
some have suggested that this Art was known to the Chinois very near two
thousand Years ago. That which those People had attained to then (tho it was of
great use to them) was inferior to this Typographick Skill, and is not to be
the compared with it. Germany and Holland, in the former Mentz, in the latter
Harlem, contend for the honor of this Invention. John Guttenberg of the first,
and one Koster of the second lay claim to it, but the former generally carries
it. Or if this latter first invented it (as some say he did about A. D. 1430)
the other was the first that published and practiced it in the Year 1440.
Others ascribe it to John Faustus, a Goldsmith in Mentz, others to John
Mentell, and others to Lawrence Ienson. But Guttenberg is the most celebrated;
he was born in Stratsburg, and was a Soldier by Profession and Employment: yet
it pleased God that this Martial Man was instrumental in discovering this
peaceable Art, and at that time when it was so seasonable: for Learning then
ran very low, and was like to decay yet more and more. All Books being in
Manuscript, and the Monks and Friars having the keeping and ordering of them,
what could be expected but that they should be corrupted and depraved, as
without doubt they had been in great measure already? For before the Invention
of Printing, Books used to be transcribed, and the Transcribers sometimes out
of mere carelessness and negligence, at other times out of Ignorance, yea
sometimes out of Wilfulness left out, or added something to the Originals. They
writ not what they found, but what they understood, and whilst they undertook
to mend other Men's Errors they showed their own. And hence we have had
innumerable Errors crept into the Writings of the Fathers, especially since the
Controversies were started relating to the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, or to
the Points of Popery. Those who Patronized Arianism corrupted several Passages
in Books, and those who excessively doted on the Roman Church, and its
Universal Bishop, and the Doctrines and Ceremonies maintained by it, did the
same by altering, mangling, transposing, inserting, or leaving out some Things
in the Copies they transcribed. And if you consider the Variety of MSS. and how
many Times, during the Space of several Centuries of Years, they were Copied
out, you must needs conclude, that either by Design or Negligence many Errors
and Corruptions crept into the Text, and Books varied very much from what they
were at first. This was the necessary and unavoidable Effect of Transcribing of
Authors, and Copying out their MSS. which is now most happily taken away by the
Press. Now, after a little Care taken at first in Correcting and Revising, many
Thousands of Copies are dispatched, and sent into the Wo^ld, free from Mistakes
and Corruptions, and that in a lasser Time than One of those Copies could have
been Transcribed. The Seasonableness of this Noble Invention may be discovered
from this, That it was so unspeakably Serviceable to the bringing on the
Ref^rmation: For by the Benefit of Printing the World was blessed with the
excellent Labors of Learned and Pious Men who lived in that Time; and thus by
this means the Popish Ignorance was laid open, the Errors and Impieties of the
Church of Rome were exposed to view, and whereas before Learning was locked up
in Cloisters, now it spread it self over all Europe, and the Truth of the
Gospel was Propagated almost to a Miracle. Of such great use was this Art,
which has been Improved of late to a Wonder: For the first Inventors are not
the most exact, they that come afterward far excel them; for so it is
oftentimes, they that are good at Inventing, are not so happy in Improving as
others: Thus we see in the Country where Printing was first found out, there is
the worst Printing, as well as the worst Paper. But these Latter Times have
extremely Cultivated both, for which we have great reason at this day to Bless
God. In short, Learning and Victory are now soon acquired, since Printing and
Guns have been found out.

That we may the better manage our Studies and all other Business and Affairs,
by Timing them rightly, Clocks and Watches were invented. For though Sun-dials
and Hour-glasses, whether made with running of Water or Sand, were of great
Antiquity, yet these Automatous Organs, or Horologies by Wheels were lately
found out, maugre the groundless fancy of those Painters who Picture St. Ierom,
who lived in the 4th Century, with a Clock by him. We are indebted to the
excellent Mechanic Wit of the Germans for this useful Contrivance, whereby the
Time is so Artificially divided that we can know the just and precise Seasons
of beginning or leaving off our Work, of what Nature soever it is; and the
public notice of the particular divisions of Time is imparted to the
Eyesight, and at a greater distance communicated to the Ear.

If I would go abroad and observe what has been found out for the Use and
Benefit of Man's Life, I might take notice of that so Pleasant and Profitable
Commodity of Sugar. For whereas former Ages knew the use of Honey only as the
Universal Sweetner, there is now discovered a more convenient one, by which a
great part of our Food is made more delicious, and many things in Physic are
prepared, and by which the whole work of Confectioning is maintained. It is
true Not. Hist. l. 12. c. 8.
Pliny speaks of Sugar (Saccharum) as it was taken out of the Canes, and says
it was used in Medicines, but it was rare, and in small quantities, and in
Galen's time it was scarcely known, and then it was used raw and indigested,
and was unserviceable to many Purposes. But at last this useful Condiment was
Boiled and Baked, Dried and Condensed, and made up as now we see it. This is an
Invention not above 200 Years old. And the first Confectioner^ or Comfit-maker
in England was one Baltazar Zanches a Spaniard, A. D. 1596. I might mention the
many Ingenious and Artificial Contrivances about Planting, Agriculture,
ordering of Bees, Architecture, Painting, which last is in some respects much
better and more exact than it was of old, as Monsie^r Perault has showed. And
in several other things the Moderns have made great and worthy Improvements,
and very considerable Additions to what was before.

But I will confine my self to some of the Arts and Sciences, and briefly
recount some of the Improvements which have been made in them. To begin with
Medicks, unto which Anatomy belongs, it is true, Pliny tells us that the
Egyptian Kings caused Dead Bodies to be cut up, to find out the Situation and
Structure of the Parts of Man's Body, and the Causes of Diseases. But Not.
Hist. I. 19. c. 5.
another tells us, that Hierophilus was the first that Diffected the Bodies o^
Men; he was Contemporary with Phalaris, and practiced this on Malefactors that
were sent to him out of the Prisons. Democritus Septingentos vivos exs^cuit, ut
naturam scrutaretur. Tertulli^^. de Anim^ cap. 10.
of old used Dissections, by the same token that he was thought by the
Abderites to be made for doing so, i. e. for cutting up Cats and Dogs. But it
does not appear that he or Hippocrates, or Galen, or any of the Famed
Physicians opened Humane Bodies. But we have of late ventured to search
frequently into these as well as those of Brutes, and from both we have found
out several things worth our search. The Circulation of the Blood may justly
pass for a New Invention, even the Discovery of this Age; for though some (and
even a J. Smith M. D.
Physician too) have thought that Solomon meant this by the Wheel as the
Cistern, Eccl. 12. 6. Though Plato in his Timaeus seems to have had some
knowledge of this, according to others; and though a Isaac Vossi^s.
late Writer, before mentioned, affirms very confidently that the Chinese were
no Strangers to it above 4000 Years ago, yet we are not certain that the Wise
Man's Words are to be understood with reference to this thing; and Plato's
Words can much less be understood so; and that Relation concerning the People
of China (as well as their extravagant Computation) is disbelieved by most of
the Learned. Or say that this was not first found out by Dr. Harvey, yet if we
consider that he was the Person who so plainly Illustrated this matter, and set
down the true way and method of it, and clearly demonstrated how this Operation
in the Body is performed, and fully answered all the Arguments and Objections
which were brought against it, we may justly style him the first Inventor of
it. Not to speak of the Infusion or Injection of Blood into the Veins of
Animals, first used by Dr. Wren, which afterward was advanced into
Transfusion, and first practiced by Dr. Lower. I might mention several New
Passages and Conveyances in the Body lately found out, as the Valuae of the
Veins by Fabricius ab Aquapendente, the Lymphatick Vessels by Bartholine, the
Lacteal Veins (dispersed through the Mesentery) by Asellius, the Common
Receptacle of the Chyle (fastened to the Vertebr^ of the Back, a little above
the Reins) and the Lacteal Veins of the Breast, or the Ductus Thoracicus (which
go from the Receptaculum to the Subclavian Veins) found out by Pecquet. Glisson
has nobly searched into the Liver, Wharton into the Glandules, Willis has
discovered several things in the Brain. And what plenty of useful Inventions do
we meet with in the Writings of Sylvius, Bilsius, De Graeff, Diemerbroek,
Malpighius, Ves^ingius, Densingius, Steno, Highmore, etc. Indeed Physic and
Anatomy have had the greatest Improvements of late, of any Faculty whatsoever.
Medicks are exceedingly Cultivated, the Nature of Diseases is more narrowly
enquired into and understood, the Signs and Symptoms of them are daily more
manifested, and the Therapeutick part is infinitely more enlarged and advanced
by a mixing of Galenical and Chemical Medicines, by the vast variety of
Observations and Experiments, and by the Skill and Sagacity of those that have
lately labored in that Art; so that this Age is grown Famous for Great and
Wonderful Cures, and the Health and Long Life of Man are marvellously promoted.

In Astronomy there are New Discoveries also. The late Ages have been more
knowing in the Heavens than those that went before. Now we are acquainted with
the Suns Spots, i. e. the Filth and Scum which it sometimes contracts, the
Mountains and Shadows of the Moon, the Lunulae or Satellites of Jupiter,
mutually Eclipsing one another, and the Ansulae Saturni. So that whereas
heretofore there were but Seven Planets known, now Six more are added, 4. about
Jupiter, and 2. about Saturn. We have found Mercury and Venus to be Horned, and
to be subject to the other Aspects of the Moon. The Stars are grown into Suns
in our Days, for there are as many Suns as Fixed Lights, and there is on
difference between these and that Luminous Body which we call the Sun, but that
they are further off from us than this. There are New Hypotheses of the Heavens
and the Earth, and of the Rest and Motion of either; which if they be not
adjusted to exact Truth, yet serve to illustrate and better set forth the
Doctrine of the Celestial Bodies, and their various Phenomenon, and thereby to
lead us to admire the Wonders of the Creation, and to extol and praise the
Great and All-wise Contriver of this Mundane Fabric. Nor is Astronomy yet come
to its Zenith, to its Meridian: We on good Grounds expect that by the benefit
of the Optic Tubes and Telescopes, which are every day growing more perfect,
we shall penetrate farther into the Nature of the Heavenly Bodies, and have a
more complete insight into them. And it is not to be doubted that we shall in
time have a more correct Account of the Suns Course, and consequently a
Reformation of the Calender; and then that Complaint will cease that the
present Computation is not exactly agreeable to the Natural Motion of the Sun
or Earth.

Arithmetic is mightily advanced of late, for whereas heretofore it was
content to be Synthetick, now it is Analytick. Unto the Vulgar way of Numbering
is now added Algebra, and the Invention of Logarithm^s, and a great many other
Accessions, which were either not thought of before, or not explained and
brought into use and practice.

Chemistry is all New; there was no such thing known to the Generations of Old.
This Spagyrick Art, which was set on foot by Paracelsus and Helmont, and by
some other searching Heads, has had Prodigious Additions made to it lately.
The Alchymists Retort and Alembick never were furnished with such rare and
excellent Secrets as they are now; the Laboratories and Furnaces never afforded
the like Inventions. It is indeed a rough and violent way of Philosophizing, it
is an hectoring as it were of Nature, it is putting her upon the Rack, and on
the Fieny Trial, to make her confess what-she never did before. And truly she
has made a very ample Confession and Discovery, whereby the knowledge of
Natural Philosophy is much increased and imbellish'd, very Noble and Precious
Medicaments (consisting of Oils, Spirits, Tinctures, Salts, etc.) are produced,
and the Healthfulness of Men's Bodies, and their Longaevity are procured, and
the Almighty Creator thereby Exalted and Honored.

In Natural and Mechanic Philosophy, and all sorts of Mathematics who sees
not the vast Improvements that these latter times have blessed us with?
Mathematics among us of Old was thought to be Conjuration: Roger Bacon, a
Franciscan Friar of Oxford, was reputed a Necromancer, and accused of Magic to
Pope Clement the 4th. though his fault was only too great skill in Mathematical
Learning. They showed at Rome what Profound Philosophers they were when a
German Bishop was Condemned as a Heretic for holding there were Antipodes. It
appeared what regard they had to Anatomy when Excommunication was threatened to
those that Dissected Humane Corpse by Boniface the 8th. The dry and sapless
Disputes, of the Schools engrossed all Physiology was Nice and Speculative, and
Spent it self in Trivial and Childish things, but not it is grown Experimental
and Practical. Natural Philosophy is become Manly and Grave, and employs it
self in matters which may tend to real (...). Hence are these great Mechanic
Rareties, Optic and Dioptrick Glasses, ^icroscopes to see to Read the lesser
Print of Na^^re, ^hermometers to discover the unperceivable Variations in the
Heat or Coldness of the Air, Barometers to measure all the Degrees of Gravity
and Levity in that Element, and the Winds and Clouds, the Pneumatick Engine
which the Noble Inventer of it calls the Air-pump for the discovering of the
Spring of the Air, the way of taking the height of the Atmosph^re, and also a
great number of Inventions that relate to Traffic and Commerce, to all manner
of Trades and Occupations. In brief, all the Mechanical Artifices which we
have, and which tend to the Profit or Delight of Man's Life are in a manner
New, and are not the product of the older Times, but of these latter Ones.

I will observe further, that Writing, and the Style of Authors of all kinds,
are extremely improved of late. There is a choicer strain of Language, and a
better vain of Wit, than were heretofore known among Writers. For abating
Burlesque and Travestie (which are the great Corruption of our modern Poesy,
because by these idle, frothy, Mock-Poems, the most Grave and Serious Writers
among the Ancients are ridiculed, the majestic and lofty Genius of Poetry is
abused and perverted, and a vain and fantastic way of Writing is propagated
among us) abating, I say, this, there has been a great Reformation of the Pens
of Authors. They have agreed to lay aside those little trifling Things,
wherein a great deal of time was vainly spent. It is well known that Anagrams
were an old Piece of Wit, and were used by the Graecians as well as Latins. The
oldest Anagrams among the Greek Poets were made by Lycophron, who changed the
Name of his King Ptolemy, (...) into (...). This Ancient mode of being Witty,
seems to have been borrowed from the Hebrews; for the Transposition of Letters,
called by them Terumah, was part of their Cabbala: Thus Haadam, homo, is the
Metathesis of Adamah, terra; and (...) Noah, is the Transposition of (...)
Gratia, because he is said to find Favor, Genesis 6. 8. Acrosticks were another
laborious way of being Ingenious heretofore, but they were generally very sorry
and contemptible Things. And so were the Leonine and Serpentine Verses; the
Knack of them was, that every Word was the very same backward and forwards.
They had Verses in the Shape of a pair of Wings, an Egg, an Hatchet, etc. But
chiefly their Wit lay in Paranomasia's, or Jingling of Words; which we find
often among the Epigrammatists. Yea, the Grave and Serious Tully, disdains not
this way of Flash: Speaking of a very Silly Fellow that had cut his Hair close,
he says, Idcirco capite and superciliis semper est rasus, ne unum pilum boni
viri habere dicatur. And he Quibbles after this rate in diverse Places. St.
Augustine was a great Jingler, and Player upon Words, and delights in the
Cadencies of Syllables. And so among us, Puns and Clenches were Wit in the last
Age, yea, and they passed for such in Sermons. But now the Affectation of
Quibble, and Equivokes, is abandoned, and there are no Remains of it but among
old Nurses. Now there is a more Manly and Generous way of embellishing Men's
Styles; now there is a better Turn of Fancy, and such as will be Wit in all
Languages. And particularly as to the Poetic Wit and Fancy among us, these
have surmounted those of former Ages; for it may be observed here, that the
Copy proves perfecter than the Pattern. Though Spencer made Cowley a Poet, (for
the former's Poems being casually lighted upon by the latter, when he was a
Boy, called forth his Poetic Genius) yet Cowley has outdone Spencer, not only
in the choice of his Words, but in the quickness of his Dispatch. Nay, he has
outdone his Master Pindar, and (as one says) is more Pindarick than he. The
same is Remarkable concerning some other Poetic Wits, Imitation has strangely
improved, and the Scholar has exceeded the Master; and there are some now
alive, that may (without flattery) be said in some respects to exceed all that
went before them. Thus upon a free, unprejudiced, and impartial Examination, we
have found, that as to diverse laudable Acquisitions we go beyond our Ancestors;
for we have not only what they found out, but what we have added our selves,
which is much ^ore considerable. This is a sufficient Confutation of that
vulgar Error (as Dr. Hackwell, who opposes it, rightly styles it) that the
World waxes old, and is become eff^^te and barren, and decays in its
Intellectuals as well as Naturals. We see the contrary, the World is upon the
thriving Hand; it does not go back and decline, as to the Knowledge of the Arts
and Sciences, but is still impregnating, and is still teeming with them.

And shall we think that as to Religion only there is a Decay? There is no
Ground for such a Surmise. Shall Divinity, which is the great Art of Arts,
remain unimproved? Shall we think that all Knowledge, but that which is the
best of all, increases and prospers? No, we can prove the contrary; and thence
entertain Hopes of greater Increases yet to come. The First Christians (as has
been observed) did not understand some Parts of their Religion, and the Nature
of it, so well as they did afterward, or so well as it shall be understood.
They were not exact in Points, but Olim ^ides erat in vita magis quam in
Articulorum professione. Erasm. Epist.
Lived better than now. The Ancient Writers, such as Clement of Alexandria,
Origin, Athanasius, Ierom, Augustine, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ambrose, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and the rest, have done excellently toward the explaining of the
Holy Scriptures; but the Moderns, especially since the Reformation, have
wonderfully added to them. And yet the greatest Harvest of Truth is yet to
come; not for discovering any New Doctrines, but for explaining the Old ones,
and penetrating further into difficult Places of Scripture. Who sees not what a
vast difference there is between these and the former Times, in point of Divine
Knowledge? How little was there of it heretofore, among those who ought to have
had a large Stock of it? I mean the Clergy, whose Ignorance in the Holy
Scriptures, and in the Doctrines of Christian Theology was scandalous, and even
ridiculous. Indeed some of them were versed in School Divinity; but this was
for the most part so far from making them more knowing, in the Useful and
Practical Doctrines of Christianity, that it rather darkened and confounded
them. In the former Days of Popery, Hebrew and Greek, (the Languages in which
the Bible was wrote) were mere unintelligible Jargon, to the Generality of
Churchmen. And as for the People, their Ignorance and Blindness were yet
grosser, and they were not suffered to make any Enquiry into Religion. Then
that Politic Maxim prevailed, Keep Men in Ignorance, and thereby enslave them.
It was an unpardonable Crime for Men to think their own Thoughts, much more to
speak or write them. Ramus having published some new Notions of Logic, and
particularly against Aristotle, who was at that time in great Credit, was
murdered among the Calvinists in the Parisian Massacre. The poor Man was a
Martyr for Logic; it is no wonder then that so many were for Divinity. There
was no liberty for Scruples in those peremptory Times; for the Roman Doctors
cut out Men's Belief, and then forced it upon them. A strange kind of Casuists,
that solved all Controversies in Religion, as Alexander did the Gordian-Knot,
by the Sword, by mere Violence. Thus Men's Souls and Bodies were injured, the
former were blinded, the latter enslaved: They might be truly said to be bound
in Chains of Darkness.

But we, by the Divine Blessing, are freed from that Ignorance and Bondage;
which we owe to the Reformation, whereby that Darkness was dispelled, and that
Vassallage removed. And now we are no longer tied up in the dark, we both see
and walk, and we daily make progress in Divine Learning. An undeniable eviction
of which, are the Discourses and Writings of those of the Reformed Churches,
especially of Divines; for from these we may gather the vast Improvements in
Sacred Knowledge. They generally argue with close Reason, they talk great
Sense, they show a deep Insight into the Inspired Writings, they cloth their
Matter with fit Words, they use an intelligible and easy Method, they are happy
in applying of Divine Truths; in brief, their Notions are amended, and all the
important Doctrines of Christianity are more plainly and clearly delivered than
before. And the Peoples Knowledge is proportionable; they hear with Judgment,
they discourse with Understanding, they try the Spirits whether they be of God,
they are able to confute Gainsayers. In the Countries where Protestantism has
taken good Footing, there is scarce any difference between the Clergy and
Laity, in the knowledge of the Chief and Practical Points of our most Holy
Religion. These are understood by the inferior and most ordinary People, as
well as by Gentlemen, M^rchants, and Tradesmen; yea, the other Sex study, read,
and discourse of them. Thus humane Minds are enlightened, and enfranchised. The
Elastick Power is restored to them; they act without Restraint, and fill the
Earth with Knowledge and Truth.

Judge now, whether the World grows old, and decays, and is sunk into a
degenerate Posture. Say rather that it is much amended, and is like to be
improved yet further in future Times. For from what has been already, we may
infer what shall be afterward. We see Divine Knowledge and Learning have been
continually in the Increase, (allowing only for some Interruptions that were
violent, and lasted not long) and yet we are sensible they are not come to the
Full; whence therefore we reasonably conclude, that there are to be farther and
greater Augmentations in succeeding Ages. And where the Knowledge of Divine
Things prevails, there Religion will get sure Footing, and Virtue and Piety
will be powerfully advanced, and the Church edified and enlarged. These are the
Grounds I lay of that Expectation which I have of a more complete and improved
State of the Christian Church here on Earth, before the Conclusion of all
Things.

But because our Thoughts and Reasonings, concerning this matter may be shallow
and vain, or too daring and presumptuous, I will build my Hopes and Belief of
that more perfect State of Christianity on the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures. I grant that some are too forward to press Texts to this purpose;
they are wont to allege several Pl^ces in the Old and New Testament, which
have n^ relation to this Matter: Especially those that (...) for Christ's
Personal Reign on Earth, quote (...) out of every Book of the Bible, several
Passages which they interpret in Favor of their Opinion. Wherever they find
the Word King, or Kingdom, (if they respect the Messiah, and the Times of the
Gospel) they presently snatch at them, and apply them this way; in the mean
time over-looking the Kingdom of Christ, which has been all this while under
the Gospel, and is spoken and prophesied of so often in the Sacred Writings.
But though they are to be blamed for this, that they strive to make all
Scriptures speak their Opinion, and accordingly force them to do it; yet it is
most certain and undeni^^le, that this Future State which I am now speaking of,
is foretold in many Places of Scripture in plain and intelligible Terms; and
particularly in some of those Places where Christ is mentioned as a King, and
his Administration under the Gospel is called a Kingdom.

But first I will produce some other Texts, where this New and Last
Dispensation is spoken of. It is probable that this is meant by (...), Mat. 24.
3. the Consummation or End of the Age, i. e. of this Age or Dispensation we are
now under; for this is the proper Signification of (...). And accordingly in
this Chapter is foretold by our Savior what shall happen in the End or
Conclusion of this Dispensation, and what are the Signs and Forerunners of the
following Scene of Things in this World, as well as of the Day of Judgment in
the close of it.

Some think this is meant by the (...), Mat. 19. 28. for they join this Word
with those that immediately follow, When the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne
of his Glory, and read the whole thus; Those who have followed me ( i. e. all
Persons who are true Christians and Followers of me) shall in the Regeneration,
when the Son of Man shall fit on the Throne of his Glory, fit also upon Twelve
Thrones. This shall happen in that last and blessed Dispensation of
Christianity, which is fitly called (...), as it was used by the Ancient
Philosophers, both Platonists and Stoics, to signify the Renovation of all
Things, their happy Restitution to their former State. In this Time of the
Regeneration or Restoration of the World, Christ properly Reigns here on
Earth, showing vengeance on his Enemies, and rewarding his sincere Followers,
as you read in the next Verse, Every one that has forsaken Houses, or
Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for
my Name's sake, shall receive a hundredfold, viz. in this present Time, as
it is expounded in Luke 18. 30. the parallel Place to it. Which implies that the
former Passage relates to Christ's Reigning upon Earth, or sitting on the
Throne of his Glory in this World. But I confess there are some Things that
occur in the Context, and in another parallel Text, Mark 10. 30. which may
induce us to think, that these Words are not absolutely meant of the matter now
before us, and therefore I will not urge them. But the Times of the Restitution
of all Things, Acts 3. 21. seem to look this way; for we may observe, that the
Times (in the plural) denote several Ages and Successions of Time, and so may
be well applied to the Millennium: And moreover it is remarkable, that in those
Days there shall be a Restitution of all Things, not only of all Persons, but
of all Things; there shall be an universal Restoration of the World, a blessed
Change in the whole Creation, which must needs point to that Time which I am
speaking of, and not to the Day of Judgment, as some would have it. But it will
be Objected that it is said here, the Heaven must Receive Christ until those
Times, therefore it must be meant of the Last Day. The Answer in brief is, That
the meaning of the Place is, that Christ shall not return until those Times of
Restitution be come and perfected; till there be (...), an universal, total,
and complete Restoring of the World, and then soon after this follows the Final
Judgment.

This is included in that (...), that Revelation (or Manifestation, as our
English Translators render it) of the Sons of God which the Creature earnestly
expects; longing and groaning to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption,
into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8. 19, 20. If you take
(...), the Creature, for the Gentile World, (as Dr. Hammond and some others do)
it may be fitly applied to the present purpose: For according to what God has
determined, and in the Scriptures foretold, concerning their future Conversion,
(of which I shall speak anon) they may be said to expect, and have been long
expecting this joyful Revelation; they earnestly look for the Manifestation of
the Sons of God; viz. when they and all other Infidels shall be converted to
the Faith, and thereby become the Sons of God; or when the Jews particularly
(who were originally the Children of God) shall embrace the Gospel. But we may
take the Word in a larger Sense; for (...), or Creature, sometimes signifies
Man, or Mankind, in the Sacred Style, and so I apprehend it is to be understood
in Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every Creature, i. e. to every Rational
Creature, viz. Men. And so in the Talmud, and other Rabbinical Writings, the
Word (...) Creature, is as much as Man. But there is yet a more comprehensive
Sense of the Word; for (...) here, may be the same with (...), the whole
Creation, ver. 22. of this Chapter, the whole created System of the World, and
every Thing in it; and so by the e^rnest Expectation of the Creature, or the
Creation, we may understand the fervent Longing, not only of all Mankind, but
of the whole Stock of created Beings: They all in their Way, and according to
their Capacity, long and groan for the last Welcome Dispensation; which is
fitly called by the Apostle, a Deliverance from the ^ondage of Corruption, i.
e. from the Slavery of Sin, by reason of which every Creature is in some sort
enslaved. The whole Frame of the Creation groans, and travaileth in Pain; they
are as it were in Pangs of Childbirth (which is a frequent Similitude in the
Holy Scriptures) ready to bring forth, impatient of being delivered. This is
appositely called here, the Adoption, v. 23. because it is accompanied with
Freedom: And it is styled, the Redemption of our Body; i. e. it is as it were a
Releasing us from Captivity, a perfect Deliverance from all Servitude and
Misery. There could not be a more congruous Expression to set forth that
Dispensation which I am now treating of, as will appear from the particular
Account which I shall speedily give you of it.

It is no improbable thought, that this is meant by (...), the World to come,
Heb. 2. 5. whereof, says the Apostle, we speak, viz. in that Chapter, where he
speaks of Christ's Kingdom, and in Chap. 6. ver. 5. where it is called, (...),
the Age to come, that particular Age of the World when Christ and his Apostles
appeared, or more generally that Time when the Gospel was preached. And I have
observed before, that this manner of speaking is borrowed from the Style of the
Jews, who were wont to call the Time of the Messiah Gnolam habba, the World or
Age to come. But as these are general Terms, to signify the Time of the
Messiah, so they are taken in a more restrained Sense for the last and
concluding Part of this Time; viz. when Christianity shall be at its Height.
That properly and peculiarly is this World to come, that particular State of
the Gospel when all Persons, Jews, Gentiles, and Infidels, shall embrace the
Christian Religion; when all the Nations and Kingdoms of the World shall become
the Kingdoms of Christ.

This New Evangelical World, this New Kingdom of the Gospel, is likewise
comprised in the (...), the Time of Reformation mentioned by the same Apostle,
Heb. 9. 10. for he uses this Expression with reference not only to the Mosaic
Law, which was to be corrected and retrenched, but in regard of the Gospel
itself, which was designed to amend and reform the World, and to set it right.
Now this was not to be a Mock-Reformation, but it was to be to Purpose, and
thoroughly to be carried on, which I call the Height and Perfection of the
Evangelical Dispensation.

This may have been signified when St. Paul would have the Corinthians, and
with them all Christians in future Ages, wait for the Revelation of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 17. And when St. Peter exhorted the Converted Jews whom he
wrote to, (and with them all holy Men in succeeding Times) to hope for the
Grace that is to be brought unto them at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1. 13. He had been speaking in the foregoing Verses of the former Dispensations
in the Church of God, together with the Evangelical one which was then present;
and now he acquaints them that there is to be a higher Degree of this last
Dispensation: The Time shall come when the Effects and Fruits of the Gospel
shall be more Conspicuous and Eminent, when the Grace of God which brings
Salvation shall produce greater Things in the World, to the Astonishment of all
the Enemies of the Church, and to the Amazement even of Holy Christians
themselves. This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

This last Condition of the Church is also expressed by New Heavens, and a New
Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13. For this is the Style of the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 65.
17. 66. 22. where by New Heavens, and a New Earth, he sets forth the State of
the Gospel; and therefore the Height of it deserves these Titles much more.
Whence it is probable, that this is the New Heaven and the New Earth which St.
John saw, Rev. 21. 1. For it is observable, that he frequently makes use of the
same Expressions and Phrases which are found in the Prophetical Writers. And
though, it is true, some Learned Expositors understand this New Heaven and New
Earth, in the Revelation of St. John, concerning the Church Triumphant, the
State of the Blessed in Heaven; yet if any ^an narrowly scans this Chapter, he
will not be backward to acknowl^dge that this cannot be the Meaning of it: For
the New Heaven, and the N^w Earth, are the same with the Holy City, the New
Jerusalem (in the same Chapter) into which the Kings of the Earth bring their
Glory and H^nour, ver. 24. they come with all their Honorable Retinue to
submit to the Scepter of Jesus, to own themselves his Converts, and they are
ambitious to be Members of this Glorious Church upon Earth.

Next, I will produce those Pla^es of Scripture where this Full and Final
Settlement of the ^hristian Church, in the last Times of the Gospel, is called
a Kingdom, and set forth by Reigning. It is not to be questioned that David's
Temporal Kingdom was a Type and Earnest of this: And those sure Mercies of
David, Isa. 55. 3. are the Faithful Promises made by God to David, concerning
the Messiah and his Kingdom, which are not yet fully accomplished, and
therefore are to be in this Reig^ of Christ which I am speaking of. Of this we
often read in the Prophet Daniel; as in Chap. 2. ver. 44. In the Days of those
Kings ( viz. the Monarchs mentioned in the Verses before, among whom (...) was
one, under whom Christ was born) shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed. That is, Christ's Kingdom then began to be erected,
which afterward shall more eminently deserve that Name; viz. when it shall
arrive to its Perfection. It is said here expressly, that it shall break in
pieces all these Kingdoms, that is, the Four Monarchies: Of which we are
further ascertained in the next Verse, for Christ (...) is that Stone which was
cut out of the Mountains without Hands, and was to break in pieces the Iron,
the Brass, the Clay, the Silver, and the Gold. This Famous Stone was to beat
down all the Four Metals; Christ was to destroy the Four Monarchies; that is,
when these cease, Christ's Kingdom immediately succeeds. It is true, it did
succeed in part when the Pagan Roman Empire expired, (and so in some measure
this Prophecy was fulfilled) but there shall be a more illustrious and eminent
Succession than this, upon the complete expiring of the Fourth General
Monarchy. Wherefore when we see this quite at an end, we may conclude that
Christ's Reign approaches; i. e. that the happy Condition of the Christian
Church in this World draws near. This Fourth Monarchy, the Roman, is now
wearing off; being translated to the Germans, it is but a mere Name and Title.
The Wings of this Imperial Eagle have been plucked, its Plumes are fallen, its
Feathers are gone, its whole Body almost consumed. Rome itself, and Italy, are
not so much as the poor Remains at this Day of the Roman Empire. This Image is
now on its last Legs, and those are infirm; for the Holy Spirit tells us, that
the Feet are of Clay and Iron, which Two Materials will not well cement, and
hold together long. Therefore another State of Things is approaching; viz. the
Fifth Monarchy or Empire here prophesied of, the Reign of Christ Jesus here on
Earth, or, which is the same, a more illustrious Manifestation of Christianity,
a more Visible and Glorious Displaying of its Virtue and Power, than ever yet
was in the World.

Of this Kingdom of the Son of Man, you have another express Prediction in Dan.
7. 14. There was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People,
Nations, and Languages should serve him. His Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed. Again, ver. 22. The Time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom:
Agreeably to what was said, ver. 18. The Saints of the most High shall take the
Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever. This Kingdom is again delineated,
ver. 27.

There is a great Number of Texts in Isaiah, Ieremia^, Ezekiel, and the Lesser
Prophets, which speak of this Kingdom of the Messiah, but they are (it is true)
generally interpreted by Expositors of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and the
prevailing of the Gospel afterward, and even to this very Day, but they are
not thought by them to reach any further. This, I conceive, is a Mistake from
the narrow Thoughts which Men are apt to have of those great Things spoken of
by the Prophets; which we shall find, upon diligent comparing of Things, to
have a very large and comprehensive Meaning. Most of the Prophetic Expressions
of this Nature, have reference not only to the first Times of the Gospel, and
these at present, but to those that are to come. Ultimately and completely, and
in their highest Signification, they cannot but be interpreted of these last.
For if those Prophetic Passages beforementioned, and several others in the
Writings of the Prophets, be expounded only of the past or present Times of the
Gospel; it is certain that the Interpretation will not answer the Greatness and
Height of the Words, much less the Weight and Dignity of the matter spoken of.
If we attend to this, we shall discern the full Design and Meaning of those
notable Prophecies of the Old Testament, we shall apprehend those many Glorious
Things (both with relation to Spiritual and Temporal Blessings) which they
foretell shall be in those last Days: But I shall have occasion to allege, and
particularly to consider those Prophetical Passages, when I come to show
distinctly wherein this Dispensation consists, and how it differs from all
others.

The Places in the New Testament where this Kingdom of Christ is spoken of, are
not a Few. But that we may not mistake, it will be requisite to observe the
different Significations of the Word Kingdom, as it refers to the Times of the
Gospel; (for we consider not the Word now as it is applied to the future State
of Glory in the highest Heavens.) First, By it is sometimes meant the
Gospel Dispensation in general, the whole Time of Christ's Administration in
his Church from first to last. Thus the Angel's Words to the Virgin Mary are to
be understood, Luke 1. 33. He shall Reign over the House of Jacob ( i. e. his
Church, the true Israel of God) for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no
end; Christianity shall more or less flourish till the World has its final
Period and Consummation. In this large and general Sense those Places are to be
taken, Mat. 4 2^. the Gospel of the Kingdom: Luke 8. 1. the Glad-tidings of the
Kingdom of God, and many others, especially the Parables, where the Kingdom of
Heaven is likened to several Things.

Secondly, We are to understand by it that particular time of the
Gospel Dispensation, which immediately succeeded our Saviors Resurrection, as
is evident from St. John Baptist's Words, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
Mat. 3. 2. and from the same Words used by our Savior himself, Mat. 4. 17. and
afterward by his Apostles, Mat. 10. 7. For none of these Texts could be meant
of the time of the Gospel when Christ was on Earth, or before his Passion, but
of some other succeeding time; otherwise it could not be said the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, but rather the Kingdom of Heaven is present, or is already
come. Whence I infer that Christ may be said not to be in his Kingdom (as it
respects the Gospel) he may be said not to Reign all the time betwixt his
Nativity and his Resurrection, that being the time of his Humiliation: But as
soon as he rose from the Dead, having conquered Death and Satan, then he set up
his Spiritual Kingdom. This is clear from Psalm. 132. 11. compared with Acts 2.
30. Then he sat upon his Throne, as the Apostle here applies it. Wherefore he
said to his Apostles, when he was risen, All Power us given unto me in Heaven
and in Earth, Mat. 28. 18. And those Words concerning Christ, Sit thou on my
Right-^and, till I make thy Enemies thy Footstool, Psalm. 101. 1. which are
mentioned four or five times in the Mat. 22. 44. Mark 12. 36. Luke 20. 43. Acts
2. 35. (...). 1. 13.
New Testament, are spoken of his Resurrection and Ascension, whereby he
declared himself to be Head and Lord of his Church. Some thus interpret what he
says in Luke 7. 28. He that is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he,
i. e. after I am Risen and Ascended, the least Apostle or Preacher of the
Gospel shall excel John the Baptist, for then a clearer Light will shine, the
Spirit will lead into all Truth. Thus we may understand our Savior when he
says, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit of this Vine until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, (...) which cannot be meant
of the (...) (...) in Heaven, because Christ will not (...) drink Wine with
them, or at least in a proper (...) it is not true. But it seems more
reasonable to take the Words as spoken concerning the time after Christ's
Resurrection, when he did Eat and Drink with his Disciples, as is expressly
Recorded. This time is Signally and Eminently called the Kingdom of God or
Christ, because this Commenced immediately after he rose from the Dead; and it
is styled the Kingdom of his Father, because soon after his Resurrection
followed his Ascension and Sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, which were
his solemn Inauguration and Enstallment. This was the first Year of his Reign,
now he entered upon his Royal Off^ce, having sent his Holy Spirit to rule in an
extraordinary manner in the Church, which he had not done before. Thus you see
the Date of Christ's Kingdom, as it is more specially and particularly
understood. And moreover, from all that has been said under this Head, the
truth of what I before asserted is made apparent, viz. That there are certain
Steps and Degrees in the Evangelical Dispensation.

Thirdly, The Vengeance of Heaven on the Jewish Nation in the Destruction and
Devastation of their City is called Christ's Kingdom, Mat. 16. 28. His
Triumphing over those obstinate People, whose Forefathers had been his
Murderers, was a considerable Instance of his Glorious Reign: Thence it is that
his destroying those his implacable Enemies is said to be his Coming in his
Kingdom; and it is called the Kingdom of God coming with Power, Mark 9. 1.

Fourthly, Christ's Second Coming, viz. at the Day of Judgment, when he shall
visibly and manifestly, in the Face of all the World, exercise his Regal Power,
is called his Kingdom; thus it is said Christ shall Judge the Quick and the
Dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1.

Lastly, By Christ's Kingdom is meant that peculiar and special time of his
Reigning which is the present Subject of our Discourse, when Christianity shall
arrive at its height, when the Church shall be in its Meridian. That Petition
in the Lord's Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, seems to be meant of this, though not
solely of it. Then the Grace of God in the Gospel will shine forth in its
greatest splendour, and God's will shall be done then on Earth as it is in
Heaven, which may perhaps be one reason why these Petitions are joined
together. It may be this is that Kingdom of God, of which, and the things
appertaining to it, our Savior Discoursed to his Apostles before he left the
World, Acts 1. 3. But in the Book of the Revelation of St. John there are many
clear Passages which relate to this Perfect State of the Christian Church
hereafter, and it is expressed by a Kingdom, and by Christ's Reigning on the
Earth. This New Scene is mentioned after this manner in Rev. 5. 10. and again
chap. 7. v. 15. and 17. and more plainly in chap. 12. v. 10. Now is come the
Kingdom of our God, which is explained by the next Words, The Power of his
Christ, his effectual Reigning, whereby he shows his Power in the Church more
than ever. We have not yet seen the Consequences of the Seventh Angel's
Sounding, when it was proclaimed with a loud Voice from Heaven, The Kingdoms of
this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11. 15. which in v. 17. is called his taking to
him his great Power, and his Reigning. Which gives us to understand that he
does not at first exert his great Power in the Evangelical Dispensation, he
does not fully Reign, but that he will afterward, and upon Earth. This is
taking to him his, etc.

There is one Text more which I will add, and I request the Reader to consider
of it, He (i. e. Christ) must Reign till he has put all Enemies under his
Feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. The Apostle had mentioned the Resurrection of the Saints
at Christ's last coming, v. 23. and thereupon adds in the next Verse, then
comes (or, then (...), sc. (...).
is) the end, viz. of this World, and Present State of things, when he (that is
Christ) shall have delivered up the Kingdom (the Saints who are the chiefest
part of his Kingdom) to God, even the Father, when (i. e. after) he shall have
put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, which oppose him and his
Kingdom: For he must Reign (i. e. in his Church) till he has put all Enemies
under his Feet. Now, it is plain and undeniable that this time is not yet come,
therefore it shall be hereafter. There must be a time here on Earth, when
Christ shall have put all his Enemies under his Feet, when he shall Reign
without opposition. And this is the time I am speaking of, viz. the Third
Exertment of the Evangelical Dispensation.

But the most Signal, Eminent and Renowned Place on which may be Founded and
Built the Future Glorious State of the Christian Church on Earth is the 20th
Chapter of the Revelation, where is expressly foretold the Binding of Satan a
Thousand Years, and the Saints Living and Reigning with Christ a Thousand
Years. I know full well this Chapter has been miserably perverted not only of
late, but at the first setting out of Christianity. Mill annos post
R^surrectionem in terreno regno Christi secundum carnales ventris and libidinis
voluptates futuros fabulantur (^c. Cerinthiani) Augu^tin. de H^^res. c. 8. De
Civ. Dei. I. 20. c. 7. Epiphan. Haeres. 77.
Some from this place asserted a Terrene Millennary Kingdom of Christ
consisting chiefly in Corporal Pleasures and Carnal Delights, as if they
designed to revive the Epicurean Happiness, or to antedate the Mohammedan
Heaven. Cerinthus is said to be the Author of this Opinion, for being a Man
addicted to Sensuality and Pleasure, he founded an Happiness here on Earth of
such a Nature, viz. abounding with all Delights relating to Meats and Drinks,
Concupiscence and Effeminacy. So says an Ancient Ecclesiastical Writer,
Dionysius of Alexandria, 1. 2. de. Promis. And Eusebius says the same, Eccl.
Hist. 1. 7. c. 19. But this savours too much of the Flesh, besides that it
contradicts our Savior, who said, His Kingdom was not of this World, John 18.
36. and consequently the Reigning of the Saints is not Worldly and Sensual, but
Spiritual and Heavenly, And besides these Men held that (...). Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. l. 3. c. 22.
this Reign of Christ here on Earth was to be after the Resurrection, yea and
Lactant. Institut. l. 7.
after the last Judgment; which renders this Opinion yet more Improbable, if
not Absurd, as if the Saints who had enjoyed the Pleasures of Heaven would
count it a Happiness to be entertained with those that are Sensual and Carnal.

There were Others of Old who had a more Tolerable Notion of the Millennary
Reign, for they placed it not in Sensual and Earthly Pleasures, and mere
outward Peace and Prosperity, though they held it was not without these. There
Opinion in short was this, that after Six Thousand Years in this World were
completed, the Saints should all rise, their Bodies should ascend out of their
Graves, or where ever else they were, and their Souls should come down from
Heaven, and Christ also should descend from thence and keep a Jubilee with them,
and Reign with great joy a Thousand Years here upon Earth, and that all
Kingdoms should be made subject to him, and that the Righteous should be
Blessed with an abundance of the Good Things of this World, but without any
Intemperance, Excess or Immoderation whatsoever. This they called the First
Resurrection, from which all the Ungodly are excluded. After this Seventh
Millennary of Years is completed, all Men shall* rise from the Dead, which is
the Second Resurrection. This was the Sentiment of most of the Ancient Fathers,
yea of (...) Dialog. cum Tryph.
all Christians who were accounted Orthodox, as Justin Martyr acquaints us. He
and Irenaeus, and Ierom, and others tell us, that this Doctrine came first from
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, who pretended he had it from St. John (whose
Scholar he was) and from the Disciples of the Apostles with whom he was
acquainted. So that the Pedigree of the Millennary Opinion is this; It was
first broached by Cerinthus, then re^ined by Papias and others, and afterward
transmitted to the Latin and Greek Fathers.

Or if we will be more exact in the Lineage and Descent of it, we must begin it
higher, and say, that the Apostles set it on foot first, for they dreamt of an
Earthly Kingdom of Christ in this World, as I have showed before. Or rather we
may trace it up to the Jews before Christ; the Millennium was borrowed from an
Ancient Tradition and Persuasion among that People, that the Messiah should
Reign a Thousand Years on Earth in all Pomp and Grandeur. The Babylon Talmud,
in Sanhedrim, in the Chapter Helek, does show this to be the Opinion of the
Hebrew Doctors, about the Days of the Messiah. And Aruch mentions it as a thing
of undeniable certainty; and so speaks R. Eli^zer in Midrash Tillim, The Days
of the Messiah are a Thousand Years. So our Learned Harm. on Rev. 20.
Lightfoot. The Opinion of his Personal Reign in the affluence of all Sensual
and Worldly Delights was an old Jewish Error, says In Isai.
St. Ierom once and again. And several other Writers testify that it was a
received Notion among them, That the Messiah, after Six Thousand Years of the
World were expired, should Reign in Person all the time of the next Millennary
with his Elect on Earth in perfect Peace and Prosperity; and hence the
Christians converted from Judaism borrowed and retained this Notion. And truly
it was kept up a long time in the Church, it was almost universally believed no
less than the first Three Hundred Years after the Apostles. At last the credit
of Papias, who was thought to be the first Broacher of this Doctrine, was
called in question. Though he was a Man o^ great Simplicity, Honesty and
Integrity, yet he was (...). Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 33.
one of small Judgment, and mean Learning, says Eusebius. And he adds in
Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
another place, that this Papias spoke Strange and Fabulous things, and did not
understand the Apostles Arguings. St. Ierom and St. Augustine were the first
Fathers that writ against this Millennary Reign, and soon after this it was
generally Condemned by the Fathers of the Roman and Greek Church, and has ever
since been looked upon as an Heterodox Opinion, excepting that some Anabaptists
have made bold to revive it. If we consider things aright we shall see
sufficient reason to condemn and explode this Doctrine, for there are these two
gross Errors in it, 1. That Christ shall Personally Reign upon Earth. 2. That
the Saints shall come from Heaven and Reign with him.

First, The Chiliasts are palpably mistaken in this, that Christ shall come
from Heaven, and Personally Reign here, and that before the General
Resurrection, and Day of Judgment, as they also hold. This is contrary to
express Words of Scripture, which says concerning our Savior, That Acts 3. 21.
the Heaven must receive him, until the times of the restitution of all things,
i. e. as I conceive, till the finishing of those times of the restitution of
all things, which will be a little before the Day of Judgment. We are assured
that Christ from his Ascension to that time remains in Heaven; From thence he
shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead; therefore he shall not come down on
Earth before that time, and consequently he will not Reign here in Person, as
those Mille^naries imagine. It is incongruous and against reason that he should
be said to come to Judge the Men upon Earth, and yet at the same time be on the
Earth. Nor is there any thing in this 20th. Chapter of the Revelation which
favors this Fancy of theirs. Had a Personal Reign been intended here, it would
have been said, that Christ shall Reign with the Saints a Thousand Years, which
Words might fairly intimate that Christ would descend from Heaven, and come
among them, and Reign in the midst of them so long a time; but instead of this
it is only said, that they shall Reign with him a Thousand Years. Or suppose it
were expressly said, Christ shall Reign, yet this does not prove that he shall
Reign in Person. How often does the coming of the Lord in Luke 12. and in other
Places signify Christ's Coming in way of Judgment and Vengeance, not his
Personal Coming? Why then may not Christ's Reigning be meant not of a Personal
Reigning, but of his Reigning in the Hearts and Lives of the Faithful? He is
with them Spiritually, and they Reign with him after the same manner, and no
other. Therefore the Inquisitive Mr. Mede, who founds the Future Reign of
Christ upon Earth on his Chapter in the Revelations, saw no Ground here for his
Visible and Corporal Reigning. Whence he has left us these Words, Book 3. p.
79.
The presence of Christ in his Kingdom shall no doubt be Glorious and Evident;
yet I dare not so much as imagine that it shall be a Visible Converse on Earth;
for the Kingdom of Christ ever has been and shall be a Kingdom, whose Throne
and Kingly Residence is in Heaven. I quote this Passage the rather, because
some have entertained another Opinion of this Learned Author. Besides, in this
Chapter, v. 8, 12. we read that Gog and Magog, intervene between the Thousand
Years and the Day of Judgment: Therefore the Personal Reign of Christ is not
before that Day, for the Heavens retain him till then: Nor is it after that
Day, for Gog and Magog, who come after the Millennium, go before the Day of
Judgment. I conceive this is an Unanswerable Proof. And as for the several
Quotations of Scripture which they bring to assert the Personal Reign, the
Answer in brief is this, that theywrest those Places which speak of Christ's
First Coming, and others which speak of his Last Coming to Judgment, and apply
them to a Second Personal Coming of Christ before the General Resurrection and
Day of Judgment. From this perverting of those Texts they set up the Corporal
Reign of our Savior, which they so much talk of.

Secondly, That is another unpardonable Error, that the Bodies of the deceased
Saints shall be raised from below, and their Souls be dismissed from above, and
that both shall be united here, that they may Reign with Christ on Earth.
First, this is against the constant Discovery which is made to us in Scripture,
that Heaven, and signally the Highest Heavens, are the Place of Glory, and the
Seat of Blessedness, prepared for the departed Souls of the Faithful. Those
Regions above, not this Earth below, are the Receptacle of Glorified Spirits.
Yet these Men are pleased to alter the Constitution and Appointment of the
All-wise God, and to make the Earth the Habitation of Blessed Spirits, and the
Seat of Happiness. This is to abrogate the Laws of God's Kingdom; this is to
anticipate the State of Glory; this is to confound Heaven and Earth. Again, How
absurd and ridiculous is it to assert, that the departed Saints shall come to
be subject (after all the Joys and Ravishments of another World) to Calamities
and bodily Evils? For Gog and Magog shall besiege them, (as they must needs
grant from v. 9. of this Chapter.) Shall the Saints not only quit their
heavenly Mansions, and come down here on Earth, but also turn Soldiers, and put
themselves into a Military Posture? For you read there of (...) castra,
exercitu^.
the Camp of the Saints. Shall immortal Saints fight after they have been in
Heaven? Yet the Chiliasts must hold this, because they assert, that the
Reigning of the Saints a Thousand Years is meant here of their leaving of
Heaven, and coming down to Reign on Earth.

They pretend to prove this from several Passages in this Chapter; as where it
speaks of the Souls of them that were Beheaded, and of their Living and
Reigning, and of the first and second Resurrection; which argues, say they,
that this Reigning is to be understood of the Saints that were before in
Heaven, and that there is one Resurrection a Thousand Years before the Last
Judgment, and another when that comes: In the former, the Saints rise to Reign;
and in the latter, all other Men shall be raised. But St. John's Words in this
Chapter signify nothing of this Nature, as will appear from setting before the
Reader the entire Text with a brief Comment upon it. I saw the Souls of them
that were Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which
had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor had received his Mark upon
their Foreheads, or in their Hands; and they lived and Reigned with Christ a
Thousand Years. But the rest of the Dead lived not again, until the Thousand
Years were finished. This is the first Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he
that has part in the first Resurrection; on such the second Death has no
Power, ver. 4, 5, 6. It is generally agreed, that by the Souls of them that
were Beheaded, are meant the Persons that were Beheaded; for that is the known
way of speaking among the Hebrews, whom St. John (who was one himself) here
imitates. And by them that were Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, we are to
understand all Martyrs that were put to Death for Professing Christianity; the
same that are mentioned Rev. 6. 9. they that were slain for the Word of God,
and the Testimony which they held. This particular manner of Death, B^heading,
is specified, because it was most in use at that Time. This was the capital
Punishment that was frequent both among Jews and Romans, (as Harmony on Acts 12.
Dr. Lightfoot has observed and proved) and we read that John the Baptist, the
first Martyr for Christ, underwent it. And not only those that suffered Death,
but all other holy Men, that had any other Punishment, of a lesser sort,
inflicted on them, are here intended; for one kind of corporal Punishment is
mentioned here to denote all the rest, which is a way of speaking very usual
not only in the Holy Scriptures, but in other Writings. They who had not
worshipped the Beast, nor ^is Image, nor received his Mark upon their
Foreheads, or in their Hands, are those Religious and Holy Persons who keep
themselves unspotted from the Pollutions of Antichrist, and do not in any kind
whatsoever comply with them, or allow of them. These St. John saw, as well as
the others before mentioned.

And they lived, which may refer to this latter sort of Persons only, and not
to the former; that is, to those who had not worshipped the Beast, not to the
Souls of them that were Beheaded. For you may observe that it is expressed
thus; (...), and whosoever; which shows, these are a distinct Company from the
others mentioned before. Therefore to the latter must be applied those Words (
they lived) i. e. these Persons were freed from Persecution under the happy
Reign of Christ which was now come. Thus it is not absolutely necessary that we
should interpret this concerning the deceased Martyrs, the Souls of them that
were Beheaded, but only concerning the Saints then in being, those that worship
not the Beast, and consequently here is no ground for the Resurrection of the
Martyrs before the Last and General Resurrection, (as a Recompense of their
former Sufferings) as some Persons imagine.

Or, suppose that [ they lived] refers here to these Martyrs, yet still we
cannot conclude thence their rising from the Dead; for it is only barely said
they lived, not they revived, or rose from the Dead. What then was this Living
here spoken of, which is the Introduction to the Thousand Years? No other
certainly than this; that whereas many of the Faithful Servants of Christ had
been put to Death for the Testimony of Jesus, and other Religious and Holy Men
had been as it were killed in former Times, (in the same Sense that it is said,
we are killed all the Day long, Psalm. 44. 22.) i. e. they were persecuted,
injured, and abused, now they shall live, now they shall flourish, now they
shall be freed from Persecution, and enjoy Peace and Rest. Not that the
individual Persons that really lost their Lives shall thus live upon the Earth;
but the Church is here considered as a successive Body, as is usual in this
Book of the Revelation, and elsewhere. The Meaning then is this; though the
Christians in the preceding Ages were cruelly and inhumanly treated by their
merciless Persecutors, though the Church in those Times labored under great
and unspeakable Miseries; yet upon the Entrance of the joyful Millennium, (for
there shall be on Earth such a Millennium, though not of that Nature which the
Ancient Chiliasts asserted) all these troublesome and afflictive Things shall
cease, and the Faithful shall be put into the Possession of an undisturbed
Repose and Serenity.

But because not living again is mentioned in the next Clause, some may think
that (...) here, is of the same import with (...) there; and therefore they
lived must be equivalent with they revived, which is as much as they rose from
the Dead. Granting this, it does not follow that it is to be understood
Literally and Strictly, i. e. of a Real living again after Death, or of the
rising of their dead Bodies out of the Grave. It is a Figurative way of
speaking, and it is probable is an Allusion to Ezekiel. 37. 11, 14. Behold, O my
People, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your, Graves:
And I will put my Spitit (or breath) into you, and you shall live. Which Words
speak not of a Bodily Resurrection, (as at the first Hearing they may seem to
do) but of Israel's rising out of a low, captivated Condition in Babylon. Your
Graves shall be opened, and ye shall live; i. e. you shall be restored to your
own Land again, and there live in Plenty and Prosperity.

There is no Expositor of any Account, but interprets the Words thus. And
indeed there are several other Texts which back this Interpretation; for in
Psalm. 71. 20. 80. 18. Isa. 26. 19. Hos. 6. 2. Reviving and Rising again are
used to express a comfortable and prosperous Condition.

So that one would a little wonder how it comes to pass that some Writers, who
have made enquiry into the future State of the Christian Church, take this
Place in the Revelation in a Literal Sense, and persuade themselves that it
speaks of a Bodily Resurrection of the Saints, when it may so conveniently be
taken in a Metaphorical and Mystical Sense; nay, when they themselves at other
Times are so delighted with this latter. Dr. Cressener.
One of them acknowledges that the killing of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. and
their Bodies lying dead, is not meant of a Literal Death, and with great
Diligence he labors to prove it, and indeed performs that task very laudably;
and in many other Places in this Book he flies to a Mystical Meaning. Why then
may not the Living, or Living again of the Saints, be understood here in the
same manner? The Dr. Burnet.
other is known to be a great Asserter of an Improper and Figurative Sense in
Scripture. But see the Unhappiness of his placing it; he that expounds the
Third Chapter of Genesis (which is a plain downright History) in a Mystical and
Allegorical way, to the enervating of a great part of Revealed Religion,
interprets this Passage in the Revelation (where Mysteries and Figures are so
common) in a Literal Sense. But I think I have showed from the Tenor of this
Place, that a Real, Corporeal Resurrection, i. e. a returning of departed Souls
into their Bodies again, is not here meant; but that a Political or Civil
Resurrection is the Thing here spoken of; that is, the Christian Church, after
its great Troubles and Mortifications, shall revive, shall as it were rise out
of its Grave; and (as the Excellent Dr. Hammond Paraphrases on the Place) there
shall be such an universal Profession of Christianity, as if all the departed
good Christians had been alive again, and were come upon the Stage of this
World once more. Or the Reader may make use of the Apostle's Words in Gal. 3.
1. to explain this Place in the Revelation; for as Christ is said to be
crucified among the Galatians, i. e. they had been so clearly and fully taught
and instructed in the Nature of Christ's Sufferings, as if Christ himself had
been crucified in their Sight: So in a resembling sort, the SAINTS are said to
live again, i. e. their holy Lives and Actions (whence they are denominated
Saints) are as evidently and completely copied out in the Persons then upon
(...) (...) a kind of a Resurrection. On such the second Death bath no Power;
i. e. those who have the Honor to be reserved to that excellent State of the
Church, which is called Reigning with Christ, being Holy and Righteous Persons,
they shall be rescued from the second Death, which is no other than Everlasting
Destruction. For as there is a Twofold Resurrection, as has been said, so in
the same way of Allusion there is a Twofold Death; a Death of Temporal, and a
Death of Eternal Destruction. This latter is called the second Death, because
it comes after the other, and is a great deal more terrible than it. Therefore
to be freed from this, is the greatest Mercy imaginable: And this is that
which all those who live under the Height of the Evangelical Dispensation
shall be rescued from. At the end of those Thousand Years, when the Books shall
be opened, and the Dead shall be judged out of them, they shall escape
everlasting Death and Damnation; and they shall pass from Earth to Heaven, from
the happy State of the Church here, to endless Blessedness in the Mansions
above.

The short then of all is this, That the Living and Reigning of the Saints with
Christ, which is foretold in this Chapter, is to be understood of the most
Prosperous and Flourishing State of the Church of Christ here on Earth, which
is the Thing that I have undertaken to prove and illustrate. Indeed it is not
expressly said, that this Reign shall be on Earth, but we may most rationally
infer as much from this Chapter. The Angel who was to bind Satan came down from
Heaven, ver. 1. therefore the Scene of these Things spoken of in this Chapter,
was to be here below. Afterward, ver. 3. it is said that Satan was shut up,
that he might deceive the Nations no more. Now none can deny but that these
Nations were on Earth. And in ver. 9. it is said of Gog and Magog, That they
went up on the Breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints
about: The Saints then are upon the Earth, as well as Gog and Magog. And this
appears yet further, from what follows in the same Verse, Fire came down from
God out of Heaven, and devoured them. Therefore neither they, nor the Saints,
were then in Heaven, but on Earth, else the Fire could not be said to come down
from Heaven upon the latter. It is out of question then, that this Reigning of
the Saints with Christ, is meant of that happy Administration of the Church
here on Earth. Though the common Doctrine of the Millennaries, viz. of the
Saints and Martyrs leaving Heaven, and coming down to Reign on Earth; and so
likewise of the Personal Reign of Christ with them be a groundless Fancy, and
built neither on Reason nor Scripture; yet I have in some good measure showed,
that T^is which I am now speaking of, is founded on Both. The former dictates
to us, that there shall be a more perfect State of Christianity than ever yet
has been; and the latter, in several Places, speaks of this higher Degree of
Christianity. Though Christ will not come in Person, yet he will come in the
Spirit, to renew his Church, and to exalt it to a greater Measure of Holiness
and Purity: And there shall then be such a joyful, blessed Season, as never was
before, and never will be again upon Earth.

It remains now that I speak particularly and distinctly of the Duration of
this Spiritual Reign. It shall last a Thousand Years, which St. Augustine contr.
Manich. l. 1. c. 24. Aquinas Sum. quaest. 77. art. 1.
some have thought is to be understood i^definitely. As in Job 9. 3. 33. 23.
One of a Thousand, is One of a great Many: And in Psalm. 50. 10. A Thousand
Hills; and Psalm. 105. 8. A Thousand Generations, is as much as very Many Hills
and Generations; so they think here, a Finite Number is put for an Indefinite;
and accordingly the Reigning of the Saints a Thousand Years, signifies no more
than the long Time of the Churches Prosperity. St. Augustine, who takes the
Thousand Years in this Indefinite manner, holds, that they began either at
Christ's Birth, or his Passion, and last to the Worlds end, or till a little
before it, when Antichrist is to come, and appear in the World. Others say,
they commence at Christ's Death, and that as the Saints are said to Reign, so
the Devil is bound a Thousand Years, i. e. all the Time from Christ's Passion
to the Consummation of all Things, excepting only that little Time when he is
Loosed. But these are very extravagant Assertions, and no considerate Men have
undertaken to make them good. Why therefore should I undertake to confute them?
I will only say this, to baffle their Notion who take these Thousand Years
Indefinitely, that first it is expres^y asserted in this Chapter, that the
Godly shall Reign a Thousand Years, and that Satan shall be bound just so many
Years, (which indeed are but the same Time.) Again, The Thousand Years are
repeated no less than Six-times by St. John here, which clearly makes against
and Indefinite and Uncertain Number. Unless a Certain, Determinate Portion of
Years were here meant, this Definite and Precise Number would not have been
reiterated so often. For this reason both the Ancient and Modern Expositors of
this Chapter universally agree, that the Thousand Years here are to be taken in
the most obvious and Proper Sense, viz. for that Particular, Determinate Number.

But then, there is a great Disagreement about the Beginning and Ending of
these Thousand Years thus precisely taken. Some say they began at Christ's
Nativity, and lasted till Pope Silvester the Second, which was about a Thousand
Years after; for Idolatry and all Superstitious Rights in the Church broke out,
and manifestly appeared under him first of all. So our Wickliff and Bilney, and
Aretius a Foreigner thought. But others, as Bede, Primasius, Pererius, fix the
Date at Christ's Passion. Others hold the Thousand Years began at the Preaching
of the Gospel, or about the Destruction of Jerusalem, and ended when Popery
first began Eminently to prevail, which was, they say, about the Year of Christ
1073. when Hildebrand, i. e. Gregory the Seventh invaded the Chair; then Satan
also was loosed. This is Dr. Lightfoot's Opinion, as it was also of our
Broughton and Usher, and of Pareus and Iunius abroad. But surely it is harsh to
say that the Devil was bound all the time of the Ten Persecutions, when he had
Power given him to stir up those Bloody Emperors and Tyrants to commit such
Outrages against the Innocent Christians: This is sufficient to confute that
Opinion. Therefore Others hold the Thousand Years began under Constantine the
Great, when coming to the Empire he caused the Persecutions to cease, and set
up Christianity as the Religion of the Empire, which was about the Year of our
Lord 310. and they ended at the rise of the Ottoman Empire, and with ^the
Papacy of Boniface the Eight, who made the Sanguinary Laws against the
Waldenses and Albigenses, which was about the Year 1300. Thus thought those
Great Men Willet, Forbes, Napier, Grotius, Hammond. And Brightman likewise
seems to hold that the Reigning of the Saints, and the Binding of Satan were
from Constantine the Great to the beginning of the Fourteenth Century of
thereabouts.

But this could not be the time of the Saints Reign, for we read in Rev. 12.
That the Woman, viz. the Church, as soon as she should be delivered was to be
in the Wilderness (a State of Distress) how then could she Reign, which denotes
her Prosperity? And she was to be in this State for the space of 1260. Days, i.
e. Years. This began according to Mr. Brightman from the time that Constantine
the Great was taken up to Heaven, for he is the Manchild caught up to God, v.
5. and to him the Context refers. Now reckon from the Death of that
Emperor, which was A. D. 337. till the time that the 1260. Years are expired,
and you will find that the Thousand Years ended later than he had set them, for
instead of ending in 1300. they could not according to this Computation have
their Period till the Year of Christ 1597. Here you see one Prophecy of the
Book of the Revelation is so interpreted as to thwart another, which is an
Argument that his Calculation is not right. And indeed what Considerate Person
can believe that the Thousand Years of Christ's Reign and of Satan's
Imprisonment are part? There has been nothing yet that has looked like it.
When was Satan so bound that he seduced not the Nations? Or when was he loosed
again, so that we may discern the palpable difference between either? Do we not
know that when the Ten noted Persecutions were expired, yet others were raised
against the Servants of God in this Period? And all this time either Old
Heresies were revived or New ones invented. Therefore I infer that the time of
the Thousand Years is not yet come, when the Angel is to cast Satan into the
Bottomless Pit, and to shut him up, and set a Seal upon him, that he should
deceive the Nations no more. And as for Gog and Magog, who were to appear soon
after Satan's being loosed, where are they at this time? If by those are meant
the Pope and Turk, then they make the date of Popery and Turcism to be before
Satan's loosing, and the expiring of the Thousand Years of the Saints Reign,
which is an Absurdity which they would willingly avoid.

Mr. Brightman has an odd fancy of his own, that though the Reigning of the
Saints a Thousand Years be their Reigning all the Thousand Years in which the
Devil was bound ( i. e. from Constantine the Great to the Year 1300.) yet there
is another Reigning a Thousand Years, viz. from the Year 1300. till a Thousand
Years after that be expired. But if there be any good ground for this, it is in
this 20th. Chapter of the Revelation, where the Thousand Years of Christ's
Reign are spoken of expressly, and no where else. But here it is manifest that
the Reigning and the Binding are in the same Thousand Years, for it is said v.
7. When the Thousand Years (viz. of Christ's Reign, expressly mention's in the
verse immediately before) are expired, Satan shall be loose out of his Prison.
Therefore the Reigning of Christ and the Binding of Satan shall both expire
together, which proves also that they both began together, the same Thousand
Years including both. The Opinion then of Mr. Brightman and others, that the
Thousand Years, of Christ's Reign are past, has no Foundation at all, but is a
mere imaginary and precarious Assertion. And yet this Assertion was taken up
and believed by very Learned and Pious Men; the cause of which I apprehend to
be this, they were prejudiced against the Doctrine of the Old Millennaries, and
looked upon it (and that justly) as a Groundless and Scandalous Opinion, and
thereupon were willing to resolve the Thousand Years into some past Time rather
than into any that is to come, and thereby quashed that fond conceit of a
Personal Reign. This was an ill method they took, but their great dislike of
the other Opinion occasioned it, and therefore they are on that account
excusable. But if they had rejected what is amiss in the Doctrine of the
Chiliasts, and had retained what is true in the General, viz. that there shall
be a Future State of the Christian Church which shall be every ways better than
its former one, they had taken the right Course, and had asserted a Truth which
is founded on the Sacred Scriptures. Thence any Unprejudiced Person may inform
himself that the Thousand Years are so far from being past (as some have
thought) that they are not yet come.

Only to assure us before hand that there shall be such a thing, the Christian
World has had some foretasts of it already. I cannot positively say with Dr.
More. Mr. Cradock,
some, that the Thousand Years began at the Reformation, and that Luther was
the Angel that had the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and bound the Devil. I cannot
fix the beginning just here, because Wickliff, Ierom of Prague, and John Huss,
and several others before Luther, did something of this Nature; they in some
measure restrained Satan's Power and Jurisdiction by Converting many Persons
from the Papal Impieties. So that if we say Babylon began to Fall in those
Times, and mean no other than this, that those forenamed Worthies made way for
it, I grant the Assertion to be true; but it is to be remembered that I am not
now treating of the Preparatives and Forerunners of the Blessed Millennum, but
of that Determinate State and Time it self. I grant that at the Reformation the
Souls of those that were Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of
God might truly be said to Live, they were as it were raised from the Dead.
When Luther and the rest of God's Faithful Servants appeared, and were active
in Restoring and Reforming Religion, the Holy Apostles and Martyrs, and all the
Primitive Professors of the True Faith were then as it were revived, and came
upon the Earth again. This is a Forerunner and Pledge of that which is called
the First Resurrection, this is a Previous assurance of the Millennary Reign or
Christ here on Earth, in that Sense which I have before explained.

Mr. Mede's Conceit that the Thousand Years of Christ's Reign shall not begin
till the Day of Judgment is not worthy of so Learned a Person, and is confuted
from what you Read in this Chapter so often made use of, where the Verse 8, 9.
Battle of Gog and Magog, and their Defeat are mentioned. Who doubts that these
Enemies of Christ, and of his Servants, shall be subdued before the Day of
Judgment? And if so, then Christ's Reign (all which time his Enemies are
subdued and disappear) and the Last Judgment cannot be the same. I may add,
that according to Mr. Mede's Opinion the Day of Judgment shall be before the
General Resurrection, which will hardly be allowed by any thinking Persons: And
in this very Chapter you will find that this latter has the Priority of the
other, v. 12, 13. And it is no other than what the Apostle St. Paul asserts in 1
Cor. 15. 28. He shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, viz. after the
Resurr^ction, which he had been speaking of all along before. How then can he
be said to come, and Reign on Earth, after he has delivered up the Kingdom?
But yet we may understand this Writer in the fairest Sense (and so we ought to
do all Authors) and then his Opinion is not to be disliked; for, largely
speaking, the erecting of Christ's Kingdom in the 1000. Years Reign may be
called the beginning of the Last Judgment, and it is represented so in Dan. 7.
9, 13, 22, 26. For with the Kingdom of Christ on Earth there is as it were a
Judicature set up, and Sentence passes according to the different Qualities of
the Persons that are found at that time. The Enemies of God and Religion shall
then be openly animadverted upon, but the true Worshippers of Jesus, all the
Sincere Professors of Christianity shall be Favored, Advanced, Rewarded. Thus
the Millennary Reign, and the General Judgment are Contemporary, or at least we
may suppose some part of the Thousand Years Reign to be included in the General
Judgment. Thus it is if we take it in the Latitude (as Mr. Mede seems to do)
but is cannot strictly be reckoned as part of the Millennium, for this Chapter
expressly tells us that it shall be after is, I saw a great White Throne, and
him that sat on it, and I saw the Dead, Small and Great, stand before God, and
the Books were opened, etc. v. 11. 12. There is no reason then to defer the
Reign of Christ to that Time: But it is more agreeable to Reason and Revelation
to assert that it is not very far off, that the Time is approaching when this
Millennary State shall Commence, when there shall be a greater Progress on the
Gospel than ever yet has been, when the Church shall be wonderfully Advanced,
and Christianity shall arrive to its Maturity and Perfection. Christ Jesus
shall not visibly come in Person (as some have fondly imagined) but he shall
come and Reign in the Spirit, he shall Rectify the Disorders that have been in
the Christian World; he shall throw down all False Worship, and establish the
True, and he shall raise the Christian Dispensation to its utmost Perfection.

CHAP. XX.
The Millenary Reign is attended with the Destruction of Antichrist, i. e.
Papists and Mahometans. This proved from several Passages in Scripture. How the
Papal Antichrist shall be destroyed by the Spirit of God's Mouth. Another
Attendant of the Reign of Christ upon Earth, is the Conversion or Fullness of
the Gentiles. An Objection answered. A twofold Calling, or Conversion, of the
Gentiles, Partial and Total. The Parable in Luke 14. speaks of this latter. The
Occasion and Manner of this Conversion. The Progress of Arts and Sciences has
imitated the Motion of the Sun. The like is observable of Religion. The General
Conversion of the Jews, is a third Concomitant of the Reign of Christ. Whether
the Jews shall be fixed in their own Country again. The Author's Judgment
concerning the Texts of Scripture, which are alleged to prove the National
Conversion and Return of the Jews. Lev. 26. 38, 39, etc. is meant of the
General Return of that People. In Deuteronomy. 30. 1, etc. there is a Primary and a
Secondary meaning. The latter applied to the Ten Tribes. The future
Restoration of the Jews proved, from Isa. 11. 11. from Isa. 60. from Hos. 3.
4, 5. from Amos 9. 14. from Zech. 12. 10, etc. from Luke 2. 30, 31. from Luke
21. 24. from 2 Cor. 3. 14, etc. from several Passages in Romans 11. What is meant
by all Israel. The 26, 27, 28, and 29 Verses particularly considered, and
showed to be Arguments for the Complete Conversion of the Jews. The 7. Rev. 4.
speaks of this. The Occasion, Manner, and Means of it, (both ordinary and
extraordinary) enquired into.

BUT to pass from these Generals to a Particular Account of this Period of the
Evangelical Economy; this Glorious State of Christ's Church, which shall be
before the Consummation of all Things, comprehends in it these Things. 1. The
Destruction of Antichrist. 2. The Fullness of the Gentiles. 3. The Calling of
the Jews. 4. Universal Righteousness. 5. Universal Peace. These are the Five
Things which are to be expected yet to come, and which constitute the Height
of the Christian Dispensation.

I. I begin with the Destruction of Antichrist: For that (it is probable) is
the first Thing which will be effected when the Thousand Years begin. By
Antichrist, I mean the Church and Polity of Rome, and the Impostures of
Mahomet. The latter is the Eastern, and the former is the Western Antichrist.
For as the Roman Empire was made up of the Western and Eastern Dominions; so
proportionably Antichrist, or the Antichristian Power, (signally so styled)
which was to succeed in the room of the Roman Emperors, consists of both these
Great Powers; viz. The Papacy in the West, and the Mohammedan Usurpation in the
East. It is well known that both these had their Rise together, and it is
probable they shall fall together. To speak of the latter first; Mahometism
has been in the World above a Thousand Years, but it must in due time have its
Period; the Cross shall triumph over the Crescent. If it be asked, Where there
is any particular Place of Scripture that mentions this Catastrophe? I answer,
That according to my Apprehension, (leaving every one to judge as they please)
the 38 th. and 39 th. Chapters of Ezekiel, plainly foretell the Saracens and
Turks invading the Holy Land, and then their Destruction and Extirpation. It is
a most Eminent and Remarkable Portion of Scripture, though little taken notice
of; but whoever will be pleased to consult the Whole, with great Seriousness
and Intens^tness of Mind, they will be induced (I question not) to join with me
in this Persuasion, That this notable Prophecy has respect to the Times of the
Chiliastick Reign of Christ, when the Turkish Infidels, (the right Gog and
Magog) with their Adherents, shall endeavor by all means to oppose it; and in
order to that, shall appear with a mighty Force against the People of God, viz.
against the Jews; who at that time shall be looking toward the Messiah, and
shall be ready to own Jesus to be that Person, and against the Faithful
Christians, who shall then expect his Reign. And here the final Overthrow, and
Slaughter of these Adversaries of the Church, are plainly foretold, and
particularly described, with which is immediately joined the Chap 39. v. 27, 28.
Gathering of Israel, i. e. the perfect restoring of that Nation: And the next
Thing is, The Chapter 40. 41, etc.
Vision of the Temple; which (after all the various Conjectures of Papists and
Protestants) must needs be meant of this State of the Church which I am
speaking of; otherwise you can make nothing of that strange Draught of the
Temple. What I have thus briefly hinted, is largely set forth in the Prophecy
it self, which is worth the Reader's Perusal. And I do^bt not, but after he
has well considered it, he will come to this Issue; namely, That this Prophecy
has not yet been fulfilled, and therefore it shall be in Time; and that Time
is the Period I am now treating of.

If you say, That by Gog and Magog are meant the Syrian Armies which plagued
the Jews, of which the Books of Maccabees give us a particular Account. I
reply, That though we grant this, yet those who I have named may be meant here
also: For I have in another Place proved, that there is a The Style of
Scripture, Chap. 1.
Double, Literal, and even Historical Sense, in some Places of the Bible: And
so there is here, I doubt not; and I shall afterward show, That the Turks have
a good Claim to the Names of Gog and Magog.

Again, the Turks Rise was foretold in Rev. 9. 14, etc. So their Ruin and
Downfall are mentioned in the same Book, 16. Chap. 12. v. The Vial is poured out
upon the great River Euphrates; i. e. the People inhabiting there, the Turks
who dwell in that part of the World on the River Euphrates. The Water thereof
was dried up; i. e. the Turkish Power and Dominion are impaired; That the Way
of the Kings of the Earth might be prepared; i. e. that some Great and Eminent
Persons may be converted, and come over to the Christian Church.

Then in general, we find Seducers and False Prophets threatened in Scripture
with Ruin; and shall we not think, That that Vile Miscreant, who gloried in the
Title of Prophet, and is signally so styled, by those that adhere to his
Principles and Laws, wherewith he has bewitched so great a part of the World;
shall we not think, I say, that that Grand Impostor is concerned? Can we
imagine, or suppose, that the Vengeance of God, which is threatened against
Seducers, and False Teachers, reaches not to him? And when we consider what a
great deal of Mischief this Mohammedan Sect has wrought in the World, and what
vast Regions of the Earth it has possessed, we shall easily be inclined to
believe, that when Christ's Kingdom is set up, and Christianity is come to its
Perfection, the World shall be cleared of this Spreading Pest.

As for the Fall of the Roman Antichrist, it is in express Words foretold in
many Places of Scripture. Out of the Old Testament I will mention only that
Famous Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the Fall of Rome, and the Reign of
Christ, (for both these go together;) 7. Dan. 19, 20, etc. to the end of the
Chapter. I have elsewhere commented upon it, but now I shall only make use
only of that part of it which is to our present Purpose. How natural is the
Character of the other Horn, which arises out of the Fourth Beast; i. e. the
Fourth Kingdom, or Empire, upon Earth, appliable to Papal Rome? For it is said,
It shall subdue Three Kings; i. e. the Greek Emperor, whose Jurisdiction
reached to Italy; and the Kingdom of Lombardy, and the German Emperors, who
had Dominion in Italy. It is further said, This Horn had a Mouth that spoke
very great Things, v. 20. and more particularly in the 25 v. He shall speak
great Words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints of the most
High, and think to change Times and Laws. And the same Horn made war with the
Saints, and prevailed against them, v. 21. which by the most judicious
Protestant Writers, is applied to the Papacy. But now hear the Doom of this
Great Speaker and Warrior, The Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
Dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the End: And the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the People of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him; v. 26, 27.
Which is answerable to what was said in v. 14. concerning the Coming, and the
Kingdom of the Son of Man; i. e. Christ, who frequently styles himself so.

If you consider these Things, with many more in this Chapter, you cannot apply
them either to the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, or Antiochus, or Mahomet, and his
Empire: But you must necessarily understand them of the Roman Power, and
especially that which is Papal; and you cannot but see that they are a lively
Description of that Bloody Dominion, and of the Downfall of it, and of the Reign
of Christ which shall immediately succeed it; that is, of the Flourishing State
of the Christian Church, in a more Glorious Manner than ever. Thus the most
Eminent and Learned Expositors, who are not Friends to the Roman See, interpret
this Prophecy; but none has comprised the Sense and Import of it in so few,
but full Words, as that Reverend Dr. Patrick, Bishop of Ely, Answer to the
Touchstone, p. 55.
Prelate of our Church: The Seventh Chapter of Daniel, says he, points at a
State of Christ's Church which is not yet come; and when it does come, will be
with a Vengeance to the Roman Church: Whose present State will be utterly
overturned, to make way for the s^tting up of Christ's Universal and
Everlasting Kingdom, which is to be erected when the Mystery of God is
finished; Rev. 10. 7. 12. 15. and that cannot be till Babylon, i. e. Rome, be
thrown down; Rev. 18. 2. 19. 1, 2, 6. And we are so far from thinking this
Kingdom will be Invisible, that we believe it will be the most Illustrious
Appearance that ever was of Christian Truth, Righteousness, Charity, and Peace
among Men.

In the New Testament likewise this is signally foretold: St. Paul, who was
blessed with extraordinary Revelations concerning future Things, acquaints us,
That the Reign of Christ, which he calls his Coming, shall begin with the Ruin
and Desolation of the Antichrist of Rome; for every unprejudiced and impartial
Man must confess, that the Second Chapter of the Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians speaks of Him; and that the Man of Sin, and that wicked One, whom
the Lord will consume and destroy, is no other than He. It is very strange to
see how Grotius bestirs himself, and uses all Artifices imaginable, to persuade
the Reader that the Papal Power is not meant here. He is forced to say, that
this Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was writ before the First, and several
such Incongruities he runs himself into, to maintain his Assertion: Whenas the
very Character here given of the Man of Sin, viz. that he sits in the Temple of
God, and exalts himself above all that is called God, etc. plainly shows to
whom it belongs. And that the Brightness of Christ's coming, whereby this Son
of Perdition shall be consumed, is not meant of Christ's last Coming to
Judgment, but of his Coming to Reign upon Earth, will appear from what I shall
presently add.

St. John, who was honored with abundant Discoveries from Heaven, concerning
the Things which were to come to pass afterward in the Christian Church, in a
most graphical and lively Manner, represents to us in Two whole Chapters, (the
Eighteenth and Nineteenth of the Book of the Revelation) the Fall of this
Spiritual Baby lon, and the Saints Rejoicing and Triumphing, because of the
Vengeance of God upon her: And then immediately, in the next Chapter, he
proceeds to speak of the Binding of Satan, and the Reign of the Saints a
Thousand Years. In which Chapters, though, it is true, the exact Order of the
Time is not observed, (as in the Book of the Revelation is ^^sual, and
therefore we must not always insist upon Prius and Post^^ius here;) yet this is
plainly signified to us, that there is a Connection between these Two, the Reign
of Christ, and the Fall of Babylon; and that the one most certainly goes along
with the other. But exactly speaking; the Overthrow of Babylon is part of
Christ's Reigning, or, you may call it, an Effect of it: For when he Reigns,
he will subdue and destroy this Greatest Enemy of his Kingdom.

If we enquire, How he shall be destroyed, both St. Paul and St. John will
satisfy us. The former tells us, That he shall be consumed by the Spirit of
God's Mouth, 2 These. 2. 8. Which may signify some immediate way of God's
blasting him. God Himself shall fight against him with 2. Rev. 16.
the Sword of his Mouth. The Pope shall be destroyed, says Colloq. Men's. cap.
23.
Luther, without Hands. As he began, so he shall end: He set up at first not by
Power, and in the like manner he shall be cast down. That Prophecy in 8. Dan.
25. concerning Antiochus, [He shall be broken without Hand] shall be fulfilled
of the Pope. And again he says, When God speaks but a Word, and says, Rome
be destroyed; Sir Pope, come down from your Throne; it shall be accomplished
immediately. The Phrase here used may denote the Easiness, and Suddenness of
the Fall of the Papal Antichrist: It shall be, as it were, with a Word of God's
Mouth. Or, the Spirit of God's Mouth, may signify the Preaching of the Gospel.
This shall be made the great Instrument of Rome's Fall. As the Prophet of old
was said to s^ay the Wicked with the Words of his Mouth, Hos. 6. 5. So shall
the Evangelical Prophets, the Ministers of Christ, (when they shall be
effectually stirred up for that purpose) slay that wicked One, and all his
Adherents, in the same manner; they shall be so powerfully enabled to enlighten
and instruct the World, that it shall soon be convinced of the Damnable Errors
and Impieties of the Roman Church, it shall plainly see and discern the
execrable Impostures of that Society of Men; it shall be made evident from the
Word of God, That they are no other than the Synagogue of Satan. Thus the Man
of Sin shall be destroyed by the Brightness of Christ^s coming, (as the Apostle
expresses it in the same place) by the Plain and Convictive Preaching of the
Word, which shall accompany that blessed State of the Church which is to come.

But Rome shall not Fall by God's Word only: The ensuing Texts of Scripture
will bring you to this Persuasion, that her Downfall shall likewise be by humane
Force and Power. He that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword;
Rev. 13. 10. Give her Blood to drink; Chapter 16. v. 6. They shall make the Whore
desolate, and naked; and they shall Eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire; Chapter
17. v. 16. All which signify the use of Violent Means. And more fully yet, in
Chapter 18. v. 6, 7, 8. Reward her even ^s she rewarded you, and double unto her
double, according to her Works; in the Cup which she has filled (which was a
Cup of Blood) fill to her Double. How much she has glorified herself, and
lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she says in her
Heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall
her Plagues come in one Day, Death, and Mourning, and Famine; and she shall be
utterly burnt with Fire. Perhaps this last Expression may intimate, that the
Papists shall fall out among themselves, that they shall dissent from one
another, that they shall contribute toward their Ruin, by their own intestine
Quarrels and Combustions; for these are signified by Fire, not only in Luke 12.
49. but in several other Places. But there must be some Fighting on both Sides,
Rome and its Opponents, as I conceive. This seems to me very plain, out of Rev.
19. 19, 20, 21. where there are Two Armies, and a formal pitched Battle, and a
Victory ensuing upon it. To take it wholly in a Spiritual Sense is very harsh,
and disagreeable to what we meet with in this, and other Chapters of this Book;
where there are several Passages which seem to inform us, That this Bloody
Antichrist shall Fall by the Hand and Force of Man (as well as by the immediate
Curse of God, and the Preaching of the Gospel, of which I spoke before.) We are
told that Hannibal brake through the Alps with Fire and Vinegar, when he was
on his march toward Rome. It is probable that those Warriors and Champions,
whom God will stir up to make their way thither, will use a resembling Method;
that they will engage in very Hot and Sharp Service, and with the utmost Force
and Violence encounter all Impediments which stand in their way. And as the Old
Romans, in great Streights of the Commonwealth, created a Dictator, an
extempore Monarch, and Governor; so, it may be, the Person to do this great
Thing shall be of that sort; he shall be extraordinarily chosen out, and set up
by Providence, on purpose for this emergent Business. And who knows, but that
he may be a Dictator as it were from the Plough; i. e. a Person taken from more
Private and Low Employments, to move and act in this High and Public Sphere?
But I need not be Inquisitive and Solicitous about the Manner of Rome's
Downfall, since we have so good Assurance of the Thing itself, and may acquiesc^
in that.

II. The Conversion or Fullness of the Gentiles, is another Attendant of the
Reign of Christ upon Earth. This was intimated in that Promise of God to
Abraham, That he should be a Father of (...)
the Multitude of Nations, 17. Genesis 4. for so it is in the Original. Those
Nations which proceeded from Abraham, by Hagar and Ketura^, should at last
contribute toward the making up the Great and Entire Body of Converted
Gentiles. And Jacob's Prophecy concerning Ephraim looks this way; His Seed
shall become the (...)
Fullness of the Gentiles; Genesis 48. 19. For the Word Gojim, is most properly
applied to the Gentiles, not to the Jews. And Our Translation is short, when we
render the other Word a Multitude; for the proper import of it is, Plenitudo,
Fullness. Now when it was foretold, that Ephraim's Seed should be the Fullness of
the Gentiles; the meaning is, that from Ephraim shall proceed Innumerable
Nations, who shall embrace the Gospel, and so fill up the Conversion of the
Gentiles. To this Prophecy appertains Psalm ^. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth
for thy Possession. The great and wonderful Access of the Gentiles to the
Church of Christ from all Regions of the World, is plainly predicted in Isa.
49. 5, etc. 54. 1, etc. 60. 1. to 15. v. 66. 19, etc. The Places are so well
known, that there is no need of reciting them. And in several other Prophets
there are the like Predictions.

To which questionless our Savior referred when he told the Jews, that such
and such Things should be^al them until the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled;
21. Luke 24 until the full Time come, when the Gentiles shall be universally
called into the Church. Of this our Lord speaks, Joh* 10. 16. Other Sheep from
among the Gentiles I have, which are not of this Fold, of the Jewish Church;
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice; they shall be Converted,
and become obedient Christians; and there shall be one Fold, one Church,
agreeing in the same Faith, and Worship, and Religious Practice; and one
Shep^erd, they shall acknowledge me to be their Head, and Pastor: As it had
been foretold concerning the Times of the Gospel, this last Time especially;
They shall all have one Shepherd, Ezekiel. 37. 24. they shall be united into one
Body, under one and the same Head. And it may be, that which he says to the
Church of Thyatira, is to be interpreted of This; He that overcomes, and
keeps my Works unto the end, to him will I give Power over the Nations: --
and I will give him the Morning Star. Rev. 2. 26, 28. The most Easy and Natural
Sense of which Words is this, That he that is Faithful to the end, shall be
honored with the Conversion of Eastern Nations; I will give him those Heathen
People where the Morning Star arises; I will give him the Conversion of Those,
as the Reward of his Faithfulness. A Future Calling of the Pagans may be
expected at length, as the Recompense of Overcoming, and of Keeping my Works
unto the end.

But supposing, say some, that this, and other Texts of Scripture before
mentioned, speak of the Conversion of the Gentiles; yet these Prophecies were
all Fulfilled in the Days of the Apostles, when they went out to preach the
Gospel to all Nations, and so they have no reference to that Conversion of the
Gentiles, which I am speaking of. But to this I answer, That the Prophecies of
the Conversion of the Gentiles, were not fulfilled in those Times; for though
many Pagans were Converted in the Days of the Apostles, yet that Conversion was
not General. Those Persons who were then Called, were but the First Fruits of
the Whole and Complete Calling of the Pagans to Christianity, which is to be a
little before the Conversion of the Jews. To this purpose, the Apostle of the
Gentiles is very clear, in Romans 11. 25, 26. I would not, Brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this Mystery, that Blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall
be saved. The Blindness of the Jews, and the Salvation of the Gentiles, are
here called by St. Paul, a Mystery: And in this he intimates, that those he
wrote to, did not know and comprehend the Design of God in this Matter.
Wherefore he unfolds this Mystery, this Great Secret of Providence to them,
acquainting them, that God took occasion from this strange Event, to
communicate the Gospel to the Gentiles, and to convert them to the Faith; and
then by the Calling of these, the Jews should afterward be provoked to
believe, and to accept of the Gospel, and so they should all be saved. But
whether this be spoken of a General Conversion toward the end of the World, or
only of the Great Numbers, converted by Christ and his Apostles, at the first
preaching of the Gospel, (as some are of Opinion) is now to be considered.

I conceive then, that there is a Twofold Calling or Conversion of the
Gentiles; a Partial, and a Total one. The first was, when the Jews were
rejected; viz. in the Time of our Savior, and the Apostles; then the Gentiles
were called in to supply their room. This is said to be the Salvation which is
come to the Gentiles, ver. 11. of this Chapter, and the Reconciling of the
World, v. 15. But there is a second Calling of The Gentiles, and that is named
here, the Fullness of the Gentiles, which is something that is Greater and
Higher than the other, for it denotes a complete Body of them. This is set
forth in the Parable of the Great Supper, 14. Luke; where the Jews were those
that were ^idden: But upon their Refusal of the Invitation, the Servants are
command to go into the Streets, and Lanes of the City, and bring in the Poor,
Maimed, Halt, and Blind: These are the Gentiles, that in the Apostles Times,
and ever since, have been converted to the Christian Faith. But after this is
done, it is said, Yet there is room, viz. for more Converts to Christianity;
and accordingly the Servant is bid to go out into the Highways, and Hedges,
and compel them to come in, that the House might be filled. Here is a plain
Distinction between the former and the latter Conversion of the Gentiles: After
the first Invitation and Entertainment there was more room; which intimates, in
my Opinion, a future Calling of them. And they are to be fetched out of the
Highways and Hedges, to show that though they be never so Mean and Unworthy,
they shall Partake of this Grace, which shall be so Powerful and Effectual in
those Days, that they shall seem to be forced and compelled to come in. And
what follows is very observable, and much to our present purpose; they are thus
compelled to come in to the Great Supper of the Lord, that his House may be
filled; that the Church may be Completed and made Entire, which it could not
be without the Conversion of these Gentiles at last. Many were converted
before, but now there shall be a General Embracing of the Faith: All Nations
shall come to the Messiah.

And there is another great Difference between that first Calling, and this;
viz. That the General Calling of the Jews (which is said to be their Fullness,
ver. 12.) shall go along with this second Calling of the Gentiles: For so the
Apostle acquaints us, That when the Fullness of the Gentiles is come, all Israel
shall be saved; i. e. all the Jews (as well as Gentiles) shall be received into
God's Favor. But some think, that Israel is not opposed to the Gentiles here,
but signifies the Whole People of God, the Whole Israel of God; (as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 6. 16.) i. e. the Spiritual Israel, All Believers, whether Jews or
Gentiles. But if not from this place, yet from a great part of this Chapter, it
appears, that after the Fullness of the Gentiles shall follow the Fullness of the
Jews: For as some of the Jews, in the Apostles Times, were blinded and
hardened, till they saw the Gentiles embrace the Gospel, and then they were
provoked by their Example to come in; so shall it be at their Last and General
Conversion, of which I am next to speak.

But first I will add a few Words concerning the Occasion and Manner of the
Gentiles Conversion, so far as I can guess. When the Impostures of Rome are
exploded by the Christian World, and her pernicious Doctrines and Practices are
loathed by them; and when the Dominion and Tyranny of Rome are laid in the
Dust, and that by some strange and amazing Acts of Divine Providence, which
shall be known to all the Inhabitants of the Earth; we may easily conceive,
that then the Gospel will have its free Course, and God will stir up some
Persons to preach it in the remotest Country, where Paganism has prevailed;
and that the Tidings which have come to their Ears, concerning the Fall of the
Roman Babylon, will in some measure prepare them to receive the more welcome
Message of the Gospel, and to embrace the Christian Faith, which they have
either been wholly Strangers to, or which they have wil^ully refused.

This is to be said also, That the Lives of Christians, will at this Time be
very Exemplary, which will be very serviceable for the promoting of the Gospel
among the Gentiles. Nothing has hindered the Propagation of Christianity in
the World, so much, as the wicked Conversations of Christians. The Story is
known of the American, who said he would choose rather to go to Hell, than live
in Heaven with the Cruel and Bloody Spaniards. Some of the Indians, showing a
piece of Gold, have said, Lo here is the Christians God! And their
Faithlessness, as well as Avarice, has been objected to them by the Pagans
whom they tra^^ick with. It is no wonder then that Infidels embrace not the
Christian Religion, when its Professors are so scandalous in their Practices.
But the Case will be otherwise in those happy Times which I am discoursing of;
the Lives of Christians will be answerable to their Professions; they will
commend their Religion by the Strictness and Circumspectness of their Walking;
which, when Pagans observe, they will be incited to think well of their Ways,
and afterward to Admire and Love, and at last to Imitate and Practice that
Religion, which has so great Command and Authority over Men's Minds and
Manners. Nor shall there be Signs, and Wonders, and mighty Miracles wanting, if
there be occasion for them; if that be the most proper Method to reduce some
stubborn Infidels, and to bring them to a hearty Confession and Acknowledgment
of the Truth: Though these (as I have suggested before) are not properly of
this Dispensation, and accordingly shall be soon laid aside.

Where this Work shall first have its Beginning, and in what Order this Great
Conversion of the Gentiles shall proceed, is difficult to assign: Therefore I
will only submissively offer my Conjecture. It has been the Observation of
some Learned Men, that the Arts and Sciences have imitated the Motion of the
Sun. Learning set out first with Adam in the East: He had his Philosophy from
God, and by virtue of That gave fit Names to all Creatures. He communicated his
Knowledge to those Eastern Countries of Assyria and Chaldaea; whence it came
into Egypt, where Moses was skilled in all the Learning of that Time. He, it is
Probable, left his Skill among some of the Israelites, and so it traveled into
Canaan, where Solomon was Famous for this Learning, and with great Success
propagated it among the Jews. From the Chaldaeans, Egyptians, and Jews, it
found its way to Greece; where it was first entertained by Musaeus, Orpheus,
Pythagoras; then Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, etc. And here, by the bye, we may
remember, That the most Inquisitive Men among the Graecians, as Pythagoras,
Plato, Solon, and others, who proved Great Sages, traveled into Egypt, and
other Eastern Countries, to bring home with them their profitable Arts and
Sciences. Learning past from Greece to Italy, and so to Rome; for with the
Grecian Empire their Arts also were transported to Rome, and she dispersed
them continually by her Victorious Arms. Passing from Italy they climbed the
Alps, and visited Germany and France, whence we Britains, and others, fetched
them over. Thus Learning followed the Course of the Sun, (an Intimation of
which seems to be in the Poets, when they made Phoebus the God of Light and
Learning,) all humane Arts and Knowledge were derived down to us from the
Eastern Parts of the World, where Mankind itself first had its rise.

The like Observation may, in part, be made of Religion, viz. that it imitated
the Suns Motion. (I say, in part, for the Progress of Religion does not exactly
answer to that of Learning and Philosophy.) It arose first in Paradise, in the
r^moter Parts of the East: And Adam, Seth, and Noah, cherished it in those
Regions. It was preserved in the Ark by Noah, and coming out thence, it was
propagated by him, and his Son Shem, but especially by Abraham the Chaldaean.
Having thus escaped the Flood, and lived among the Chaldaeans, it sojourned a
while in Canaan, and from thence came into Egypt, with Joseph first, and soon
after with Jacob, and the rest of the Patriarchs. From thence it took its way
through the Wilderness, and so into Canaan again; where it continued a long
time under many Vicissitudes, till it began to go Eastward again; viz. in the
Time of the Captivity. But Seventy Years put and end to that Thraldom, and
fetched back the True Religion to go on in its way, its Western Road, that it
was in before. Observe especially how when it began to be Christian, (though at
first it took its Circuit through the whole World, to inform all Mankind of its
being Arrived; and afterward Constantine the Great carried it with the Empire,
and settled it more Eastward, yet still) it ran the same Course with the Sun
generally; from Jerusalem to Gre^ce, to Africa, to Rome, and so to all Italy,
to Germany, France, Britain, Spain. Though I do not say, the Gospel went
exactly in this very Order successively, yet we find this to be the Progress of
the Gospel at last: It began in the East, and it has traveled Westward. The
Church, and the Sun, (as Mr. Herbert has observed) have observed the like
Motion.

And it ^ath crossed the Western Ocean: The Americans hear of Christ. We have
an Essay in those Plantations, to confirm us in the Truth of what is to come
afterward. The true Gospel has been preached, and is at this Day, in several
Places of this Newfound World. And though the Roman Priests have planted their
Persuasion in many Parts of it, with vast ^^fusion of Blood; yet Popery may
make way for a better Religion afterward, when the Gospel shall be spread even
to the utmost Parts of this Western Hemisphere, and so in its direct way step
into the East again, and visit the Islands in the Eastern Seas, and then land
on the Continent among the Tartars, Indians, Chinoises, Persians, etc. and so
finish its Circuit, by returning to the Place where it set out first of all.
Thus our Savior's Words shall be verified, The Gospel shall be preached in all
the World, and then shall the End come, Mat. 24. 14. This will be a plain
Indication that they are come to the last Period of Time designed for this
World; and that as soon as this is past, the Day of Judgment is at hand. Thus
much concerning the Conversion of the Gentiles; by whom, I understand the
People of those Nations, and Countries, that have not had the Knowledge of the
True God: And therefore they are to be distinguished from the Mahometans, who
are not to be reckoned in the Body of the Gentiles, and therefore not be
Converted, but Destroyed.

III. The Conversion of the Jews, is another Concomitant of the perfect State
of Christianity. This being a great Controversy among Divines, Whether the Jews
shall be Converted to Christ before the end of the World; I will Enlarge upon
it, and endeavor to give Satisfaction in the Point. By this Conversion, we do
not mean the Conversion of a Few, but a Great and Remarkable, a General and
National Conversion of the Jews, before the Consummation of all Things. This
was the general Belief of the Ancient Writers of the Church: The Holy Scripture
has declared, says In cap. 7. Esai* v. 14, 15.
Cyril of Alexandria, that the Jews in the last Times shall obtain Mercy, being
justified with us by Grace in Christ. The Jews, says Hilar. Com^ent. in St.
Matthew. Can. 10.
another Godly Father, shall turn unto God, and believe in Jesus, at the end of
the World, and be saved. And that there shall be this Signal Conversion of that
People, was the Persuasion of several Irenaeus, Origin, Justin Martyr,
Athanasius, Augustine, Jer^m, Ch^y^ostom* Ambrose, Prosper.
other Christian Fathers. Though I find there is some Disagreement among them
about this, Whether the Jews shall return to their own Country Iudaea, and
there be fixed again, and build and inhabit Jerusalem. Origin, speaking of the
Jews, (...). Contr. Cells.
affirms confidently, that they shall not be restored to their own Land; and
with him agrees St. Orat. 4. adv. ^uda^os.
Chrysostom. But Dialog. cum Tryph.
Justin Martyr, and some others of the Ancients, hold, that they shall return
to the Land of Canaan, upon their embracing the Messiah, and that they shall be
fixed there. To prove which, they quote Jer. 25. 5. Turn ye every one from his
evil Ways, and dwell in the Land which the Lord has given unto you, and to
your Fathers for ever and ever. In the 39 Chap. of Ezekiel, there seems to be
foretold not only the Destruction of the Turks, (called Gog) in the latter
Days, (ver. 1. to 23.) but immediately after that, the Return of the Jews to
their own Land, v. 23. to the end of the Chapter. All the Circumstances of the
Prophecy argue it to be spoken of this last Return from their Captivity, and
Dispersion. Which is further evidenced, from those remarkable Words in the
close of all, v. 29. I will not hide my Face any more from them; which shows,
that the Prediction cannot be meant of their Return under Cyru^ from their
Captivity in Babylon, because they have been Captives since, and banished into
all Parts of the World. Whence I conclude, that this Prophetic Promise was
never yet accomplished, and therefore must be. And other Prophecies (which are
very plain) may be alleged out of Isaia^, Joel, and Zechariah, which for^tel
that the Messiah shall restore the Israelites to their own Land. Indeed if we
duly weigh some of those Passages, we cannot but think it very credible, that
these poor Vagabonds shall recover again the Holy Land, and inhabit there,
after their long Dispersion. Though I will not designedly concern my self in
this Dispute, yet I think I shall render their Restoration extremely probable,
whilst I am discoursing of, and proving the main Thing, which is their
Conversion. And that this shall be National and General, was the common Opinion
of the Ancients; and the Moderns, excepting a Grotius, H^m^ond, Ligh^^oot, etc.
Few, assent to them in it.

I deny not, that some of the Texts usually cited out of the Old Testament, to
prove the General Calling and return of the Jews before the last Judgment, are
to be understood of the Temporal Deliverance of that People from the Captivity,
and their Returning back to their own Land presently after. And other Texts are
meant of the Spiritual Deliverance of the Jews, who were Godly and Righteous.
(Some of those Prophecies being to be taken in a Mystical and Spiritual Sense,
Canaan being a Type of the Church.) And there are some Places also which speak
of the Conversion of the Jews, which was to be in our Savior's Time, when he
chose his Disciples and Apostles out of the Jewish Nation; and when afterward
Multitudes of Jews submitted to Ch^istianity, and owned Jesus to be the Christ.
All this I acknowledge; but yet any unprejudiced Person may take notice of
other Places of Scripture, both in the Old and New Testament, which point at
the General and National Calling of the Jews, and that toward the end of the
World. And it may be taken notice of further, that some of those Texts which
foretell their Return from Babylon to their own Land, and others which speak of
their turning from Judaism to Christianity, at the first Propagation of the
Gospel, are also to be understood of this Universal Recalling of them at the
first setting up of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ which we are discoursing of;
for there is a Twofold Historical Meaning of such Passages in the Prophetical
Writings of the Bible; one is Primary and Chiefly intended, the other Secondary
and Included. This I am thoroughly persuaded of, from the Style and Tenor of
Scripture, that there are different Things spoken of in the same Place and
Narrative; different Occ^rrences are prophesied of at one time. All other
Historical Books have but one Sense and Meaning, and no more, because they
refer to one Thing only. But it is not so here. Any observing and consid^rate
Man must needs see this; and it is a Key to a great part of the Bible.

There is an eminent Passage in Lev. 26. which I don't find taken notice of;
but, in my Opinion, it speaks home to the present purpose. God, after that long
Scroll of Curses and Plagues threatened to the disobedient Israelites, from 15.
v. to 40. shuts up all with a merciful Assurance of their being Restored to
their own Land at last. Though they should perish among the Heathen, and though
the Land of their Enemies should eat them up; and though they that are left of
them, shall pine away in their Iniquity, in their Enemies Lands; v. 38, 39. Yet
I will remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and
also my Covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the Land; v.
42. He promises to perform the Covenant made with their Forefathers; viz. that
he would give them the Land of Canaan for a perpetual Possession. When they are
in the Land of their Enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor
them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my Covenant with them, for I am the
Lord their God. But I will for their sakes remember the Covenant of their
Ancestors, etc. 43, 44, 45, ver. The Repeating of these Terms, viz. of their
being in the Land, and in the Lands of their Enemies, shows, That this refers
not only to the Jews being Captives in Babylon, but to all their other
Dispersions and Banishments, and particularly that which is at this time, and
has lasted many Ages. And so the Reiterating of those Words, viz. God's
remembering his Covenant, plainly refers to the continual performing of his
Covenant with relation to the Restoring of the Jews; not only when they were
Captives in Assyria, but when afterward they should be banished into other
Lands, as they are at this day; even then God would be mindful of his Covenant,
and bring them back again. And, to this end, he would enable them to confess
their Iniquities, etc. v. 40. This is that Repentance and Conversion which we
expect; this is the Promise which remains to be fulfilled, for hitherto it is
not.

Again, it is promised in Deuteronomy. 30. 1, etc. That if the Israelites, when they
are driven into other Nations, shall call to mind those Blessings and Cursings
mentioned in the Chapter before, and shall return to the Lord their God, and
obey his Voice, then the Lord ^od will turn their Captivity, and have
Compassion on them, and will return, and gather them from all the Nations
whither the Lord God has scattered them. If any of them be driven out to the
utmost Parts of Heaven, from thence will the Lord their God gather them, and
from thence will be fetch them: And the Lord their God (...) bring them into
the Land which their Fathers possessed, and they shall possess it, and he will
do them good, and multiply them above their Fathers, and the Lord their God
will circumcise their Heart, and the Heart of their Seed, to love the Lord
their God, with all their Heart, and with all their Soul, that they may live.
In which Words, without doubt there is that Primary and Secondry Meaning, which
I spoke of. The former is not denied by any, and I will now prove the latter.
That this Promise extends even to the Universal Calling of the Jews, is clear
from these Things; First, that it is said, they shall be gathered from all the
Nations whither God had scattered them, and if any of them were driven to the
utmost Parts of Heaven, from thence the Lord will fetch them. Now we know that
the Ten Tribes of Israel, that were carried Captive by Salmanasser King of
Assyria, were removed into the utmost Parts of the World. Esdras tells us, That
they went forth into a very far Country where never Mankind dwelt; (or at least
he thought these Regions were not inhabited before:) They were a Year and a
half a going to it, and the Region is called Arsareth, or Ararath; then dwelt
they there until the latter Time; i. e. the Time we are at present speaking of,
2 Esd. 13. 41, 45. It is likely this was part of that vast Moiety of the World
which is now called America. Spes Israelis.
Manasse^ ben Israel, a Learned Jew, is persuaded that these Tribes were not
only the first Inhabitants of China, and some Parts of Tartary, but that they
went into the West Indies. However, we are certain that they came either into
these, or some other Countries, that were at a great distance from Iudaea;
because if they had been near it, they would have returned thither with the
rest of their Captive Brethren, when Cyrus gave them leave to do so, and (which
is more) encouraged them to it. It is manifest therefore, that they were driven
to the utmost Parts of Heaven.

Or if we should suppose, that they were not scattered so far, but (as Dr.
Lightfoot thinks) were removed to the farthest Parts of Assyria, or (as others
have imagined) were dispersed into Egypt, and other Parts of Africa, or (as
some have thought) traveled into Syria and Arabia; yet still we can say this,
that we no where read of their Return to their own Land. I do not speak of the
coming back of a Few, (of which we have some Footsteps in the Sacred History)
but of the Return of them in a Body, or as to a very Considerable Part of them,
of which this Text speaks. We have not one Syllable concerning this; and it is
certain that if they had returned, it would have been mentioned. Therefore I
infer hence yet, that this Promise is not fulfilled. And from this Inference I
make another, viz. that it is to be fulfilled hereafter, for none of God's
Promises fall to the Ground. And hence likewise I gather another, which is
this, That if God will be so favorable to them, as to restore them at last to
the Promised Land, it is most probable that he does it in order to a Greater
Blessing; viz. the turning every one of them from their Sins, and causing them
to embrace that Jesus whom they have so long despised and rejected. Therefore
their Returning, and their Conversion, most commonly go together in Scripture;
and we cannot think that God would take so much Care of those Outcasts, as to
bring them back to their Own Land, unless he intended to extend his Ancient
Mercies to them, and to receive them for his Own People again. And then observe
also it is added, The Lord will circumcise their Heart, to love the Lord their
God with all their Heart, and with all their Soul; which gives us to understand
that their Conversion shall be Sincere and Effectual, which without doubt will
be the Qualification of that Great and Catholic Conversion of the Jews before
the end of the World.

Next I might produce that Prophecy of Isaiah, Chapter 11. v. 11. And it shall come
to pass in that Day, that the Lord shall set his Hand again the Second Time, to
recover the Remnant of his People which shall be left, from Assyria, and from
Egypt, and from Pathros, and Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from
Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea. It is very reasonable to think, that
this Recovering of the Jews the Second Time, is, First, Particularly meant of
the Returning of the Posterity of the Ten Tribes, who, upon Salmanasser's
invading Iudaea, were either taken by him, or fled into strange Countries.
There shall not only be a Return from Babylon and Assyria, but from Egypt and
AEthiopia, and even from the most distant Regions. Secondly, more Generally and
Comprehensively, it is meant of those Times of the Gospel, when the Jews,
dispersed through all Countries, shall be restored to their own Land again, and
shall be Converted to the Christian Faith. This is here called the Second, and
it is the Last and most Eminent Time of their Conversion; when they shall be so
Happy likewise, as to have all the Gentiles for their Fellow-Converts, as it
follows in the next Verse of his Chapter: He shall set up an Ensign for the
Nations, as well as assemble the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah, from the four Corners of the Earth.

The Sixtieth Chapter of Isaiah treats of this very Subject, the Glorious
Condition of the Church under the Messias's Reign, when there shall be a
General Conversion of the Jews, as well as Gentiles; which is most elegantly
described by this Lofty and Poetic Prophet. And the 20th Verse plainly shows,
that whatever is said in this Chapter is to be understood not of the First Call
of the Jews which is past, but of the Second which is to come: For the Words
are these, Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it
self: Where is promised the perpetual Grace and Favor of God to this People
without any Interruption; but who sees not that this is not yet fulfill^d, and
therefore is not yet past? The Sun and Moon have gone down upon the Jewish
Nation; though the Light shone upon them with great vigor after our Savior's
Coming, and many were converted to Christianity; yet since that time there has
been a miserable Defection, and they have for many hundreds of Years been
rejected, and have remained in Darkness, and have been deprived of the Divine
Favor. But though the sun and Moon have withdrawn themselves since the first
Conversion; yet there is a Time coming when they shall no more go down, for (as
it follows) the Lord shall be their everlasting Light, and the Days of their
Mourning shall be ended. Therefore this Place of Scripture is meant of the
future State and Restoration of this People. In my Apprehension this is a a
very remarkable Text to prove it.

And those Words of the Prophet Hosea, Chapter 3. v. 4, 5. may well be thought to
refer to this Last Calling of the Jews: The Children of Israel shall abide many
days without a King, and without a ^rince, and without a Sacrifice, and without
an Image, and without an ^phod, and without Teraphim. Afterward shall the
Children of Isra^l return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King,
and shall fear the Lord and his Goodness in the latter days. We see the former
part of the Words verified: Nothing is more evident than that this People have
been many days, and are are at this very time, without a King, etc. they are
destitute of a Head and Governor, they are debarred the Use of Sacrifices which
were the main part of their Religion: But yet they do not erect Images, and
fall into Idolatry, as they were wont to do. This is the present State of this
People, which this Text speaks of, viz. that they have neither the Mosaic nor
Heathenish Worship, however the hearts of some of them may be inclined to this
latter: But I do not judge them. And as for the latter part of the Words, they
shall be verified in due time; the Children of Israel shall return (i. e. shall
be converted unto the Lord, as the Chaldee Paraphrast, of Jonathan renders it)
and seek the Lord by Repentance and Faith, and David their King, i. e. the
Messiah (as is acknowledged) by that Chaldee Paraphrast, and several of the
Jewish Doctors on this Place) because the Messiah was of the Stock of David,
and because Christ was typified by him; whence he is often called David in the
Jer. 30. 9. Ezekiel. 34. 24. Amo^* 9. 11. Acts 15. 16.
Holy Scriptures. This fiducial and penitential seeking the Lord, and owning
the Messiah, shall be accomplished under his Thousand years Reign, which is
here called the latter days, and in other Places signally the last Days, before
the End of the World. And it is impossible it should be meant otherwise,
because it is to follow this time of the Jews Exile in which they are at this
day, as we heard confessed before by one of their Chiefest Rabbis. But I found
what I say not only on the Concession of this Great Man among them, but upon
the Words themselves of the Prophecy, which tells us, that the Israelites shall
be without a King or Prince, many days, which in the Style of Scripture,
especially in the Prophetic Writings, usually signifies a very great number of
Years, as in Isai. 24. 22. 32. 10. Ier. 3. 7. Ezekiel. 12. 27. 38. 8. Dan. 8. 26.
10. 14. so that the time of their Captivity in Babylon, whence they returned as
soon as 70 years were expired, is not here intended, but some much longer space
of time.

And indeed it could not be the time of their being Captive there, because that
did not immediately precede the latter Days, by which in Scripture are
frequently denoted the Times of the Messiah, the last Age of the World; and the
Hebrew Writers and Commentators themselves freely grant this. Here it is said
they shall abide many Days without a King, etc. and afterward, i. e. in the
latter Days (as it is explained) they shall return, and seek the Lord their
God, and the Messiah: Which clearly argues, that the time of acknowledging the
Messiah shall presently succeed after those many days wherein they have abode
without a King, etc. This could not be any part of the time between their
Return from the Babylonian Captivity, and Christ's Coming in the Flesh, for
then they were not without a King, Prince, or Ruler, etc. therefore it must be
since, and the Time commenced when Shilo^ the Savior came, for then the
Scepter departed from ludah, then the Jews were left without King or Prince.
After this particular Period of Time is ended, the Messias's Kingdom shall be
erected in a more illustrious manner than ever, and then the Children of Israel
shall return, and seek the Lord, and shall have a King again; they shall
embrace that Messiah whom their Ancestors crucified, and they shall fear the
Lord and his Goodness; they shall, with Reverence and Admiration, acknowledge
the exceeding Favor and Grace of God to them. This I apprehend to be the
genuine Import of this Prophecy, and I leave it to the Reader to judge whether
it be not a Proof of the Grand Point now in hand.

I might mention Amos 9. 14, 15. with some of the preceding Verses, which
questionless are to be understood of this Kingdom of the Messiah which is yet
to come. The Close of the Prophecy plainly shows that it is meant of this; for
it is said, they shall no more be pulled up out of their Land which I have given
them. They have been pulled up out of that Land; that we are certain of, and
they are not yet returned to it: But when God shall bring them again to that
Place, they shall no more be pulled up: they shall remain there 'till the End
of the World.

I will add that famous Prediction of the Prophet Zachariab, Chapter 12. v. 10,
etc. I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Terusalem, the Spirit of Grace, and of Supplications; and they shall look upon
me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. That this Chapter is
spoken of the Tews, is agreed upon by all; and that this Portion of it is more
especially so, appears from that first thing which is said of them; viz. that
they shall look upon him whom they have pierced; for it refers to the piercing
of our Savior's side with a Spear, John 19. 37. where, upon this Action, this
Scripture is said to be fulfilled. Upon this Account, their looking upon
Christ, and mourning for him, cannot be meant of what they did presently after
their return from the Captivity in Babylon (of which some imagine most of the
Prophets speak) for Christ was not then come, and therefore they could not
pierce him: And besides, this Zechary prophesied after the Captivity and the
Restoration of the Jews, and consequently could not speak of these as future
things, as here, they shall look, they shall mourn. Nor can this Prophecy be
understood (as some conceive) of the Conversion of the Jews in the Apostles
Times, when several of them embraced the Christian Faith, and particularly in
one day there were added to the Church about three thousand Souls, Acts. 241.
some of whom had been Crucifiers of our Savior, v. 36. for this is far
different from a National Mourning and Repentance, which are here foretold. Not
only Jerusalem, but the Land shall mourn, v. 12. the whole People of the Jews.
Neither is this Prophecy to be interpreted concerning the Day of Judgment, as
several Expositors have thought, telling us that then there shall be a General
Mourning and Lamenting for the Crucifying of Christ, when they shall look on
him whom they have pierced. But this Exposition cannot be admitted, because
these Words speak of the true and hearty Repentance and Conversion of the Jews,
which no considerate Man can expect shall be at the Last Day. If they have not
the Spirit of Grace and Supplications poured on them before, it is too late
then to have it. Nor can the Jewish Families mourn apart at that time, as is
related here. Therefore I conclude, seeing none of the foresaid Interpretations
are well grounded, that the Words are to be understood of the Days of the
Millennary Reign, when there shall be a National and Universal Call of the
Jews: The whole Land, i. e. all the People shall mourn, and every Family apart,
to show the Sincerity of the Mourning. The Spirit of Grace and Supplication
shall be bestowed on these True Penitents; they shall be effectually moved by
the former to hate their past Enormities, and by the latter to beg Pardon for
them. They shall in a sincere and saving manner bewail the execrable Wickedness
of their Forefathers who put the Blessed Jesus to Death, and as cordially
grieve that they themselves cruci^ied him by their Sins. This is looking on him
whom they pierced. Thus, on all Accounts, this Prophetic Passage is to be
interpreted concerning that Last Conversion of the Jews, which is one main
Ingredient of the Messias's Kingdom toward the World's End, when the whole Body
of that People, disperesed over the several parts of the Earth, shall be
brought home to the Flock of Christ. Thus it is apparent that this is one of
the most considerable Texts in the Old Testament to this purpose.

I will now pass to the New Testament, which chiefly recounts the wonderful
Grace of God in the Conversion of Persons to Christianity in the Times of our
Savior and his Apostles, and therefore speaks but little of this future Call
of the Jews; but two or three Places are very Remarkable, which I will Produce.
The first is that of Luke 2. 30, 31, etc. where we read that Aged Simeon took
the Child Jesus up in his Arms, and blessed God that his Eyes had seen his
Salvation, viz. the Savior whom God had sent into the World, whom he had
prepared before the Face of all People; i. e. whom he had from Eternity decreed
and appointed to make known in due time to all the Nations and People of the
World: And because Gentiles and Jews are a dichotomy of all the People of the
World, this Great Blessing is more particularly and distinctly expressed thus,
that he shall be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People
Israel. Where we are assured that the Gentiles shall first share in this
Blessing of the Messiah, and then the Jews, which manifestly shows that this
latter is to be understood of the General Conversion of the Jews; for in our
Savior's Time the Jews were first called, and then the Gentiles. It shall be
otherwise afterward; the way of Salvation and Happiness shall first be
discovered to the Gentiles, and then to the Jews. But observe how differently
this is expressed; it is said Christ shall enlighten the former, but he shall
be the Glory of the latter. It is a very high Word, and lets us know how great,
how renowned, how glorious the State of the Jews shall be hereafter: For this
must necessarily be meant of their future Condition, because they have never
since these Words were spoken been a Glorious People; yea, they have been above
Sixteen hundred years an inglorious, base, despised People. Therefore there
remains a Time when these Words of Simeon shall be fulfilled, viz. when the
Gentiles are converted to the Faith, then Christ shall be the Glory of his
People Israel. And it is probable that this is meant by those Words that
follow, Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising again of many in
Israel, that is, the Jewish People shall be rejected, but they shall afterward
be recovered and restored. We have seen the first part of this Prophecy
accomplished, and at this very day the Truth of it is manifest; the Jews are
fallen, they are cast off, and cease to be a Church or Nation. The second part
of the Prophecy is yet to come, when this People shall rise again, and be
received to Mercy and Favor.

The next Text is that which I had occasion to mention partly before, but now I
will set it down in full, Luke 21. 24. where our Savior, after he had been
discoursing of the several Forerunners of those Judgments which were to befall
the Jews, foretells that there shall be great distress in the Land, and wrath
upon this People, and they shall fall by the Edge of the Sword, and shall be
led away Captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the time of the ^entiles be fulfilled. We are abundantly
assured that at the Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, the Land of ludaea
was in great distress, and wrath was upon that People, and they fell by the
Edge of the Sword: And those that remained were led Captive into all Nations,
and dispersed over the whole World. But this Captivity and Dispersion, this
treading down of Jerusalem by the Gentiles, shall not last always, but only
until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, i. e. (as I explained it before)
till the time of the full Conversion of the Gentile World. So that it is plain
from these Words, that the Jewish Nation is to be restored, and that their
present Captivity and Banishment shall have an End. There shall be a time when
the Jews shall not be any more trodden down of the Gentiles; and this shall be
when the Times of these latter are fully accomplished, and run out, i e. when
the particular time arrives in which they shall be called into the Christian
Church, of which I spoke before.

The next Passage to this purpose which I will take notice of, is in 2 Cor. 3.
14, etc. where the Apostle speaking of the Children of Israel, says, that
their minds were blinded, God was pleased not to give them that Light and
Knowledge which are common under the Gospel: Their dark Understandings were
agreeable to their obscure Administrations, which consisted chiefly of Types
and Shadows. Yea, even unto this day, says he, the Veil (i. e. of Ignorance
and Blindness) is untaken away, and is still upon their heart. Nevertheless
when it (i. e. Israel, say some; but this is not probable, because though there
is mention made before of the Children of Israel, yet not of Israel barely. It
is more reasonable to believe that it refers to their heart immediately
beforementioned. When this) shall turn to the Lord, when the Jewish Nation
shall be heartily converted, and embrace the Gospel, and the Blessed Author of
it, then the Veil shall be taken away, this Ignorance shall be removed, and
they shall attain to a complete Insight of the Imperfection of that Law which
they before adhered to, and of the Excellency of the Christian Institution, and
the Founder of it. This Veil, whenever it is removed, is done away in Christ,
and him only, i. e. by believing in him, and by renouncing their former
Infidelity. It is evident that the Apostle speaks of a Time when this shall be,
therefore it was not then past when he wrote this Epistle: Though I grant it
was partly accomplished at that time, because several Jews had received the
Christian Faith: And I grant that it was further verified afterward, when
others of that Nation renounced Judaism, and believed in Jesus. But yet still
the Apostles Words, which are a Solemn Prediction, are not completely
fulfilled; for you may take notice that he speaks of the Jews in General, and
as they are a Body, calling them the Children of Israel, which is always
understood in this manner.

And I could observe that the way of speaking here used intimates as much: It,
i. e. their heart (in the singular number) shall turn to the Lord; which
implies that this Conversion shall be with a General Consent; they shall All
turn to the Lord as if they were one Person; they shall do it (as it is in
Scripture expressed) with one heart and with one soul; the whole Jewish People
shall unanimously repent and believe. The Reader may choose whether he will
attend to this Criticism or no; for I pretend not to prove the Universality of
the Jews future Conversion from this Mode of speaking. I know this way of
arguing is not convincing, because we do not know but that this may be merely
an En^llage of Number: But then, on the other hand, we are not certain but that
the Holy Ghost intended something remarkable and peculiar in this manner of
Expression, and therefore I could not but offer it to your Consideration. To
conclude, the Text assures us that there is a certain determined Time when the
Children of Israel shall turn unto the Lord, and then the Veil shall be wholly
taken away, as it has been in part already. This is to be fully brought to
pass at the Time when the whole Community of them shall own the Messiah, and
become Subjects of his Kingdom here on Earth.

The other place which I will propound is the Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans, a most Eminent and Illustrious Proof of the Matter before us.
There the Apostle speaking of the Rejection of the Jews, and the Calling of the
Gentiles, expressly asserts in the 12. v. the Fullness of the former, (as well as
of the latter afterward in the 25. v.) as much as to say, there shall be a
time when the Full Conversion of the whole Body of the Jews (no less than of
the Gentiles) shall come to pass. This he Appositely calls Life from the Dead,
v. 15. because it is so wonderful, and withal so welcome a thing. And the
Expression is the more Observable, because the Isai. 26. 19. Ezekiel. 37. 12, 13.
Dan. 12. 2, 3.
Prophets of the Old Testament express the Restoration and Conversion of the
Jews by the same manner of speaking, viz. by Living again, or by Rising from
the Dead. And this gives light to Rev. 20. 5. where (as I have showed you) the
Glorious Reign of Christ with his Saints is called the first Resurrection. It
is as it were a Living again after Death; and particularly, the Restoring and
Calling of the Jews (which is so considerable a part of that Reign) is
signalized by these very terms, even by the Inspired Prophets of God in the Old
Testament, and by St. Paul in the New. Now then I argue thus from what the
Apostle here says, if there shall be a Fullness of the Jews, their Conversion
shall be Complete and Entire, the numbers of those that are called shall be
Consummated. I ask now whether this is past, or whether it is to come? It is
past, say some, for the Fullness which the Apostle speaks of here happened in
the first times of the Gospel, when both Gentiles and Jews were Converted by
the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles. A great many Jews turned to the
Lord, and Believed, and became Christians just about the time of the Romans
besieging Jerusalem; and soon after the Destruction of that City many were
convinced of the Truth of Christ's Prophecies, and owned Christianity. But can
any impartial Man persuade himself that all this amounts to the Fullness of the
Jews which the Apostle here speaks of? No; the Apostle himself calls it but a
Remnant, v. 5. and he makes a plain distinction betwixt this Remnant and the
General Calling of the Jews, which he says is their Fullness: And therefore if
we will allow St. Paul to speak Properly and Significantly, we must not mistake
one for the other: We may, and ought to grant that very many Jews were called
to the Faith in Christ, but we cannot with any shadow of Truth assert that
there was a Full and General Calling of that People. Therefore I conclude that
this Calling is not past, but is yet to come, which is the thing I designed.

So I might briefly argue in the same manner from that other Passage of the
Apostle in this Chapter, v. 26. where he sets down the result of that Mystery
which he had mentioned before about the Casting off of the Jews, till the
Conversion of the Gentiles be full. This, says he, shall at last be the Issue
of it, all Israel shall be saved: As soon as the Gentiles are Converted, the
Jews shall follow their Example, and repent, and believe in Christ, and receive
the Pardon of their Sins; so all Israel, i. e. the Jewish Nation, shall be
saved. I know there are some (as Theodoret of Old, and Mr. Calvin among the
Moderns) who Interpret the place more generally: They think that All Israel
comprehends not only Jews but Gentiles, all true and faithful Members of the
Christian Church that shall be gathered from among them both. There shall be in
due time a Great and Famous Conversion of all the Pagan parts of the World to
Christianity, and this shall soon be followed with as Notable and Signal
Conversion of those that are Natural Jews, in what parts of the World soever
they are. If we should understand the Words thus, they sufficiently assert the
Point which I am proving, but the Scope of the Apostle in this place directs us
to a stricter meaning of his Words: And so by all Israel here we are to
understand, that People which peculiarly have that Name, viz. those that were
of the Stock of the Patriarch Israel.

That the Apostle speaks of the Salvation of these particularly, I will prove
from what goes before, and what follows these Words. First, you may observe how
the word Israel is understood in this Chapter: It cannot be denied that in the
2d. and 7th. Verses it signifies the Body of the Jewish Nation; and so it does
in the Verse just foregoing this. Blindness in part is happened to Israel,
says the Apostle, i. e. to the Natural Jews whom he had been speaking of all
along: and he tells us, that this Blindness or Hardness (as it may also be
rendered according to the Greek) which happened to them for a certain time
shall be removed as soon as the whole Body of the Gentiles embrace
Christianity, as soon as their fullness is come in; then this very Israel also
shall do the same, and so all Israel shall be saved. There is no Considerate
Man can seriously refuse this meaning of the Word, for it is manifest that it
is not meant here of all the Faithful, but is to be taken in a restrained
sense, viz. for that particular People of the Jews who shall hereafter believe;
for the Apostle expressly opposes them to the Gentiles. Again, this acception of
the Word may be proved from what immediately follows in this Verse, As it is
written, there shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
Ungodliness from Jacob. This Prophecy, as appears from the place whence it is
taken ( Isai. 59. 20.) does primarily and directly refer to that peculiar
People. We may gather from the preceding part of the Chapter, and from those
terms Sion and Jacob, in the Verse it self, both which signify here the Jewish
People, that this Text speaks of them, and consequently that Israel in the
preceding words is meant of the same People; otherwise the alleging of this
Prophecy out of the Old Testament would be impertinent. I think there needs no
more to be said to prove what I undertook, viz. that this Text of the Apostle
foretells the General Conversion of the Jews. And of this (and nothing but
this) many of the Ancient Origin, Jerome, Athanasius, Chrysostom, etc.
Fathers and Beda, Aquinas, etc.
Others understood the Words.

Now then, if all Israel shall be saved, I demand when this was fulfilled? It
could not be in the Primitive Times, for though many Thousands of Natural Jews
were then Converted to Christianity, and so were saved, yet far greater numbers
persisted in their Judaism, and believed not in the Crucified Jesus, therefore
all were not saved. And we hear but of few since that have renounced their
Infidelity and received the Gospel. Wherefore there shall be a time hereafter
when the Apostle's Words shall be accomplished, viz. toward the latter end of
the World. For though it is not here expressly said, that it shall be at such a
time, yet both this and other places of Scripture speak of it as a Future Event
of great Concern: And then by rational Deductions and Inferences, and by
comparing of things together (which has been part of my task) we find when
this time shall be, viz. at that happy Revelation toward the close of the
World.

And it is observable that the Apostle calls this Conversion a Mystery, v. 25.
which he would not have done if it were meant of the Jews that were in those
Primitive Days Converted, for that was no Mystery, but apparent and known to
all: But it was a great Secret or Mystery, that the whole Body of the Jews
should continue in Unbelief and Impenitence till the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and that then they should all be Converted and Saved. This was a
Mystery, he tells them, at that time, but he was pleased to reveal it to them;
whence it is evident that he speaks of a Future Conversion.

After all that has been said, there is yet farther Evidence from the 27th.
Verse of this Chapter, which is part of the Prophecy produced from Isa. 59.
This is my Covenant unto them, or with them; which without doubt refers to Genesis
17. 7. I will Establish my Covenant betwixt me and thee, and thy Seed after
thee, in their Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee,
and thy Seed after thee. The Jewish Race, for the sake of their Faithful
Progenitors, shall partake at length of Mercy and Favor, for the Covenant is
made with Abraham's Seed after him, in their Generations, and it cannot be
nulled (though there may be for a time an interruption of the actual exerting
of it) it is an Everlasting Covenant. Again, in the 28. Verse of this Chapter,
the Apostle lets us know, that not only on this account, but by the tenor of
the Divine Election, (whether you take it for the Eternal Decree of Heaven, or
only God's singular favor in chosing this People in time out of all others)
they shall find Mercy at last* As touching the Election, says he, they are
beloved, and that for the Fathers sake, i. e. the sake of Abraham and the other
Godly Patriarchs from whom the Jews descended: And this Love and the effect of
it, which shall be seen in their being Called, are not to be frustrated, For
(as the Apostle adds) the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance, v.
29. God having made choice of this People, they cannot totally be Rejected.
Though many of them were fallen, and many more afterward should continue in
their Unbelief, yet God has not, and will not cast off his People whom he
foreknew, and whom he Elected: They shall not finally Perish, but be gathered
to the Church; for the Gifts and Callings, etc. Such special Favors as these
are Unchangable; being once Promised they cannot be Revoked. The Apostle founds
the Universal Recalling of the Jews upon this, that God has chosen them,
according to what we read in Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. As there was a Remnant (a small
number of Jews) according to the Election of Grace (as we find in this Chapter,
v. 5.) who at that present time, when the Apostle writ, rejected not the
Gospel, but were effectually Called and Converted; so likewise hereafter there
shall be a vast number of this People, who by virtue of the same Election shall
turn unto God; and besides he will not fail to perform the Promise made to
their Ancestors, he will not forget his Covenant made with them. The Jews were
once the Beloved People of God, and their Posterity shall be beloved for the
Fathers sake; which is agreeable to the Faithfulness as well as the infinite
and unmeasurable Goodness of God. Thus you see how the Great Apos^le argues,
viz. from the Election, and from the Covenant, and from the Love of God, and
from his Unchangeableness. All these are concerned for the restoring of that
People, and therefore there is no question of the Truth of it. Though they are
laid aside for the present, yet they shall be taken into Favor again, and be
of the number of those that are Saved* This very thing which the Apostle here
asserts was the Ancient Notion of the Jews, who had this Common Saying (though
they did not so well understand it) Every Israelite shall have his part in the
World to come; which is the same that the Apostle here affirms, All Israel
shall be saved, there shall be a General Conversion of that People.

Lastly, to insist upon no other Proofs, I will only add Rev. 7. 4, etc. which
gives an account of the number of them that were Sealed, of all the Tribes of
the Children of Israel, which I conceive is to be understood of the numerous
Company of Jews that shall be Converted in the Latter Days. It is true,
Expositors generally interpret the Words otherwise, and fix this Sealing long
before this time: Particularly Dr. Hammond thinks this is spoken of the
Conversion of the Jews about the time of the Destruction of Jerusalem. But if
it be considered that the Subject of this Chapter is under the Sixth Seal (as
is evident from comparing the 12. v. of the 6th. Chapter with 1: v. of the 8th.
Chapter) and belongs to the close of it, we must be forced to acknowledge that
these Words appertain to the Last Times, in which the Signal Conversion shall
happen, which is fitly represented by the Sealing of so many Thousands of every
Tribe of Israel. Besides, I cannot find any time when this has been already
fulfilled, i. e. when there was such a vast number of Jews Converted together,
and therefore this Time is yet to come, and accordingly I am persuaded that
this place of the Revelation foretells this Notable Event, and (As I apprehend)
refers to Zech. 12. 12, etc. of which I have largely treated before.

From all thse places of Scripture laid together I conclude that there shall be
at length a Visible, National and General Conversion of the Jewish People, and
that they being joined to the Converted Gentiles shall make up One Church of
Christ. I confess I have heretofore thought the contrary, being strongly
inclined to believe that those Texts of Scripture had no determinate reference
to this affair. But I have since thoroughly examined them, and more exactly
scanned them, and penetrated into the sense of them; insomuch that I am now
persuaded, that a Future Conversion of the Jews in spoken of in them all, or
most of them. Particularly, in my Judgment, the Eelventh Chapter to the Romans
is a very clear and convincing Evidence of this great change of their
Condition, which as it shall be Amazing, so it shall be matter of exceeding
Rejoicing and Exultation, and therefore is deservedly called (as you have
heard) Life from the Dead.

If it be asked, How this General Conversion of the Jews shall be effected, I
conceive the first Occasion of it will be this, They will take notice of the
Wonderful and Avenging Hand of God upon the Idolaters of Rome, who have so long
a time prospered: They will observe the sudden downfall of that Wicked Assembly
of Men, who have boasted of their being founded on a Rock, and that they should
never be removed. When the Jews shall see how remarkably God has Defeated and
Confounded these Men, it will have a very good effect upon them, and cause them
to reflect on their own Stubbornness and Insidelity, and to fear lest the
Divine Vengeance may overtake them. And when the Idolatrous Worship of the
Papists is removed, which was always so great an Offense to the Jews, and was
one main reason why they spoke and thought ill of the Christian Religion, they
will then be encouraged to approach nearer to it, to be more familiar with it,
and to discern the innate Goodness and Excellency of it, which was before so
much clouded with Ceremonies, and corrupted with Superstitious Practices.

And w^ must suppose likewise, that at that time Christians will lay aside all
their former Prejudices against the Jewish Nation. It has been a Vulgar
Opinion that the Jews Stink naturally, and that the whole stock of them have an
unsavory Smell. And generally Christians have acted toward that People as if
this were really true: They avoid their Society, and keep at a distance from
them, as if some unwholesome and fetid Vapors issued from them: They have
treated them with Scorn and Contempt, with Contumely and Reproach; which may be
more eminently observed in Buxtorf's Synagogue, where he most rudely handles
them, grossly and sometimes almost profanely deriding them and their Services,
calling them Beasts, Swine, Mad Dogs and Devils; which certainly is not the way
to do any good upon them, which yet that Learned Man pretends to in that Book.
But when those happy Days shall shine which I am speaking of, the former
Antipathy of Christians against the Race of the Jews shall vanish away, and
they shall unfeignedly endeavor to promote the welfare of their Immortal
Souls, which by the Divine Blessing on their Endeavors will end in their
Effectual Conversion. It was the Opinion of Tertullian, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
and several other Fathers, (in which they are followed by the Doctors of the
Roman Church, that the Calling of the Jews before Christ's Coming to Judgment
shall be chiefly Effected by the Preaching of Enoch and Elias. So far we may
allow it to be true, that such Holy and Zealous Men as they were shall be the
Instruments of this Great Work; and you may be certain it will easily be
brought to Perfection, when such Persons are raised up by God to act in it.

And with Pathetick Instructions, Invitations, Admonitions and Convictions
shall be joined most Ardent Prayers; for at such a time the Christian Church
will be stired up to pity the forlorn state of this miserable People, and to
solicit Heaven with importunate Addresses in their behalf. The Devout Mr. In
his Poem Entitled* The Jews.
Herbert may be a Pattern in this particular, who when he had expressed his
sense of there Condition, in these (and the like) Words, Poor Nation! whose
sweet Sap and Juice
Our Cyens have purloyn'd and left you dry,
Compassionately adds, O that my Prayers! mine alas!
Oh that some Angel might a Trumpet sound,
At which the Church falling upon her Face
Should cry so loud, until the Trump were drowned,
And by that cry from her dear Lord obtain,
That your sweet Sap may come again!


Moreover, the wonderful Conversion of the Gentiles, (which shall be a
forerunner of that of the Jews) shall be another cause of the coming in of
these latter, and of their accepting the Gospel. This is suggested to us by our
Apostle, v. 11. of the 14. to the Romans, Salvation shall come (for so we may
read it, because there is no Verb in the (...).
Original to determine the time) to the Gentiles, to provoke them (i. e. the
Jews) to jealousy. And this is yet more clear from 25, and 26. v. of the
Eleventh Chapter before insisted upon, which not only assert the General
Calling of the Jews, but that it shall be after the Fullness of the Gentiles, i.
e. when the Gentiles are Converted. Blindness in part ( i. e. for a certain
time) is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And
when this is come in, then the Jews shall no longer be blinded. I take this to
be a clear Text for the Priority of the Gentiles Conversion before that of the
Jews, though I find it opposed by several, and particularly by our Learned
Hammond (who attempts to distort the Words) and by the Author of The State of
the Church in Future Ages, Chap. 6. where he contends that the Apostles Words
are to be understood in a qualified sense, and that is this, Blindness in part
is befallen Israel, for so long as until the time come in which the Gentiles
shall come in, in their fullness, that is they shall come in then more
generally than ever before. But whatever this dark Gloss drives at, this is a
plain, obvious and intelligible Truth, that though there was a great and
notable Conversion both of Gentiles and Jews in the Apostle's time, yet that
could not be meant here, because the Apostle speaks of something to come in
Future Ages, viz. a Complete and Universal Conversion of those two: And as to
the Order of them he lets us know that the Gentiles shall be first Converted,
and then the Jews, for (says he) the Blindness and Hardness of these latter
shall not be taken away until the fullness of the other comes in, i. e. until
the full number of Gentiles be come into the Church of God, by a hearty
embracing and professing of Christianity. Can any thing be plainer than this?
Could the Apostle have used any clearer Words to express this matter, viz. That
the Conversion of the great Multitude of the Heathen World will preceed that of
the Jews, that it will be a means to remove their Blindness and Hardness, and
to cause them to own the Christian Faith. Wherefore I cannot submit to this
Authors qualified sense, and that for a Reason which himself assigns in another
W. A. Of the Nature and Order of Occurrences, etc.
Place, To force an unusual Signification upon a Word, where the Scope of the
Place, and Nature of the Matter where it is used, does not necessarily require
it, has little Authority in it to procure assent. But this Sense which I
offer, is further evident from what the Apostle adds in the forenamed Place, So
all Israel shall be saved. The (...), so, is very Emphatical and Remarkable
here; for it acquaints us, that the General Conversion of Salvation of the Jews
shall be such, shall be so, that it shall be the Effect and Consequence of the
Gentiles foregoing Conversion. SO they shall be Converted, in this Manner they
shall be Saved, and no otherwise. The Jews shall behold that strange
Revolution, and sudden Change, in the Pagan World, and thence be stirred up to
make an Alteration among themselves. A holy Emulation shall possess their
Minds, which shall push them on to this great Work. So, i. e. in this Manner
and Method all Israel shall be Saved, the whole Body of the Jews shall be
received into the Church.

Perhaps this Universal Call may be promoted by some extraordinary Appearance,
or Spectacle in the Heavens. Some would infer from that Place beforecited, They
shall look on him whom they have pierced, that our Savior will come, and be
seen at that Grand Change of Affairs; but from what I have said already on that
Passage, it is manifest that it is not capable of the Sense. As for Rev. 1. 7.
Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and even they which
pierced him; and all Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him; which is
thought by some to be a parallel Place with that which I last named, because
there is some likeness in the Words in both Places; I rather think it is spoken
of the Last Day, the Day of Judgment, when they shall see the Son of Man coming
in the Clouds of Heaven, Matthew. 24. 30. which is generally acknowledged to the
meant of Doomsday. Then all impenitent Sinners, and more especially they that
pierced and crucified Christ, and died in their Sins, shall see him to their
unspeakable Sorrow.

But those Words (if any) in Dan. 7. 13. may seem to be some proof of Christ's
Appearing himself in the Clouds, when his Kingdom on Earth is to be set up
anew. One like the Son of Man came in the Clouds of Heaven; and there was given
him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, etc. for I have showed before that
these Words are a Prediction of the Millennium. Though I cannot be positive
here; (for it may be this coming in the Clouds of Heaven, may only refer to the
Manner of the Vision which Daniel had; I saw in the Night Visions, says he,
one like the Son of Man, who appeared as if he came in the Clouds) yet, I must
needs say, I am rather inclined to think that this Place speaks of a visible
Appearance of our Savior at the Entrance of the Millennary Reign, especially
in order to the rouzing and alarming of the Hardened Jews, who will be looking
after Signs from Heaven: And therefore at such a time it is likely Christ may
appear in the Skies with an amazing Splendour and Glory to these gazing
Spectators. I conceive he may Personally Appear above, though he will not Reign
Personally on Earth. After he has showed himself, he soon retreats, and
remains in Heaven till the Last and Final Day. Mr. Mede, who once thought that
our Savior would make a visible Appearance in the Clouds, in order to the Jews
Conversion, afterward retracted this Opinion; (as may be seen in one of his
Letters) because there is no good Foundation for it, viz. in Mat 24. 30. which
he had formerly quoted for that purpose. But whether there is any Foundation
for such an Apprehension in that Place of Daniel, I leave to the Reader to
judge: I only offered it as probable, but am persuaded that no Man can
Absolutely determine any Thing in this Case, and therefore he is very
presumptuous that attempts it.

Chap. XXI.
Universal Righteousness is another Attendant of this Last Dispensation. An
Objection doubly answered. It is not a Sinless State. Greater Knowledge than
ever shall be at that Time. Religion shall then appear in its Native Purity.
The Influence of the Holy Spirit on Men's Lives, shall be more effectual than
formerly. Jesus shall in a more eminent Manner be exalted. Other Fruits of this
happy Reign. How these great Things shall be wrought. Civil Magistrates shall
be made use of. Christ's Reign is not inconsistent with that of Kings and
Princes. Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Rulers shall be Instruments in this great
Work. All Persons are some Ways capable of promoting it. Universal Peace is
another Blessing that attends this Kingdom of Christ. On what account it must
needs be so. Scripture attests it. An Objection obviated. A Concurrence of all
manner of Temporal Blessings in this happy State. More especially Bodily
Health, and Long Life. Also a vast Increase of the Poeple of that Time. The
Savage Brates shall become Tame and Gentle. These Earthly Blessings are but
Appendages of this Dispensation. They are Inconsiderable, in respect of the
Divine Blessings which constitute this State. The Author's Doubtings and
Reluctancies. He is not positive as to Particular Circumstances. He cannot
determine concerning the Forerunners of this Revolution. The Freedom which he
uses in a Point that is highly Probable. He follows not some late Writers in
assigning the particular Time when the Millennary Reign shall commence. The
punctual Date is not to be known. The Thing discoursed of is certain, though
the Time as to us is not so. The Degeneracy of the present Times is no obstacle
to this. The Author leaves a Testimony of his Wishes and Desires.

HAving spoken of Three of the Grand Concomitants of the Reign of Christ, I
proceed now to the Fourth, which is Universal Righteousness and Holiness. You
might have observed, that in some of those Places of Scripture, which I
alleged to evince the Future calling of the Jews and Gentiles; and you may
observe in several. others besides, which speak of this happy Revolution, and
the consummation of the Messias's Kingdom, that there is some mention all along
made of the Holiness which shall abound in that Time. This is reckoned among
the Blessings of Christ's Kingdom in several Places of the Prophetic Writings:
Thy People shall be all Righteous, Isa. 60. 21. I will sprinkle clean Water
upon you, and ye shall be clean, Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will save you from your
Uncleanness, ver. 29. which is the same with cleansing them from their
Iniquities, ver. 33. They shall not defile themselves any more with their
detestable Things, or any of their Transgressions, Ezekiel. 37. 23. In those Days
HOLINESS TO THE LORD must be engraved on the Bells of the Horses, Zech. 14. 20.
There shall be such a Catholic Reformation, that every Thing, even the meanest
and commonest, shall share in it. We find it to be the Office of the Messiah to
bring in everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. not only that of his Own,
whereby we are to be justified; but an Inherent one in our selves, (though
produced by the Holy Spirit) whereby we are sanctified.

If it be said that this, and some of the other Texts, refer to those Times
which are past, viz. when Christ came in the Flesh, or when the Apostles made
so many Converts to our Holy Religion, or even to the present Times of the
Gospel; and therefore they have no respect to what is to come. I answer, That
the Consequence is not valid; for though these Prophecies were partly and
initially fulfilled before, yet it does not follow thence, that they shall not
be Completely fulfilled hereafter. I grant that they are in part come to pass,
for there never was more Holiness than since the Rise of the Gospel; but I
assert withal, that the Full Accomplishment is yet behind, for there shall be a
larger Effusion of Holiness in the ensuing Dispensation.

Or the former Answer, which I gave in the like Case, may be Satisfactory here;
viz. that this kind of Prophetic Passages have a Double Meaning, and
therefore, must have a Double Accomplishment. Many of these Predictions which
foretold what should be at Christ's first setting up the Kingdom of the Gospel,
do also foretell what shall happen at his Coming in the Millennium. This is a
safe way of interpreting those Place, and giving an Account of those
Prophecies; yea, this solves the Difficulties which occur in this Controversy.
This is no groundless Notion, but built upon the Interpretation of Scripture,
dictated by the Holy Ghost himself, as I have proved in another Discourse;
where I have showed, that this is the peculiar Excellency of the Sacred
Writings, to have a First, and a Second, or (if you will) a Direct and a
Collateral Meaning, which we find in no other Books whatsoever that are
Historical. This is applicable here; those Passages in the Prophets concerning
an extraordinary Measure of Sanctity and Righteousness, are to be understood
not only of the Primitive Times of Christianity, but more especially of those
that shall be toward the latter end of the World, viz. in the Blessed Reign of
Christ. It is not to be doubted but that the Prophetic Words reach to these
Two times, so that they are fulfilled twice. In the Sacred Writings not only
different Persons and Things, but different Times and Seasons, are contained in
the same Words.

And as this Holiness of the future State on Earth is foretold in the Holy
Scriptures, so it naturally follows from what has been said before: For when
Babylon shall fall, and the Mystery of Iniquity with it, when those whose grand
Design and Business it was to extirpate the Purity of Religion, shall
themselves be rooted out, when both Jews and Gentiles shall universally abandon
their evil Opinions and wicked Practices, and jointly set themselves to the
Study of God's Will, and the observance of their Duty; you cannot but think
there will follow upon this an Universal Sanctity in the World. I do not mean a
Sinless State; for this is so like Heaven, that I cannot be induced to think
that we shall have it here on Earth. Those High-fliers, who represent the
Millennary State as such, lash out too far; and remember not that our Heaven is
not to be here. The binding of Satan, which is spoken of, is not such a Binding
as if the Devils were all shut up, and none of them had the least Liberty to
solicit and entice us to Sin. I observe, that it was the Chief of these
Infernal Spirits that was bound by the Angel, Rev. 20. 1. which I gather from
the several Names that are here given him; viz. the Dragon, that old Serpent,
who is the Devil and Satan, which are heaped up on purpose to distinguish this
Arch-Daemon from the rest. This is that very Apostate Ghost, it is probable,
who wrought the First Mischief in the World, the Fall of the First Man and
Woman; by assuming the Shape of a Serpent, or rather, by entering into, and
acting a Real Serpent; whence he is called here, the old Serpent. He being the
Subtilest and most Malicious of all the Diabolical Crew, is bound, and cast
into the bottomless Pit, and shut up, and a Seal is set upon him, that he
should deceive the Nations no more. He, who was the Head and Ringleader of the
rest, and by whose order they generally acted, is secured; and thereupon their
Power is extremely abated, though they are not chained up in the same manner
that He is. It is not likely that they forget their old Employment, but they do
what they can in it, though it be but little. They shall not be totally,
absolutely, and fully bound, till the Last Day, and therefore they will not
cease to tempt and deceive Men till that time; but they shall be Restrained in
a very great Measure and Degree. However, if we suppose the whole Body of Evil
Angels so confined, that they are utterly incapable of Tempting; yet, as long
as Men are on this side of Heaven, Corruptions will adhere to them. The Best
will Sin to the Worlds end, because they are a Compound of Flesh and Spirit.
Their Make and Frame being such, there can be no entire Freedom from Sin in
this Life. But this high Degree of the Evangelical State shall set them at as
great a Distance from it as they can be capable of, in this lower Region of the
World.

For, First, in that happy Restoration, Men shall be Blessed with a greater
Knowledge than ever, which is the Groundwork of true Holiness. The Inspired
Prophets, who speak of those Days, assure us, That the Earth shall be full of
the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9. And perhaps
this is intended in Isa. 65. 20. The Child shall die an Hundred Years Old; i.
e. all Persons shall grow up to maturity of Understanding, even before they
have attained to any considerable Number of Years: The Children shall have such
Knowledge, that if they die in their Childhood, they shall be as Knowing as
some of those heretofore that were very Old, that lived an Hundred Years. This
is the Privilege of those that are reserved for the New Heavens, and the New
Earth, or the New-created Jerusalem, which the Prophet speaks of there, as we
learn from ver. 17, 18.

There will be more Knowledge, because there will be a more General Commerce;
according to that of Daniel, who prophesied concerning these Times, Many shall
run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12. 4. viz. by that free
and peaceable Traveling, by Sea and Land, from one Part of the World to the
other, which will be the uninterrupted Privilege of those Days. For I am not
inclined to submit to that New Hypothesis, W^iston's New T^^ry of the Earth.
That the Earth in the Millennium will be without a Sea. Which is founded on a
wrong Bottom; for the supposes the (...) will be after the Con^^agration, which
^e imagines will burn up the Sea; or his Comet (which he fancies) will drink it
up. For according to this Gentleman's New Philosophy, as a Comet procured the
Universal Flood, so it will bring on the Final Conflagration; and so he makes
the Drowning of the World, and the Burning of it up, to be from the same Cause.
But leaving this Theorist to his own Inventions, I think we may rationally
assert, that the E^rth shall not be destitute of Sea in the foresaid Thousand
Years, because I shall prove afterward, that the Firing of the Earth will not
happen till after those Years be expired. And consequently we may be persuaded
of the Truth of what I before suggested, that a Commerce by Sea, as well as by
Land, shall be mightily increased and improved in that Millennary State.

In order to this, it is probable that there will be a Common Language for all
the World, a kind of a Lingua Franca, (but much larger) that may be used by
all; whereby all Nations will be enabled to hold correspondence with one
another at the greatest Distance. Traveling is uneasy now, because we must
have a Druggerman to interpret between us and the Foreigners we converse with;
but then they will be encouraged to visit one another, when the Conversation
between them is become so easy. By this means the great Principles of
Christianity will be soon propagated, and known in the World, especially when I
add, that now Men's Minds shall be better disposed than ever to understand the
Truth, and to entertain the Doctrine of Jesus. The true Notions of Things shall
bear sway, and Men shall not take Pains to Cheat and Delude themselves, as well
as others, as has been their constant Course through all Ages.

Secondly, in this remarkable Renovation of the World which we expect,
Religion, shall appear in its Native Purity and Simplicity, and Men shall see
and understand the Real Worth of it. Indeed Religion, like the Sun, at its
first Rising, made long Shadows; it abounded with Obscurities, and Dusky
Representations; and Men were employed chiefly in external Formalities and
Ceremonies: But when it shall be in its Meridian, at its greatest Height, there
will be none of these Things; but it shall be chosen for its own Sake, and
loved for its intrinsic Value. Even at the first founding of Christianity
itself, many embraced it, because it was attested by such Extraordinary and
Miraculous Occurrences as then every Day showed themselves; so that they were
in a manner thrust upon Christianity, and they were compelled as it were to
receive it. But it shall not be so afterward; it shall commend itself to the
World, by its own Natural Excellency, by the Worthiness of its Noble
Principles, which it is furnished with; and thence Men shall serve God Freely,
and out of Choice, and the Christian Religion shall then appear more eminently
to be a Reasonable Service. This must needs promote a more than usual Holiness
in the Hearts and Lives of Men; for when Religion is esteemed for its Self, and
its inward Excellency, it will cease to be measured by mere Words, and outward
Shows; by mere Opinion, or by Matters of an indifferent Nature. We live in an
Age wherein Men talk and discourse much concerning Religion, and yet the
Generality of them have less Religion than any Age ever had. Why? Because they
place Religion in Words and Pretenses, in some peculiar Sets of Opinions, and
in a mere external Show of some Performances that relate to Devotion. But in
that happy Kingdom which we look for, Substantial Religion will take place, and
the only Standard of it shall be True and Solid Piety.

Thirdly, A greater Measure of Grace shall be bestowed on the Christian Church,
more of that Divine Spirit. Not in the Sense that some mean, that Extraordinary
Gifs, and Supernatural Endowments, shall be conferred, and that the Outward
Teachings of Man shall cease, and become useless: But I mean thus; that the
effectual Power of the Holy Spirit shall be seen in making Men better; which
indeed is the grand Design and Office of the Holy Ghost, and therefore shall
take Place in that happy Time. The most admired and glorious Gifts are mean and
base, in respect of Real Goodness and Holiness; i. e. a hearty Love of God, and
his Ways, and an upright Life resulting from it. Therefore we may infer, that
by a more abundant Communication of the Spirit, these shall be advanced in the
World. In the Golden Age of Christianity there shall be a mighty Power and
Efficacy on Men's Minds, exciting them to worthy and noble Actions, causing them
to be zealous for Religion, and to act with Vigor and Concernedness, and to
overcome all Difficulties that lie in their way; and (in a Word) to design and
bring to pass Great Things, for the Honor of the Supreme Being, and the Good
of the World.

Fourthly, JESUS shall then in a more eminent Manner be exalted; his blessed
Undertakings for our Redemption and Salvation, his Merits and Perfect
Righteousness, shall be more than ever esteemed, admired, and extolled. This
shall be a more especial Time of magnifying and celebrating the meritorious
Transactions of our Lord Christ for the Saving of Mankind. Which must needs
produce a very high Degree of Holiness in Men's Lives; for there is not a more
genuine Source of it, than the Consideration of what Christ has done and
suffered for us. There is not a more effectual Spring of True Obedience, nor a
more powerful Motive to it, than the Free and Unmerited Love of God the Father,
through his beloved Son Jesus. Wherefore now the Reformed World shall exercise
itself more and more, in this true Way that leads to Purity and Holiness; viz.
a perpetual valuing and prizing the Grace of God in the Gospel, through the
Blood of the New Covenant. This has not been sufficiently done hitherto; yea,
it has been shamefully neglected in all Ages of Christianity: Therefore now it
shall be performed with great Zeal and Application, by all the Inhabitants of
the New Jerusalem. Though their Works and Obedience shall exceed all that went
before, yet they shall not presume to rely upon them. Though their Lives shall
be more strict and blameless than ever, yet they shall entertain no Opinion of
their own Worthiness, but confide wholly in the Spotless Obedience of the Lamb
of God; and they shall attribute all to Jesus, and his Holy Spirit.

Lastly, to heap up many Things together, in those blessed Days there shall be
no New Religion, but New Hearts; that is, more enlightened, more warmed, and
more sanctified. There shall then be a continual Striving to excel one another
in laudable and virtuous Actions. Religion and Piety shall be Fashionable, and
Goodness and Holiness shall be esteemed most Honorable. All Perfidiousness and
Fraud, all Lying and Falsehood, shall cease; and Truth and Sincerity, Integrity
and Open-heartedness, shall universally prevail. Swearing will then be of
little Use, unless it be as a mere Act of Solemn Worship, and owning a God; for
where there is no distrust of one another, where it is known that Persons deal
Truly and Uprightly, Oaths are not needful to attest or confirm what they say.
In those Days Men shall conciliate an assent to what they speak; they shall
persuade others of the Truth of what they assert, or promise, by plain Words,
and by an honest Life. Briefly, all-sinister and base Designs; all unworthy
Aims, and vicious Ends, shall be laid aside; and the Glory of the Great God,
and of his Son Jesus Christ, shall be the main Thing which shall influence upon
their Lives.

If it be demanded, How this great Change shall be wrought? I answer; It shall
be done by the powerful Aids and Assistances of Heaven, which shall be
vouchsafed to Men in a very plentiful Manner. Hereby they shall be enabled,
above their own Abilities and Strengths, to subdne their Lusts, to conquer
their Vices, and in the most exact manner to conform their Lives to the Rules
of the Gospel.

If you further ask, What outward instruments and Means God will make use of,
to accomplish this Great Work? I conceive, it shall be effected by Active and
Zealous Governors. For we cannot but take Notice, that Persons of that
Character have been rai^'d up continually, in order to great Revolutions and
Alterations in Church and State; as is evident in the Examples of Cyrus,
Alexander the Great, Constanti^^ the Great, Charles the Great, and the Electors
of Saxony. And in the beginning of our REFORMATION in this Land, what strange
Things did a Resolute and Courageous King bring to pass? Much more may be
effected here, and all the World over, by God's inspiring the Hearts of some
Christian Kings and Princes with Valor and Resolution; especially by adding
Goodness and Holiness to these, by blessing them with a real Sense and relish
of Religion in their own Minds and Consciences. Being thus qualified, what is
there too hard for them to accomplish? What may not be expected from Governors
of this Character? Wicked Rulers are the greatest Mischief and Plague of the
World; and accordingly it has been Satan's Stratagem throughout all Ages, to
procure such Magistrates as will abett and further his Design; i. e. that will
patronize all Vice and Wickedness, and, if it be possible, establish it by a
Law. This has been the Cause and Sourse of that horrid Deluge of Vice, which
has broken in upon all Cities and Countries, and miserably overspread them.
Therefore I infer, that when God will vouchsafe to stem this mighty Torrent, he
will set up some Eminent Persons in High Places, who by their powerful Laws, as
by so many Walls and Ramparts, shall effectually stop its impetuous Course.

I question not in the least, but that those Words in Rev. 20. 4. I saw
Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them, refer partly
to this; they signify to us, that Power and Authority which shall be at that
time: Evildoers shall be called to an Account, and punished according to their
Offenses, and the Earth shall in a manner be cleared of all wilful and stubborn
Criminals. This perhaps may be the Meaning of 1 Cor. 6. 2. Do ye not know that
the Saints shall judge the World? I offer it to be considered whether we may
not interpret it thus; Do you not know that there shall be a time when there
shall be a Christian Magistracy in the World, and that especially when
Christianity is coming to its Height, there shall be such Godly Rulers, and
Judges, as shall reform all Things that are amiss in the World? And this great
Sway and Authority shall make way even for their judging of Angels Afterward,
v. 3.

I am far from abetting in this Discourse the wild Fancy of those Enthusiastic
Spirits, who make the Reign of Christ on Earth inconsistent with that of Kings
and Princes; who at the same time that they set up King Jesus, pull down all
others: Their Fifth-Monarchy brooks no Crowned Heads. But they forget that in
the same Place where the Evangelical Prophet says, Behold, a King shall Reign
in Righteousness, (meaning Christ, and this Kingdom which I am now discoursing
of) he adds, And Princes shall rule in judgment, Isa. 32. 1. Though it is said,
the Scepter shall depart from Judah when Shiloh first comes; yet neither then,
nor afterward, is it to be taken out of the Hands of Christian Princes. Their
Monarchy, and Christ's Kingdom, are not incompatible. Yea, I am so far from
giving any Allowance to this sort of Men, that I confidently aver Christ's
Kingdom, whereof I am speaking, shall be set up and maintained by the Kings and
Rulers of the Earth; Christianity shall arrive to that excellent Pitch, by the
Assistance of the Civil Magistrate, by the Encouragement which shall be given
to it by the Secular Powers, There is Ground for what I say; for we are
expressly told, that those who formerly gave their Kingdom to the Beast, shall
afterward hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, etc. Rev. 17. 16, 17.
These great Things shall be effected by Monarchs, Princes, and States, entirely
devoting themselves to the public Good and Welfare, and to the Glory of Him
who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. The Builders of that Jerusalem
shall hold the Trowel with one Hand, and the Sword in the other: They shall at
the same time Rear this happy Structure, and severely Punish those who
endeavor to hinder them; till at last, by sharply Animadverting on all
Wickednesses and Enormities, these be driven out of the World, and Universal
Piety and Righteousness come in their room.

Again; This great Work shall be promoted and advanced by the help of Spiritual
Pastors and Teachers, whose Care and Faithfulness, whose Courage and Zeal, are
as requisite in this present Affair, as that of the Civil Magistrate. The
Rulers and Guides of the Church shall then show themselves true Lovers of
Souls, by not refusing any Labor of Love for their Peoples Good; they shall 2 Timothy 4. 2, 5.
preach the Word, be instant in Season, out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort;
with all Long-suffering and Doctrine, they shall Watch in all Things, do the
Work of true Evangelizers, make full proof of their Ministry. They shall
discharge their Holy Function with all Mildness and Clemency, with all
Tenderness and Compassion, and yet with all Fervency and Vigor. They shall let
all Men see, that they make the Honor of God, and the Saving of Men's Souls,
the Grand Design of their Ministry.

And it is not without great reason that I mention both these great Orders of
Men, Magistrates and Ministers; for it is absolutely requisite that they go
hand in hand, toward the accomplishing that Great Work which I am discoursing
of. Moses and Aaron must befriend each other, Zerubbabel and Joshua must join
in building the Temple. The great Hinderance of the Improvement and Increase of
Christianity, has been the disunion of these Two. The Temporal Rulers, and
Spiritual Overseers, have not concurred in the promoting the same Religious
Designs. The Secular and Ecclesiastical Powers have frequently been divided
among themselves, and thereby have retarded and impeded the Common Good. But it
shall not be so in those happy Times; there shall be no disagreement between
Ecclesiastical the State and Church, no opposition between the State and Civil
Laws. The Spiritual and Secular Officers shall be so far from being an
Impediment to one another in their particular Charges, that they shall make it
their Business to promote the respective Cause and Interest of each other. If
Phocas and Boniface held together, and thereby wrought such horrid Mischiefs in
the World; it is certain we may experience as great and notable Effects of a
contrary Nature, from the unanimous Concurrence of pious Governors in the
Church and Commonwealth. When they mutually advise and consult with one
another, and act jointly for the Advancement of Religion and Godliness; as in
the Times of Constantine the Great, Theodosius, Valentinian, Gratian; when they
strive with great Ambition (and no other Ambition) who shall be most
serviceable and beneficial to the Christian Community, this will be found to be
the true Method for the propagating and establishing of Religion in the World.
And seeing Religion is the only unshaken and lasting Basis of Kingdoms, it is
the Concern of th^se Two Ranks of Persons, to agree to advance this above all
Things whatsoever. They are to remember, that even Civil Politics are best
guided by this Conduct; and that if a Nation, or Council, exclude this in any
of their Laws and Constitutions, they cannot be said to be Wise and Politic:
For what is disagreeable to Religion, is unsafe, dangerous, and extremely
Impolitick. To be short, all lies in Rulers, both of Church and State, both
Spiritual and Civil. These, as I apprehend, will be the special Instruments
which God will employ to work that happy and wonderful Change. When God
pleases to send such Princes and Leaders as Zerobbabel, such Priests as
Joshua, such Teachers and Scribes as Ezra, the Building of the House of God
will soon be finished. Such Great and Noble Spirits being s^t on work, will
easily bring it to perfection. The Gospel will be completely established,
Christianity will be universally propagated, and Evangelical Righteousness will
prevail every where in the World.

Yea, All of us are capable of promoting this great Work more or less; and
therefore we ought to make it our Concern. Our earnest and constant Prayer
should be that this Kingdom may come, and prevail and prosper; that
Antichristianism, wheresoever it is, and under what Shape and Guise soever it
appears, may be demolished and destroyed; that the Infidelity of Jews and
Pagans may have a period; that Vice and Immorality, Irreligion and
Profaneness, may be trod down; and that the Contrary may be set up, and
advanced, in all the Regions of the World. And we are obliged to set forward
this blessed Design, not only by our Devotions, but our Endeavors; and to
hasten the actual Prevailing of it in our Lives and Practices; that Jesus may
be seen to Reign among Men, and that Christianity may be at last the Catholic
Interest of the World. When it is come to this, you need not doubt but such a
State will last long. Being so well founded, it is no wonder that it shall
continue so many Years. That Government is most remote from Desolation, which
keeps itself most free from Sin and Vice.

Fifthly, and Lastly, UNIVERSAL PEACE AND UNITY crown all the foregoing
Blessings. This must needs be part of the Happiness of those Days; because when
the Names of Jew and Gentile shall cease, and all other Names of Difference
shall be taken away, and turned into that of Christian, there will necessarily
follow Peace and Concord; all Sidings and Factions will be at an end, all
Parties will be reconciled. This will be partly the Effect and Result of that
clear Knowledge, which shall be the Blessing of those Times. Isa. 11. 9. They
shall not hurt, nor destroy, in all my holy Mountain: For the Earth shall be
full of the Knowledge of the Lord. It is this that mitigates and pacifies the
distempered Minds of Men, and brings them to a peaceable and loving
Disposition; and thereby prevents unchristian Feuds and Quarrels, whence spring
Violence and Bloodshed, and all manner of Evils, in the Lives of Men. It is
certain, that one great Sourse of those many Quarrels and Disputes that are in
the World, is the Ignorance or Misapprehension of Persons. They form not right
Conceptions of Things, or they mistake one another. Especially in Matters of
Religion this proves very troublesome, and makes a great Disturbance, and
miserably divides Men's Judgments and Affections. But there shall be no such
Thing in that happy Age which is to come; because then there will be a greater
Light, and Men will have a better Understanding of one another. Which will in
part be occasioned by that Universal Language which shall be all the World
over. We read, that soon after the Flood, a Plurality of Tongues caused a
Dispersion, a Division of the Sons of Men: But the Unity of Language will join
them together in one Communion. Their speaking the same Words will be one way
to unite them in the same Apprehensions: for by this means they may with ease
and freedom confer with one another, and compare their Notions together, and
thereby come to an entire Agreement. This is so rational to conceive, that we
cannot but deem it almost impossible that there should be an universal Converse
and Peace without it. When that wished for Period comes about, Men being better
informed of Things, shall lay aside their false and mistaken Opinions; but
especially all Misapprehensions touching Religious Affairs shall have an end,
and consequently all Controversies relating to them shall vanish: All
Distinguishing, but odious Names, whereby Men labored to brand one another,
and to perpetuate their Grudges and Antipathies shall be forgot. They shall no
more revile, and (which is worse) persecute one another. They shall not call
down Fire from Heaven, of fetch it up from Hell, to devour their Adversaties.
In a Word, They shall no longer differ from one another, but be all of one Mind
and Persuasion.

This must needs be so upon another Account; viz. because that Wisdom which is
from above, is not only ^^re, but Peaceable: Especially where that Purity takes
place in a very great Degree, there will be as considerable a Portion of Peace
and Amity. True Godliness will extirpate all Rancour and Bitterness, all
Dissension and Division, and will cause the Christian Worshippers to be of one
Heart. He that purges his Church from Error and Vice, will clear it also of
all Distractions. This too ought to be remembered, that the principal Disturber
of Mankind, the great Incendiary of the World, and who made it his continual
Business to soment Quarrels and Divisions, shall be shut up, and imprisoned,
all the Time of that expected Reign. And though some of this inferior Agents,
who shall remain behind, may be soliciting a Revival of the Ancient
Dissentions, yet they shall be repulsed; or if some smaller Disagreements shall
at any time arise, they shall but make way for a greater and more lasting Love.
The former Bickerings and Disgusts shall be heard of no more, and (as the
consequent of this) an universal Calm shall obtain upon Earth.

Of this the Evangelical King speaks, in Psalm 72. which is a lively
Description of Christ's Kingdom, and among other Properties and Privileges of
it, it is foretold, that there shall be abundance of Peace so long as the Moon
endures, v. 7. Of this the Evangelical Prophet frequently speaks; as in Chap.
2. v. 4. They shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more. The Messiah is called the Prince of Peace, Chapter 9. v.
6. of the increase of whose Government and Peace, there shall be no end, v. 7.
The Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness
Quietness and Assurance for ever. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable
Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet Resting-places. Chap. 32. 17,
18. Thine Eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, Chapter 33. v. 20. The whole
60th. Chapter is a Prophecy of the Peaceable and Prosperous State of Christ's
Church. In Chapter 65. 25. there are almost the very same Words which I before
recited from Chapter 11. v. 6. 9. To this belongs that of Ieremah, Chapter 32. v. 39. I
will give them one heart and one way.

I know it will be said that some of these Prophecies are to be understood of
the Times after the Return from the Captivity in Babylon, and others respect
those Times of the Gospel which are now past. I do not wholly deny this; for it
is my Judgment that they are to be interpreted concerning either of those
Times, and likewise concerning that Mill^nnial State which is to come. We may
truly say, that these and several other Predictions of the like Nature are to
be understood in a double sense, and consequently there is a double fulfilling
of them. They have in some measure been accomplished; but the Full and Utmost
Extent of them reaches to that future Period of the Gospel-Oeconomy, and so
they shall be more amply verified then. There shall then be no hurting or
destroying; there shall be a Cessation from Wars and Bloodshed, from Violence
and Persecution, yea, from all Thoughts and Attempts of them. For in those
Halcyon Days Christians shall be inspired with a peaceable and loving Temper,
and shall be made like unto their Master, who is the Great Pattern of Love. The
Modern Jews acknowledge that it was a Celebrated Saying among the Old Rabbis,
that the Days of the Messiah shall be one whole perpetual Sabbath. This is the
very thing we are speaking of; Christ shall bring with him such a Rest as was
never in the World before: They shall enjoy a Sabbath of a Thousand Years. Let
us be preparing for this Happy Time, and let us be hastening it by what proper
Methods and Arts we can. Let us lay the Axe to that Root of Bitterness which
has spread it self among us, and taken such hold of some Men's Earthly
Natures. Let us compose our selves into a quiet posture, and effectually
promote Peace and Good Will in the World. Let us bring out, and make use of our
Juleps to check that fierce, that Feverish Distemper which reigns among too
many. Let us endeavor by mild and cooling Applications to accommodate
Differences, to reconcile disagreeing Parties (especially in Matters referring
to Religion, but so as not to betrary the Truth) to allay all passionate Heats,
and to discountenance all wilful Authors of Division.

And as the Word Peace in Scripture signifies, according to the Usage of the
Hebrews, all manner of Outward Blessings, so here in the present Case it is to
be taken in that comprehensive way. In that Kingdom of Christ on Earth, there
shall no kind of Earthly Conveniences and Advantages be wanting which shall be
useful to the great Ends and Purposes of that Blessed State. But as for any
other; viz. such as are serviceable to Undue Pleasures, to Lust and Wantonness,
to Vanity and Pride, to Effeminacy and Luxury, no Man of sober Thoughts can
reckon them in the number of those Worldly good Things which the Pious shall
hereafter enjoy: And therefore we must condemn that Narrative which some have
given of the Millennium, as too sensual and fulsome. But we may with Truth and
Soberness assert this, That there shall be a concurrence of all those things
which render Men's Lives truly pleasant, comfortable, and joyful. It is part of
the Description of that Millennary Jubilee, that they shall come to Sion with
Songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: They shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow, and sighing shall flee away, Isai. 35. 10. And again, Chapter
65. v. 17. Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth (which questionless is
meant of this Glorious Renovation, and might have been alleged among the other
Texts as a Proof of it) and then it follows, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her People a joy. The voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor
the voice of crying, v. 18, 19.

And if we go back to Chapter 9. v. 3. we shall find that this rejoicing and this
joy shall be entire. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and not increased the
joy, i. e. heretofore Joy and Sorrow were mingled; sometimes that Nation of the
Jews was visited in Mercy, at other times it tasted of God's Judgments: They
joy before thee according to the joy in Harvest, and as Men rejoice when they
divide the Spoil; i. e. there was in the times past a Medley of Joy and
Trouble, of Gladness and Fear, as in the Services of War and Harvest; but when
a Child shall be born to us, when a Son shall be given, and the Government
shall be upon his Shoulders, v. 6. then there shall be Joy without any allay,
then there shall be such a perfect State that nothing shall be able to impair
it. I know most Interpreters expound the Place otherwise, and make the Joy in
Harvest to be exceeding Great Joy, surpassing all other. But I crave leave to
dissent from the common Exposition, and to understand this Passage after the
manner beforementioned; viz. that whereas heretofore they joy'd according to
the Joy of Harvest, i. e. their Joys were mixed with Hardships, they were
accompanied with Sweat and Toil: And besides, the Joy of Harvest does not last
long; for the Husbandman, as blithe and cheary as he is^ must soon return to his
wonted Circle of Pains and Labor;) Whereas under the preceding Dispensations
there was no Entire and Undisturbed Joy, now it shall be otherwise, there shall
be a Continued and Uninterrupted Serenity, without any dashes of a contrary
Nature; for as Christ's Government increases, v. 7. so (as it follows there)
the Peace, i. e. the Success and Prosperity of it shall increase, and have no
end. This is the Happiness of the Subjects of that Blessed Kingdom, who are
under the Scepter of the Prince of Peace, as he is styled, v. 6.

This in general; but, more particularly, the Safety and Security of their
Habitations, their Success in all their Labors, and their lasting Fruition of
them are mentioned as the Attendants of this Happy Time, v. 21, 22, 23. They
shall build Houses, and inhabit them: And they shall plant Vineyards, and eat
the Fruit of them. Mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They
shall not labor in vain, etc. These are the Blessings of that Adult State of
the Church.

Farther, there will be greater Strength and Soundness of Body than ordinarily.
I will not be positive that as in the first Ages of the World, so now, there
will be some of a Gigantick Stature; but this is not to be doubted of, that
there shall be bodily Strength and Vigor in an unusual degree. It is one of
the Privileges of the New Jerusalem (for in the large and extensive sense it is
spoken of that Place and State) that the Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick.
Isai. 33. 24. Many Exorbitancies before were frequently the Cause of Corporal
Weakness, and diverse sorts of Maladies and Diseases: But now those shall
generally be removed; and a sound and hale Temper shall be given them; for
their Bodies shall answer to their Souls. The whole Tour of the Blood shall be
laudably performed: There shall be a due and regular Exercise of the natural,
vital, and animal Functions: And all Persons shall be healthful and vivacious,
brisk and sprightly. This will be the more credible if we consider that the
Curse brought upon the Earth by Adam's Fall, and afterward continued, shall be
reversed. The Soil every where shall become fertile, and give its increase
freely and plentifully, and all the Fruits and Products of the Earth shall be
(not only numerous, but) wholesome. God made all the Creatures Good at first,
as we expressly find in the repeated Approbation of this their Goodness, Genesis 1.
And they shall be Good at last; for the World shall be restored to its
Premitive State, and the Earth it self shall be renewed. And as for those
Living Creatures which are Food for Mankind, they shall arrive to greater
degrees of Perfection than formerly, and consequently shall yield more laudable
and generous Nourishment than heretofore. Besides that the continued Health of
those Times will depend much upon the excellent Temper of the Air, which shall
then be agreeable to humane Bodies, and have no ill Ferments from the continual
Vicissitudes and Successions of too much Heat or too much Cold. To which may be
added that the Heavenly influences, as well as the Temper of the Earth shall be
meliorated: And so even in a literal sense there shall be New Heavens, and a
New Earth.

As the consequence of all this, the People of those days shall be long-lived:
Which I gather from Isai. 65. 20. There shall be no more an Infant of days, ^or
an old. Man that has not filled his days. For though this Dispensation be no
exemption from Mortality, though Christ's Reign does not unthrone and depose
the King of Terrors, yet it wards off his fatal Blows for a long Season: And
perhaps some may reach the long Ages of those that lived before the Flood. And
this shall happen not only from the Nature of the thing it self, but by the
singular Favor of God: For as before in a judicial way he sometimes short'ned
Men's Lives, so now in the way of a Blessing he is pleased to extend them to a
great length. Which perhaps is the meaning of what follows in the foresaid
Chapter, v. 22. As the days of a Tree (a longliv'd Tree) are the days of my
People. But supposing that this is not the strict import of the Text (which I
submit to the Thoughts of the Judicious) yet it is certain from the reason of
the thing it self that those Happy Ages shall abound with all things that
conduce to the Welfare and Happiness of the Body as well as of the Soul, and
consequently Longaevity shall be one of the Felicities of those times: And I
doubt not but it will be procured by a perfect Knowledge of the true Causes and
Springs of Long Life, and of the more immediate Sourses of Diseases. For
Natural Philosophy (as well as all other Parts of True Philiosophy) shall be
then improved to the utmost, and a Vertuoso shall be no Rarity. Especially the
Nature of all Vegetables and Minerals, wherein are laid up the great
Restoratives of Life, shall by exquisite Experiments be laid open to the World:
And the use of all the Vessels in the body (which now we have but an imperfect
insight into, and some of which we know nothing of) shall be exactly
discovered. And whatever else, relating either to Nature, or Art, or Morality,
shall be conducible to this great End beforementioned, shall not be wanting;
no, not that which is the choicest and most sovereign Conserver of Life, viz. a
well-tempered Joy and Cheerfulness, a ferene and placid Spirit, than which
nothing can be more serviceable to uphold and maintain the vital Congruity, to
nourish the Lamp of Life, and to give a lasting Vivacity to Nature.

And from the several Particulars we may gather this also, that there will be a
greater Number of Persons upon the Earth in that Sabbatick Reign than there is
now. This follows from what has been said concerning that Universal Peace,
that Extraordinary Measure of Bodily Health and Strength, that Duration of
Men's Lives, which shall be the Blessing of those Days. Upon the more Cessation
of Wars and Slaughters, of Pestilence and Famine, etc. (which are wont so
visibly to diminish the number of Mankind) there must needs be a great
lengthening out of Men's Lives, there must be a vast Increase of the People of
the World. The whole Earth will be replenished and even crowded with
Inhabitants.

This will make amends (as I suggested before) for the great multitudes of Men
that have in several Ages perished, and gone to the Infernal Regions: For
within the compass of this Happy Time wherein we suppose Mankind to be thus
extremely multiplied, and all of them (excepting some very few) to be holy and
Religious Persons, there will be a larger Stock of Inhabitants for Heaven than
there was of those who in all the preceding Times of the World were thrust down
to the contrary Place. And thus, which way soever we look, this Blessed
Dispensation shall be eminent for the Natural as well as the Moral and
Religious Emendation of all Things, for Temporal and Earthly Blessings as well
as those that are Spiritual and Heavenly, for the present bettering of the
World, and for the Provision it makes for the future. Mankind being freed from
all Dangers, Mischiefs, and Troubles, shall enjoy an undisturbed Peace, Quiet,
and Repose, with a Freedom from all Pain and Sickness: And their Bodies shall
be more vigorous, and their Beauty more lasting than ever before. Which shall
be attended with all outward Conveniences, Comforts, and Refreshments of what
nature soever, together with inward Peace, Pleasure, and Satisfaction.

There is one thing more I will venture to add, as belonging (I verily believe)
to this Happy State I have been describing: There shall be a Peace not only
between Rational Creatures and their Brethren, but between these and the most
Salvage Brutes, i. e. those Brutes which heretofore were so. For now the
hurtful Disposition and cruel Nature of all such Animals shall be taken from
them, and they shall become mild and gentle, tame and tractable. This I take to
be the meaning of that Prophecy, Isai. 11. 6, 7. The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young
Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them. And the Cow
and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together: And the Lion
shall eat Straw like the Ox; and the sucking Child shall play on the hole of
the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice-den: They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain. Which Words seem to me to
be a clear Prediction concerning the peaceable Temper which even the fiercest
of the Irrational Herd shall be endued with in the last Times of the World:
Their former Antipathies, their pristine Enmities shall cease, and they shall
be restored to that harmlessness and Innocence which were at the first
Creation. I know these Words are generally by Commentators understood of that
Inward Change which shall be made in Men's minds and hearts by the powerful
Influence of the Gospel: But I see little or no Foundation for this
Interpretation; for I go upon this ground (which all sober Interpreters of
Scripture acknowledge and own) that there is no reason to fly to a Metaphorical
and Mystical Sense of a Text, when it appears that there is a Literal one. So
it is here, there is no need of supposing any such thing as Metaphors and
Allegories, for the Words in themselves, as interpreted according to the
Letter, are very plain and intelligible. The Prophet here gives an Account of
the Peaceable Kingdom of Christ, and tells us that this (among other things
appertaining to it) is part of it, that there shall be a change in the Nature
and Qualities of Brute Animals; the Wolf, Leopard, Lion, Bear, ^erpent, Adder
shall be as t^me as Lambs, Kids, Calves; they shall lie down, and dwell, and
feed together; they shall neither prey upon one another, nor shall they be
hurtful to Men. Nothing could be more plainly said to express the great
Blessing and Privilege of those last Days, when the Earth shall be full of the
Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, which are the very next
Words to those which I have set down, and show to what Period of Time they
relate.

And that we are to understand the Words in a Literal meaning may be further
proved and confirmed from the brief Repetition of this Prophecy in chap. 65. v.
25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat Straw
like the Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents Meat, they shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my Holy Mountain. It is not probable that the Prophet would have
repeated this Prediction, and urged it in the same manner, and on the same
occasion, viz. when he was foretelling the Happy Reign of the Messiah in the
laft Days (for he brings it in under the time of the New Heavens and the New
Earth, v. 17. and it is the close of the Description of the State of the New
Jerusalem in this Chapter, most part of which I had occasion to mention before)
it is not probable, I say, that the Prophet would have reiterated this
Prediction in the very same way and circumstances that he mentioned it before;
if the Words were a mere Metaphor or Allegory, and not to be understood in a
downright Literal Sense, he would have varied the way of expressing, and have
let us know that a Spiritual meaning is to be understood. But indeed the very
Natural Tenor and Import of the Words themselves acquaint us that they are not
Allegorical, but are to be taken according to the obvious signification of the
Terms, viz. That in those Happy Times the very Brutes (the most Furious and
Implacable of them) shall be reconciled to Man, and likewise to themselves
mutually; in order to which they shall have a new way of sustaining themselves,
the Wolf and the Lamb shall have the same Food (that is the meaning of Feeding
together) such as the Earth affords; the Lion shall have the same Provender
with the Bullock; and the Serpent, which used to hurt other Beasts, as well as
Men, shall be content with the Food which was at first appointed him, Genesis 3.
14. In short, the Irrational Creatures shall neither devour Men, nor one
another (as was usual before) but they shall become Serviceble and Obedient to
Man, and shall be at Peace among themselves. This may be censured perhaps as a
new Interpretation of this Prophecy, but I believe no Wife and Intelligent Man
will condemn it for its Novelty, but rather embrace it because it is so plain,
easy and intelligible in it self, because it agrees so exactly with the
Context, and because it is so suitable, yea so absolutely requisite to that
State which I have Discoursed of, wherein every thing shall be in a better
condition that it was, and accordingly the very Nature of the Beasts shall be
changed, that they may be what they were at first, that is, not Harmful or
Terrible; as appears from Eve's Conversing with the Serpent. and in a Word,
there shall be such a Catholic change as shall bring with it an accumulation
of all Temporal Felicities.

But this must be said (that I may not be mistaken by some Persons) that though
these Earthly and Corporeal Coveniencies shall be in the Millennary Reign, yet
they are the least part of it, nay, they may be said to be the Attendants
rather than Parts of it, for it is the Confluence of Spiritual and Divine
Blessings that gives Denomination to this Happy Economy, it is this that makes
it chiefly to be Admired and Esteemed: And those other things which I have
mentioned which relate to the Body, and which are but Appendages of this State,
are wholly in order to the Better Enjoyments, and are no farther to be regarded
than as they are some ways subservient to these. This I insert, that we may not
deceive our selves about the Notion of this Happy State which I am speaking of,
that we may not fancy it to be merely an Earthly Paradise, that we may not
think Christ's Kingdom to be of this World. But notwithstanding this, it is a
certain Truth that all manner of Good Things inhanse the Comsort and Pleasure
of that Blessed Kingdom.

In fine, that which gives the Value to all things relating to the New
Jerusalem is, that the Glory of God Enlightens it, and the Lamh is the Light
thereof, Rev. 21. 23. That is, it is the Eternal Father and Son (not excluding
the Holy Ghost) and not any Created Being or Enjoyment, though never so
exquisite, that can constitute the Blessedness of this State. In which respect
it is said, The City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it: that is, all Temporal and Mundane Felicities (be they never so bright) are
useless and insignificant, in comparison of the fruition of GOD himself. I take
this to be the meaning of St. John's Words, and not what is suggested by the
late Mr. Whiston.
Th^orist, viz. That the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem on Earth shall be
wholly destitute of those great Luminaries of Heaven; there will be no use of
the Light of the Sun and Moon, but they shall be supplied by a Supernatural
Bodily Light. Which mistaken Interpretation was caused by not attending to the
place in the Prophet Isaiah, whence this without doubt was borrowed, Isai. 60.
19. The Sun shall be no more thy Light by Day, neither for Brightness shall be
Moon give Light unto thee. And yet in the next Verse it is said, Thy Sun shall
no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self: Which evidently shows
that the former Words are not to be understood Literally, that is, concerning
those Celestial Bodies; otherwise there is a plain Contradiction in those
Texts. The true intent then of the foresaid Words is no other than this, that
the Sun and Moon, and all the other Temporal Blessings of the Millennary
Revolution, are Mean and Inconsiderable in respect of the Transcendent Glory,
Splendour and Influence of the Divine Majesty, who alone is able to render that
State Happy. When that desired Day comes the full Virtue of Shiloh's Name shall
shine forth, which denotes not only Salvation (which that Time shall prepare
Men for, above any other) but Peace or Tranquillity both inward and outward, and
(which is much more extensive) Prosperity or Happiness, which comprehends in it
all things that are rationally Desirable in the Life of Man upon Earth, as
well as in the Mansions above.

Thus I have briefly represented to you those things which may reasonably be
supposed to be the inseparable Attendants of the Happy Reign of Christ on
Earth, which is the highest Exaltation of the Christian Economy. It has been
with some doubting and struggling that I have said so much, for Holy Writ seems
some times to say, that Acts 14. 22. Romans 8. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 11. 3. 12. Heb. 12.
6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 7. Jam. 1. 12.
the Condition of the Church is such, that it shall not be wholly free from
Trouble and Calamity, but that it shall always, or for the most part, suffer
from the Wicked. When I perused those several Predictions concerning the
Sufferings and Persecutions of the Church, I staggered as to my belief of this
Future Quiet State on Earth, I was apt to think that the World is now wearing
off, and that we shall have an end of it without any such thing. But then when
I considered that those Places of Holy Scripture which foretell the Calamities
and Distresses of the Church of Christ may have respect only to the Times which
preceed those Thousand Years, I was again induced to believe that there shall
be such a State as I have represented, that Christ will set up his Kingdom in a
more Illustrious and Effectual manner than ever, and that this Kingdom shall be
accompanied with lasting Peace and Righteousness, with the General Conversion
of Jews and Gentiles, and the Ruin of Antichrist.

As to some Particular Circumstances, which I have mentioned, relating to this
Prosperous State of the Christian Church, I am not Positive. It has pleased
God to deliver things of this Nature Darkly and Mystically; and there are no
express places of Scripture on which a certain and unquestionable expectation
of them can be grounded, because we have no sure Word to ascertain our
Determination. Therefore as to the Particular Way and Manner of the things I
have been Discoursing of, I deliver nothing with Confidence. It is the main of
the Dispensation that I assert, and which I verily believe; though I censure no
Man for thinking or saying otherwise. I am sensible of this, that when we see
how the World is at this Day, we may be inclined to think there is no
probability of this Great Change. There seems to be little likelihood at
present of this Happy Reign in other parts of the World, as well as among our
selves; for we seem to be every Day degenerating more and more, and we run
further from that excellent Temper and Genius which are required in that Future
Paradise. But then I consider, that this is to be accomplished by a Divine Arm
and Conduct, and shall be the work of Heaven in a singular and particular
Degree. The Supreme Arbitrator and Manager of the World can of a sudden dispel
all Difficulties, and alter the Course of the Universe, and frame Men's Minds
as he pleases. When we remember how mean and despicable Christianity was at
first, but how strangely it spread it self afterward, and made its Progress
through the whole World against the greatest Opposition imaginable, we may then
believe the same may happen again, and that what has been foretold concerning
that Glorious State may be fulfilled. Thus I will not despair of that happy
Time.

Both Popery and Mahometism, or either of them, may for a time decay and grow
less, and then recover strength; Or perhaps one or both of them may remain
without any Diminution entire. There may be a Superfoetation in the Mother of
Harlots, she may conceive and bring forth a New, and replenish the Earth with
her Children. It may be the Reformation which has been begun and set forward
in some Parts of the Christian World may be put back: Papal Superstition and
Tyranny may return again, and Rome may sit a Queen, and know no Sorrow but what
she creates to the true Professors of Religion. One would be apt to think as
much upon reading what is said concerning the Two Witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. When
they shall have finished the Testimony (viz. at the end of 42. Months or 1260
Years, the time of the Antichristian Reign) the Beast that ascends out of
the Bottomless Pit shall make War against them, and overcome them, and kill
them; whereupon there is great rejoicing over them and making merry, v. 10. It
may come to pass that the Seven Hills may be exalted higher than ever, and the
Reformed Religion depressed and trampled on. Christianity may (as Mr. Herbert
presaged) hoise Sail for America, the Gospel may leave us to go to them, and we
may be half Pagans before it comes to us again. Or, if we hold fast-the Faith,
we may be forced to part with every thing else that is dear to us: It may be
our lot to undergo all Dangers, Calamities, Outrages and Persecutions before
that Blessed Sabbatism arrives. There may be a very Dark Night before that
Lightsome Day is seen: But at last it shall appear, yea shine forth, and the
World shall be every ways the better for it. Yea, it may (and I hope will) show
it self in God's good time without any such Sad and Tragical Prologue to it as
this.

I have ventured to offer my Conjectures about it, and the freedom I have taken
will not be disliked, I conceive, by Persons of sober Minds. In my Judgment,
that is a very Curious and Notable Saying of Mr. Mede (in his Epistle to the
Reader before his Comment on the Apocalypse) speaking of the interpreting of
the Prophetical Writings and other Obscure Matters in Scripture, Unless, Nisi
in hisce talibus liberius paulo sentiendi, ^mo and errandi venia concedatur, ad
profunda illa and latentia veritatis adyta (...) nunquam patefactum iri.
says he, there be liberty given to us to be somewhat free in our Thoughts and
Opinions, yea even in our Errors and Mistakes sometimes about these things, we
shall never clear our Passage to those Profound and Hidden Secrets of Truth.
Accordingly I have freely suggested my Thoughts, and if therein I have
represented some things amiss, let it be remembered that it was in the pursuit
of Truth, and of that Truth which it was difficult to attain to; or rather let
it be examined whether Truth be not here found out by that which some interpret
a Mistake. I declare I am not Dogmatical in what I have said, nor will I
persuade others to sit down with Peremptory Confidence that this is the certain
meaning of all the Prophecies in Scripture before alleged. But then this must
be said, there are several things highly Probable, of which we have no Absolute
Certainty; and This that I have been Discoursing of is of that Nature. Many
Passages in Holy Writ do exceedingly favor it; and there are no Contemptible
Reasons to in^line us to a belief of it. And when we have both Scripture and
Rational Arguments on our side, it is more than half of the Opinions which make
a very plausible show in the World can really lay claim to.

If, after all, you enquire concerning the Particular and Determinate Time when
this Sabbatick State shall begin, my Answer in brief is, That I cannot, neither
will I attempt to assign any such thing. When I say I cannot, my meaning is
that I apprehend no possible way of doing it in a Certain and Satisfactory way;
for otherwise I could (as some have done) pretend to present the Reader with a
Punctual Calculation of the Time when these things shall happen. Perhaps I
might say without Ostentation, that I have made enquiry into the Chronology of
the Scriptures as well as others, and have considered all that any Writers of
Note have said on this Matter, and have made search into these Mysteries my
self; but after all I declare that I find no Foundation for a Precise and
Individual Assignation of Time. In general we know Christ's Kingdom on Earth
shall commence when the Seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, for then the
Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, Rev.
11. 15. But when this Last Angel shall do this Office we are ignorant, though a
Mons. Jurien.
Learned Foreigner lately is confident, that this is the Time. But we see he
had but little ground for it, for his Calculations have proved false, though he
thought he had some more than ordinary Foundation (in the Transactions and
Events of these late times) for what he offered. And he has been followed by
some of our own Country Men, who presumed to assign the Punctual and Precise
time when those Prophetic Passages in the Book of the Revelation were to be
accomplished; as if they, above all other Men, had a Key to those Divine
Secrets, and were authorized to unlock them. I look upon this as the Product of
a well-meant Mistake, of their misapplying some Apocalyptick Texts, which they
were betrayed into by apprehending that the Circumstances which the Public
Affairs were in at that time were agreeable to those Prophecies. But certainly
this Rashness is very blamable, because it may give occasion to ill-minded Men
to disbelieve all the other Prophecies in the Apocalypse, because the Period of
these, which was with so great Confidence determined, is found to be untrue.
Nay, indeed it has sometimes happened that when Positive Men have peremptorily
set a certain Year it has generally proved a worse Time than ordinary, on one
account or other; instead of a welcome issue of their Predictions, some very
unusual and dismal thing appears upon the Public Stage, as it were a doom for
such rash Prognostications. Here therefore ought to be a great deal of Caution,
Prudence and Sincerity. But so it is, we may observe that it is the way of
these Apocalyptick Men, like the Clocks of Basil, always to anticipate the
time; they are too hasty in fixing the Periods of Prophetic Occurrences,
either because they impatiently desire the approach of them, or because they
are ambitious of being thought the first Discoverers of these Secrets.

In the Book of the Revelation the Time of the Beasts Reign seems to be
determined, viz. 1260. Days, Rev. 11. 3. 12. 6. i. e. (as all grant) so many
Years (for that is the Prophetic way of Numbering) which are the same with the
Time and Times and half a Time, Dan. 7. 25. Rev. 12. 14. and with the 42.
Months (i. e. of Years) Rev. 11. 2. 13. 5. Now if we could tell when the
Apocalyptick Beast began, we might, from what is here expressly set down,
exactly know its end; but the former being no where mentioned we are at a loss
for the latter. A very W.^ Of the ^tate of the Church in Future Ages, c. 11.
Sober and Modest Pen fixes the beginning of the Beasts Reign in the Year of
our Lord 456. and consequently by adding 1260. to that number makes the end of
it to be A. D. 1716. But according to this way of Computing, the Papal Beast
was in being before there was Popery (properly so called) in the World, which
is sufficient to invalidate that Calculation. However, if those Numbers refer
to the end of the Beast (as it is certain they do) I agree with this Writer
that it cannot be very far off. But as to the precise time, we may conjecture,
but we cannot be certain: It may be our Chronology is Defective, it may be the
Account which we have of Years is not Exact, and consequently our Calculations
cannot be accurate: Or suppose they were, yet our Savior acquaints us, when he
speaks of such Affairs, that the time shall be shortened for the Elects sake,
Mat. 24. 22. So that our exactest Chronology will not avail us then. I have
nothing therefore to say concerning the Punctual Date of this Notable
Revolution which has been the matter of our Disquisition. Yea, perhaps it is
impossible for any Man to know it infallibly, I mean without a particular
Revelation. Yet I will not, as the Jews, curse those who Calculate these Times,
but rather wish that Men would be Sober and Modest in this, as in all other
difficult and intricate Points. It is folly to be overcurious and sollicitous
here, but it is no less than Presumption and Arrogance to be Peremptory. This
should suffice us that there is a time when these things shall be accomplished.

In the mean season, let us comfort our selves with the expectation of that
Blessed State of the Church. Let it be remembered that however things go now,
there shall be a better Face of them hereafter; and though we may not live to
the arrival, much less the fruition of it, yet it is some solace to our Minds,
that, with Moses, we have a sight (at a distance) of that Blessed Canaan, the
Land of Promise; in which all the Defects and Declensions that have been either
in Nature or Morals shall be repaired and amended. Nor does the ill posture of
things at present in the least retard my hopes or belief of a change for the
better; for though it sounds like a Paradox, yet it is an experienced Truth,
that things farthest off are nearest. Look into the Calendar and you will see
that December, which is at the greatest distance from January, is the next
Month to it. See it in Nature, when the Night is darkest it is nighest break of
Day. Look on the Globe of the Earth, and you will find the extreme parts of the
East bordering on the West. And so it is here, when things seem to be most
remote from this Revolution they are nearest to it. Extremity proves successful
sometimes. The worst Times introduce the Best. The Condition of the World is
like that of some Dis^ased Bodies, which must of necessity be brought low
before they can arrive to a sound and perfect Constitution. Our weak,
languishing and perishing State may by the Divine Disposal make way for our
Health, and prove the forerunner and occasion of our lasting Happiness. Though
the World in some Ages is palpably worse than in others, yet (bating the Last
Scene of all) when in respect of the Universal prevailing of Vice, it seems to
be worst of all, as at this time, even then it is tending to the best; for this
has been always observable since the first Creation, that the greatest
Corruptions and Apostasies have made way for the most remarkable Reformations;
and accordingly, the horrid Degeneracy of these present times (not only among
our selves, but in all Christian Countries) is one Argument to incline me to
believe there will be a mighty alteration. Irreligion, Impiety and Atheism are
now making their greatest and last Efforts, before that Glorious Day (which I
have been describing) arrives. An Universal Profaneness is to preceed and
usher in an Universal Holiness and Purity. Unchristian Wars and Commotions,
Divisions and Contentions in Churches and States are the forerunners of a
General Peace and Repose. The World will not go off thus as it is, but a more
pleasant and delightful Scene of it will appear; and this so Vitiated and
Corrupted Age shall be followed with as Eminent a Restoration. Though we are
ignorant of the exact time of it, yet this should content us that the thing it
self is undeniable, viz. that the Evangelical Economy is not yet perfect, that
great things are yet to be done, that though our Blessed Savior shall not
descend from Heaven till the Day of Judgment (for I am none of those that dream
of his Personal Reign upon Earth) yet by his Spirit he shall come and Reign
here a Thousand Years, and advance Christianity to its utmost height: At which
time all ^ntichristian Doctrines and Powers shall be exploded and destroyed,
the Fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, the Dispersed Jews shall be
gathered, and embrace the Faith of Christ: Universal Righteousness and Holiness
shall prevail, and the Peaceable and Philadelp^ian Spirit shall be infused into
all Churches, so that they shall be of one Heart and of one Mind. This ^uture
Kingdom of Christ, this Happy part of the Evangelical Dispensation is not
unworthy of our Assent and Belief.

However, I have entertained my self and the Reader with an Id^a of the
Delightful and Happy State of Christianity here on Earth. If it be not adjusted
to Truth, (though no Man alive, I am sure, can prove it is not) yet it shall
remain as a Testimony of my Hearty Desires and Wishes that the Gospel may
flourish in a Higher Degree than ever it yet did, that Christianity may be the
Religion of the whole World, and that all Mankind every where may know the True
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and that knowing him they may
Universally practice his Law, and do his Will, and that they may all be United
and Cemented together in the Bond of Peace and Love.

CHAP. XXII.
The Last part of the Evangelical Dispensation, under the loosing of Satan out
of his Prison. Who are Gog and Magog. Not only the Mohammedan but the Roman
Power shall be revived. The Last Days, before the End of the World, shall be
extremely Wicked. They shall be exceeding Perilous and Calamitous. Christ
comes to Judgment. The Conflagration of the World succeeds this, whatever some
have suggested to the contrary. A Particular Answer to a late Writers Arguments
on this Subject. It is observed how he resembles Origin. A plain Exposition of
those Words, Nevertheless we look for New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness. A farther Proof from the same Chapter. The Nature and
Design of the Final Conflagration. The Sum of the whole preceding Discourse.

I Am unwilling to go off from this Pleasant Scene, especially to one that is
so Black and Melancholic as that which follows. But the uncontrollable Wisdom
and Providence of Heaven leads us to it, and therefore we must be obsequious to
their Conduct. I proceed then to the Fourth and Last Part of the Evangelical
Dispensation, namely that which immediately preceedeth the Coming of Christ to
Judgment. For I have showed before that it has had its Infancy and Childhood,
its Youth, its Manhood or Full Growth, and now come its last and feeble Years.
Wherefore I call this the Old Age of Christianity, for now it miserably
Declineth and grows Weak and Decrepid. Now the World degenerates again, and in
a short time it becomes very Wicked and Impious. For we are expressly told, that
when the Thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison,
Rev. 20. 7. The Wicked shall again assa^lt the Church; for we must know that
the World shall not through all the time of the Thousand Years be free of the
Ungodly Race of Men. The Tares (i. e. the Children of the Wicked One) are to
grow up till the Harvest, Mat. 13. 30. and that will not be till the End of the
World, as the same Infallible Teacher has told us. Every Individual Person
shall not be Virtuous and Good ( Heaven only being the place where there are no
Sinners) but there s^all remain and spring up at last upon Earth some very Bad
Men, out of which Brood afterward, as soon as Satan shall be set at liberty,
and come to hatch them, there shall arise a Deadly Generation of Vipers, a
Cursed increase of the most profligate Sinners, who will be set upon Mischief,
and will invade and wast the Church, and make it their work to Deceive and
Seduce the Nations; or rather Satan, who sets them on work, is said here to do
it, v. 8, 9. He shall go out to deceive Nations which are in the Four Quarters
of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to B^ttel; the number of
whom is as the Sand of the Sea. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth,
and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City.

The plain General meaning of which Words is this, that as of Old God's People
the Jews were beset on the North and South with Gog and Magog, their implacable
Enemies, (who are meant, but not exclusively of others, in the 38. and 39.
Cha^t^rs of Ezekiel) so the Saints at that time shall be environed with
their's, who will prove no less Restless and Implacable. And the more
^articular and Abstruse meaning is this, that the Race of the Turks shall be
those that shall cause this Disturbance, for these are meant by Gog and Magog,
for the old Gog and Magog, were Scythians, as is Universally agreed by the
Learnedest Commentators on Genesis 10. 2. where we find that Magog was one of the
Sons of Iaphet, who was the Father of the Getae, Massagetae, Scythians,
Sarmaritans, and their Neighbors the Tartars, from whom it is generally
asserted that the Turks first Sprung. Antiqu. l. ^. c. 7.
Josephus is positive that Magog was the Father of the Scythians, and tells us
that Magogae was the Name that the Scythians were anciently known buy among the
Greeks. We learn from Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 2^.
Pliny (who often gives a better account of Places than of Manners, and is very
exact in some parts of his Geography) that Magog and Scythopolis were
Coincident Names of the same Place. Therefore there is reason to think that Gog
and Magog in this place of the Apocalypse are the Turks and Mahometans, who are
(as ^^is generally acknowledged) descended of the Scythians. And these are that
Stock of People who (...) so Molest and Persecute the Saints of the Most High
after the expiring of the Thousand Years.

And it is not unlikely that the Papal Beast will begin to lift up his Horn
again. I do not mean that any of those individual Persons who acted before
shall now appear, for they are secured: The Beast, as well as the False
Prophet, is in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, v. 10. But there shall be those
that shall revive the old Roman Tyranny and Superstitions, and shall join their
Forces with those of the Mohammedan Faction. Both these Parties shall arise and
show themselves soon after the thousand years are ended: And the Prince of the
Infernal Demons, who had been imprisoned and chained up all that space, shall
be Head and Commander of them, and gather them to Battle: Their Numbers shall
be exceeding great, even like the Sand of the Sea, insomuch that they shall
cover all the Earth as it were: (for that is meant by their going up on the
breadth of the Earth) And they shall lay close Siege to the Beloved City, that
Place whither the Saints, the Beloved of God, shall fly for Refuge: Or the
whole Church of Christ, the Visible Body and Society of the Faithful, which
shall be left at that time may be understood by the Beloved City. In a very
lamentable and wretched Condition they shall be, you may imagine, all the time
of this Gogick and Magogick War, and the Siege which accompanies it. It cannot
be expressed what Streights the Saints are reduced to, what Calamities they
undergo, what Miseries they endure.

And This is but agreeable to what our Blessed Lord foretold of the Times
immediately preceding the Day of Judgment. He has assured us that those Days
shall be very remarkable both in respect of Sin and Suffering. As to the
former, when he compares them to Mat. 24. 37.
the Days of Noah, in which the Old World gave themselves up wholly to their
Pleasures, and forgot God, and defied his Providence, he shows how Corrupt
and Wicked the Last Times shall be. So that Interrogatory of our Savior, Luke
18. 8. When the Son of Man comes, shall be find Faith on the Earth? is a
downright Negative, and signifies that he shall not find Faith upon Earth: That
is, not only (as some interpret it) the Faith even of God's Servants shall be
very Weak and Little before the Last Coming of Christ; the Saints themselves
having been persecuted and harassed by the Wicked shall faint and flag: They
shall scarcely believe the Promise of his Coming; they shall almost despond
that Christ will help and deliver them: But the meaning rather seems to be
This, that Faithfulness (here called Faith) shall be very rare upon Earth,
Sincertiy and Truth shall be bani^h'd, and Lying, Perfidiousness, Dissembling,
and (which is the Consequent of those) inward Hatred and Malice, and all
outward Injustice, Violence, and Oppression shall come in their place. And so
in another place Mat. 24. 12.
Christ foretells that not long before the Day of Judgment Iniquity shall
abound, and the Love of many shall wax cold: For this is to be remarked that
the Signs foregoing the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Coming of Christ,
are intermixed in that Four and twentieth Chapter of St. Matthew: Or we may
say, the former Signs were to be repeated, and more fully displayed in the
Latter Event.

Our Savior likewise fets forth the State of the Last Days before the End of
the World, not only as extremely Sinful, abounding with great Wickedness and
universal Corruption of Life, but as most Afflictive and Dangerous, most
Distressed and Calamitous. There shall be (says he) distress of Nations, with
perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, Men's hearts failing them for fear,
Luke 21. 25, 26. Yea, Those Words of Christ in Mat. 24. 21. are applicable
here, for the reason beforementioned; Then shall be great Tribulation, such as
was not since the beginning of the World to this time, no, nor ever shall be.

And now the Forerunners of that Great and Notable Day of the Lord, mentioned
by our Savior in this Chapter, shall appear; viz. Wars and great Commotions in
Kingdoms and Nations, Signs in the Heavens and in the Earth, Earthquakes,
Pestilence, and Famine; with other unusual and extraordinary Occurrences, and
tremendous Accidents, which shall give notice of the approaching Judgment. Thus
our Savior not only confirms the Truth of what we read in the Revelation, but
he further explains and sets it forth. He plainly suggests unto us what an evil
posture the World will be in before he comes to Judgment. He lets us know that
the Tribulation as well as the Wickedness of those Days which approach the End
of the World shall be more grievous than any that ever were before. At that
time the Sins of the Churches Enemies, and the Sufferings of the Godly shall be
at the Vertical Point, as high as they can go. Briefly, It will be found true
that the World shall be most Wicked and most Perilous at last. The worst State
of it will be toward its End. For the Devil will be very wrathful and
outrageous, because he knows that he has but a short time, as it is said of
him in Rev. 12. 12. And at that time it may more truly be said of him than
ever; for the 1000 years being ended he is loosed but for a little season, Rev.
20. 3. He must soon go off the Stage, and that makes him act his part with so
much vigor and fierceness. The Judgment shall come presently after the 1000
years: There shall be a very considerable time between the Mellennium and
Doomsday; but it is (...), a small time in comparison of the thousand years:
And therefore on this account that malicious Spirit shall bestir himself with a
mighty Concernedness. The Tenth and Last Persecution which he raised in the
Primitive Times was the Bloodiest: So now he rages most when he is to take his
farewell of this Earthly Stage.

And now behold the Tragical Close of all! Fire came down from God out of
Heaven, and devoured these Armies of Gog and Magog, and the Devil that deceived
them was cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 20. 9, 10. For now,
after all, CHRIST appears from Heaven, and comes to be Avenged of his Enemies,
and to Judge the whole World, as you read expressly in ver. 11, 12, of this
Chapter. Before his first Coming Satan reigned a long time, as God of this
World; he had a kind of an unlimited Rule and Sway: But our Savior, by his
Coming, restrained his Power and Lordship, and afterward, in the Millennary
Reign, gives a greater check to them: But, at his Last Coming, he shall wholly
deprive him of his Rule and Dominion. Accordingly he comes at that Day, to
drive Satan down into his own Place, and there to leave him to be tormented for
ever and ever: He comes to take Vengeance on Sinners, and to punish them with
the utmost Severity: He comes to rescue the Righteous from the Fury both of
Satan and wicked Men. This is the Work of the Last Day.

There is nothing more to be added, unless it be the Conflagration of the
World: For this I take to be an evident Truth, that the Firing of the whole
Frame of Heaven and Earth, is a Consequent of the Final Judgment, which is
after the Millennium. For to what purpose should this material System be
consumed, or rather indeed how can it, till the present Scene of Action in this
World be at an end, which will not be till after the Thousand Years are past? I
deny not, but there may be some Beginnings of it before, which perhaps is meant
in that forenamed Place, Rev. 20. 9. Fire came down from God out of Heaven, and
devoured, etc. Here is an Essay of the Last Firing of the World, which is
prophesied of by St. Peter, and others; and it appears from this Chapter, that
it was after the Devil was loosed, after the Thousand Years Reign of Christ
here on Earth, yea toward the Consummation of all Things. This is the true
Time of its happening, and therefore we are not to credit the fanciful Conceit
of the High^flown Spagyrick Tribe, who talk of the Calcining of the Earth by
that Fire, and preparing it in a Chemical Way, for the reception of its new
Inhabitants after the Resurrection of the Saints. Of Kin to this is what the
Author of the New Theory of the Earth asserts, Book 3. Chap 5.
That the last Conflagration is to alter and dispose the Earth for a New State,
to receive the Saints and Martyrs for its Inhabitants, who are at the first
Resurrection to enter, and to live and reign a Thousand Years upon it. Before
this we were told by Dr. Cressen. God's Judgments on the Romans Church.
another Writer, that the Millennium shall begin after the beginning of the
Conflagration. But Dr. Burnet's Theor. Tellur. l. 4.
another Learned Gentleman is positive, That the Millennium shall be after the
Conflagration is quite past.

Any Man may see that this latter Author misplaceth the World's Conflagration,
only to make way for his Paradisiacal Earth, of which he expects a New Edition;
for Lib 3.
he fancies that this shall arise, Phoenix-like, out of the Ashes of that
other. For this Reason it was necessary to hold, that the blessed Reign of the
Thousand Years shall begin after the Conflagration is over; viz. between this
and the last Judgment. But, so far as I am able to judge, most of the Places he
quotes are rather against him than for him, if they be well scanned. As to what
he lays so great Stress upon, that the Judgment, and the Reigning of Christ,
and joined together in the Apocalypse, Chap. 11. and 20.) he should consider,
that the Judgment is oftentimes introduced in this Book, not as if it were then
to happen when it is mentioned, but to strike Terror into the Minds of the
wicked Persecutors of the Church, and to represent to them the Certainty of
their future Punishment, viz. when that Day comes: Besides, that it were easy
to prove, that not only in this Book, but in other Writings of the Prophets,
every great and Notable Revolution is compared to God's judging the World, and
is set forth by the Holy Ghost after that manner.

Again, this Learned Writer frequently misinterprets the Places which speak of
Christ's Coming, as that in 2 These. 2. 8. which is not meant of his Last Coming
to Judgment, but of that which I have been largely treating of; viz. the happy
Reign of the Godly when Antichrist shall be destroyed, which commenceth long
before the Final Coming of our Savior: And therefore when he says, the
Millennium cannot be till Christ's Coming, he deceives himself, and his
Readers, by not attending to the true Meaning of Christ's Coming, in those
Texts which he refers to. Indeed, most of his Mistakes proceed from this, That
whereas the Scripture often mentions the Coming of our Lord to set up a
Glorious Church on Earth, before the end of the World, (which likewise he
himself acknowledges) he interprets it of another Coming; i. e. he imagines it
to be understood of the Last Appearance of our Savior.

Another great Occasion of his Misapprehensions in the present Point is this,
That wherever almost he finds in the Old or New Testament any Passages
concerning Fire and Burning, he applies them (as the Reader may observe through
his whole Treatise) to the Last Combustion of the World, which has
unfortunately betrayed him to many Errors.

Likewise, wheresoever New Heavens, and a New Earth, are made mention of in the
Bible, he understands them of a New Material World, whenas there was no such
Thing intended; for these Terms denote only a new State and Face of Things,
viz. that blessed Millennium before treated of. Then there shall be such a
great and notable Change, that there shall seem to be a New World. The
Inhabitants of this Place shall be so strangely altered, that there shall be as
it were an Appearance of a New Creation. In this Sense the Apostle uses the
Expression, 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in Christ is a New Creature. This Author
might as well interpret these Words, as the New Heavens, and New Earth, of a
New Material Creation, and hold that every Man, when he is made a true
Christian, is physically Created again.

But I observe it is with this Learned Gentleman, as it was with Origin of old,
who was generally faulty in Allegorizing those Places of Scripture which are to
be taken Literally, and yet was so unhappy as to expound a clause in Matthew. 19.
12. in this latter way, notwithstanding it is evident that it was spoken in a
Mystical one. So we find this Writer turning that part of the Bible which
speaks of the Creation of the World, and of the Fall of Man, into Allegory and
Metaphor, though they are plain Historical and Literal Passages; but those
Texts of Scripture which mention New Heavens, and a New Earth, in a
Metaphorical way of speaking, are taken by him in a Literal and proper Sense.
The Heavens, and the Earth, with the whole Six days Works of the Creation, in
the first Chapter of Genesis, are according to him Allegory and Mystery, not to
say a Fable: But the New Heavens and Earth in Isaiah, (where they are
interpreted to his hand of Chap. 65. 18, 19.
Jerusalem, the the Church of God) and in other Places, are understood by him
in a strict and literal Sense, of a New Corporeal System of the World. This is
the Perverseness of humane Wit, and it is its own Punishment. I heartily wish
the Learned Author were sensible of it; and then he would see, that this Notion
of a New Material Earth, and a New Set of heavenly Bodies for Men to inhabit
in, is all Romance and Fiction, built only upon some distorted Texts of
Scripture, upon some mistaken Passages, for want of comparing them with others
in the Sacred Writ; upon some Scraps and Fragments of a few Platonic and
Stoic Philosophers; upon the Prepossessions of some of the Fathers of the
Church, who had been Admirers of the Platonists Opinions; upon the Rhetorical
Flaunts of some others of them; upon the high Flights of some fanciful Poets;
and, lastly, on the Dreams of some of the Jewish Rabbis. These are too small,
too tender Wires, to hang so great a Weight on, as those New Heavens, and that
New Earth, which he fancies.

If it be said, that the New Heaven, and New Earth, are after the Burning of
the World; because S. Peter, immediately after he had mentioned this dreadful
Event, adds these Words, Nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for
New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, Epist. 2. Chap.
3. ver. 13. I answer, That this is Inconsequential; for we cannot here argue
from the Order of the Apostle's Words, to the Order of the Things spoken of. He
relates the Consumption of the World by Fire, and then annexes his Expectations
of a new and better state of Things: But it does not follow thence, that this
shall be after that. For the plain Mind of the Apostle seems to me to be this;
Notwithstanding that dreadful Dissolution of all Things, which I have been
speaking of; you and I, and all good Christians, must comfort and cheer our
selves with that Expectance and Belief of another State of Things, which shall
certainly intervene between this and that. We look for happy Days before that
Time comes: These shall present us, as 'twere, with a New-made World; these
shall be New Heavens, and New Earth to us; and therefore let us not be
discouraged and disheartened, with the Thoughts of that Terrible Conflagration
of the material Earth and Heavens. We, according to God's Promise, (recorded in
the Prophetic Writings, Isa. 65. 17. 66. 22. Hag. 2. 6.) look for this new
Scene of Affairs in the World, viz. a Glorious Church on Earth. And though
things look otherwise at present; though there is no Appearance of any such
State now, nevertheless I tell you there shall be, before the Day of Judgment,
a Time when this shall be fulfilled. And though we of this Age shall not
survive to see this blessed Time, yet we rejoice in the firm and certain Belief
of it; and we exhort all holy Men, in succeeding Ages, to expect and long for
this Day. The Sum of these Words then is this; Although this World shall be
dissolved by Flames, yet before this amazing Change happens, we are to look for
New Heavens, and a New Earth; i. e. such a State wherein universal Holiness
shall be Lasting and Permanent, (which is one of the Qualifications, as you
have heard, of this happy State I have been treating of;) for that is the
meaning of those Words [ wherein dwells Righteousness.] This I conceive is
the Sense of this Text of St. Peter, which is vouched by the Analogy of it with
other Texts, and the natural and facile Scope of the Words, and the Criticism
of the Adverb ^, which in many other Places of the New Testament is Synonymous
with (...) and (...), sed, attamen, quinetiam. This, I say, I take to be the
genuine Sense of this Place, and accordingly the forementioned Objection
vanishes. Or if you interpret it, (as some Learned Expositors do) of the
Eternal Glory and Happiness of blessed Souls above, which all holy Men look
for, the Objection has no force.

Further, it is intimated in this very Chapter, that the universal Combustion
of the World shall be after the Millennium, and after the Judgment; (whereas
this Author places it before them both;) for the setting of the Heavens and the
Earth on Fire, is said to be in order to the Perdition of ungodly Men, ver. 7.
for presently after the Last Judgment is dispatched, and the Righteous are
translated into the Regions of eternal Happiness in the Heaven of Heavens;
presently after this, I say, the Earth, and the Elemental Heavens, shall be
fired, and those vile Criminals who were adjudged to everlasting Torments,
shall be plagued and cruciated in these Flames. This at least is their
INCHOATIVE PERDITION, I conceive.

To shut up all, and make a Final Period, (and now it is high Time to do it,
when the World it self does so) As the Earth of old was overwhelmed with Water,
so now it feels an Inundation (if I may so say) of Fire, a Burning Deluge, an
Universal Flood, and Torrent of Devouring Flames. Now Nature itself expires,
and is laid asleep in her own Vrn, and Bed of Ashes. And as this General
Bonfire is as it were to Light the Saints to Heaven; so the loud Blazes of it,
its crackling Flames, its horrid Flashes and Eruptions, are to give the Wicked
some Foretasts of the contrary State and Place: For they shall pass but from
one Fire to another, even to those EVERLASTING BVRNINGS which were prepared of
old for them. This Earth, which before was their only Heaven, shall now justly
become their Hell; and all the infernal Vaults, which were the former
Receptacles of Evil Spirits, shall be set wide open, and make one large and
capacious Prison, and Place of Execution, for these Condemned and Tormented
Wretches. Therefore this Conflagration must be after the Final Sentence is
passed upon them, and not before it. If the World were all on Fire before the
Judgment, (as some assert) it would be a Hinderance to the Trial, and good Men
as well as bad would feel the Effects of it. Therefore when the Doom is over,
and the former are taken up to Heaven, and safely lodged there, the dreadful
Fireworks shall play upon the latter, and the whole World at last shall become
one Funeral Pile. Now Hell is enlarged, and the Devils, and other damned
Creatures, change their subterraneous Vaults of Fire, for a more capacious
Furnace of Flame and Smoke; the whole lower World being converted into one
Eternal Hell. This is the Last Catastrophe, the Final Close of the Incorrigible
World, the Everlasting Period of all the Churches Enemies, of all her
Calamities of what Nature soever. This is the true Order (as I conceive) of the
Transactions of this concluding Scene of the World.

Thus I have finished my Task; I have set before you, and explained the various
Administrations, Discoveries, and Manifestations of the Divine Majesty, and his
Will to Mankind in the World; with the true Series and Order of Times belonging
to them, with their several Dates, Ages, and Periods. I have presented you with
a Scheme of the whole Progress of Religion, since the beginning of the World.
Yea, I have made bold to enquire into the Future State of it, and of the Church
of Christ: In which, and in all that went before, I have endeavored to unfold
and discover (...), Ephesians. 3. 10. Plena var^etatibus. Tremell.
the Manifold Wisdom of God, (as the Apostle rightly styles it,) the Curious
and Admirable Variety which is to be discerned in the Divine Providence; the
Consideration of which, induced me to prefix that. Title to this Treatise.

FINIS.

