A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS it has Pleased Almighty God in his Great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
Vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that
our Preservation is due next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of ORANGE, whom God has Chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity; and being
highly Sensible, and fully Persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of ORANGE, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion will no
doubt bring a Blessing along with Her upon this Nation. And whereas the Lords
and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
Presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of ORANGE, and therein
desired Them to Accept the Crown, who have Accepted the same accordingly. We
therefore, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, together with the
Lord Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, do
with a full Consent, Publish and Proclaim according to the said Declaration,
WILLIAM and MARY, Prince and Princess of ORANGE, to be KING and QUEEN of
England, France and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, Who are accordingly so to be Owned, Deemed, Accepted, and Taken by
all the People of the aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from henceforward
bound to acknowledge, and Pay unto them all Faith and true Allegiance;
Beseeching God, by whom Kings Reign, to Bless King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY,
with Long and Happy Years to Reign over us.

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON; Printed for James Partridge, Matthew Gillyflower, and Samuel Heyrick.
MDCLXXXIX.


