SOME THOUGHTS Concerning the Several Causes and Occasions OF ATHEISM,
Especially in the Present Age. With some Brief Reflections on SOCINIANISM: And
on a Late BOOK Entitled The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the
Scriptures. BY JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. and sometime Fellow of S. John's College in
Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and I. Wyat at the Role in
S. Paul's Churchyard* MDCXCV.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, His GRACE THOMAS, By Divine Providence
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, etc.
MY LORD,
YOUR Grace being not only by Your Place and Station, but by Your own Choice
and voluntary Act, the Grand Patron of our Religion, it cannot be improper to
present You with these brief Papers, which, though in themselves very mean and
inconsiderable, and unworthy of Your Grace's View, are a Vindication of that
Holy Cause against the repeated Cavils and bold Insults of Atheistical Spirits,
who (as Your Grace with a very deep Resentment and Regret Sermon of the Folly
of Atheism. Sermon at the Queen's Funeral.
observes) are of late grown very numerous. How vigorously Your Lordship has
attacked this sort of Men, is well known to the World; and that hitherto they
have not been able to bring about their impious Designs, is in great part owing
to Your Lordship's successful Attempts. I presume, from the Encouragement which
so Illustrious an Example has given me, to engage in the same Cause, that is,
to lay open the Folly and Absurdity of their Pretenses, and withal to discover
some of those Heads and Springs whence the Atheistick Apprehensions of these
present Times arise, and whereby they are fed and nourished. Which I hope will
be of good use to those who desire to be cautioned against the Venom of this
Raging Evil, and will in some measure operate even on those who are infected
and corrupted with it already.

I am sensible how Precious Your Grace's Minutes are in this time of
extraordinary Business and Emergency; and therefore I will not be injurious to
the Public by any farther Applications to Your Grace. Only I superadd my
hearty Prayers for Your Health and long Life, wherein the Common Welfare and
Happiness both of Church and State are so much involved: And so I subscribe my
self,

Your Grace's Most Dutiful Son, and Devoted Servant, John Edwards.


THE PREFACE.
I Designing, by the Divine Help and Conduct, to defend the Existence and
Providence of God by Arguments drawn both from the Greater and the Lesser
World; it is my Request to the Reader, that he would accept of this Brief Essay
in the mean time, which I conceive will be a suitable Introduction and
Preparative to that other Undertaking. For as in that intended Discourse I
shall carefully trace and discover the Footsteps of the Divinity every where;
so here I make it my Business to show how frequent an obvious the Occasions of
Disbelieving it are. By which means we shall effectually learn how to purge our
Minds of those ill Qualities which naturally are subservient to Atheism; we
shall know how to remove those Stumbling Blocks, to answer those Objections,
and to clear up those Mistakes which usually betray Men to this Infidelity. And
thus there will be a Way made for what I design. Persons will be fitted to
receive and retain the Impressions which those Topics that I shall afterward
make choice of will enstamp upon their Minds: And I hope the Age, which has
lately been stigmatized with Marks of Atheism, will for the future be renowned
for these truly illustrious and glorious Characters.

I will only farther acquaint the Reader, that some part of what I here offer (
viz. such Particulars as I thought were convenient for an usual and mixed
Auditory) was delivered lately in one of the City-Pulpits; and the other Heads,
with their Enlargement (which are of somewhat a different strain, and are
chiefly adapted to the Curious and Inquisitive) are an Addition since. But as I
have added several things, so I have omitted some, at the Desire of those who
are concerned in both. This is all that I had to advertise the Reader of; and
so I bid him

Farewell.
SOME THOUGHTS Concerning the Causes and Occasions OF ATHEISM.
THAT the World was not void of Atheists in King David's time, may be gathered
from his Words in Psalm xiv. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no
God. But it is exceedingly to be lamented, that the number of them is much
increased since, yea, that it is the Unhappiness of this Present Age, to be
pestered with not a few of them. Notwithstanding those cogent and incontestable
Arguments for a Deity which are suggested from the Holy Scriptures, and the
Natural Reasonings of sober Minds, there is still an Atheistical Spirit
prevailing in the World. There is a sort of Men (if I may call them so whole
bold Infidelity is so Irrational and Brutish) that reckon the Notion of a God
to be a Melancholic Conceit, and the mere Effect of Credulity and Ignorance.
Yea, there are some that pass for Wits, who strive for the honor of being
accounted the most Able Atheists of the Age.

Wherefore, instead of rehearsing or urging those Topics which are wont to be
produced for the Proof of the Divinity; my Business at present shall be, to
enquire into the Causes of Atheism, which now vaunts it self with an impudent
Forehead, and begins to boast that it has got Footing in a great part of the
World.

I will search into the Occasions, either real or pretended (for I will mention
both) of this Reigning Mischief. I will show you on what Grounds the Impious do
at this Day not only, with the Psalmist's Atheistical Fool, say in their
Hearts, but openly and avowedly proclaim to the World, that there is no God,
that is, no Supreme Overruling Being of Infinite Perfection, no eternally
Wise, Intelligent, and Omniscient Substance that at first gave Existence to all
things, and ever since upholds them, and takes care of them.

I. I assign Ignorance to be one great Spring of this gross Unbelief. As
knowing as the World is at this day, there are too many People of inferior
Rank whose Education has been so unhappy, that they have not been instructed
in the Common Principles of Religion; and they are more unhappy in that they
will not allow themselves time and leisure to look into their own Minds, and to
rouse those inbred Notions which are implanted there by God, and which would
(if they would give way) lead them to him. Wherefore it is the Concern of all
Persons, to know how to converse with Themselves, and to rifle their own
Breasts, that they may find a Deity written there: and besides, they should be
careful to acquire such a stock of Knowledge from without, that they may
understand their Religion, and not be seduced by Atheistical Notions that fly
up and down every where.

But this first Cause which I assign of Atheism, is not only to be found in
some meaner sort of People who have not time (as they order their Affairs) to
think of a God, but in others of a higher Rank and Quality: for by Ignorance I
mean a wilful and sottish stifling of natural Notions and Impressions: And this
sometimes prevails in Men of great Parts and Knowledge.

Think it not strange that I reckon such Persons in the number of the Ignorant;
for (to speak impartially) they are so: and this was the Sense of the (...).
Hierocl.
wisest Pagans long since. For to have no Knowledge, and to stifle it, is the
same thing; which is the Case of these Men: they make it their business to
choke the innate Principles of their Minds, and to disregard those Notices
which their Natures suggest to them. Thus these Persons are stubbornly and
obstinately Ignorant. Whatever their Pretenses and Boastings be, their Atheism
proceeds from want of Learning and Wit. For it is not the part of a Learned and
Ingenious Man to destroy the Notions of Mankind, and pull down what has been
built by the universal Suffrage of the World, and in its place to erect a
Conceit of his own. Some may take such for Brainish and Scholar-like sort of
Men, but then these are so without Thinking; for it is the want of this that
makes them what they are. Or, to say the best of this kind of Men, and Atheist
is but a half-witted Person: He has perhaps made some Attempts in Science, but
to little purpose: He has attained to some slight and trivial Notions; but
has not penetrated into the heart of Things; and thence it comes to pass, that
he is full of Doubts and Cavils, which he is able to raise, but he has not
Skill and Ability enough to answer them. Wherefore it was excellently said of
my Lord Bacon, His Essays.
A little Philosophy inclines men's minds to Atheism; but depth in Philosophy
brings men's minds about to Religion and a Deity. Thus though this misshapen
Monster would be thought to be the genuine issue of True Wisdom and Sound
Knowledge, yet it is really the daughter of an Affected Ignorance. Wherefore to
secure your selves against Atheism, be careful that you blind not your minds;
willingly receive the rays of light into your souls, cherish all sound notions
and conceptions, and by all proper methods bring your selves to a right
understanding, and steady embracing of all the Fundamental Principles of your
Religion.

II. There is great Disingenuity and unhandsome Dealing in the case, else we
should not have so much Atheism. Here I will prove, that they do not act
fairly, but that they are Ungenteel, which perhaps will affect these Persons
more than any thing that I can say. What they are willing and forward to grant
in other matters, and on other occasions, they refuse to grant here, yea they
utterly deny it, though there be the same reason for one as the other. This
plainly appears by their Objections.

As first, they tell us they have no Sensible Notices of a God, and therefore
they cannot admit of it; for all the knowledge (say they) which we have of
things, is derived to us from Sense. But here we see that these Men are Partial
and Disingenuous, for they will not deny that there are many things which they
judge not of by Sense; they grant that the swiftness of Motion oftentimes
out-runs the nimblest Sense, and the Observation of the quickest eye; yet they
do not deny the Motion it self: The Element of Air, in which the daily
converse, is not seen, nor is it heard or felt (unless when it is
extraordinarily moved and disturbed, which is but seldom:) nor will they say
they taste it; and it is as certain that they cannot smell it, (for this is only
the Vehicle of Smells, but is not it self the object of that sense) and yet
these nice Gentlemen do not deny the Existence of the Air. They can by none of
their Senses discern the Motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars (or, as perhaps
they think it most proper to say, the Earth), and yet there is not a man of
them that denies that they move. It cannot be determined by Sense, whether the
Sun be bigger than it appears to be, and therefore Epicurus (who was a great
Man for Sense) held it was of no greater dimension than it seems to the Eye to
be; yea, of no greater heat in it self than it seems to the Feeling to be here
on Earth. And the Atheistical Poet, who borrowed his Notions from him, was of
the same mind, Nec nimio solis major rota, nec minor ardor
Esse potest nostris quam sensibus esse videtur.
Lucret. lib. 5.

This is certain, that the things that are least discernible act most. The
Animal Spirits, which do all the great things in our bodies, are themselves
Imperceptible. They are the Insensible and Invisible Parts, as Spirits, Wind,
Subtle matter, Exhalations, which (being agitated) do the chiefest Exploits in
Nature. There are Fine Particles and Atoms diffused through all bodies
whatsoever; and these are the cause of Sense and Motion in Animals: by help of
these, Minerals, Plants, and all Vegetables, are brought to perfection. These
Invisible Agents effect strange things, and act most wonderfully in the World.
The Nutritious Juice in the Nerves, if we may credit the famous Glisson, is of
mighty use and influence: yet (as he confesses himself) there are no Cavities
to be seen to convey it, and none of this Succus is ever discerned in the
dissecting of Animals. Notwithstanding this, some Physicians of the most
piercing Judgment, have granted (whatever they do now) the real being of it.
And in other Instances it might be showed, that Sense is not always made a
Judge even in sensible Objects, but we gather the being and operation of them
from Reason and Discourse. This the persons whom we are now dealing with do not
deny, but even practice it themselves, and are willing to allow of it. Why
therefore are they so void of Ingenuity and fair-dealing, as not to admit of
the same in the case that is before us? Why do they most irrationally deny a
God because they do not apprehend him by Bodily sense, whenas they judge not of
some other things by Sense, nay though they be proper objects of it? This is a
plain proof of these men's wilful Prejudice and Partiality, especially if I add,
that God is infinitely farther removed from our most exalted Apprehensions,
than the Sun (of which we spoke before) is from this Earth. This Glorious Sun 1 Timothy 6. 16.
dwells in that light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has see,
or can see.

Secondly, they tell us that there are Great Difficulties in conceiving a God,
and they are loath to swallow these down: and more especially the notion of a
Spirit* i. e. a Being that is void of Matter and Body is too hard to be
conceived by them, and therefore seeing we hold God to be a Spirit, they can
form no conception of him. I will reply to both the parts of this Objection
distinctly: and first as to the General Cavil, That this notion is accompanied
with Difficulties, I answer, there are great Difficulties in other matters,
which yet they leap over with ease, and do not disbelieve the things themselves
because of the Difficulties that attend them. It is very hard to explain how a
little Wheel of two inches diameter, fixed on the same Axil with two greater
Wheels of ten inches a-piece, moving together (the greater ones on the ground,
the lesser on a table) should move over the very same space in equal time, with
equal rotation with the greater ones: and yet the thing it self is not denied
by any one. And many other puzzling Problems might be mentioned, where the
Hardship does not discourage them from embracing them. But I will instance in
one of their own Hypotheses, viz. that of Atoms, which they choose to solve the
Original of the World by, that they may evade the insuperable Difficulties (as
they think them) of the Acknowledgment of a God. If they say that these Atoms
had their Existence from Themselves, then instead of denying one God, they
assert many, for Self-existence is of the very nature and essence of a Deity;
wherefore if they were all from themselves, they are all Gods. If they say that
other Matter or Atoms were the first Cause of these, then they run to Infinity,
and no body is able to trace them. If they say they are of Nothing, then they
had as good have begun with that, and have confessed in plain terms, that the
World was made out of Nothing, and then they come to us, but they are resolved
they will not do that. Thus they are confounded as to the Rise and Origin of
their Atoms.

Then, as to their Motion, whence had they that? either of themselves or of an
other? They could not have it of Themselves, for we see it is not of the nature
of Matter to move: it is in it self a dull and inert, a lumpish and unactive
thing. If this Motion was impressed on it by an Other, then that was either
some other Matter, or Something else. If they hold the former, they run again
in infinitum, and he is a distracted man that will run after them. If they
maintain the latter, they betray their Cause, and acknowledge a Spirit, for
there is no real and substantial thing besides Matter and Spirit. In brief,
whether the former or the latter Assertion be held by them, they do in a manner
own what they deny: for we will not disagree about the Name, if we can agree on
the Thing it self. That Being or Agent which gave the first Motion to things,
is God.

If after all they say, that Matter had this Motion by Chance, and so was
neither from it self or any other, they talk more absurdly and wildly than
before; for Chance is a Word made to signify only the unexpected happening of
a thing, but does not import that there was no Cause or Author at all of it.
But however, if they will stand to this (as generally they do) that Matter at
first had a strong power by Chance to jump into an Orderly System of Heavens,
Earth, Sea, etc. then I ask them, What is the reason that there has been
nothing of this nature since? What reason can be given why all the Atoms and
Effluviums in the several Ages and Successions of Time, ever since this visible
World had its being, have not produced some excellent Frame either like this
World, or of an other nature? What! is this Lucky Chance quite ceased? Is this
Fortunate Lottery at an end? Is there no probability of a brave fortuitous hit
once again? Is there no such fine piece of work as that of Sun, Moon, and
Stars, to be expected once more? No: there is an utter despair of it; for from
Eternity (according to them) to this moment, we have had no such good Luck, and
therefore what reason have we to expect any such afterward? yea indeed, what
ground have these Chance-Philosophers to think that there ever was any such
thing? What reason have they to declare it to be their firm persuasion that
Matter was set into motion from Eternity, and that by the frisking of its
Particles, it at last danced into a World? yet this and all the rest they
believe and vouch rather than they will hold that the beginning of things was
from an Intelligent and Wise Being.

It appears hence, that they will say any thing rather than acknowledge
themselves to be in the wrong: they make nothing of talking idly and
impertinently, of running into Banter and Nonsense, as we have heard. They can
give credit to this extravagant Fancy, that an everlasting Juncto of Atoms did
without Counsel and Knowledge club together to make the World. They can tamely
submit to this unaccountable Maxim, that these infinite Bodies, after eternal
Brushings, Agitations, Encounters, Knockings, Tiltings, Justlings, Jumblings,
fell by mere Chance into this excellent Frame that we now behold. Thus the
Atheist, to avoid some seeming Difficulties, runs into those which are really
so, yea into the greatest Absurdities imaginable. If it be difficult to
conceive the Self-existence and Eternity of one God, surely it is insuperably
so, to conceive infinite Matter moving it self, and giving Being to it self
from all Eternity. It is plain then, that these men deal not fairly and
uprightly, but wilfully deceive themselves and others. They cry up Reason, and
yet maintain things which are repugnant to ordinary Discourse and the Common
Dictates of Reason; and therefore are rather to be exploded than with much
industry to be confuted. They cannot only swallow down, but digest Absurdities
when they think fit, and at other times they can fancy them where there are
none, nor any shadow of any.

Then as to that particular Difficulty, viz. That the Notion of a Spirit is
inconceivable, and therefore they have no conception of a God; I return this
brief Answer, That if this which they say be true, if it be impossible to
apprehend the Idea of a Spirit, then there is no such thing: and if so, then
Matter alone must do all things in the World, but particularly, it must have
Understanding and Knowledge, is must think and reason, for (whatever the
precarious Hypothesis of Atoms suggests) the Curious frame of this World could
not be erected without Knowledge and Wisdom, and it cannot be kept up and
managed without these. Now, I appeal to any considerate man, whether the flat
denying of this, and the asserting that the Dimensions of a Body are
Intellectual, that to be Long and to be Broad, and to be Deep, are Acts and
Exertments of Reason or Will, and (in short) that Extension is Thinking, be not
far greater Absurdities than any thing they imagine to be in the notion of a
God. It is a sign therefore that these men make Difficulties where there are
none, and do not take notice of them where they are. I could here prove that
our Faculties may form as clear, explicit, and distinct an Idea of a Spirit
(which they so much boggle and startle at) as they do of their own Existence,
or any other Principle in Nature; but this I have made my task in an other
place.

Thirdly, they tell us they cannot believe a Deity, because there are no Proper
Demonstrations to prove it. For you must know, that there Persons whom we have
to do with at present, are great men for Demonstrations. But I answer, The
Existence of many things in the World cannot be made out by Demonstration,
strictly so called, and yet no man questions the reality of them. The
skilfullest Mathematician under Heaven cannot demonstrate that the Sun Shines,
and yet there is no doubt at all of it, and he would be counted a Madman that
denies it. We are morally certain of many things which we cannot possibly
demonstrate; but this does not hinder us from yielding a firm assent to them.
And it is certain, that an Assent is an firm on Moral grounds as on rigid
Demonstrations, when the matter is capable of no other grounds; for the
Evidence is proportionable to the Matter to be proved, and that is as much as
can be desired by any intelligent man. There can be no greater than a Moral
Certainty of a Deity: for there are no grounds of it Mathematically
Demonstrative. But by being Morally Certain we are certain enough, and as
certain as the nature of the thing will bear. This should content any Rational
man, and it is unreasonable to demand any more.

Then, as for those Demonstrations which they talk so much of, they cannot but
acknowledge, that as they are sometimes managed they yield but little
Certainty. For, not to speak now of the old Academicks and Scepticks, who
denied Geometrical Principles; or of Demetrius, Sextus Empiricus, Epicurus,
Zeno, and others of the Ancient Philosophers who reasoned against them, I will
mention some of our Moderns (and those of great Skill and Learning) who have
disagreed about Mathematical Proofs, and thereby proclaim to the World their
Uncertainty. The greatest Astrologers hugely differ as to the distance of the
Sun from the Earth. It is nearer to it ten thousand miles than it was, says
Copernicus. But I. Scaliger would have the Writings of those Authors who hold
the Sun is nearer to the Earth than 'twas in former days, Exercitat. 99.
to be razed out with sponges, or the Writers themselves to be corrected with
stripes. And other very good Astronomers are so far from consenting to this,
that they maintain the Sun is farther off from the Earth than it was at first.
And yet on both sides they proceed on Mathematical grounds. There is no
Mathematical Demonstration for Comets being above or below the Moon, says De
Cometis.
Ricciolus, a very skilful Mathematician: but others of that Faculty have
pretended much to the contrary. The Paralax is well known to be a Mathematical
business, that by which the Planets are judged to be higher or lower: but the
greatest Astronomers have quarreled with one another about this Doctrine.
Tycho is for it; but Claramontius is against it; and Galilaeus even explodes
the Proof brought from the Paralax. Dr. Wallis and Mr. Hobbes's Contrasts in
Print, show that Mathematics are dubious: and this latter (who was so stiff an
Opposer of the Notion of a Spirit, and consequently of a Deity) finds fault
with all Geometricians, old and new, in his Book entitled The Principles and
Ratiocination of Geometricians. Cartes's Dioptricks and Geometry are pretended
to be baffled by other Learned Mathematicians, as Bourdin, Hobbes, Fermat.
Franciscus du Laurens, and Dr. Wallis, scuffle about a Mathematical Problem. So
that it seems it is not an Infallible Science. I am certain, says Preface
before his Philosoph. Writings.
Dr. Henry More, that Mathematical Certitude it self is not absolute. There is
an Essay of Dr. Pell to show the Errors and Mistakes of the best and most
celebrated Astronomers for want of better Knowledge in Geometry. Even Search
after Truth, Book 3. Chap. 4.
Monsieur Malebranch, a profound Admirer and Follower of Descarts, acknowledges
that in his Geometry there are some footsteps of the weakness of the humane
mind. And I will conclude with the Words of One that was known to be eminent in
Mathematical Studies, Bishop Ward's Sermon.
Even in Geometry and Arithmetic (says he) how many things are forcibly
concluded to be true which are inexplicable, unimaginable, incomprehensible?

Thus you see the Mathematical Certainty which some men talk of, is not so
easily to be attained as they fancy. Disputes have place in Geometry;
Demonstrations sometimes prove to be Paralogisms. But as for a Mathematical
Demonstration for the proof of a GOD, it is vainly and unreasonably required,
because there can be no such thing, for the matter will not bear it. Wherefore
though Copernicus, Lansbergius, Clavius, Petavius, Tacquet, Scheiner,
Gassendus, Fromondus, Kircher, Ricciolus, Oughtred, Ward, Wallis, More, Glanvil.
Some Divines have been great Philosophers and Mathematicians, yet they never
attempted any such thing. A man must not expect to have every thing proved the
same way. If we have things evidenced by the Arguments which they are capable
of, it is satisfactory, and every wise man rests in it. And these men
themselves do so in other things: they acquiesce in that Evidence which the
things admit of, and they seek no farther. Which shows, that in the present
Case they are Disingenuous, and Cross-grained, and act merely out of Prejudice;
which was the thing I undertook to make good. Their Insincerity nourishes their
Atheism. Therefore let us have a care that we give way to no such thing.

III. Another Cause of this Pernicious Opinion, is, Ostentation of Wit. For you
may take notice, that this Mischievous Plant springs from Contrary Seeds. As
before this kind of men put on a very grave and solid Countenance, so now they
show themselves to be very Pleasant and Airy, and set up for the Art of
Drolling. Before they appeared like Philosophers, now they come upon the Stage
like Buffoons. Then with a Magisterial Grimace they affected Demonstrations;
now nothing will please them but the Comical part. It is observable, that they
are a sort of Jesting, Scoffing People, giving themselves to Railery and
Burlesque. And it is this Jocular Humor that in part betrays them to Atheism,
for they take liberty to jest with their Maker. These witty and facetious Folks
must needs play with Heaven, and laugh God out of his being. They are defective
in sound Learning and Judgment, and in the place of these have a fanciful way
of Jeering, which they addict themselves immoderately to. Democritus was the
great Asserter of Eternal Matter, and thought that the Casual Motion of it was
the Cause of all things: the influence of which Principle in his Cogitations,
made him at last laugh at every thing he saw, and mock at all Actions and
Occurrences of humane life; for it is certain that if they are all by Chance,
they are to be denied. The Followers of this Great Man have learnt from him to
be Laughing Philosophers; and there are abundance of this Sect nowadays. This
I look upon as one Cause of the great Atheism of this Age. They think their
Tongues are their own, and they may say what they please; and they persuade
themselves, that what is wittily said is well said. Hence these Sparks venture
to ridicule Religion, to scoff at Virtue and Piety, and to mock God himself.
Then at last they really believe what they fancied, and jestingly uttered; and
they assert in good earnest what at first perhaps was said only in Merriment.
Wherefore, to guard your selves from Atheism, be always very Serious, and abhor
the sportful vein, the flashy fancy of these men, who think they cannot be men
of Parts unless they make a mock of God and Religion. Whereas the Brightest and
most Accomplished Heads ever exploded this: and in our own Nation we have
abundant Instances of this, that even the Sir Tho. More*, Sir Phil. Sidney, Sir
W. Raleigh, Sir Hen. Wotton, Lord Bacon, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Cowley, etc.
Wisest and the Wittiest Men (tho no Churchmen or Divines) have expressed
their deep sense of God and serving him, and defied the contrary Profane
Atheistical humor.

IV. Pride and Self-conceit may justly be reckoned another Spring of Atheism.
Men in this and former Ages have thought it below them to go tamely along with
the generality of Mankind in asserting a Deity. They would be thought wiser
than others: and consequently they affect to go against a commonly received
Notion. But more particularly these High-Flyers account it base and sneaking to
listen to an Old Story of Religion, and to submit their Belief to the Harangues
of the Parsons, as they are pleased to word it. Especially Great Men are apt to
be possessed with this Pride, and consequently to be Atheistical. They strongly
incline to King Alphonsus's impious Bravado, That if he had been present at the
Creation, he would have framed the World better than it is now. There is in many
an excessive Desire of a Name and Vogue: and they think to obtain them by
scorning the Common way, and going out of the beaten road, by giving the Lie to
all Mankind. And though one would think that they might show the subtilty of
their Wit by diving farther into things than the Vulgar, and not by casting off
the agreed Sentiments of Mankind; by refining and improving the Principles of
Nature, and not by nulling and evacuating them; yet they choose the latter,
that they may (as they think) give the greater proof of their Wit and Parts,
and that it may be seen that they are able to weather a Cause be it never so
bad. To maintain this all sober Considerations are postpon'd: they
superciliously renounce (when they are in the Humor) all Reason and Arguments;
they arrogantly resolve to hold the Conclusion, whatever becomes of the poor
Premises. Atheism owes its Being much to this, as I apprehend; as I think it it
is sufficiently evident from what I have said before, when I showed that they
choose rather to maintain the greatest Absurdities, than to adhere to a Received
Truth. Wherefore that we may effectually prevent this Folly in our selves, let
us banish Presumption, Confidence, and Self Conceit; let us extirpate all Pride
and Arrogance; let us not list our selves in the number of Capricious
Opiniatours.

V. Undue Apprehensions of a Deity joined with Superstition are the high road
to Atheism. Those that think amiss of God will easily be inclined to question
his Existence. It is too true that men model the Divinity according to their
own fancies: the Creature fashions his Creator. Or, like him that engraved his
own Image in that of the Goddess, they shape themselves and figure out their
own absurd notions and conceits, whilst they pretend to give the Pourtraiture
of God. Therefore imposing of false Doctrines concerning the Attributes of God
is very pernicious, for they are destructive of his very being and nature. It
is no wonder that when these come to be scanned and examined, men doubt of the
very existence of God, because so irrational and absured things are attributed
to him. They are loath to think there is such a One, or they wish there were
not. So that they endeavor to destroy that which they cannot endure. Thus
mistakes and misprisions concerning God lead to Atheism. False Conceptions of a
Deity expunge at last the belief of one.

And so 'twas of old in Paganism, Idolatry was the great mother of Atheism:
gross Superstition undermined the Godhead. It has been falsely and
blasphemously said that Primus in orb Deos fecit timor. -- Pap. Stat.
Fear was it which first introduced a God into the world: but yet it is
certainly true that This with some persons has expelled the notion of him out
of the world: for they being Timorous and Melancholic create to themselves
strange fancies concerning Him whom they are to worship, and represent him to
their thoughts as Severe and Tyrannical. And the Gentile Priests and Rulers
laid hold on this passion of Fear, and did what they could to promote and
heighten it, that thereby they might keep the people in awe. To which purpose
they invented Innumerable Rites and Ceremonies, many of which were harsh,
troublesome and afflictive. So that Bigotry and Excess in Religion made way for
none at all: and when they were wearied with the intolerable burden of it they
cried out, with that Nonsensical Atheist, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

Then Religion it self and the Author of it were discarded. This was caused by
the Undue Representations which were made of God: the Priests would have the
Superstitious Bigots believe that the Divine Numen could not be appeased
without those wild Observances. This is that which Plutarch took notice of,
telling us that (...).
from such gross, absurd and extravagant Devotion men came to disregard a
Diety, and to conclude there is None rather than to believe there can be Such a
one, one that is delighted with so unaccountable Ceremonies and Usages.
Therefore, to shut out Atheism, let us have right conceptions of the Supreme
Being whom we worship and serve. It concerns us to assert rightly the notion of
God, lest otherwise we slide into a disbelief of any. Who misrepresenteth the
Divine Being is in a ready way to deny him.

VI. Corrupt Affections and Lives (for I will join both these together, because
they are never asunder) make men Atheists. Men of depraved minds and manners
doubt of all Religions because they Like none, and at last they flatly deny
what they Love not. An Atheist first desires and wishes no God, and his desires
and wishes work on his Understanding. His Willingness to have it so enclines
him to believe it. He easily credits what he longs for: his Affection corrupts
his Judgment. Thus the indulging of Lust and Vice dispose a man to Atheism. To
which purpose observe the Soil where this Poisonous Weed springs up, grows, and
thrives most, viz. in the Courts of Debauched Princes, among such Nobility and
Gentry, and in Great Cities where vicious and profane living is most in
fashion. They are lewd and dissolute in their manners, and give themselves up
wholly to the satisfying of their Lusts: and this naturally prejudices them
against the belief of a God and a life to come. Nothing does so much extinguish
all apprehensions of these as Carnal Pleasures. He that lives dissolutely and
wickedly cannot easily entertain the notion of a God, for it is counter to his
course of Living. Therefore he goes on in his Debauchery, and huffs and
swaggers, and perhaps swears by the Divinity that there is none. It is plain
that this sort of men decry a God, because they would not be obliged by his
Laws. Sensuality makes them desirous to remove all stops of a wicked life, and
therefore they whet their wits (such as they are) to annihilate Religion, and
to extirpate a Deity. An abhorrence of the Practical part of Piety engages them
against the Theory. Their Lives influence on their Belief. They are addicted to
Atheism by their Lewd and Profane Courses.

For we must observe this, that these two mutually advance one an other. As
Atheism is the highway of Wickedness (which the Psalmist takes notice of when
he says, The fool has said in his heart, There is no God: Corrupt are they,
and have done abominable iniquity, Psalm. 53. 1.) so it is as true that
Wickedness is the original of Atheism and Infidelity. For 'twas rightly said by
a Great Man, Lord Bacon's Essay of Atheism.
None deny there is a God but those for whom it makes that there were no God.
For they know that if there be one, he will certainly judge them for their evil
doings. They cannot therefore be secure in their sins unless the notion and
remembrance of a Deity be blotted out. It is their supposed Interest then, not
their Reason, that makes them deny a God; for it is their Concern to be
persuaded, that there is none to punish them. Briefly, they are unwilling to
believe any thing but what their Lust shall put into their Creed. Thus you see
the true Reason of the Atheism of these times. It is fed and pampered by
Luxury; the constant Fumes and Steams of this affect the Brain, and discompose
the Intellect. Practical Atheism leads to that which is Dogmatical, i. e.
holding and believing that there is no God. Evil and perverse minds, profane
and debauched lives, strangely bias and incline men to this. Wherefore if you
would effectually shut out this Vile Persuasion, take care to suppress your
Evil Affections and Practices, for these are wont to court men's understandings
to turn Atheists.

VII. Atheists take occasion from our Divisions, Broils, and Animosities, from
the many Parties and Squadrons of Sects that are in the World, to bid defiance
to all Religion; and they resolve to profess none till they can see them all
Agreed. Thus De Not. Deorum, Lib. 1.
Tully observed of old, that the Dissentions of Philosophers, the various
Sentiments and Opinions that prevailed among them were a cause of some men's
denying a Deity, at least of their staggering about it. And truly this
Observator himself, in his Books De Natura Deorum, is so given to the
Academical vein of Disputing, that he seems sometimes to be irresolv'd whether
there is any God or no. So it has been among some of those who have taken upon
them the external Denomination of Christians. The Differences in Opinion, the
Errors and Heresies which they take notice of, cause them to suspect yea to
renounce all Truth. A great deal of the Atheism of this present Age may be
ascribed to this. Some behold the great Scufflings that are about Religion, not
only the Single Combats, but the Pitched Batelts that are about it, and
thereupon they discard all thoughts of any such thing, and become perfect
Libertines. And herein they are promoted and pushed on by such persons as the
Author of Fiat Lux and the Treatise of Humane Reason, who both design
Skepticism, and so Atheism.

But though it is thus, though the Different Persuasions about Religious
Matters have this ill effect, yet this can be no true Reason why any man should
renounce the Belief of a God. For he that is truly rational and considerate,
will rather make this an Argument of the contrary: for it was foretold by Mat.
7. 16. Luke 17. 1.
Christ and his 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. ^, 6. 2 Pet. 33. Jude 18.
Apostles, that Errors and Delusions should be in the World, and therefore the
Fulfilling of these Prophecies be as witness not only to the Truth of the
Writings of the New Testament, and consequently of Christianity, but of the
Divinity it self. For things of this nature, which depend wholly on free and
arbitrary Causes, cannot be foretold without Divine and Supernatural help. None
but an Allseeing eye could have a prospect of these future Occurrences. The
Predicting of such things to come is an Evidence of an Omniscient Deity.

And then as to the thing it self, why should any man think it Strange and
Unaccountable that there are Dissentions in Christendom? He may as well wonder
that there are Men in the World; for as long as these retain their nature, i.
e. are subject to Prejudice, Love of Interest, Passion, Pride, and the like,
there will be Errors and Heresies, for these proceed from some of those ill
Principles: and unless God should change the frame of the World, and destroy
the freedom of Man's will, i. e. make him another Creature, it cannot be
otherwise. How unreasonably then do men question a God, and cry out against
Religion it self because they see so many of this sort of Disorders in the
world? Whereas it is certain, that it is not the fault of Religion that things
are thus, but they are thus because men have so little Religion.

Again, the Cheats and Delusions that are in the world are useful for the Trial
of Mankind, that (as the Apostle says) they who are approved may be made
manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19. I do not say they were designed for this (for no Evil
is designed by God) yet it is certain they are expedient for this purpose; and
there is no better way to have an experiment of the Upright Judgment,
Sincerity, Faithfulness, and Constancy of Persons, than by their being exposed
to these Impostures. Lastly, God deservedly Punishes men with erroneous and
false Doctrines. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Because they receive not the love of the
truth (yea because they hate it, and oppose themselves to it) and have pleasure
in unrighteousness, for this cause he sends them strong delusion, that they
shall believe a Lie, and that they shall defend and maintain it. It is just
with God to leave men to the Error and Blindness of their Minds, and judicially
to give them over the Atheistical Persuasions when they have wilfully debauched
and abused their Faculties. This is the dreadful, but just Judgment of God; and
I doubt not but the present Atheism of this Age is such.

Thus it is evident that Errors and Dissentions about Religion are so far from
being Arguments of the Nonexistence of a Deity, that they are undeniable
Proofs of it. Let not then the diversity of Sects and the Disputes of wrangling
Heads (as particularly the late upstart Contrast between the Unitarians and
Trinitarians) prejudice us against our Christian Faith. But let us rather be
stirred up hence to hold fast the Principles of our Belief, and to own a Deity
when there are so many in this degenerate Age that deny it. And withal, let us
endeavor to banish Atheism by doing so to our Divisions: let us lay aside our
Religious Squabbles, and arrive at last to a happy Agreement in Doctrine, that
we may hereby cut off occasion of Atheistick Unbelief on this Account. However,
though in some Points we cannot fully accord, let us not be hot and fiery against
one another, as if Charity were no Virtue with us.

VIII. There is something more heinous than Divisions, which frequently
occasions Atheism, and confirms men in it; and that is, the Hypocrisy and Evil
Practices of too many that make a very fair profession of Christianity. Whilst
it is observed that they talk Religiously, and pretend to Holiness, but do
nothing of what they talk of or pretend to; whilst it is seen that they have a
form of godliness, but deny the power thereof; whilst it is evident that they
cry the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet are unhallowed in
their Lives; whilst it is known that they lay claim to the Spirit, but are
Carnal and Sensual in their Manners, and enterprise very vile things for their
worldly Profit and Advantage; in short, whilst it is observed that the
Behavior of sundry of the avowed Professors of Christianity is unanswerable to
their Principles, there is a sort of men that for the sake of these, presently
conclude all to be Hypocrites, and Christianity it self to be an Imposture.
This then I grant, that the Unbecoming Lives of Christians are an unhappy
occasion of Atheism sometimes, but they can never be alleged as a sufficient
one. For what though there be mere Pretenders to Godliness? does it thence
follow that there is none at all? What though there are great numbers of
Religious Impostors? Must I therefore thence conclude that all Professors of
Religion are an errant Cheat? Then by the same Logic I may peremptorily infer,
that there is no such Metal as Silver, because by too noted experience we find
at this day that it is generally counterfeited; and there is no such thing as
True Coin, because so much is adulterated amongst us. No man of sense will make
these Conclusions: and it is as certain, that he can with as little reason make
the others. Let us not then be abused by unsound and fallacious Inferences: let
us not think there is no Religion because there are so many Unworthy Retainers
to it. Yea, let us be fully convinced of this, that though Christianity has
been, and is to this day abused and sophisticated, and thereby dishonored; yet
it is a Reality, and we may venture our Lives upon it. And seeing the Evil
Deportment of some that profess Christianity is the greatest encouragement to
Atheism and Vice, let us all make it our great business to adorn our Profession
with a holy, strict, and exemplary Conversation. Let our light so shine before
men, that others seeing our good works may be so far from denying, that they
may glorify God. And let us pray for the arrival of that Happy Day (and I hope
it is not very far off) when Religion shall universally bear sway upon Earth,
and when men shall be thoroughly convinced of the real Worth of Christianity
from the Practices of those that profess it.

IX. In the next place, more particularly, the Ill Examples of some who by
their Office are Spiritual Guides and Instructors, are mentioned as another
great occasion of Irreligion and Atheism. It is necessary to take notice of
this, because it is alleged (but very frequently without ground) by the sworn
Patrons of that Cause which I am now pleading against. They observe of some of
this Order of men, that they urge Virtue and Holiness with great Warmth and
pathetick Zeal, and yet are very cold, yea wholly neglectful in the Practice of
them, and visibly favor those Vices and Enormities which they dissuade others
from: whence it is no wonder (say they) that these Persons are not believed to
be in good earnest, yea that they are thought not to believe themselves, i. e.
to be really persuaded that those things are true which they discourse of; for
it is seen, that their Lives wholly contradict their Doctrine. Whence this rash
Conclusion is made, that Preaching is a mere Trade, that the Ministerial
Function is a Cheat, and that Religion it self is so too, and that a Deity is
no other. Thus where is there more of Atheism than in Italy, the Pope's own
Soil, part of which is called Holy Land? Which the Observing Sir Edwyn Sandys.
Author of Europae Speculum (who had conversed in his Travels with the
Italians, and knew them very well) attributes to the gross Wickedness of the
Roman Clergy, and particularly of the Popes and Cardinals, of whose scandalous
Speeches and Actions the people of that Country have a greater knowledge than
others. They are not ignorant that several Popes were inclined to be Atheists;
as Paul 3. when he was dying told the Standers by, that he should now know
three things, viz. whether the Soul be immortal, whether there be a Hell, and
whether there be a God. And John 23. (as is plain from that Council of
Constance by whom he was deposed) professed that he looked upon Religion as a
Fable, and God and the Soul's Immortality as such. And they daily behold the
lewd and dissolute Practices of some of the Cardinals and Prelates, Abbots,
Monks, and of their Parish Priests, which very thing (as the foresaid Author
observes) makes them the most Irreligious People in the World, yea causes them
to defy all Religion for their sakes. Especially they conclude, that there is
nothing true and real in Christianity, because so many of the eminent
Pretenders to it and Assertors of it, live continually in opposition to all
Religious Principles and Practices, and are seen to be guilty of the most
horrid Impieties, of the most execrable Villainies that are to be imagined.
Their being so near to the Head of that Religion (as he is styled) makes them
averse to the whole kind. And this is in some measure the case of People in
other Countries, where even the Protestant Faith is professed, but is
accompanied with the Scandalous Lives and Lewd Practices of some that are
immediately concerned in Holy things, and whose Employment it is to direct
others in Religion.

But to speak impartially to any considerate Person, this cannot yield an
occasion of being Atheistical: for though the manners of some of the Sacred
Function be offensive, yet it is irrational and absurd to blast all Religion for
their Misdemeanors. We do not read that our Savior condemned the Jewish
Church and Mosaic Law because of the Hypocrisy and Wickedness of the Chief
Priests, Scribes, and Doctors of the Law. Nay, he tells the People, All that
they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works,
Matthew. 23. 3. As much as if he had said, The Moral Law, and all the Offices of
Religion, are not in the least discredited by the vicious Manners of some of
your Teachers. Be careful that you imitate them not in their Practices; but be
very observant of the Holy Doctrine which they deliver; entertain no ill
Thoughts of it, because of the corrupt Lives of your Guides. The like may be
said now; the Faults and Miscarriages of any Ecclesiastical Persons must not be
charged on the Sacred Institution of Christ; we ought not to think ill of
Christianity for the disorderly Behavior of any spiritual Officers in the
Church. We see that there is no man refuses to follow a Learned Physician's
Prescriptions and Rules concerning Health, because he does not observe them
himself. Nor can the Spiritual Patient with any reason reject the Rules of
Saving Health and Happiness, though they are not observed by the Prescriber
himself.

But to be yet more plain with the Persons I am now dealing with, they (of all
men) cannot with any tolerable pretense make use of this Plea: they cannot
complain of the Lives of the Clergy as administering to their disregard of
Religion, for the more strict and religious any Churchman is, the more is he
despised and hated by them. A Pious Clergyman is reckoned by them a weak
shallow Creature, a fantastic Bigot, and is laughed at as such. So that it is
evident, that what they allege concerning the undue Behavior of some that
serve at the Altar, is a more groundless Cavil; for they would have all men as
Wicked and Debauched as themselves.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that this is a great Scandal, and of very
pernicious consequence, and such as is not to be permitted with impunity in the
Church: but it is no excusable ground of Impiety and Atheism. However, since it
is so heinous in it self, and is made by the perverse minds of many an Excuse
for their Atheism, it is the concern of all Christian Guides of Souls to be
Examples to the Flock, to conform their Lives with great Circumspection and
Exactness to the Laws of Christ Jesus their Master, and to take care to perform
themselves whatever they require others to do.

X. Unbelief of a God is occasioned sometimes by the Strange Revolutions and
Changes, the Odd Events, and Unaccountable Administrations that are in the
World. Especially men are inclined to question God's Existence as well as his
Providence when they behold the prosperous state of the most vicious Persons,
and on the contrary, observe how miserably sometimes the Best men are treated
in this Life, and at Death are not at all differenced from the Worst, but
perish alike. Then you shall hear one cry out, Quis putet esse Deos? And
another uses the like Language of the Poet, Dum rapiant mala fata bonos, --
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.


But any understanding man, who will take time to consider and deliberate, will
see that nothing of this nature can justly administer matter of Atheism. For is
must be remembered, that we are finite shallow Creatures, and are not able to
comprehend the Wise Designs and Purposes of Heaven in every Event that we see:
and therefore when we meet with obscure and rugged Dispensations, and such as
seem to be very disordered and irregular, we have no reason to find fault with
them, and to think them unworthy of God, and of Divine Providence, because we
are not able to make a judgment of them. Those Events which seem to be
excentrick and at random, are guided by a steady unerring hand: but we have not
depth of Apprehension to conceive it at present. But it may be afterward, when
our minds are more enlightened, we shall know how to solve these difficult
Phoenomena. However, at the last Day all these Intrigues, these Knots, these
Labyrinths, these Riddles, shall be fully resolved; and it shall be part of our
employment in the other world, to admire and adore the Infinite Wisdom of God
in the disposal of the Affairs here on Earth. And particularly we shall then be
satisfied, yea we may be now, concerning the foresaid Problem, viz. the
Prosperity of the Wicked, and the contrary Circumstances of the Good; for it is
evident, that these are according to exact Justice and Wisdom. God intended the
former should have their portion in this life only; and he designed the latter
to be prepared for Heaven by those rougher dealings here below.

Lastly, Learned Times, especially if accompanied with Peace or Prosperity, are
reckoned by a Lord Bacon's Essays.
Judicious Person as another Cause of Atheism. Nor is this inconsistent with
what I said before, that Ignorance is the Mother of Atheism. For Learned or
Peaceable times are only thus far conducible to this Great Evil, that men are
then generally too Inquisitive and Curious, too Nice and Wanton, and
over-busily pry into Secrets; which when they cannot satisfy themselves about,
they are inclined to be Atheistical, and to doubt even concerning the chief
things of Religion. Wherefore I question not but the starting and keeping up at
this day the Debates about the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity are a great
advancement to this evil disposition of mind. There are those who push on both
Parties to wrangle and quarrel about this Grand Point, and in the mean time
laugh at the Combatants on both sides. Whilst they encourage some Writers to
baffle the Trinity of Divine Persons, their Project is to destroy the Essence
it self. Whilst they put them upon maintaining the Unity of the Godhead, they
hope in the close of the Dispute to introduce a Nullity not only of the Deity,
but of all Religion. For by these Bandyings backward and forward, they know
that men's minds will be unsettled and that they will be apt to waver about the
truth and certainty of the main Articles of our Religion. When Persons observe,
that the very Divinity of our Blessed Lord and Savior is tossed and torn by
rude Pens; when they see so Catholic a Doctrine attacked with such Violence;
what can they think of the other great Verities of Christianity? And withal,
the Anti-Trinitarians hereby provoke some of their Adversaries to an indecent
sort of Language concerning these Holy Mysteries: so that some of these latter
have hurt the Cause it may be almost as much by their Defending it, as the
others have by their Opposing it. Thus it must needs be when Persons
immoderately indulge Curiosity in these Abstruse and Sublime Matters, and will
not be content with what the Bible and immediate Inferences drawn thence
suggest to us. By this means they lose their hold, and give their Antagonists a
clear Advantage against them, and manifestly promote the Design of those who
make it their work to make void the Notion of a Deity.

Nay, in the very Socinian Doctrine it self there seems to be an Atheistick
Tang. Would not a man guess that there is in approach to Atheism in those
Reflections which are made on a Sermon preached by the Right Reverend Bishop of
Worcester, Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
Page 5, 6, 7.
where one of the most received Notions concerning the Nature of the Deity it
self is cashiered. The Self-Existence of God, which is the Primary,
Fundamental, and Essential Property, and is the very Life and Soul of the
explicatory part of the Doctrine of the Deity, is peremptorily pronounced by
them to be a Contradiction. It is well known, Socinus, and Crellius, and others
of this Party, deny God's Immensity, i. e. his being present every where as to
his Essence and Nature. All of them agree, that he has not a Knowledge and
Foresight of every thing that happens in the World, for future Contingencies
are hid from him. Particularly Praelect. cap. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Socinus largely argues against this Praescience, and tells us, that he is to
be laughed at that asserts the contrary. Nay, it is farther observable, that
this great Patriarch of the present Cause disowns the Immaterial or Spiritual
Nature of God, as may be undeniably gathered from his Fragment. Disp. de
Adorat. Christi.
Exposition of John. 4. 24. and other Passages in his Writings. And he is
followed by Crellius, as is manifest from that Account which this latter gives
of a Spirit, when Deus est Spiritus aeternus: spiritum autem cum nominamus,
substantiam intelligimus ab omni erassitie, qualem in corporibus oculorum
arbitrio subjectis cernimus, alienam. Hoc sensu Angelos dicimus Spiritus, and
Aerem, etc. De Deo and Attrib. cap. 15.
he speaks of the Nature of God. He does not make it to be any thing above a
refined body, a substance void of all gross matter, such as the Air or Ether
is. So that when these men call God a Spirit, their meaning is, that he is a
Fine and Tenuious sort of Matter, not that he is wholly Incorporeal, and
altogether free from Matter. This is the same with Mr. Hobbs's Corporeal God.
Thus four of the Chief Attributes of the Deity, viz. Self-Existence,
Omnipresence, Omniscience, and Spirituality, are either in whole or in part
rejected. Whereupon, I ask this Question, Whether these things do not discover
a Tendency (to say no more) in the Anti-Trinitarians to that which I am
charging them with? For to assert a God* and yet to deny some of his Choicest
Properties (whereby we know him to be God) is in effect the same with denying a
Deity.

If they distinguish between the English and Foreign Socinians (as I perceive
they do) and tell us that the former do not assert the things before mentioned,
I answer, the very English Prints avouch the first of those Particulars: and as
for the rest, they being the Doctrine of the Chief Patrons of the Socinian
Cause, yea and of the Most of them, the English Unitarians are involved in
them, because those Foreigners are the greatest and most substantial part of
that Body of men called Socinians. Thus the Trinitarian Scheme of Religion,
drawn up by some English Socinians of late is thought by them to touch all the
Trinitarians (else it could not be styled the Trinitarian Scheme) though every
individual Trinitarian does not hold all those things mentioned there. Let them
apply this, and they will have nothing to object.

And further, I would argue from their own avowed Principle, which is that they
are to admit of nothing but what is exactly adjusted to Nature's and Reason's
Light, nothing but what is entirely clear and evident: for though it is true
some Socinian Writers of late have laid aside this Notion (and truly we may
observe that they are shifting every day their Arguments, and so we know not
where to have them) yet he that is acquainted with the Writings that make up
the main Body of Socinianism knows full well that this is a Principle
constantly asserted and maintained by the generality of them, and upon all
occasions insisted upon. This has been the Stanch Notion of the Great Dons of
the Party, and of the famous Socinus himself. And Slicktingius, though he seems
indeed sometimes to be otherwise persuaded, yet comes to this at last, that the
Trinity is a Doctrine that cannot be borne, because it cannot be understood. And
why do Comment. Vol. 1. page 118.
De Uno Deo P. lib. 2. sect. 1, 2.
Crellius and others argue from Reason and Logical Arguments against the
Trinity, if they do not refuse the Doctrine upon the account of Reason? And it
is certain they would not do this if they were not persuaded that these things
in Religion must be adjusted to Natural Reason, and that they are displeased
with the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation, etc. because these are not
exactly squared to their Natural Notions. You see then what is the sentiment of
the Greatest Rabbis of this way, and therefore we must make our estimate of
the Socinian or Antitrinitarian Doctrine from these, and not from one or two
Modern Writers. This I think will be granted by all men of reason.

But what if it does appear that even the very English and Modern Socinians,
though they seem to wave this Principle, do yet retain it, and govern
themselves by it? Else why do they complain that Letter of Resolution
concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity. The Unreasonableness of the Doctrine of
the Trinity.
they have no conception of the Trinity as the Trinitarians represent it to
them, they cannot form an idea of it; it is a notion that excites no idea's in
their minds; it is against Reason and Natural Light? We are advised by the
Modern Penmen An Accurate Examination of the Principal Texts, etc. chap. 5.
to consult our Reason about the thing in question; and if we do so, we shall
find an absolute impossibility in the Trinitarian Doctrine: our Reason will
assure us that an Almighty Father and an Almighty Son are most certainly two
Gods, and that two Creators can be no other than two Gods: Therefore we may,
and we must infer that the explication of the first Verses of St. John 's
Gospel, which advance such a Doctrine, is certainly false. Again, the English
Socinians tell us that Observations on the Answer to the brief History of the
Unitarians, chap. 2.
the Doctrine of the Trinity clashing altogether with our natural idea's can be
no matter of Revelation, and therefore ought not to be believed. And hear their
Final and Resolute Determination, which fully speaks their absolute adherence
to this Principle, Letter of Resolution concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity.
We abide by this Argument, here we fix our foot, never to be removed, that the
inconsistence of the Trinity (as well as the Incarnation) with Reason and
Natural Knowledge being undeniably evident, therefore this Doctrine can have no
real foundation in Divine Revelation, that is to say, in Holy Scripture. And we
find that our English Unitarians Observations on the Answer to the brief
History of the Unitarians, chap. 1.
argue from Reason in this Point, and they declare that they cannot believe it
because Reason does not teach it. Thus we find that the bottom of all is, the
Trinity and such like Doctrines are above their Reason, and Natural Idea's, and
therefore they are no matter of their Faith. This is it which the Reverend
Person before named charges these men with in a great part of his Of the
Mysteries of the Christian Faith.
Sermon: and certainly he would not have done it if there were no such persons
in being. It is too plain that there are such, and I think I have proved it
from their own mouths. The sum of their Opinion and resolution if this, that
there is nothing difficult and abstruse in Religion, and that they will not
believe any thing in Christianity but what they can make out by Reason:
otherwise it must be discarded presently.

Now, to apply this Principle of the Antitrinitarians; we are assured that we
cannot by searching find out God, Job 11. 7. his Infinite Nature and Immense
Essence are not commensurate to our Conceptions, are not adjusted to our
Idea's, but are far above them: it is impossible that the Apprehensions of
finite Creatures should reach these things: therefore according to the foresaid
Principle, the Unitarians are not obliged to believe any such things; they must
not admit of the Infinite Nature of God, concerning which our Conceptions will
always be obscure and unproportionate; yea, they cannot but infer from their
own Maxim, that God is an impossible Being, at least that His Immense Nature is
such. They cannot comprehend and conceive the Manner of the Immense and
Infinite Presence or Knowledge of God; therefore they must disown the things
themselves. Thus by virtue of their own professed Principle, the Godhead it
self as well as the Trinity is shocked by them: and consequently one would be
apt to gather that a Socinian, so far as he is led by this Principle, is an
Atheist, or (lest that should seem harsh) one that favors the Cause of
Atheism. For he may as well quit the belief of a God because of these
Difficulties and Abstrusities in the Nature of God, as renounce the Doctrine of
the Trinity, because there are some inexplicable and unintelligible things that
accompany it. But because all men do not follow the natural Conduct of their
Principles (the Divine Providence overruling in these cases) I do not here
pass an Universal Censure, I do not speak of every individual man, nay I hope
charitably concerning most of them. However, it is to be feared, that some are
unhappily under the force and sway of the foregoing Principle; and these are
the Persons I speak of, and no other.

These things I freely and openly suggest. Which the Learned and Ingenious
Gentlemen of the Racovian Persuasion cannot dislike, unless they disapprove of
themselves, unless they disclaim their own Writings; for they cry up in almost
all of them (and in An Exhortation to a Free and Impartial Enquiry, etc.
one very lately) a Freedom of Discourse, a Liberty of speaking their Thoughts,
which they applaud as a very Generous and Noble thing, and much value
themselves upon it. They cannot deny that to me which they allow of and
magnify in themselves, especially when I most sacredly profess to them that I
have sincerely delivered my Thoughts, and spoken what I conceive to be the
words of Truth and Soberness. Wherefore I expect to be approved of by Persons
of their Ingenuity and Free Temper, who (as I find) blame others (even some of
the Clergy) for palliating and dissembling, and not speaking out. I think they
will not charge me with this Fault, for I have acted according to their own
Generous Principles: and I must tell them there is not a Friend of theirs in
all their dear Eleutheropolis that is more disingaged and unbiased than I am.

But though I have used a becoming Freedom, yet there are some things that I
omit, because I would let the World see that I am not eager and lavish in
blaming and censuring any Party of Men, especially since it is suggested to me
by some that are Learned and Sober of that Persuasion, that it is hard that
their Opinion should suffer for the Ill Consequences of it, or for the
Insincerity of any that profess it, or by reason of the Rash indiscreet
Passages which occurr in some of their late Writers. I do it likewise because I
would give the World an Example of Moderation and Temper in this Disputing and
Wrangling Age; that it may be seen, that whilst I remonstrate against the
Errors and Mistakes (as I suppose them to be) of any Side, I can forbear to
publish the Aggravations of them, and that I had rather the Truth should
prevail than the Contrary Opinion, or the Maintainers of it should be exposed.
Finally, I consider that it is improper and unseasonable to contend among our
selves at home whilst our Armies are engaging the Enemy abroad.

The Proper Antidote belonging to this Head of my Discourse is this; Let us
make a Difference between Finite Beings and that which is Infinite: for seeing
there is such a Vast Difference between them, we ought to observe it. We cannot
form the same Conceptions of one and the other; yea the latter is exalted above
our reach and comprehension; wherefore let us be satisfied, that the Properties
of an Infinite Being (such as God is) are incomprehensible, and therefore that
may be possible in the Infinite Nature of God (as namely that it is
communicable to Three Distinct Persons) which is impossible in the Finite
Nature of Man or other Creatures. Let us attend to that which may be known, and
that clearly and distinctly, and not trouble our thoughts and wrack our brains
about Unsearchable Mysteries. A Lover of Peace as well as Truth should not be
so much sollicitous about the Manner of the Three Personalities or
Subsistencies as about the Trinity it self. We are sure of the latter, as sure
as the Scripture can make us; therefore it does not become us to wrangle about
the former; especially when we find that ill-minded men make use of this
Quarrel to promote the Cause of Atheism; and truly they make advances toward
it every day.

I proceed to Other Doctrines which administer to this Great Evil which I have
been speaking of, and which may justly be reckoned among the Blemishes of these
Inquisitive Times. Such is that of a Spinosa. Tract. Theol polit. cap. 8, 9, 10.
late Writer, that the Books of the Old Testament were not written by those
Persons whose Names they bear, that the Historical parts of the Bible are lame
and imperfect, and repugnant to themselves; that the Writings were not
carefully and faithfully transmitted to us, but abound with many faults and
mistakes, that the Books of the Prophets are mere scraps and fragments, and
taken without order and method from other Writings. All which put together,
destroys the Authority of Divine Revelation, and consequently of all Revealed
Religion, from whence we have the strongest and most pregnant Arguments for a
Deity.

Again, The same Design is advanced in these Learned Times by thrusting of
Opinions and Theories on the world in defiance of the plain Letter and
Historical Part of the Bible: as if the Sacred History, which was written by
Inspired Men, were not as credible and authentic as that of Profane Authors.
The frame of the Primitive Earth is represented opposite to what Moses tells us
it was: the account which he gives of Paradise (as it is a Particular Place) is
contradicted, yea it is strongly averred, that there never was any such thing.
What Moses relates concerning our First Parents is laughed at as a Romantic
Story. The Universal Deluge in Noah's time is attributed to an accidental
diruption of the Earth; which when scanned, is found to be fictitious and
imaginary, and thence the Deluge it self is concluded by many to be so; and
Moses is reckoned by them as an Impostor. Which is taken notice of, and thus
animadverted upon by a Curious Observer, and One who (as becomes so Learned an
Head) joins Religion with his Philosophical Researches, Dr. Woodward's Hist. of
the Earth, Part 3. 161.
The Atheistical Party had hereby an occasion (says he) boldly to give out
that such a Deluge as that described by Moses was altogether incredible, and
that there never was, nor could be any such thing. Nothing was talked of among
them under Mathematical Demonstrations of the falsehood of it, which they vented
with all imaginable Triumph, and would needs have it that they had here sprung
a fresh and unanswerable Argument against the Authentickness of the Mosaic
Writings; which is indeed what they drive at, and a Point they very fain would
gain. For if the Penman of the first book in the Bible be found tripping, then
the Credit of all the rest falls to the ground; we may justly question their
Fidelity, yea deny whatever they say. And so the Bible falls, and with it all
our Religion, and with that necessarily a Deity, which is the thing ultimately
aimed at, I do not say by the first Hand from whence these Notions came (for I
charitably hope better things of so Learned a Person, especially since he has
showed himself not unwilling to retract them) but by those ill-minded men who
make their Markets of these Opinions. All that I will add here is this, that if
(according to a Learned Du-Pin Hist. of Eccles. Writers. Prelim. Dissertat.
Doctor of the Sorbon) it be a very dangerous Paradox to presume to deny that
the Pentateuch was composed by Moses, and accordingly Hobbes and Spinosa are
condemned by him for using Arguments to that purpose, then surely it must be
much more dangerous and pernicious to hold that any part of Moses's Writings is
mere Forgery and Fiction, i. e. was designed only to comply with the Ignorant
Jews at that time, and does not contain matter of fact. I have said something
of this nature in another place, and on another account, but I never had
occasion before to represent it as an unhappy Handle which Atheistically
disposed Persons may lay hold upon. Wherefore let those who are Philosophically
disposed take warning hence, and forbear to prefer their own precarious
Hypotheses before the plain Account which this Inspired Historian gives of
those first things in the World. Let none presume to represent the Writings of
this First Author as false, in order to make their own true, and thereby to
gratify the worst sort of men. I need not say more here, because I have
already antidoted against the Infection of these two last Heads, viz. in those
Discourses wherein I have treated of the Authority and Perfection of the
Scriptures.

In the next place, Learned Enquirers are apt to give Encouragement to Atheism
by an obstinate endeavoring to solve all the Phoenomena in the world by mere
Natural and Corporeal Causes, and by their averseness to admit of the aid and
concurrence of a Supernatural or Immaterial Principle for the production of
them. The Mechanic Philosophy has done a great deal of mischief on this
account: not but that (so far as it ought to be made use of) it is generally
the most excellent (because the most plain and sensible) way of displaying the
Operations of Natural Bodies: and it cannot be denied, that since This has
been revived and entertained, there has been that Improvement in Natural
Philosophy which never was thought of before, and which could never have been
attained by the Aristotelian way: yet this is to be said with truth and reason,
that the Great Reviver and Manager of it has carried it on too far by
undertaking to give an account of All Effects and Events in the production of
Vegetables and Animals, and in the very Formation and Organization of the Body
of Man himself by mere Mechanic Principles, thereby in a manner ascribing
Divinity to Matter and Motion. This Great Philosophic Wit over-shot himself
here: and though it is true he has otherways ( viz. by asserting the Notion of
Souls or Spirits, and by demonstrating the essential and real Difference from
Bodies) made some part of amends for this, yet there are many at this day who
make very ill use of this Doctrine. Some take occasion thence to believe, that
Men as well as Brutes are no other than Engines and Machines, mere Neurospasts
and Senseless Puppets. Others build upon this Notion the Conceit of Thinking
Matter, for if Pores and Particles do all things in the Bodies of Brutes, it is
probable they serve instead of Souls to those of Humane Race: and so a
Spiritual and Immaterial Principle is excluded. This Philosophy is Vain Deceit,
and too many are spoiled by it.

But they should consider that the Noble French Philosopher himself did not
believe all that he wrote. Malebranch, who was a great Admirer and Defender of
him, tells us, that he never pretended that things were made in that manner
that he describes them Search after Truth, Book 1.
. Yea, we have Des Cartes's own word for it, Princip. Philos. Pars 4.
I require not any one, says he, to believe that Bodies which compose this
visible World were ever produced in that way which I have represented them. It
seems by his own Confession, that he was not in good earnest in all the parts
of his Philosophy, and therefore we may gather that in some of the Particulars
aforementioned he only propounded his Conjectures.

We might carry this Thought yet farther, and observe that the generality of
the Modern Philosophers (not only Cartesians, but others) have contributed much
to Atheism, by referring All things, not only in Organized Bodies but in every
part of the World, and all the Phoenomena that we take notice of in it to a
Corporeal Principle, and to the Efficiency and Power of this alone. Whereas, it
is certain that there are many things which happen in the World that cannot be
solved any other way than by the Superintendence of a Spiritual Being. There
are several wonderful Occurrences which no man can give an account of, but by
supposing an Almighty Immaterial Agent, which is no other than God. Thus we
must be constrained to repair to an Incorporeal Principle to solve the Cause of
the Seas constant Ebbing and Flowing, and the Attraction of the Loadstone, and
the Hanging of the Clouds, and many other Phoenomena in Nature: for the
Accounts that are given are imperfect and inconsistent, and do no ways satisfy
any Serious Enquirer. A man that is not willing to be put off with slight and
insufficient Suggestions, cannot rest in them as true Causes of those things.
Only Philosophical men will be assigning some Reasons of things, whether they
can or no: and this is an Inclination which is incident to the best and wisest
Naturalists in all Ages. But they may as reasonably undertake to show whence it
is that the Sun has its continual Motion from East to West, or (as they would
rather express it) why the Earth wheels about upon its Axis from West to East:
which yet I do not see attempted by any Philosopher whatsoever; and yet there
is as much reason for the one as the other.

So for Gravity, that known affection of Bodies whereby they are inclined
toward the same Common Center, it seems not to be solved by any Principles of
Mechanism that have hitherto been propounded, whether it be from a kind of
Magnetism in some parts of the Earth (as has been imagined by some) or from
the reflected Particles of the Celestial Matter driving down into their places
the earthy bodies they find above them, or (as they at other times are pleased
to speak) from the pressure of the Atmosphere, which moves all Bodies
continually downwards, because it does it self press always toward the Earth:
or whether it be (as the Learned Isaac Vossius holds) from the Diurnal Motion
of the Earth, whereby all heavy Bodies (which move with greater difficulty than
light ones) tend to the middle or Center, and light Bodies are expelled toward
the Superficies or from the Center. But a man that would be very serious in
Philosophizing, can hardly acquiesce in any of these Solutions. He is not
hereby satisfied how Non-gravitation can be and not be in a thing at the same
time, as in Water in the Sea or in a River: for it is heavy and presses down,
and yet the parts do not gravitate; for it is known that those that dive, and
are under so great a heap of Waters, yet feel it not upon them. Here must be
(...), there must be acknowledged an other Cause besides those before mentioned
(if they may be said to be Causes at all).

And accordingly I find that some of the most Judicious Philosophers of our own
Nation have averred that a God, a Divine Incorporeal Substance may be evinced
from the Phoenomena of Gravity. This is made good by strong and nervous
Arguments in an Enchirid. Metaphys. Cap. 11.
Undertaking of the Learned Dr. More. Mr. L^ck concerning Education.
Another Ripe-witted Naturalist positively determines, that the common
Phoenomenon of Gravity is impossible to be explained by any natural operation
of Matter, or any other law of Motion but the positive Will of a Superior
Being, so ordering it. And there is lately risen in our Horizon another Bright
Philosophic Luminary, from whom we may expect Great Discoveries: it is his
frank Acknowledgment that this wonderful Property of Bodies, whereby the World
is tied and linked together, and all things in it are kept from running back
into their First Chaos and Confusion, and which consequently is necessary for
the welfare, yea the very subsistence of the Universe, is supernatural. Dr.
Woodward's Not. Hist. of the Earth. Part 1.
No power, says he, of mere Nature can produce it: it surpasses all the
Mechanism of Matter. And in several other Instances which might be offered,
there may be seen a despair of resolving the nature of them by material Causes
wholly. No meaner a Person than De Cord.
Doctor Lower (who was voted by all the Faculty to be one of the most
Accomplished Anatomists of this Age) imputes the wonderful Motion of the Heart,
and the Circulation of the Blood, to a Divine and Supernatural Cause. He who
was as well skilled as any man in the Fabric of the Parts and Vessels of the
Body, and knew all the Springs of their Actions and Operations, was of opinion,
that these could not be solved by any ordinary Principle. I mention this only
to let the Reader see that some of the Bravest and Wisest Philosophers are
forward to own a Divine Hand even in the Common Works of Nature. They do not
think it below a Man of Philosophy to resolve some things into an Immaterial
Principle. For a Pious and Christian Philosopher may plainly discern that there
are some things above the Efforts of Matter and Motion.

It cannot be denied (whatever some are pleased to say to the contrary) that we
live in as Learned Times as ever have been extant. All Arts and Sciences are
improved even to a Prodigy; and particularly the Accessions which are made to
Philosophy are very great and astonishing. But yet I must needs concur with
that very Thoughtful and Ingenious Gentleman before cited, who has most truly
told the World, that Concerning Education.
without the notion and allowance of Spirits our Philosophy will be lame and
defective in one main part of it, when it leaves out the Contemplation of the
most Excellent and Powerful part of the Creation, viz. those Immaterial Beings.
And herein he follows all the Great and Renowned Philosophers of our Age,
especially those of our own Country, as Dr. More, Sir Matthew Hale, Dr. Willis,
Mr. Boil, Mr. Ray, etc. who pretend not to solve all things in Philosophy by
mere Natural Causes, who look not upon Man as a piece of Clockwork, but have
frequent recourse to those Springs and Causes which are Spiritual and
Incorporeal, and sometimes to the immediate hand of the Almighty Himself. To
conclude then, let not the inestimable Blessing of Knowledge and Learning which
is so peculiar to this Age, make us forgetful of the Grand Source and Spring of
all operations and effects in Nature. Let us beware of those men who ascribe
all the Phenomenon in the world to the power of the modified matter, and will
leave nothing for God to do himself. Neither let us think that to Philosophize
is to jar with the Sacred Writings, and to deny the very Natural History of it.
The Scoffers at a Deity never had a more hopeful Harvest then since these
Notions have prevailed. By this means it comes to pass that Philosophy, which
is the Study of Wisdom, affronts the Truest and Highest Wisdom; and even
Natural Philosophy, which is one of the Choicest Accomplishments of humane
minds, leads men even to the denial of the Author of Nature.

No wise man will disapprove of a Latitude either in Philosophy, or in the
dubious and controverted Points of Theology: but then here he must be upon his
guard, for there are those that under the pretense of throwing off some
precarious things in the Old Philosophy, and discarding the empty Speculations
of the Schools cast off those Principles which are useful and sound: under the
notion of the Advancements of Arts and Sciences, and the Improvement of the
belles lettres, and carrying Learning up to a greater height, they in the mean
time help to pull these down. Especially in Religion, under the color of
searching further than others have done into Divine matters they abandon some
of the choicest Principles: under the pretext of Reason and Good Sense they
obtrude any New Conceit upon the world, and regard not the suffrage of the Holy
Scriptures or of the Primitive Church. This they call a Rational Religion, and
if you offer any thing against it, they cry it down as a Dream, a Romance, a
Fable, a Phantom, an Hobgoblin, and (which is a word which they think
comprehends all the rest) Priestcraft.

And here I might observe that among the Opinions which lead to Atheism, the
denial of Demons and Witches, which Mr. Hobbs Leviath. chap. 34. Mr. Websters
Display of supposed Witchcraft. Dr. Becker's Enchanted World.
of late has so much prevailed, is none of the least. For besides that this is
an open defiance to unquestionable History, Experience and matter of Fact, and
so introduces the worst sort of Skepticism (which is the highway to Atheism)
it is evident that this supplants the belief of Spiritual Beings or Substances:
for Witchcraft and all Diabolick Transactions are disbeliev'd on the account of
the improbability, if not impossibility of Spirits. So that it is plain the
rejecting of the being and commerce of Demons or Infernal Spirits opens a door
to the denial of the Deity, of which we can no otherwise conceive than that it
is an Eternal Spirit.

There are Other Doctrines which advance Atheism, and may be reckoned among the
Dangerous Luxuriances of these Inquisitive Times. Such is the vilifying of the
Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, the proclaiming it to be faulty and
erroneous, in order to establishing the Seventy's Version as only Authentic.
Such is the building the Authority of the Books of the Old Testament on the
pretended inspiration of certain Public Scribes or Notaries among the Jews, in
imitation of such among the Egyptians; the avouching that the Leaves or Volumes
on which those Books were wrote are misplaced and put out of order; the
professed declaring that the Canonical Books are not the same that they were at
first, but that several words and passages are left out. All mere Fiction and
Conceit, unworthy of so Excellent a Genius as F. S's. Such also is the
maintaining that the greatest part of the Religious Rites and Constitutions
which God himself settled among the Jews were a Transcript of those that were
in use among the Idolatrous Pagan Nations, and that the All-Wise Lawgiver
borrowed those immediately from these. The two former of these Attempts null
the Authority of the Sacred Writings, and the last of them disparages not only
them but the Blessed Founder of the Jewish Economy. I speak not this as if any
of these Opinions can be thought to be True Reasons on which a man may ground
his disesteem of the Scriptures, or of the Holy Doctrines contained in them, or
of the Sacred Inditer of them; for they are the Sentiments but of a very few,
and of those whose Learning, though it was exceeding great, had not wholly
conquered their Prejudice, or freed them from Misapprehensions in some things.
I cannot charge them with any direct design of favoring the Cause of Atheism,
but ill-disposed men have made use of their Notions to that purpose. Wherefore,
as we value the Reputation of our Religion, and the Honor of the Divine Author
of it, let us be careful that we split not upon any of these Rocks, nor
endanger our selves on any of the Shallows before mentioned, and thereby make
Shipwreck of our Faith and Holy Profession, or so endanger our selves that we
can hardly be brought off again.

I might in the last place take notice of a Plausible Conceit which has been
growing up to a considerable time, and now has the fortune to come to some
maturity. Not to speak of its reception, (if not its birth) among some Foreign
Authors, chiefly Socinians, it seemed among our selves to be favored by that
Learned, but Wavering, Prelate who writ the Liberty of Prophesying, and
afterward by another of his Order who composed Chap. 1. Concerning the
Articles of Faith.
The Naked Truth. Lately it has been revived by the Author of the Naked
Gospel: and since more particularly fully and distinctly it has been
maintained by the late Publisher of the Reasonableness of Christianity, as
delivered in the Scriptures. He gives it us over and over again in these formal
words, viz. that nothing is required to be believed by any Christian man but
this, that Jesus is the Messiah. He contends that there is no other Article of
Faith necessary to Salvation; this is a Full and Perfect Creed, and no person
need concern himself in any other. This takes up about three quarters of his
book, for he goes through the History of the Evangelists and the Acts of the
Apostles, according to the order of Time (as he thinks) to give an account of
this Proposition. But yet this Gentleman forgot, or rather wilfully omitted a
plain and obvious passage in one of the Evangelists, Go teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. From which it is plain, that all Proselites to
Christianity, all that are adult Members of the Christian Church, must be
taught, as well as baptized, into the Faith of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. And if they must be taught this Doctrine (which is the
peremptory Charge and Commission here given to the Apostles, Go teach, etc.)
then it is certain that they must believe it, for this Teaching is in order to
Belief. This will be denied by none, I suppose, and consequently more is
required to be believed by Christian men, and Members of Christ's Church, than
that Jesus is the Messiah. You see it is part of the Evangelical Faith, and
such as is necessary, absolutely necessary, to make one a Member of the
Christian Church, to believe a Trinity in Unity in the Godhead; or, in plainer
terms, that though God is One as to his Essence and Nature, yet there are Three
Persons in that Divine Essence, and that these Three Persons are really the One
God: for we cannot imagine that Men and Women should be required to be baptized
into the Faith and Worship of any but the Only True God. This Epitomizer of the
Evangelical Writings left out also that famous Testimony in John 1. 1. In the
beginning was the Word (Christ Jesus) and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. Whence we are obliged to yield assent to this Article, that Christ is
the word of God. And there is added in Verse 14. another indispensable Point of
Faith, viz. that the word was made Flesh, i. e. that God was Incarnate, the
same with 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh. And it follows in the same
Verse of this first Chapter of St. John, that this Word is the only begotten
of the Father: whence we are bound to believe the Eternal, though ineffable,
Generation of the Son of God. Our Author likewise takes no notice that we are
commanded to believe the Father and the Son, Joh. 14. 10, 11. and that the Son
is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, which expresses their Unity. This
is made an Article of Faith by our Savior's particular and express Command.
And other eminent parts of Christian Belief this Writer passes by, without
having any regard to them, and yet pretends to present the World with a
Complete and Entire Account of all that is the matter of our Faith under the
Gospel. This cannot but seem very strange and unaccountable to any man of
deliberate Thoughts, and who expects Sincerity from a Writer who makes some
show of it?

But this is not all; this Learned Gentleman, who with so much industry amasses
together Quotations out of the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, yet is not
pleased to proceed to the Epistles, and to give an Account of them as he did of
the others; though the Epistles are as considerable a part of the New Testament
as the Gospels and the Acts, and the Penmen of them were equally inspired by
the Holy Ghost. Can there be any Reason given of this partial dealing? Yes, it
is most evident to any thinking and considerate person that he purposely omits
the Epistolary VVritings of the Apostles because they are fraught with Other
Fundamental Doctrines besides that One which he mentions. There we are
instructed concerning these Grand Heads of Christian Divinity, viz. the
Corruption and Degeneracy of Humane Nature, with the True Original of it (the
Defection of our First Parents) the Propagation of Sin and Mortality, our
Restoration and Reconciliation by Christ's Blood, the Eminency and Excellency
of his Priesthood, the Efficacy of his Death, the full Satisfaction thereby
made to the Divine Justice, and his being made an All-sufficient Sacrifice for
Sin. Here are peculiar Discoveries concerning Christ's Righteousness, and our
Justification by it, concerning Election, Adoption, Sanctification, or the New
Birth, and particularly Saving Faith, which is so signal a part of it. Here the
Nature of the Gospel, and the New Covenant, the Riches of God's Mercy in the
way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, the Certainty of the Resurrection of Humane
Bodies, and of the Future Glory, are fully displayed. These are the Matters of
Faith contained in the Epistles, and they are essential and integral parts of
the Gospel it self: and therefore it is no wonder that our Author, being
sensible of this, would not vouchsafe to give us an Abstract of these Inspired
Writings, but passes them by with some Contempt. And more especially (if I may
conjecture) he does this because he knew that there are so many and Frequent,
and those so illustrious and eminent Attestations to the Doctrine of the ever
to be Adored Trinity in these Epistles.

Nor is this any uncharitable conjecture, as the Reader may easily satisfy
himself if he takes notice that this Writer interprets the Son of God to be no
more than the Messiah: he expounds John 14. 9. etc. after the Antitrinitarian
mode, whereas generally Divines understand some part of those words concerning
the Divinity of our Savior. He makes Christ and Adam to be the Sons of God in
the same senses, viz. by their Birth, as the Racovians generally do, and so he
interprets Luke 1. 35. John 5. 26. according to their Standard. When he
proceeds to mention the Advantages and Benefits of Christ's Coming into the
world, and appearing in the flesh, he has not one syllable of his Satisfying
for us, or by his Death purchasing Life and Salvation, or any thing that sounds
like it. This and several other things which might be offered to the Reader,
show that he is all over Socinianized; and moreover that his design was to
exclude the belief of the Blessed Trinity in this Undertaking of his, viz. to
prove that the believing of Christ to be the Messiah is the only Point of Faith
that is necessary and saying. All the other Articles and Doctrines must fall a
sacrifice to the Darling Notion of the Antitrinitarians, namely that Christ is
not the True God, and coessential with his Father. For the sake of this one
Point they are all dispatched out of the world, and are made by him Martyrs to
this Cause. One could scarcely imagine that a person of Ingenuity and Good
Sense should go this way to work. Which enclines me to think that the Ingenious
Gentleman who is supposed by some to be the Author of this Treatise is not
really so. I am apt to believe that the world is imposed upon in this matter,
for in this present Attempt there are none of those Noble Strokes which are
visible in that Person's Writings, and which have justly gained him a fair
repute. That Vivacity of thought, that Elevation of mind, that Vein of Sense
and Reason, yea and of Elocution too which runs through his Works are all
extinct here: only he begins as 'twere to recover himself about the Close when
he comes to speak of the Laws of Christian Morality. Some may attribute this
Flatness to the Ill Cause he manages; but for my part, I question whether we
have the right Author, I cannot persuade my self but that there is an Error of
the Person: at least I will charitably presume so, because I have so good an
opinion of the Gentleman who writ of Humane Understanding and Education.

But what is the ground of the foresaid Assertion? What makes him contend for
One Single Article, with the Exclusion of all the rest? He pretends it is this,
that all men ought to understand their Religion. And I agree with him in this;
but I ask him, may not a man understand those Articles of Faith which I
mentioned out of the Gospel and Epistles, if they be explained to him, as well
as that One which he speaks of? Why then must there be but One Article, and no
more? But he, notwithstanding this, goes on, and urges that there must be
nothing in Christianity that is not plain, and exactly level to all men's
Mother-wit and common apprehension. For P. 302.
God considered the poor of the world, and the bulk of mankind: the Christian
Religion is suited to vulgar capacities, and has only P. 302.
such Articles as the laboring and illiterate man may comprehend. The Writers
and Wranglers in Religion fill it with Niceties, and dress it up with Notions,
(viz. the Trinity, Christ's Satisfaction, etc.) which they make necessary and
fundamental parts of it. But the bulk of mankind have not leisure for Learning
and Logic: and therefore there must be no such doctrine as that concerning the
Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the like, which are above the
capacity and comprehension of the Vulgar. And in the Entrance of his book he
has the same notion, for he tells us that the Scriptures are a collection of
writings designed by God for the instraction of the illiterate bulk of mankind,
(for he is much taken with this phrase, you see, the bulk of mankind) whereby
he understands the Ignorant and Unlearned Multitude, the Mob, as he calls it in
another place. Surely this Gentleman is afraid of Captain Tom, and is going to
make a Religion for his Myrmidons: and to please them he gives them as little
of this kind as he possibly can, he contracts all into One Article, and will
trouble them with no more. Now then the sum of all that he aims at is this,
that we must not have any Point of Doctrine whatsoever in our Religion that the
Mob does not at the very first naming of it perfectly understand and agree to.
We are come to a fine pass indeed: the Venerable Mob must be asked what we must
believe: and nothing must be received as an Article of Faith but what those
Illiterate Clubmen vote to be such. The Rabble are no System-makers, no
Creed-makers; and therefore away with Systems and Creeds, and let us have but
One Article, though it be with the defiance of all the rest, which are of equal
necessity with that One.

Toward the close of his Enterprise he has a fling (and that a Shrewd one) at
the Dissenters, telling them that Page. 303.
their Congregations and their Teachers understand not the Controversies at
this time so warmly managed among them. Nay the Teachers themselves have been
pleased to make him their Confessor, and to acknowledge to him that they
understand not the difference in debate between them. Why? because they (as
well as the Conformists) have Obscure Notions and Speculations, such as
Justification, the Trinity, Satisfaction, etc. terms that all the bulk of
mankind are unacquainted with: whereas Religion should have no Difficulties and
Mysteries in it. The very Manner of every thing in Christianity must be clear
and intelligible, every thing must be presently comprehended by the weakest
noddle, or else it is no part of Religion, especially of Christianity, which
yet is called the 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Mystery of Godliness: but this being in the Epistles, it is no great matter;
we are not to mind what they say.

Thus we see what is the Reason why he reduces all Belief to that one Article
before rehearsed: as if the other Main Points which I produced were not as
easily learnt and understood as This; as if there were any thing more difficult
in this Proposition [The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are One God, or Divine
Nature] than in that other [Jesus is the Messiah]. Truly if there be any
Difficulty, it is in this latter, for here is an Hebrew word first to be
explained before the Mob (as he styles it) can understand the Proposition. Why
therefore does this Author, who thinks it absurd Page 302.
to talk Arabic to the Vulgar, talk Hebrew to them, unless he be of opinion
(which no body else is of) that they understand this Language better than that?
Or, suppose he tells the Rabble that Messiah signifies Anointed, what then?
Unless he explains that word to them, it is still unintelligible. So that it
appears hence that this Article which he has spent so much time about, is no
more level to the understanding of the Vulgar then that of the Holy Trinity,
yea it is not so much.

To conclude, this Gentleman and his fellows are resolved to be Unitarians;
they are for One Article of Faith, as well as One Person in the Godhead; and
there is as much reason for one as the other, that is, none at all. But it does
not become me perhaps to pronounce this so peremptorily, and therefore I appeal
to the Judicious and Impartial Reader; desiring him to judge of what I have
suggested. But this I will say, if these Learned men were not highly prejudiced
and prepossessed, they would discern the Evil and Mischief of their Assertion:
they would perceive that when the Catholic Faith is thus brought down to One
Single Article, it will soon be reduced to none: the Unit will dwindle into a
Cipher.

The Proper Remedy here is to consider that it is unlawful Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
to add unto, or diminish ought from the Written Word: yea, a Curse is
threatened against those that Rev. 22. 18, 19.
add to or take away from the Scriptures; for if it be criminal, and deserves a
Curse to deal thus with the book of Deuteronomy or of the Revelation, then by
the same reason those that add to or detract from any other part of the Holy
Scriptures are undeniably guilty, and are obnoxious to the Divine Plagues. I
hope such as practice the latter will seriously think of it, and for the future
believe themselves concerned to embrace All the necessary and fundamental
Articles of Faith, as well as One of them.

Thus I have briefly discovered the Springs and Sources of Atheism, and I have
endeavored all along (more or less) to stop them up, and hinder the current of
them. Now, for the close of all, let me add these Inferences from the whole,

I. We ought to bewail the spreading Atheism of this Age wherein we live. Of
old there were but few that openly professed it. There are reckoned up four
several sorts or forms of Atheism by a late Dr. Cudworth's Intellectual System.
Learned Writer, viz. Anaximandrian, Democritick, Stoical, Stratonical, and yet
there was scarcely one of these that was a downright denying of a God. Some
have given Diagoras, Theodorus, Protagoras, the title of Atheists, and have
thought them to be absolutely such: but others, upon a strict search, are of
opinion, that they deserved not that infamous Name; yea, they find that they
were great Asserters of a Deity. The first of these was accused of Atheism, and
banished for it by the Athenians; not that he denied a God, but because he
derided the Feigned Gods of his time, whom the Athenians had such a reverence
for. The second passes for an Atheist; but those who have narrowly enquired
into things tell us, that he got that Name because he spoke against the
Idolatrous Worship of the Grecians, and had a kindness (it is probable) for
another Religion: for being a Cyrenian, and acquainted with King Ptolomee, he
came to have some Intercourse with the Jews of Alexandria, and had some notice
of the True God. The third was reputed and called by some an Atheist because he
doubted of the Truth and Reality of the Gentile Gods. So Anaxagoras (another
Greek Philosopher) was arraigned for Atheism by the Athenians because he denied
the Sun to be God, and freely discoursed against the other Pagan Deities. Thus
the malicious Accusers of Socrates represented him as an Enemy to the Gods:
part of the Crime charged on him, and for which he was condemned, was his
speaking against the Traditions and Fables of the Poets concerning the Gods,
and his declaring them to be lewd and wicked. To give this Great Man his due,
he was so far from being an Atheist, that he died a Martyr for a Deity. Only to
gratify the Vulgar, and that he might not go off unlamented, after he had
drank his Poison he requested his Friends to offer a Cock for him to
Aesculapius. Some put Democritus into the Catalogue of the Ancient Atheists,
but if we read his Life in Laertius, we shall find that they have little reason
to do so. Lucretius is the most suspicious man of all, and Lucian may be joined
with him, the former a serious, the latter a jocular Atheist.

But it is sad to consider that the number of this sort of men has been
exceedingly augmented since. L'Histoire d' Henr. 3.
David Perron undertook in the presence of King Henry the Third of France, to
prove that there is no God. Mersennus, in his Commentary on Genesis, tells us,
that in the Year when he wrote it, viz. 1623. there was a vast multitude of
them in France: there were at least fifty thousand Atheists in the City of
Paris at that time, and in one house sometimes a dozen were to be found. A
worthy In his Europae Speculum.
Author, whom I had occasion to mention before, acquaints us on his own
Knowledge, that Atheism was very common and rampant in most parts of Italy. Not
to mention Machiavel, Aretine, etc. it cannot be denied that Vanenus openly
declared and professed himself an Atheist, and died so at the Stake. Indeed I
am apt to suspect those who tell us there are scarcely any of this Persuasion
in the World. Thus An Essay in a Letter from Oxford.
one declares that he has traveled many Countries, yet could never meet with
any Atheists, which are few if any: all the noise and clamor is against
Castles in the Air, i. e. such and no other he fancies them to be. But to come
nearer, our Own Nation has produced too many of this kind. Even in this
Civilized Christian Protestant Country there are those that are infected with
this Cursed Infidelity, and defy all Religion and a God. It is an
unquestionable Truth, that there are in this great City of the Kingdom constant
Cabals and Assemblies of Professed Atheists, where they debate the Great Point
of the Existence of an Infinite Spirit that governs the World, and in the close
determine in the Negative. I have sometime accidentally happened into the
Company of, and held Discourse with some that acknowledge they belong to that
Society; and they have not been ashamed to own whatever is done in it. Mr.
Hobbes is their Great Master and Lawgiver. I find that they pay a huge
reverence to him. If they acknowledge any Divine Thing, it is He. If they own
any Scriptures, they are his Writings. The Language that I lately met with from
the mouth of one that was, I suppose, a Wellwisher (according to his poor
ability) to Mr. Hobbes's Mathematics, was this, His Leviathan is the best Book
in the world next to the Bible: He himself was a Man of great Piety, and is
spoken against by none but the Priests. And whom do they (for this man speaks
the sense of the rest) mean by Priests but the Ministers of Religion? So they
would have a Bible and Piety without these; which is as much as to say, they
would have neither of them. But indeed this man had a way of being something
more plausible than his Fellows, and would vouchsafe to mention the Bible and
Piety, and thereby seem as it were to allow of such things; whereas Others are
wont to laugh at them as well as at the Persons they call Priests, for they go
together. I may say truly, it is grown Fashionable to deride whatever is
Sacred, and to talk like an Atheist. In some Companies it shall be questioned
whether a Person be a Gentleman if he does not give Proofs of his being
Profane. To defend the wildest Principles, and to ridicule Religion, is
counted one certain mark of a Wit. He that does not show his Raillery against
Virtue and Goodness, and speaks not contemptibly of God and Religion, is not a
Man of Parts. This is the Sentiment and Persuasion of a great part of this
Nation. I would not libel the Land of our Nativity; yea, I rather heartily wish
that what I have said on this occasion might receive a Confutation. But it is
too evident that I speak truth; it is too manifest to be denied that there are
every where confiderable numbers of men who openly renounce the Existence of
God. David's Atheist was modest, and only said in his Heart, There is no God;
on which account some Atheistical Spirits nowadays may think perhaps he
deserved the Title of Fool which the Psalmist gives him. But these count
themselves a Wiser rank of Atheists, because they say this with their mouths,
and speak it aloud, audibly proclaiming their Opinion, and being very zealous
to gain Proselytes to it.

2. Let us abhor the Converse and Society of those Persons whom we know to be
of this Character. And truly they are very common every where. It is prodigious
to see how they daily increase. There is scarcely a Town where there are not
some that may justly be reckoned in this number. Do not mistake me. There are
some deluded People who are apt to censure all as Atheists that are not of
their way. The Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
Primitive Christians were thus stigmatized, and usually called by that name
because they did not comply with the Pagan Worship and Usages. If a man
discourses not according to some men's fond Notions and Bigotisms; if he speaks
against their superstitious Practices, he presently has this Brand set upon
him. There are those that call all Persons Atheists and Hypocrites that hold
not the same Principles with themselves. Yea, if a man be a great Student in
Philosophy, some weaker People may be apt to fix this Character on him. As
heretofore all that had skill in Mathematics were said and thought to deal in
Art Magic; so in the opinion of some at this day men of great Art and Learning
are voted Atheists by them, and almost every Physician has this Censure past
on him by men of weak minds. But I hope none of those I now speak to are so
unwise and weak, or at least not so uncharitable and censorious as to bestow
this Ignominious Epither on those to whom it does not belong. By an Atheist or
a person very much disposed to be so, I mean one that has an Enmity to the
very notion of a Divine Infinite Being, a Supreme Immaterial Substance, that is
the Sovereign Author of Nature, and the First Cause of all things, from whom
all things were, and on whom they depend. I mean such a one as owns no
Allegiance to this Divine Ruler and Sovereign, and in his Words and Actions
discovers this to the World. And accordingly he is one that acknowledges not
the Infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice of God in the Government of
all things: he speaks irreverently of all that appertains to Religion and
Godliness: he laughs at the profound Mysteries and sublime Doctrines of
Christianity: he endeavors always to diminish the esteem of Sacred things:
yea, he will be jesting and drolling on them if he has any Talent that way. If
he be open-hearted, and not upon the Reserve, he will tell them that Religion
is a mere Invention of Politic Heads to awe the Multitude, and to keep the
World in good order. He is one that blasts Religion with the ignominious Title
of a Popular Cheat, and labors to persuade others to do the like. Where you
find these Characters in any person, you may conclude without breach of
Charity, that he is an Atheist.

And it is the Company of such that I exhort you to beware of, and wholly to
avoid. It is almost incredible that such great numbers should be every day led
away with this Ignis Fatuus, and plunged into Bogs and Mire, never to be
plucked out thence. Therefore take heed what Society you mingle your selves
with in this Dangerous Age. Sit not with the known Despisers of God and
Religion, for they will insensibly instill their poison into you. By frequent
associating with them you will learn to resemble them. Wherefore fly from them
as from a Serpent, and be not prevailed with by any Entreaties or Threats to
hold Correspondence with them. Assure your selves of this, that the Title of
Atheist is the most Reproachful and Detestable one imaginable, though some of
late who glory in their shame entertain other thoughts. Nay, some of these
Persons seem to be partly sensible of it, and change the name into that of
Deist. At this day Atheism it self is slily called Deism by those that indeed
are Atheists. Though they retain the things, yet they would disguise it by a
false Name, and thereby hide the Heinousness of it. But let us not be deceived
and blinded by pretended Shows, but thoroughly apprehend the Vileness of this
Opinion which some endeavor to palliate. It is a very denying the Creed of
Nature, it is a Renuntiation of that which the very Devils believe, and tremble
at. It is briefly but fully represented in St. Cyprian's words, Haec est summa
delicti nolle agnoscere quem ignorare non possis. De Vanit. Idol.
This (says he) is the sum of this most beinous Crime, that those who are
guilty of it wilfully refuse to acknowledge Him whom they cannot be ignorant
of. For their own Beings and Natures furnish them with Arguments for a God: and
if they did not obstinately shut their eyes, they must needs behold a Deity.
Therefore to be Atheists, or without God in the world (as the Ephesians. 2. 12.
Apostle speaks) cannot but be a Great Prodigy; it is Unaccountable almost (if
the Degeneracy of Manking were not so great as it is) that the World it self
should not administer to men's Thoughts Convictive Arguments of a Divinity.
Whence it has been observed by a very Wise Man, that there never was any
Miracle wrought by God to convert an Atheist, because the Light of Nature might
have led him to confess a God. This shows how detestable and pernicious Atheism
is; and much more might be said to this purpose. Wherefore I hope I need not
multiply words when I call upon you to keep out of the Company of those men who
you know are infected with this hellish Poison.

3. Let us labor to work in our selves and others a profound Sense of that
Great God with whom we have to do. Generally the Belief of a Deity is from
Custom and Education, because it is the Persuasion of the Place and the Persons
we converse with: but we should not content our selves with this, but arrive to
the Knowledge of the true Grounds and Reasons of this Belief. Seeing this is
the First thing in Religion, and no Man can be Religious and Virtuous unless he
believes there is a God, let us fortify our Minds against Atheism by those
several Arguments and Considerations which are wont to be propounded by Learned
and Religious Fab. Faventini Disp. 4. adv. Atheos. Tho. Campanella Spizel
Scrutin. Atheismi. Muller. Atheismus devictus. Ian. and Ioach. Ian. Disputat.
contr. Atheos. Dr. More, Mr. Smith, Sir Charles. Woosley, Dr. Tenison, (now
Archbishop of Cant.) Dr. Cudworth, Dr. Barrow.
Writers: that we may as thoroughly be persuaded of this Great Truth as of our
own Being, which a Great Philosopher makes one of his First and Indubitable
Principles.

But especially view the Works of the Creation, and persuade your selves of
this, that a Material World without an Immaterial Cause of it, is mere Nonsnse.
Look abroad, and behold the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Furniture of
them; there you may believe a Deity, because you do as 'twere see it. The
Creator is made visible by his Works. Every thing in the Sensible World is an
(...). Plato.
Image, a Picture, a Footstep of the Deity. From this Exquisite Fabric we
infallibly gather the Existence of its All-wise Architect and Moderator. Of
which I shall give the Reader a particular Demonstration in a short time And
that you may effectually extirpate Atheism out of your minds, frequently peruse
the H. Scriptures. Read God in his own Book. There you will certainly inform
your selves concerning the Superintendence of Spiritual or Immaterial Agents,
viz. Angels, which makes way for the Belief of a God, who is a Spirit. There
you will meet with those Wonderful Operations and Events which can no ways be
solved without granting an Omnipotent and All-wise Disposer of things. And
there you will find this Supreme Governor of the World communicating his Will
and Pleasure to Mankind. I question not but one great Reason (and I might have
mentioned it among the rest) why men are so disposed to be Atheists, is because
they never, or very seldom, consult this Holy Volume: they refuse to hear God
Himself speaking to them in these Writings. Wherefore I recommend to you the
serious and frequent reading of the Bible as the most effectual means to
confirm you in the Belief of a Deity. Assure your selves that this Book is the
best Antidote against Atheism.

4. and lastly, Labor to be truly Religious and Holy; beg the Divine
Assistance to sanctify you in your Hearts and Lives; and thereby you will be
let into the intimate knowledge of this Grand Verity which I have been
discoursing of. You will then more sensibly understand and be convinced of it
than by all the Arguments that can be offered: or rather, this one will make
all the rest effectual. Whereas on the contrary, Men of Unsanctified Minds and
Profane Lives despise and scoff at that of which they have no experience, and
will not believe the Existence and Power of God which they never felt: Strive
then by an Inward Experiment to confute Atheism: so that you may not have any
Inclination to say in your hearts (though you do not utter it with your
tongues) There is no God, but that you may be so strongly convinced of the
contrary Truth that you may be able to assert it with a firm and unshaken
Belief, and from an internal sense of it on your hearts, to attest the reality
of it to the whole World.

FINIS.
ERRAT.
Page 104. lin. 8. dele to.


