Socinianism Unmasked. A DISCOURSE Showing the Unreasonableness Of a Late
Writer's OPINION Concerning the Necessity of only One Article of Christian
Faith; And of his other Assertions in his late Book, Entitled, The
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures, and in his
Vindication of it. With a Brief Reply to another (professed) Socinian Writer.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. and sometime Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and I. Wyat at the Rose in
S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE following Discourse (which was finished above two months ago, but by
reason of some Intervening Occurrences found not its way to the Press) is
designed against the undertaking of a late Author in his book which bears the
Title of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. But the Writer himself is
wonderfully pleased with his Lying hid, and being No Body. I grant there may be
Reasons why a man may sometimes conceal his Name, and not prefix it to the Book
he is Author of. But there are some Reasons that are proper and peculiar to
this Writer's circumstances, for this is perfectly after the Mode of our late
English Racovian Writers, who constantly appear Nameless, and accordingly
herein he shows himself to be of the right Racovian breed. And another good
reason is this (which indeed argues something of Modesty) he would not set a
Christian Name before that book wherein he so grossly abuses Christianity, and
renounces the greatest part of it.

I will not wast time, and trouble the Reader and my self about guessing who
this Writer is. Out of Christian good will and charity I am backward to believe
that he who is vogued to be the Father of these Extravagant Conceits, is really
so. I will still persuade my self that there is an Error of the Person; upon
which account I shall be more free than otherwise I should have been.

But to come to the Book it self; there was (to express it in the most Learned
and Rhetorical Style of our Author himself) a great flutter, noise and buz
raised about it, even while it was yet under the Printers hands. There were
certain Factors and Emissaries who extravagantly extolled it, and it was
observed this Applause came from the Racovian quarter. Those of that way knew
before it came out that it was in favor of their Cause: whence it was that
they so mightily raised the Expectations of those they conversed with, and
highly magnified this Piece before the world had seen it. And as soon as it was
blessed with the sight of it, their language ran to an exorbitant height: as
if Christianity had been never known before the time of the compiling of this
book. All that went before this Author were deluded Creatures, and were perfect
Strangers to the Articles of the Christian Faith, and to Christianity it self.
Now is risen up an Infallible Teacher: all must obsequiously repair to this
Great Oracle. Now the Socinians have another Champion, now they look brisk upon
it, and the day is their own. Now Converts come in apace, and the Youth begin
to have a Polonian Aspect: and in a short time we shall have a Brood of
Socinians, we shall be stocked with Young Racovians.

And to let you into the whole Project, this is the short account of it,
Socinianism was to be erected at this time (they can stay no longer) and in
order to that all hands are to be employed, i. e. all that they can get. Among
others they thought and made choice of a Gentleman, who they knew would be
extraordinarily useful to them; and he it is probable was as forward to be made
use of by them, and presently accepted of the Office which was assigned him.
Now, thinks he, I had best to make use of this opportunity, and to set up for a
Divine. Not only the Illiterate bulk of mankind, but their Reverences and Right
Reverences (to use the words of a The Exceptions of Mr. E. against the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. examined.
Writer of our own Brotherhood) shall come to Me to have their understandings
informed, for we have but a sorry unthinking sort of Teachers now adays,
whether they be Conformists or otherwise: I could never approve of their
Systematick genius, their doting upon Creeds and Confessions, and rendering our
Faith cumbersom and burdensome. It may be even these men will give ear to what a
Thoughtful Musing Man dictates to them, though they never think themselves, but
take all upon trust, and swallow Epistles and Gospel together. I have attained
to such a height and perfection of knowledge that I am able to instruct these
people after another rate. I must tell them (which I know they will look very
strangely upon) that the Apostles, when they wrote the Epistles to their
Christian Converts, designed not to trouble their heads with any Articles or
Truths that were necessarily to be believed, they only dropped a few Occasional
Documents. And it may be now and then that One Article which I have propounded
to the world may be hooked in by the by: but that is no place to look for any
Necessary and Fundamental Truth of Christianity, which is absolutely to be
believed by us.

This seems to be Novel Doctrine, and so indeed it is, for I have the honor to
be the first famous Inventer of it; but I doubt not but in a short time I shall
not only propagate this, but the Cause to which it is subservient, in a
wonderful manner. To this purpose I will carry it cunningly: whilst the
Double-Column'd Prints are openly and in a downright way advancing the Cause,
I will do as much service underhand. They look directly toward Poland or
Transylvania, they publicly profess themselves to be Socinus's Followers, but
I Will be upon the Reserve, and so disguise my self that it shall be very
difficult to discover me. I will make the world believe that I never heard of
such a man as Socinus: and if they tell me that I speak his very language as
perfectly as if I were a Native of Sienna, I Will face them down that I had it
not by fingring of any Socinian Authors, but by a kind of Natural Revelation.

Well, this cause must be carried on, and I can do it as well as any man by
maintaining that there is but One Article of Christian Faith necessarily to be
believed to make a man a Christian, necessarily to be believed in order to
salvation. For if there be but One Point necessary to be believed, then the
doctrines concerning the Trinity, concerning the Incarnation and Divinity of
Christ, concerning his Satisfaction, etc. are rendered unnecessary as to the
making us Christians. And this I will shove on under the color of being
serviceable to the bulk of Mankind, of being obliging and merciful to the
Multitude and Rabble, and Poor People; though (to say the Truth) I show my self
to be so far from obliging the Multitude that I do them an infinite deal of
Mischief. Yet if I compass my End, it is enough, and I care for no more. And my
End is this, to hale in Socinianism after a new manner.

You see what the Musing of this Gentleman comes to: and I was so unhappy a man
as to find it out, to take notice of it, and to discover it to the world in a
late Discourse which I published: and thereby I have extremely exasperated this
New Undertaker and his Adherents. I do not wonder at it, for now their
Intrigues are laid open, their Racovian Plot is detected, and all their
Measures are thereby broken.

But to keep up their hearts, a Vindication (as it is called) of this Treachery
is published by him who was appointed to be the Chief Tool in this work. Here
he makes it his business to defend his New Paradox, and to shore his Notion up
again with some crazy props. Throughout the whole he is pleased to Criticize
with some Magisterialness and Pertness on the Reflections which I made on his
book. And now it is my turn again to be Critic, and I shall discharge the Task
with all impartiality and integrity. It is true, there is nothing of any
Moment, nothing Weighty and Argumentative in what he has offered, and
therefore some in whose Judgment I could confide, would have prevailed with me
to add no more on this Subject, which they were persuaded I had before
sufficiently cleared: but partly to show somewhat further the great Danger and
Mischief of this Writer's Opinion, partly to prevent the Seduction of some
well-meaning persons who may be apt to be led away by his smooth Pretenses,
(for though his Cavils and Evasions be weak, yet they may chance to light into
the Hands of some Weak Readers, such as are not well established in their
notions: Wherefore not on the account of his Petty Objections, but for the sake
of these persons I reassume this Argument) and partly to lay open the Wilful
Mistakes and Gross Dissimulation (as I take it) of this Writer, and partly to
gratify those Gentlemen's expectations who with some impatience seem to long
for a Reply, I have once again undertaken to employ the Press upon this
occasion. But the Chief and Principal Design, as well as Motive, of my
appearing again in this Cause is to assert and defend the Christian Faith which
this Author has misrepresented, maimed and abused. To which purpose I will set
before the Reader the Heads of his pretended Vindication, and in the face of
the world make it appear how falsely and perfidiously he has acted in the Cause
of Religion. And may it be the Readers Prayer (as well as it is mine) that this
Enterprise may tend to the Glory and Honor of God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost (Three Glorious Persons in One ever to be Adored Deity) and
to the Edification of the Christian Church. Amen.

Ian. 27. 1695/6.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. line. 1. read. World. p. 22. l. 18. for Christ. r. Jesus. p. 54. l.
20. r. Sylburgius. p. 85. l. 9. r. Racovians. p. 87. l. 23 after Jesus insert
Christ. p. 116. line 3. after done make the other part of the Parenthesis. p.
117. l. 18. after if insert the truth were known, I believe it would appear
that. p. 120. l. 17. r. telling. p. 125. l 8. r. him. p. 128. l. 21. after has
insert had. p. 131. l. 13. after religion insert who is so near akin to one
that is voted a Socinian in the Brief History of the Unitarians. p. 135. l. 11.
r. Socinianiz'd.

A Late WRITER's Unreasonable Opinions CONFUTED.
CHAP. I.
The first General Charge against the Late Writer, viz. That he unwarrantably
crowds all the Necessary Articles of Faith into One, with a design of favoring
Socinianism. He endeavors to shift off the Enditement, but is cast by his own
words. His wilful mistake about the Article of the Deity. He labors in vain to
split One Article into Two. It is showed that besides the bare believing of
Jesus to be the Messiah, it is necessary to know and believe the Fall of Adam,
whereby Sin and Death entered into the World, and were derived to his posterity.
It is necessary to know and believe Who the Messiah is; whether he be God or
Man, or both: on which will follow the necessary belief of the Holy Trinity. It
is requisite to have a right conception concerning our Recovery and
Restoration by the Messiah, i. e. to know what he undertook and did for us,
and to be acquainted with the Great Privileges bestowed upon us by him. It is
of necessity to believe what the Messiah requires of Us. It is undoubted matter
of our belief, that our Salvation springs from the mere Favor and Grace of God
through Christ Jesus, and not from any works or merits of ours. It is
indispensably requisite, that we believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection, of
the Final Judgment, and of Eternal Life.

I Will now betake my self to the Task which is before me, after I have told
the Reader, that I intend not to imitate our Nameless Author in his Childish
Flourishes, in his Spruce and Starched Sentences, and in his Impotent Jestings,
which are sprinkled up and down his Vindication. Nor will I follow him in his
Impertinencies and Incoherencies, in his trifling Excursions to eke out his two
sheets and a half. I will not resemble him in his Little Artifices of evading,
in his weak and feeble Struglings with a Strong Truth. I will not personate him
in the Confusion and Disorder of his Reply, for it seems he had forgot, that it
is one sign of a Well-bred, a Well-taught Man, Mishn. Tract. Avoth. c. 5.
to answer to the first in the first place, and so in order. I will not imitate
him in his Dry Common Places, in his Set of Words and Phrases, of Sayings and
Apothegms, which would have served on any other occasion, as the Intelligent
Reader cannot but take notice. Much less will I comply with him in his Angry
fits and Passionate Ferments, which, tho he strives to palliate, are easily
discernible, for he feels himself Wounded, and is not able to disguise it. I
will betake my self, I say, to the present Concern with great application and
mindfulness, fully making good my Former Charges against his Book, and clearing
my own from those sorry Objections and Cavils which he has since raised
against it. In the whole management I will sincerely acquaint the Reader first
with his own words, and then offer my Refutation of them: and all along I will
be careful to banish all Indecent Reflections; unless those shall be counted
such which are purely grounded on his own expressions, and which his Freedom of
Language necessarily and unavoidably administers to me.

The Main Charges are these. 1. That he unwarrantably crowded all the Necessary
Articles of Faith into One, with a design of favoring Socinianism. 2. That he
showed his good will to this Cause by interpreting those Texts which respect
the Holy Trinity, after the Antitrinitarian mode. 3. That he gave proof of his
being Socinianiz'd by his utter silence about Christ's satisfying for us, and
purchasing Salvation by virtue of his Death, when he designedly undertook to
enumerate the Advanvantages and Benefits which accrue to mankind by Christ's
coming into the World. And in the making good of these Particular Charges, I
shall (as I did before) evidence to the World that this Writer has not only a
design to cherish Socinianism, but at the same time to make way for Atheism.

I begin with the First, on which I will enlarge more than on any of the rest;
because it comprehends in it several other Particulars, and because in
discussing of this, I shall have opportunity to lay open the Sophistry and
Dissimulation of this Vindicator, and likewise to discover to the Reader how
Mischievous and Pernicious his Design is. First, it is observable that this
Guilty Man would be shifting off the Enditement by excepting against the
formality of the Words, as if such were not to be found in his Book. But when
does he do this? In the close of it, when his matter was exhausted, and he had
nothing else to say, Vindic. p. 38. Then he bethinks himself of this Salvo,
whereas he had generally before pleaded to the formal Enditement, and had
thereby owned it to be True. And indeed he can do no other, for it was the main
work he set himself about to find but One Article of Faith in all the Chapters
of the four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles: and accordingly he over and
over again declares, that there is but that One Truth (viz. Jesus is the
Messiah) necessarily to be assented to by Christians, or (as he sometimes words
it) absolutely required to make a man a Christian, or a member of Christ. This
is the SOLE Doctrine pressed and required to be believed in the whole tenor of
our Savior's and his Apostles preaching. p. 192. of his Reasonableness of
Christianity. And again in the same place. This was the ONLY Gospel Article of
Faith which was Preached to them. This he often inculcates, having left out
several considerable passage in the very Gospels, and having thrown aside the
Epistles, as if they were no part of the New Testament, hoping that some of his
Readers would be bubbled by this means.

And when I told him of his One Article, he knew well enough that I did not
exclude the Article of the Deity, for that is a Principle of Natural Religion;
whereas, I only took notice of his passing by and wholly omitting those points
which are Evangelical. Yet he wilfully mistakes me in this, p. 27. of his
Vindication, and says he does not deny the necessary belief of a Deity, or One
only True God; and so the belief of the Messiah with that makes Two Articles.
Thus he would persuade the Reader, that I misunderstood him, and that I taxed
him with setting up One Article, when he acknowledges two. But the Reader sees
his Shuffling; for my Discourse did not treat (neither does his Book run that
way) of Principles of Natural Religion, but of the Revealed one, and
Particularly the Christian. Accordingly this was it which I taxed him with,
that of all the Principles and Articles of Christianity he chose out but One as
necessarily to be believed to make a Man a Christian.

And though since he has tried to split this One into two, p. 28. yet he
labors in vain, for to believe Jesus to be the Messiah amounts to the same,
with believing him to be a King or Ruler, his being Anointed (i. e. being the
Messiah) including that in it. Yet he has the Vanity to add in great
Characters, THESE ARE ARTICLES, as if the putting them into these Great Letters
would make one Article two. Such is the fond fancy and conceitedness of the
Gentleman, whereas in other places he has formally declared, that there is but
One Article that is the necessary Matter of Faith. This I had just reason to
except against; and now I will give a farther account of my doing so, by
showing that, besides that One Fundamental Principle or Article which he so
often mentions, there are Others that are as necessarily to be believed to make
a Man a Christian, yea to give him the denomination of a Believer, in the sense
of the Gospel. Several of these I particularly, but barely enumerated in my
former Discourse, and now I will distinctly insist on the most of them, and let
the Reader see, that it is as necessary for a Convert to Christianity to give
assent to them, as to that other he so frequently specifies.

This Proposition, that by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin:
and this which follows, Death passed upon all men, for as much as all men have
sinned, Romans 5. 12. and that other, that even the Regenerate (for the Apostle
speaks of himself and the Converted Ephesians) are by nature the Children of
wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. these, I say, are as absolutely necessary
to be known, assented to, and believed, in order to our being Christians as
this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, or Sent of God. For I ask, what was the
end of his being sent? Was it not to Help Mankind, to rescue and deliver them
from some Evil? And where can we be informed concerning the Rise and Nature of
this Evil, but in the Sacred and Inspired Writings? And do not these foresaid
Texts, which we find in St. Paul's Epistles, acquaint us with the true Source
and Quality of our condition by nature? Do they not discover the Root of Man's
Misery, viz. the Apostasy of Adam (for he is that one Man) and the dreadful
Consequences of it, expressed by Death and Wrath? And is this set down to no
purpose in these Inspired Epistles? Is it not requisite that we should know it
and believe it? Yea, is not this absolutely requisite? For it is impossible any
one should firmly embrace, or so much as seriously attend to the Doctrine of the
Messiah, unless he be persuaded that He stands in need of him. And can he be
persuaded of this unless he be acquainted with his Degenerate and Miserable
State, his universal Depravity and innate Proness to what is Vicious, and with
the true Original of it? viz. The voluntary Defection and Fall of our First
Parents, and with that the loss of our Happiness. The word Messiah is an
insignificant term till we have a belief of this: Why then is there a Treatise
published to tell the World, that the bare belief of a Messiah is all that is
required of a Christian?

Again, it is not only necessary to know that Jesus is the Messiah, but also to
know and believe who this Jesus, this Messiah is, viz. whether he be God or
Man, or both. For every one will grant that there is a Vast Difference between
the one and the other, as much as there is betwixt Infinite and Finite; and
therefore that we may have a due apprehension concerning the Messiah, it is
absolutely necessary, that we should believe him to be what he is declared to
be in the Infallible Writings, viz. God, as well as Man. The Word was God, John
1. 1. The Word was made Flesh, v. 14. And this Word is the Only begotten of the
Father, in the same Verse. God was manifest in the Flesh, 1. Tim. 3. 16. He is
called not only God in these places, and in several others, but he is styled
the True God, 1 John 5. 20. and the Great God, Tit. 2. 13. The Lord of all,
Acts 10. 36. God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Hence we must conclude, that
there is a necessity of believing the Messiah to be the very God, of the same
Essence with the Father and the Holy Ghost, for these are the two other Persons
included in the Deity. So that hence it will follow, that it is requisite to
believe the Holy Trinity, i. e. that there are in the Godhead Three Persons,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; which is the Doctrine that our Savior himself
taught (and he taught it, that it might be believed) Mat. 28. 19. where the
Celebration of Baptism, which is a solemn part of Divine Worship, is commanded
to be in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, who are
One God, 1 John 5. 7. These Three are One, one Essence or Being, as the word
(...) imports. Those words of the Apostle are observable, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Were ye
baptized in the name of Paul? As much as to say, Baptism is in the name of God,
and not of a Man: Therefore when it is said, Go and Baptize in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it is included, that these Three are God, i. e.
Three Persons of one and the same Deity. Thus it is manifest, that the
believing of Iesus's being the Messiah, or Anointed is not sufficient to make a
Man a Christian Believer, but he must further believe these Propositions or
Articles, viz. that the Son of God was made flesh, i. e. assumed our Human
Nature; that Christ is True God; that He with the Father and the Spirit are One
God; for these are not only expressed in the Gospels and Epistles (out of both
which we are to gather the Fundamental Articles of Faith) and consequently are
to be assented to by all Christians, but the very Nature of the thing it self
dictates that we ought to have a firm belief of these Truths; for otherwise
when a Man professes his belief in the Messiah, he is yet ignorant of the
Person he pretends to believe in. He does not know whether he believes in a God
or in a Man, or to which of these he is beholding, for the Good he looks for by
the Messias's coming. Now, Sir, you with your Reasonableness of Christianity,
what do you think of this? Is it not reasonable that a Christian should (as the
Apostle speaks of himself) know whom he has believed? 2 Timothy 1. 12. Nay, is it
not indispensably necessary, that he should know whether it be a Divine, or
Human, or Angelical Power that he is obliged to, that so he may accordingly
proportion his Affections and Service? for (what ever the late Set of Socinians
hold) there must be a difference made between the Homage which is paid to a
Creature (such as they declare Christ to be) and that which is due only to the
Creator. I will refer the Reader to the Incomparable Bishop Pearson on the
Second Article of the Creed, where he shows, the Necessity of our believing
Christ to be the Eternal Son of God, and God himself, 1. For the directing and
confirming of our Faith concerning the Redemption of Mankind. 2. For the right
informing of us about that Worship and Honor which are due to him. 3. For
giving us a right apprehension, and consequently a due value of the Infinite
Love of God the Father in sending his Only-begotten Son into the World to die
for us. Thus this Judicious Writer. But our Nameless Author would persuade us,
that there is no necessity of believing any such thing.

Then in the next place, we are to have a right conception concerning our
Recovery and Restoration by this Messiah, who is God-Man. And here those
several Scriptures will furnish us with Articles, As by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteonsness of one
the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous, Romans 5. 18, 19. He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9. 26. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.
28. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
He gave himself a Ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Ye are redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And to it is prefixed ye know, to
let us understand that this Article is to be known and assented to. We are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. We are reconciled unto God by the
death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. By him now we have received the Atonement, v. 11.
By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.
14. It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, Luke
24. 46. Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, Acts
17. 3. He was taken up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God, Mark 16.
19. These and the like places afford us such Fundamental and Necessary Doctrins
as these are, that by and for the Meritorious Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ (the Second Adam) we are accounted Righteous and Obedient in the sight
of God: That Christ was a Sacrifice for us, and suffered in our stead: That he
satisfied Divine Justice by paying an Infinite Price for us; That by virtue of
that Payment all the Debts, i. e. all the Sins of Believers are perfectly
absolved: That hereby the anger of the Incensed Deity is pacified, and that we
are entirely Reconciled to him: That we have an assurance of all this by
Christ's rising from the dead, and ascending triumphantly into Heaven. These
are Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12. These are part of the Form of
sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. which are indispensable Ingredients in the Christian
Faith, which you may know by this, that if a man be obliged to the belief of
the Messias's Coming, it is undeniably requisite that he should know what the
Messiah came to do for him, and that he should firmly yield assent to it. This
I think no Man of Reason will deny: and then it will follow that these Articles
which I have last mentioned are the Necessary and Unexceptionable object or
matter of the Faith of a Christian Man. And here likewise it were easy to
show, that Adoption, Justification, Pardon of Sins, etc. which are Privileges
and Benefits bestowed upon us by the Messiah, are necessary matters of our
Belief, for we cannot duly acknowledge him for our Benefactor and Savior,
unless we believe, that these Great Prerogatives are conferred upon us.

Moreover, it is of undoubted necessity in order to our being Christians, that
we know and believe what the Messiah requires of us; which is contained in such
general Texts as these, That ye being delivered out of the hands of your
enemies may serve him (Christ our Deliverer) without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1. 75. The grace of God
which brings salvation, teaches us, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12. He gave himself for us, that he might reredeem us from all
iniquity, etc. Tit. 2. 14. This is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Which places yield us such
Propositions as these, that the Messiah who vouchsafed to come into the world
to redeem lost Man, requires of him universal Holiness and Righteousness, and
the abandoning of all sin and ungodliness: That it was one grand end and design
of Christ's visiting the would to redeem men from their iniquities, to
sanctify their Natures, and to make them entirely godly, sober and righteous
in their Lives: That without these there is no Salvation, no Seeing of God in
the regions of Glory, no hopes of Everlasting Happiness. The disbelieving of
these Articles has made so many Sorry Christians as we see every where, such
as lay claim to that Honorable Title, but are regardless of that Holiness
which should accompany it. We must not only believe that Jesus is the Messiah,
but we must believe this also that we can have no Benefit by this Messiah
unless we by Faith and Obedience adhere to him.

Neither is this enough, it is further matter of our Belief, as we are
Christians, that our Salvation springs from the mere Favor and Bounty of God
through his Son Jesus Christ, and that this is the only source of that
Happiness which we expect. By grace we are saved, through faith, and that not
of our selves: it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saves us, Tit. 3. 5. Where
there is not this persuasion and belief, the true notion of Christianity
vanishes, and the conceit of Merit comes in its room: Wherefore there is a
Necessity that we believe and be persuaded aright as to this matter. We are
Worthless Creatures of our selves, but there is a Worthiness derived to us from
the Unspotted and Meritorious Righteousness of him that is the Eternal Son of
God. He that knows not this, he that believes not this deserves not the Name of
a Christian. I should have been glad to have found something of this nature in
this Gentleman's Christianity. But he endeavors to seduce his Readers by other
apprehensions, he tells them that the bare assenting to this, that Jesus is the
Messiah, is the Sum Total of the Christian Faith, and the Gospel requires no
more.

Lastly, The doctrines of the Resurrection of the Final Judgment, and of
Eternal Glory in heaven are contained in such passages of the New Testament as
these, Christ will raise up his at the last day, John 6. 44. The Lord Jesus
Christ shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory, John 17. 24. And are not these Truths the proper
Object of our Faith now under the Gospel, they so peculiarly belonging to the
doctrine and belief of the Messiah? Can we believe in him, and yet not believe
these Great things which are brought to light by his preaching the Gospel? For
though they were in some measure discovered and revealed before ( i. e. the
General Doctrine concerning a Future State, and the Endless Happiness
accompanying it was not unknown) yet Christ's Words and those of the Apostles
do more abundantly assure us of the truth of them: especially Christ's Rising
from the dead and ascending into Glory have irrefragably confirmed the reality
of them, according to that of St. Peter, We are begotten again unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Who but the Vindicator could imagine that these Evangelical
Doctrines are not Necessary Matter of Faith to Christian Men? Who but he could
fancy and (which is more) publicly assert that the belief of the Messias's
being sent from God, without being acquainted with his gracious appointment as
to our Future Rewards, is all that is required as necessary to constitute a
Christian Believer? Especially, when it is said, He that comes unto God must
believe that he is a Rewarder, Heb. 11. 6. Observe it, he must believe: then it
is not indifferent, but a Necessary Article of faith.

CHAP. II.
The foresaid Articles and Doctrines are proved to be Necessary matter of
Christian Faith. Not that a man is supposed Actually to exert his Assent and
Belief every moment. That we may be True Christians, All these Fundamental
Truths must be embraced, and none excluded. The late Writer's forgetfulness. It
is proved that he grounds his notion of One Article upon the Weakness of
Understanding and Capacity in the Generality of people. Herein he follows the
Steps of the Racovians, who submit the greatest Mysteries to the judgment of
the Vulgar; and, if they will not bear that Test, reject them. The Doctrine of
the Trinity how said to have no Difficulty in it. It contains in it no
Contradiction. This Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah is not more intelligible
than any of the Articles before mentioned.

THUS I have briefly set before the Reader those Evangelical Truths, those
Christian Principles which belong to the very Essence of Christianity. I have
proved them to be such, and I have reduced most of them to certain
Propositions, which is a thing the Vindicator called for, p. 16. If what I have
said will not content him, I am sure I can do nothing that will. And therefore,
if he should capriciously require any thing more, it would be as great Folly in
me to comply with it as it is in him to move it. From what I have said it is
evident that he is grossly mistaken when he says, Whatever doctrines the
Apostles required to be believed to make a man a Christian, are to be found in
those places of Scripture which he has quoted in his book, p. 11. The places
which he quotes are made use of by him to show that there is but One Article of
Belief, viz. that Christ is the Messiah: but I think I have sufficiently proved
that there are Other Doctrines besides That which are required to be believed
to make a man a Christian. Why did the Apostles write these Doctrines? Was it
not that those they writ to might give their Assent to them? Nay, did they not
require Assent to them? Yes, verily, for this is to be proved from the Nature
of the things contained in those Doctrines, which, were such as had immediate
respect to the Occasion, Author, Way, Means, and Issue of their Redemption and
Salvation, as any impartial judge by examining the several Particular Articles
and Propositions will readily grant. So that the sum of all amounts to this.
The belief of those things without the knowledge of which a man cannot be saved
is absolutely Necessary: but the belief of the foregoing Particulars is the
belief of such things without the knowledge of which a man cannot be saved;
Therefore the belief of these Particulars is absolutely necessary. None will be
so refractory, I suppose, as to deny the first Proposition in this Syllogism;
therefore I am to prove the Second, which is easily effected thus. The belief
of those things which have Immediate respect to the Occasion, Author, Way,
Means, and Issue of our Salvation, and which are necessary for knowing the True
Nature and Design of it, is the belief of such things without the knowledge of
which a man cannot be saved: but such is the belief of the preceding Articles,
Ergo.

Not without good reason therefore I called them the Essential and Integral
Parts of our Christian and Evangelical Faith: And why the Vindicator fleers at
these Terms ( p. 18.) I know no reason but this that he cannot confute the
application of them. Surely none but this Upstart Racovian will have the
confidence to deny that These Articles of Faith are such as are Necessary to
constitute a Christian, as to the intellectual and doctrinal part of
Christianity; such as must in some measure be known and assented to by him,
such as must be generally received and embraced by him. Not that a man is
supposed every moment to Actually exert his Assent and Belief, for none of the
Moral Virtues, none of the Evangelical Graces are exerted thus always.
Wherefore, that Question, p. 16. (though he says he asks it seriously) might
have been spared, Whether every one of these Fundamentals is required to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, and such as without the Actual belief
thereof, he cannot be saved? Here is Seriousness pretended when there is none,
for the design is only to Cavil, and (if he can) to expose my Assertion. But he
is not able to do it, for all his Critical Demands are answered in these few
words, viz. that the Intellectual (as well as the Moral) Endowments are never
supposed to be Always in Act: they are exerted upon Occasion, and not all of
them at a time. And therefore he mistakes if he thinks, or rather as he objects
without thinking, that these Doctrine, if they be Fundamental and Necessary,
must be always actually believed. No man besides himself ever started such a
thing. And why should not every one of these Evangelical Truths (which is
another thing he puts into his Question) be believed and embraced? They are in
our Bibles for that very purpose, as I have proved, and therefore I need not
undertake it again here. Hence it follows that a man cannot be a Christian
without the knowledge and belief of these Truths which are the basis of
Religion, the Standard of the Christian Faith, the very Badges and Characters
of Christianity. Wherefore for any man to make up Christianity without the
belief of these is a Ridiculous and absurd attempt, and consequently we may
guess that none would have ventured upon it but this Writer. This is he that
sets up One Article with defiance of the rest, (though he is much displeased
with me for saying so, p. 31.) for what is excluding them wholly but defying
them? Wherefore, seeing he utterly excludes all the rest by representing them
as Useless to the making a man a Christian (which is the design of his whole
Undertaking) it is manifest that he defies them.

But let us hear what this Author pleads for himself. He founds his conceit of
One Article partly upon this, that a Multitude of doctrines is obscure, and
hard to be understood, and therefore he trusses all up in One Article, that the
poor people and bulk of mankind may bear it. This is the Scope of a great part
of his book. But his Memory does not keep pace with his Invention, and thence
he says he remembers nothing of this in his book. Vind. p. 27. This Worthy
Writer does not know his own Reasoning that he uses, as particularly thus, that
he troubies Christian men with no more but One Article, because that is
Intelligible, and all people high and low may comprehend it. For he has chosen
out (he thinks) a Plain and Easy Article, whereas the others which are
commonly propounded are not generally agreed upon (he says) and are dubious
and uncertain. But the believing that Jesus was the Messiah has nothing of
doubtfulness or obscurity in it. This the Reader will find to be the drift and
design of several of his Pages. And the reason why I did not quote any single
one of them was because he insists on this so long together, and spins it out
after his way. In p. 301. of his Reasonableness of Christianity, where he sets
down the short, plain, easy and intelligible Summary (as he calls it) of
Religion, couched in a Single Article, he immediately adds, The All-merciful
God seems herein to have consulted the poor of this world, and the bulk of
mankind. These are Articles (whereas he had set down but One) that the
laboring and illiterate man may comprehend. He assigns this as a ground why it
was God's pleasure there should be but One Point of Faith, because hereby
Religion may be understood the better, the generality of people may comprehend
it. This he represents as a Great Kindness done by God to men, whereas a
Variety of Articles would be hard to be understood. This he enlarges upon, and
flourishes it over after his fashion, and yet he desires to know when he said
so, p. 29. Vindic.

Good Sir, let me be permitted to acquaint you that your Memory is as defective
as your Judgment; for in the very, Vindication you attribute it to the goodness
and condescension of the Allmighty that he requires nothing as absolutely
necessary to be believed but what is suited to Vulgar capacities and the
comprehensions of illiterate men, p. 30. It is clear then that you found your
One Article on this, that it is suited to Vulgar capacities, whereas the Other
Articles mentioned by me are obscure and ambiguous, and therefore surpass the
comprehension of the Illiterate. And yet you pretend that you have forgot that
any such thing was said by you: which shows that you are Careless of your
Words, and that you forget what you write. What shall we say to such an
Oblivious Author as this? He takes no notice of what falls from his own pen,
and therefore within a page or two he confutes himself, and gives himself the
Lie.

The plain truth is, he Socinianizes here, but will not own it, which makes him
run into these Contradictions. He follows the steps of his Good Patron Crellius
(one of the stiffest Racovians that we have) who throws aside several Articles
of faith because they are Dark and Difficult, and not adapted to the Capacity
of the Vulgar. This very thing he alleges to set off his Arguments against the
Holy Trinity, viz. that De Uno Deo Patre. l. ^. c. 1.
the doctrine which he maintains is according to the understanding of the
Vulgar. The Common people (he says) among the Jews, the Fishermen did not
apprehend the doctrine of Three Persons in the Deity: neither do the Vulgar
Christians at this day form any such notion: therefore away with the doctrine
of the Trinity. And this is the guise and practice of our Socinians at this
day: it is known that they are wont to propound this Sacred Point to the very
Schoolboys (very great Judges indeed) and to demand their Resolution of it,
and they pretend that they give it in the Negative. All the appeal now is to
Vulgar Capacities, to the judgment of the Multitude. If these please to allow
of any more Articles of Belief than One, then our Author will consent to it
that we shall have them: but he acquaints us that they are for no more but One,
and therefore we must be content with That. This is his New Divinity. And a The
Exceptions of Mr. E. etc. examined.
Socinian Brother, who undertakes the defense of his Notions, seconds him in
this, telling us that the Articles of faith which are generally propounded by
Divines are difficult, obscur, unintelligible, abstruse, but the One Article of
Mr. Lock) is not so, but is exactly calculated for the Vulgar Meridian, and
therefore is the only Authentic and Necessary Point in the Christian Theology.

I think the Reader will bear me witness that I have refuted this wild Conceit
by giving a distinct account of the Evangelical Doctrines and Articles before
mentioned, and at the same time showing how Intelligible and Plain they are,
and by letting him see the Absolute Necessity of their being assented to and
embraced by every Christian. No true Lover of God and Truth need doubt of any
of them, for there is no Ambiguity and Doubtfulness in them. They shine with
their own light, and to an unprejudiced eye are plain, evident and illustrious.
And they would always continue so if some Ill-minded men did not perplex and
entangle them, on purpose to render them contemptible, yea, to exclude them
wholly from being the matter of our belief. And as to the doctrine of the
Trinity, which is the Main Verity which these men set themselves against, there
is not any Difficulty, much less any Absurdity or Contradiction (as they are
wont to cry out) in that Article of our Christian Belief. Indeed there is a
Difficulty in this and several Other Truths of the Gospel as to the Exact
Manner of the things themselves, which we shall never be able to comprehend, at
least not on this side of Heaven: but there is no Difficulty as to the Reality
and Certainty of them, because we know they are Revealed to us by God in the
Holy Scriptures. Nay, as to the thing it self, thus far we can apprehend that
it is not impossible or absurd that the Three Distinct Persons in the Deity
should be One God, for there may be a Plurality of Persons in the same Infinite
Essence. Every Person does not require a Single Particular Essence, or if they
will call the Three Numerical Subsistencies by the name of Essences, yet they
are united in One General Substance or Essence, which is common to them all.
And when they say it is a Contradiction that One should be Three, which is as
much as to say, One is not One, this is soon taken off by replying (and that
most truly) that One and not One in the same respect is a Contradiction, but
One and not One in different respects is no Contradiction. Any smatterer in
Logic know, this. And this is the case here, for tho the Three Personalities
be distinguished, and that really, yet they agree in One Common Essence, and so
the Divinity is both One and Three in different respects, on different
considerations. And this is that which is abundantly testified in Scripture, in
the Gospels as well as the Epistles (let our Author remember that:) there we
learn that the Divine Essence or Nature is branched out into Three Distinct
Persons, Mat. 28. 19. John 10. 30.
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and that Mat. 28. 19. John 10. 30.
these three are One.

Then as to the Proposition which this New Modeller of Christianity commends to
the World as the only Necessary Matter of Faith, although he pretends it is
more Intelligible than any of those that I have named, yet any Judicious Man
cannot but see the contrary, for this must be explained (as well as those)
before his Vulgar Capacities can apprehend it. Here first the name Jesus, which
is of Hebrew Extraction, though since Greciz'd, must be expounded, and so must
the Word Messiah (as I said before:) And when this is done they must be told,
even according to the confession of a late The Exceptions, etc. examined.
Socinian Writer (whom afterward I must discourse with a little) the manner of
his being the Messiah, such as being conceived by the Holy Ghost and Power of
the most High, his being anointed with the Holy Ghost, his being raised from
the dead, and exalted to be a Prince and a Savior. And then they must be told
for what End and Purpose this was (or else they can have no true belief of the
Messiah) under which several Weighty Truths are comprehended. And if he does
not agree to this, viz. that the Words must be thus Opened and Explained, and
fully understood so that Christian Souls may have the true sense of them, then
he does as good as say that the bare pronouncing of these Words Jesus is the
Messiah is enough to make a Christian. And we shall be apt to think that he
intends this for a Charm or Spell, and that the very Syllables will suffice to
make one a True Believer, especially if he be one of the Vulgar and Illiterate.
But it may be he has something else to say to an Other Rank of Men: Perhaps he
holds that there is one Christianity for, the bulk of mankind, and another for
the Finer and Better Sort of People: And then it is likely he will tell us of
two Heavens, one very Spacious to hold the Multitude, and the other of a Lesser
Compass to receive the rest. These are the Absurdities (which I confess I
delight not in exposing or so much as mentioning) that this New Notion may
produce. Whence it appears that all his jargon and chatter about his One
Article are vain and insignificant, and are serviceable only to gull the Unwary
Reader, and (which is worse) to debauch Christianity it self.

CHAP. III.
The late Writer's passing by the Epistles, and not collecting any Articles of
Faith out of them show his Contempt of them. His Evasion, viz. that the
Epistles were writ to those who were already Believers, is proved to be
groundless. If it were true, it is nothing to his purpose. The Epistles teach
Fundamentals. His other Evasion, viz. that the Fundamental Articles in the
Epistles are mixed without distinction with other Truths discovered to be of no
force, and Retorted upon him. The true Reason why he went no further than the
Gospels and the Acts. His other Excuses for rejecting the doctrines contained
in the Epistles examined, and found to be Sophistical. He travels as far as
China for Prudence, and there borrows it of the Missionary Jesuits. The Romans
14. 1. which he alleges, authorizes him not to impose upon Weak Christians.
His Evasions are inconsistent with themselves, and accordingly not well
approved of by the Party. His Objection about the Apostles Creed fully
answered. Our Church's Judgment concerning the Articles of this Creed. This
Profession of Faith has several Articles in it which Socinians will not
subscribe to. Whilst he is censuring, he commits a great Blunder. He mistakes
and misrepresents the Gospel Dispensation.

BUT the Gentleman is not without his Evasions, and he sees it is high time to
make use of them. This puts him into some disorder, for when he comes to speak
of my mentioning his ill treatment of the Epistles (which he purposely omitted
when he made his Collection of Articles, or rather when after all his search he
found but One Article) you may observe that he begins to grow Warmer than
before. Now this Meek Man is nettled, and you may perceive that he is sensible
of the Scandal that he has given to good people by his slighting of the
Epistolary Writings of the Holy Apostles: yet he is so cunning as to disguise
his Passion as well as he can. He requires me to publish to the World those
passages which show his Contempt of the Epistles, p. 19. But what need I, Good
Sir, do this, when you have done it your self? I appeal to the Reader whether
(after your tedious Collections out of the Four Evangelists) your passing by
the Epistles, and neglecting wholly what the Apostles say in them be not
publishing to the World your Contempt of them.

But let us hear why he did not attempt to collect any Articles out of these
Writings: he assigns this as One Reason, The Epistles being writ to those who
were already Believers, it could not be supposed that they were writ to them to
teach them Fundamentals, p. 13, 14. Vindic. Certainly no man could have
conjectured that he would have used such an Evasion as this. I will say that
for him, he goes beyond all Surmises, he is above all Conjectures: he has a
faculty of Shifting which no creature on Earth can ever fathom. Do we not know
that the Four Gospels were Writ to and for Believers as well as Unbelievers?
Are we not particularly and expressly told by St. Luke that he writ his Gospel
to the most Excellent Theophilus? Luke 1. 3. whom all grant to be a Believing
Christian of some eminent rank. Or if this Author be so singular as to question
it, he may be satisfied in v. 4. by the Evangelist himself. And so the Acts of
the Apostles we find are dedicated to the same Eminent Believer, Acts 1. 1. By
the same Argument then that he would persuade us that the Fundamentals are not
to be sought for in the Epistles, we may prove that they were not to be sought
for in the Gospels, and in the Acts, for even these were writ to those that
believed. And yet it is clear that this Writer did not make use of this
Argument, otherwise he would not have confined the Fundamentals to the Gospels,
and the Acts. Here then is want of Sincerity in a great measure, which has
been accounted heretofore a good qualification in a Writer.

Again, granting that the Epistles were all of them writ to those that already
believed, yet what can this be to his purpose? Must no Believers have any
Fundamentals taught them? What is the meaning then of 1 John 2. 21. I have not
written unto you because you know not the Truth, but because you know it.
Suppose they have forgot the Fundamentals, or have corrupted and perverted
them? as was the case of the Galatians, who mixed the Law with the Gospal,
Legal Works with Faith; and of the Dispersed Hebrews who had received the
Christian Doctrine, but were falling away from it. Might not the Apostle, yea
did he not in his Epistles to these Persons remind them of the Great Articles
of the Christian Faith? Did he not, when he writ to the Galatians assert the
doctrine of Justification through faith in Christ's Righteousness, without the
Works of the Law? Did he not in his Epistle to the Wavering Hebrews endeavor
to establish them in Christianity by displaying the Excellency and
Transcendency of the Priesthood of Christ, by convincing them of the Efficacy
and Perfection of the One Sacrifice of the Messiah on the Cross, whereby the
sins of mankind are perfectly Expiated? So St. John's first Epistle was written
on occasion of the Christian Churches (converted from Judaism) being endangered
by certain Seducers that were crept in among them, and labored to unsettle
their belief concerning the Divinity as well as the Humanity of our Savior.
Whereupon this Apostle, who had clearly delivered the doctrine of the Holy
Trinity in the beginning of his Gospel, now more especially urges that
Principal Article of their Faith the Deity of Christ, chap. 2. v. 22, 23. and
also in express words asserts the Whole Trinity, chap. 5. v. 7. Thus it is
manifest that the Apostles in their Epistles taught Fundamentals, which is
contrary to what this Gentleman says, that such a thing could not be supposed:
and he would pretend That as a reason why he did not look for any Necessary
Articles of Faith in the Epistles. But we see how groundless his pretense is.

Hear another feigned ground of his omitting the Epistles, viz. because the
Fundamental Articles are here promiscuously, and without distinction mixed with
other Truth. p. 14. But who sees not that this is a mere Elusion? for on the
same account he might have forborne to search for Fundamental Articles in the
Gospels, for they do not lie there together, but are dispersed up and down: the
Doctrinal and Historical part are mixed with one another: but he pretends to
sever them; why the did he not make a separation between the Doctrines in the
Epistles and those Other Matters that are treated of there? He has nothing to
reply to this, and therefore we must again look upon what he has suggested as
a cast of his Shuffling faculty. Or if he should excuse himself by saying that
Necessary and Fundamental Principles cannot be distinguished from those other
Truths which occur in the Epistolary Writings, any one may discover the
insufficiency of such a plea, because Necessary Truths may be distinguished
from those that are not such by the Nature and High Importance of them, by
their Immediate respect to the Author and Means of our Salvation.

Besides, I suppose this Flourishing Scribler (he knows very well why I give
him that particular Title) will not deny that the Epistles contain diverse Rules
of Holy Living, several Religious Precepts in order to the practice of
Godliness; and that these are not so promiscuously and without distinction mixed
with other Truths but that they may easily be distinguished from them. Why then
may we not expect to find Necessary Doctrines of Faith in these Writings as
well as Instructions concerning the practice of Holiness, and the regulating of
our Lives? And why may we not distinguish between these and the Occasional
Matters as well as between the Others and them? Nay, it is certain that those
Necessary doctrines of Faith which were but lightly touched upon in the Gospels
and the Acts are distinctly and fully explained in these Epistles. The truth
then is that the Gentleman was loath to go any further than the former: these
latter affrighted him, for he knew either by reading them or by hearsay, that
there were several Other Divine Truths in them, which have been generally
thought to be Necessary to be believed in order to making a man a Christian;
but our Author had no kindness for them. He commands his Readers not to stir a
jot further than the Acts. It is not in the Epistles, says he, that we are to
learn what are the Fundamental Articles of faith, p. 295. They were written for
resolving of doubts and reforming of mistakes, (as he says in the same place)
and therefore I forbid you to seek for Fundamental doctrines there, you will
but lose your labor, and moreover you will meet in these Writings with several
Points which we approve not of, and therefore must not admit of, because
Faustus Socinus has given us a charge to the contrary.

But let us hear further what this Vindicator says to excuse his rejection of
the Doctrines contained in the Epistles, and his putting us off with One
Article of Faith. What if the Author (meaning himself) designed his Treatise,
as the Title shows, chiefly for those who were not yet thoroughly or firmly
Christians: purposing to work upon those who either wholly disbeliev'd or
doubted of the Truth of the Christian Religion? p. 6. Here he comes with his
what if's, and gives another palpable proof of Counterfeiting, and that in
Religion. Now, seeing his Book is sifted, and the design of it is laid open, he
would make us believe that he intended his Piece for Atheists, Turks, Jews and
Pagans, and a few Weak Christians; for these he must mean by those that wholly
disbelieve, and those that are not firmly Christians. And he would bring in his
Title to speak for him, but it says not a word in his behalf; for how those
that wholly disregard and disbelieve the Scriptures of the New Testament, (as
Gentiles, Jews, Mahometans and all Atheists do) are like to attend to the
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scripture is not to be
conceived, and therefore we look upon all this as mere Sham and Sophistry. He
is put hard to it, and like one a drowning he fastens on any thing next at
hand. That is his case, as any man may perceive. But I ask, Why had we not a
hint (one gentle hint at least) of this in all his Book? It would have been
very useful to the Reader to have been acquainted with his Design. No: he
thinks otherwise, for in the same Page he says, Would any one blame his
Prudence if he mentioned only those Advantages, (viz. of Christ's Coming) which
all Christians (especially Socinian Christians) are agreed in? He has
bethought himself better since he first published his Notions, and (as the
result of that) he now begins to resolve what he writ into Prudence. I know
whence he had this Method (and it is likely he has taken more than this from
the same hands) viz. from the Missionary Jesuits that went to preach the
Gospel to the people of China. We are told that they instructed them in some
matters relating to our Savior; they let them know that Jesus was the Messiah,
the Person promised to be sent into the World, but they concealed his
Sufferings and Death and they would not let them know any thing of his Passion
and Crucifixion. So our Author (their humble Imitator) undertakes to instruct
the World in Christianity with an omission of its Principal Articles, and more
especially that of the Advantage we have by Christ's Death, which was the Prime
thing designed in his Coming into the world. This he calls Prudence: so that to
hide from the people the Main Articles of the Christian Religion, to disguise
the Faith of the Gospel, to betray Christianity it self, is according to this
Excellent Writer the Cardinal Virtue of Prudence. May we be delivered then, say
I, from a Prudential Racovian.

He would clear himself by quoting Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith
receive ye, p. 7. as if that Text authorized him to deceive Novices and Weak
Christians; as if because they are Infirm, therefore he must Strengthen them by
Imposing upon them. It may be he will say, Children must have but few Lessons
given them: but I answer, there is difference between few and only One; and
there is difference between telling them that there is but One, and afterward
hinting that there are More. For that must be the meaning of his What if he
designed his Treatise chiefly for those, etc. What if he first of all tells
them that nothing is absolutely requisite to be believed but this that Jesus is
the Messiah, and what if afterward he intends to let them know that something
else is required of them? And yet at the same time (such is the unaccountable
humor of the Gentleman) he declares that Nothing more is required of them.
Here is no bottom for any thing he says. He contradicts himself, and imposes
falsities upon men's minds. he would in one place (I remember) fancifully please
himself by thinking that all his sins which I epsy in his book are sins of
Omission, p. 9. But if this be not one of Commission (and that a very Great
one) it is hard to tell what is. He pretends a Design of his Book which was
never so much as thought of till he was solicited by his brethren to vindicate
it. But now, (see how his Pious Frauds prosper) when he has attempted it, they
are displeased with the way he has taken. And no wonder, because they cannot
but perceive that his Vindication is inconsistent with his Treatise, and that
by these last Evasions and Collusions he has in a great measure betrayed their
Cause, as well as that of Christianity. I find that they have only this to
excuse him that he did not take Time enough to consider of what he Writ: but
for my part, I think that adds to his Fault.

But this Author of the New Christianity wisely objects that the Apostle's
Creed has none of these Articles and Doctrines which I mentioned, p. 12, 13.
Nor does any considerate man wonder at it, for the Creed is a Form of outward
Profession which is chiefly to be made in the Public Assemblies, when Prayers
are put up by the Church, and the Holy Scriptures are read. Then this
Abridgment of Faith is properly used, or when there is not generally time or
opportunity to make any Enlargement. But we are not to think that it expressly
contains in it all the Necessary and Weighty Points, all the Important
Doctrines of our Belief, it being only designed to be an Abstract. It is with
this Creed as it is with the Commandments and the Lord's Prayer. If a man does
not more than is expressly enjoined in the Decalogue, he cannot be said to Act as
a Christian. If he prays for no more than is expressly mentioned in the
Petitions of the foresaid Prayer he cannot be said to Pray as a Good Christian.
So if a man believe no more than is in express terms in the Apostle's Creed,
his Faith will not be the Faith of a Christian. And yet still it is to be
granted that as all things to be done and all things to be prayed for are
reducible to the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, so All matters of
Faith in some manner may be reduced to this Brief Platform of Belief. But when
I call it an Abstract or Abbreviature, it is implied that there are more Truths
to be known and assented to by a Christian, in order to making him really so,
than what we meet with here.

And yet I must take leave to tell our Vindicator that this Creed has more in
it than he and his brethren will subscribe to. If he were not above Catechisms
as well as Creeds, I might remind him of Our Church's judgment concerning the
Articles of this Creed. Qu. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of
thy Belief? Answ. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who had made me
and all the world: Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all
mankind: Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me and all the Elect
People of God? These are killing words to a Disciple of Socinus, who
acknowledges neither the Godhead of the Son, nor of the Holy Ghost, nor the
Redemption or Sanctification by either. Yet our Church, with all the Christian
Churches in the world, owns these Truths to be contained in the Apostles Creed.
And there are other Articles of this Symbol (let them palliate it as they
please,) which the Racovian Gentlemen are unwilling to give their assent to.
They faulter about Christ's Judging the quick and the dead, they partly deny
the Resurrection of the body, they deny Life Everlasting as it respects wicked
men, for they hold that these shall be Annihilated, of all which I may have
occasion to speak another time. At present I only take notice of their lopping
off several Articles from this Creed.

But was it not judiciously said by this Writer that it is well for the
Compilers of the Creed that they lived not in my days? p. 12. I tell you,
Friend, it was impossible they should, for the Learned Diatr. de Symbol.
Usher and De Trib. Symb.
Vossius and others have proved that that Symbol was drawn up not at once, but
that some Articles of it were adjoined many years after, far beyond the extent
of any man's life; and therefore the Compilers of the Creed could not live in
my days, not could I live in theirs: but I let this pass as one of the blunders
of our Thoughtful and Musing Author. Nor had he reason to think that those that
made the Apostles Creed would have been censured by me, for I have vindicated
and asserted their Articles, whereas he and his friends have new-modell'd the
Creed, yea indeed have presented us with One Article instead of Twelve, and in
order to that have sunk the Epistles, because they are not Socinianized, all
over Socinianized.

If this Gentleman had said that the belief of Iesus's being the Messiah was
one of the first and leading acts of Christian Faith, he had said right, and
none would have opposed it. If he had said that the knowledge of the Gospel, and
consequently of the Doctrines of it, advanced at first by degrees, and shone
brighter after our Savior's Ascension than before, he had spoken truth; but
when he positively and peremptorily declares that neither at first nor
afterward there was any Necessity of believing more than this that Jesus is
the Messiah, he misrepresents the Gospel Dispensation, and mistakes the nature
of Christiaanity. To stop here, and go no further is unsufferable. This is as
if a Breeder up of Children and Youth should carry them no further than the A B
C. He is wholly for reducing of Christianity, whereas he should have given it
in its Full and Ample Extent; especially he should not have kept back any thing
of the Foundation.

CHAP. IV.
The Christian Faith which this Gentleman describes is of the same scantling
with that of the Mahometans. The Affinity between the Turks and
Anti-trinitarians. The Devils are capable of a higher degree of Faith than that
which he says makes a Christian. A brief Idea of the Complete Faith of a
Christian. The Danger of asserting that there is but One Article of Christian
belief necessary to be assented to. This is the way to introduce Darkness and
Blindness into Christendom; and to promote the designs of that Church which
cherishes Ignorance as the Mother of Devotion and Religion. How far this Writer
is instrumental in it. What care he has of men's Souls, and of their Salvation.
It is the practice of Socinian Writers to curtail Christianity, and to cut off
as many Fundamental Articles from it as they can. This Writer had his Platform
from Crellius. He is approved of and applauded by the English Socinians. Three
Reasons assigned why the Socinians agree to maim the Heads of Christianity, and
to reduce all into One Article. The Office of Catechizing was not instituted
for the teaching of One Article of Faith only.

IT is likely I shall further exasperate this Author when I desire the Reader
to observe that this Lank Faith of his is in a manner on other than the Faith
of a Turk. For the Azoar 1.
Azoar 67.
Alcoran acknowledges that the Spirit of God bore witness to Christ the Son of
Mary: a Divine Soul was put into him. He was the Messenger of the Spirit, and
the Word of God. And in another place God is brought in declaring that he had
sent Christ the Son of Mary, etc. And in other places he is mentioned as a
Prophet, as a Great Man, one Commissioned by God, and sent by him into the
world. This is of the like import with what our good Ottoman Writer the
Vindicator says of our Savior, and this he holds is the sum of all that is
Necessary to be believed concerning him. The Mahometans call themselves
Musselmen, of rather (according to the true account of the Arabic word) From
the Arabic verb islam, credidit, whence the Mohammedan Religion is called
Islamisinus.
Moslemim, i. e. Believers; and what difference is there between one of them
and our Author's Believer? The former believes that Christ is a Good Man, and
not above the nature of a Man, and sent of God to give Instructions to the
world: and the Faith of the latter is of the very same scantling. Thus he
confounds Turkey with Christendom; and those that have been reckoned as Infidels
are with him Christians. He seems to have consulted the Mohammedan Bible, which
says, Alcor. Azoar. 11.
Christ did not suffer on the cross, did not die; for he and his Allies speak
as meanly of these Articles as if there were no such thing. The Alcoran often
talks (particularly see the Last Chapter of it) against Christ's being the Son
of God by Generation. It is one of the First Principles of Mahometism that
there is but One God neither begetting nor begot. See Sulburgius's Saracenica.
This is it which our Author drives at when he labors to prove the Messiah and
the Son of God are terms synony mous, as you shall hear by and by. This reminds
me of that Affinity and Correspondence which has been between the Turks and
this Gentleman's Party. De Trin. l. 1.
Servetus conferred notes with the Alcoran, when he undertook to fetch an
Argument out of it to disprove the Deity of our Savior. It is observable that
those Countries of Europe which border on the Sultan's dominions, as Hungary,
Transylvania, etc. abound with Socinians and Antitrinitarians. The inhabitants
of these places accommodate themselves to their Potent Neighbors, they make
some approach to the Conquerer's Creed. Some of these men have lately got
footing in England, and because they and the Great Turk disbelieve the Trinity,
therefore we must all be Proselytes to their opinion. They are making way for
this by taking away all the Articles of the Christian Faith but One. And our
late Writer is the Instrument they make use of for this purpose. This Great
Mufti has given us a Hopeful Draught of Christianity; and it was fit the
English Reader should know that a Turk according to him is a Christian, for he
makes the same Faith serve them both.

Nay, in the last place, let us take notice that this Gentleman presents the
world with a very Ill notion of Faith, for the very Devils are capable of all
that Faith which he says makes a Christian man, yea of more, for we read that
they believed Jesus to be the Son of God, Mat. 8. 29. They cried out to him,
Thou art Christ the Son of God, Luke 4. 41. which latter words in both places
denote his Divinity, as I shall show afterward. But besides this Historical
Faith (as it is generally called by Divines) which is giving credit to
Evangelical Truths as barely revealed, there must be something else added to
make up the True Substantial Faith of a Christian. With the Assent of the
Understanding must be joined the Consent or Approbation of the Will. All those
Divine Truths which the Intellect assents to must be allowed of by this
Elective power of the Soul. True Evangelical Faith is a hearty Accepting of the
Messiah as he is offered in the Gospel. It is a sincere and impartial
submission to all things required by the Evangelical Law, which is contained in
the Epistles as well as the other Writings. And to this Practical Assent and
Choice there must be added likewise a firm Trust and Reliance in the Blessed
Author of our Salvation. But this late Undertaker, who attempted to give us a
more perfect account than ever was before of Christianity as it is delivered in
the Scriptures, brings us no tidings of any such Faith belonging to
Christianity, or discovered to us in the Scriptures. Which gives us to
understand that he verily believes there is no such Christian Faith, for in
some of his Numerous Pages (especially 191, 192, etc.) where he speaks so much
of Belief and Faith, he might have taken occasion to insert one word about this
Complete Faith of the Gospel.

Having thus represented how Defective, how Narrow, how Erroneous, how Mistaken
this Unknown Writer's Christianity, and especially his Faith is; I will now
proceed to show how Dangerous and Pernicious this sort of Doctrine is. Here is
a Contrivance set up for the bringing in of Darkness and Barbarism into the
Christian world. The only Necessary Point of Belief that the Old Testament
delivers, is, according to these Gentlemen, that there is One God: and all the
New Testament affords us as matter of Necessary Faith is this, that Jesus is
the Messiah. Carry but these Two Articles along with you, and you are a True
Christian. There is no Necessity at all of being acquainted with the Revealed
Doctrine concerning the Cause of Mankinds Degeneracy and Corruption, which gave
occasion to the Messias's Coming into the world. There is no Necessity of
knowing whether this Messiah be God or Man, or both: there is no Necessity of
understanding whether he came to suffer and dye in our stead, and to satisfy
the Divine Justice, and to purchase Salvation for us by his Blood: There is no
Necessity of believing that without Faith and Evangelical Obedience we cannot
have any Benefit by the Messiah: There is no Necessity of being persuaded that
our Salvation springs from the mere Grace and Bounty of Heaven: There is no
Necessity of believing the Privileges and Rewards (both here and hereafter)
which are entailed on Christianity. There is but a Single Article of Belief,
and this is a very Short one too, viz. that Jesus is the Messiah; and if you
assent to This you are as Sound a Christian and as Good a Believer as this
Gentleman can make you. One would think that seeing there are so many Branches
of the Evangelical Faith commended to us and urged upon us by the Apostles in
their Epistles (some of which our Savior himself in the Gospel, had made
mention of) one would think, I say, that a man that has a True Sense of
Christianity, and is a Lover of Souls should endeavor to display before the
world these Several Parts of the Christian Belief, and should be earnest with
men to embrace them All, and not to omit or neglect any of them, seeing they
all so nearly concern their Everlasting Welfare. But here comes One that makes
it his great business to beat men off from taking notice of these Divine
Truths, he represents them as wholly Unnecessary to be believed, he cries down
all Articles of Christian Faith but One. He at this time of day, when
Christianity is so bright, strives to darken and eclipse it; he hides it from
the faces of mankind, draws a thick Veil over it, will not suffer them to look
into it, takes the Holy and Inspired Epistles (which are as much the Word of
God as the Gospels) out of their way, and tells them again and again that a
Christian man or Member of Christ need not know or believe any more than that
One Individual Point which he mentions.

Hear O ye Heavens, and give ear O Earth, judge whether this be not the way to
introduce Darkness and Ignorance into Christendom, whether this be not blinding
of men's eyes, and depriving them of that Blessed Light which the Writings of
the Evangelists and Apostles should illuminate men's minds with. Which makes me
think sometimes (and perhaps the Reader does so too) that this Writer and the
other Confederates are Under-hand-Factors for that Communion (though they would
seem to be much against it) which cries up Ignorance as the mother of Devotion
and Religion. If they had not some such design, why do they labor so
industriously to keep the people in Ignorance, to tell them that One Article is
enough for them, and that there is no Necessity of knowing any other doctrines
of the Bible? Thus by following their Italian Master Socinus, they trade for
that Country. And this Vindicator among the rest trafficks very visibly for it
whilst he blasteth so substantial a part of the New Testament as the
Epistolary Writings are. Would not one be apt to suspect that (as their Roman
Masters have done) they would afterward not only keep a part, but the Whole
Scripture from the people? And so we shall travel to Rome by the way of Racovia.

And here you may see now what his Pretenses of Love to the bulk of mankind
come to. See how Sincere he is in taking care of the Salvation of their Souls,
which is a thing that he more than once mentions, and with some reflection ( p.
9. Vindicat.) on me as if I disregarded that Great Concern. But I hope I have
in some measure faithfully discharged that part, though the Great Judge of
heaven and earth knows my manifold desiciencies and failings in it; but I am
well satisfied that this Inferior Inquisitor cannot charge me with a noglect in
that Great and Important Work, which I have made the business of my life. But
behold how this Censorious Gentleman himself manifests his regard to the
Salvation of peoples Souls when he puts out their Eyes, when he studies how to
nurse them up in Ignorance and Blindness, and thereby to Ruin their Souls for
ever. He can afford them but One Article out of the Whole New Testament. That
must suffice them now, and perhaps afterward it will be thought too much.

Here, before I proceed any further, I would take notice that the Project of
the Necessity of but One Article of Christian Belief is the direct Spawn and
Product of Socinianism, but improved by this Author. He that has conversed
with the Unitarian Writers is sensible how they endeavor to cramp our Belief
and Knowledge, and cut off as many Fundamental Articles of Religion as they can.
Socin. de Cognit. Dei. Ostorod.. Instit. cap. 3, 4. Epifeop. Apol. Remonstr.
They insist upon this, that the Points necessary to be known are but Few: they
interpret those places of Scripture which directly speak of Knowing of God, i.
e. of knowing his Nature and Attributes, and other matters in Religion that are
to be believed, concerning a Practical Knowledge. Praelect. cap. 5.
Socinus leads the way, undervaluing the former sort of Knowledge, and
interpreting Acts 17. 27. seeking the Lord, if happily they may feel after him,
and find him, concerning a Holy Life; whereas the plain scope of the place will
convince any unprejudiced man that it is spoken of those who being ignorant of
God, labor to throw off that Ignorance, and to attain to a Knowledge of him, in
order to their right worshipping and serving him. The rest follow this
Ringleader, and accordingly you may observe that in their Definitions of
Religion they seldom (or never) insert Knowledge as any part of it, but they
wholly define it to be a Living according to the Divine Precepts and Promises,
or to be the Way to Eternal Life and Happiness. Some of them seem to restrain
that place, John 17. 3. that they might know thee the only true God, etc. unto
a Practical Knowledge. And in other particulars it might be showed that they
very much disparage the Doctrinal Part of Christianity, and more especially
take care to abbreviate and cut off the Fundamentals of it. Crellius is much
for diminishing and reducing the knowledge and belief of the Articles of Faith.
The Sacred Writers (says De Uno Deo Patre. Sect. 1. cap. 1.
he) when they speak of that knowledge in which Religion, or the way to eternal
life consists, speak not of that knowledge whereby any Attribute that is
Essential to God or Christ is known. Here is the Platform of our Gentleman's
Design, and thence let the Reader guess whose part he takes. Crellius has
given him his Kue, and he very strictly observes it: No Attribute that is
Essential to God the Father (as Father) or Christ the Second Person in the
Deity must come into his Creed, i. e. to be made a Necessary Article of it. And
that the World may know that this is acceptable to the Party, one of them is
chosen out to vindicate this Attempt of setting up One Article. A The
Exceptions of Mr. E. against the Reasonableness of Christianity examined.
Professed Socinian Writer (and no Alien, but true English Breed) undertakes
it, and applauds the Author, and defends his Work: that it may publicly appear
that this is the doctrine of the Racovians or Anti-Trinitarians, and that it
was not only begun to be entertained by the Ancient and Outlandish Socinians,
but that now, when it is fully improved, it is vouched by the Modern and Native
ones.

But what may be the Reason why both the Exotic and English Unitarians agree
to maim the Heads of Christianity, to contract its Articles, and to reduce it
into so small a compass? Seeing there are Several Fundamental Truths
appertaining to the Christian Religion, why are they not all pronounced
Necessary to be believed and assented to? They have several reasons for this;
first, they are compelled to do it because otherwise they cannot maintain that
which so many of them profess to believe, viz. the Salvation of all men, of
whasoever Persuasion they are. This is an extravagant Principle which they have
taken up, and it is the Modish Opinion at this day, but if they should hold
that there is a Necessity of believing a considerable number of Articles in
Christianity, they could not possibly entertain this Fashionable Notion.
Secondly, they cunningly keep up this Conceit of the necessity of but One
Article, because it makes for their own Preservation and Safety, that neither
the Magistrate nor Ecclesiastical Power in any Country may take occasion to
animadvert upon them: for why should they trouble and molest them for holding
such doctrines as are not of the Foundation of Religion, as are of no Necessity
to be believed? This makes them forward to propagate their Notion. And hence
also we see what is the reason of their talking so warmly for Liberty: This is
done to Secure themselves that though they broach never so Pernicious Opinions
they may not fall under the lash of the Magistrate. In brief, they would not be
Punished here, and they think they have made sure of hereafter by another
Tenent of theirs. Thirdly, by virtue of this Expedient they can throw off any
Doctrine when they please, especially those Main Articles of the Holy Trinity,
of Christ's Satisfaction, etc. for it is but saying that they are not necessary
to be believed, (there being a Necessity of believing but One) and the business
is done. Thus you see how it is their Concern to hold up their One Article.

But who sees not that hereby they depress Christianity, and unspeakably injure
the Faith of the Gospel? What is the meaning of Catechizing, which has been so
universally commended and practiced by the Ancients? There were in the
Primitive Church particular persons that made it their business to instruct and
inform the ignorant in a Catechetical Way: yea, it was a Distinct Office among
the Christians of old. Saint Mark in the Church of Alexandria was a Catechist,
Pantaenus succeeded him, then Origin had the same Employment there, and
Heraclius after him. What! was this only to teach One Article of Faith? Who but
a Socinian can believe this? Is it not enough to rob us of our God, by denying
Christ to be so, but must they spoil us of all the Other Articles of Christian
Faith but One? Who would think that the Popular Man, who pretends to take such
care of the Multitude, should do them the greatest Mischief imaginable, whilst
he makes a show of being extraordinarily kind to them? for a greater Mischief
there cannot be than to put them off with One Article of Christian Belief, when
there are Many others of absolute necessity.

CHAP. V.
This Writer's doctrine tends to Irreligion and Atheism. In what terms we may
suppose the Atheists congratulate him. The clipping of the Articles of the
Creed is a preparatory to the diminishing of the Precepts of the Decalogue, and
the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer. Obj. Does not the frequent mentioning of
this Article [ Jesus is the Messias] in the New Testament; yea, the sole
mentioning of it in some places argue that there is no other Article of Faith
which is necessarily to be believed but this? Answ. No: because 1. the
believing of Jesus to be the promised Messiah was the first step to
Christianity, and therefore is so often propounded in the Evangelical Writings.
2. Though this One Article be mentioned alone in some places, it is to be
supposed that other matters of Faith were at the same time proposed, though
they are not recorded. 3. We must supply those places of Scripture where this
One Article is set down alone from others which make mention of Other Necessary
Points of Belief. 4. The clear discovery of the doctrines of the Gospel was
gradual; and therefore we must not think that in the Four Evangelists and Acts
are specified all the Necessary Articles of Faith, but we must look for some of
them in the Epistolary Writings, when the Spirit of God had further enlightened
the Apostles and other Christians.

AND now, to prove yet further the Pernicious Nature of his Writings, does any
man doubt of their Tendency to Irreligion and Atheisin? I charge him not with
any such thing as a formal designing of this. (No: I will not entertain such a
thought) but I only take notice how serviceable his Papers and Opinions are to
this purpose. He has mightily gratified the Atheistical Rabble by this his
Enterprise, and accordingly we may suppose them in such Words as these to
express their great Obligations and Thankfulness to him on this occasion; We
are beholding to this Worthy Adventurer for ridding the world of so Great an
Encumbrance, viz. that huge Mass and unweildy Body of Christianity which took
up so much room. Now we see that it was this Bulk, and not that of Mankind
which he had an eye to when he so often mentioned this latter. This is a
Physician for our turn indeed: we like this Chemical Operator that does not
trouble us with a parcel of Heavy Drugs of no value, but contracts all into a
Few Spirits, nay does his business with a Single Drop. We have been in bondage
a long time to Creeds and Catechisms, Systems and Confessions, we have been
plagued with a tedious Beadroll of Articles which our Reverend Divines have
told us we must make the matter of our Faith. Yea so it is, both Conformists
and Nonconformists (though disagreeing in some other things) have agreed in
This to molest and crucify us. But this Noble Writer (we thank him) has set
us free, and eased us by bringing down all the Christian Faith into One Point.
We have heard some men talk of the Epistolary Composures of the New Testament,
as if Great Matters were contained in them, as if the great Mysteries of
Christianity (as they call them) were unfolded there: but we could never make
any thing of them; and now we find that this Writer is partly of our opinion.
He tells us that these are Letters sent upon occasion, but we are not to look
for our Religion (for now for this Gentleman's sake we begin to talk of
Religion) in these places. We believe it, and we believe that there is no
Religion but in those very Chapters and Verses which he has set down in his
Treatise. What need we have any other part of the New Testament? That is Bible
enough, if not too much. Happy, thrice happy shall this Author be perpetually
esteemed by us, we will Chronicle him as our Friend and Benefactor. It is not
our way to Saint people: otherwise we would certainly Canonize this Gentleman,
and, when our hand is in, his pair of Booksellers for their being so beneficial
to the World in Publishing so Rich a Treasure. It was a Blessed Day when this
hopeful Birth saw the light, for hereby all the Orthodox Creed-makers and
Systematick Men are ruined for ever. In brief, if we be for any Christianity,
it shall be this Author's, for that agrees with us singularly well, it being so
short, all couched in four words, neither more nor less. It is a very fine
Compendium, and we are infinitely obliged to this Great Reformer for it. We are
glad at heart that Christianity is brought so low by this Worthy Penman, for
this is a good presage that it will dwindle into Nothing. What! but One
Article, and that so Brief too! We like such a Faith, and such a Religion
because it is so near to None.

And is not the Reader satisfied that such language as this has real Truth in
it? Does he not perceive that the discarding of all the Articles but One makes
way for the casting off that too? And may we not expect that those who deal
thus with the Creed will use the same method in reducing the Ten Commandments
and the Lord's Prayer, abbreviating the former into One Precept, and the latter
into One Petition? So that not only our Faith but our Practice and Devotion
shall be crampt. There is as much reason to do one as the other: and they that
have done the former will in time, it is no doubt, use the same discipline
toward the latter, i. e. lop off some of the Precepts of the Decalogue, and
diminish that Form and Pattern of Prayer which our Savior has left us.

Thus this Writer sees how sitly his book of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. was brought into my Discourse about the Causes and Occasions
of Atheism, which he seems to wonder at, p. 2. It appears also that if I gave
his book an Ill Name (as he complains,) it does deserve it, and that it has
not only a Socinian but an Atheistick Tang. I have proved (and shall yet
further do it in this present Undertaking) that he has corrupted men's minds,
depraved the Gospel, and abused Christianity. And is there no Atheism in this?
To conclude, if after all he will stand to his Proposition, and assert there is
but One Article of Faith (just one and no more, and it is sure there can be no
less) necessarily to be assented to, he may enjoy his Confident Humor, but it
is to be hoped that there is not any considerable number of men in the world
that will admit of such an Unaccountable Paradox, and forfeit their Reasons
merely to please their Fancy.

But because I designed these Papers for the satisfying of the Readers Doubts
about any thing occurring concerning the matter before us, and for the
establishing of his wavering mind, I will here (before I pass to the Second
General Head of my Discourse) answer a Query or Objection which some, and not
without some show of Ground, may be apt to start. How comes it to pass, they
will say, that this Article of Faith, viz. that Jesus is the Messiah or Christ,
is so often repeated in the New Testament? Why is this sometimes urged without
the mentioning of any other Article of Belief? Does not this plainly show that
this is All that is required to be believed as Necessary to make a man a
Christian? May we not infer from the frequent and sole repetition of this
Article in several places of the Evangelist and the Acts that there is no other
Point of Faith of absolute necessity, but that this alone is sufficient to
constitute a man a True Member of Christ?

To clear this Objection, and to give a full and satisfactory Answer to all
doubts in this affair, I offer these ensuing Particulars, which will lead the
Reader to the right understanding of the whole case.

1. It must be considered that the believing of Jesus to be the promised
Messiah was the first step to Christianity; and therefore This rather than any
other Article was propounded to be believed by all those whom either our
Savior or the Apostles invited to embrace Christianity. If they would not, if
they did not give credit to This in the first place, viz. That Jesus of
Nazareth was that Eminent and Extraordinary Person prophesied of long before,
and that he was Sent and Commissioned by God, there could be no hope that they
would attend unto any other Proposal relating to the Christian Religion. This
is the true reason why that Article was constantly propounded to be believed by
all that looked toward Christianity, and why it is mentioned so often in the
Evangelical Writings. It was that which made way for the embracing of all the
other Articles, it was the passage to all the rest. But our Anonymous Author
not thinking of this, but observing that this One Article was usually required
to be assented to in the Gospel-Writings, he thence inconsiderately concludes
that this is the Whole of the Christian Belief, and that there is nothing else
to be necessarily assented to, to make a man a Christian. I am sorry to see
that a person of some Sense can have so little a feeling of the True Nature and
Import of Christianity, that he can harbor such a thought as this, that all
the necessary part of our Belief is summed up in a bare giving assent to this
Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah. He mistakes a part of Christian Faith for
All, and the Entrance and Beginning of it for the full Consummation of it.

2. It is to be remembered that though this One Proposition or Article be
mentioned alone in some places, yet there is reason to think and be persuaded
that at the same time other Matters of Faith were proposed. For it is confessed
by all Intelligent and Observing men that the History of the Scripture is
concise, and that in relating of matter of Fact many passages are omitted by
the Sacred Penmen. Wherefore though but this One Article of belief (because it
is a Leading one, and makes way for the rest) be expressly mentioned in some of
the Gospels, yet we must not conclude thence that no other matter of Faith was
required to be admitted of. For things are briefly set down in the Evangelical
Records, and we must suppose many things which are not in direct terms related.
The not attending to this has been one occasion of the present mistake. Hence
it was that this Narrow-minded Writer shuts up all in belief of Iesus's being
the Christ.

3. This also must be thought of, that though there are Several parts and
members of the Christian Faith, yet they do not all occur in any One place of
Scripture. This is well known to those that are conversant in the Writings of
the New Testament, and therefore when in some places only One single part of
the Christian Faith is made mention of, as necessarily to be embraced in order
to Salvation, we must be careful not to take it alone, but to supply it from
several other places, which make mention of other Necessary and Indispensable
Points of Belief. I will give the Reader a plain Instance of this, Romans 10. 9.
If thou shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him (i. e. the Lord
Jesus) from the dead, thou shall be saved. Here One Article of Faith, viz. the
belief of Christ's Resurrection (because it is of so great importance in
Christianity) is only mentioned; but all the rest must be supposed, because
they are mentioned in other places. And consequently, if we would give an
impartial account of our Belief, we must consult those places: and they are not
all together, but dispersed here and there: wherefore we must look them out,
and acquaint our selves with the Several Particulars which make up our Belief,
and render it entire and consummate. But our hasty Author took another course,
and thereby deceived himself, and unhappily deceives others.

4. This (which is the Main Answer to the Objection) must be born in our minds
that Christianity was erected by degrees, according to that prediction and
promise of our Savior, that the Spirit should teach them all things, John 14.
26. and that he should guide them into all truth, John 16. 13. viz. after his
Departure and Ascension, when the Holy Ghost was to be sent in a special manner
to enlighten men's minds, and to discover to them the great Mysteries of
Christianity. This is to be Noted by us, as that which gives great light in the
present case. The discovery of the Doctrines of the Gospel was Gradual. It was
by certain steps that Christianity climbed to its height. We are not to think
then that all the Necessary doctrines of the Christian Religion were clearly
published to the world in our Savior's time. Not but that all that were
necessary for that time were published: but some which were necessary for the
succeeding one were not then discovered, or at least not fully. They had
ordinarily no belief before Christ's Death and Resurrection of those
Substantial Articles, i. e. that he should die and rise again: but we read in
the Acts and in the Epistles that these were Formal Articles of Faith
afterward, and are ever since necessary to complete the Christian Belief, so
as to other Great Verities, the Gospel increased by degrees, and was not
Perfect at once. Which furnishes us with a reason why most of the Choicest and
Sublimest Truths of Christianity are to be met with in the Epistles of the
Apostles, they being such doctrines as were not clearly discovered and opened
in the Gospels and the Acts.

Thus I have, I conceive, amply satisfied the foregoing Objection, and I hope
the Reader is convinced of the True Grounds why we must not expect all
Necessary Points of Christianity in the Writings of the four Evangelists. If
our present Writer had thought of this, and had distinguished of Times, he had
not formed such an Ill Notion of Christianity as we find he has done. But it
is not only upon Mistake that this Author proceeds: his fault is much worse. It
is too apparent that by this Abbreviating of Christianity, and by his voluntary
neglecting what the Epistolary Writings deliver, he designs to exclude those
Fundamental Doctrines which have been owned as such in the Church of Christ. So
much for the First General Head which I propounded to insist upon.

CHAP. VI.
The next General Charge against him is, that the Texts of Scripture which
respect the HOLY TRINITY are disregarded by him, or interpreted after the
Anti-Trinitarian Mode. This is proved from plain Instances. The latter more
especially is evidenced from his interpreting the Messiah and the Son of God to
be the very same as to signification, and that no more is denoted by one term
than by the other. The Weakness of the Socinian Arguing on this occasion fully
laid open: and the Texts where these terms are mentioned plainly cleared. A
Text produced and urged that confutes the vain surmises of the Racovians about
those expressions, and that reduces them to an unavoidable Absurdity. The
Messiah is a Title of Christ's Office: The Son of God is the Title of his
Divinity. The former is founded on his Mission from the Father: The latter on
his Peculiar Property as he is the Second Person in the Sacred Trinity; and
consequently they are not synonymous terms. The Gentleman would wind in two
Learned Prelates, but his attempt proves ineffectual He is given to Shuffling.
He abuses Scripture by quoting it.

MY next Charge against this Gentleman was this, that those Texts of Scripture
which respect the Holy Trinity were either disregarded by him, or were
interpreted by him after the Antitrinitarian Mode. And this he is so far from
denying, that he openly avows it, Vindic. p. 22, 23. By which he has made it
clear that he espouses that doctrine of the Socinians. When I had offered those
two plain Texts, Mat. 28. 19. John 1. 1. to prove the doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity, he takes no care to give any Resolution about them, though he was
absolutely obliged to do it, because those Texts are not in the Epistles, but
in the Gospels, out of which latter he says he made his Collection of
Articles, but he should rather have said (and that with Truth) out of which he
drew One Article. Nay, which is more strange, though he particularly mentions,
p. 9. my taking notice of his omitting these Texts in his Treatise, nay though
he sets them down at large in his Vindication, yet he has the confidence to
run presently to another thing, and he shifts it off by one impertinent matter
or other, and faith not one syllable with reference to those Famous Texts which
are such remarkable testimonies to the doctrine of the Trinity. Who could do
this but a Socinianiz'd Writer? And who could do this but a man that was wholly
careless of his Credit, and did not care how he acted? And this very thing does
moreover show that this Author (let him pretend what he will) is as great a
despiser of the Gospels (when any thing in them does not serve his turn) as he
is of the Epistles. This will perpetually stick upon him, and he will never be
able to wipe it off. If ever he accounts for this, he must at the same time
make an acknowledgment of his crazy memory, and of something worse.

Again, as it is evident that he rejects the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity,
so more especially and particularly he waves that of the Deity of our Savior.
Which appears from this that he justifies the Charge against him, viz. that he
made these terms [ the Messias] and [ the Son of God] the very same as to
Signification, p. 23. Vindic. Which is the very thing that Cont. Meisner. de
Trin.
Slichtingius and other Racovians insist upon, and make a great stir about. And
herein they write after Socin. cont. Wiek. cap. 5.
their Master, who largely pursues this Argument (for so he reckons it to be,)
viz. that there is no difference between the Name Christ or Messiah and that
other the Son of God. He alleges the very same Text that our Vindicator does,
and some others. He argues from Matt. 16. 16. compared with Luke 9. 20. Thou
art Christ the Son of the living God, says the former place: Thou art the
Christ of God, faith the latter: therefore Christ and the Son of God are not
only the same person, but these two expressions signify the very same thing
and no more. What a weak and pitiful Consequence is this? For it is grounded on
this absurd bottom, namely, that when any of the Evangelists speak about the
same matter, if one of them adds some words, yea, some material Passages which
are not in the other, these must be reckoned to be the very same with what the
other said, though they were utterly omitted by him. Then we may argue thus,
St. Matthew says, Christ began to preach, and to say, Repent, Mat. 4. 17. St.
Mark says, He preached the Gospel, saying, Repent ye, and believe the Gospel,
Mark 1. 14, 15. therefore Repenting and Believing are the same, and there is no
difference between them. Would not a Man be hooted at for such Arguing as this?
Yet this is the very Reasoning of our Racovian, and of this late Proselyte of
theirs. In one Evangelist he says, our Savior is called Christ, in another
the Son of God, therefore the denominations of the Son of God and Christ are
identified. Again, they endeavor to prove it from comparing Mat. 26. 63. Mark
14. 61. with Luke 22. 67. In the former places it is related that the High
Priest asked our Savior whether he was the Son of God, the Son of the Blessed:
in the latter, whether he was the Christ. Whence they roundly conclude that
those Names Christ and the Son of God are synonymous. But they do this without
any show of reason, because they cannot (as Cont. Meisner. de Trin.
Slichtingius himself confestes) simply from an Omission infer the identity of
the things which are expressed and which are left out, viz in the Writings of
the Evangelist: and consequently their Arguing is vain and groundless. The
plain and satisfactory Answer to it is this, that St. Luke (guided by the Holy
Ghost in giving the Narrative of what was done relating to our Lord) omitted
the particular words which the other Evangelists have: and this is usual with
all the Evangelists at one time or other. But a man cannot infer thence that the
words and expressions which are used by them are of the same import and
signification. After this rate, when I read that Christ fell upon his face,
Mat. 26. 39. and that he fell on the ground, Mark 14. 35. and that he fell on
his kness for so it is in the Greek) Luke 22. 41. I may conclude that face and
ground and kness are the very same thing, and one of them signifies no more
than the other. This is the wild Logic of these men. Can there be a more
extravagant way of talking than this? Especially if we remember what Pretenses
to Reason and Good Sense these men make above the rest of mankind. There are
other Texts quoted by our Author to prove that there is no difference between
Christ and the Son of God as to the signification of the words, but they may
easily be answered from what I have said concerning the interpretation of the
foregoing Texts.

There is one place (to name no more) which confutes all the foresaid surmises
of the Socinians about the identity of those Terms: it is that famous
Confession of Faith which the Ethiopian Eunuch made when Philip told him that
he might be baptized if he believed; Acts 8. 37. I believe, says he, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. This without doubt was said according to that
apprehension which he had of Christ from Philip's instructing him, for it is
said he preached unto him Jesus, v. 35. He had acquainted him that Jesus was
the Christ, the Anointed of God, and also that he was the Son of God, which
includes in it that he was God. And accordingly this Noble Proselyte gives this
account of his Faith, in order to his being baptized, in order to his being
admitted a Member of Christ's Church, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God,
or you may read it according to the Greek, I believe the Son of God to be Jesus
Christ. Where there are these two distinct Propositions, 1. That Jesus is the
Christ, the Messiah, 2. That he is not only the Messiah, but the Son of God. If
you do not own these two Propositions included in his words, you must say that
the Eunuch (though instructed by Philip) spoke Nonsense, for it to be Christ
and to be the Son of God are of the same signification, then his words sound
thus, I believe that Jesus Christ is Christ, I believe the Messiah is the
Messiah. This absolutely follows from the foresaid Notion, that the Messiah and
the Son of God are synonymous. So then here is an Absurd Tautology instead of a
Sober confession of Faith from this Eminent Convert: and Philip accepts of it
as a good and right profession of his Belief. This you must grant, or else you
must acknowledge that the Messiah and Son of God are not of the same
signification, but are distinctly attributed to Jesus. These words will force
you to acknowledge this, for in saying he believes Christ to be the Son of God,
or that the Son of God is Christ, he lets us know that these two, viz. to be
the Messiah and to be the Son of God are different things (though they meet in
the same Person) and consequently that in all those places (which are very
many) where the Son of God is added to the Messiah, we must understand it as an
addition to the Sense: whereas according to this Writer and his Accomplices these
two are identified: and consequently here is a Nonsensical Reiteration in the
words, for they amount to no more than this, I believe Jesus Christ to be
Christ. This is that Absurdity which they are reduced to.

But yet I will subjoyn this, that we are not unwilling to grant that our
Savior is sometimes called the Son of God because of his Luke 1. 35.
Miraculous Conception, also because of the Dignity of his John 10. 36.
Mission, and sometimes because of his Acts 13. 32, 33.
Resurrection. But then we say that these do not exclude another, and higher
cause of this Appellation, viz. his John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 31.
Eternal Filiation: he was begotten from Eternity of the substance of the
Father by an ineffable Generation. If then we will speak of these two
Denominations distinctly and properly, we must say that one is the Name of his
Office, the other of his Divinity, and consequently that Christ and the Son of
God are not expressions of the same latitude and import. And how indeed can
they be? For they have different foundations, the one has its rise from the
Divine Mission, viz. that of the Father, who sent and anointed him to be a
Savior: the other is grounded in the singular and peculiar Property of the
Second Person in the Sacred Trinity, and so is the Name of his Person.
Wherefore it is most irrationally and absurdly done of our Late Convert, in a
fond Imitation of his Brethren, to confound these two which are really
Distinct. I mentioned this as a proof of his being a Socinian, and he lets it
remain a Proof, and so do I. But here I would only observe that he and they
proceed in a Preposterous manner when they tell us that Christ is called the
Son of God, because of his Office and its Dignity, whereas it is evident that
he had the Office and Dignity, because he was the Son of God, and because none
could perform the Office but he that was so. He was not God (a Metaphorical
God, as the Socinians sometimes make him) because he was Christ or the Messiah:
but he was the Messiah because he was God, even the True God. He was the Christ
of God because he was the Son of God: And this Filiation, in its strictest and
properest sense, implies his Divine Nature, and his Coessentiality with the
Father.

He would here wind in ( p. 23.) the late Archbishop of Canterbury, as if he
understood the foregoing Terms as the Socinians do. But his words that are
cited do not necessarily import any such thing, for Nathanael might own our
Savior to be the Messiah, and call him the Son of God, and yet it does not
follow thence that the signification of both these Appellations is the same, or
that the Archbishop thought so. And he would make use of the Authority of an
Other Prelate, now living, of extraordinary Worth and Learning, who speaking
only in a general way represents these two as the same thing, viz. that Jesus
is the Christ, and that Jesus is the Son of God, because these expressions are
applied to the same Person, and because they are both comprehended in one
general Name, viz. Jesus. Yet it does not follow thence but that if we will
speak strictly and closely we must be forced to confess that they are of
different significations; for we have different Ideas and notions of them, the
one being the Name of our Savior's Office, the other of his Person and Eternal
Filiation. But our Gentleman adheres to his good Patrons and Friends the
Racovians, and pronounces them the very same. And we may, for this as well as
other reasons, pronounce him the same with those Gentlemen. Which you may
perceive he is very apprehensive of, and thinks that this will be reckoned a
good Evidence of his being what he denied himself to be before. The Point is
gained, says he, and I am openly a Socinian. p. 23. He never uttered truer
words in his life, and they are the Confutation of all his Pretenses to the
contrary. This Truth, which unwarily dropped from his pen, confirms what I have
laid to his charge, that he did read the foresaid Texts with Socinian
Spectacles, that he interpreted them after the Racovian Mode, that he passed by
Other Texts, yea, the Whole Epistles themselves, because he was sensible how
many Illustrious Attestations to the doctrine of the ever to be Adored Trinity
are contained in them.

It is true, he tells us that he never read the Socinian Writers, p. 22. but we
know his Shuffling is such that there is no depending on his word. But suppose
he did not read those Authors, yet he does not deny that he has Conversed with
some of them, and has heard their Notions and Arguments: and this indeed he
intimates to us when he lets us know that the generality of Divines he more
converses with are not Racovians, p. 22. which intimates that there are some
Particular Divines he less converses with that are of another way. What shall
we say? The Gentleman is a Racovian, and yet pretends he does not know it. So
we must number him among the Ignoramus-Socinians (as they tell us in their late
Papers of Ignoramus Trinitarians) which is one sort of those folks it seems.

I will only further take notice here of what was truly said, before he was
aware, that it was a dull work with him to quote Scripture, p. 25. He has
sufficiently convinced the world, in his numerous Quotations of Scripture, that
it was so. He might have added, it is a diabolical work, for in quoting
Scripture after that rate which he is guilty of, he does but follow his Pattern
in Mat. 4. 6. His handling of Scripture, and making that use of it which he
does, is an Abusing of it. Such treating of the Holy Book is desecrating it;
and whilst he talks Scripture, he prophanes it. So that a Socinian begins to
mend when he leaves this work off, (p. 25.) in comparison of what he did
before. So much for the Second Charge.

CHAP. VII.
The last General Charge against him is, that when he professedly enumerates
the ADVANTAGES of our Savior's Coming, he has not one syllable of his
SATISFYING for us. Hence it is rationally inferred that he favors Racovianism.
He endeavors to evade this by pretending that in other places he uses such
terms as import Satisfaction. Herein he is refuted. His Dissimulation
discovered. Even whilst he proclaims himself a Socinian, he labors to
disguise it. Which argues his Weakness and Insincerity. His Book is unworthy of
the specious Title which he prefixes to it. The Author's Conclusion of the
foregoing debates.

ANother Proof, or rather Demonstration of our Author's being a Disciple of
Socinus is this, that when he mentions the Advantages and Benefits of Christ's
Coming into the world, he has not one syllable of his Satisfying for us, or by
his Death purchasing life and salvation, or any thing that sounds like it. He
makes nothing of the force of this Evidence, wherefore it will be proper now to
set it before the Reader in its true and native light. He that was giving an
Account of the Reasonableness of Christianity, and was more particularly making
it his business to show for what End and Purpose Christ appeared in the flesh,
and to let his Readers know what Good and Advantage were brought to them by the
Messiah, he (I say) when he was about this work, and Designedly undertook it in
this part of his book, was obliged to declare that one great Advantage of the
Messias's Coming was to take away our sins by Expiating them, that one Main End
of his Coming was to make Satisfaction for us, and thereby to purchase life and
glory. But this New Convert has not any thing that sounds like it in this
place, where he professedly took upon him to acquaint us what are the
Advantages which accrue to us by the Messiah. Though he has the confidence to
struggle with many other parts of the Charges against him, yet here he submits,
and grants ( p. 5. Vind.) he has no such thing in the place where the
Advantages of Christ's Coming are purposely treated of. And if by his own
acknowledgment he has no such thing when he reckons up the Advantages and
Blessings of Christ's appearing in the world, then every intelligent man knows
what Inference to make, viz. that this Author was of opinion that Christ came
not to Satisfy for us, and to purchase life for us by virtue of his Death,
which is one of the Grand Points of Socinianism.

The force of this Inference is unavoidable, and it will attack our Adversary,
be he never so cunning at Evasions, be he never so closely entrenched in his
Equivocations. For where should we expect this to be mentioned, if it be not
expressly taken notice of in that part or division of his Treatise where he
Purposely sets forth the Benefits of the Messias's Arrival? If he does not make
express mention of it here, it is either because he forgot it, (but he owns no
such thing) or because he was careless (but he does not think himself, whatever
others do, to be such a Writer) or because he wilfully left it out, and this
indeed is the true Reason: for all the world cannot but see (notwithstanding
his Shifts) that his Subject engaged him to reckon This in the number of the
Benefits accruing by the Coming of Jesus Christ, if he had thought it to be
one. When he was enumerating of those, this could not possibly have been
omitted, because by all Writers that are not Socinians this is always put into
the Catalogue of those Blessings which we share in by the Undertakings of our
Blessed Savior. Hence it appears how impertinent and ridiculous that is, It
was not in the place he (meaning me) would have it in, p. 5. He should have
said, it is not in the place where every one might reasonably have looked for
it, it was not in the place where his matter necessarily obliged him to insert
it, so that he was both faithless to his Subject, and false to the True Cause:
in brief, it was not in that place where, if he had not been a Pupil of
Socinus, it would certainly have been found: for no man but such a one did ever
designedly undertake the Enumeration of those Benefits which we are partakers
of by our Lord's Coming, and yet omit at the same time his Redeeming and
Purchasing us by his Blood.

He pretends indeed, p. 5. that in an other place of his book he mentions
Christ's restoring all man kind from the state of death, and restoring them to
life, and his laying down his life for an other, as our Savior professes he
did. These few words this Vindicator has picked up in his book since he wrote
it. This is all through his whole Treatise that he has dropped concerning that
Advantage of Christ's Incarnation which I was speaking of: and they are general
terms too, and such as every Racovian will subscribe to; for they are not
backward to own that Christ some way or other (but not That before specified)
restored us to life, and they cannot gainsay the express words of Christ
concerning his laying down his life for his sheep, John 10. 15. but it is well
known that (notwithstanding this) they deny the Satisfaction of Christ, and his
purchasing life and salvation by virtue of his Meritorious Passion and Death.
There is not any thing that sounds like this in that part of his Discourse
where he peculiarly made it his employment and task to let the Reader know what
Advantages we reap by our Saviors assuming our humane nature.

But he deridingly cries out What will become of me, that I have not mentioned
SATISFACTION? p. 6. I will tell you, Sir, (seeing you would know) what will
become of you; you will ever hereafter be reckoned by all understanding men an
Egregious Whiffler, or in plainterms a Notorious Dissembler. For the case
stands thus, (and I doubt not but the Reader will perfectly agree with me in
it) you believe Christ's Satisfaction, or you do not: if you believe there is
such a thing, and this was one of the Advantages we have by Christ's Coming,
then you were false and treacherous in omitting it: if you believe it not, you
are as false and hypocritical in vouching your self to be no Socinian, seeing
this is one known Badg of a person of that Character.

Let him take which of these ways he will, he forfeits his Truth and Integrity.
Was it not enough to make use of the Chief Socinian Arguments, and to expound
Texts in the Racovian way, and to leave out plain and direct places even in the
very Gospels that assert the Holy Trinity, and moreover to throw off all the
Famous Testimonies to this doctrine in the Apostolical Epistles, and to balk
the Satisfaction of Christ for us even when he was purposely telling the Reader
what are the Advantages which flow to us from Christ's Coming? Was it not
enough, I say, to do all this (which loudly proclaims him a Socinian) but must
he also hold the world in hand that he is none? Can this Writer himself
consider this, and not blush? Who does not wonder at his Weakness, that he
should manifestly take the part of these Gentlemen and yet endeavor to
persuade us that he is not of their number? But who does not wonder more at his
Insincerity, that he should act thus? Must not this then be his Lasting
Character that he has in his Writings demonstated himself to be not only a
Socinian, but a False hearted one?

There are other Passages in his book which I might produce to confirm this
Character of him, but those may be taken notice of at another time. At present
let it suffice that I have showed that he has not said one word in his
Vindication that clears him of this imputation. And as for his book it self of
the Reasonableness of Christianity, let it suffice to say that though there
have been many Treatises concerning that Subject, yet none ever could imagine
that this which he offers could possibly be brought under that Title. He says
some body is good at Conjecturing, but if a man had the best faculty in the
world that way, it were impossible to guess and surmise that such a Title
should be prefixed those Papers which are an Unreasonable and False
Representation of Christianity, a Lame and Shattered Account of the Principles
of the Gospel, and, in short, a kind of Libel against the New Testament.
Finally, let it suffice that I have demonstrated to the Reader that this
Gentleman acts a Part in what he writes; by which he has gained this, that he
must never be believed for the future. He that is such an Underhand dealer
cannot be trusted: there is no heed to be given to what he says.

Thus I thought my self obliged to set before the Reader the state of the Case
between this Gentleman and my self, and to give an impartial account of our
Sentiments. I am satisfied in my Undertaking, for (whatever my defects in it
otherwise be) I Am sure I have aimed aright, at the vindicating the Glory of the
Great Majesty of heaven and earth. I have faithfully asserted our Holy
Religion, and the Divinity of the Blessed Author and Founder of it. I have
maintained the Authority and Honor of the Holy Scriptures. To the pursuing of
which Glorious Designs I shall dedicate my whole life: and I hope from what I
have written, and shall hereafter write, the World will bear me witness that I
do so.

CHAP. VIII.
The Gentleman insinuates that the Author would represent every one as an
Atheist that thinks not as he does. This Calumny is baffled. He laughs at
Orthodoxy, and cries down Systems and Creeds. This Indifferent Writer blames
the Author for his Zeal. Is angry with him for penetrating into his Thoughts
and Intentions. The Party inure themselves to Sophistry, and yet make a show of
Simplicity and Plainness. The Gentleman's Uneven Temper observed. What is meant
by a known Writer of the brotherhood. He is himself of an other Fraternity.
Though he pretends to be Grave, he Scosss and Ieers. He cannot be brought to
confess himsef to be a Retainer to Socinianism, though he has given such
evident proofs of his being one. The Author shuts up all with seasonable Advice
to him, giving him some account of the Freedom which he has used toward him
in the preceding Discourse.

HAving now dispatched my Main Business, and found the Bill against the
Criminal, not by Innuendo's but by Plain Express Proof, I am at leisure to
account with him for some Other Passages in his Vindication. He insinuates that
I would represent every one as an Atheist, or a Promoter of Atheism that does
not think as I do, does not just say after me, p. 1, 2. Which is a groundless
Calumny, and might be confuted from that Freedom which I professed, p. 77. even
in that Discourse which he excepts against. I have always been averse to
Bigotism, I never showed my self a Dogmatizer, but always declared for an
Ingenuous Liberty, such as does not audaciously encroach upon the Necessary and
Fundamental Points of our Religion. Therefore this Vindicator's wilful
mistaking of what I said, thereby to represent me as extremely Censorious and
Uncharitable, looks like Spleen. But I need say no more than this, that the
Reader is convinced (I question not) from what has been premised that this
Writer will say any thing that comes into his head. This seems to be natural to
him every where: and he can be no more without it than a Spaniard without his
Guittar.

To be Orthodox is a great Scandal, it seems, and he often objects it to me:
which, as the Learned know, was the very language and idiom of the Arrians of
old, and of that sort of men who are since known by the name of Socinians. He
speaks in the very Style of the Old Antitrinitarians; though it may be he will
say he does not know it. He publicly prides himself in his Heterodoxy, and
hates even with a deadly hatred all Catechisms and Confessions, all Systems and
Models, p. 8. He laughs at Orthodoxy, p. 17, 20. and derides Mysteries, which
are infallible marks of a Racovian Brother. And O how he grins at the Spirit of
Creedmaking? p. 18. Vindic. the very thoughts of which do so haunt him, so
plague and torment him that he cannot rest till it be conjured down. And here,
by the way, seeing I have mentioned his rancour against Systematick books and
writings, I might represent the Misery that is coming upon all Booksellers if
this Gentleman and his Correspondents go on successfully. Here is an effectual
Plot to undermine Stationers Hall; for all Systems and Bodies of Divinity,
Philosophy, etc. must be cashiered: whatever looks like System must not be
bought or sold. This will fall heavy on the Gentlemen of St. Paul's
Churchyard, and other places.

This Author often finds fault with me for my Zeal, p. 5, 18, 37. It is likely
he has heard that when the Gospel was heretofore read in the Churches in
Poland (before it was Socinianized,) it was usual to draw their Swords, to show
that they would defend it against all that opposed it. I do but draw my Pen in
defense of the Gospel, yea and the Epistles, and I am censured as a Zealot by
him. And it is not strange, for he must needs declare against Zeal that is
Indifferent. Besides, according to this Judicious Casuist there is but One
Point of Christianity that a man can be zealous for, if he would. Queen Mary's
Martyrs foolishly threw away their lives, for neither Bonner nor any of their
Persecutors did so much as desire them to renounce this Article Jesus is the
Messiah: and as for all the rest, this Gentleman tells us that they are not
necessarily to be believed, and consequently not to be acknowledged and
professed; and then who will show any Zeal for them, especially such as will
carry a man into the Flames?

He often talks of my being in his bosom, and knowing his heart and thoughts,
p. 14, 15, 24. (which by the by is more than his Brethren will allow God
himself to know, for Free Acts being uncertain they cannot be certainly
understood by God (as the Gentleman whom I shall speak a word with anon tells
us.) This sort of Talk argues that he is much troubled that I have penetrated
into his Thoughts, and have discovered to the world what his Intention and
Design is. And yet he intimates also by this way of speaking that it is an
Impossible thing to do this. How impossible then is it for himself to know his
heart? for this is a certain Maxim, It is the Punishment of a Dissembler to
deceive himself, for his endeavoring to do so to others. I wish this Writer
would consider of it, and learn for the future to be free, open and fair, and
then others (as well as himself) would have a window into his breast, and see
that which they are sorry they find no appearance of now.

And I wish this were not too common a fault of the Party, at least of many of
them. They inure themselves to Sophistry, Cunning, and Artifice, when they
either interpret Texts, or Argue in favor of their Darling Opinions. They then
too palpably impose upon other men's minds, as well as upon their own. And yet
at the same time they pretend to great Simplicity and honest dealing. Thus you
find them applauding themselves in their late Prints: The Trinitarian Scheme of
Religion, page 21.
the Unitarians (say they of themselves) are plain fellows, and have Country
Consciences, and do not like juggling. You Gentlemen of the City, look to it:
these Unitarians, these Socinians have a very bad opinion of you, for here they
would have it believed that City-Consciences are false and perfidious,
deceitful and juggling. It is a course Complement, and Rustic enough which
these Plain Fellows put upon you. It is not the first time they have struck at
you: London must be disciplined by Racovia. And the Vindicator is one of these
Plain Fellows, for as he has showed himself an Unitarian, so he makes it
appear that he has a Country-Conscience in the sense that these men ultimately
mean it in, viz. a knack of Cheating in a Rustical plain way, as when he
pretends to make a Religion for the Rabble, an Easy Plain Religion, a Creed
with One Article, and no more; pretending thereby to gratify them, but under
hand subverting Christianity.

Nor have I yet done with him. I find him to be a Man of a very Uneven Temper:
sometimes he is very Low and Whining, and will be asking pardon, and desiring
me, etc at other times he is Imperious and Magisterial, and requires me, etc.
Sometimes he talks very demurely, as about being in earnest, p. 9. being
serious and grave, p. 24, 25. and in a Pedantick Humor he undertakes to
censure and correct my Style, p. 24. But this fit of Gravity does not last
long; he every where shows himself Light and Freakish, Ironical and Abusive as
far as he is able, and nibbles at Wit according to his mean Talent. He inveighs
forsooth against Declamatory Rhetoric, Wit and Jest, etc. p. 24. Vindic. and
yet at the same time is Wanton and Frolic, Starting any thing to sport himself
with. In that very place before mentioned where he seems to put on his Gravity,
he has not forgot the Merry time of Rope-dancing and Puppet-Plays, at which he
was good in the days of yore. It is likely he had been a little before
conducting some of his Young Brood to Bartholomew Fair, and thence this
precious idea came into his head.

Without doubt he thought he was not a little Ingenious in that waggish
expression, p. 6. a Known Writer of the brotherhood: which is meant of the
Brethren of the Clergy who have writ against the Socinian Cause, the same with
the Popular Authorities and Frightful Names which he speaks of, p. 23. The
professed Divines of England you must know are but a pitiful sort of folks with
this great Racovian Rabbi. He tells us plainly that he is not mindful of what
the Generality of Divines declare for, p. 22. He labors so concernedly to
engratiate himself with the Mob, the Multitude (which he so often talks of)
that he has no regard to these. The generality of the Rabble are more
considerable with him than the generality of Divines, the Writers of the
brotherhood. Though truly a Wise Man that hears any one judge thus, will think
he deserves as well to be rewarded with a pair of Ears of the largest size as
he did who judged on Pan's side against Apollo. But there is more yet in this
term of brotherhood than this, for here it is implied (and his thoughts may be
supposed to be upon it when he wrote) that he himself is a Writer of an Other
Fraternity; and truly this Style is very proper, for the men of that Party (as
it is well known) have labored to signalize themselves (in the Writings that
they have published) by the Title of Brethren. It is agreed then; we will for
the future take him for a Polonian Brother. And I ask the Reader whether this
Brother be not of kin to the Order of Friars in Italy who were called Fratres
Ignorantiae, viz. because, they professed to teach the people as little as
possibly they could, as suppose One Article of Religion, and no more.

I might proceed further, and show that this Author, as Demure and Grave as he
would sometimes seem to be, can scoff at the Matters of Faith contained in the
Apostles Epistles, p. 18. l. 4. etc. To coakse the Mob he profanely brings in
that place of Scripture, Have any of the Rulers believed in him? p. 33.
Ridiculously and Irreligiously he pretends that I prefer what he faith to me to
what is offered to me from the Word of God, p. 25. What is there that this
Gentleman will not turn into Ridicule or Falsity? What is there that he will
not take hold of to be Sportive and Gamesome? We may further see how
Counterfeit his Gravity is whilst he condemns frothy and light discourses, p.
26. Vindie. and yet in many pages together most irreverently treats a great
part of the Apostolical Writings, and throws aside the Main Articles of
Religion as unnecessary. From all which it is clear that he contradicts and
opposes himself. Whence by the by we may gather that when he says he is no
Socinian, we must take his meaning to be that he is one, for he is made up of
Contradictions. I observed before that the Dissenting Ministers consfess'd to
him (if you will believe Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 303.
him) that they understood not the difference in debate among them: but this
Gentleman cannot be brought to confess any thing, he will not own that he is a
Writer of the brotherhood. No: there is some great Reason (if it may be called
so) for this, that he would not be thought to be of Sozzo's side: though the
Marks and Tokens are so plain that he may be apprehended without a Hue and Cry.

Come, Good Sir, do not act a part any longer: They have been desirous to put
you upon service, and you were as willing to be employed in it: but now at last
Confess it. Appear no more in Masquerade: away with this Mummery, and show your
self what you are. You have let the world see (and so far we are beholding to
you) that Socinian is a Reproachful Title; that any one may gather from your
being so backward to own it. You would never have taken so much pains to shift
off this Character if it were not a very Scandalous One. Throw off your Vizour
then, and speak out like a Man. Be free and ingenuous, and dissemble not with
Heaven as well as Men. I have, Sir, been very free with you, which you may
impute to your not being so with your self. You know the Rule among the Men of
Art, The Heart is known by the Pulse. I have made bold to usurp upon the
Faculty, I have been feeling your Pulse, and I have found that it strongly
beats after the Racovian tone. This I have told you with some plainess, and you
are obliged to me for representing you to your self. I know you did not expect
an Assault, for it was your self (however you apply it to me) that was thought
to be one of Vindic p. 20.
the most Privileged sort of men. But, Sir, in the Reign of Truth Protections
are not of any use. It is a laudable way sometimes to fight the Enemy in his
Trenches. There are some Criminals that must be snatched from the horns of the
Altar, especially when they injure the Altar it self, when they abuse that
which is Holy, and trample upon our Sacred Faith and Religion.

To conclude, I have said nothing out of prejudice or disgust, much less out of
bitterness and ill will, for I am in Entire Charity with you, and the more so
because I have spoken so freely. If you complain now (as you did before) that
you are hardly dealt with, I have only this to say, A Plain Downright
Adversary might perhaps have met with another usage, but such a Stubborn
Dissembler could not expect fairer quarter.

A Brief REPLY To Another SOCINIAN Writer, Whose Cavils bear this Title, [The
Exceptions of Mr. Edwards in his Causes of Atheism against the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. Examined.]

A Brief REPLY To another SOCINIAN Author.
THERE came lately to my hand this Writer's Sheets in the true Racovian Print:
but I having been so large upon the Vindicator, this Double-Column'd Gentleman,
who pretends to be an Examinator, cannot expect I should spend much time about
him. In the first place we are to observe that he most humbly and reverentially
dedicates his Papers to the New Patron of the Cause, and takes upon him the
Defense of what he has said in his Reasonableness of Christianity. He highly
applauds him for his being so serviceable to the Socinian and Antitrinitarian
Interest. And it is part of his Panegyric that he has happily provided for
the quiet and satisfaction of the minds of the honest multitude, p. 3. That is,
he has not troubled and molested them (as some have done with propounding
Several Articles of Christian Belief) but has told them that One is enough for
them, and bids them rest contented with that, like good honest Ignorant Souls.
Thus he has provided (but how happily let the Reader judge) for their quiet and
satisfaction. But though the Examinator heaps great Commendations on the
Vindicator, yet he professes i^ (you will believe him, you may) that he knows him
not, p 4. Only at a venture he takes his part, he now being become one of the
Brotherhood, and may prove a very Substantial Tool and Engine in the great Work
they are now about, viz. the subverting of our Savior's Divinity, the laying
aside the Apostolical Epistles, the shutting out the Necessary Matters of Faith
contained in them, and the setting up and idolizing of One Article, with
defiance of all the rest as any ways Necessary to be believed. This is the New
DIANA that is set up by our Ephesians, especially by their late Demetrius.

Then he has a fling at my Booksellers, p. 5. wherein he follows the steps of
the Vindicator, p. 37. And in this and other things they jump, which discovers
their Correspondence, though he had but just before said he knew him not. And
so this gives us an account of the truth of what the Vindicator said, that he
knew not that the Socinians interpreted such and such Texts after such a
manner. This is said to impose upon the world, and make them believe that he
and the Racovians have not been Confederates. But he confutes this in another
place, where he owns that he has particular knowledge of that Gentleman, and
knew the circumstances of his Life, p. 13. Col. 2. for he could not say of him
that he overcame the prejudices of Education unless he had been acquainted with
his Education and manner of life. And if this is the Gentleman of no ordinary
judgment, from whom he says he has seen a Letter, etc. p. 17. Here still you
see is Juggling and sleight of hand, and it is natural and proper it seems to
the Party. And further to show their Conferring of Notes together, it might be
observed that both agree to say that what I write was writ in have and in a
fit, Examine. p. 5. Vindicat. p. 19. And let it be so, if they will, for thence
it will appear that a man need not take up much time to confute either the
Vindicator or this Gentleman.

But what is this that he has to say of my Booksellers? Some great matter
without doubt. He put me upon making Exceptions against that Treatise, that so
the sale of his own Tract might be the more promoted, p. 5. The Reader may
guess from this what is their own Trade; they and their Booksellers jointly
club to cheat the poor bulk of mankind. That is their practice we may learn
from their fastening it upon others. Any man may see that the Rationalist went
snips with his Pater-Noster-Men, they fully understood one another, as appears
from their not denying him to be the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. all the time it was in the Press: but when they saw the Sale
of it was not according to their High Expectations, they, to buoy up the
Gentleman's Credit, began to disown him to be the Author. This was done by the
two Shrinemen that before cried aloud for Diana. Now then, I think it appears
at last that these people are extremely beholding to my Booksellers if they did
any such thing as they surmise, for by this means the sale of their Book was
promoted.

After the Booksellers, I must be taken to task by the Reverend Examinator, who
having fluttered a little about the formal words which I had said were to be
found in the Reasonableness of Christianity (which no Creature that has once
read it will once doubt of) he fixes on this ( p. 5.) as the Vindicator's true
sense, yea his own words, that all that was to be believed for justification,
or to make a man a Christian, by him that did already believe in, and worship
one True God, maker of heaven and earth, was no more than this Single
Proposition, that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ or the Messiah. This man
makes a Miserable Entrance to his work, for though he says these are the
Vindicator's words (for thus he brings them in, It is true he says) yet no man
alive can find them in his book: and he knew this himself, else he would have
set down the page, as we find him paging it afterward. What shall we say then
to such men as these who will vouch any thing? They can be trusted with no
book, no not with one of their own Tribe, for we see here that this Writer's
style is, he says, and yet this Express Saying no where occurs in the book he
refers to. And here by the way, we may observe the bold Partiality of this
Writer; he (as well as the Vindicator, p. 38.) would charge me with not quoting
the formal words which are in the Reasonableness of Christianity, whilst he is
not sensible of his plain misquoting the same Author. Yet here we may observe
this, that it is but a Single Proposition (and no more) which is to be
believed, to make a man a Christian. This is the sense of the Vindicator's
friend, thus he understands him; and so indeed every one must, and yet it may
be remembered that the Vindicator himself would evade this, and pretends that he
means more than a Single Proposition or Article.

Now next let us see how this Examinator licks over the Vindicator's Article,
and tells us that the belief of Iesus's being the Messiah comprehends and
implies several other things, p. 3. Here he sweats to bring off his Brother
handsomely and with credit by letting us know that his Bold Assertion which runs
through his whole book is to be qualified after this manner, 1. All synonymous
expressions, etc. and so he sets them down one, two and three. But I ask him
this Question (and let the Reader be pleased to observe the issue of it) Why
did not the Gentleman himself make use of these Qualifications when he vented
the Proposition, and insisted upon it in the bulk of his book, yea why did he
not mention these Qualifications in his Answer to my Exceptions against his
book? He knew what he had asserted, and he defends (as well he can) his doing
so, but you will find in no part of his Vindication that he betakes himself to
these Evasions, though he has enough of Others of a different sort. How then
come you, Mr. Examinator, to invent these things for him? Do you not hereby
proclaim to the world that you will put off the Reader with any idle and
groundless Conceit of your own?

When he repeats my words, p. 6, 7. wherein I took notice of the Gentleman's
willful omitting of plain and obvious passages in the Evangelists (out of whose
Writings he had drawn a Whole Article) which contain the belief of the Holy
Trinity, he says not a word to excuse his Omission, but by his silence (for he
would have spoken without doubt if he had had any thing to say in his Friends
defense) he owns it to be wilful and blameable. Only he comes with the Trite
and Common Answer of the Party to those Texts; but before he enters upon the
Second of them, viz. John 1. 1. he declares there is no such Text in the whole
Bible, p. 9. He said rightly that he was bold to say it, for a man shall
scarcely hear a more Audacious word, though it is true he endeavors to mollify
it with an if.

As to what he says about my taking notice of the Gentleman's slighting the
Epistolary Writings, I have fully answered it in the foregoing Papers, and
therefore shall add no more here.

He proceeds next to those Socinan Authors, whose undue Notions concerning God
I glanced upon. The Author of the Considerations, etc. in reply to the Right
Reverend Bishop who had from the notion of God's Eternity inferred that he was
Self-existent or from himself, has these words, What makes him (viz. the
Bishop) say, God must be from himself, or self-originated? for then he must be
before he was, which this Writer concludes to be a Contradiction. Therefore he
would make this Conclusion that God's Self-existence is a Contradiction. I know
it will be pretended that this is the Consequence only of the Bishops Notion of
Eternity, but it is plain that that Writer makes use of this Arguing to shake
the belief of the Eternity and Self-Existence of the Allmighty, and that will
appear from what he further adds in way of Exception to what that Reverend
Person says afterward concerning God's Eternity. This Examinator talks of a
false notion of Self-existence, but does not say what it is. If I have mistaken
the Considerer, let him write plainer another time.

As to the Examinator's question. How the Second and Third Persons can be
Self-existent? I answer, They are Self-existent as they are eternally from the
Self-same Deity. Though according to the Nicene Creed Christ be God of God, yet
that does not infring his Self-Existence, because those words are not spoken of
the Essence of Christ which is common to him with his Father, but of his
Personality. He being the same with the Father as to the former has his
Existence of himself; but differing from the Father as to the latter, he is
rightly said to be from him, or of him as he is the Second Person in the
Trinity. This is easily reconciled with what he says an Other Bishop asserts,
if this Unitarian has not a mind to quarrel.

In the next Paragraph he is quite nonplus'd, for I had charged the Sacinian
Authors with their denial of God's foreknowing future Contingencies, and
consequently denying the Omniscience of God, which is an inseparable Attribute
of the Deity; and he having nothing to reply to the purpose, first tells us he
is not concerned in it, p. 18, whereas every one knows that he being one of the
Party is concerned. Secondly, as soon as he had as it were renounced the
Socinian doctrine by saying he was not Concerned in it, he presently owns it
for Truth, as those words import, p. 18. -- to deny his foreknowledg of the
certainty of that which is not certain, etc. which is as much as to say that
there are some things that are Uncertain and therefore Unknowable, and these
God can have no knowledge of. And yet thirdly, he would seem to hint that it is
a dishonorable thing to God (those are his words) that he should not have a
foresight of these things. Thus Confused is our Author, which shows he is not
fit to be an Examiner of other men's Writings, when he cannot write Consistently
himself, but in three or four lines has as many Blunders.

In the next words and what follows he perfectly gives up the Cause, p. 18. for
I had laid this to the charge of the Racovians that they denied the Immensity
or Omnipresence of God, which is a Property or Perfection never to be disjoined
from the Deity; whereupon he tamely acknowledges that Crellius and the rest of
the Fraternity are of this persuasion. Only, because the Gentleman must be
wagging his tongue, he gives us a scrap out of a Latin Poet, and just names a
Greek Father, who never said any thing to that matter, and so we are rid of
them.

But he comes on again, and goes off as soon, for he barely mentions the
Spirituality of God, which I had asserted to be another Divine Excellency: and
it is such an Attribute of God that we cannot conceive of him without it, and
therefore it is made the short and comprehensive Definition of him that he is a
Spirit, John 4. 24. In my Discourse which this Examinator calls in question I
took notice that the Socinians denied this Property of the Deity, which I
justly taxed as an Atheistick Tang: and I think it was a mild term, for it is a
Rank Sign of a great tendency to Atheism to deny that God is a Spirit, i. e. an
Immaterial Incorporeal Being. But our present Author resolves himself into the
opinion of those modest Divines (who by their Blushing can be no other than
Socinus's Scholars) who determine nothing about the Point; which is as much as
to say, he and they deny it. But you must know they are now a little upon their
Credit: this Gentleman (who speaks in the name of the rest) had before given up
the Immensity and Omniscience of God, and therefore it is high time now to be
upon the Reserve, and to pause a little, that the world may not see that they
reject All those Properties of the Deity which I mentioned. But notwithstanding
this cunning practice of theirs, the world may see, yea, it cannot but plainly
see that they deny every one of these Divine Attributes more or less, and this
particularly which I mentioned last, viz. that God is a Spirit properly so
called. For whereas I quoted Socinus and Crellius (their Grand Patriots) to
prove this denial, this Writer takes no notice of my doing so, which lets us
see that the opinion of those Great Masters is humbly submitted to by all the
rest.

So now I hope the Reader is convinced that I was not Unjust to the Socinians,
that I did not highly injure them (as they have cried out) when I charged them
with Atheism or a Strong Tendency to it in some Points. I taxed them with
denying these four Attributes, the Self-Existence, the Omniscience, the
Omnipotence, the Spirituality of God, and lo! this professed Son of Socinus
(who was chosen out with great deliberation and judgment without doubt from the
rest of his brethren to undertake the Cause, to refute what I had alleged
against them, and who questionless has said all that he could in the Case) lo!
I say, this professed and known Writer of the Brotherhood confirms and ratifies
what I have laid to their charge. For he produces the words out of their own
Author which I referred to, whence it appears that he had a mind to distort the
Right Reverend Bishop of Worcester's words, and to argue against the
Self-Existence of God. This Examinator without any more ado rejects the Second
and third Attributes, and by his boggling at the fourth we know what must be
the fate of that. Thus he and his fellow-Criminals being conscious to the truth
and Justice of the Charge, confess themselves Guilty. They are so far from
clearing themselves of the Imputation and Enditement that they Aggravate it. I
leave the Reader to give the Sentence. They deserve a Severe one at his hands,
but I desire him to be Merciful for the sake of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who
forgave and prayed for his greatest Opposers. May the AllMerciful God forgive
them, and enlighten their minds, that they may be convinced of their Errors,
and heartily renounce them. The Lord give them Repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil.

Then he runs to their Common Place, which has helped to fill up their papers
many a time, and he thinks he does great feats. But he only epitomizes Crellius
de Vno Deo Patre, and offers a great many Texts which have been answered a
hundred times, as he (but untruly) says on another occasion, p. 8. This takes
up 18 or 19 whole Pages: and why? Because this costs him nothing, he borrows it
all (and he might have borrowed a great deal more) from the same Author. Here
he can afford to be very long and large, but when he undertakes the Examination
of what I had particularly objected against the Socinians, he is like the dog
at Nilus, he is presently gone: he is not furnished with any Answer that he
dares insist upon, or trust to.

Next, I will observe to the Reader that this Author meddles not with my
Argument which I drew from their own Professed Principle, viz. that nothing is
to be believed but what is exactly adjusted to Reason, and thence proved that
upon the same account that they reject the doctrine of the Holy Trinity they
may likewise quit the belief of a Deity. This I enlarged upon in seven pages
together, it being (as I then conceived, and am more confirmed in it since) an
Unanswerable Proof of what I laid to their Charge. He only grazes on it a
little, p. 19. but wheels off presently, and fixes upon that subject before
mentioned, God's Unity, because he knew where to have enough of it, but did not
know how to take off the force of that Argument which I propounded and insisted
upon.

In the next place he will turn Critic, and see whether he can thrive in this
employment, seeing he has so ill success in his former attempts. His nice
palate disgusts the word birth, as applied to Adam, p. 38. but thereby he only
shows his want of skill in the Denotation of words. He is so poor a Dabbler in
Grammar and Criticism that he knows not that by the Hebrew jalad, and the Greek
(...) and (...), and the Latin nasci, and accordingly our English [ to be born]
are signified in a general way the Origin, Rise, or Beginning of things or
persons, and consequently Birth or Nativity is not to be taken always in the
Vulgar Sense. He might have read in Genethliack Writers that the word is
applied even to Cities and Houses. But I need not go so far to defend the
Expression. The use of it, and that in the very way that I have applied it, is
to be found in Scripture: Art thou the first man that was born? Job 15. 7. Or
we may read it, if we please, more exactly according to the Original, Art thou
born as the first man, or Adam, i. e. (as the Context will show it) art thou as
understanding as the man that was first born, viz. as our First Parent Adam? By
reason of this birth Adam is called the son of God, Luke 3. 38. Whence the
Socinians would gather that Christ has that name upon the like account,
because of his Extraordinary Original, because of his Miraculous Birth. Thus we
have found that this Gentleman is ignorant of the true meaning of words in
Common Authors, that he does not know the acception of them in Holy Scripture,
nay that he does not know what his own Authors say, which evinces him to be
triply a Blunderer, and that he deserves no more to be called an Examinator.

Then he thinks he does mighty things, p. 39. by quoting Limborch a very
Learned Foreigner (a System-maker, for he has compiled a Large System of
Divinity, though he gives it another Name; and why then does this Gentleman
talk so reproachfully of Systems? p. 44. etc.) but this his Author is a Second
Episcopius; and therefore it was wisely done to bring him in to tell us what
are the Fundamentals of Religion.

But it was more cunningly done in the next Paragraph to fetch in the Sixth
Article of the Church of England in favor of the Vindicator's Conceit. Surely
this his Patron, at whose feet he lays his Papers, will give him little thanks
for this, for he jeers him rather than defends his Cause. Thus though they are
agreed, and understand one another so far as to Impose upon the world, yet they
cannot (and never will) agree to speak Truth. And indeed this Worthy Writer
foresignified something of this nature. He is a boding sort of man, you may
perceive, for thus he speaks in his Humble Dedicatory to the Vindicator, If I
have mistaken your sense, or used weak reasonings in your defense (and behold!
here he does both) I crave your pardon. And so you may, and I will tell you for
your comfort, he will soon forgive you, for he knows that your heart is right,
i. e. for the Good Cause, and therefore a little Mistaking of him out of
weakness is pardonable.

Then he hales in Mr. Chillingworth by head and shoulders, p. 40. pronouncing
him very definitively the ablest defender of the Religion of Protestants that
the Church ever had; which is too high a Character for him, though he was a
person of Great Parts and Learning. Why must he be said to be the Ablest
Defender when we can name so many Eminent Writers in other Countries that have
performed this task? Or, if he means the Church of England, why must he have
the absolute Preference to Others that we can name here, especially that Great
Ornament and Glory of our Church, whom I had occasion to mention before, who
has so Learnedly defended the Religion of Protestants? I, but he writ against
Crellius, and therefore he must not be the Ablest Defender. Again, there is a
reason well known to the world why Mr. Chillingworth has the Pre-eminence in
the opinion of this Writer and his Confederates, but of that at some other time
perhaps. Let us now go on, and see what this Gentleman gets by his producing of
Mr. Chillingworth; and it is no other than this, a plain confutation of the
Vindicator's Project concerning the reducing of Religion to a Point, and no
more. For these are that Worthy Man's words, The Bible, the Bible, I say the
Bible only is the Religion of Protestants. And I say so too, but this Gentleman
and the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity are of another opinion,
for according to them it is not the Bible, but a very Small Portion of it that
is the Religion of Protestants. They acknowledge that Some few Verses in several
Chapters of the Four Evangelists and the Acts are matter of Faith or Religion,
but they do not cry the Bible, the Bible, the Bible, they do not think that All
and Every one of the Fundamental Truths in the Whole Scripture are the
necessary matter of our Belief. Thus I think this Reverend Scribe might have
spared the quoting of Mr. Chillingworth, unless he delights in confuting
himself and his New Convert.

Afterward he nibbles at some other passages in my Discourse, but flies off
into Impertinencies. Only one thing I meet with that is very Remarkable, and I
request the Reader to attend to it. There are (says he) some that-of Deists
have been reconciled to the Christian faith by the Unitarian books, and have
professed much satisfaction therein, p. 42. You may perceive that they are
making of Proselytes as fast as they can, and among the rest some Deists come
in to them, and so (as the Apostle speaks of Seducers and those that are
Seduced, 2 Pet. 2. 20.) the latter end is worse with them than the beginning:
for whereas before they owned a Natural Religion, now they become guilty of
perverting and profaning a Revealed one. They are so far from being reconciled
to the Christian Faith, that they oppose and contradict it, and even defy the
Main Articles of this Religion which is owing to Divine Revelation. Such
Converts as these have no reason to profess much satisfaction in the Unitarian
books, unless Corrupting the Christian says be to be chosen before plain
Theism. To speak the plain truth (and it is the design of these Papers to do
so) and that which every Thinking and Considering Man cannot but discern, the
Socinians are but the Journey men of the Deists, and they are set on work by
them, for these latter hope to compass their Design, which is to impair the
Credit of the Christian Religion and of those Inspired Writings which give us
an account of it, they hope (I say) effectually to compass this design by the
help of such Good Instruments as they find the Socianiz'd Men to be. You see
then what ground this Gentleman has to think that the Deists are Proselytes to
the Unitarians.

Then he proceeds to make a long harangue about the Obscurity of Systematical
Fundamentals, p. 44. etc. but never was poor Creature so bewildred as he is.
Only he happily lights upon the Quakers, p. 44, 45. where it is worth observing
that the man does not know his Friends from his Foes, nor these from them. He
rails against this sort of men (who he says would be counted the only People
of God) and yet it is certain that they are his brethren- Socinians. They
utterly disown the Scripture as the Rule of Faith, he says: and does not our
late Socinian Writer symbolize with them when he declares that the Divine
Truths contained in the Epistles of the Holy Apostles (which are a considerable
part of Scripture) are not the Necessary matter of Faith? He complains that the
Quakers turn the Gospel into an Allegory; but the forementioned Author does
much worse, for he represents the greatest Part of the Gospel-discoveries as
Superfluous and Needless. In giving us the farther Character of the Quakers, he
in lively colors represents the Socinians, for these are his words concerning
them, Retaining still the words wherein the Christian Faith is expressed,
though in an Equivocal Sense, they have made a shift to be reputed generally
Christians. Certainly there could not be a better Pourtraiture of the Racovian
Writers, for it is known that they are crafty and sophistical, and quote
Scripture only to pervert it. They acknowledge Christ to be God, and an
Expiatory Sacrifice, but they mean it Equivocally; they quit the true sense of
Scripture though they retain the words, and by reason of this latter have made
a shift (as this Author speaks) to pass for Christians. These men (whatever
some few English Writers of the Racovian way hold of late) exactly side with
the Quakers in crying down of Water Baptism (for so they both call it in
derision.) In the Grand Point of the Trinity they both concur, i. e. to reject
it, witness W. Pen's Sandy Foundation, by which he means the doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity. In a quibbling manner, wherein he shows both his Ignorance and
Blasphemy, he thus speaks, W. Pen's Sandy Foundation, p. 12.
If God, as the Scriptures testify, has never been declared or believed but
as the HOLY ONE, then it will follow that God is not an HOLY THREE. Neither can
this receive the least prejudice from that frequent, but impertinent
distinction, that he is One in Substance, but Three in Persons or
Subsistencies. To which all Socinus's followers say Amen. The same Gentleman
derides the doctrine of Satisfaction, and scoffingly calls the Asserters of it
Sandy Foundat. ibid.
Satisfactionists: and who knows not that Transylvania agrees here with
Pensylvania? The Man that suffered at Jerusalem is the Socinian as well as the
Quakers Style: And generally as to the main things that relate to our Savior,
they perfectly accord, viz. in making nothing of them. If Quakerism then be no
Christianity, as this our Writer reports it in the same place, then we may with
much more reason conclude that Socinianism is none. By this it appears that
Socinus and Fox are well met, and that they are very Loving Friends. But they
must seem to disagree, as here in this Gentleman's Papers.

Lastly, let us see the wonderful hand of God in suffering this Unthoughtful
Writer to produce a Paper written by a Jesuit in the late Reign, entitled an
Address, etc. And in this Address, he says, he goes about to show that the
Scriptures commonly alleged for the Trinity, admit of another sense. He goes
the same way in the Article of the Incarnation. What! had he not enough of the
Quaker but he must bring in the Jesuit? And must he tell the world that the
Iesuitical Writers take the part of the Socinians? must he publicly give
notice that they both carry on the same work, and jointly conspire to pervert
the Scriptures in order to it? For the credit of the Cause, it had been better
to have placed this under a former head, and to have told the Reader that some
Jesuits (as well as some Deists) are Converts to Socinianism. But he has
blurted it out that Ignatius Loyola and Faustus Socinus were of kin. Surely
this Author must not be employed any more to write in defense of the Cause. He
must be no longer a Double-Column'd Writer: they must look out for a man that
is not so Open-hearted, one that can handle his Weapon with more Cunning, for
this man has stabbed his own Cause.

But because this Writer in the beginning and toward the end of his Papers is
pleased to use some words of Deference and Respect, I will not be backward to
return his Civility in the same kind by letting him know that I suppose him to
be a Person of Ingenuity and Learning (only I wirh he had showed it in his late
Undertaking) and that I would not have made opposition to him in any other
Points but These which are the Foundation, Basis and Groundwork of
Christianity, and the very Life and Soul of our Religion, and therefore none is
to be permitted to treat them irreverently and scoffingly, as he and his
Associates have lately done. But I entertain some hope that this Unsavory Tang
will wear off in time.

And thus I have finished both my Replies to the Gentlemen's Writings against
me: and I have wholly confined my self to these, and not ventured to guess at
their Persons, or make any Reflections of that kind, for that is a thing which
I abhor. Nay, though the Vindicator by his reflecting upon my Degree, p. 24.
and 36. and Calling, p. 36, and before, p. 26, and before that, p. 9. had given
me occasion to enquire into his Quality and Character, yet I purposely forbore
to meddle with any such Considerations. And so as to the Examinator, I could
easily have traced his Person and Station, and offered some Remarks upon
either, but I made it not my business to observe Who they were that wrote, but
what they had written. And it was necessary to do this latter with some Salt
and Keenness, that the levity of their Arguments might be the better exposed,
and that I might in a lawful and innocent way retaliate that Liberty which they
had taken. And indeed the Socinian Gentlemen must show themselves very
Disingenuous (which I will not presume of them) if they be dissatisfied with me
for my Freedom of discourse, when in all their Writings they profess to use it.
And it is plain that they make use of it: for who sees not that Considerations
on the Explications of the doctrine of the Trinity.
they have been very sharp upon some of the most Eminent and Venerable Persons
of our Church? They have handled the late Archbishop and some of his Reverend
Brethren (who in their Writings showed their dislike of the Socinian doctrines)
with no excess of Respect: And they represent them and the whole Clergy as
Mercenary, Timorous, and False hearted: They would persuade the world that the
doctrine of the Trinity is defended by them merely because they are bribed or
forced to it. And others of their Writers have been very severe upon the
Trinitarians in their late Prints. And therefore with good reason some of These
have been free with them again, especially that Worthy Person who undertook the
Defense of the Archbishop and the Bishop of Worcester, and has with great
Vivacity and Sharpness reflected on the Socinian Errors, and with as great
Solidity and Composedness established the contrary Truths, and has not spared
that Socinian Author whom he grapples with, no not in the least. I suppose none
will grudg me that Freedom which this Gentleman and others have taken in their
Replies to the Racovian Writers, especially seeing I have not (as I conceive)
made ill use of it. But of that let the Reader judge.

FINIS.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. John Edwards.
AN Enquiry into several Remakable Texts of the Old and New Testament which
contain some Difficulty in them, with a Probable Resolution of them, in two
Vol. 8o.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books of the
Old and New Testament, with a Continued Illustration of several Difficult Texts
throughout the whole Work. In three Vol. 8o.

Some Thoughts concerning the several Causes and Occasions of Atheism,
especially in the Present Age, with some brief Reflections on Socinianism, and
on a Late Book entitled, The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in
the Scriptures. 8o.

A Demonstration of the Existence and Providence of God from the Contemplation
of the visible Structure of the Greater and the Lesser World. In two Parts. The
first, showing the Excellent Contrivance of the Heavens, Earth, Sea, etc. The
second, the wonderful Formation of the Body of Man.

Socinianism Unmasked: A Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of a Late
Writer's Opinion, concerning the Necessity of only One Article of Christian
Faith, and of his other Assertions in his Late Book Entitled, The
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures, and in his
Vindication of it; with a brief Reply to another (Professed) Socinian Writer.

All sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John Wyat at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard.


