Imprimatur,

Henr. Aldrich VICE-CAN. OXON.
July 10. 1693.
A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST SOCINIANISM: SHOWING The Direct and Plain opposition
between It, and the Religion Revealed by God in the Holy SCRIPTURES. THE FIRST
PART. By JONATH. EDWARDS D. D. and Principal of Jesus Coll. OXON.

The Second Edition.

OXON. Printed at the THEATER for Henry Clements. MDCXCIII*

THE PREFACE.
THO Custom has in some sort made it necessary to entertain the Reader with a
Preface, before he enters upon the perusal of a Book, showing the design, and
the occasion of Writing of it; yet in this case I hope there will be no need,
either to Court his Favor, or Mollify his Displeasure, for undertaking the
Defense of Christianity against the great and dangerous opposers of it. For
this being the common cause in which every man who is called by the name of
Christ, has an Interest, he may I hope without begging pardon, or if he please
without showing any Reason, engage in maintenance of our holy Religion,
embraced by the whole Church of God, as well as by that of which he is a
Member; against all such, who shall either openly oppose, or secretly endeavor
to undermine it.

Here every man is a Soldier, and by his Baptismal Vow, having bin listed
under Christ's Banner, is obliged to fight under it, against all the Enemies of
his Savior; and such are the pernicious Opinions here represented, which carry
in their forehead an open, and declared Hostility, and direct opposition to the
Divinity, and the Cross of Christ. The adversaries of our Holy Religion have
taken the Confidence to publish their Impious Opinions, not only without Leave,
but in Opposition to the just Authority, and the known and standing Laws of
this Nation: they have revived the Opinions, reprinted the Books of some former
Socinian Writers, which had almost bin forgotten, but they have taken care to
refresh our memories; and all this has bin done in defyance to the Government,
as well as in the Face of it.

It has bin as the occasion of trouble to all Good men, so likewise matter of
Wonder and Enquiry to all Considering men, to find the Nation pestered with
such numbers of Socinian Books, which have swarmed all upon a sudden, and have
bin industriously dispersed through all parts of the Kingdom, whereby many weak
and unstable Souls have bin beguiled, and their minds corrupted from the
simplicity which is in Christ.

Who they are, who have bin the secret abettors and promoters of these
Antichristian Doctrines as it is variously discoursed, so I shall not Curiously
Enquire; least by Roaving and uncertain Conjectures, the Innocent may be
mistaken for the Criminals. Only this I think is so evident, that it may be
taken for granted; That since there have bin no considerable numbers of men
formerly, that we know of, who have openly and avowedly professed the Impious
tenants of Socinus; They must have lain lurking under some other outward name
and profession, watching the first and most convenient opportunity to divulge
their Opinions, which for some just and weighty reasons no doubt, they thought
fit for some time to stifle and conceal. I think there are scarce any among us
so foolish as to imagine, that like Cadmus his Offspring (though without doubt
the Old Serpent has had no small hand in this Affair) these men should spring
out of the Ground; or as some have fancyed of Woodcocks, that they have dropped
out of the Clouds among us: it is therefore beyond all doubt, that they have
lain hid and disguised under the denomination of some other Sect or Party, and
Profession.

But among other persons or parties concerned in this Affair, it would be a
Miracle, greater than any of late years pretended to be wrought in France for
the Conversion of the poor Hugonots there, if the Papists should not be engaged
in it: who never as yet have stood by as unconcerned Spectators, when any
mischief was in contrivance against our Church: But have always watched, and
laid hold on the fittest Opportunity, of Sowing and Increasing Divisions among
us; and who have by a late Experiment sufficiently convinced the World, that
they have a much better Knack, at Unsetling and Disturbing our Religion, than
in Establishing and Defending their own.

No question it must afford matter of no small Sport and Entertainment to them,
to find a Generation of Men, or Vipers rather shall I call them? risen up in
their stead, who may though by different methods, at length perfect that design
which they have bin long since projecting; viz. the Ruin of this poor Church,
and the destruction of that Holy and Excellent Religion, which by Gods Right
Hand has bin Established, and hitherto wonderfully preserved among us.

But whatever the Causes have bin of this sudden Appearance of Socinianism, or
whoever were the Authors that have secretly and in masquerade, abetted and
encouraged it; much of which lies as yet in the dark; the pernicious effects of
it have bin, and are, at this day too Visible. The minds of men, as we said
before, throughout the Nation being strangely corrupted; Infidelity and
Skepticism universally prevailing. Some deriding all Religion, which they
either laugh at as the effect of Folly and Superstition, or detest as a mere
Cheat and Contrivance of some Cunning and designing men.

Others profess themselves Enemies to Revealed Religion, speak opprobriously of
the Holy Scriptures, deride the Sacred Penmen of them, and make but a jest of
any thing that is said in vindication of their Authority and Inspiration.

A Third sort seem to own, and profess to believe the Bible, yet oppose, nay
not only so but Ridicule all the Great Mysteries of our Religion; such as are
the Doctrines concerning the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of
God, the Redemtion of the World by the Merit of his Death and Sufferings; the
belief of which have bin hitherto looked upon to be the Badge and Mark whereby
Christians have bin distinguished from Jews and Mahometans.

Lastly, a Fourth sort there are (for you must know there are several Ranks and
Orders of these Enemies of our Religion) who receive the Holy Scriptures as we
do, and Believe, at least they tell us they do so, all the Great Mysteries of
our Faith contained there; but yet at the same time they take care to let us
know, that the belief of these is not necessary. So that whether you are a
Believer or an Infidel in these matters, it makes no great difference;
forasmuch as the Honor of God, the Welfare of Religion, and the Salvation of
your own Soul, is not concerned either one way or other. And if so I am sure no
wise man ought to trouble himself, much less to give others any Trouble about
such Trifling and Inconsiderable Opinions. And these I look upon to be the
greatest and most dangerous of all the forementioned Enemies, forasmuch as by
the Observation of all Ages, it has bin found a much surer and speedier way,
to ruin any cause by betraying than opposing it; and that you may much easier
guard your self from the Open Hostility of a professed Enemy, than from the
Treachery and falsehood of a pretended Friend.

To prevent therefore if it be possible (and I hope it is not too late to
Attempt it) the Growth and Progress of that Infidelity which is to be found in
many; That Coldness and Indifference about the Great and Sacred Mysteries of
our Religion, which is to be observed in others; All which are the blessed
effects of Socinianism; and which seem to have diffused themselves among all
Orders and Ranks of men among us, beyond the Example of former times; It has
bin Judged an advisable course, to show the plain and direct opposition, that
is between the Doctrines of Socinus and those which are revealed by the Spirit
of God in the Holy Scriptures, and especially in the Writings of the New
Testament. And this, among such especially who have not extinguished all Regard
for Religion, may, as it is hoped, be of some good use, to fortify them aaginst
the Infection of these pernicious Errors, which have already spread like a
Gangrene.

Our Writers generally have bin Employed, and that very Commendably, and for
the most part with great success, in vindicating our Holy Religion, from the
Bold and Impudent Cavils of these Heretics; and so have stood upon the
Defensive part. Now it may be thought, for many good Reasons, advisable, to
make an Offensive War upon these Infidels; and to bring it into their own
Territories. That is, that the charge of Unreasonableness and Impiety, which
they with Equal Falsehood and Impudence, have laid at the door of the Christian
Religion; should be retorted upon their New, and dangerous Opinions; which upon
Examination will be found to be Opposite to Piety, Repugnant to plain Reason,
and in the conclusion such as will conduce to the Overthrow of all true
Religion. And to discover this, (which I hope in some measure is done in them)
is the design of these following Papers; viz. That the Religion of Socinus as
opposed to Christianity is both Impious and Absurd. So that fairly to represent
Socinianism will be the best method that we can take to Consute it; and rightly
to state the Controversy, will be the speediest way to put an end to it.

I confess as to the point of Reason, the Socinians have laid such a claim to
it, as if they did intend to Engross and Monopolize that to themselves, which
yet, though in several degrees, is the Right and Inheritance of all mankind. And
for their seize in this, they have so magnified themselves, and have bin
so undecently as well as unjustly magnified by others; that many innocent and
well meaning men have bin afraid to enter the Lists with these Sons of Anak,
these Champions of Infidelity. But I dare venture to assure the Reader, he
needs not fear to encounter these Giants upon the plain square of Reason,
notwithstanding all their Boasts and Brags of it. And I think it may be easily
made out, that in Opposition to some Important Articles of our Faith, upon
pretense of their Repugnance to Reason, they have advanced some other
positions, so contrary to Reason; that when they come to be compared, I believe
it will be found, that there is scarce any thing in Popery, not excepting that
Gross Fulsome Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which contains greater
Absurdities, more opposite to, and incomprehensible by natural Reason.
Particularly what they say concerning the Factitious Divinity of Christ, is by
far more unconceivable then what the Papists aver of the change of the Elements
in the Eucharist. And any man that has abilities to judge of these matters,
will upon enquiry find; that it is less Absurd and Impossible, if there are
Degrees of Absurdity in Contradictions, and of difficulty in things that are
Impossible; that a piece of Bread should be Transubstantiated into Flesh, than
that a man should be Transformed into a God.

In short tho Reason be the Idol of these men, yet I must desire to be excused
if I do not stand in any great awe and admiration of it: and truly for my own
part, I should much rather fear the Malice then the Reason of a Socinian, at
any time. And I am afraid, that if ever these men ( Quod avertat Deus) should
gain strength and numbers among us; they would prove one of the most Cruel and
Sanguinary Sects, that ever yet disturbed the peace of the Church. It is not to
be denied, but that they have in their Writings advanced some parts of
Christian Morality to a great height, and have spoke many and deservedly great
things, concerning forgiveness of injuries and patience under them, in
compliance with the commands, and in Imitation of the Example of our Blessed
Savior: But I should be loath to trust a Socinian for all that; and if we were
forced to make the Trial (tho I hope we are in no danger of the experiment) I
doubt not but we should find, the forgiveness of these Men more Implacable than
the Revenge of others: and that their meekness and moderation would have more
terrible effects, than the rage and fury of the Arians and Donatists, in
ancient times. And that the Reader may not think I utter this without ground,
tho I have a great many, I will at present offer but one reason for my
conjecture, and that is taken from their Boisterous, Impudent, Scurrilous way
of treating the great and adorable mysteries of our Religion; which shows what
usage the professors of them would in all likelihood meet, if they ever had
them in their power.

The Blessed Trinity is by some of them styled Triceps Cerberus, and the
doctrine concerning it they have ascribed to the Invention of the Devil, and
tell us that it was fetched from Hell. Sometimes they will speak very
honorably of our Savior, but at other times, and upon other occasions so
reproachfully of his divine nature, that they treat him worse then either the
Jews or Romans who condemned and Crucified him. And tho they pay Divine Honor
and Adoration to him, yet that does not take off the guilt and impiety of their
Sacrilegious denial, and as far as in them lies Despoiling him of his Divinity;
but herein they transcribe the Copy which the Roman Soldiers before mentioned
set them after his Condemnation by Pilate, who put a Crown upon his head, and a
Scepter into his hand; and yet at the same time they Spit in his Face and
Buffeted him.

One would think that the great and venerable mysteries of our Religion,
entertained by all the Wisest, and Learned, and best Men and Churches, in all
ages ever since Christianity was first planted in the World; tho they had bin
Errors, yet had deserved to be treated with a little more Civility and Respect,
than these men have showed in their Writings: who have wanted something else
besides a good Cause to defend: for they have wanted Modesty and Civility in
the Defense of a very bad one; have wanted the Candor and Ingenuity of a fair
adversary; and have treated the mysteries of our Faith with such a Prostitute,
and Impudent Scurrility; that we cannot well tell what reply to make to them;
except in Imitation of the blessed and meek Archangel Michael, we should
desire God to Interpose in his own quarrel, and to rebuke the Blasphemies of
these men, but to have mercy upon the Blasphemers.

To Conclude all, as there is no danger at present, God be thanked, that we
should be frighted out of our Religion, so I hope we shall not be wheedled out
of it, by any of the Artifices of these seducers who lie in wait to deceive;
nor by any other specious pretenses that they may make; no not by the pretense
of Peace, which I know has sometimes bin offered in their behalf. I confess
peace is a most desirable thing, the blessings that attend it are so great
that we cannot tell how sufficiently to value, and so many, that we can scarce
number them. So that all humble and truly pious Christians should be content to
part with any thing to obtain it.

But I must recall that last word, for upon second thoughts I find it may be too
dearly purchased; as it certainly will be, when bought at the expense either of
Truth or Justice; without which, Peace tho otherwise the most useful and
excellent, would prove one of the most pernicious and mischievous things in the
World. And when I speak of Truth I chiefly and principally mean those
fundamental Truths which are treated of in these following Papers, the Belief
of which have hitherto bin looked upon by most Christians, to be necessary to
our Salvation: and if there be any Truths of that Importance I hope every man
will consider, that tho Peace be much to be desired, yet that it is not
advisable for him to hazard his Salvation to secure it.

When all is done the reputation of being esteemed a Peaceable and moderate man
will stand a man but in little stead when he comes to appear before the
Tribunal of Christ, and there to be charged with the guilt of betraying his
Religion, and at the same time, the Souls of them committed to his charge, to
endless perdition and ruin. In one word, tho Peace be so great a blessing that
a man might be content to lay down his Life, yet no man should lay down his
Soul for the sake of it. And tho a Pious man might in some cases commendably
submit to Death, yet no wise man, nay indeed no man not out of his wits, would
venture upon damnation to Obtain it.

A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST Socinianism.
IN all ages ever since the first planting of a Christian Church in the world,
God for many wise reasons has thought fit to exercise it with various and
different sorts of trials. The Apostles who were immediately commissioned by
Christ, and sent to teach all Nations, and thereby to bring them over to the
belief and obedience of the Gospel, (according to the prediction of their
blessed Master in the 10 th. of Matthew. who had forewarned them of it,) met with
great and violent opposition, and that both from Jew and Gentile, who with an
extraordinary zeal or rather fury, set themselves to oppress and stifle this
new doctrine, if it were possible, at its first appearance, and before it had
gained much ground and footing in the world.

But besides the open force with which the enemies of it endeavored to destroy
the Christian doctrine, the Apostles and other Ministers of it, met with
another and more dangerous opposition from some false brethren, who did not
aim so much at the destruction of the Christian faith, as by some undue
mixtures to corrupt the purity of it. Such were the Judaizing Christians, who
tho they embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, yet still they retained a weighty
affection for their old Religion and the law of Moses, to the observance of
which they thought themselves under an indispensable obligation, and not only
so, but would oblige all other Converts to the like observance; and their zeal
in this matter occasioned no small trouble to the Apostles, and disturbance to
the Churches, where they first planted the Christian faith. See Acts 15. and 5.
Gal. And tho this was a matter of no small concern, and might in the conclusion
have proved of dangerous consequence, yet it was not considerable in a manner,
if compared with many other execrable opinions and practices, which began very
early to be introduced into the Church, by Ebion and Cerinthus, Menander,
Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates. Succeeded afterward by Valentinus and
Marcus, Marcion, and Hermogenes, and a long train of Heretics shall I call
them? or Hogoblins; for so I think they might well be styled, if we consider
either the darkness and ignorance of all religious matters with which they were
encompassed, or the wild pranks which they played, to the great disturbance of
all good men; who were all descended from that son of perdition Simon Magus,
who was their Patriarch and Ringleader. It were a difficult task to muster up
the names, but almost an endless attempt to reckon the senseless and
extravagant opinions of these Heretics; by reason of whose pernicious ways,
the way of truth was evil spoken of. For many of the objections of the Heathens
against Christianity, tho all of them were false, yet were taken from the
execrable opinions and practices of these lewd miscreants, who thereby brought
no small disgrace upon the Christian Religion, and put no small stop to the
growth and propagation of it. But not to prosecute this matter any farther, if
we descend a little lower, we shall find that God had no sooner dissipated the
storm that hung over the Christian Church for some Centuries; and put a stop to
the effusion of any more of that blood, (which without any distinction of Age
or Sex, was spilt like water under the ten famous persecutions) by the
advancement of Constantine to the Empire; but the devil betakes himself to new
shifts: who finding his former methods of cruelty so signally baffled by the
patience and constancy of the Martyrs, he begins to play a new, or rather to
revive his old game, and since he cannot destroy the professors of
Christianity, he will endeavor to undermine their Religion. He had indeed made
a vigorous effort, to extinguish both the name and memory of the Christian
Religion, and to have tore up both the faith and the believers quite by the
very roots; but herein he was disappointed, and therefore he endeavors to
compass that by stratagem, which he cannot effect by storm; and in this method
he finds greater success than in the former. For being baffled as we said
before, in his attempts upon the disciples of Christ, he attacks the doctrine
which they embraced: and here Inimicus homo, the enemy came and sowed tares
among the Wheat; hoping thereby to choke the word, which now he despaired to
extirpate. And herein he found fit instruments for the execution of his design;
for taking advantage of the ambition and curiosity, the discontent and revenge,
and other disorderly passions of Arius, Photinus, Nestorius, Eutyches and
others, he soon prevailed with them to assist him in the project which he had
laid, for corrupting the doctrine and thereby disturbing the peace of the
Church. For they presently broached many dangerous opinions, whereby they did
either plainly deny, or some other way pervert the doctrines then generally
entertained by the whole Church, concerning the natures and the person of the
Son of God.

But these errors having long since bin buried in the Western Church, and lay
forgotten in a manner with their Authors, were again unhappily revived at the
beginning of the Reformation, by the endeavors chiefly of some Polanders and
Italians in the last age, and among them principally of Faustus Socinus; who
having gathered up the dangerous errors of Paulus Samosatenus and Photinus
chiefly, against the divinity of Christ, he put them together in one body,
together with those of Pelagius in the point of original sin, and those other
doctrines which are supposed to have a necessary dependence upon it.

And herein Socinus seems chiefly to have chosen Pelagius for his pattern. For
the other Heretics, I mean Arius, Photinus, and Macedonius being content with
the denial of those fundamental doctrines, concerning the divinity of the Son
and the Holy Ghost, or with their particular Errors about the natures and
person of Christ, as Nestorius and Eutyches; they did not attend to, or at
least did not draw out those doctrines into all their pernicious consequences,
which might when clearly understood, overthrow all the other parts of the
Christian doctrine. But Pelagius gave us a systeme of his Divinity, and drew
out his Errors into a greater length, in opposition to several important parts
and branches of our Religion; chiefly that which concerned the doctrine of
Original sin, which naturally lead him into those other dangerous mistakes,
which did by consequence overthrow the necessity of the satisfaction made by
Christ, and the redemption of the world by the merit of his death and
sufferings, as the Fathers, and particularly St. Austin directly charge him.
For he was master of reason enough to consider where it was that his first
error would naturally lead him, and he was content to follow it, and thereby
fell into that Labyrinth of errors, from which with all his skill and sophistry
he could not disentangle himself; for when pressed with the arguments of his
adversaries, and the authority and tradition of the Catholic Church; tho he
could and did find as many shifts and tricks as any other, to escape the force
and conviction of truth; yet his former and fundamental error in denying the
imputation of Adam's sin, and the original guilt and stain of our natures
contracted thereby, hung like a dead weight about him, and sunk him down into
those impious opinions which he broached concerning the grace of God, and the
liberty and freedom of man's will in religious matters in opposition to that
Grace; concerning the nature and efficacy of the Sacrament of Baptism, the
merit of good works and the justification of a sinner, the nature of Gods law
and the possibility of raising to a state of perfection in this life, by
yielding a perfect obedience to it, etc. all which having been picked up by
Socinus, together with what was delivered by the other Heretics, against the
divinity of the Son of God, and the Holy Ghost, he has at length given us the
most perfect systeme of Heresies, in opposition to the doctrine of the Gospel,
in almost all the parts and branches of it, that ever was ushered into the
world. And indeed to give him his due, tho in point of time and standing he was
inferior, yet in point of skill and management, that is, in the art of Heresy,
he was superior to all that went before him, most of whom were but fools and
^unglers in comparison. For many of the ancient Heretics had several
extravagant and incoherent notions, which had no more connection between one
another, then the parts of a rope of sand: so that like a company of mad and
hair-brained people, they attacked the Christian Religion with great fury, but
it was at random and without skill; flinging about their mad opinions like
wildfire, with which indeed they did a great deal of mischief, but it was at
all adventures, without order, and as one would imagine, without any certain
aim. But Socinus comes more gravely and leasurely to work, and what M. Cato
said in another case of Julius Caesar, 2 1 Ad evertendam Rempublicam sobrium
accessisse. Suet. in Jul. Caes.
may be applied to him, Sobrius accessit ad perdendam religionem. LIke a man
that had his wits, tho, as many think, not the fear of God about him, he comes
more soberly and with greater deliberation to destroy the Christian Religion:
he puts his opinions into better order, his errors are better united, and have
as far as the nature of error would allow, for the most part, a good
correspondence between one another: like a wary and well disciplined Captain,
he puts his arguments into good array, levels his Batteries against the great
mysteries of our Religion, and chiefly against the eternal Divinity of the Son
of God: as well knowing that if he can succeed in his attempt upon that, he may
promise himself an easy and cheap victory over all the rest of our Religion;
and therefore having, as he thinks, effectually overthrown that main and
fundamental Article of it concerning the ever blessed Trinity, he is resolved
to follow his blow, and to pursue his imaginary conquest in that point, to the
overthrow of all the other parts of the Christian doctrine. He saw where Arius,
Photinus, Nestorius, etc. were wanting, who having, as was said before,
contented themselves with their particular errors concerning the natures and
person of Christ, as persons who thought they had done mischief enough, they
seemed content with what they had done, and went no farther. But Socinus in
imitation of his beloved loved Pelagius, enlarged our prospect into his
Religion, and from the principles which he laid down, he drew out his
conclusions to a greater length: for having denied the Trinity, and
particularly the eternal divinity of our Savior, with it he could not avoid
denying his satisfaction, and the redemption of the world by the merit of his
death and sufferings; having disowned the personality of the Holy Ghost, the
necessity of his grace, and the efficacy of his operations upon the minds of
men, must at the same time fall to the ground. Together with these he has
published many dangerous errors concerning the nature and attributes of God;
concerning his prescience and providence in the government of the world;
concerning the creation of man and the fall of Adam, and that corruption of our
natures which is the consequence of it; concerning justification, and faith
which is the means of obtaining it; concerning the Church, its nature and the
notes whereby it may be distinguished from all other societies; concerning the
ministry and the persons to whom Christ has committed the care and government
of his Church; their distinction and authority to preach the Gospel, and to
exercise discipline in it; concerning the Sacraments and the end of their
institution, and particularly concerning the nature and efficacy of Baptism and
the Lords Supper; lastly, concerning a future state and the condition of men
after this Life. To which may be added some other doctrines, which do not seem
to have any connection with the former, but yet are of dangerous consequence to
the peace and welfare of all civil Societies: those I mean which he has
advanced about the power and authority of the Civil Magistrate, the Lawfulness
of War and Oaths in a Christian Commonwealth, which have as mischievous an
influence upon the order and peace of States and Kingdoms, as his other
opinions have upon Religion.

So that Socinus having observed what was wanting in the former Heretics to
make their attempts entirely successful against the Christian Religion; being
engaged in the same design, but in order to make it more effectual, he wisely
resolved to correct what he thought was amiss in them: wherefore laying aside
what was more gross and absurd in the wilder and more extravagnt opinions of
the ancient Heretics, and supplying the defects of the more subtle and
refined who came afterward; he and his followers have at length given us a
body of their divinity, more complete in its kind then ever the world was
blessed with before their time. Not but that in spite of all their art and
skill, such being the fate and folly of error, they cannot avoid, especially in
the defense and maintenance of their opinions, falling into many and those very
plain contradictions. Upon the whole matter I think it may be reasonably
doubted whether Socinus, any more than that grand Impostor Mahomet, may be
properly called a Heretic, as being the Founder of a new Religion, rather than
the Author of a new name and sect among Christians. For as the Alcoran of the
former, is, as we are told, a fardel of errors and absurdities arising from the
impure mixture of Christianity, Judaism, and Paganism, together with some idle
and extravagant notions of his own; so the doctrine of Socinus, seems to be a
composition of the errors of Arius, Photinus, and Pelagius, etc. together with
some additions of his own, not indeed so seemingly absurd, as those of Mahomet,
but, I am afraid, no less dangerous to the Christian religion; of which he has
retained only the name together with the empty sound of the words; but with
such false glosses, such forced and malicious interpretations, as have quite
destroyed the true notion, as the whole design of the Gospel: in opposition to
which he has given us a kind of natural and new Religion, not such as the
spirit of God has revealed in his word, but such as his own carnal reason
suggested to him, in opposition to that revelation. And that this may not be
looked upon to be an uncharitable because a groundless charge; I shall lay
before the reader a scheme of the religion revealed by God in Holy Scripture,
and particularly that published by Christ and his Apostles in the writings of
the New Testament, and which has bin embraced by all sound Christians in all
ages of the Church, from the first planting of one in the world, to this day,
together with another of the new, or newly revived opinions of the Socinians:
that by comparing of both, he may be able to make a judgment of what is here
suggested, which upon examination I hope he will find to be agreeable to truth,
and not contrary to charity. And first, as it is fit, we shall begin with the
great object of our religion, Almighty God: in the knowledge and worship of
whom, together with an obedience to his commands, consists the entire nature of
religion. And here upon enquiry I believe we shall find, that what the
Scriptures have revealed concerning the nature of God, is widely different from
the account which Socinus and his disciples give us of him.

As to what concerns the nature of God, the Scriptures propose him to be
considered two ways by us. 1. Absolutely in his glorious and essential
attributes, or 2 ly, Relatively in the great and adorable mystery of the ever
blessed Trinity.

First, if we consider God in his Attributes, we shall find that the first
great, and, if I may so call it, fundamental attribute which the Scriptures
reveal, and indeed natural reason dictates concerning him, is the unity of the
Godhead, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.
39. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me. 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.
For tho there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, etc. But
to us there is but one God the Father of whom are all things. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and man, etc.

Here undoubtedly it will be said that the Socinians are beyond all suspicion
orthodox, all their studies and labors being employed in asserting and
vindicating the unity of the Godhead in opposition to the doctrine of the
Trinity, which according to their apprehensions must infer a plurality of Gods.
But for all their boasts concerning this matter, and assuming to themselves
upon that score the name of Unitarians, we must not be too hasty in acquitting
them from the imputation of Polytheism; for tho they deny the eternal
generation and divinity of Christ, and say that he had no existence before his
being formed in the womb of the Virgin, and appearance in the world; and that
the being which he then had was purely humane: yet after his resurrection from
the grave, and his ascension into heaven, they say that God the Father as the
reward of his obedience and sufferings, exalted him to the honor and dignity
of a God; not indeed to be the supreme and eternal God, but however deus verus,
a true God, distinct and separate from his Father; and Socinus takes it ill of
his adversaries, that they should charge him with denying Christ to be God,
Quasi nos Christum verum deum esse negamus, quod tamen a nobis non sit, Socin.
oper. Tom. 2. p. 645.
, and complains against them that will not be brought to confess and worship
him Ut pro Deo ac Domino suo venerentur, p. 631.
, for their Lord and God, who was once a weak and infirm man: and herein he
says the power and goodness of God was discovered, and his admirable wisdom
displayed, in extolling and deifying this man, beyond what we can imagine In eo
homine supra quam dici potest extollendo and deificando, Ibid.


And to the objection that might be made against this opinion, as that which
did unavoidably infer a plurality of Gods, Wolzogenius will tell you, that if
by two Gods you mean one of whom are all things and we in him, and one by whom
are all things and we by him, we are so far says he, from being ashamed of
worshipping two such Gods, that we rather glory in it Ut potius id gloriae
nobis and laudi ducamus, Wolzogen. Prolegom. in Evangel. Johannis cap. 8. de
vera divinitate Christi.
But if it shall be farther said, that to do them right, they acknowledge but
one supreme God by nature, and that Christ is only a God by Appointment and
Office, not, natus but factus, not born but made, and deifyed after his
ascension, by a communication of the divine power, wisdom and goodness to him:

I Answer that this is so far from abating, that it rather increases the
difficulty, and makes the Socinian notion both absurd and impious, as may be
shown more at large hereafter, when we come to lay the charge of Idolatry at
their door. Indeed one would think it should be a debasing of the name and
honor that is due to God, to give either of them to any but him that is so
from all eternity; the same Wolzogenius will tell you, you may if you please,
reproach them for so doing, but he values it not a rush, nos non erubescimus,
we are not ashamed to own that we worship Deum factum vel factitium, a made
God; not made indeed by a Goldsmith or Engraver, ab aliquo sculptore vel
aurifabro, but they acknowledge with St. Peter Acts 2. 36. that God has made
Jesus who was crucified Lord and Christ, that is, says he, deum eximium
fecerit, has made him a great and eminent God. Ibid.

If this be not enough, if you please to consult Smalcius, he will give you all
the satisfaction that you can possibly desire further in this matter. For
first, he will tell you, that whereas the Scriptures assure us that there is
but one only true God, yet that must be taken sano sensu; not as if there were
no other true God besides God the Father, but that there is none that is God;
eodem prorsus modo, just in the same manner as he is Quod vero Deus ille unus
qui pater est, solus verus dicitur, id non ideo fieri dicimus quod nemo alius
praeter Patrem deus verus sit, sed quia nemo alius praeter Patrem, isto prorsus
modo deus verus sit, quo ille est. Small. Exam. Cent. Err. p. 4.
. For otherwise the thing is certain and past all doubt, that there are more
true Gods then one; and let the Inspired writers be never so positive, yet he
and his friends can and will with equal confidence advance this contrary
position, that the true God is not one only God Certissimum est quod non unus
tantum verus Deus sit. Ibid.
. Nay it is not an indifferent matter, but a truth which they firmly believe
and earnestly contend for Contendimus and firmissime docemus esse plures Deos
praeter unum. Eosque veros. Refut. Smigl. de Novis Monst. Nov. Ar. p. 14.
. And therefore pronounce it without any haesitation, that there are more true
Gods then one.

And indeed they have reason to contend earnestly for this opinion, if it be
true what he says in the same place, that to acknowledge and confess, and
adore one only chief and supreme God, is purely Judaical, and a renunciation of
the Christian Religion Tantum unum summum deum agnoscere unum tantum natura
Deum Colere, unum tantum Independentem Deum confiteri, esse Judaicum quiddam,
and abnegationem Christianae Religionis. Ibid. p. 26.
. Here he speaks as home to the point as you can possibly desire, and it is
enough in all conscience. Thus whereas the Scriptures tell us there is but one
God, the Socinians say there are two; one God by nature, another by grace, one
Supreme, another Inferior, one Greater, another Lesser, one Elder and eternal,
the other a junior and modern God: and this by Socinus is made the great
mystery of the Christian Religion, greater indeed if true, and more
incomprehensible than any other, or than all the other stupendous and adorable
mysteries of our Faith put together.

Now as the Socinians say there are two Gods; so if you believe Curcellaeus, he
will confidently tell you there are three, who tho he be no Socinian, yet he
agrees perfectly with them in almost all their other Errors, except that which
concerns the doctrine of the Trinity, where he has a peculiar notion of his
own, distinct as he tells you both from Arius and Socinus: for he makes the Son
and Holy Ghost to have a divine nature communicated to them from all eternity,
but yet such that is different in each of them, so that they are thee distinct
divine beings. And to the objection made by Maresius, that this notion must
inevitably imply that there are three Gods; he Answers, that if by three Gods,
be meant three specifically distinguished from each other, he disowns any such
distinction between the persons of the Trinity; but if by three, by meant three
persons agreeing in the same common nature, yet numerically distinguished in
each of them, it is that which he owns and earnestly contends for; that the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are as much three Gods as Peter, Paul, and John,
agreeing in the same common nature are three distinct men. And if you believe
him, he will tell you the Ancients were not afraid of the imputation of
Polytheism, in this sense; and to think of the same individual nature being
communicated to three persons, was a notion that never entered into the heads
of any of the Fathers, in their disputes against the Arians, as being against
both Reason and Religion. Curcell. Dissert. prima de vocibus Trinit. etc. cap.
105. and deinceps. And Limburg, who publishes and recommends him to the world,
I suppose is of the same opinion.

The 2 d Attribute which the Scriptures ascribe to God, is his immensity and
omnipresence, assuring us that his nature is infinite, and consequently that it
cannot be confined to any place, or circumscribed within any limits. Tho he is
peculiarly and eminently resident in Heaven, yet Solomon will tell us that
Heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 King. 8. 27. and the
Psalmist puts the question, Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if
I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there also. Ps. 139. 7, 8. So St.
Stephen, Act. 7. 48. the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands,
that is, is not confined within those limits, as many of the Heathens thought
their Gods were, for, as says the Prophet, heaven is my Throne, and the earth
is my footstool. And indeed not only the infinite nature of God, but the belief
of his providence necessarily supposes it. Upon which account we are said in
him to live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28. forasmuch as he is
above all, and through all, and in all. Ephesians. 4. 6.

Now in opposition to this important Truth, which is not only revealed in
Scripture, but dictated by the light of nature, and acknowledged upon that
score to be such, by all sober Heathens, as well as by sound Christians; the
Socinians will tell you, that God is not infinite in his Essence, or Nature,
but that he is so confined to the Heavens, as not to be substantially present
elsewhere, or not to fill any places out of those limits. And therefore when
urged with those places of Scripture, which say that God fills Heaven and
Earth, and that he is every where present, Jer. 23. 24. Ps. 139. They answer,
that they must be Interpreted, only with respect to the virtue, power, and
operations of God, which extend to the remotest places where he is not
essentially present Ea verba, speaking of those words Jer. 23. 23. [ Am I a God
at hand, and not a God afar off?] Suadere videntur, ipsius Dei substantiam non
ubique pariter praesentem esse, and sic eam non esse immensam sive infinitam,
quamvis ubique tamen sua virtute and providentia sit ipse Deus praesens. Socin.
de Dei essentiae Cognitione p. 68. vid. Crellium, cap. 27. de Dei Immensitate
and Omnipraesentia.
. As the Sun, which is the Instance some of them give us to illustrate this
matter, is confined to the Heavens, and indeed takes up but a small room there
in comparison, yet may be said to be, ubique terrarum, because he diffuses his
Light, Heat, and other influences, to the remotest parts of the Earth. But of
this Attribute more hereafter.

The 3. Attribute ascribed to God in Scripture, is his omniscience, whereby he
knows all things past, present, and to come, which knowledge of his extends it
self not only to all things and persons, but likewise to all their actions and
the effects of them, and together with them views the secret springs and
principles of those actions, discerning the designs and contrivances of men,
and all the thoughts and intents of the heart, There being no creature that is
not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open to the eyes of him
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13.

What our Translation renders open, is more Emphatically expressed in the
Greek, (...), all things are, as it were, diffected and anatomized, the very
inside of all things are laid open to his view. What is lodged in the darkest
corners and deepest recesses of the Soul, cannot be hid from his sight, whose
eyes are in every place, like a flame of fire, beholding the evil and the good.
Nay this knowledge is of so vast an extent, as to comprehend within its mighty
compass, not only things past and present, but likewise all things to come; for
his duration being commensurate to all the parts of time, he does not measure
things as we do, by first and last, but all things present and to come, are
open to him at one view, with whom a thousand years are but as one day, and one
day as a thousand years, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Nay not only those things which are
properly future with respect to any necessary causes of their production, but
even those which are most contingent, as depending upon the spontaneous motion
of men's free will; all such actions, together with the most casual events, as
well as remote consequences of them, are the objects of Gods knowledge, who
does not only discern our Intentions and designs whilst they are in fieri, in
the time of their hatching and framing in the Soul, but antecedently, long
before the mind comes to any determination, he understands our thoughts afar
of, Ps. 139. 2.

And of this besides the plain declarations of Scripture, the predictions that
have bin made by God of the most contingent and fortuitous events are an
Argument that one would think should place this truth beyond all contradiction:
It being that which God Almighty made choice of, to vindicate the honor of his
divine nature and perfections, in opposition to the vain claim that was laid to
them by the dull Idols of the heathens, and their more stupid worshippers,
Esaias. 41. 22. Let them bring forth and show us what shall happen, let them show
the former things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter
end of them, and declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to
come hereafter that we may know that you are God.

It is true this knowledge of God as it extends to things to come, is too
wonderful for us, we cannot attain to it: and therefore if we think to measure
his knowledge by our own shallow conception of things, we engage in a task more
absurd and ridiculous, than if we should attempt to take up the waters of the
Ocean and enclose them in the hollow of our hand.

And of this absurdity are the Socinians guilty. who will by no means be
brought to acknowledge this great truth; for tho when you come to discourse
with them upon this subject, they will tell you, they allow God to be
omniscient, and that he knows all things; yet you must not be too hasty in
taking an advantage of that concession. You must give them leave to explain
themselves; God knows all things, That Is true, but with this limitation,
quatenus sunt scibilia, as far as they are capable of being known. But future
contingencies must be excluded out of that number, having no being either in
themselves, or in any certain or necessary causes of their production; and
therefore are no more the object of any, even divine knowledge, then darkness
is the object of sight: your eyes may as soon be dazzled with one, as your
understandings be affected or receive any Impression from the other.

For Gods knowledge, say they, is agreeable to the nature of the things known;
which may in some sense be true, but is a truth ill applied by them, when they
tell us, that God knows things that are certain, as such that shall come to
pass; things that are likely, he considers as such that may probably come to
pass; things that are barely possible, as depending upon the arbitrary, and
therefore uncertain determinations of men's free will, he knows as possible,
that is, they may or may not come to pass, but whether of these two shall
happen, that is still a secret even to God himself; whose divine knowledge
cannot arrive to the knowledge of such future contingencies, of which,
according to the known maxim, there can be no certain or determinate truth or
falsehood.

Perhaps you will say this maxim is true, with respect to second causes, and
any created knowledge, but not with respect to the knowledge of God, to whom
the most casual events are present, and therefore certain; for as much as he
foresees which way men will freely determine their own choice, either in
acting, or forbearing to act, in doing this, or doing the contrary. And without
this prescience we cannot well imagine how God should be able to govern the
world, and particularly Angels and Men, in whose actions and the event of them,
his own glory is so eminently concerned.

The Socinians will tell you all this is a great mistake, and that such a
notion of Gods knowledge is so far from being necessary to his providence, that
it is derogatory to the freedom of men's will, and thereby leads to the
dishonor of God, and the overthrow of all Religion, which Crellius endeavors
at large to prove Lib. de Natura Dei cap. 24. de Sapientia Dei.

And after he has taken some pains to show that this omniscience is opposite
to reason, he comes to show its repugnance, as he thinks, to the plain
declarations of Scripture, and what he and his Master say upon this head, and
upon that which follows, it will be worth our while a little to enlarge upon,
forasmuch as it will help to give us a true Idaea of Socinianism, which tends
plainly to the dishonor of God, and in the conclusion to the overthrow of all
natural as well as revealed Religion.

Now the places of Scripture which he quotes to this purpose, are those which
speak of Gods waiting for the amendment and repentance of sinners, as he does
in that remarkable manner, Esaias 5. 4. What could I have done more for my
vineyard, that I have not already done to it; and yet when I expected it should
bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes? and v. 7. When he looked for
judgment, behold oppression; for righteousness behold a cry Quo enim pacto
potest quispiam dici id expectare, quod non eventurum planissime intelligit,
imo jam reipsa videt, Ibid.
: How says he could it be said either with propriety or truth, that if God had
foreseen their obstinacy, he could have waited and hoped for their amendment.
He farther refers us to two other places, to Genesis 18. 21. Concerning Sodom, and
to that concerning Abram Gen 22. 12. this is certain says he, Deum novum
quoddam and insigne experimentum, illic quidem impietatis Sodomicae videre
voluisse, hic vero pietatis Abrahamicae vidisse, quod antequam fieret, plane
certum and exploratum non erat.
, That God here by a new and an extraordinary experiment, made a discovery of
the faith and piety of Abraham, which he was not certain of before he made this
trial of it: And of the execrable Impieties of the Sodomites, which he would
scarce believe they could be guilty of, till he came down from Heaven on
purpose, and made as it were his own eyes the witnesses of the truth and
certainty of those matters.

For a further confirmation of his opinion, he cites those places of Scripture
where God is said to tempt Abraham, that is, to make a trial of his obedience,
Genesis 22. 1. and so those other Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Judges 2. 21. where God is said to
have lead the Children of Israel in the wilderness forth years, to prove them,
and to know what was in their hearts, and whether they would keep his
commandments or no: and to have left of the Canaanites in the land, declaring
his resolution not to drive them out thence, that he might prove Israel,
whether they would keep the ways of the Lord as their Fathers did or no. From
all which he concludes that he must be pertinacissimus, extremely obstinate
that should oppose his opinion, which if you believe him Non modo Evidentissima
and plane cogente ratione nititur, sed and sacrarum literarum autoritate
stabilitur.
, is supported not only by the evidence and strength of reason, but by the
Authority of Holy Scripture Crell. Ibid.
.

What Crellius here says against Gods prescience, he learned from his Master
Socin. Praelect. Theol. Cap. 8. p. 585. Where the Master goes farther then the
Scholar in aggravating the inconveniences that must attend the notion of
prescience; for from hence says he it must follow, that many things are
ascribed to God in Scripture either falsely, or else must suppose him guilty of
such imprudence Quae ne in hominem cadere potest, nisi plane dementem. Ibid.
, which we cannot imagine any man could be liable to, except he were stark mad.
And then quotes the places before cited by Crellius, and to them adds Numb. 14.
12. etc. where God swear that the Israelites should not enter into the Land of
Canaan, which yet he swear to their forefathers he would give them, and he did
once really intend to put them in possession of it, but their murmurings and
rebellions caused him to alter his resolution.

Now if God had foreseen the disobedience and impieties of the Children of
Israel which moved him to change his purpose concerning them, in promising to
bring them into the Land of Canaan, and confirming that promise with an oath;
he must have acted, says this Bold man, so, as we cannot suppose any man to
have acted, that was not quite out of his wits Quis ex hominibus it a amens
est, ut juret se aliquid facturum, quod se facturum minime esse jam probe
noverit. Ibid.
. But now against all this, the foretelling of future events, even such as are
most contingent, as depending upon the entire freedom of men's wills; and the
numerous as well as plain predictions of these matters which stand upon record
in the book of God, one would think should be an unanswerable objection. And it
seems it was so with Episcopius, who though he agrees too well with Socinus in
many of his other loose and dangerous notions concerning the nature and
attributes of God, yet here he leaves him, and declares himself of a contrary
Opinion, being chiefly induced thereunto from this Argument of predictions.

But yet to mollify the matter; and to give as little offense as might be, to a
party whose favor he courted, he tells them and us Lib. 4. Inst. Th. cap. 18.
, that it was but a small matter about which they differed, which should break
no squares between friends; for tho he affirmed, and they denied, yet the Inter
Eruditissimos Theologos Lis adhuc sub judice est. Ibid.
matter of the dispute was purely problematical, which had divided the opinions
of the most learned Divines, but never to that day had received any
determination; Vixcredo millesimum Christianum dari qui scientiam hujus rei
habeat.
That there was not one Christian in a thousand had any knowledge of it; in
short, Absque hujus scientia, religio cultusque divini numinis apud innumeros
hominum Myriadas sartus tectus constat. Idem ibid.
that it was so trifling and inconsiderable a matter, that neither Religion nor
the worship of God was at all concerned in it. But what Episcopius could not
do, Socinus has done, or at least has attempted the doing of it; viz. the
reconciling the truth of Gods predictions with the denial of his prescience,
and it is worth our while to hear what he says upon this occasion.

1. Then, sometimes Gods predictions are no more then his warnings, Potius
monet quam praedicit, Socin. prael. Th. cap. 10. God dealing with men, as men
sometimes deal with children, telling them that they will do such and such ill
actions, to deterr and shame them from so doing, Solemus nos cum puerum ab
aliquo errore committendo deterrere volumus, etc. Ibid.

2. God foretells some actions, and particularly some wicked actions, not as if
he knew they would certainly be committed by evil men, Quia ea certissime
futura nosset, sed quia sic plane verisimile erat, Ibid. but because it was
very likely they should be so: that is, what we call a prediction, and what the
Scriptures without any limitation deliver as such, Socinus accounts but a
conjecture, that is a probable guess, of what may likely come to pass; But what
may come to pass, may likewise not come to pass, and so for all their
confidence, the inspired writers, and what we cannot think of without horror,
the Holy Spirit that directed them might be mistaken. But forasmuch as these
two former Answers may serve for some predictions, but cannot give a reasonable
Enquirer just satisfaction as to others, which are so plain that the force of
them cannot be thus eluded:

Therefore once for all to put an end to this objection, and you may well
imagine he was hard pressed, before he would betake himself to this last, and
in him a desperate shift; he is forced to take sanctuary at those very decrees
of God, which at other times he opposes with all his might: like a Malefactor
when close pursued, and finding no other way of escape, he flies for protection
to those very Altars, which at other times he has so often profaned by his
crimes.

For says Socinus, the things which God foresees, are either good or evil; if
good, he may absolutely decree what is so Si testimonium loquitur de bonis
operibus certo praevisis, sine dubio Deus ipse decrevit. Socit. Prael. Th. cap.
10. p. 549.
, and make that necessary otherwise would be but indifferent: nay he may impose
a necessity upon the Wills of men, and make them to do and choose what is good
Crell. cap. 24. de sap. Dei.
. Now this is downright Calvinism, and if you had a mind to believe it to be
true, yet the Socinians themselves, and the Remonstrants their friends, will
furnish you with such Objections against the belief of it, that to them at
least they must be unanswerable. For it is a known and an avowed Principle
among them both, First that where there is necessity, there is no religion; and
consequently neither good nor evil Hoc est pessundare religionem, quae nulla
proprie est ubi est necessitas. Smalc. contra Smigl. cap. 2.
. If our actions proceed not from freedom, they lose their nature, and may be
any thing else, but cannot be virtue and vice, forasmuch as necessity takes way
the distinction of actions good and bad. Crell. cap. 24. de sapientia Dei p.
204. Ubi talis necessitas est, nec ullum verum peccatum est, nec meritum
poenae. Ubicunque necessitas dominatur ibi religioni non est locus. Examen.
censurae cap. 7. p. 82. So say the Remonstrants.
.

2. That Freedom and Necessity are so opposite one to another, that Omnipotence
it self cannot reconcile them, forasmuch as they are plain contradictions, and
terms that destroy each other Quod necesse est, hominis libertatem a se penitus
excludit. Socin. Prael. Th. cap. 8. Arbitrium libertatem in se continet quam si
demas, arbitrium esse desinet. Crell. de volunt. Dei cap. 21. p. 139. Qui
necessario vult and agit, is libero arbitrio praeditus non est, Id. cap. 24. de
sap. Dei. p. 206.
. That necessity robs you not only of your freedom but of your will itself, to
which freedom is so necessary, that without it it is no will, it being an
essential property of it, proprium quarto modo; and to say that the Will can
subsist without its property, that is it is essential liberty, is absurditate
ipsa absurdius Exam. Censurae Conf. Remonst. cap. 6. p. 76.
. Now let us put both these things together: there is no Religion, consequently
neither Good nor Evil, Virtue nor Vice, where there is necessity; and yet nihil
prohibet, says Crell. nothing, consequently neither religion, nor the nature
of good and evil hinders, but that God may absolutely decree things good to be
done Nihil prohibet quin Deus simpliciter bona fieri decernat. Crell. de sap.
Dei p. 210.
, and decree them so as to become necessary by virtue of that decree.

Again, the Will cannot be necessitated in any of its actions, forasmuch as
this would destroy its freedom, which is a fundamental radical property of it,
and cannot be separated from it without destroying the Will itself: And yet God
can impose a necessity upon the wills of men of choosing this thing or another
Potest necessitatem homini imponere hoc vel illud volendi. Ibid.
: and Socinus will tell you, that God usually leaves the wills of men to their
freedom, except it be when the judgments require him to lay them under a
necessity Deus voluntatem liberam esse sinit, nisi quando ut ei necessitatem
afferat, ejus judicia requirant. Socin. Praelect. Th. cap. 7. p. 544.
. Now how shall we reconcile these sayings, which to us poor Christians seem to
be plain contradictions, and therefore impossible to be true. But Socinus is
not only a great admirer of reason, but a great master of it too; and therefore
by the help of a distinction, he doubts not but to bring himself fairly off;
for in the forementioned place, having in order to give an account of some of
the predictions of Scripture, bin forced to bring in the Decrees of God into
his assistance, which could not, one would think, but entrench upon the freedom
of man's will, by making all actions subject to these Decrees necessary; he
gravely tells us, and we are beholding to him for the discovery; That
notwithstanding his Decrees, God has left man entirely to his liberty; for
besides the direction and government of his external actions which indeed God
has reserved to himself, he has left every thing else in the power of man's
will 4 Volunt as hominis ad extremum usque est plane libera, adeo ut praeter
ipsum factum externum, omnia in ejus sint potestate. Ibid.
. That is, when you say a man is a free Agent, you must distinguish between the
inward and outward Act, between choosing and doing; in the former sense a man
is entirely at liberty, for what can be freer than thought, who can lay a
restraint upon man's will, or shackle his desires? The decrees of God, can put
no force upon these, and here Sapiens dominabitur astris; they only govern men's
outward actions, which may indeed become thereby necessary, but that is no great
matter; animus cujusque est quisque, the mind is the nobler part, let a man but
assert the honor and dignity of that; and he need not be much concerned what
becomes of his outward actions. But against this it may be objected, that a
great part of Religion consists in the practice of many External actions of
Piety toward God, Justice and Charity toward men; and if these are not free,
they are no longer Acts of Religion, any thing else but not Virtue and Vice as
was said before. To this he will tell you, that God measures men's Obedience or
Disobedience respectively, not by the External Fact, but by the Internal
Actions and consent of the Will Deus Obedientiam and Inobedientiam hominum, ex
ipsa perfecta and consummata voluntate, non autem ex ipso Externo facto
metitur. Ibid.
.

Which tho in some sense, and with a just limitation it may be true; yet as it
is here brought in by him, to serve his present purpose, is a very loose and a
dangerous determination; in short this whole matter, as it is stated by
Socinus, is liable to very many and those unanswerable exceptions.

For 1 st. whereas he says the will even to the last is entirely at liberty,
tho the external actions are subject to the decrees of God, and thereby become
necessary; this is a plain contradiction to what both he and Crellius before
told us, that God might necessitatem afferre voluntati and necessitatem
imponere hominibus hoc vel illud volendi: force even the will, as well as make
the outward actions necessary.

2 ly, He asserts a freedom in men to little or no purpose; for one would think
if God gave man a principle of freedom, he did it chiefly for the government of
his actions; and if these are not in his power he had even as good be without
his liberty; and that his will and his actions should run the same fate, and be
both equally subject to it. For my part I should think I had as good be
shackled and manacled, as to have a full power of moving, and yet not be able
to stir either hand or foot.

3 ly, If Socinus should be asked, how it can be imagined that the actions can
be necessary, when the principle from whence they proceed is absolutely free,
for it is of humane and voluntary actions that Socinus in that place is
speaking, I believe it would puzzle him to give a satisfactory answer.

4 thly, Tho Socinus takes care of the freedom of man's will, which he in this
place is concerned to vindicate, yet as far as I can perceive he has little
care of Religion; for if, where there is necessity there can be no Religion, as
the Socin. and Remonstrants said before, and that a great part of Religion
consists in external as well as internal actions; I cannot see but that thereby
Religion is left in great danger, if not entirely overthrown, and that Virtue
and Morality, are for any assistance that Socinus in this place affords them,
fairly left to shift for themselves.

Well, but however tho Socinus by making good actions subject to Gods decrees,
and thereby necessary, may be guilty of contradicting himself; yet there is no
great harm in all that, his opinion may be absurd, but he does not design to
encourage impiety thereby; for tho he make God the cause of good actions yet he
does not as his adversaries do, make him the Author of Sin. In reference to
what is Evil, here man is left entirely to his own freedom, the guilt of which
cannot be transferred upon the decrees of God, which are not in any wise
concerned in them; but the shame and blame of all must be laid at man's own
door, and imputed only to his own freedom. But soft and fair: there is no
general rule but may have some exceptions; for there are plain predictions in
Scripture, not only of some good, but of many evil and wicked actions, such for
instance, as were the Treachery of Judas, and the denial of Peter, etc.

Now these according to the Socinians, God could not foresee except they were
necessary, and they could not well be necessary without his decree, and
therefore to reconcile the prediction and the event, God first resolves to have
an ill thing done, and then wisely foretells the doing of it. Read what follows
and then you will be further satisfied in this matter, and that Socinus and his
followers are not wronged in having this laid to their charge.

For first, says Crellius, if God finds men ^it and disposed for any mischief,
Eorum malitia uti potest ad consilia sua exequenda Crell. cap. 24. De Sapientia
Dei p. 210.
, he may make use of their wickedness to compass his own designs. Nay not only
so, he may likewise decree something to be done by them, Quod sine peccato ab
iis fieri nequit, Ibid. which cannot be done without sin. What Crellius says
in general, Socinus gives us an example of in the Egyptians, whose sin in
oppressing the Children of Israel, God long before foresaw and foretold, Genesis
15. as having decreed it to be done. But to excuse this matter he says, God
did not put that wicked disposition into the minds of the Egyptians, but found
it there, Malam eam mentem in ipsis invenerat, qua ad judicium suum exequendum,
quodammodo abusus est. Praelect. Th. cap. 10. p. 547. and what he found there,
he made use of for the execution of his judgments.

This is something, but it is not full enough, this is but beating about the
bush, therefore he will keep you no longer in suspense. Not only an action that
could not be done without sin, but the sin it self may be decreed and effected
by God, Si quid ab hominibus contra Dei legem committitur id non quidem
decernente ac autore Deo fieri asseveramus, nisi raro ac quibusdam de causis,
Socin. Prael. Th. p. 544. that is, if God be the Author of sin it is but
rarely, and that for very weighty reasons. Here again Socinus to our great
amazement, is a downright predestinarian, and if we may judge of the opinions
of Calvin even by the representation of his adversaries, he is Calvino ipso
Calvinior. What Socinus here affirms, that God sometimes is the Author of men's
sins, is confirmed by Smalcius, but with this difference, that whereas by
Socinus God is made the immediate Author of sin, Smalcius will bring in the
Devil to bear part of the blame, deum quandoque per diabolum homines compellere
ad scelera perpetranda Small. Contra Frantz. p. 416.
. God indeed, says he, compells men to do evil, but he makes use of the
ministry of the Devil, who is the instrument in the Compulsion.

What they say thus in general, they do further illustrate, if you think what
has bin said may not be so clear, but that it may want a Comment, by
particular instances, and specially that of Peter's denial of his Master, which
was a contingent Event, one would think, as depending upon the freedom of his
will, and yet this was foretold by Christ. But how could this be? why Socinus
will tell you this denial of Peter, was not a matter so contingent as you may
imagine; for God for the punishment of his confidence, decreed to withdraw his
Grace from him, upon which substraction of his Grace, that denial could not but
follow Negatio ista necessario consecutura erat, Socin. ibid. p. 548.
. Nay he goes farther; not only withdrawing his Grace from Peter in the Hour of
Temptation, but taking effectual course that he should be tempted. For, says
he, Peter being disposed to commit this sin, and wanting only an Opportunity of
putting it into practice, to make good the truth of his prediction, God took
care to offer him that occasion. And this he thinks may safely be said, without
any absurdity Non alia re opus erat, nisi ut occasio Christum negandi Petro
daretur, id quod deum ipsum curasse, i. e. Effecisse, nihil absurdi continet.
Vid. Small. Contra Frantz. p. 431. Ubi asserit voluntatem Petri quodammodo esse
coactum and ad breve temporis spacium liberate sua privatam, idque Deum
interdum and facere posse and solere.
. Here he speaks home and full to the point.

Indeed at another time he himself can scarce digest, what he here would have
his Readers swallow without straining; for, says he, to say that God foresees
evil, because he decrees it, cannot be affirmed without impiety Peccata ita a
deo nota fuisse affirmare, quia futura omnino ita decrevisset, impium prorsus
videri debet. Ibid. p. 547.
. How shall we reconcile this with all we before quoted out of him? I confess I
was in some pain for him, to know how he would come off, but he soon relieved
me: by the help of a distinction he can perform wonders, among which one of the
greatest is to reconcile contradictions. For says he, Si certa mali operis
praedictio erit, ipsum quidem opus a deo decretum fuerit, non autem cordis
malitia, p. 549. That is, you must distinguish between the Act and the
Obliquity of it, and then you may reconcile the honor of Gods justice and the
truth of his predictions: a very nice and Methaphysical distinction, and which
I should almost have despaired to have found any where, but in the writings of
a Schoolman or a Calvinist.

Upon the whole, I think, we have reason to admire the Judgment of God, upon
these men; in giving them up, as a just punishment of their contempt of his
Revelations, to the conduct of their own carnal and corrupt Reason, which when
it is not assisted by a Divine Revelation, is but a blind guide in matters of
Religion; and therefore it is no wonder if we find them roving and wandering in
a labyrinth and maze of Errors, like men bewildred, going backward and forward,
saying and unsaying, and at length growing giddy, and falling back into those
very opinions which they have made so much have to fly from, and upon the
account of which, they and the Remonstrants have raised so many, and such
tragical exclamations against their adversaries.

4 ly. The next Attribute that the Scriptures ascribe to God, is his
Immutability, whereby he is incapable of Alteration, and therefore not liable
to change 1 Samuel 15. 29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he
his not a man that he should repent. This would argue God to be like our
selves, of like weakness, and like passions with men.

For whatever Alterations may happen in the world, yet he remains unalterable,
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. James 1. 17. Indeed
men upon many accounts, and for many very warrantable reasons, may be obliged
to shift and change their Counsels and Resolutions: who for want of wisdom and
foresight in laying their projects, or for want of strength of execute them,
and by a great many other unexpected accidents, which the greatest prudence
could not foresee, nor consequently avoid, oftentimes meet with many and fatal
disappointments.

But when Infinite Wisdom is joined with Infinite Power, nothing can hinder
such an Agent from bringing his purposes to the desired Event. My counsel,
says the Lord, that shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Esaias. 46. 10.
Who can withstand the power of God? who can baffle his Contrivances, or resist
his will? For the Counsels and Decrees of God are as Immutable as his Nature;
for be they Absolute, or be they Conditional, as long as he foresees the
performance of the Condition, it makes no difference in this case: many devices
may be in man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 19.
21. however men may alter, and the dealings and dispensations of Gods
providence in several acts of mercy and justice upon that score, may be
different toward them; yet this is without alteration or change in his
purposes toward them, who remains still the same, yesterday, and to day, and
for ever.

The Socinians utter many bold and dangerous expressions in opposition to this
plain truth, which is the unavoydable consequence of their denial of Gods
Omniscience. Forasmuch as there are many events which depend upon the actions
of men, which arising from the freedom of their Will, are therefore purely
contingent, and consequently out of the reach of Gods knowledge; this must
according to them unavoidably cause God to alter his counsels, to take new
measures, to change his affections toward men, and alter his purposes
concerning them: that is, he who is a Reprobate to day, may be an Elect person
to morrow, and he who at present is elect, may afterward be reprobated, and
those may finally perish, quos Deus saluti destinavit, whom God once designed
for eternal happiness. Socin. de Off. hominis Christiani, cap. 11. Now this one
would think should be an Argument of inconstancy, and consequently not fit to
be ascribed to God.

Crellius will tell you, there is no such matter; this is only an instance of
his freedom; it shows you only that there is a variety in the acts of Gods
will, but no inconstancy. For a man is then said to be constant to his purpose,
who persists in it till some good reason obliges him to alter it Constantis^
est persistere in animi proposito, nisi quid intervenerit, cujus ratio non
immerito haberi possit, and quod in aliam sententiam voluntatem jure flectere
queat. Crell. cap. 25. de Sanct. Dei, p. 265.
, and therefore what you would call wavering, he will say is the result of
wisdom Quae rebus mutatis ita consilia mutat, ut ea illarum rationi
attemperet, Cap. 32. de Decretis Dei. p. 350.
, God accommodating his decrees to the nature of things, and the actions of
men; so that in short, God is subject to change, but not without good reason,
he may alter his purposes as wise men usually do, according to the different
circumstances of things, and as the exigence of his affairs shall require.

But with the leave of this bold man, another would be apt to think, that tho
men may without the imputation of levity alter their counsels, yet this arises
from the imperfection of their natures, and particularly of their knowledge of
future events, which tho it be no fault, yet it must be acknowledged a
weakness, tho such an one as they are no more accountable for, than they are,
because they cannot restore sight to a man born blind, or raise the dead. But
it cannot be ascribed to God without a derogation to his infinite knowledge,
and unerring judgment, and is therefore an argument of weakness,
notwithstanding all that Crellius urges very weakly to the contrary, Ibid.

Therefore that we may return where we first began, to the Decrees of God
concerning the future, and final state of men; this is certain, that they with
relation to their several and respective objects, are fixed and unmovable; for
be they antecedent or subsequent to his foresight of men's faith or infidelity,
it matters not in this case: the Scriptures however assure us, and right reason
would confirm the same, that they are immutable, more stable then the
Foundations of the Earth, or the Poles of the World, which may and shall be
shaken, and stagger out of their places like drunken men, but the Counsel of
the Lord that shall stand.

For let holiness and perseverance be the cause or the effect of Gods election,
yet all sober persons agree in this, that whoever lives an holy life, and
perseveres in it, is undoubtedly chosen by God to eternal life, and whosoever
lives and dies in his sins and impenitence, is certainly designed and shall be
doomed to everlasting punishment: here the foundation of the Lord stands
sure, the Lord knows them that are his, and them that are not so. But
Socinus, who denies the certainty of Gods knowledge of many future events, viz.
those which are contingent, such as are the actions of men, as depending upon
the uncertain because free motions of their will; must in pursuance of this
principle, deny the certainty of Gods Election; because he cannot foresee who
will obey his commands and continue to do so, against all the temptations which
they will meet with in the world to the contrary: and consequently he must say,
what another would account Impiety to think, that God Almighty for want of
knowing the determination of men's choice, must likewise be ignorant of the
final event of their actions: and therefore he who at present is the object of
his Love, and designed by him for the joys of Heaven, may in the conclusion
for ought he knows, merit his displeasure, and be tumbled down to hell.

Now that men may make such uncertain conjectures concerning their final state,
and thereupon meet with a fatal and terrible disappointment, may be a certain
tho a sad truth, and therefore no great wonder: But to think that it should
thus happen to the Allwise Creator of men, is to have too mean and
dishonorable conceptions of him; and such the Socinians have, doubting not to
aver, that God finds reason to alter not only his dispensations toward men
according to their behavior, but his own intentions of kindness and
displeasure, choosing what at first he refused, and refusing afterward what
once he thought worthy of his Approbation and choice, Socin. prael. Th. cap. 7.

A fifth attribute in God, and which indeed cannot be separated from him,
without overthrowing all Religion, is his Justice: and that not only as it
signifies his holiness and righteousness, but as it betokens his anger,
indignation, his severity and displeasure against Sin and Sinners. And this the
Scripture speaks very often of, Psalm. 5. the Psalmist describes God as one not
only that has no pleasure in wickedness, ver. 4. which arises from the
holiness and righteousness of his nature, but as one likewise that hates all
the workers of iniquity, ver. 5. and particularly, who abhors the deceitful,
and will destroy the Lying man. The wicked and him that loves violence his
Soul abhors, Psalm. 11. 5. Hence he styles himself a jealous God, jealous of his
authority and honor, and will revenge the contempt of it: he is slow to anger,
but yet will not acquit the wicked, forasmuch as he is jealous, and furious,
who will take vengeance on his adversaries, and reserves wrath for his enemies,
Nahum. 2, 3. and when God proclaims his name, the name by which he desires to
be known, it is the God merciful and gracious, etc. but yet one that will by no
means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 6. Numb. 14. 18. he is Deus ultionum, the God
to whom vengeance belongs, Ps. 94. 1. the God of recompenses, Jer. 51. 56.
and in short, a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.

All which expressions seem plainly to denote, that Justice in God is a
necessary and an essential attribute, and which you can no more separate from
him than you can his nature: I mean that Justice which betokens his severity
and indignation against sinners, and moves and enclines him to punish them, tho
the punishment it self may in some sense be said to be arbitrary, and subject
to the freedom of Gods will; as are also the Emanations of his goodness, and
the effects of his power: but yet all this does not hinder but that power and
goodness may be essential Attributes of God, and are acknowledged so to be by
the Socinians themselves: and the like we affirm of Justice, to the terrible
effects of which, the sins of men render them necessarily obnoxious: all guilt
which is the inevitable consequence of sin being in its own nature an
obligation to punishment.

But Socinus will furnish you with new notions concerning God in this matter,
and quite different from what either Jews or Christians have conceived of him.
For he will tell you, that Justice and Mercy in God, not only as to their
external effects as they are discovered in rewards and punishments, but
likewise in themselves, are not attributes essentially belonging to God, but
are things purely arbitrary and indifferent: and particularly that justice, as
it bespeaks an hatred of sin and indignation against the workers of iniquity,
is not a permanent property, or, as he loves to speak, a quality residing in
God, which belongs to him per se, but ex accidente, that is, it is a matter
purely contingent, and the effect only of his free and mutable will Justitia
ea, quae severitas vel vindicta, vel ira, vel indignatio, vel simili alio
nomine nuncupatur, non est qualitas seu mavis proprietas, nec vere residet in
Deo, sed tantummodo effectus est voluntatis ejus. Socin. di^p. de Christo
Servatore, p. 123. Nullam ejusmodi in Deo proprietatem, h. e. qualitatem in
ipso perpetuo residentem, esse censemus, quae Deum ad peccata punienda
simpliciter moveat. Sed id quod in ipso existens eum ad peccata punienda
simpliciter movet, iram and severitatem, misericordiae oppositam, esse
statuimus; quae non proprietas est in Deo perpetuo residens, sed veluti
affectus quidam ipsius, and liberae voluntatis effectus. Crell. Resp. ad Grot.
de Satisf. Christi. p. 1.


Now this as it is laid down by the Socinians I take to be not only a false but
a dangerous position; forasmuch as it furnishes us with such a notion of God as
is dishonorable to him, and will naturally lead us to a contempt of him. But
before I come to prove this, (forasmuch as I take it to be a matter of great
importance in it self, and especially is so in our disputes with the Socinians,
who have introduced this notion of God without Justice, in order to destroy the
true reason of Christ's death and sufferings, which was to give satisfaction to
the Justice of God for the sins of mankind,) I must crave leave to lay down
certain positions, which tho I might take for granted, and call postulata, as
being commonly known and received Truths: yet I shall as I go along endeavor
to prove them so.

The first thing therefore which I shall lay down, is, that if there be a
Providence, it must be chiefly and principally employed in the care and
government of human affairs: for there can be no imaginable reason assigned,
nay it would be contrary to all reason to suppose, that God should take care of
Beasts and Inanimate Creatures, and neglect one of the noblest parts of the
Creation, I mean man, for whose sake chiefly, next to his own Glory, he created
the visible world, and to whom as to his Vicegerent he has given the Dominion
over the works of his hand, having put all things under his feet.

2 dly, There can be no providence nor care of human affairs without giving men
Laws for the government of their actions: for as his providence toward other
creatures is seen, in giving them certain laws of motion and rest suitable to
their respective natures, and in guiding and governing them so, as may most
tend to his own glory, and the welfare and beauty of the universe: so his
government and care of men consists in giving them certain Laws as Rules of
their actions and manners; it being much more requisite upon many accounts that
they should act by a certain direction; forasmuch as the confusion and mischief
that must be the consequence of their disorderly living must be far greater,
and more repugnant to the nature and righteousness of God, than if other
creatures should swerve from the Laws of their creation; which yet they
inviolably observe, except when God thinks fit to interpose, for the ends of
his own Glory, and the good of men.

3 dly, That Laws are so a Lex est regula actuum moralium, obligans ad id quod
rectum est, Gr. de Jur. B. and P. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Sect 9.
Rule of Moral actions, as to put us under an obligation of yielding obedience
to them, and in this they differ from Obligationem requirimus, nam consilia and
si qua alia sunt praescripta honesta quidem sed non obligantia, Legis aut Juris
nomine non veniunt, Ibid. Ubi consilium datur, osserentis arbitrium est; ubi
praeceptum, necessitas servitutis, Hieron. Lib. 2. contra Jovin. Decretum
necessitatem facit, exhortatio liberam voluntatem excitat Gratian. Did. 4. ad
finem.
good counsel and advice, which tho it tend to our advantage, and the promoting
of our truest and best interest, yet it puts us under no necessary obligation
of complying with it; every man being left to his liberty to take or refuse it
at his pleasure.

4 thly, That the violation of a Law naturally and necessarily upon that very
score makes a man liable to punishment: which is but the same thing tho in
other words with the foregoing proposition: for therefore are we obliged to
yield obedience to Laws, because if we refuse to do so, we are thereby
obnoxious to punishment. This is that which in the civil Law is called, Jus seu
obligatio delicti, quo quis ob maleficium ad poenam tenetur. The prescribing of
a Law is the act of a Superior, whereby he obliges his Subject to regulate his
actions according to that prescription; which if he refuses to do he may be
called to an account as one that deserves to be punished for his disobedience
Praeceptum ibi est, ubi est poena peccati, Ambr. Lib. de Viduis. Praecepto
quisquis non obtemperat, reus est and debtor poenae, August. Lib. de Sancta
Virgin.
. This is one of the prime dictates of nature Inter ea quae natura ipsa dictat
licita esse, est and hoc, ut qui male fecit malum ferat: quod Antiquissimum and
Rhadamantheum Jus vocant Philosophi Grot de Jure B. and P. Lib. 2. Cap. 20.
Sect. 1.
, as well as the Language of Scripture, that he who does wrong not only as that
signifies injury, but any evil in general, should receive for that evil that he
has done, Col. 3. 25.

Lastly, That there is a necessary relation between punishment and justice,
whose office among other things is to distribute rewards and punishments. I do
not say that Justice is always obliged to exact the punishment, which the
Delinquent is always and necessarily obliged to suffer, I mean is necessarily
obnoxious to; but wherever there is punishment if just, it must flow from that
Habit or Attribute which we call Justice; and that not only as it bespeaks
Righteousness and Equity; but likewise as it signifies that severity and
indignation which every Lawgiver is supposed to conceive against him that
transgresses his Laws, who thereby violates his Authority and offends against
the public good.

It has bin doubted indeed whether in human punishments, the Civil Magistrate
may aim at the vindicating of his own Authority, considered abstractedly from
the public good. And here that famous passage of Seneca Nemo prudens punit
quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur: revocari enim praeterita non possunt,
futura prohibentur, Lib. 1. de Clem. Cap. 6.
, is often cited upon this occasion, and which he translated out of Plato de
Leg. no wise man punishes a fault because it has bin committed, but lest the
like should be committed again: for what is past cannot be recalled, but wise
and good men in punishment aim at preventing mischief for the future.

But tho this may be true with respect to men, yet it is not so with regard to
Almighty God, to whom, as Grotius in the formentioned Book and Chapter Sect. 4.
has very truly and judiciously observed, those sayings of Plato and Seneca
would be very ill applied; forasmuch as God in punishing the sins of men, may
very righteously, and oftentimes does, aim at nothing but the asserting of his
own honor, and vindicating the authority of his Laws, and in short, the
revenging the contempt and violation of them: as is evident in certain
invisible punishments inflicted upon some sinners in this life, such as are
obduration and giving them up to a Reprobate sense; and will be much more
evident in those everlasting punishments (for so we will make bold to call them
whatever the Socinians may say to the contrary) in the life to come, where God
can aim at nothing but the satisfaction of his Justice, and thereby the
manifestation of his own Glory Certe poenas quorundam valde perditorum a Deo
non ob aliud (scil. extra se) exigi, sacra verba testantur, cum dicunt eum
voluptatem capere ex ipsorum malo, subsannari atque irrideri impios a Deo. Tum
vero and extremum judicium post quod nulla expectatur emendatio, immo and in
hac vita poenae quaedam inconspicuae, ut Obduratio, verum esse quod contra
Platonem dicimus evincunt. Ibid.
.

But whatever the reasons may be of inflicting punishment either by God or man,
yet Justice is the hand that inflicts it: which is called distributive or
vindictive, and is therefore defined by an Apud Grot. Ibid.
Ancient writer from one of its noblest offices to be (...), an exacting of
punishment: And by Plutarch to the same purpose, to be (...), ultrix in eos qui
adversus legem divinam delinquunt.

Now these things being thus premised, I proceed to make good my charge against
the Socin. in calling that not only a false but a dangerous Opinion of theirs,
which makes Justice to be no necessary or essential Attribute in God, but a
matter purely Arbitrary and Contingent, as being the effect only of his free
will.

1. Then this Opinion I say is false and impious, because it furnishes us with
such an Idea of God as is dishonorable to him and will naturally lead us to a
contempt of him; because it teaches us so to conceive of God, as of one that is
not necessarily concerned in the Actions of men and the affairs of the World:
that is, it gives us a notion of a God without a providence; for if there be a
providence, it must chiefly and principally be employed (as was said in our
first Prop.) in the care and government of Human Affairs; there can be no
government without Laws, no laws without the Sanctions of Punishment, either
expressed or necessarily employed in all such Laws; no punishment without
Justice to inflict it; and consequently (that we may bring both ends of our
Sorites together) where there is no Justice, there is no Providence; and where
the one is not necessary, the other is not so too. Therefore tho the Socinians
do acknowledge Gods providence and that he does actually govern the World, yet
this does not take off the charge of falsehood and impiety from this position of
theirs; because thereby they make his providence to be a contingent and
perfectly an Arbitrary matter; you may notwithstanding all this have a true
notion of God and do him no wrong, if you conceive of him as of one that may be
unconcerned in the actions of men, who after he has sent them into the world,
may suffer them to live as they please, every man doing that which is right in
his own eyes: which yet is great Impiety so much as to imagine; forasmuch as it
is repugnant to the infinite perfections of Almighty God, helps to debase him
in our thoughts, to weaken that reverence and esteem which arises in our minds
when we conceive of him; and thereby leads us naturally and inevitably from a
disesteem to a denial of him.

So that what at first I called a dangerous I am now afraid in the conclusion
will prove to be an Atheistical assertion: upon which account Epicurus among
the Ancients was generally accounted an Atheist; Cicer. de Natura Deo. Lib. 1.
Cap. 123.
Posidonius the Stoic thought him so, and that it was only the Envy and Infamy
which attended such persons, which obliged him not to profess himself one: But
what in words he affirmed, he did in deed effectually overthrow: For by denying
Gods providence, Ibid.
Re sustulit, Oratione reliquit deos. In which charge against Epicurus, Cotta
the Academick has had the consent of all wise men among the Heathens, as well
as the suffrage of Christians: whose way of arguing would be of no force, had
they not bin of Opinion, that if there be a God who made the World, there must
necessarily be a Providence; and if a Providence, I am sure there must be that
Attribute in God which we call Justice, without which that other can never be
exercised. But you will say that God may give men Laws for the government of
their Actions, and that will be a sufficient vindication of his providence, tho
he assigns no punishment to the breach of them. That is, tho we cannot conceive
a God without a providence, yet we may conceive a providence without Justice.
Indeed Socinus has told us so, for speaking of the command of God to Adam in
Paradise, requiring him not to eat of the forbidden fruit, and the threatening
annexed, In the day thou eatest thou shall die the death, Genesis 3. which
threatening Covet his adversary told him, did flow from that Justice in God
which we have hitherto bin speaking of; he Answers, that this Justice was not
any thing in God inhering in him, and therefore nothing could flow from it, as
being only an accidental effect of his free will: Socin Disp. de Christo Serve.
pars prima p. 123.
Cum a me ostensum fuerat, ejusmodi justitiam in Deo non vere residere, nec
proprie Dei qualitatem dici posse, sed tantummodo effectum voluntatis ejus;
nihil ex ea fluere potuit: as much as if he had said, non entis nullae sunt
operationes, what is not, can have no influence to produce any thing. And for a
confirmation of this he adds, Quod verum esse deprehendetur, si consideremus
potuisse Deum praeceptum illud homini tradere, neque tamen poenam Mortis, si
illud non servasset addere: Immo ne poenam quidem ullam. Ibid.
that God might have given Adam (and what God might have done to Adam, he might
undoubtedly have done to all the Sons and posterity of Adam) this law, and not
have annexed Death as the punishment of the breach of it, nay if he had so
pleased he might have assigned no punishment at all.

But this is delivered by Socinus with the same Confidence as are many of his
other absurd Errors, in which he stands single by himself, against the constant
and uniform suffrage of Divines Ancient and Modern, Fathers and Schoolmen,
Philosophers and Lawyers, and those both Canonists and Civilians: among whom it
passes for an uncontrolled maxim, That, that is very vainly and impertinently
commanded which may be securely neglected. Frustra est aliquid praecipere, quod
impune potest negligi: and this bold position he lays down, and gives us not
the least reason for it, but his own affirmation. But tho he gives us no reason
for his assertion, I am sure there is very great as well as very apparent
reason against it; forasmuch as such Laws as these will neither secure the
honor of God, nor serve the ends of his providence; being but in the nature of
good advice, which, as we said before, every man is at liberty to take, or
refuse at his pleasure.

So that while he makes the Law precarious, at the same time and for the same
reason he makes the Obedience of men so too: in which case God must be
beholding not to his own Authority, but to the good nature of his Creatures,
that they yield any obedience to his commands. Perhaps you will say there may
be other obligations, besides those of punishment which men may be under to
practice their duty: such as are those of Honor and Gratitude, and the strong
tie of Reason, which will bind a man to comply with his Duty, if there were no
other motive to it, but this, that to do otherwise will be to act unsuitably to
the dignity of his nature.

All this may be fine in speculation, but will signify little when reduced to
practice: the generality of men being governed by sense, the motions of which
are too headstrong and furious to be curbed by the bare commands of reason,
when they are not enforced with the fear of punishment: the voice of which will
be as feeble as that of old Eli to his rebellious Sons, far too weak to master
their violence: and therefore that Frantic Woman that some have talked of, who
brought fire in one hand to burn up Paradise, and water in the other to quench
the flames of Hell, if she had succeeded in her design, instead of promoting
would have extinguished all virtue, and soon have rooted it out of the world.

In short, to sum up what has been said upon this subject: if there be no
Justice naturally in God, there might have bin no Providence, and if no
providence, then men might have bin left to the conduct of their own giddy and
unruly passions, which would soon break through the restraints of reason; and
when men were thus left to the government of Lust and Sense, the unavoidable
consequence of this must have bin, that the world would have bin filled with
Blood and Murders, with Impurity and Uncleanness, with Theft and Rapine, with
Injustice and Oppression, and the gentle race of men would soon have become
worse then the worst of wild Beasts, preying upon and devouring one another.
And to suppose that God could be unconcerned at all this, as if there be no
Justice in him which enclines him to punish such wickedness, he might be, is to
have such a notion of God as it is reported Lewis the 11 th of France had of
his Leaden God which he carried about him, and when he had caused any man to be
Murdered, or done the like mischief, he would take it into his hands, and kiss
it, and beg pardon, and then all was well again, and he himself became
immediately safe if not innocent. In short at this rate, we should not
dishonor God if we so conceived of him, as of one who did not necessarily act
according to the eternal and unalterable Rules of Wisdom, Goodness, and
Righteousness, that he might be a God not of Order but Confusion, which is not
only an Impious, but a Blasphemous assertion.

2 dly, My second reason why I account this Position of Socinus about Gods
justice to be false and dangerous, is because it takes away the distinction
between Laws Positive and Natural; which distinction has hitherto bin looked
upon, not only to be true but sacred; sorasmuch as the contrary would open a
Gap to all manner of impiety and wickedness. Now positive Laws are accounted
such as owe their original only to Gods free will and pleasure; and therefore
as they cannot be known, so they cannot oblige any but those to whom he has
made such a declaration, and discovery of his pleasure. Jus natural est
dictatum rectae rationis, indicans alicui actui, ex ejus convenientia aut
disconvenientia cum ipsa natura rationali, inesse moralem turpitudinem aut
necessitatem moralem, ac consequenter a Naturae Autore talem actum aut vetari
aut praecipi. Actus de quibus tale extat dictatum, debiti sunt aut illiciti per
se, atque ideo a Deo necessario praecepti aut vetiti intelliguntur, qua nota
distat hoc jus non tantum ab humano jure, sed and a Divino voluntario, quod non
ea praecipit, aut vetat, quae per se ac suapte natura aut debita sunt, aut
illicita; sed vetando, illicita, praecipiend^, debita facit. Grot. de Ju. B.
and P. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Sect. 10.
Natural Laws are those which are discovered by the light of nature, as being
the necessary result of our Constitution, and that relation which we hear to
God as rational Creatures: many of which tho revealed in Scripture, yet in
themselves are obligatory, antecedent to any such revelation.

Now these Laws do necessarily suppose Justice in God, without which they would
be insignificant: for tho natural Laws owe their Original to the holiness of
God, as being but a transcript of those essential Rules of righteousness which
make up his nature; yet all their force and obligation, (without which they are
not properly Laws) results from his Justice; that is, from the fear of
punishment, which the Law threatens, and Justice inflicts, without which they
would be perfectly insignificant. From which by a just and necessary
consequence it unavoidably follows, that if their be natural Laws, there must
be Justice naturally in God: so on the other hand, if there be no Justice,
there can be no Laws of nature, forasmuch as without the former they can have
neither Force nor Obligation, nor consequently have the formal reason of Laws.

3 dly And Lastly, This Opinion of Socin. is both false and Impious, because it
tends to overthrow all natural Religion, by supplanting that which is the chief
if not the only support of it in the world, and that is the fear of God. For
take away his Justice as this Socinian hypothesis does, and then you have left
nothing in him which a man governed by the light of nature need to fear: not
his unity, nor his eternity, nor immensity, not his holiness, nor his goodness,
to be sure; nor lastly his power which in conjunction with the former, as it
necessarily is in God, is as harmless and innocent as either of the former
Attributes, when it is not moved nor excited by a just displeasure and
indignation.

Imagine therefore a Socinian were to discourse a Pagan, I would fain know how
upon this principle he could convince him that it were his Duty to worship God,
and to live a virtuous life: he might tell him indeed, and tell him with great
truth, that the Divine nature and perfections are in themselves a just ground
of Esteem and Adoration: That virtue has many and those powerful though
invisible charms, as being both agreeable to our Reason, and at the same time
serving to promote our welfare and happiness in this world; yet all this would
lay him under no obligation to do that, which otherwise would be highly
reasonable and fitting to be done: suppose it be honest, suppose it rational,
suppose it his Interest, yet he is left to his liberty, and may, and no doubt
will, do what he pleases for all that: he may act indeed like a fool and a
Brute, yet he is guilty of no sin in the mean time; for where there is no
Justice, there can be no fear of punishment, where there is no punishment,
there is no obligation, nor consequently Law; and where there is no Law, there
can be no transgression.

So that tho his reason may upbraid him with the folly, his Conscience in this
case would never check him for the guilt of his vices; which if the Laws of his
Country did not take some care to prevent, he might securely practice without
any fear of Gods displeasure. In short, notwithstanding all the fine discourses
about the beauty and amiableness of religion and virtue; the inclinations of
sense would soon bear down the dictates of Reason, and the slightest
temptations would prove too strong for these very speculations; and as to the
generality, the conclusion which they would draw from this principle, would be,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye, and after death comes no reckoning
or account. Come on let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us
speedily use the Creatures like as in youth: Let us fill our selves with costly
Ointments, and let no flower of the spring pass by us: Let us crown our selves
with Rose-buds before they are withered, Let none of us go without his part of
our voluptuousness: Let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place; for
this is our portion, and our Lot is this. Wisd. 2. ver. 6, 7, 8.

But tho this notion overturns all natural Religion, yet it is it self
effectually overthrown by the dictates of natural Conscience, which are an
unanswerable proof both of the existence and the Justice of God: for we must
know that Conscience is something more than bare Reason: for Reason may direct,
but Conscience will prescribe; Reason gives us a Rule for the government of our
actions, Conscience passes that Rule into a Law, gives it its force and
obligation. The Facultas injungendi aliquid per modum Legis aut praecepti
infert superioritatem, quemadmodum obligatio parendi arguit nos inferiores esse
eo, qui praecipere nobis potest; saltem qua Imperium ejus se extendit: Ob eam
causam suis decretis immediate nemo potest obligari irrevocabiliter,
Puffendorf. Elem. Jur. Lib. 1. cap. 13. Sect. 4.
prescribing of a Law is the act of a Superior, and no man is properly Superior
to himself, and consequently no man can by his own act, peremptorily oblige
himself, except that act be enforced by some other and higher obligation.

And therefore Conscience is not bare Reason, but reason as it is Gods
Vicegerent, clothed with his Authority, armed with his Justice: and therefore
in a more Imperious way it commands our obedience, not only persuading us to
our duty, but threatening for the neglect of it: it puts on a Majestic Air,
tells us this must be done, or refuse it at your peril: indeed it executes the
office, and sustains the person of a Legislator, a Witness, and a Judge: first
prescribes a Law, then accuses for our disobedience, and lastly solemnly
arraigns the Sinner for his guilt, and then passes sentence upon him. So that
these actions of Conscience and the Tribunal that God has erected there, are
one of the clearest and most uncontrolled proofs of a future Judgment, of
which the former are a kind of Anticipation.

And indeed if we look back to former times, and consult the History of Ages
and Countries, the most ignorant and barbarous, we shall find, that as the
Light of Nature has directed them to the belief and acknowledgement of a God;
so one of the earliest notions that arose in their minds when they have thought
of him, has bin the Apprehension of his Justice: of which among other things,
the numerous, tho many of them Impious and Ridiculous rites, which they made
use of to appease the anger of their incensed Deities, are an irrefragable
Argument. And this apprehension of divine Justice, was, as one of the principal
causes, so one of the chiefest, if not the only support of natural Religion in
the world.

Now to apply this to our present purpose, and to bring the parts of our
argument a little closer together: If men by the light of nature could discover
this Attribute of Justice in God, it must unavoidably follow, that Justice in
him is natural; for the light of nature can discover nothing in God but what is
so: whatever is the effect of Gods mere pleasure, and the result of his free
will, can never be known but by Revelation; and it is impossible it should be
otherwise discovered, except we should suppose men to be Omniscient, and that
they may know more of God than they can of one another: For what man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of man that is within him? 1 Cor. 2. 11.
so much less can any man discern the things of God but the spirit of God. He
indeed searches the deep things of God, such as are the results of his free
pleasure, and the counsel of his will; which lay hidden in the breast of God,
and must for ever have done so, had not he who lay in the bosom of his Father,
revealed them unto us: and therefore if justice were, as the Socinians tell us,
the effect only of Gods free will, it must have lain undiscovered to the
Gentile world, to whom God vouchsafed no revelation of his will; which yet is
contrary to the account which the Histories of all times and ages have given us
of this matter: from whence it is evident that the belief of Gods Justice among
men, is coeval with that of their being, written in the same Characters, and
engraven by the same Hand, that implanted the notion of a God in the minds of
men; and if so, then the same hand that defaces the notion of Gods Justice,
must at the same time and for the same reason erase the belief of his existence
out of the Souls of men: and I doubt not if the Socinians had lived in those
days, by this Hypothesis of theirs, they would have been extremely serviceable
to Theodorus, Diagoras, Democritus, and Epicurus, in the design they were
engaged in, of rooting the belief of a God and Religion out of the world; for
they might have told men not only with great plausibility but truth (if this
opinion were true) that all those accusations of Conscience, and anxieties of
Mind, which were occasioned by the belief and dread of divine Justice, were the
effect only of fancy and delusion, and did owe their Original not to a divine
Impress, but to the Craft and Contrivance of Priests and Politicians, who
instilled into the minds of weak and unwary men, the vain fears of invisible
powers; representing them armed with Thunder and with the Sword of Justice in
their hands, whereas really there was no such thing; But all this they did to
keep the world in awe, and thereby to compass the designs of their interest and
ambition.

What further design Socinus himself might have, or whether he had any other
design by advancing this Opinion, than the overturning that great Article of
our faith concerning the satisfaction of Christ, I shall not positively
determine. Only this I cannot but acquaint the Reader with, which has bin long
since observed likewise by others, that Socinus and his followers in all their
books and disputations, have made it their business chiefly to cavil and make
exceptions to their adversaries, not careing what became of Religion, so that
they might with any color avoid the Arguments with which they were pressed, as
is in some measure made evident by several passages which we have quoted out of
their writings in the foregoing discourse. And I have this further to add, that
as Socinus, by denying the divinity and satisfaction of Christ, has plainly
overturned the foundation upon which the Christian Church and Religion have bin
built: so by this assertion about Gods justice, and by several others dispersed
and slily insinuated through his writings, he has given a shrewd blow to all
Religion whatsoever, whether natural, or revealed; so that an unwary Reader, by
perusing his writings, may find himself an Atheist before he well perceives how
he comes to be so: as he says in another case, viz. his opinion against Hell
Torments, that he had so contrived the matter, ut lector prius sentiat
doctrinam istam sibi jam persuasam esse, quam suaderi animadvertat Epist. 6. ad
Volkel.
.

And now I should come to a conlusion of this discourse about Gods Justice,
(which I have spun out to a greater length then I at first intended;) But that
I foresee an objection will be made against all that I have said, by the
Socinians and their friends; who will be apt to say, that I have bin taking a
great deal of pains to no purpose, to aggravate the mischiefs of an Opinion,
which admit it were false in speculation, yet as it is stated by them can in
point of fact and practice, carry no inconvenience imaginable along with it.

For whatever God may do when left to his own liberty, yet he has thought fit
to oblige himself by positive promises and threatenings to reward the righteous
and to punish the wicked: so that now by the revelation of his will he has
indeed abridged himself of his natural liberty, but has thereby taken
effectual care to secure his own honor, and to establish Religion in the
world, and all this is plainly acknowledged by the Socinians.

To which I answer, 1 st. that this does not take off the falsehood and Impiety
of this Socinian opinion, which I was obliged to discover; any more than if a
man should say, that God has indeed resolved to act wisely and righteously in
the government of the World; but that neither wisdom nor righteousness are
necessary and essential Attributes perpetually residing in him, but are only
the effects of his free will: which were a most irreligious and profane
assertion, notwithstanding the former acknowledgment.

2. Tho the Socinians hereby take care of revealed, yet they overturn all
natural Religion, as we showed before, where God has made no such Revelation
of his will, or discovery of his intentions how he does design to deal with
men; and so as far as in them lies, by this principle, they help to make the Sea Breerwoods Enquiries, Cap. 14.
much greatest part of mankind Atheists.

3 ly. When God has declared his purpose, and has accordingly given men Laws
for the government of their actions, and has to those Laws expressly annexed
the sanctions of rewards and punishments, yet according to the Socinian
principles, this does not sufficiently encourage men in virtuous practices, nor
lay an effectual restraint upon the wicked.

1 st. As to rewards it is true the Gospel affords us, as the Apostle tells us,
exceeding great and precious promises 2 Pet. 1. 4. which exceed not only our
deserts, but our hopes: But what absolute assurance have we that they shall be
made good to us. They are only the effects as Socinus tells us Liberae, or as
Vorstius explains it, vertibilis voluntatis, not only of a free, (for therein
we agree with them,) but of a mutable will: for according to them, as was
showed before, God is liable to alterations, and may change his purpose as he
does the weather, sicut potest pluere vel non pluere: and tho the Morning
proves never so fair, yet the Heavens may be overcast; and the Sun that rose so
gloriously, may set in a Cloud.

In short, if we believe the Socinians, the promises of God considered barely
in themselves are not a sufficient Basis for a Christians hope and security;
forasmuch as God being Voluntas Dei est principium cujusdam mutabilitatis in
Deo, Vorst. Disp. p. 212.
mutable in his nature, he may repent of what he promised, and change and alter
his Resolution. And that the Reader may not think that I have wronged the
Socinians in laying this to their charge, I must refer him to a Treatise writ
by Crellius, de Causis Mortis Christi; where he will find this that I have
affirmed of them abundantly made good. For there he tells us that the true
reason of Christ's dying for us, was that thereby he might be a Mediator, and
surety of the Covenant which God has made with men; for tho God had given men
the promise of pardon of their sins, yet that promise was no sufficient
security, because he might have receded or started from it: Therefore to fix
him as it were to his word, Christ was sent as a sponsor and surety of the New
Testament, which, in the name of his Father, he did confirm and ratify, by
sealing it with his Blood; whereupon now God is obliged to make good his
promise, so that if he had a mind to revoke it he cannot, the Death of Christ
compelling him to preserve it Vis atque efficacia mortis Christi ad remissionem
peccatorum comparandam tanta est, ut etiam Deum, si forte eum promissionis suae
de remissione peccatorum, and liberatione ab interitu nobis concedenda
poeniteret (utimur phrasi sacris literis usitata) movere atque impellere
possit, ne promissum suum rescinderet, sed quod pollicitus esset, reipsa
praestaret Crell. de Causis Mortis Christi. p. 613.
.

Indeed he could not but be sensible, that what he had thus delivered, would
sound harshly in the Ears of most Readers, those especially who had any concern
for the Honor of their Maker, which by this supposition was so highly and
scandalously invaded: therefore to mollify this matter he tells us, that the
efficacy which he ascribes to Christ's Death, was not absolutely necessary in
respect of God; whose own Love, Grace and Mercy, might move and incline him to
make good his promise; yet however this put him under no obligation; for if it
had, there had bin no need of the death of Christ, either in respect of God, or
our selves, either to have tied him to the performance, or to have afforded us
security.

Therefore he tells us Nam ut nos tanto certius credere possemus, nobis in
Christum credentibus peccata remissum iri, plurimum referebat Deum ad id
faciendum obligatum esse, and nos jus ad illud obtinendum habere; jus inquam
manifestissimis ac certissimis documentis nixum, quod jam quicquid tandem
interveniret, Deum non pateretur promissa sua rescindere, Ibid.
, that we might have a firm bottom for our hope, that if we believed in Christ,
that is, obeyed his Gospel, our sins should be forgiven us; it highly concerned
us that God should be obliged to perform what he had promised; and not only so,
but that we might acquire a Right to pardon; which right he founds not in the
promise of God but the Death of Christ, which he says gives us such an
undoubted Title to Mercy, and that supported by such a firm and manifest
assurance and proof, as will not suffer God whatever may happen, to break his
word, and recall his promise. Hic revera finis ac scopus fuit, cur Deus Morte
Christi se nobis obligare voluerit, ut porro ad Christum morti tradendum
impulsus fuerit, Ibid.
And this he tells us was the true reason of Christ's coming into the world, and
of Gods delivering him up to death for our sakes.

By all which it is evident, that in the opinion of this man, the promises of
God considered nakedly in themselves, do not afford us a sufficient security;
forasmuch as something may intervene, which may cause God to repent of what he
promised, and thereby hinder the performance: and that you may not think that
he had forgot himself, by making an impious or impossible supposition, he tells
us, utimur phrasi sacris literis usitata; that he used a phrase which was
frequently made use of in the Scripture it self, which often mentions Gods
sorrow and repentance, and therefore it can be no disparagement to Almighty God
to ascribe it to him, it being rather in their opinion an argument of his
wisdom, as was showed before.

I must indeed acknowledge that this very Author at another time, Lib. De Deo.
Cap. 25. de Sanctitate Dei. p. 241. affirms that the promises of God put him
under an obligation, and that both his veracity and faithfulness engage him to
make them good. But it is as evident on the other hand, that here he supposes
the contrary, and that his Argument proceeds upon that supposition. But by this
time I hope the Reader will not be much surprised to find Socinians
contradicting themselves, and he need not be concerned at it; for I can assure
him, whether he will or no, they will take the liberty of so doing. And hereby
we find the observation which we a little before made concerning them,
confirmed; viz. that in their disputations and writings they care not what they
say, having no regard to the honor of God or Religion; being only concerned
for their own reputation, and to defend and maintain their own loose and
unwarrantable Opinions.

2 ly, But let us admit that God by his promises puts himself under an
obligation to men, so that he cannot go from his word, but is obliged to make
it good; yet he may be at greater liberty as to his threatenings. Indeed these,
as the Gospel represents them to us, are very terrible, whether we consider the
punishments threatened either as to their Intensive pain, or as to the extent of
their duration; for we are told that the wicked shall go into everlasting
punishment; that the worm that gnaws their Conscience shall not dye, and the
fire that torments them shall never be extinguished. This is indeed enough to
make the sinner look pale, and to fright him either out of his wits, or out of
his wicked course of living. But for all this he need not despair of Mercy; for
tho God has threatened severely, yet no man living can absolutely tell us, if
we believe Socinus, whether he is resolved to execute his threatenings. For as
at first God might either not have punished the Sinner at all, or not with
eternal death, so now tho he has declared by his solemn Edict that he will do
so, yet for all that he may if he pleases not inflict the punishment. Deus
potuisset, idque jure, homines licet peccantes morti aeternae non mancipare,
sic postquam eos morti aeternae edicto suo mancipavit, ex illius imperio
eximere potest. Socin. de Christo Serve. Lib. 1. p. 124.

Eximere potest, says Socinus, he may exempt the Sinner notwithstanding his
Decree of punishing him; and why may not he hope that he will: the bare
threatenings, according to Socinus, do not oblige God to execute them: and the
consideration of Gods Mercy and Justice, to which the Torments of Hell, as he
may imagine, can scarce be reconciled, may upon that score afford him some
ground to hope that he does not design to do so. We know sinners are apt to
allow themselves, as too great liberty in sinning, so to flatter themselves
with too great hopes of Impunity; and if they meet with any such compassionate
Casuists as Socinus, who will afford them any encouragement, they are presently
apt to run away with it, and never look back, to see that vengeance which
pursues, and will at length certainly overtake them.

But how comes this man to know any thing of God besides what he has revealed
of himself in his word? must we have recourse to that exploded distinction of
the Calvinists, and for which they have bin so much railed at by their
adversaries, concerning the revealed, and the secret will of God? For tho the
question in the case may seem to be about the power of God, yet really and in
truth it is about his will; forasmuch as God cannot do what he has solemnly
declared he will not do; and that for this plain and irrefragable reason,
because God cannot deny himself.

And now have we not reason to put the question, and enquire, whither went the
Spirit of God from the Inspired writers, to rest upon the head of this
Impostor, who makes his exceptions to what they have declared as the peremtory
and unalterable decree of God? Nay who boldly ventures to affirm that, which
Balaam could not be hired to utter, tho tempted to it by the wages of
unrighteousness; but makes that pious acknowledgement Numb. 23. God is not a
man that he should lie, nor the son of man, that he should repent: has he
said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
Now if it be Impossible for God to lie, then it is not possible for him to
alter the sentence concerning the final state of men; which is delivered in
Scripture in such terms, as plainly evince it to be his peremptory and
irrevocable decree: The happiness of the Righteous, and the punishments of the
wicked, as to the extent of their duration, being expressed in the same words,
and in the same sentence: and if it be possible to know any thing of the
Absolute and Immutable pleasure of God; the wit of man could not contrive any
plainer words, then what the wisdom of God has already made use of, to declare
his final and unalterable intentions, concerning the everlasting punishment of
the wicked.

Besides it deserves to be considered, that this Declaration is not only
delivered in the manner of a threatening, but likewise by way of prediction, in
the fulfilling of which, the veracity of God may seem to be more particularly
concerned, than in the execution of a bare Threatening delivered in a Sermon, or
Exhortation, or the like. Now in those glorious visions which were communicated
to St. John which he styles the word of God, the Testimony and Revelation of
Jesus Christ, concerning the things which were, and which should be hereafter,
Rev. 1. v. 1, 2, 19. which are styled the true sayings of God, chap. 19. v. 9.
the words that are faithful and true chapter 21. v. 5. I say in these visions are
contained, as the state and events of the Church till the final dissolution of
all things; so likewise the condition and fate of the Righteous and Wicked,
after the judgment of the last day. Chapter 20. 21. he tells us that he saw the
dead, both small and great, stand before God, and they were all judged
according to their works, and whoever was not found written in the Book of
Life, was cast into the Lake of fire, ver. 15. called ver. 10. the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the Devil, and the Beast, and the false Prophet shall be
tormented day and night for ever and ever.

And what is said in general of the wicked, we are assured shall betide the
fearful, and unbelievers, and the abominable and murderers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, who shall have their part in that lake, which burns
with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. this is that Furnace of fire which our
blessed Savior so often mentions, Mat. 13. 42. 50. that everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. That fire, which again and
again he assures us Mark. 9. shall not be quenched, no less then five times
within the compass of six verses, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. to declare unto us by
this Repetition, the certainty of this thing, as in the case of Pharaoh's
Dream, which was doubled to assure him that the thing was established by God.
Genesis 41. 32.

The wit of man could not ^ind out words more full and significant, to express
the eternal duration of these punishments, and Gods unalterable purpose to
inflict them. Now to say, notwithstanding all this, that yet in the conclusion,
things may happen to be otherwise then what the Son of God has declared, and
this servant of God has foretold, is with great boldness to contradict them
both: and if it be possible that these predictions may not be accomplished,
then the words are not faithful and true, that is, are not undoubtedly and
absolutely true: so that at the same time, that Socinus puts an end to the
certainty of Hell Torments, he does likewise put an end to the certainty of the
writings of the New Testament, and the predictions that are contained there:
which is highly derogatory to the Authority of those sacred Writings, and
particularly of the Revelation of St. Sohn; which looks too much like the
taking away from the words of the Prophecy of that Book; which yet I hope it is
not, because of that dreadful punishment which attends those that do so, Rev.
22. 19. In short, if things may happen otherwise than St. John foresaw and
foretold, some Scepticks and Infidels, which the age we live in does too much
abound with, may be apt to account that a dream, which he calls a vision; and
to think, the holy man was was scarce awake when he pretended to foresee these
things.

Neither ought the case of Temporal threatenings be objected here in favor of
Socinus's assertion: forasmuch as God himself has told us, that in all such
Threatenings, a condition is to be supposed, tho it be not always expressed; so
that tho they are delivered in terms seemingly absolute, yet God without any
impeachment of his veracity, may upon the performance of the condition revoke
them. At what instant, says God, I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: if that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil, that I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18. 7. 8. and this was the case
of Niniveh, where tho the threatening was seemingly peremtory, yet the execution
was suspended upon their Repentance, which was the end of the threatening.

But as to the punishments of the life to come, the threatenings of them must be
absolute and unconditional, forasmuch as there can then be no room for
Repentance and amendment: every man's state will then be finally determined: he
that is filthy will be filthy still, without any possibility of change, or hope
of pardon: and this is that which fills up the measure of the punishment of the
damned: he that sinned without the fear of God in this life, shall be punished
without Mercy in the next; and this despair will be that worm which will feed
upon him to all eternity, which shall ever torment, but never devour the
sinner, who will then become a terror to himself and an everlasting amazement.

In short therefore, and to sum up all that remains to be said upon this
subject; he that goes about to weaken the force of those declarations which God
has made concerning the eternal punishment of the wicked, gives a dangerous
blow to all revealed Religion, of which we can have no certainty, if once we
undermine the veracity of God, which is the foundation upon which it is built,
and by which it is supported. But you will say the hopes which Socinus gives
the sinner are but very slender, and those remote ones, which no man in point
of prudence or safety should venture to rely upon. I confess I think so too:
but for all this sinners will be bold and presumtuous: and you cannot wonder
that men should grasp at any thing; lay hold upon any the weakest twig, rather
than sink into Hell. But if this be not enough, Socinus can give the sinner
more positive and direct encouragement; such as will not only put and end to
the Torments of Hell, but likewise to his own vain and superstitious fears
concerning them, and will extinguish those flames, which our blessed Savior
(who one would think should best know) has assured us are unquenchable: But of
this more hereafter.

Now if what has bin hitherto said is not sufficient to show the impiety and
detestableness of these Socinian notions, he that will be at the pains to
peruse their writings, or will but have the patience to read what is here
transcribed out of them, will find (if it were possible) yet greater
abominations than these: particularly in the account which they give of those
affections and passions which they ascribe to God, and with which indeed the
Scriptures represent him to us, but in a quite different sense than they are
understood and interpreted by the Socinians; who give us such a description of
Almighty God as is repugnant to piety, and to the general sentiments, not only
of all sound Christians, but even of Jews, and many sober heathens, who have
had truer and more honorable conceptions of the nature of God, than these men
furnish us with; who cloth him with all the passions and weaknesses of men,
ascribing to him love and hatred, mercy and compassion, hope and desire, joy
and sorrow, fear and repentance, which they make to be truly and properly in
God, tho not exactly in the same manner as they are in men, no more than they
are in other created spirits, or the Soul of man it self in its state of
separation from the Body: that is, they are there, but without any motion, or
sensible alteration of the Blood and Spirits, such as is to be found in men.
But our Religion and right reason will inform us, that these things are
attributed to God, but it is (...), in a figurative sense, representing thereby
to us the various administrations of Gods providence toward diverse objects,
who as they are endued with different qualities and dispositions, so God is
pleased to exercise different actions toward them; which actions in men indeed
arise from different principles and passions, but do not so in God, who amidst
the variety of the actions and dispositions of men, and his dealings suitably
to them, yet in his essence continues still the same, without any perturbation
or the least shadows of change. And therefore Divines tell us, and particularly
Limburg, that these things are ascribed to God Non cum relatione ad ipsum Deum,
sed in ordine ad ipsa objecta, quae extra deum sunt, circa quae Deus operatur
Lib. 2. Cap. 10.
, not with respect to God, but with a regard to those objects about which the
acts of his providence are conversant, according to that known maxim of the
Schoolmen, affectus in deo notant effectus; and so far he is Orthodox: but a
little after in the same Section he overthrows what but just before he
asserted, and so interprets and explains himself, that a Socinian cannot be
displeased with his Opinion.

For first he makes these affections to be acts, or as Crellius calls them
commotions of Gods will, which some have thought could not be properly ascribed
to him, without overthrowing the simplicity as well as immutability of his
divine nature. But to let that pass.

See Episcop out of whom Limburg has transcribed his Divinity, Inst. Th. Lib.
4. cap. 22. Quod non sic accipiendum est quasi affectus nulli proprie ac per se
Deo competant: contra enim in Deo credimus affectus esse. Natura divinorum
affectuum vix aliter a nobis concipi atque aestimari potest, quam ex natura
affectuum humanorum* sive per similitudinem and Analogiam quam habent cum
affectibus humanis.
. He makes these passions in God to be Analagous to those in men, without which
Analogy, or resemblance, there is no reason, he says, why the Scriptures
should ascribe them to God. Si nihil illis Analogum Deo tribuamus, nulla
apparebit ratio, cur iisdem cum affectibus humanis nominibus appellentur. So
says Limburg, Loc. supra citat. sunt enim in nobis affectus commotiones
quaedam atque inclinationes appetitus, cui vim facultatemque Analogam voluntas
divina in se complectitur. So says Crellius Cap. 26. p. 197. and here I think
they perfectly agree. But for once we will make so bold as to ask these
Gentlemen, whether when the Scriptures attribute hands and feet, and eyes and
ears to God, they think that there is something in the nature of God that is
Analogous, and bears any resemblanee to these parts of a man's Body, without
which they could not with any reason be applied to him.

Tho I have reason not to be over confident of a Socinian, yet in this case I
will take it for granted, they would both answer in the negative, and that
there were here no (...), but what the Fathers, and particularly St.
Chrysostom upon many occasions so often mention, (...), nay there is (...) and
(...), or, if in imitation of St. Paul you will join these two words together,
there is (...); nothing to be supposed in God by way of resemblance, but an
exceeding great and adorable condescension in him, who stoops to our
capacities, and expresses some properties and operations of his, by such parts,
which are the Instruments of the like operations in men.

So with the same truth, and for the same reason it should be averred, when
human passions are ascribed to God, it is not by reason of any resemblance that
is between God and Men in these affections; but by reason of that Analogy or
similitude that is to be found between the operations of God, and these actions
of men; which in them arise from such commotions of the Soul which we call
passions, but in God proceed from his simple and uncompounded nature, who is
Infinite and unchangable, and therefore as our Church in conformity to the
Scriptures has taught us to believe, is without parts and without passions.
Article 1st.

The Impiety of this opinion will further appear from a consideration of those
particular passions which the Socinians affirm to be in God; which cannot truly
be ascribed to him, without a great disparagement to his Infinite and adorable
perfections, and those are Fear and Grief: under which we must comprehend
sorrow and repentance, which properly respect things past, whereas grief and
trouble which always attend it indifferently respect things either past or
present. And these are passions which necessarily infer a weakness in God, such
as a Stoic would not allow in his wise and virtuous man.

And first for fear, Crellius Sapientiae ipsius, quatenus circa creaturas
versatur in peccata pronas, effectum esse prope necessarium, Cap. 31. p. 324.
will tell us that tho at first view this passion cannot without a seeming
absurdity be attributed to God, yet he is truly liable to it, and indeed it is
the necessary effect of his wisdom, as it is conversant about creatures prone
and liable to sin. And this he proves from Deuteronomy. 22. 26, 27. I said I would
scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease among
men, were it not that I feared the wrath of the Enemy, least their adversaries
should say, our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this. And then
refers you to two other places before mentioned, Exodus 32. and Numb. 14. where
we have instances, as he tells us, of Gods altering his purpose of destroying
the Children of Israel, out of this principle of fear Moses Deum a proposito
perdendi populi Israelitici revocasse dicitur, Argumento metuendi mali Eventus;
quod scil. Hosts Deum essent calumniaturi, videtur Deus hunc eventum, utpote
sua natura possibilem, suo modo metuisse, and propterea a proposito suo
recessisse. Vorst. Notae ad Disp. 10. p. 451.
: least the Heathens and particularly the Egyptians, should misconstrue his
actions, and for want of knowing the true reasons which moved him to this
severity, impute it either to a malicious design, as if he had rescued them out
of the hands, and delivered them from the Tyranny of Pharaoh, that he might
have the Glory of their overthrow in the wilderness: or else to his Impotence
that he was not able to complete their deliverance, and to bring them into the
Land which he had so often promised them. Now God to save his honor which else
might have suffered by this action, and to prevent the upbraidings of his
Enemies, which he was extremely afraid of, was prevailed upon by the Entreaties
of Moses, and the reasons which he offered, to spare those, whom in his
thoughts he had solemnly devoted to destruction.

He further refers his reader to several other places where God is said to do
something which otherwise he was unwilling to do, or to omit the doing of
something which before he was resolved upon, as Genesis 5. 22. Exodus 15. 17. 35.
3. etc. out of a just fear of what might happen: and this is so far from being
with him an Argument of Imperfection, that he says it is the result of wisdom
and a just caution, in foreseeing some probable events, and thus wisely
preventing them. Ibid.

2. For grief and trouble, these likewise by the same Metaphor are to be
ascribed to God, that is, says Crellius, forasmuch as all Metaphors arise from
similitude, something like these must be found in him. And for proof of this he
quotes all those places of Scripture, where God is said to be provoked, to be
displeased and grieved, Ps. 78. 40, 46. Ps. 106. 33. Esaias. 3. 8. 2 Samuel 11. 27.
and particularly that memorable place, Esaias. 1. 14. where God is said to hate
the New Moons and Feasts of the Jews, they are a trouble to me says God, I am
weary to bear them. Where he has this remark Cap. 31. p. 319. these things are
then said to be troublesome to us, and which we cannot well bear Ea Demum
molesta sunt, and in illis sustinendis laboramus, quae dolorem aliquem nobis
afferunt.
, which bring uneasiness and a certain disquiet along with them. And to say and
think this of God, is so far from tending to his dishonor, that the contrary
conceit would overthrow all Religion, forasmuch as it would introduce an
Opinion concerning God fit only for Stoics and Epicureans to entertain of him:
quis enim, says he, who can form such a notion of God, as of one that is not
affected with pleasure, nor sensible of pain, nisi qui ad Epicureorum vel
Stoicorum saltem sententiam de Deo accedere vult? Loc. citat. 321. a God
enjoying pure and unmixed pleasure, perfect rest and an uninterrupted
tranquillity, never disturbed with passions, nor disordered by any of the
actions of men, or the changes and revolutions that happen in the world; this
doctrine concerning him is fit not to be preached in the Temples of Christians,
but to be published in the Schools of Zeno and Epicurus. Indeed we are
beholding to him for that liberal concession, that this trouble and grief which
he supposes to be in God, does not arise from any Internal causes, such as are
the indispositions of Body or mind which occasion grief in men, and make them
uneasy: but only from external motives and reasons, viz. the actions of his
creatures Ex rebus extra deum existentibus, quas in creaturarum arbitrio
posuit, Ibid. p. 320.
So that what God cannot do himself, he has put it into the power of his
Creatures to effect, and that if it were not for the follies and impieties of
men he would be entirely happy, perfectly at rest; all that grief and trouble
which affects him, is solely owing to the actions of his creatures, and not to
any disorder of his own nature: A very pious acknowledgment!

Lastly, for that sort of grief which respects things past, which we call
Repentance, this likewise is to be found in God: and not that only which
signifies the alteration of his Counsels, or a change of his will, of which we
have spoken before; (which may indeed be called Repentance, but that says
Crellius is dilutior Metaphora Ibid. p. 322.
:) but as it betokens the passion and affection it self. And for this he quotes
Genesis 6. 7. where it is said, that God repented that he made man, and that it
grieved him at the heart. This is affectio in deo ingrata, Ibid. an affection
that brings molestation with it, arising in God when he sees that those his
actions which were so well designed by him, by the folly and malice of men, are
so far perverted, as to produce effects so contrary to his Intentions.

Now against all this it would be very natural for men to object, and the
Socinian easily foresaw it, That what is thus asserted, must be quite contrary
to the sense of mankind, and to those notions which naturally arise in men's
minds concerning the perfections of Almighty God; for to suppose such variety
of commotions in the mind of God, and these sometime opposite to ane another,
which cannot but occasion in him molestation and trouble; which must be further
increased, when he finds his designs baffled, his Councils overthrown, his
authority despised; which obliges him oftentimes to change his own purposes,
and revoke his decrees: one would think that all this should really be not only
a derogation to his Infinite perfections, but likewise a diminution of his
happyness.

1 st. As to what concerns the perfections of God, Crellius will tell you, that
nothing of all this that is asserted of the nature of God is an Argument of
Imperfection. It is true, he has not the same notions of the perfections of
God as you have. You may perhaps think him Infinite, but that is a weakness in
you to think so: he is finite in his being, and consequently must be so in his
Operations: he is limited in his presence to certain spaces: his knowledge has
its just bounds; he is mutable and liable to change: he is extended* and for
that reason must be made up of parts; in him you may find a composition of
substance and accidents, and these oftentimes contrary to one another: he is
clothed with passions, which have such a resemblance to those weaknesses of
our nature, that from a Ex affectuum humanorum natura, a quibus ipse Dei
spiritus ob Analogiam, ac similitudinem voces ad Deum transfert, aestimanda
nobis erit natura illorum voluntatis Dei actuum. Cap. 29. de Affect. Dei. p.
297.
consideration of humane passions, we must make a judgment and frame our
apprehensions of those motions which are to be found in God.

And these motions in God are sometimes more calm, at other times more violent
and impetuous, the Impieties of men provoking him to that degree that he is
earnestly bent upon their destruction, but afterward calmed by their prayers:
now angry at men for their Sins, by and by appeased by their Repentance.
Sometimes you will find him doing a thing, by and by repenting the doing of it;
one while resolved upon one action, and anon resolving the quite contrary: and
all this to be found truly and formally in God, and not in that figurative
sense in which the Scriptures ascribe them to him. For says the same Author,
separate all impurity from those passions, all corporeal mixture, nay it must
be concretio terreni corporis, the mixture of a terrestrial body, that you may
not mistake him: for there is a spiritual Body, and Celestial matter which may
belong to God himself: in short exclude all Impotence and Imperfection from
these affections, (and indeed it must be a very nice and Metaphysical
abstraction that is able to do it) and then whatever remains in the true notion
and formal conception of these passions, are still to be supposed and must be
left there, when applied to God himself. Sejungenda quaecunque Imperfectionem
aut Imbecillitatem resipiunt, caetera, quae in natura cernuntur affectuum
illorum, quorum nomina deo tribuuntur, esse relinquenda. Ibid.

But however tho this should prove no Imperfection, yet the uneasiness and
disquiet, that is the inseparable attendant on grief, and fear, and sorrow,
those tormenting passions, must, one would think, interrupt that tranquillity
which we suppose God to be possessed of, and consequently be an abatement of his
happiness.

To which he answers first in general, Ut jucundum quendam rerum malarum sensum
ei tribuere non liceat. Idem Cap. 31. p. 321.
that as we ought not indeed to urge any expressions in Scripture, so far as to
oppose the happyness of God; so neither on the other hand ought we to urge the
belief of his happyness, so as to affirm him not to have a true sense of evil,
mixed with uneasiness.

But more particularly, you must consider in this case that tho men by their
Sins Ea quae voluntati divinae adversa sunt, illius beatitudinem non evertunt
aut laedunt. Ibid.
may grieve God, yet they cannot hurt him: tho they may disturb, yet they
cannot deprive him, of any of his essential perfections. That is something, but
not enough; for among men we are apt to account it an unhappyness to be robbed
of our ease and quiet, tho they that do so should not have it in their power to
deprive us of any thing else.

Therefore 2 ly, tho there are some things of that force as to be able to
create dolorem and molestiam, grief and molestation to God; yet the number of
those other things which afforde him satisfaction and pleasure, do so far
exceed and overballance them Ut vim ingratarum rerum and molestiam quam parere
possunt, aut tollant, aut imminuunt, p. 321.
, that they do much abate the trouble and uneasiness that is occasioned by
them: a Blessed Apology for the perfections and happyness of Allmighty God!

And thus much shall serve to be said upon the first head, concerning the
nature of God considered absolutely in himself, and his divine attributes; by
which we may see the difference between what the Scriptures say, and what the
Socinians affirm of him: and I doubt not but the pious Reader, will not only
be offended, but struck with a just horror and amazement, at the boldness and
impiety of these blasphemers, who are thus injurious to their maker, and think
and speak thus dishonourably of him. But how little regard, and how mean soever
their conceptions be of God, yet they have a good opinion of themselves; in
that they make not only their reason to be the adequate Judge of his
revelations, but even their own passions and weakness, the rule by which they
measure, at least make an estimate of his infinite nature and most adorable
perfections; an attempt, besides the impiety of it, more ridiculous, then if a
man should endeavor to take the dimensions of the Heavens with a single span,
or to fathom the depth and reach the bottom of the Ocean with his little
finger.

In the next place we must consider God Relatively in the great mystery of the
Trinity. And that which the Scriptures teach us to believe of this matter, is
briefly summed up in the first Article of our Religion established in this
Church concerning faith in the Holy Trinity, in these words; In the unity of
the Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, Power and Eternity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Or as it is with some alteration of words, but to
the same purpose expressed, in the Doxology to be repeated upon Trinity Sunday;
wherein we are taught to make this acknowledgement of Almighty God, That he is
one God, one Lord, not one only person, but three persons in one substance; for
that which we believe of the Glory of the Father, the same we believe of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any difference or inequality. A brief but
comprehensive Epitome, of what is more largely declared and explained, in the
Creed, which the Socinians and Remonstrants have so great a spite against,
commonly called the Athanasian Creed.

This is the Faith of all the Reformed Churches, being herein Agreeable to the
doctrine held by the Church of God in all Ages, ever since the first planting
of Christianity in the world; what we and they believe of this matter, being
conformable to the plain and express declarations of Scripture, and especially
of what Christ and his Apostles have delivered to us concerning this matter, in
the writings of the New Testament. For this you may consult the Harmony of
their Confessions; both Lutheran and Calvinist all exactly agreeing in this
doctrine, without any the least difference or variety: where you may likewise
see the consent of the Catholic Church from the first Ages next to that of the
Apostles, from whose inspired writings the Fathers received this Doctrine,
which by an uninterrupted Tradition, through all the successive Ages of the
Church, has bin delivered and brought down to the times we live in: In this
Faith we have all bin baptized, being at our first admission into the Christian
Church, solemnly consecrated to the worship and service of those three ever
blessed and glorious persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Mat. 28. These being
the three that bear witness in Heaven, and these three are one, 1 Jo. 5. 7.

For that Text we shall not easily part with, notwithstanding the Cavils of the
Socinians, and the over officious endeavors of some others, whether Papists or
Protestants, who would weaken the Authority of that Testimony, and thereby rob
us of the advantage of it. For tho some Greek MSS. want it, yet there are
others more approved and of greater antiquity in which you may meet with it.
Besides it is to be found in the writings of the Ancients, Tertull. Cypr.
Athanasius, and Jerome who quote these very words: and if you have a mind to
know more of this matter, without going any further, you may peruse what Mr.
Poole in his Synopsis has quoted out of Gerhard, Dr. Hamond and other Writers
in vindication of this Text.

From which, I think, it will appear, that the Authority of this place remains
clear and in full force, notwithstanding the attempts that have bin made to
overthrow it. Tho if we gave up this Text, yet we should not the holy Doctrine
contained in it, which is so plainly delivered in other places of Scripture,
and shines there with so bright a luster, that a man had need wink hard, who
would avoid the conviction; or else must have so great a confidence in his
Eyes, that he may hope in time to stare the Sun it self out of countenance.

For as in some places of Scripture he will find the unity of the Godhead
asserted; so in others he will find the name, and not only so, but to avoid any
Cavils and exceptions that may be made about the ambiguous signification of
that word: he will find the same divine Attributes, and Operations, on all
hands acknowledged to belong to God the Father, ascribed likewise to the Son
and the Holy Ghost; who yet are allwaies mentioned as distinct from one
another: from whence by an easy and a necessary deduction, it must unavoidably
follow, that since they are really distinguished from each other, and yet agree
in the same common nature, as the same properties and the same operations
irrefragably evince; they must be, what we have bin taught hitherto to believe
and profess of them, in the Language of the Church, three Persons and one God.
And as we pretend to agree in the same doctrine with the Ancient Church, so I
think it is highly fitting, and for many just reasons in a manner necessary, to
preserve the same words in which it has bin delivered down to us, in
opposition to any new modes of speaking. For the Ancient words by prescription
and long use, have obtained both a just Authority among Christians, and a
settled and determinate signification: whereas new phrases may be liable to
great exceptions, and introductive at long run of new and unwarrantable
opinions about these mysteries; beyond the intention of them who first made use
of them.

Now against all this the Socinians will tell you, that this doctrine
concerning the Trinity is so far from being a fundamental truth, that it is
indeed the foundation of all the errors that have crept into the Christian
Church; as being opposite to the Scriptures, and plainly repugnant to reason:
it is a Popish doctrine, so says Socinus Lib. quod Regm Polon. etc. cap. 4. so
Welsing. Lib. de O^^ic. Hominis Christiani, and by so saying they do
exceedingly advance the Reputation of Popery, by making it of so great and
venerable antiquity, embraced by all sound Christians ever since the Apostles
days. It is a Paganish opinion, Ethnicismum sapit, so says Smalcius, Exam.
Cent. Err. So opposite to reason, that it is a wonder how any man in his wits
could ever have thought of it. So says Ostorod. he cannot imagine, quomodo
homini ulli ratione praedito in mentem venire posset. Inst. Rel. Christianae
Cap. 4. that is, sure it could never have entered into any man's head, that ever
had any brains there. Nay it is not only a very foolish, but a very dangerous
error, that puts a stumbling block, and rub in men's way to Heaven. Strange that
that doctrine should be thought an hindrance to men's happiness, the belief of
which by all good Christians has hitherto bin thought necessary to salvation:
but so it is if you believe Socinus, Lib. supra cit. eodem cap.

And indeed it is no wonder it should hinder men from going to Heaven, if it be
true that Volkel. tells us, that this doctrine of the Trinity is not an Error
that is owing to the ignorance and mistakes of Men, but to the delusion of the
Devil Volkel. de Vera Relig. Lib. 5. Cap. 9.
. That it is a blasphemous Doctrine as another of them says Sunt blasphema
Dogmata, ex imo Orco, per filium perditionis Ecclesiis Gentium, virtute Satanae
obtrusa, Theod. Schimberg. citat. a Gerhardo in Exeg. Loc. 3. de Trin.
, hatched in Hell, and from thence fetched by the Son of Perdition, and
obtruded upon the Church. And if this be so, I I must profess my self to be of
the same mind with Propediem Exsibilabitur ista absurdissima simul, and
falsissima de dei essentia Opinio. Small. Contra Franz.
Small. and to hope with him, that this absurd and most false doctrine as he
calls it, will shortly be chased and hissed out of the World.

But farther, particularly concerning Christ, they tell us that he had no
existence before his formation in the womb of the Virgin: and the being which
he then had was purely humane, and therefore what is said of the Divinity of
Christ is a mere fable Small. Refut. Smig. Fabula ista mundo tunc non innotuerat.
, owing to senseless and absurd interpretations of Holy Scripture Facessant hae
imperitae ac absurdae interpretationes, Socin. in 5. Cap. 1. Epis. Johan. ver.
20.
. The Account of his Eternal Generation, is a mere Romance, false, impossible,
a plain contradiction Nugae, falsum, impossible, contradictionem implicat.
Small. Refut. Smigl. ad Nova Monst. Ar.
; the Idem Refut. Lib. de Incarn. cap. 3. Vanissimum Commentum otiosorum
Hominum.
contrivance of some idle trifling persons, who had nothing else to do but to
invent such absurd and incredible notions. Here by the way, I must desire the
Reader to take notice not only of the impiety, but likewise of the unparalled
impudence and scurrility of these blasphemers, and consequently whether it be
fit to entertain any favorable opinion, of the doctrines of these men, and
much more to have their Persons and Writings in admiration.

2 ly, Concerning the Spirit of God; they tell us that he is not a Person, as
the Church of God has hitherto vainly imagined: but only a quality, an
accident; sometimes taken for the Innate power and virtue residing in God, and
sometimes for the operations that proceed from that virtue and faculty Vid
Small. Refut. Lib. de Incarn. cap. 27. Socin. Tract. de Deo, and Contra Wier.
and alibi passim.
. Crellius has written a particular Treatise de Spiritu Sancto, and therein he
tells us that the word spirit, in its first and proper signification, denotes
Flatum exore Animalis expressum. p. 455.
that breath which is expired out of the mouths of Men or other Animals; and
from the resemblance that is to be found between them, it is transferred to
signify that divine virtue in God which we call the Holy Ghost: and therefore
when Christ, Joh. 20. 22. breathed on his Disciples, and thereby conferred upon
them the Holy Ghost; Indicavit Spiritum Sanctum ejusque a Deo and Christo
Emanationem seu Emissionem, a^^latui sive spiraculo esse similem, Proleg. de
Spiritu Sancto Ibid.
he did thereby give them to understand, that the holy spirit was an Emanation
from God, not unlike a vapor or breathing. At this rate the Holy Ghost should
it seems be a subtle and tenuious substance, contrary to what he asserts cap.
1. where he plainly tells us that the Spirit of God is not properly a substance
but a quality, therefore called in the Scripture the power of the most High,
and virtus proprie qualitas est, p. 466.

But forasmuch as many things, by his own acknowledgment, are affirmed of, and
actions ascribed to the Holy Ghost, which cannot well agree to qualities, but
must suppose the thing to which they are ascribed to be a substance; such as
are Local motion, Bodily shape, division and the like: to reconcile therefore
these seeming differences he is of Opinion, that the Spirit of God considered
abstractedly in it self, is a mere quality; but yet this virtue may be
impressed upon, and conveyed into some subtle and celestial matter, and
ejus naturae valde congruae, which is agreeable to its nature, Ibid. As we find
the vital energy of the Soul communicated first to the Animal Spirits, and by
them to all the other parts of the Body: and as we find the influences of the
Celestial Bodies, and qualities of Terrestrial ones, Heat, Light and Odors,
conveyed in some subtle effluvium's, from the Bodies in which they are, into
the Air, and some other subjects at a great distance. So says he, by the
Spirit of God is sometimes meant that Materia subtilis, quae qualitatem divinam
in se habet, and per quam in hominum pectora deferri solet. Ibid. p. 476.
tenuious matter which contains a divine quality in it, and by which it is
conveyed into the minds of men: and in this sense he conceives the spirit of
God, may be called a Corporeal substance, which has extension, and is capable
of division, as other Bodies tho spiritual are Isto modo Spiritum Sanctum
substantiam quandam esse, eamque corpoream non est negandum, Ibid.
.

And by this notion he thinks he has found out an easy way, to solve the
former difficulties concerning the Local motion of the Holy Ghost, and
particularly, his descent upon our Savior at the time of his Baptism, and upon
the Apostles in the day of Pentecost. Of his being poured out, of his being
given, sometimes in measure, and sometimes without it: of his being divided and
distributed and the like: which tho we interpret of the gifts, he does of the
nature and essence of the Holy Ghost, which according to this account he gives
of it, may like other steams and vapors be carried here and there, and may be
divided and distributed in greater and lesser quantities as there is occasion.
And thus God took some part of this Celestial matter, which contained that
divine virtue with which Moses was endued, and put it into the 70 Elders Numb.
11. 25. and in the same sense Elisha had a double portion of the Spirit of
Elias, that is, of that divine steam and vapor which enabled him to do wonders.

Now if we shall further enquire what that Celestial matter is, by which this
divine quality which he makes to be the Holy Ghost, is conveyed and
distributed among men; he has not determined, but has left it to the Readers
discretion to conjecture: tho he has given sufficient intimation how he would
have him govern his Opinion. For in the other instances which he produces, the
quality and the effluvium's, proceed from the same subject; and he gives you no
limitation, no caution in the least to think otherwise in this case: it is
plain that some of his friends as he tell us, were of that Opinion, that the
Spirit of God, was nothing but an Emanation, a tenuious steam flowing from the
very substance of God, as the breath does out of our mouths and nostrils Crell.
Proleg. de Spiritu Sancto, p. 1. Substantia subtilissima Halitui Oris Analoga,
and quemadmodum ille ab Ore Emanat, ita Spiritus iste a Deo.
: quam sententiam, says he, in medio relinquimus; he will not give you his
Opinion in this case, it being but fit that in matters of Religion, every man
should be left to his own freedom, and therefore he fairly leaves you to your
own. It is plain, if he were not himself of that Opinion, yet he thought there
was no harm in it; otherwise he would have given his Reader some caution about
it, which he has not in the least done.

And now we are come to the Bottom, or if you please, to the very dregs of
Socinianism, and that which is the true cause and sourse of all those
extravagant, and indeed Blasphemous Notions which these men have of Allmighty
God: who in their most refined and exalted speculations, cannot raise their
thoughts to conceive any substance above matter. It is true, they call God a
Spirit, but it is as certain that they mean a spiritual Body; as appears by
what Crellius tells us when he comes to describe God, and to give the Deus est
Spiritus Aeternus; Spiritum autem cum nominamus, substantiam intelligimus ab
omni crassitie, qualem in Corporibus oculorum arbitrio subjectis cernimus,
alienam. Hoc sensu Angelos dicimus spiritus, and aerem licet sensibus
quibusdam, ut tactui patentem, and alia corpora huic similia. Lib. de Deo, and
Attrib. Cap. 15.
definition of a Spirit which is contained in that description. When we call
God a Spirit, says he, we mean a substance free from all that thick gross
matter which is the object of our senses shall I say? no that is too much, but
which can terminate our sight; for a Spirit tho it be invisible, you must know
it may be palbable; and such is the aer says he, to which the word Spirit is a
genus, common to it, to God and Angels Quorum unumquodque hoc nomen tanto magis
sortitur, quanto est subtilius, Ibid.
: each of which are spirits, but that which is most subtle is likewise most
spirituous.

And by this explication of the nature of a spirit, Crellius who calls God a
spirit, and Socinus who plainly thought he was none, (as appears by his Vid.
Vorst. Not. ad Disp. 3. de Natura Dei p. 200.
forced and perverse Interpretation of those words of Christ Jo. 4. 24. which
contain as plain and clear a declaration of this great truth, as could be
expressed in words,) may very easily be reconciled. For whereas the Master
denies God to be a spirit, he might by spirit mean an incorporeal, immaterial
being; and the Scholar by acknowledging him to be one, did not intend to
exclude matter from his constitution; but that he was not composed of such
thick gross parts of matter as our Bodies are, which can terminate the sight;
but of matter of a more tenuious and refined Contexture, more subtle perhaps,
but of the same nature with Aer or Ether.

And from hence result all their Impious Opinions about God, in opposition to
his Immensity, simplicity, Omnipresence: Judging of their Maker by themselves;
of his thoughts by their thoughts, of his ways by their ways, of his dealings
with men by their own foolish passions: and in short, measuring all his
Glorious and Incomprehensible perfections, by their own narrow and shallow
conceptions of sensible objects. Hence it is that we have those bold assertions
of Vorstius Ibid. p. 234, 235.
Deus non est infinitus, nec in essendo nec in operando. Infinita virtus non
est in Deo. Immensitas Non est fortasse eorum verborum sententia, quam plerique
omnes arbitrantur, [Deum scil. esse spiritum:] neque enim subaudiendum esse
dicat aliquis verbum (...), quasi vox (...) Recto casu accipienda sit: sed
(...) repetendum verbum (...), quod paulo ante praecessit; and (...), quarto
cas^ accipiendum, ita ut sententia sit, Deum quaerere and postulare Spiri^um.
Frag. Disp. de Ador. Christi cum Christiano Franken* p. 778.
seu infinitas est (...). To be Infinite is impossible, and therefore so far
from denoting a perfection, that it implies a plain contradiction. And among
other Arguments which he makes use of to prove God not to be Infinite, this is
remarkable Ibid. p. 237. Because God at present, says he, is seen by the
Angels, and shall be so hereafter by us, with our Bodily Eyes; and therefore
not Infinite. For what is so cannot be comprehended by any sense, as he rightly
upon this supposition argues: Quia debet esse proportio inter objectum
percipiendum, and personam percipientem: and whereas it may be objected that
the Beatifick vision respects the inward speculation of the mind, and not the
external perception of the Eyes; some indeed so interpret it, says he, Sed
nescio an sacris literis consentaneum sit; certe magnam futurae nostrae
foelicitatis partem hac explicatione tollere videntur.

Now if God be finite, it must further follow, and is plainly acknowledged by
these men, that magnitude and extension, and a true local presence may and must
be ascribed to God: and this is so far from being by them looked upon to be
derogatory to the nature and perfection of God; that the contrary notion is
scouted by them, not only as false, but as absurd and ridiculous, which asserts
such a presence of God, as obliges us to believe him not be confined to any
certain place, neither to have any parts commensurate to the parts of that
place in which he is. For this if any thing must be the meaning of Exam.
Censurae in Conf. Rem. Cap. 2. p. 43.
Episcopius's Atomica and Atopica essentiae divinae praesentia; which he rails
and exclaims against, and can scarce think of without horror and Astonishment.

But further, if Local presence be ascribed to God, I think Local motion may
with good reason be so likewise; forasmuch as it may be more honorable to God
to Imagine that he may sometimes change, then that he should allwaies be
Immoveably fixed and consined to one certain place. Lastly if extension may be
attributed to God, and such an extension as was said before, which has its
certain bounds and limits, by an unavoidable consequence, Figure must be
ascribed to him also: forasmuch as figure does naturally and necessarily result
from the termination of extension: this being the definition of a figure, quae
sub aliquo vel aliquibus terminis comprehenditur.

And now at length we see what a blessed notion of Almighty God the Socinians
have furnished us with; how scandalous and dishonorable to God, how repugnant
to piety, how opposite to right reason, and to those sober and just
apprehensions which that has furnished many wise heathens with, who I am
afraid may one day rise up in Judgment against these men and condemn them.

It may be now time to draw toward a conclusion of this Discourse, therefore I
shall briefly sum up what has been said upon this subject: that the Readers
memory may be refreshed with the account which has bin given him, both of what
the Scripture affirms of God, and what the Socinians say of him.

The Scriptures have informed us that our God is Infinite, they say he is
Finite, ours is Omnipresent, theirs Limited and confined to a certain place:
ours Immutable, theirs Liable to change; ours is naturally just, theirs
contingently so: ours necessarily concerned in the government of the World, and
taking care of humane affairs; theirs might, like Epicurus his Deity, sit at
ease in the enjoyment of his own happyness, leaving the world to the conduct of
chance; and men to the guidance of that which is equally uncertain, their own
giddy and unstable passions; neither giving them Laws for the regulating of
their actions, nor assigning any punishments to the violation of them. Our God
is Omniscient, theirs ignorant of future and contingent events: ours without
parts or passions, theirs compounded of one, and liable to the other; even to
those which argue the greatest weakness and infirmity, and which some of the
Philosophers thought inconsistent with the bravery and resolution of a wise and
virtuous man. In short, our God consists of three blessed and glorious persons,
subsisting in the same undivided essence: They deny the divine nature of the
Son, and yet by an unpardonable contradiction, say that he is a true God; and
disown the personality of the Holy Ghost.

From all which I think it will appear very evident, what we undertook to make
out at the beginning of this discourse, that the Object of their Religion and
ours is different; and that will go a great way to prove that the Religions
themselves are so too. In short, the difference between us is not so small as
some ignorant people may imagine, and some crafty and designing persons may
pretend; among whom I cannot but reckon Curcellaeus, who most falsely and
impudently against common sense and reason, and therefore one might be tempted
to imagine, against his Conscience, would persuade the world to believe, that
the difference between us and the Socinians, in the point of the Divinity of
the son of God, was a (...), a contention about words rather then any real
difference, in a matter of faith: which is quite contrary to the notion that
either the Orthodox or the Socinians have of this matter: who lay a greater and
truer stress upon their Opinions, then this man does, who pretends to bless the
world with a discovery of what no body ever knew before.

But I believe the Reader who has perused the foregoing discourse, will be
induced to believe that either the Socinians or we are in a very great mistake,
the distance between us being wider then that between Heaven and Earth: and
indeed no less then between Finite and Infinite. So that upon a true state of
things, I believe it will be found that our Opinions are not only seemingly
inconsistent, but absolutely irreconcilable; forasmuch as in order to
reconcile them, we must part with the Infinite nature of God the Father, and
the Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And surely that man must be
very fond, nay he must be mad for peace, that can be content, to sacrifice both
Truth and the Divine Author of it, in order to purchase it. Once indeed our
Blessed Savior came down among men, and offered up himself upon the Cross in
order to reconcile the two greatest Enemies, God and Man: but it is too much in
all Conscience which is expected of us, that we should make a new Oblation of
our Savior: and not only as the Jews Curcell. Rel. Christianae Inst. Lib. 2.
Cap. 21. p. 78. Quae Confessio, si rem ipsam potius quam verba aut phrases
spectes, parum ab Orthodoxorum sententia differ videtur.
did, nail his Body to the Cross, but sacrifice even his Divinity, to compose
the differences in Religion.

But perhaps some may say the Socinians are men of more reason and moderation,
then to desire us presently to part with all our Religion to gratify them:
They only plead for liberty, and in order to their joining with us, that we
would remove those obstacles of communion, viz. Articles, Creeds, Confessions
of Faith, some useless expressions in our Common Prayer, which contain too
plain and uncharitable acknowledgments of the Trinity; which hinder many pious,
useful and excellent persons from coming to our Churches. Why should we not
strip our Faith of all those larger and unwarrantable explications which
Councils and Fathers have made of it; and reduce all to the naked expressions
of Scripture: that is, content our selves with a few Ambiguous words, (which
the perverse and subtle Interpretations of Heretics have made so) and let
every man abound in his own sense.

They believe Christ to be the Son of God, so as to be true God likewise: what
need we trouble our selves or them with the word Consubstantial; pity it is,
that a word, nay a Letter should divide men in their Opinions and Affections.
To all which, tho I have a great deal that I could answer, yet at present all
that I shall say shall be this: That the Socinians are wise men, persons of a
deep reach; but they must not think that all the rest of the World are fools.
It were too much in all Conscience to desire us to part with all at first: but
they know what advantage to make of our Concessions: if they can persuade us
with that foolish woman Prove. 14. 1. to pull down our house with our own hands,
it will save them the toil and drudgery of so doing: at least if they can
prevail with us to demolish our Outworks, then they will be able as with
greater ease, so likewise with greater hopes of success, to attack the main
Fort. In short, the Ancient Creeds and Confessions, and those Ancient words in
which the Doctrine of Faith has bin conveyed down to us; are only Dr.
Sherlocks Apol.
an Hedge of Thorns, as they have bin truly and pertinently styled, with which
the Christian Faith has bin guarded against the designs of disguised
Heretics, and I hope they will prick their fingers, who shall attempt the
removing of them.

And thus much shall serve to be said upon the first Head, of the great
difference there is between what the Scriptures affirm, and what the Socinians
say of the great object of our Religion God Allmighty. And if there were only
this in the case, I hope it might prove sufficient to guard any pious well
meaning Christian from the Infection of their Impious Opinions, which furnish
him with notions so dishonorable and injurious to his maker: and who by denying
the blessed Trinity, and the Divinity of our Savior, have subverted the very
foundations of Christianity, altered the whole Economy of man's Salvation: so
that they and we must go different ways to Heaven, as having neither the same
means of Grace, nor the same hopes of Glory.

I should now proceed to show the Opposition between the Socinian tenets, and
the other parts of the Christian Doctrine, which are thereby contradicted, and
overthrown. But this must be referred till a time of further and better
leisure: But by this Taste which I have given the Reader of Socinianism, I may
have reason to hope that he will be of the Opinion, that Religion is like Wine,
the older, the more excellent and desirable. And therefore that no man of
wisdom, or indeed of common sense, who has not lost all Relish of divine
things, when he has tasted of the old Religion, will straightly desire the
New, because he will find that the Old is much better.

Now to the Holy Blessed and undivided Trinity, three Persons and one God, be
all Honor, Glory, and Praise both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

