REMARKS Upon a BOOK lately published BY Dr. WILL. SHERLOCK Dean of St. Paul's,
etc.

ENTITLED A MODEST EXAMINATION OF THE Oxford Decree, etc.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, MDCXCV. And are to be Sold by H. Clements.

REMARKS UPON THE EXAMINATION OF THE Oxford Decree.

REFLECTIONS ON THE LATE EXAMINATION OF THE Oxford Decree.
A Modest examination of the Oxford Decree; So the Dean begins his Book: But
the whole Book, and almost every page in it, is a very plain and effectual
confutation of the Title; in which you will find as little modesty in this
censure of the Decree, as there is soundness and truth in the propositions
which are condemned by it. The former is just as decent as the latter are
Orthodox, and they may each of them be thus called by the same figure, which is
commonly known by the name of Antiphrasis; as some say Parcae are so called a
non parcendo. But the Dean is to be excused, if any excuse may be framed from
long use and custom, which have rendered such a way of contradicting himself
habitual, and that habit is turned almost into a second nature.

I shall readily therefore acknowledge, (and let him take what advantage he
pleases of that concession) that there is as great an harmony between this
Title and the Book, as there is between the several parts of this, and and some
others of his late discourses. Upon which account I have sometime bin induced
to think, that a man could not reasonably desire to encounter a fairer
Antagonist than the Dean, who will save his Adversary the pains and trouble of
confuting him; he will do it so often and so effectually himself.

It has long since bin made an observation, that when men have once cast away
the Faith, they at the same time make shipwreck of a sound and discerning
judgment; being oftentimes, as a just punishment of their pride and vanity,
delivered up (...), to a mind which cannot rightly judge of, and distinguish
the natures of things. One would almost be temted to imagine, that some such
thing has overtaken this Dean, who as he does not make a right difference, in
some points of great importance, between truth and falsehood: so in these papers
he seems to have lost all distinction between reason and sophistry; between
arrogance and Modesty. For if this be a modest vindication of his Opinions,
then we have lost the true signification of words.

But perhaps he will come off, and relieve himself, as he does upon some other
occasions, by his meaning. It is true indeed, if you will judge of things by
the letter and words of his book, he has treated the Governors of the
University with great insolence and contempt: but yet still he meant nothing
but fairness and respect toward them; and therefore in spite of what can be
said to the contrary, his discourse shall still be called a Modest examination.

I am loath to part with this word, because if I do, I must bid a final adieu
to it, and never expect to find any thing again like it, at least in this book.
If any man therefore who at present has a good opinion of this Dean's modesty,
has a mind likewise to continue in it, then I must tell him, if he meets with
this examination, he must be content to read but a few pages; nay that is too
much; Titulo debet, aut si placet, Titulis contentus esse. He must be satisfied
to read only the Title of the book, or at most the Titles of the Author; which
are enough in all reason. And indeed before this trifling paper, he has
prefixed so many of them, as if he had a mind to oppress those by his puissance,
whom he despaired to subdue by his reasons.

It is true indeed, they are all of them (not now to enquire into his merits)
such as he has reason to be proud of: But however it will not become him to
swell and look too big: for I must tell him, tho these Titles, may give him a
place above some of the Heads of Houses; yet neither will they, nor twice as
many more put together, render him equal to all, or the major part of them when
met together. He cannot be offended then if I put him in mind of the frog in
the Fable: he knows the story, it will become him to make the application; or
if he will not, some body else would do well to whisper him in the ear, and
advise him, ne te infles, ne intumescas, Decane, non si te ruperis par eris.

And now from the Preface, I proceed to the Book. But before I come to consider
his examination of the Decree, there are certain passages and expressions, here
and there dispersed in these papers, which must not slightly and
disrespectfully be passed over, but call for our notice and observation.

And the first thing I am to take notice of is, the manner how he treats the
Oxford Decree, and the persons who made and published it. The Decree he styles
rash and injudicious, the rash and hasty judgment of some Heads, p. 10. which
Heads he all a long by way of contempt calls these Heads, Decreeing,
Heresy-making Heads, p. 46. who in their determinations, have not only opposed
the common faith of Christians, but acted likewise in opposition to the common
sense of mankind. Of them he farther says, that they talk of the Fathers and
Councils, but are wholly ignorant of those matters, of which they have no
knowledge, except it be by inspiration or prophesy. And in short, this
ignorance and inconsideration has betrayed them into a belief, and declaration
of what is at the same time both Heresy and nonsense; and for which, not only
all learned men, but even the most illiterate plowmen, whom he makes competent
judges of these matters, will condemn them.

I shall consider first what he says of the Decreeing Heads, and then of the
Decree its self. Now as to what concerns the Heads of the University, I believe
there is no indifferent stander-by, that is, no man who is not perfectly of
this Dean's complexion and interest, but will acknowledge that he has treated
them in a very rude, and unbecoming manner. He ought to have considered who
were present at this meeting, and to have made some distinction at least. Among
them he ought in the first place to have thought upon the Vicechancellor, who
presided in this meeting, and not over-hastily to have passed his Censure,
without a salva reverentia, a preface of respect, which is due to his place and
Character. For he should be put in mind of, what now perhaps by reason of his
long absence from the University he may have almost forgotten, that the
Vicechancellor of this, as also of our Sister University, upon the account of
the greatness of his Trust, and the condition and quality of the persons under
his Government, has bin always thought to deserve a place, and has
accordingly bin ranked, with the chiefest Magistrates, and Officers of
Corporations in the Kingdom. Upon which account he has bin wont to be treated
with Honor and respect by all persons of good manners, and civil behavior.

Besides him, among the persons who composed that meeting, (as his friends who
gave him an account of what passed there, might, and I suppose did inform him)
there were two more, one whereof upon the account of his noble birth, and the
other of his Character and Station in the Church, deserved to have bin
distinguished. But he without any restriction or qualification, jumbles and
shakes all these Heads together, and represents them to the World, as a Company
of indiscreet, ignorant, rash men. Some of the wiser Heads indeed he says were
absent; by which he would have it believed, that those who were present were a
Company of illiterate and injudicious blockheads. And so infallibly they must
be, if in the affairs of religion, and the judgment and doctrines of the
Ancient Church, they understand nothing but by prophesy or inspiration, as he
says, p. 31. that is, nothing at all. Neither can he relieve himself, by
suggesting as if some who were present dissented. For his friends might have
informed him, that after some previous discourse, as usually happens at such
meetings; when the Censure and Decree was settled and agreed upon, there was not
one person who opened his mouth, or said one word in opposition to it, either
as to matter or form. So that all who were present are equally involved in
those decent epithets before mentioned.

From the Decreeing Heads let us pass to the Decree it self; this is styled the
rash and hasty judgment of some of the Heads of Colleges and Halls; and
immediately afterward, he sets himself to show the rashness and
injudiciousness of this Decree, p. 11. Sure our Author when he made this
reflection had his own writings before him, in which there are so many marks of
have and precipitation. But let us consider these epithets apart. First he says
it was a hasty judgment; but that is more than he knows; and if it were as
hasty as he imagines, yet I must tell him, that is no disparagement to it in
this case. For there are some things so grossly and palpably false and absurd,
that their falsehood and absurdity appear at first view, and therefore require
no long time, or previous deliberation to detect them, and when they are so
detected, I hope it is no Argument of rashness to condemn them. And such were
the propositions censured in the Decree, which are directly repugnant to the
common faith, and universally received doctrines of all sound Christians;
tending plainly to overthrow the Unity of the Godhead, which is the first and
Fundamental principle of all Religion, whether natural or revealed.

But if these propositions were not so grossly and palpably absurd, yet the
condemnation of them could not be accounted injudicious; because the Heads, who
were concerned in that Censure, herein followed and were governed by the
judgment and determinations of Fathers and Councils. To make this more plain.
Suppose any one now should assert, that there are two persons, or but one
nature in Christ, and thereby revive the Heresy of Nestorius, or Eutyches;
would it require any long time and previous consultations to Censure those
positions? or could such a Censure so passed be accused of rashness? I say no,
because we have the example and Authority of two General Councils, to justify
such a Condemnation, which cannot be impeached of imprudence, without
reflecting upon the wisdom and integrity, not only of the Fathers who composed
those august Assemblies, but likewise of the Catholic Church, which has
confirmed their sentence, by rejecting those errors which they Condemned. He on
the other hand, is justly to be accounted rash and arrogant who presumes to
oppose his own single opinion, to the judgment and determinations of Fathers
and Councils; and upon that account endeavors fixa refigere, to shake and
unsetle those Doctrines, and those words in which they have bin conveyed down
to us, and which are now universally established in the Christian Church.

In short therefore, to censure any positions which have already bin condemned
by any General Councils, does not require any slow or tedious consultations; it
is sufficient to declare them impious and scandalous, because they have bin so
adjudged formerly, by assemblies composed of persons who have bin celebrated
for their wisdom and learning, and renowned for their soundness in the faith
and their zeal for it.

And so it was in the case before us. The propositions censured by the Decree,
were such as had formerly bin condemned by the famous Council of Nice, whose
Determinations have bin received with respect and reverence by all good
Christians, and make up at this day part of the established Doctrine of all the
Churches in the Christian World: who, amidst that variety of judgments and
opinions in other matters, are at perfect agreement among themselves in this,
that the Father and Son are Consubstantial, or of one and the same Substance,
to which assertions the propositions condemned, are plainly and diametrically
opposite; it being absolutely impossible that two or three individual
Substances, should be one and the same Substance.

The second thing which ought not to be passed over without observation, is
that undecent reflection, which in more places than one of this examination, he
passes upon zeal. One would think, he accounts it unlawful and unwarrantable
in the affairs of Religion; or else sure he would never brand any man with the
name of Zealot, as if it were a mark of infamy and reproach. He ought therefore
to be told, that there never was a just sense, and a firm belief of Religion
found in any person, where it was not likewise accompanied with a zeal and
concern for it; which for that reason was never condemed by any wise or honest
man. Neither indeed can it be censured, without a bold and dangerous reflection
upon our blessed Savior himself; and together with him, upon those wise and
good men who in all ages of the world, as occasion has served, have shown a
zeal for the Glory of God, and a just concern for the preservation, and
maintenance of the true Religion.

It is true indeed it may be, as oftentimes it has bin, joined with ignorance,
or excess; in which cases it has bin found to be so far from being serviceable
to the interest of truth, that it has rather bin the occasion of a great deal
of mischief in the world. But on the other hand, to disparage and expose it
without any just restriction and limitation, is to introduce a coldness and
indifference among men in the great affairs of Religion, which in time may end
in the ruin and extinction of it.

Perhaps it will be said, that he does not design to condemn zeal absolutely
and for it self, but as it is to be found in conjunction with some other ill
qualifications, which are apt to corrupt and spoil it: the best things being
liable to abuse, and when they are so abused, they often prove very hurtful and
mischievous. I find it therefore joined with two other qualities, for the sake
of which possily, he may speak disrespectfully of it. The first whereof is
Warmth, p. 2. where he represents a certain member of the University under the
character of a warm Zealot; which to be sure he did not design to be a
commendation, but rather a Title of contempt and disgrace. The other is
Orthodoxie or soundness in the faith, p. 24. where in the same slight and
contemptuous manner, he styles some persons, our modern Orthodox Zealots; to
which he joins an other ornamental Epithete of Heresy makers. It may not
possibly then be bare naked Zeal, but zeal thus qualified, which he thinks fit
to condemn.

As to the first Epithete of Warm; if zeal found in conjunction with Warmth, be
blameworthy, than I would fain know of him where he can direct us to find out
any kind of zeal, which will not come under the same condemnation. In all his
great reading did he ever meet with any Author who furnished him with the
notion of a cold zeal; or in this case did he ever meet with any medium between
hot and cold, i. e. a lukewarm zeal. Does this great critic in languages know
whence this word is derived?

Perhaps he will say, that it was not the bare Warmth, but the Excess of it,
which he disliked in this Zealot. But I do not hear that he did promote any
petition, or use any endeavors that the Sermon should be burned, but that the
propositions delivered in it which gave great occasion of offense, should be
condemned. However let the warmth of this zealot be what it will, the reflection
made upon it by this examiner can never be excused in him, who in many of his
writings discovers such an intemperate heat, as has bin disapproved by his
friends as well as enemies. Nay there is one peculiar circumstance of his
warmth, for which I think no tolerable excuse can possibly be made by any
person, tho never so much biased in his favor; and that is, the fervor which
he has discovered on both sides of the question; having discoursed pro and
con, and with equal violence appeared in defense of quite contrary opinions.

It is true indeed, it is no disparagement to any man to alter his opinion;
provided that that change be attended with modesty, and supported by reason.
But whoever shall maintain both parts of a contradiction, and then with equal
fury shall think to bear down all opposition; it is plain such an one can have
no sincere concern for truth, but only for his own opinion, and thereby gives
too great occasion, to call in question either his judgment, or sincerity,
which are hereby brought under a just suspicion.

But 2dly, Supposing that a warm zeal may be excused, yet I find a zeal for the
Faith is not like to meet with the same fair quarter; for an Orthodox Zealot,
is a pernicious creature, and never to be endured; who will be sure either to
find or make Heresies; and thereby disturb the quiet and peace of the world.
But where, I beseech you, can a man employ his zeal more commendably, than in
the defense and maintenance of the truth; especially when it is of great
importance? As it certainly must be, when the opposite error is such, as
plainly overturns the foundations of our Religion; and this is plainly the case
before us. But it seems, a zeal for errors, for false and impious opinions may
be warranted, tho attended with all the warmth, nay with all the rudeness and
scurrility imaginable; but we must not lift up a finger to support the faith,
nor open our mouths in defense of it, but presently they must be stopped again,
with such dirty and foul language as this examiner thinks fit to fling in our
faces. This is not just and equal dealing.

3dly, The next thing that calls for our observation is, that strange vein of
pride and haughtyness which runs through this paper. To give an account of all
particulars of this nature, would be in a manner to transcribe his book, which
ought not to be honored with too many Editions. I shall therefore confine my
self to two particulars, in which a vanity and arrogance which are
insupportable are too plainly discovered.

The first is, the charge of Heresy, which almost in every page, he lays at the
doors of all them who differ from him in his notion of three distinct minds and
substances in the blessed Trinity; the denial of which he over and over calls
Sabellianism, and in the conclusion of these papers, he dubbs with the
honorable titles of Heresy and nonsense. But I would fain know how this Dean
comes to be thus invested with this large Authority and prerogative of
adjudging and declaring Heresy, which he says, and says rightly, ought not to
be entrusted with any single person, nor any body of men less than a National
Synod. I do not know that he is his Majesty's High Commissioner for
Ecclesiastical affairs.

Perhaps it will be said, that he did this by way of retaliation: the Heads of
Houses declared his notion of three minds and substances to be Heretical; and
he adjudges their opinion of three persons and one substance to be so too. Here
he does but recriminate, and therefore is on the same level with these
Decreeing Heresy-making Heads. If this be a fault, it is a fault on both sides,
and they are alike equally criminal.

To which I answer, 1st, That the Heads of Houses by the judgment and
declaration which they made, were very far from designing to assume to
themselves an illegal and extravagant power of adjudging or declaring any
matter or cause to be Heresy, which was not, as they thought, adjudged and
declared to be so before by a competent Authority, and allowed for such by the
Laws of this Land. The Doctrine of one substance was Decreed in the Council of
Nice, confirmed afterward by all the other General Councils; to which the
contrary opinion of three substances, as was said before, is diametrically
opposite; and therefore by the whole Church has bin in former ages accounted
and adjudged Heretical.

On the other hand, the examiner declares the belief of one substance in the
Trinity to be Heresy, not only which had never bin declared so before by any
Council either general or particular: but quite contrary to the plain meaning
of the Canonical Scriptures, to the express determinations of General Councils,
to the established Faith and Doctrine of the Catholic Church; to all which, he
has with unparalled pride and presumtion bid defyance, and thereby brings
himself within the compass and condemnation of the Law.

But 2dly, The judgment and declaration of the Heads of Houses, was made with a
particular regard to the Members of their own Body, over whom they are
entrusted with a just and legal Authority. They have reason to look upon
themselves to be under a strict and sacred obligation, to prevent as far as in
them lies, the growth of any pernicious Doctrines in Religion. Some such had
bin preached among them, which they had reason to fear, might in time gain
ground, if not timely obviated. To prevent therefore the infection and growth
of such false and impious opinions, they thought fit to publish their Decree,
which, as I said before, had a particular regard to those persons who were
committed to their care, eorum fidei and curae commissis.

But this Dean like an Universal Pastor and Bishop, sets himself as it were in
Cathedra, and from thence he dictates to the whole Church. He lifts up his
voice, as if he would say, audiat orbis Christianus, I do declare, and let all
persons take notice of it at their peril, that the Doctrine of three Persons,
and one God, or one Substance in the Godhead (which is all one, as shall be
shown by and by) is Sabellianism, is Heresy and nonsense. Would not this Dean,
think you, have done well to have advised with some men of skill and learning,
how far the reputation of his wisdom and modesty, (not now to mention the
Integrity of his Faith, which thereby may be justly called in question,) might
be affected by such a bold and presumtuous declaration?

The next instance of his great modesty may be found in the 11th and 12th pages
of this examination, where he makes an Apology for the use of new forms of
words, unusual, unscriptural forms of speech, in order to explain and declare,
as he calls it the Catholic Faith: several of which, as it is very well known,
this examiner had invented and made use of to this purpose, in his vindication
of the blessed Trinity, and for which he was justly called to an account by the
learned Animadverter. Now among other things, which he offers in vindication of
this bold and dangerous practice, p. 12. he tells us, That the Church tho it
never had authority to make a new Faith, yet it always had, and always will
have authority to declare and explain the true Catholic Faith, in such words
as are most aptly expressive of it, and necessary to countermine the Arts and
Evasions of Heretics. And this he says will justify the use of such
expressions as these, Three distinct infinite Minds, and Spirits, or three
substances, how novel soever they may be thought. To this suggestion of his I
have several things to Answer. First he says the Church has Authority to use
new, and unusual forms of words in Articles of Faith. But I am apt to think she
would be very unwilling to exercise her power, and would never do it, except
when pressed with a great and an unavoidable necessity. We have reason to think
it would be one of her last remedies, when all other methods of preserving the
faith had proved ineffectual.

It is true indeed, in the Ancient Church, the meaning of certain words which
sometime were of doubtful and ambiguous signification, were afterward settled
and determined, such as was substantia, persona, (...). And some new
unscriptural words, such as the (...), were made choice of by the Fathers, and
put into their Creeds, in order to detect the hypocrisy and Heresy of the
Arians. But this was not done till after many disputations, and great
deliberation: and afterward they thought themselves obliged to declare the
necessity they were under, of settling the sense of one word upon this
important subject, which was not a new word neither, but such as had bin
formerly used; before they would impose it on the Church. So weighty a thing
was the faith and peace of the Church, in the opinion of those great men in
those days.

But tho they introduced some new words, and settled the signification of
others, they never did attempt to alter, and lay aside the use of any which had
formerly bin of general usage, and universally received among Christians, in
order to introduce new ones in the room of them. On the other hand the Church
has condemned all (...), all new invented terms; and has forbid the
introducing any such, under the pain of deprivation or Anathematization. And
for this Decree of the 6th General Council, the third of Constantinople, the
Church in succeeding ages has preserved so great a veneration, that none,
either Greek or Latin, Roman or Reformed, have ever since complained of the
hardship of that Synodical sentence, or have endeavored to reverse it. But on
the other hand, they have declared a high displeasure against all such who have
at any time attempted any such innovations. As is evident from the fate that
attended Abbot Joachim, and Valentinus Gentilis, the one in his book, the other
in his person.

All this the Dean had formerly bin put in mind of by the learned Animadverter;
and yet notwithstanding this monition, he still persists in that presumtuous
humor, of using and defending these new, unusual, inconvenient forms of speech;
and which he himself allows may be liable to an Heretical meaning.

But 2dly, Let it be granted, that the Church may alter old phrases; but has
she actually made use of that her Authority in the case before us? Has she
published any declaration, whereby she has discovered her pleasure in this
affair, viz. that the old words, such as those of persons, Hypostasis,
subsistence, should be laid aside to make room for self-consciousness, and
mutual consciousness? Or that one nature, one essence, one substance, must be
discarded, and in their place, the phrases of three distinct minds, spirits,
and substances should be introduced. That maxim in Law, is true here in
Divinity; eodem modo res solvitur quo ligatur. The Church has tied us to the
use of these words, I pray who has set us at liberty? why he says, or at
least intimates, that the Church has. But what Church I beseech you? why none
that I know of, except it be that which is included, and which he carries about
with him in his own person. How comes he to be styled the Church? That you must
know is by a Synecdoche, whereby the Dean of a Church may be called the Church
it self. Tho others may account it rather a Catachresis, or vocis abusio; when
a word is abused, being transferred from a proper to a very improper and absurd
signification.

But sure the Dean cannot so far forget himself, as to arrogate to himself the
name of the Church. He does not that I know of indeed assume the name, but he
plainly does the Authority of the Church. And under her name and power he
shelters himself. For as was said before, p. 16. he justifies his own
innovations, by saying that the Church always had, and always will have
Authority to use such words as she thinks most expressive of the faith. How can
this Apology vindicate him, except either he be the Church, or at least be
commissioned by her, and invested with her Authority?

I presume he will not pretend to be formally the Church either Ecumenical or
National. He must therefore only be so, either virtually, or by way of
representation. And sure some such thing he fancies of himself, viz. that the
Christian Faith, or at least the words wherein it is to be expressed, are
committed to his care, or rather are to be disposed of at his pleasure.
Otherwise sure he would never talk as he does in this book. For instance, p.
16. He has these remarkable words. Now since Person is the Catholic word,
which long Ecclesiastical use has rendered familiar, I should by no means
allow of any other word in this mystery, could we retain the Catholic Faith,
together with the word.

What must words be used, or laid aside at his discretion? He acknowledges the
word to be Ecclesiastical: the Church has made it her own; she has adopted it
into her Creeds, and confessions of her Faith: by long use it is now rendered
familiar, and is become the common Language of all Christians. What Authority I
pray has he to order the laying of it aside? I should by no means allow, etc.

It is fit he should be told upon this occasion, that this word was anciently
used without his leave, and will still continue to be so without his allowance.
For neither the faith nor language of the Church have any such dependence upon
him, as that they must stand or fall at his pleasure.

But lastly, whatever Authority the Church may have to alter the usual and
received forms of speech, yet to be sure she would never exercise it, except
forced, as was intimated before, by some very great, and some very apparent
reason. To this he answers that there is as great reason and necessity for such
an alteration of words now, as ever there was in any age of the Church, p. 12.
And the reason that he assigns is this, viz. That we are in great danger of
losing the Catholic Faith, by the revival of the Heresy of Sabellius, p. 16.
which walks publicly abroad, tho under the disguise of a new name. And if we
believe him it is one of those doctrines too publicly received in the Church
of England, which are not the true doctrines of our Church, p. 44.

Now this, I cannot but say, is not only extremely false, but likewise a very
scandalous suggestion. Because it must not only affect our own times and
Nation; but likewise bring all other Churches Ancient and Modern, Eastern and
Western, Roman and Reformed under the same suspicion. For all these are at
perfect agreement both in the belief of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and in the
manner of expressing their Faith; which is by the profession of three persons,
and one nature or substance. So that if by retaining the old words there is
danger of losing the Catholic Faith, it must be lost out of the Catholic
Church: and this revolt to Sabellianism, must be both the most lasting, and the
most general Apostasy, that ever was foretold, or feared should happen to the
Christian Church.

But as to what may concern this Church, I believe, if all wise and good men in
it, have reason to fear any danger, it is from another quarter; I mean from the
revival of the Heresies of Arius, Pelagius, and Socinus, which some evil men
with great industry, and with no small art, endeavor to propagate among us.

But 2dly, Tho the charge of Sabellianism be a very great and heavy one, yet we
ought not to look upon it to be such a bugbear, as thereby to be affrighted
out of our Religion. We may comfort our selves with this, that this imputation
is no other, nor better, than what has formerly bin made by Heretics against
the Orthodox. For the Arian Orthodoxi universo orbi Christiano testatum
faciunt, se Patrem, Filium, and S iritum Sanctum in unum individuum conflare,
ita ut pater non sit alius revera quam filius; nec filius alius quam pater; sed
ejusdem substantiae uterque, idque hoc ipsum est quod Haeresis Sabelliana.
Arian. apud Zanch.
against whom Zanchy wrote, in his Antithesis doctrinae Christianae and
Antichristi de uno vero Deo; and Quum ad supplicium educeretur (scil. Val.
Gentilis) non desiit homo pertinacissimus, and ex sola indomita pervicacia
gloriam quaerens, (sicut Satanae Martyrs solent) ingeminare, se pro gloria
altissimi Dei pati. Nos omnes esse Sabellianos, and Deum habere trinomium,
Benedicti Aretii. Hist. Valent. Gent.
Valentinus Gentilis in order to establish his Doctrine of three distinct
infinite Spirits, made the very same objection against the Catholic Faith,
with relation to the error of Sabellius. Cantilenam Sabellii nobis obgannit,
says Aretius of Gentilis; and eandem nobis cantilenam occinit Decanus, may we
say.

But as they who believe three persons and but one nature or substance, are as
far from being Sabellians, as any the greatest Tritheist; so they no doubt will
be as ready to oppose the attempts of such, who at any time hereafter may
endeavor to revive the Heresy of Sabellius. But in order to combat that
Heresy, they will not think themselves obliged to use any other weapons, than
those with which in former times it has bin so succesfully vanquished. The
faith has bin transmitted down to us for these thirteen centuries, in that
form of sound words, viz. Three Persons and one nature, and has conquered all
opposition made against it; and in all times since, they who have refused the
Language of the Church, have bin justly suspected to be no true friends to the
faith of it; which now by long use, and the prescription of so many ages, have
contracted such a friendship, that they are like to live or die together.

And therefore we find none, as I now intimated, who in any times heretofore,
either quarrelled with, or rejected the words established in the Church, but
either open Heretics, or such who were justly suspected to favor their errors.
Thus of old, the Arians and Semi-Arians were displeased with the words, (...),
because these (...). Vid. Athan. de Synod. Arim. and Seleu. Epist. p. 903.
Edit. Colon. and alibi passim. p. 906. 908.
words troubled and gave offense to many forsooth; and were such as rather
perplexed than explained this Doctrine, being above the reach of men's
understanding and conceptions. So the Polish and Transylvanian Unitarians in
their times made the same complaints. That the Church by using those words,
homoousion, Person, Essence, Unity, Trinity, had perfectly confounded all right
notions of God, and in a manner overturned the Christian Religion. Valentinus
Gentilis echoed back the same calumnies, from Bern and Geneva, and called the
former words monstrosae and profanae voces, quibus omnia divina mysteria
pervertuntur.

And to bring up the rear, we find the Dean in his vindication, declaring his
displeasure against them in the like expressions, p. 138. where he tells us,
that that which has confounded this mystery, has bin the vain endeavor of
reducing it to terms of art, such as Nature, Essence, Substance, Existence,
Hypostasis, Person and the like. I am sorry to find him in such ill company.
Tho I charitably hope he is not engaged in the same evil designs with them.
However it will become all men of wisdom and integrity, to avoid giving any the
least countenance to such tho but suspicious practices, which we have reason to
think, were first set on foot on purpose to undermine our holy Faith and
Religion.

There is one thing more to be observed, before I come to consider the
propositions, which I had almost forgotten; but it must not by any means be
omitted, and that is, his very curious and critical remark upon the Latin
Decree, p. 5. where he tells us that he who drew it up need not brag much of
his skill in Latin, having transgressed the plain rules of Grammar, in using
EORUM FIDEI ET CURAE for SUAE FIDEI ET CURAE. And for this, that you may not
rely only on his word and single judgment, he vouches the Authority of some
Critics, some Critics say, etc. Who those Critics are we are not able to
divine: perhaps they may be found in the number of those wise and Learned men
whom he mentions in the 6th page, and of whom he undertakes to procure a
meeting any day in the year, to censure the Oxford Decree.

But whosoever those Critics were, I am sure neither He nor They have any
great reason to boast of their skill in Criticism. For I would fain know what
those Rules of Grammar are which he says are transgressed, by using eorum for
suae fidei. Some waggs sure pretending to be Critics imposed on him. I will
endeavor to set him right. And therefore for his better information, I would
direct him to the Oxford Grammar, and to the observations which are there made,
p. 232. upon the pronouns sui and suus, which are called Reciproca, quia
reflectuntur ad id quod praecessit in eadem oratione.

But perhaps he may think that book beneath his perusal; he may therefore, if
he pleases, consult Gerhard Vossius, in his book de Sermonis constructione,
where in the 56th chap. he will find three Canons or Rules laid down de
Reciprocis; the last of which, being to our present purpose, is this: Si ob
neglectum reciproci nulla oriatur ambiguitas, potest aliquando reciproci loco
aliud relativum poni. This is the Rule, and there he may likewise find several
examples among the most approved Authors. Cic. Philipp. 2. Omnes boniquantum in
ipsis fuit, Caesarem occiderunt. Idem 3. de Off. perfuga Fabritio pollicitus
est, si praemium ei proposuisset, etc. Id 1. de Off. Si non poterit causas
defensitare, illa praestare debebit, quae erunt in ipsius potestate. Quinctil.
Declam. 3. neque ignoravit, quae eum manerent pericula. More instances he may
there find to this purpose, out of Curtius, Pliny, etc. Now the Dean I hope
will not be so hardy, as to say, that Tully, and Pliny, and Quinctilian were
ignorant of the rules, nay the plain rules of Grammar. The Dean I verily
believe, knew nothing of this matter. He has no better way then that I can
think of to come off, but to tell the world that some persons under the
disguise of Critics imposed upon him; the confession of his ignorance being in
this case his best excuse, tho at best it is but a very sorry one.

Having thus finished these previous remarks, I come now to consider more
particularly the Propositions which occasioned the Oxford Decree, and which
were condemned by it. The Propositions are these: There are three infinite
distinct minds and substances in the Trinity. Item, that the three persons in
the Trinity, are three infinite distinct minds or spirits, and three individual
Substances. These are adjudged and declared to be False, Impious, etc. He
desires to know the reasons upon which this Decree was grounded, which he
says, in the conclusion of his Examination, p. 46. had much better have bin
thought on at first, and then we should have escaped this Decree: Intimating
thereby, what he had in broad words expressed before, that it was a rash
injudicious Censure, neither managed with consideration, nor supported by any
good reason.

I must confess for my own part, I do not see any just ground why we should
comply with this Examiner's expectation. For reasons have already bin offered
by the Learned Animadverter, and those penned with such a strength and
clearness, as are peculiar to his writings. But he says, he cannot persuade
himself to read what the Animadverter has written on this occasion. To what
purpose therefore is it to offer any new Arguments, which must all be lost,
upon one, who superciliously disdains to peruse and consider, what either has,
or what may hereafter be charitably proposed for his conviction? But because
he, who resolved never to read whatever should be written by the Animadverter,
may perhaps cast a scornful glance on these papers, I shall therefore so far
gratify him in his demand, as to offer him one Reason against his three
Substances in the blessed Trinity, but it shall be a substantial one, and such
as most men I am sure, will look upon to be as considerable, and as effectual
to show the falsehood and impiety of his opinion, as if twenty were proposed.
And that is this, viz. That if there be three distinct substances, (and the
same is to be said of three distinct minds and Spirits) in the Trinity, then
there must unavoidably be three Gods.

This has bin so plainly and irrefragably already made out by the Learned
Animadverter, that if the Dean would have vouchsafed to have spent that time in
reading and examining the Animadversions, which he has misspent in examining
the Oxford Decree, it would have spared any farther trouble or pains in this
affair.

Now for a farther proof and confirmation of this reason, I shall lay down some
observations, which carry such a plainness and evidence along with them, as
cannot I think be gainsaid or resisted, but by such who are beforehand
resolved to persist in their errors, and are hardened against all conviction.
Such as 1st. That the Existence and Unity of the Godhead, is the first and
Fundamental principle of all Religion, both revealed and natural. And
consequently that there cannot be more Gods than one, in any sense whatsoever;
if the word God be taken in its proper, and not in a Metaphorical and
Figurative signification. That therefore which I affirm is, that there are not
more Gods than one, either Superior or Inferior; Coordinate or Subordinate;
Numerical or Specifical; Ancient or Modern. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is
one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. The Lord he is God, and there is none else besides him,
Deuteronomy 4. 35. But this is the dictate of nature as well as the language of the
Scripture; Reason (I mean where it is not corrupted and depraved) and
Revelation both conspiring to teach us this Lesson.

2dly, That, there being but one God, from thence it must follow, that in God
there must be but one nature, one essence. Because essence is that by which
every thing is constituted that which it is: it is the ratio formalis of that
thing be it what it will, and primo de re concipitur, being the first thing
that offers it self to our thoughts, when we form an Idea of it. One essence,
one nature, constitutes one thing; Two natures, two or more essences,
constitute two or more things. Where there is one human or Angelical nature*
there is but one man, one Angel. Where there are two or more, there are two or
more men or Angels: Peter, and John, Michael, and Gabriel. And so for the same
reason, there being but one God, there can be but one divine essence; and if
more essences, more Gods.

3dly, That when we speak of God, the words Essence, Nature, Substance,
Divinity, are Synonymous terms, and signify one and the same thing. Thus in the
Fathers, (...), are promiscuously used to denote the divine nature, or Godhead.
The Divine Nature, Essence, Substance, being nothing else but the Deity or
Divinity: and the Divinity, vice versa, is nothing, but the Divine Nature,
Substance, Essence.

4thly, Therefore, if in the Trinity there are three distinct Substances, there
must be three distinct Essences, and Divinities, and consequently, there must
be three Gods. For that there is one God, or more Gods than one, must depend
upon the Unity or Multiplication of the divine nature and essence. If there be
but one divine Nature, Substance, Divinity, there is, and for that reason it is
impossible there should be any more than one God; and if more distinct
Substances and Divinities, there must be more Gods. As the former are numbered
and multiplied, so are the latter; in the same proportion, both as to number
and kind. If there be but three distinct Substances and Divinities, there are
but three Gods; and if those Substances be only numerically distinguished, then
they constitute only three numerical Gods; but if specifically distinguished,
then there must be three Gods of a different kind, that is specifically
distinguished from each other.

5thly, That the Unity of the Godhead is the most perfect and complete sort of
Unity that can be imagined. No Nature, Essence, Substance, can in any sense be
more one, than the Divine Nature or Essence is; which has such so perfect, and
so peculiar a Simplicity and Identity, as to exclude all manner of division,
and all sorts of Multiplication.

It is true indeed, there is one peculiar prerogative of the Divine Nature and
Substance, founded in its infinite, and therefore transcendent perfection,
whereby it is capable of residing in more persons than one; and is accordingly
communicated from the Father, to the Son, and holy Ghost. But this is done
without any division, or multiplication; so that the same divine nature is a
singular, but not a solitary nature, being whole and entire in the three
blessed persons; in each of which it does completely subsist, tho with a
different manner of subsistence; yet so, as to retain its most complete
Identity, excluding all plurality of essences, whether equal or unequal, like
or unlike; the Divine nature being but one and the same, as was said before, in
the three divine persons, without diversity and without distinction. The
Persons indeed are distinguished from each other by a true, real, proper
distinction. But this is not founded in the diversity or distinction of their
natures, but is taken from the different ways of subsistence, which one and the
same nature has in the three persons; whereby they have different properties,
characters, and relations, which are absolutely incommunicable to each other,
and whereby some things may be affirmed of one, which cannot possibly be
affirmed of either of the others. Such as are the generation of the Son; the
procession and mission of the holy Ghost.

And in this different manner of subsistence is founded, as the distinction, so
likewise the subordination between the divine Persons: the Father being the
first, and therefore styled by the Fathers, the Origin and Fountain of the
Divinity with respect to the Son and holy Ghost. Not by the production of a new
divine nature, but by a communication of his own, which, as the Fathers always
speak, is (...), one and the very same, in all three, without separation,
difference, or distinction. This is indeed a great mystery, but we speak of the
blessed Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, which has bin always looked
upon by the greatest and wisest men in the Church, to be above all expressions
and description. If any man therefore will not be satisfied with this general
account, but will be putting new and nice questions, and desire to be informed
with Nicodemus, (...); how can these things be? Then I must acquaint him once
for all, that neither man, nor Angel can give a satisfactory answer to such
enquiries, which are not only impertinent but dangerous; proceeding from a
wanton, and impious curiosity, which ought severely to be condemned. As for us
of this place, I hope we shall always endeavor to regulate our apprehensions in
the affairs of Religion, by the discoveries which God has made in the holy
writings; accounting that the truest wisdom, when men are wise according to
what is written. And therefore in spite of all the objections and flouts of
Arians, Socinians, Tritheists, Atheists, we will resolve to believe what is
revealed, and to adore what we cannot comprehend.

Lastly, Since the Unity of the divine nature is such, and so perfect as is
before described, therefore we may conclude, that all those, who attempt to
explain it by a specifical sameness and identity, are so far from confirming
that they plainly undermine this great and fundamental truth.

For 1st, hereby they destroy a true real Unity, and in the room of it,
introduce only a notional Unity, which may be consistent with, nay indeed, as
the Dean has bin told, implys a multiplication of the divine nature. So that
when we say the three persons are one God, they are no otherwise one according
to this explication, than as ten thousand individual men, are one man, or a
myriad of Angels, are one Angel.

Neither is it enough to say, that the three divine natures and substances are
United in the Trinity; but are separated or divided in the persons of Angels
and men. For this will not alter the case; for the three substances so united,
retain their true and real distinction from each other, notwithstanding that
Union, and are still as much three as if they were not united. And therefore
this Union of natures will no more constitute one nature, than the Union of the
three persons in the Trinity, who are most intimately, and inseparably united
to each other, will make one person; or than the Union of both natures Divine
and Humane, in our blessed Savior, will constitute and make one nature.
Eutyches of old maintained such a senseless opinion; but the Fathers told him,
that those natures were united, it is true, but yet, (...) and (...), without
confusion, alteration, or conversion of either into the other. So that each
nature retained its own powers, faculties and properties, entire and distinct
from those of the other, without any mixture or change.

The like is to be said, of the union of several essences and natures in the
Trinity. For should such an union be allowed, yet still the natures must remain
entire and distinct; and so must their attributes likewise. They must have
distinct understandings, and wills, and distinct operations, as flowing from
powers and faculties, essentially distinguished; and consequently they must be
three Gods to all intents and purposes, when united, as much as if they were
separated.

But 2dly, A specifical sameness of the Godhead, is by no means to be allowed,
because it destroys the true and fundamental reason of that unity, viz. the
infinite perfection of the divine nature, which renders it absolutely incapable
of any multiplication; and places it upon another weak and unstable foundation;
viz. the operation of the mind and understanding. So that the unity of the
Godhead according to ths hypothesis, does not result from the nature of God,
but is owing to, and dependent upon the operation of some intellect, drawing
one common notion from the agreement which it observes in several individuals.
Which to affirm would certainly be both a monstrous and a Blasphemous
assertion; ss the Animadverter has very judiciously observed, p. 183.

From all these observations, I think it is as evident as any truth in nature,
that to assert three substances in the blessed Trinity, is plainly to imply,
and in other words to affirm, that there are three Gods; which assertion
therefore in the judgment not only of all true Christians, but even of Jews and
Mahometans, and some sober Pagans, would be accounted and adjudged false and
impious, as it is declared to be by the Oxford Censure.

But against this the Dean will urge in behalf of his three distinct
substances; the plurality and distinction of persons in the Trinity. Are there
not three Persons in the Godhead? Yes. Are not these three Persons three
substantial Persons? Yes, we acknowledge they are. Tho by the by, this epithet
of substantial when added to Person, is superfluous, and is no better than a
plain tautology; because the very notion of Person imports the perfection and
complement of substance, so that it receives no addition to its signification
by the word substantial.

But to pass this by, and proceed to his questions: Are not three substantial
persons, three distinct substances? I answer, no. For these three persons have
but one and the same substance, or nature that is common to them all; which
nature has three different ways of subsisting in the three persons. From which
different ways of subsisting, as I said before, do result distinct properties,
and relations, belonging to each of those divine persons, and which are
incommunicable to the others. All these questions so often and so impertinently
proposed by the Dean, are easily resolved by proposing the like questions, in
other words, but such as are, perfectly equipollent.

Are not the Persons in the Trinity three distinct Divine Persons? Yes. Is not
every divine Person, truly and properly God? Yes. Is it not then as plain, that
if there be three distinct divine Persons, there must consequenty be three
Gods? I answer, no. Because, tho each of them distinctly is a divine Person,
and therefore God; yet they have but one and the same Divinity or Godhead in
common to them all: so that they are distinguished only by their personalities,
but are united in one divine nature or Godhead. And therefore, as the
Athanasian Creed tells us, tho we are compelled by the Christian verity to
acknowledge every Person by himself to be God and Lord; yet we are forbidden by
the Catholic Religion, to say there are three Gods, or three Lords.

Now of all this I would defire no greater or plainer acknowledgment, than what
I find in the writings of this examiner, and particularly in the papers before
us. p. 18. he has these words: That there are three Persons and one God, is
the Catholic Language, and therefore three belongs to the Persons, and one to
the Godhead. This is right: but in the words immediately succeeding, he quite
overturns the Catholic Faith and Language, by saying: That therefore whatever
is essential to the notion of each Person, may be numbered and distinguished
with the Persons. From hence he would have it follow, as indeed it will, if
this be allowed, that spirit and substance being included in the notion of a
Person, it must be multiplied with it, so that as there are three Persons, so
there must be three spirits, three substances, in the Trinity.

Now this is extremely false; for by the same way, and for the same reason that
there are three substances or three spirits, there must be three Godheads. He
says no: adding that this will not affect the unity of the Godhead; for three,
he says, belongs to the persons, which are three, not to the Godhead, which is
but one: very right. And must it not be said for the same reason, that when we
affirm that there are three substantial Persons, three is to be applied to
Persons, and not to substance; because substance when we speak of God, being
equipollent to Godhead, as was said before, is but one, and therefore cannot be
multiplied? But cannot what is essential to the notion of a person, be numbered
and distinguished with the person? No, by no means; for tho it may and must be
so in finite persons, it is not so when we speak of the divine infinite persons
in the Trinity. Because there is something in each of those persons, which in
common belongs to them all; such is the divine nature, substance, Godhead,
which is so in each as to be whole and entire in all three; and therefore tho
residing in, and applied to each person, yet it may not, it cannot be numbered
or distinguished with the persons; who are distinguished by their properties
and relations, which arise from three different ways and manners of their
subsistence, but not by their substance and Godhead, which is but one and the
same in all three, without division, distinction, or multiplication. The same
orthodox acknowledgment we have, p. 21. tho tacked by him, according to his
usual method, to an egregious contradiction. There he says: that the divine
nature is whole and entire in each divine Person; and that infinite, and
infinite, and infinite, when applied to the Persons, are but one and the same
infinite nature. Very right: but then with the same breath in a manner he puffs
all this away; by telling us, that each of the divine Persons is a distinct
infinite mind; and yet that these three infinite distinct minds can have but
one and the same divine nature. Which is a plain contradiction, making one to
be three, and three one, in one and the same respect. And is no better than if
he should say, in three Gods, there is but one and the same Godhead; for
infinite mind and spirit is but the same thing in other words with God, as he
himself elsewhere acknowledges.

Lastly to mention no more, p. 29, 30. He repeats the same orthodox
expressions: The Scripture-notion of the Unity of God is not such an Unity as
is only in one Person, for then it could not enjoin the Faith and worship of
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. But such an Unity as can be between three: when
the one same divine nature, is wholly and entirely communicated by the eternal
Father, to the eternal Son, and by the Father and the Son, to the eternal
Spirit, without any division or separation. And that which is communicated
whole and entire, without division or separation, makes no number, for it is
but one still. Here he is as sound and orthodox as Athanasius; but when he
comes to explain himself, and therein to give us his true sentiments, (for all
the former expressions, are but an artificial disguise of his errors) then he
uses such a shuffing, ambiguous, deceitful way of speaking, that you would
think, that Ursacius, or Valens, or Eusebius of Nicomedia, were risen from the
dead.

I confess I have bin beyond measure astonished, when I have perused his
writings on this subject, to find such plain and gross contradictions, so often
and so boldly uttered by him. Sometimes he will make a good and laudable
confession of the Faith; and by and by he spoils all, by a very fraudulent and
treacherous explication. And indeed hereby he has laid the foundations of such
a sophistical and deceitful way of writing; that if it should be countenanced
in him, and thereupon imitated by others, it would render it almost impossible,
either to vindicate the truth, or to confute any Heresy.

This charge will be made good by considering these following particulars. Such
as are 1st, his manifest, and manifold contradictions, with which his books
written upon the subject, which is now before us, do every where abound.
Whereby he affirms and denis the same thing, almost in a breath; and what he
erects in one place, he presently kicks down in another. To make out this, I
shall confine my self to one instance of it, relating to the Unity of the
divine nature, p. 21. He says the Divine nature is whole and entire in each
divine person, and the three divine persons, whom he very falsely and very
dangerously there calls three divine minds, have the same one divine nature,
and are but one and the same infinite nature. p. 29. There is but one and the
same divinity or Godhead in them all, speaking of the three persons. The same
one divinity or Godhead is entirely and indivisibly in three distinct persons.
p. 30. The same one divine nature is wholly and entirely communicated from the
Father to the Son, etc. See p. 45. where you have the like expressions, by
which he affirms that there is but one and the same nature, one Divinity, one
Godhead in the three Persons. And yet in other places, he is as confident, that
there is not only one singular nature, and substance in God; p. 16. To say that
there is one singular substance in the Deity is the fundamental Article of the
Sabellian Creed. p. 17. If there be but one singular divine nature and
substance in the Deity, tho men could find a Trinity of Persons in this one
divine nature (which yet p. 16. he represents as a ridiculous imagination) yet
from thence he says it must follow, that the whole Trinity must be incarnate,
p. 23. Now to affirm that there is but one Godhead, one and the same divine
nature in the three Persons; and yet to deny, that there is one singular divine
nature and substance in those persons, I think, amounts to a very plain
contradiction.

I know it will be said, that he affirms and denies the Unity of the divine
nature, but it is not in the same respect: when he says it is one, he means
that the same specifical nature is whole and entire in the three Persons; but
when he denies it to be one, he means, that there is not one only singular, or
numerical divine nature, for this were, by so saying, to revive the Heresy of
Sabellius.

I Answer, this will not save him from a contradiction. For let him make choice
of which of these terms he pleases to express the Unity and sameness of the
divine nature by, it is certain, that what he affirms in one place he denies in
another. When he says it is one, one and the same, does he mean one singular,
numerical nature? if he means so, then this he does at other times in plain
downright terms deny, not only as a thing that is false, but as Heretical,
impossible, contradictory, as was seen before. Well? when he asserts the Unity
of the Godhead, and says, that one and the same divine nature is in the three
Persons, wholly and entirely communicated from the Father to the Son, as he
expressed himself, p. 30. does he mean a specifical Identity? I suppose he
does, for p. 10. he tells us that to assert three substances in the Arian
notion, that is three distinct minds and species of substance, or three natures
and essences specifically different, this is false, impious, and Heretical.
Therefore to affirm three natures of the same kind, must be a true, religious,
orthodox acknowledgment.

This he must mean if he means any thing. Otherwise if he shall say, that when
he affirms there are three natures, or substances, he means, that there are
three, but yet which are neither of the same kind nor of a different kind; that
is, neither numerically, nor specifically different: Then I say that he
advances an absurd and an inexplicable position, which neither he nor any man
else can possibly understand. But on the other hand, if he affirms or means a
specifical Unity in the Godhead, then I am sure he does as plainly as words can
make it, in other places contradict his meaning. For p. 19. He has these
words, Tho the Ancient Fathers frequenty make mention of a specific Unity of
nature in the Godhead, yet they did not confine the Unity of the divine nature
to this. And p. 33. This specific sameness does not answer the complete notion
of the divine Unity. Nay, he does not only say this, but gives a very good
reason for it. p. 19. The divine nature is no species, for it is but one.

If there be any force in this consequence, it must be this viz. That the
divine nature is but one singular individual nature, which is incapable of
plurality or multiplication, and therefore it cannot be a species, because a
species, can be multiplied, and therefore is capable of being affirmed and
predicated de pluribus, of more things of the same kind. He proceeds: The Unity
of the Godhead is the most real, essential, indivisible unity. Very right.
Therefore say I, it is not a specifical Unity, the former assertion being a
clear and an unanswerable proof that it is not so: For 1st, The Unity of the
Godhead is a real Unity; but a specific Unity, is only a Logical and Notional
one. 2dly, The unity of the Godhead, is an essential unity, the unity of one
nature and essence; the specific is only an unity of several natures, which
are really and essentially, a part rei, distinct from each other, and are only
united in the understanding. Lastly, The unity of the Godhead is the most real,
and therefore the most perfect unity; but a specific unity is not the most
real, but of a lesser sort, and much inferior to a singular and numerical
Identity. It is this latter then that is to be found in the Godhead, which
being incapable of division, or multiplication, is for the same reason, as he
himself acknowledges, incapable of numeration. For when we say three persons,
Three belongs to the persons who are three, but not to the Godhead, which is
but one, p. 18.

And now is it not plain to any man, that the Dean, by thus going forward and
backward, saying and unsaying, very evidently contradicts himself? I think he
does. But if this wants any farther confirmation, let the Reader look into his
Vindication, and there he will find these contradictions yet in more plain and
express terms, if it be possible, which the Reader may find exemplified in the
Animadversions, p. 178. etc. and thither I refer him, to save the trouble of
transcribing.

But the Dean for all this, will not allow that he is guilty of a
contradiction; and therefore to save himself from that imputation he has
contrived two Answers, but they are the most bold and arbitrary, that ever were
invented. But when men are hard pressed, it is no wonder that they should make
use of any the most desperate shift to make their escape.

1st then, Does not he who asserts the unity of the Godhead, and yet tells the
world, that this is neither a specific nor a numerical unity (for of a
Generical one, there is no question in this case) I say does not such an one
contradict himself? Surely he does. For if God be one, he must be so in either
of these two senses. And therefore if the Godhead be one, and yet is neither
numerically nor specifically such, it must be one, and not one, which is a
contradiction.

He answers no, because there is an unity that is a medium between both. The
unity of the Godhead, is not such as is to be found in a singular nature: that
is, says he, Sabellianism, neither is it a specific unity, for that is only a
Logical and notional unity, and therefore the unity of the divine nature is not
to be confined to this, p. 19. In opposition to the Arians the Fathers taught,
not one singular substance in God, which is Sabellianism. But such an oneness
of substance as we know not how otherwise to express, than by a specific
sameness and unity, tho that does not answer the complete notion of the Divine
unity, p. 33. In short, the Divine nature is one, but by what kind of unity no
man can divine. It is neither a specifical, nor a numerical oneness, but an
unity either made up of both, or made up of neither; however it is a medium
between them. I fancy such another medium, as he found who desired the people
to join with him in singing the Psalm, that was between the three and
twentieth, and the twenty fourth Psalms. But if this Answer will not bring him
off, he has contrived a second, viz. that these three numerical substances are
united into one, by a mutual self-consciousness. But for this notion of his the
Animadverter has sufficiently-accounted with him: and therefore there remains
nothing more by me to be said upon that Head.

Thus it is plain that the Dean in his writings is guilty of many gross and
palpable contradictions, which way of writing is very scandalous, and ought
therefore by every one to be condemned. But this is not all; there are several
other things in his way and manner of writing, which ought to be
discountenanced: I can but just name them. Any man that peruses his late
writings, will besides his contradictions, find in the 2d place, that he
frequently, but very fraudulently, endeavors to impose upon his Readers, by
making two words to be equipollent, which yet have a different signification.
Thus in order to amuse unwary Readers, when he speaks of the divine nature, he
joins the words singular and solitary together, as if they were synonymous
terms; and then insidiously asks, p. 17. Is it not Sabellianism to affirm that
there is but one singular and solitary nature in the Trinity? Answer, To affirm
that there is but one solitary nature, is to revive the Heresy of Sabellius;
because it were as much as to say, that the divine nature or substance is to be
found only in, and therefore confined to one Person. But to say there is but
one singular nature imports no such thing. For the same singular numerical
nature is to be found in each of the divine Persons, being common to them all,
but yet without multiplication, as he has often bin told by his Adversary, and
which thing he has often affirmed himself; how sincerely let others judge.

So again, in order to establish a plurality of substances, he makes three
substantial persons, to be the same with three personal substances. But he has
bin often told, that tho the persons are different, each of which is a
substance; yet that the substance or nature is not distinct, but common to all
three. And therefore three substantial Persons, are no more three substances,
than three divine Almighty Persons, have three distinct Divinities or
Almightinesses; which he himself sometimes will not allow.

3dly, When hard pressed by his Adversary, to defend himself, he invents
several arbitrary and incomprehensible distinctions, for which he has neither
reason nor example. Thus when told that three substances, must infer a
multiplication of the divine nature in the Trinity, and that again must infer
three Gods: to avoid the force of this Argument, he tells us, that the same
Individual nature subsists thrice, not by multiplying but by repeating its
self, and that the divine nature is repeated in its Image, but without
multiplication. And this senseless distinction he often repeats in his defense;
by which it is certain that he multiplies words, tho perhaps he may think that
he does not multiply distinctions. Again, having denied a Numerical Unity of
the Godhead, and yet being aware, that a Specifical Unity would lay him open to
many unanswerable difficulties; he has in a most presumtuous, unprecedented
manner, formed a distinction as to Identity and sameness of nature, by which he
makes a middle sort of Unity between the two former, partly specific, and
partly numerical. Which distinction is perfectly an Original, and for which he
has neither copy, nor precedent, from any writer either living or dead.

Lastly, In the same insidious manner, to avoid the force of those Arguments
which are brought against him; when he cannot maintain his words, he flies to
his meaning, where he entrenches himself, and then he is as safe as if he were
in an enchanted Castle. And there let him continue for me, unmolested and
undisturbed, provided that he will no longer disturb the world, with so
unjustifiable a practice; for if men may be allowed by a mental reservation to
harbor a meaning different from the plain, obvious and natural signification of
words, then there is an end of all truth and sincerity, and consequently of all
mutual confidence between man and man, which by this means, or such meaning, if
you please, is entirely destroyed.

By all that has bin said upon this Head, I think it will appear plain to
every unprejudiced person, that there was great reason to condemn the
Propositions mentioned in the Decree, which plainly overthrow the Unity of the
Godhead; and therefore are justly styled false, and impious. Of them it is
farther affirmed in the Decree, that they are contrary to the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church; and particularly to that received here in the Church of
England. And so they are, as opposite to it, as truth is to falsehood, and faith
to infidelity. It has bin the belief and profession of all good Christians,
since the first planting of Christianity in the world, that as there is but one
God, so there is but one nature and essence in the three persons of the
Trinity, of which they are all partakers. This was upon a particular occasion
Decreed in the Council of Nice, confirmed afterward by all the other General
Councils; and they who have opposed this determination have in all times
heretofore bin adjudged and declared Heretics.

For some time indeed, the words Substance, Person, and Hypostasis, were of
ambiguous signification, but that was afterward settled; and the Language of
the Church, ever since has bin Three persons, and but one Substance, Nature,
Essence, Divinity. In this all the Fathers agree, both Greek and Latin, even
St. Hilary, who styles the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three substances, yet
in the very same place where he is cited by the Examiner, he explains himself,
and vindicates the Synod of Antioch, and tells us p. 37. Tres substantias esse
dixerunt, subsistentium personas per substantias edocentes; by three substances
they meant three persons. But as to the substance it self when placed in
opposition to person, he acknowledges that to be but one; and that the Father
and son, unius recte ambo creduntur esse essentiae. Again: Credamus and dicamus
esse unum substantiam. p. 39. and p. 40. Deus unus, ob indiscretae in utroque
naturae indissimilem substantiam praedicetur. Which the Examiner thus renders
into English: The Father who begets, and the Son who is born, are to be
acknowledged one God, upon the account of the same nature in both, without the
least difference or variation; and therefore, say I, without the least
distinction: except the Dean can find out a distinction without a difference,
which I confess he has done in some other cases before mentioned. But this is
his peculiar talent, to find out that which no body before him ever dreamed of.

The like observation is to be made with relation to the Alexandrian Synod
under Athanasius; which one would think he would never have mentioned, if he
had not in a manner bin forsaken by his reason, at the same time that he
abandoned his Religion. For nothing could have bin produced, which is more
apposite and pertinent, to overthrow his new notion of three minds and
substances. For there happened a dispute between the Catholics, concerning
(...) and (...), which was merely a contention about words, when they all
agreed in the same thing; those who asserted three Hypostases, thereby meaning
three Persons, but yet but one Godhead, and one substance in the Trinity; those
who denied there were three Hypostases, thought that by Hypostasis was meant
substance, and they dreaded nothing more, than to affirm there were three
substances in the Godhead.

Take it in the words of the Examiner, p. 43. They owned but one Hypostasis or
substance, for they believed but one 'Divinity or Divine nature, by reason of
the Identity of nature, between Father and Son. And they having given their
several Explications, were all found to agree in the Catholic Faith; and then
afterward three Hypostases and one nature was the Catholic Language. Can any
thing be more directly opposite to his notion, than this Determination of the
Synod. One cannot but think he was Infatuated when he produced it. But still he
has a shift in reserve to save himself and his three substances. For in that
same place, he renders Hypostasis by substance, and says, that when they said
three Hypostases, they meant it still in the notion of three substances. A very
false and perfidious suggestion; making the Catholic Language, as he himself
acknowledges it, wherein Catholics expressed their consent in the same Faith,
to consist in a ridiculous contradiction. For according to him, when they said,
three Hypostases and one nature, they meant three substances, and one nature;
that is, three substances, and one substance; three natures, and one nature;
these being two words that signify but one and the same thing.

But the true Language of the Church was, that there are three Persons, truly
and really distinct, and yet but one nature, essence, substance. And this
doctrine has bin constantly, uniformly, and without any alteration conveyed
through all the Ages of the Church to our days; this being the Faith, and these
the words, of all Christian Churches, Greek and Latin, Eastern and Western,
that are at this day in the World. And particularly of our own Church, who in
the first Article of our Religion teaches us to profess, that there is but one
God; and that in the Unity of this Godhead, there are three Persons, of one
power, substance, and eternity. And in our most solemn addresses to Heaven, she
directs us to make the same acknowledgment, viz. upon Trinity Sunday; and to
give glory to God in these words: Who art one God, one Lord, not one only
Person, but three Persons in one substance. For that which we believe of the
glory of the Father, the same we believe of the Son, and holy Ghost, without
any difference or inequality. And if there be not any difference in the
substance, there can be no distinction, as was said before.

And now at length being quite tired with following this Examiner, through that
maze and Labyrinth, into which he commonly leads his Readers: it is high time I
should take leave of him, after I have committed him to the mercy of God, and
his writings to the censure of the Church. The former I hope he will partake
of; the latter perhaps he and they may escape, tho he stands in great need of
it, especially since he so obstinately and pertinaciously persists in his
errors, after so plain a discovery, and so clear a confutation of them.

But I cannot fairly part with him, without enquiring into the reasons, which
induced him to publish this Paper, wherein he treats the Governors of the
University, in so rude and insolent a manner; falling foul upon persons, whose
Character, Profession, and Station he ought to have considered; and from whom
he never received the least personal injury or provocation, that ever I could
yet hear of. Among other Reasons, he has suggested one in the last page of
this Book, which I shall only take notice of, viz. That it was impossible for
him to do otherwise than he has done, unless he wonld be content to be
trampled upon by every Scribler. Now this is a reason, I think, that is wholly
owing to his Guilt, and some unreasonable fears which are consequent thereupon.
Sure he is conscious to himself that his credit runs low, and that he is much
fallen in the esteem of many who formerly had a good opinion of him. He is
sensible that his Adversary has foiled him, which some perhaps may call
running him down; and now he is afraid that the bystanders should trample upon
him.

What persons who are abroad may do, I cannot tell; but as for the members
whether scriblers or no scriblers of the University, notwithstanding this
Humiliation, I am apt to think that they never intended to insult over him,
especially if he had not published this insolent Paper. But this phrase of
treading and trampling, brings to my mind the story that Socrates tells of that
famous Rhetorician Ecebolius; a man much talked of in the days in which he
lived, and who by his levity and inconstancy in the profession of Religion,
has given occasion to be much talked of ever since. This man, (...),
accommodating himself, as the Historian tells us, Socr. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 3.
cap. 13. to the manners and inclinations of the Emperors under whom he lived,
in Constantius's time was a zealous Christian, but an Arian, as Baronius
thinks, under Julian's Reign he turned Apostate, and proved a violent Pagan.
But after his death, he was desirous to embrace once again the Christian
Religion, and to be admitted into the society and communion of the Faithful.
But being sensible that his prevarications had rendered him unworthy of that
favor, he made use of this notable stratagem, to move the compassion of
Christians: He lays himself prostrate before the doors of the Church, and
bespeaks those who were entering into it, in those emphatical words, conculcate
me, (...), salem insipidum infatuatum, good Christian people, tread me under
your feet, trample upon me, a Lump, a heap of Salt, which has lost its savor.

Now that which I have to add farther upon occasion of this story, is only
this, in relation to the Members of the University; for whom, I think, I durst
undertake, that if any of them should happen to find, I will not say the Dean,
but any tho a much inferior Person to Mr. Dean, in the same humble penitent
posture, begging pardon for any the like public offense and scandal, that he
might either by word or deed have given the Church: I dare be confident, I say,
there is no Member of the University would insult over the misfortunes of such
a penitent. They would rather on the other side lend him a helping hand, and
would lift him up: they would comfort him, and give him good words, and bid him
hope for Gods mercy, and the Church's pardon upon the condition of a sincere
repentance. But I am apt to think likewise, they would add counsel to their
consolations, and would give him good advice into the bargain. They would
advise him to be steady for the future in the practice of his duty; and by no
means to play fast and loose with the Faith, or to be guilty of any the least
prevarication in the affairs of Religion. And in short, I presume they would
dismiss him with those words of our Savior, Jo. 5. 14. Go and Sin no more lest
a worse thing come unto thee.

FINIS.

