Die Veneris 21 February, 1644.
WHereas both Houses of Parliament, have appointed certain Ships to be set
forth this Spring for Guard of the Narrow Seas, preservation of Trade, and for
the necessary defense of this Kingdom, and other his Majesty's Dominious,
which at this time is of great necessity, considering not only the homebred
distractions of this Kingdom, and of Ireland; but the great preparations which
are making already in foreign Parts, in aid and encouragement of the Papists,
and ill affected Party amongst our selves now up in Arms against the
Parliament: And whereas there is occasion as well at present as hereafter will
be, for impresting of Mariners for the said service; Be it therefore ordained
by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the Lord
high Admiral of England appointed by both Houses of Parliament, shall and may
at any time or times, from the day of the date hereof, unto the first day of
January, 1645. by himself, his Commissioner or Commissioners, Officer or
Officers, or any of them, raise, leavy, and impresse such and so many
Mariners, Sailors, Watermen, Chirurgions, Gunners, Ship-Carpenters Caukers and
Whoymen, as also Carmen for carriage of victuals, etc. as shall be requisite
and necessary for the service aforesaid, or for any such further defense of
this Realm, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions: which said Mariners,
Sailors, and other such Persons so to be leavied and impressed as aforesaid,
and every of them shall have paid and delivered unto him upon such his
Impressing by the person that shall so impresse him, for conduct money for
every mile from the place where he shall be so iwprest to the ship or place
where he shall be appointed to make his repair, the sum of one penny to each
man, and the like sum of one penny for every mile from the place of his
discharge unto the place of his abode, and shall be allowed for this service
the same wages and entertainment in all respects which has bin allowed by the
Parliament this last year to any such person or persons employed in the said
service. And if any Mariner, Saylor, Waterman, Surgeon, Gunner,
Ship-carpenter, Cauker, Whoyman, or Carman, shall wilfully refuse to be
impressed in or for the said service, or shall voluntarily hide or absent
himself at the time of such press, to avoid the said service, or receiving
his said conduct moneys, do not appear at such places and times as by his
Ticket he is appointed; that then any such Person so offending, shall suffer
imprisonment for the space of three months without Bail or Mainprize;
Provided always, and be it ordained that no money or other reward shall be
taken, or any corrupt practice used by any the Persons Authorized by this
Ordinance, in or for the pressing, changing, sparing, or discharging of any
Person or Persons to be impressed as aforesaid, as they will answer such offense
in Parliament. And all Deputy Lievtenants, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and
all other inferior Officers, are hereby required and enjoined to be aiding
and assisting from time to time to the Persons Authorized by this Ordinance,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof; Provided always that this
Ordinance shall not extend to the pressing of any Master, or Masters Mate,
Gunner, Carpenter, or Boat-swaine of any Ship or Vessel, that is or shall be
in employment: And for the better encouragment, both of Seamen and watermen,
to apply themselves the more willingly to this service, It is further ordained
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That all Mariners, Sailors, and
likewise all watermen, who have served an Apprentiship by the space of seven
years in their said Professions, or that are servants and Apprentises by
Indenture to any such watermen, shall hereby be freed and exempt from being
pressed to serve as Soldiers in any land service, except in case of extreme
necessity, and that with the consent and privity of the Lord high Admiral of
England, or by express Order of both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

London, printed for Laurence Blaiklock, near Temple Bar, 1644.


