Advertisement.
THe Author being informed, that after he had Preached this Sermon, the people
judged him to be the Capuchin Friar, who lately burnt his Beads, Crucifixes,
etc. in the Palace Yard at Westminster: He desires to satisfy the World of
their mistake, for, that to his knowledge, he never saw him in his life, neither
was he in England at that time.

Anthony Egan.

FINIS.
The Franciscan CONVERT: OR A Recantation-Sermon OF ANTHONY EGAN, (Late
Confessor General of the Kingdom of Ireland, and Guardian of the Friory of
Monasterioris, in the Province of Lemster; Now a Minister of the Gospel
according to the Ordination of the Church of England,)

Preached in London on April 6. 1673.

To which is annexed, A NARRATIVE of the strange Behavior and Speeches of the
Papists in Ireland since His Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence.

And the Commendatory LETTER in Latin, given to the Author by his Superior
before his Conversion.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel in Little Britain, 1673.

The Franciscan Convert: OR A Recantation-Sermon, etc.
Luke 22, the latter end of verse 32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy
Brethren.
COnversion is an hard work, but it is glorious; it relates to the two great
Faculties of our mind, the Understanding and the Will. Our Understanding, that
our Faith be found; Our Will, that our Morals be good. I will begin with our
Morals, because it is no matter what our Judgment is when our manners are bad;
Lewd men credit no Profession, but disgrace the cause they own. Christianity
consists of a redemption, and that redemption from the iniquity of our ways;
that is to say, a Turning from Sin to Virtue, from Satan unto God. A Turning
from a bad life is nothing else but a Separation of a man's self from profane
uses unto Holiness; As when a Child and Heir of Hell becomes one of the Sons of
God, in Scripture Phrase this work of Conversion is called a Ceasing from evil,
and a learning to do well; A putting off of the old man, and a putting on of
the New; and it is called a new Creature, a Conformity to Christ in his Death
and Resurrection; or according to the same Apostle elsewhere, Be not conformed
to this World, but rather transformed by the renewing of your minds. Or lastly,
in our Saviors Language, A seeking the Kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, and being holy as he is holy in all manner of Conversation. Therefore
Christians, as you desire to have Peace with God and your own minds, live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this World. Labor to prove the truth of
your Profession by your pious practices. Endeavor to become living Images of
God, Vessels of honor, and Temples of the Holy Ghost. I might argue against
Sin from the common mischiefs of it, and remind Sinners of the Labyrinths into
which it leads them, and assure you that Gods Service is perfect freedom. For
if all the happiness which Christian Religion propounds to us were only
confined to such Promises as have a relation to eternal Bliss, it might be
thought that the Lord Jesus was only careful to make the end of a Christian
Race glorious, yet had neglected to make the way pleasant which leads
thither. But if it be truly considered on the other hand, that those very
Precepts which are enjoined as the Rules of our duty are in themselves
infinitely conducing to our own present satisfaction, then we must conclude
that none can be miserable in the next World but only such Sots as will not
give God leave to make them happy in this.

For the Laws of the holy Jesus are so agreeing to our Natures, that the
Execution of them are as great expedients of our present happiness as
Testifications of our duty, so that our duty and our privileges run parallel
in one Line. In the next place, as Conversion relates to our Wills, so also to
our Understandings, that we may have such Notions of God and his Worship as
becomes the Solemnity of that duty we owe to our God. And what dangerous
Errors, Education, and Prejudice may breed is very obvious to all that have
made remarks in the World. For we know that a dangerous Principle has hurried
many into desperate Practices; Saint Paul's Zeal for the Mosaic Law made him
spurn against Christ himself. So that the immoralities and debaucheries of some
men are less dangerous than their Tenants. God forbid that any thing that I say
should give the least countenance unto Vice, but to show that we may fly from
one extreme to another.

I may compare the enormities of Vice to a Sore that is Ulcerated, Nauseous,
and Offensive to all men's view: Errors in our Judgment (or a false worship of
God) is like to a Sore skinned over, though not so offensive to our Senses, yet
more dangerous to the Vitals. Our Savior told the Scribes and Pharisees, that
Harlots and Publicans entered into the Kingdom of God before them; not that we
are to think that the Kingdom of God is a place for either Harlots or
Publicans, as such: but that the recovery of the one is more hopeful than the
recovery of the other. The Profane person is sick, but then he and all men know
it: The Heretic is sick, but he thinks himself well, and so neglects all means
for a remedy, and the cure of such a one becomes a wonder.

The Subject I have chose this day is copious, and from it I might present you
with many particulars, but I must forbear and come to the Application, which I
must Center in my self: When thou art converted, etc.

I hope this Scripture is fulfilled this day on my self, being a Monument of
God Almighties mercy in bringing me from the gross Superstitions of Popery to
the glorious light of the Gospel; and seeing the Consequent of my Text is the
strengthening of my Brethren. I shall now give you some few of the principal
motives which drew me from my former persuasions.

You must know I was bred and Catechized in all the absurd Doctrines and
Practices of the Romish Church, and no little Zealot in that way; I was
ordained Deacon and Priest, and made Confessor General throughout the Kingdom
of Ireland; was a Friar of the Order of St. Francis, and afterward Superior
of a Convent, and Chaplain to several eminent persons of qualety in that
Kingdom. Upon a certain time I accidentally came to a public house to refresh
my self, I found that a lewd Priest had pawned the consecrated Host to the
woman of the house for five and thirty Shillings: which I redeemed: And with
this remarke that Christ was made by him, not an Offering for Sin, but a
Sacrifice for his Lust. I need not tell you how great the Scandal was to my
self, but augmented by considering that the Person was a Superior of an Order,
and in great reputation among his People. There are many sad circumstances in
the story, but I will forbear at present to mention them.

Upon this great disgust I began to dispute the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
and all the ridiculous consequences of it became evident to my understanding;
for suppose a Turk should tell me that I make my God, and then eat him; and
should he challenge me to produce so nonsensical a Tenent in the Alcoran, I
must either change my opinion of Transubstantiation, or quit my Christianity.
Is it not strange that Christ should eat himself, and that all the Disciples
should eat him alive before the Jews had Crucified him? I know he calls the
Bread his Body, but then he calls the Cup his Blood, and shall one be allowed
to be a figure, and not the other? But that which expounds the whole
Institution are these words, Do this in remembrance of me; that is to say, This
Ordinance is a commemorative Sacrifice of my self; if Christ be corporeally
present, how comes there to be any exercise of our memories? But others have
said so much of this Subject that I need say no more.

Another great motive of my Conversion was their Adoration of Images, so flatly
contrary to the Second Commandment. God told his People Israel of old that they
saw no similitude, for the prevention of all manner of Worship by Images. They
say, by Graven Image is meant only an Idol, but then these words following, Nor
the likeness of any thing before me, spoils that interpretation. For if by
graven Images be meant only Idols, then the Commandment is altogether
superfluous, for Idols were forbidden in the first Commandment by having no
other Gods; and if they say, they worship not the Image, but the person
represented by it: I answer, this justifies all the Heathens in their
Idolatries, for they said they worshipped nothing made with hands, neither did
they believe them to be their Gods, but that their Gods were present in them in
an Extraordinary manner.

In the next place, I will speak of the Doctrine of Purgatory, which upon
serious examination became strange to me. Indeed I read of a narrow way that
leads to bliss, and a broad way that is the high road to misery, for that Via
media, that leads to Purgatory, I find it not in my Bible; yet I hold
Purgatory, but it is in my Saviors blood: and it is that Purgatory which only
must purge my soul from sin; and if that Purgatory will do a sinners work, I
will look for no other. Yet for all this, Purgatory in the Popish Notions of it
is a gainful Doctrine; it is that fire which makes the Popes Pot boil; and
therefore no wonder if they be so loath to have it extinguished.

Another motive that I had to abandon all Communion with the Church of Rome,
was that intolerable practice of having the Service in a Tongue unknown to the
people: and Chap 14 of the former Epistle to the Corinthians seems to be wholly
writ against that Custom. It is said Exodus 12. 26, 27. And it shall come to
pass, when your Children shall say unto you, What mean you by this Service?
that you shall answer and say, it is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, etc.
When I read this Scripture it reminds me that Gods Service is a reasonable
Service, and that we ought to know the reason and meaning of that Service we
perform to God. Edification and Devotion are inseparable from the true Worship
of God. Now should I in the language of this Scripture come to the Common
People at the celebration of the Mass, and say, What mean you by this Service?
What satisfactory answer can be expected? Some of late (I must confess) have
translated the Popish Prayers into the Vulgar Language, but the Pope has
forbidden the use of them. So that who shall so use them are not right
Catholics.

But above all the Tenants of Rome none seemed more ridiculous to me than that
Doctrine of Infallibility, for if that be proved, I shall submit to any thing
that she shall impose upon me.

For had St. Peter himself been appointed the infallible Judge of
Controversies, what needed the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. It would have
been a much shorter cut to have had St. Peter's determination in the Case,
without giving the Apostles any further trouble in it. The Patriarch of Antioch
pretends that he is St. Peter's Successor, and we have more reason to believe
him so then the Pope; for Antiquity is clear that he was Bishop of Antioch, and
the Scriptures are express that there he exercised his Function, and that there
it was that the Disciples were first called Christians. St. Paul saitb, that to
him was committed the care of all the Churches. St. Peter might have said those
words with as much innocence as St. Paul, but it was Gods mercy that he did
not, for then the Pope would have pretended a good Text for his Universal
Pastorship. But that which makes the Doctrine of infallibility more vain are
those contradictory establishments which are in that Church; had I time I might
give in endless instances. But that which is the most mischievous to them is
their non-agreement among themselves where this infallibility is seated, which
makes nothing more fallible than the very Doctrine of Infallibility. And I must
tell you, that among the many other Errors and ill Practices which I discovered
in the Roman Church, their Cruelties were no small disgust to me, as if
Christianity had taught them to forget Humanity; I cannot but with horror think
of those barbarous Massacres which were committed in my own Country, as if
Papists had guts, but no bowels; so that it is not only their Prayers, but
Faith that they have written in bloody Characters: You will hear them boast of
Loyalty: Look into the Irish Histories, and then judge of those pretenses. If
by accident some have showed themselves so in England, yet the constitution of
their Church looks with another aspect, for I am sure I ever thought it a
meritorious action to murder either Prince, or any Protestant Subject,
provided I was commissionated so to do by the Pope, but how to serve two
Masters, I understand not, the Pope and the King; I must tell you, that I my
self am an instance of their intended cruelty, for after my conversion from
their fooleries, and having by the good providence of God been instrumental in
bringing seven Friats and Priests from their Communion, and several of their
Laity, their malice was such, that Preaching upon a Sunday in a Protestant
Church a Musket was levelled at me as I stood in the Pulpit, but through Gods
mercy the Bullet went only through my hair without doing me any other mischief;
but when I saw my life was aimed at, I was forced to quit both my new
Preferment, and my Country. But are these things according to the Gospel of
Peace? They that Preach Religion with fire and faggot surely know not what
manner of spirits they are of, if our Savior's Kingdom were of this world his
Servants would fight; and indeed we read St. Peter used his Sword once in his
Masters quarrel, but he got so sharp a rebuke for it, that I do not read that
he ever so much as wore one after. Must the Pope cut off Heads because St.
Peter cut off an Ear? This is strange. The old Romans thought to propagate the
Faith by dying for it: Our new Romans think to establish theirs, but by a quite
contrary method; Reason is the Crown of a man, Religion is the Crown of Reason,
Christianity is the Crown of Religion, Charity is the Crown of Christianity,
and Charity we know suffers long, and is kind, and seeks its own
establishment by means and methods the most like to it self.

I must also tell you, that the Prayers to Saints and Angels became very
offensive to me, having in all the Scriptures not one Precept, nor one Example
to give countenance to any such custom. I am sure our Savior invites weary and
heavy laden sinners to come to him, Mat. 11. 28. And when I can come and have
an access to the Throne of his Grace with boldness, I shall not think my self
to stand in need of any other Spokesman; if I can be free with my Prince, why
should I trouble any Courtiers to present my Addresses. Besides, we have great
reason to believe there is an incommunicable gulf between the glorified Saints
and us, for the Scripture tells us, That Abraham knows us not, and Israel is
ignorant of us, etc.

I could also give large Narratives of their pious frauds, as they call them,
by which they delude the people to fix them in their gross Errors and
Superstitions. When I was made a Friar, a great number of people were present
at the Solemnity; I appeared in a spruce Garb, had there my Horse, my Sword and
Pistols, and appeared with much Gayety and Splendor. The head of the Convent
advised the People to take notice of my Pompous condition, and that I was
willing to lay aside all those outward glories for St. Francis his sake, and
accordingly I disrobed my self, and put on the mean Garments which belonged to
the Order, and then made three Vows, of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity: After
that took one and twenty Oaths; now in the Oaths I swore never to come on
horseback, never to wear Shoes, to obey my Superior in what ever he commanded
me, without examining the lawfulness of his Commands, not to be ashamed to beg,
never to be out of my Friars habit. But that which was a cause of a disgust at
that time unto me was this: The Superior tells me, that I must take my former
Garments, that is, return in the same Posture I came, and go see my friends;
and though all these things were against my Oaths, yet he would absolve me from
them. I must confess this seemed to me a strange cheat to the People, that he
should tell them what self-denial I was guilty of in taking those Oaths, and
yet he presently absolves me from them; and this is the state of all the Irish
Friars. And I may tell you what offense I took at those vain stories which they
have of Miracles, and especially when I discovered their grand impostures
therein: For about seven years ago a Priest, near the City of Limbrick, by name
William Sarchwell, had for fifty shillings hired a Woman to pretend her self a
Cripple from her birth, and that she had a Revelation that if she dipped her
self in such a Well, whilst a Priest said Mass by the place, she should be
recovered of her infirmity; The plot thus laid, and accordingly executed, she
comes halting to the Well, returns out of it perfectly cured, which became a
Miracle to the people; which did not only get the Contriver of the Cheat a vast
sum of money, but also confirmed the people in their Superstition. But after
some time the Counterfeit had some remorse of conscience, came to me to
confession in order to absolution, which I would not grant till she had
declared the whole story to the Congregation, which she did accordingly. It is
well known the poor miserable people are mightily deluded by these Cheats. A
Friar of great note and Zeal told me that he was at a Franciscan Convent beyond
the Seas, where was the Image of the blessed Virgin, made with a Scrue in the
head thereof, where they put in some water, and having a string that came
undiscerned to a place where the Friars stood (and when they thought the people
had brought a good Offering) then by the help of that string they could unloose
the Scrue, by which the blessed Virgin seemed to weep, and this was one of
their Miracles.

Indeed the Relator (though a Friar) said it was a great scandal to him, and
accordingly complained to the General of the Order, but his answer was, should
he make a reformation in that particular that Convent should starve. It is
said, that the Monks of a certain Convent had put the like fallacy upon St.
Bernard himself, who when he came into their Church had prepared an instrument
to carry a voice to the Image of the blessed Virgin, who when he came into the
Church saluted him with a Salve Bernarde; but he, apprehensive of the cheat,
gave no other return to the complement than this: It is a shame for a woman to
speak in the Church. But of all their fine stories commend me to this new
Miracle they talk of for the confirmation of Transubstantiation, the Story is
this: They say, that in a certain place within the King of Spains Dominions,
that as the Sacrament of the Mass was celebrated that all the perfect Effigies
and proportion of a man rose out of the Host, but when the people came too
near, that they might plainly see the Miracle, he vanished away, therefore for
ever hereafter it must be horrid Blasphemy to deny Transubstantiation shall be
hardly guilty of so much Vanity as to make any replication to such a ridiculous
story, only let it be no offense to tell you what a remark a facetious person
made to the Relator of it: You suppose, says he, that it was Christ himself
that appeared, and it seems that upon the approach of the people he vanished a
way, which is the only circumstance to make the story credible, for he might
suppose the people were come to eat him, and so he vanished. Upon these
considerations, and reasons, and others, more than I have now time to mention,
I renounce here in the presence of God and this great Assembly my former Popish
ways, and withal I declare my self a Protestant; and that you may believe me a
true Protestant, I do further declare, that I am a Protestant according to the
Church of England, as it is here by Law established; And I must further declare
before the Searcher of all hearts, that I speak none of these things either out
of malice or prejudice, nor for any sinister end or corrupt design whatsoever,
but that Gods name may be glorified, his truth cleared, and my Brethren
edified, and that my own Soul may be eternally saved. But will it not be
enquired by some, Whether I be not gone from Popery to Popery, that is, unto
the same Church, though of another Denomination, it being objected, that the
Constitutions of this Church are framed out of Popery, and the Common Prayer
Book compiled out of the Mass Book? I answer, The Devil has many devices to
carry on his own interest, and the Papists do contrive many Engines to distract
Protestants; and I look upon this Objection to be hammered in their Forge to
make us worry one another, and to break our Communion. But to give a full
answer to the objection, let me tell you, that I think I understand the
Mass Book better than any here, and can assure you the Argument is vain and
unworthy: My reason follows, first all is not Popery that is in the Mass Book,
there are several particulars of the Primitive Litturgy that is not Popery:
There are several places taken out of the holy Bible, neither is that Popery.
Secondly, there are several other good things in the Mass Book, and if it were
not so the Cheat would be evident to every Eye. You know the Devil could tempt
our Savior in Scripture language, shall we therefore expunge these Scriptures
because the Devil used them? He transforms himself sometimes into an Angel of
light, yet that makes him no less a Devil, though harder to be discovered. The
reformation quarrels not with the Church of Rome for any thing that is good,
but what is really bad; We differ not from Rome in any thing but wherein she
has differed from her self, so the Schism is in Rome, not here: and from very
good grounds I am apt to believe that Rome has altered almost as much in her
Religion as in her Language; for you may as well say that the Italian is the
ancient Language of Rome, as the present Court of Rome is the ancient Church of
Rome. The Church is compared to a Spouse, the Pope has put her in a Fools
coat, and besmeared her face with filth and nastiness. The Reformation washes
her face, and takes from her her ridiculous garments, but meddles not with her
Essentials, nor any thing else but what is an apparent scandal: But I know not
how to represent the condition of our Church at the time of the Reformation
better than by comparing it to a house infected with the Plague; The Charity
and Wisdom of Authority orders this house to be cleansed by burning all the
infected Rags, but the Pewter, Brass, or Iron, and other goods not capable of
any infection still abide to the use of the house. What remains of the
comparison I leave to your own meditation to illustrate. I have only this to
say, That as the Papists have attempted my life, I must conclude that they will
traduce my name, and bespatter my reputation, but I hope your Charity will
relieve me; and for my own part, with the Almighties assistance, I will be
cautious that my life scandalize not my Profession, that from thence the
Enemies of the Lord may have no cause to blaspheme.

I hope you will join with me in giving to the God of my mercies all honor and
praise, the just Tribute of all created beings, henceforth and for evermore.

AMEN.
A true Narrative of some of the Actions and Speeches of several Papists in
Ireland, since his Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence, published in that
Kingdom, whereby does appear the great disadvantages and hazards such persons
as are converted from Popery to the Protestant Religion, must of necessity
expose themselves to:
By me, Anthony Egan, now Minister of the Gospel, late a Franciscan Friar, and
Guardian of the Friery of Monasterioris, in the Kings County, in the Province
of Leinster, Confessor general throughout the said Kingdom, and Chaplain to
several persons of quality of the Popish Religion there.
BY the Providence of God, I was Converted to the Protestant Religion about two
years since, at which time I obtained from the succeeding Guardian of the
Friery, whereof I was formerly Guardian (a Guardian being used to be Elected
every three years) a Testimonial of my good behavior before I declared my self
in public to be Converted

After my Conversion, I applied my self to the Lord Bishop of Clonfeart, who
gave me a Curates place in Loughreah, with some other preferment in the County
of Galloway, worth about 80 l. per annum, where I, shortly after, in using my
Function in the Church, was shot at by one Thomas Tressey, a Papist, Inhabitant
of that place, but not wounded, for which he was afterward bound to his good
behavior, by the said Bishop; after which, the Papists, there, did several
times threaten me with death: whereupon, for preservation of my Life, I was
forced to retire into Lymerick, whereby I lost such preferment as the said
Bishop had bestowed upon me: But before I went from Loughreagh, several of the
Papists Priests, and others, living thereabouts, which I am ready to name, and
do hereby Accuse, did publicly report that his Majesty, his Royal Highness,
and all the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom of England, were privately of
their Religion, which they used as an Argument to make me fall back again to
Popery.

After my coming to Lymerick, I being appointed to Preach an Anniversary Sermon
in Detestation of the late Rebellion there, several Popish Priests, and others,
came to hear me; and after Sermon ended, as I was going from Supper, assaulted
me in the Nightime, and endeavored to kill me, but by the providence of God,
I defended my self, and escaped unhurt.

After that, I came to Youghall about Christmas last, where one of the Papists
there, did report in the hearing of Credible Witnesses, that he should think
himself very happy if he could have opportunity to kill me, though he should be
hanged for it immediately, for which the said Papist was by the Mayor committed
to prison.

After which, to save my life, I was forced to go to Dublin, and being
recommended by the Earl of Orrary to the Archbishop of Dublin, and Lord
Chancellor of Ireland, I had Authority, and did preach as well in the
Cathedrals as other Churches there; and as often as I preached, was assaulted
in the Streets by a Rabble of Papists of that City: in one of which Assaults,
my Man was wounded, and I hardly escaped their Fury; whereupon my Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland gave me his Protection; notwithstanding which, I was
persecuted and assaulted as much as before, in so much that I was forced for
safeguard of my Life, to come for England, to my great discouragement, and the
discouragement of all such that are Protestants of that Kingdom, and others
that would be so, were they not held to their Superstition, for fear of losing
their Lives by the fury and rage of the Papists there.

During my abode in Ireland, since my Conversion, I was instrumental in
Converting several Priests and others to the Protestant Religion, and without
doubt, many more would have been turned from the Romish Church, had they not
been affrighted by the rigor and fury of the Papists there against me, and
others; one whereof being Guardian of a Friery, and after some Correspondence
with me, had inclination to become a Protestant; whereof, Talbot, that goes by
the name of Arch Bishop of Dublin, understanding, Excommunicated him, and the
whole Inhabitants of two Parishes procured a Warrant from the Lord Dungan, who
is a Papist; and made a Justice since the Indulgence, to take the said Guardian
or Prior, who being brought before him, he caused him to be laid in Irons, and
committed to a Dungeon, where he remained till complaint was made to the
Counsel of Ireland; whereupon the Council dispatched Sir Henry Ingoldsby to
know the truth thereof, with a Habeas Corpus for his Removal, who found him in
the Condition before related, and committed for High Treason, as appeared by
his Mittimus, whereby he could not be removed; but all the said Sir Henry
Ingoldsby could do, by being bound for his true Imprisonment, was, to procure
him the liberty of the Town, and a Tolerable Room to Lodge in, till he should
be delivered by due course of Law.

All which I am ready to prove, not only of my own knowledge, but also by the
Testimony of several persons of Quality; some whereof are now in this Kingdom:
and many other things of like nature, which to avoid prolixity, I now omit; but
if desired, will show the particulars.
By the Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Ireland.
ESSEX.

WHereas we are informed, that Anthony Egan Clerk, the last Sabbath day, and
several other times, has been Assaulted, abused and disturbed in the Street,
and other places, by Boys, and other disorderly, loose, and idle persons, to
his great discouragement in the performance of his Function, and contrary to
his Majesty's Laws, and all good Order and Government: For prevention of the
like disorders in the future, We do hereby, strictly Charge, Require, and
Command all Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and their Officers,
Constables, and all other his Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects
whomsoever, not only to permit the said Anthony Egan, and his Servant, quietly
and peaceably to pass from place to place, as they, or either of them shall
have occasion, within this City and Suburbs, or elsewhere, in this Kingdom; but
in case they, or either of them, shall hereafter be Assaulted, Abused, or
Disturbed, or any manner of Violence or Injury offered unto them, or either of
them, openly, or privately, (they behaving themselves civilly, as becomes
Loyal Subjects) to take, apprehend, and secure all such person or persons of
what age, condition, or sort soever they are, that shall be found offending, as
aforesaid, in any kind, and carry them before the Lord Mayor of this City, or
the next Justice of the Peace, to the place where they shall be taken to be
punished according to Law:

Given at his Majesty's Castle in Dublin, the 4th. day of February, 1672. Henry
Forde.

This following Commendatory was given to the Author by his Superior, a little
before he was Converted to the Church of England.

TEnore praesentium licentiam concedo fratri patri Antonio Egano nostri
instituti confessario eundi ad Commitatum de Clare circa quaedam negotio per
agenda, nobis nota quibus finitis, sicut ipsi videbitur expediens, revertatur
praecipue commendo praefatum Antonium omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos
contigerit in via, ut, benign charitative illum tanquam verum obedientiae
filium recipiant.

15. March. 1670. Frater Carolus Mack Carty Guardianus.


