A SHORT REVIEW OF SOME REFLECTIONS, Made by a Nameless Author, UPON Dr.
Crisp's Sermons, In a piece, Entitled, Crispianism Unmasked.

With some Remarks upon the Union in the late Agreement in Doctrine among the
Dissenting Ministers in London; Subscribed the 16th of December, 1692. and
that, as referring unto the present Debates.

Exek. 8. 7. Behold a hole in the Wall, v. 11. Every Man his Censer, (i. e.
Atonement, or Inherent Righteousness) in his Hand; (but not the Obedience of
one, Romans 5. 19.) v. 12. Son of Man, have thou seen what the H^use of Israel do
in the dark, every Man in the Chambers of his Imagery?

Prove. 17. 24. Wisdom is before him that has understanding; but the Eyes of a
Fool are in the end of the Earth, -- as roving in his implicit Universals.

Matthew. 13. 25. While Men slept, his Enemy came, and sowed Tares among the
Wheat, and went his way, (i. e. would not be known, or openly Subscribe to his
Work.)

Isa. 28. 17. Judgment also will I lay to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, and the Hail, (i. e. sharp and impartial dealings, drawn from a deep
and weighty Consideration of the Divine Perfections) shall sweep away the
Refuge of Lies, and the Waters, (i. e. an over-powering and continued Testimony
unto the Truth by the Spirit) shall overflow the hiding place.

Latet anguis in herba. By THOMAS EDWARDS, Esquire;

London, Printed for Will. Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-steeet: Where you
may be supplied with Mr. Edwards's Inquiry into the Gospel Truth. You may
likewise be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's, and Mr. Beverley's Works, and
likewise those other lately Published in Vindication of Dr. Crisp's Works. 1693.

THE Introduction.
Reader,
THere appeared lately, and that openly upon the Stage (in a Religious Sense,
or rather pretense) an Italian Quack-Salver; who failing to pass off his Drugs
with that Expedition and Success, that his high Conceptions of them might
possibly suggest him with, is withdrawn behind the Curtain, and yet we may
justly suspect his return upon us in this his Anonymous Proxy, from the Matter
and Process of this his Treatise; as Mountebanks, in their unsuccessful
Attempts, leave the Remainders of their dying, and yet restorative Hopes, on
the Cryptical Efforts, and renewed Endeavors of their Jesters, or
Jack-Puddings, in their managing, even the same Design, though but in Disguise,
as they themselves had done before. Therefore thou will find that all that this
our Author produces against Dr. Crisp, is no more as to the Matter and Manner,
Ends or Design thereof, than what thou have formerly seen fully opened, and
undeniably invalidated by others, especially in a Treatise, called,
NEONOMIANISM UNMASKED, and A REJOINDER by its Author, in Defense of the same;
unto which I expect not any sober, or tolerable Reply. The which, our present
Latent Author, (though I am apt to think conscious of his fault by his
flattering Preamble to his bitter, and false Charge against the Doctor) takes
no more notice of, than the Journeyman-Taylor did of his Master's Reproof for
sewing awry or amiss, but desired he might stitch out altogether. This our
Author, as we shall find, does in the Close of his Treatise. Vain Glory,
Itching Fancies, Carnal Appearances, and Prevaricatory Practices, are the
infallible Sprouts of a self-Justiciary. Therefore, considering how fully the
Truth, and that under a Fundamental Consideration thereof, has been from Dr.
Crisp's Works, defended and maintained, I shall be the more concise in my just
Remarks upon this our Masquerading Stage Player, as not being willing actum
agere: Only I would desire thee to consider these few Heads:

1. That the present Controversy lies not between Protestant and Protestant,
in the general as such, i. e. Church of England-Man, Presbyterian,
Congregational, or Baptist, either as to Forms of Worship, or Modes of
Discipline and their different persuasions therein; neither does it primarily
or positively, consist in the order of God's Dispensation in the Covenant of
Grace, for herein many upright Souls may unexitially be mistaken, (though this
be the subterfuge our Adversaries most miserably betake themselves unto, to
amuse both their Readers and Hearers with) but whether indeed there be such a
Covenant of Grace, as is mainly constitutive of a Representative Headship, in a
pr^per, and not barely and s^lely a Political Sense, together with an actual,
real Commutation, in an external Juridical Acceptance of Sin and Righteousness
between Christ and the Fl^ct, not by Infusion but Imputation. This is that they
would under their g^ngling Pretenses of the Merits of Christ, Holiness, Duties
and Works, rem^ve out of the way; which when done, Farewell Reformation, and the
Covenant it self to Beet; for by this they absolutely condemn our Separation
from the Church of Rome, and exp^se us justly to the Charge of Shifm and
Schismatics, and stabilitate the Council of Trent: Nay, I dare confidently
assert and can make it evidently appear, that there is never a Jesuit in the
World but might unequivocally, and that safely, as well as gladly, and roundly
would, if requested thereunto, subscribe unto their Treatises: Wherefore,

2. Note, That whenever these our self-Justificaries speak mostly of the
Doctrine of Justification, and therein would express themselves by the
Preposition [in] but [for] or [by] as knowing that the two latter are more
capable in the Letter, though not in the least, as to the Analogy of Faith, of a
remoter Construction, as to a Causality in the same, and consequently becomes a
more adapted, suitable, and undiscerned retirement to lodge their rotten
Hypothesis in; hence it is also that their revived Cerberus's Head,
dogmatically asserts, without any manner of proof, or so much as once offering
at the same. Mr. D. Williams 's Defense of Gospel Truth, p. 3.
That Merit and Matter in Judicial Acts or the same; which is a positive
Falsehood, either as to their identick or essential Coincidence, or their more
proper and d^^^inct uses, and Applications, though here^n their wicked retiring
holes do lie. Thus ^^^^ing them into a convertibility of terms, they think to
secure themselves as much as may be from oath Observations of others; whereas
in their Teaching^ and Writings they absolutely contradict their own Assertion,
by separating between Merit and Matter in our Justification, as that they take
Merit of Christ's Righteousness, from the Matter of the same, which as they say
abides in him, and apply it to the matter of our own Righteousness, the former
being in Christ, the latter in us; which indeed is but our Justifaction, not
Justification, by virtue of the same; therefore thou will find, by a diligent
attendance upon their Treatises in the whole scope and design of them, that
they allow unto Christ but a mere Adjunctive station unto the Covenant of
Grace, or to be but a bystander, and Looker on upon poor Sinners: That as they
come in by Faith and Repen^ance (notwithstanding their acknowledging that it is
by his Merits and Spirit) then it is that he steps in to apply a promise; and
that as they continue in the same, so continues he in the discharge of this his
Neonomian Office, as by them assigned unto him. Whence it genuinly follows:

3. That their exploding of Dr. Crisp for an Antinomian, and exp^sing him as
One that is an Enemy to, and Rejecter of Graces, Duties, and good Works, an
Espouser of Sin, as disowning of any Evil to be therein, arises from his not
acknowledging of some causally-conditional (th^ugh not meritorious, with all
our Adversaries blinding Arts) Prerequisites to our Justification; which had he
done, he must have openly defied, Romans 4. 5.and many more Texts that I could
name, to the absolute overthrow of the whole Economy of the Covenant of Grace;
but that in an acquitted and Righteous sense, must be not only through, but as
being chosen in Christ, and thereby in time made actual Members of that
Mystical Head, and that from, and by virtue of this our Fountain Union with him
in Election, vertually by Redemption, and manifestatively by Effectual Calling,
both the Change of our Natures is wrought, and consequently the performance of
our Duties, become exp^rimentally unto us, acceptable with God. From a neglect
of a due Consideration of the foregoing Heads. I must tell thee, and that from
my own Experience and Knowledge;

That of all the Persons in the World, that I have been acquainted with,
especial Professors, either in their Polemical Writings, Ep^st^lary
Argumentations, or all Conferenc^s; I never met with (I speak not of any of the
former persuasions, whereby they are distinguished as such, as being satisfied,
that there are many truly worthy of each of them) a more prevaricating,
inconsistent, false dealing, and vain glorious people, than such as are settled
and fixed upon this Neononomian bottom, and that as a Judgment of God, resting
upon them for their abuse of his Righteousness, so as to make it truckle
thereunto in the bare Merits of the same, and become thereby a mere Drudge to
our own Righteousness, or the Righteousness of the Spirit wrought within us
which does not only cast us the Foundation, but brings also a disorder into the
proper, peculiar Acts of the Trinity it self, in their positively distinct
personal Operations, wherein and whereby the Scripture evidently declares
(Maugre all the Socinian and Arminian Quodammodo's) the perfect Exaltation,
Glory and Renown of one Eternal Deity, in the subservient, regular, and
conj^ynt management of that Covenant, which these persons would overthrow) as
carried on by these threee bl^ssed Subsistenci^s, though essentially One; for
the Father properly serves not the Son herein, nor the Son the Spirit, though
each unanim^usly carry on the same design, yet it is by a distinct
Demonstration and Application of both the form and matter of the same, as
Graciously engaged in and by their own voluntary and everlasting Counsels.
Hence it is that the Pharisees of old fell short of their Justification,
notwithstanding their owning of the Grace of God, and their great Expectations
from the same, in order unto it, Luke 18. 81. etc. and which is remarkable in
reference unto Peter himself; who when he began to warp in this point, Gal. 2.
He is treated with, as no less than a Dissembler, and all those s^ding with him
to be under the Power and Prevalency of Dissimulation for a time* The reason of
God's Jealousy herein, and consequently his Judgment upon them is very plain,
in that it is the same Righteousness in God, that he will have exalted both in
the Salvation and Damnation of a Sinner, and that as exerted by, and held forth
in the the Law, though toward the latter immediately, but to the former in,
and [mediately] through Christ, and that not as to the mere Effects thereof,
though they follow thereupon, but the solid substantial Appearance and
Application of the same, as the stabilitating Ground and Juridical Foundation
of both their Bliss and Misery, together with the just Proceedings of God
therein. Mark Romans 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. For it is the self-same
Righteousness, under the just prosecuting Sentence and Charge whereof the
Damned lie, in which it is that the Elect stand justified before God. Thus the
same Doctrine preached by the same Apostles, became the Savor of Life, unto
some, and the Savor of Death unto Death, unto others, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. comp.
Romans 10. 3, 4. Therefore of Grace; for why should any one be made Partaker of
that unto his Salvation, which pronounces a just Sentence of Condemnation upon
another, but that it is merely of Grace? The one standing justified in that
which passes a Sentence of Condemnation upon the other. He that has Ears to
hear, let him hear.

A SHORT REVIEW OF SOME REFLECTIONS, etc.
IN all Buildings, the Foundation is to be first secured; for where that is
laid essentially and entirely in an Error, it is absolutely impossible to be
true unto it in an erected Fabric upon the same, without a continued
Superstructure of Errors, Mendacium mendaciis tegit, ne perfluat; for as Truth
cannot be retained, and defended but by Truth, there being an inseparable
connection between that of the lowest, and highest Degree and Station thereof in
the Church of God, as there was of every Nail and Thread of a Fringe in the
Tabernacle, to the Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice; so neither can Error be justly
maintained, and genuinely pleaded for, but by a constant Enumeration of Errors,
(those being a decorum and order, even in Romances, and Play Books, as well as
other things.) Hence it is that these two things do infallibly fall out,
especially in days of more than ordinary Trials; when the Lord Jesus comes with
his Fan in his Hand, by this or the other Providence, thoroughly to purge his
Floor.

1. That the more the Heretic, properly such (which I take to be one that
either removes or perverts the Foundation that God has laid) is put upon the
defensative part of his Error, he still adhering unto the same, though never so
latent at first, or for a while, and consequently undiscerned, the more
speedily and clearly, both he, and it will appear unto others. This is evident
beyond all manner of Dispute in our Neonomian Contestors this day, as will
fully appear anon.

2. That many who may seem to differ much, even to a direct opposition, as to
appearance at least in several Circumstantials, and more Minute Appendixes unto
Truth, as arising either from their Darkness, and consequently invincible
mistakes, in apprehending one another, their peculiar mode of expressing
themselves, or their timing of each particular Truth, in assigning unto it its
proper and more individual station, order, use, and dependence; yet these as
truly holding the Head, especially in reference to the Doctrine of Justification
(the Controverted point this day) whatever their present Dissonancy, and
thereupon Exasperations may be, as between Luther and Calvin, will sooner or
later coalesce, and fall into One, as being truly Members of the same Mystical
Body, because the Foundation is the same, on which they are both laid and
built. This will evidently appear from its contrary; and that, as relating unto
the apparent Apostacies that have discovered themselves in the Treatises of
some later, as well as former Writers; who notwithstanding their Vigor against
the Papacy, even to a Preparation for its Burial by a winding sheet, yet upon
trial of them in the Fundamental Points (which we must stick unto, or we not
only lose all, but east a most wretched Aspersion upon the Providence of God,
and vindicate the Proceeding of our Enemies in the Death of the Martyrs) of
Reformation, have been driven to shelter themselves under its argumentative
Umbrage, and to draw forth the Arrows of their Defense out of it Quiver; yea,
and as it is too notoriously known to assign in a manner unto it from
Protestanism, in the general the very right Hand of Fellowship in Christoanity;
and all because the bottom is the same, on which they are fixed both in their
Hopes and Trust, it being natural for every thing to incline to its designed,
and as such proper and uniting Center. Jo. 5. 40. comp. chapter 6. 64, 65, 68, 69.
Hinc illae lachrymae!

The matter and truth in Controversy, having been by others so justly and
fully stated and defended, we may be the more brief with this our blank Author,
especially, considering how weak, as well as false, his Attempts are against
the same.

His confident and grave Trumpeter tells us in the Preface, That the wrath of
Man works not the Righteousness of God; much less I am sure does our Author's
lurking, and yet open Politics, with their false Reserves, contribute in the
least to the Manifestation of the same, wherewith his Pamphlet is sufficiently
stuffed; for as Wrath is the resultive Operation of Anger, which Anger is a
Passion, created in the Soul by God himself, and drawn forth into its proper
exercise by him into that which the Scripture calls Zeal for his Glory; so also
is Politicism in Man, a mere exurgency from that reasoning faculty within him,
by which he is distinguished as well as by others of his Qualifications from
the Beasts that perish; but all thes^re discriminatively adjudged as to their
sinful or gracious position, frame, or operation, ae they co-work with, or for,
or against the Righteousness of God, and that as to their principles and ends,
the very Text our Prefacer produces, sufficiently Demonstrates the same. 1 Sams
2. 13. etc. 1 Kin. 18. 27. 2 Kin. 3. 13, 14. chapter 1. 10. Luke 9. 54, 55. Judge.
5. 23. Ephesians. 4. 26. Ab equis, ad asinos.

Our Author in his first, and part of the second page, highly commends (after a
little vent of his Gall) Dr. Crisp's Sermons, and that for some certain uses
and ends that he is pleased to assign unto them: That he exalts Free Grace,
Christ's Righteousness, his Paths, in expressing the astonishing love of Jesus,
and that in the Redemption of Mankind, how Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and
Peace met, and kissed each other in him, that Justice and Goodness had their
equal discovery in his satisfaction, and how that he depresses good Works and
holy Duties, (but observe how he takes him, p. 2* as to satisfying God's
Justice, or meriting any thing for us. Here the hooks lies) from being
ingredieats of Justification, and so on. I doubt this word irgredients will
prove but a very nasty one, by then we have compared it with his ten charges
against the Doctor; but for all this we must endeavor as inoffensively and
honestly as we can to rescue him out of his Hands, for I never iiked ovem lupo
committere, or Agninis lactibus canem alligare, since we see our Author has no
sooner got him into his clutches, by his fawning reserved acknowledgments, but
like the Lion in the Fable, tears him to pieces.

Some few things to be remarked out of our Author, p. 2, 3, 4. before we enter
precisely upon his Decemvir'd Charge against the Doctor.

1. His inconsistency, even whilst he endeavors falsely to charge the Doctor
wirh the same (besides, as we shall see in the Close of his Treatise how he
overthrows the whole of his Forgery, and that even with his own Pen unto our
Hands) from comparing what he says, p. 2, 3, and 4. and several other places,
with what his Armor-bearer in the Preface expresses: Far be it from me to
censure or arraign the State and Spirit (note those words State and Spirit) of
the Reverend Dr. Crisp, whose Soul I take to be in Heaven, and whose Intentions
and Designs might be sincere and good, though not so distinctly see the nature,
order, and mutual Rela^ions and Dependencies, to and upon each other. Pref. l.
17, 22. Author, p. ^. His Zeal for Christ's imputed Righteousness, makes him
vilify, and almost, (mark that word) exclude an inherent Righteousness of our
own; comp. p. 3. Though the Author of these Sermons often attempts to persuade
you thas he is no Antinomian, i. e. that he is not against the Law of
Righteousness and Holiness; that he is no discourager of of Faith and good
Works, and the several Duties of Religion; yet nothing is more evident than
this, that he is a professed Enemy to these, and uses all the Art he can to
make others so. Suit but these together, and thou will find a Preliminary
Transcript of both his Treachery and I^consistency, wherewith we shall be
sufficiently glutted anon; besides p. 58. He makes him a Derider of the new
Birth, with many other false, as well as bitter Sarcasms, which should they be
but in the Hundredth part of them true, would absolutely bespeak the Doctor a
Reprobate, Gal. 4. 29, 30. Scarce one, or but very few of his Stigmatizing
marks, if Faith in its Analogy be attended unto, that can be reckoned of the
spots of God's Children.

2. HIS Displeasure against him for separating between Justification and
Sanctification, which the Holy Scriptures (as he says) always join together, p.
3. but not as to the ends for which our Author and his Jesuitical Fraternity
would have them promiscuously jumbled together; does the Scripture join them,
and in no other a Sense does the Doctor separate them.

3. HIS solemn Appeal unto the Searcher of Hearts, before he enters upon this
his allowed, deliberate, and studied false Dealings with the Doctor, of his
Innocence in the same, I could tell him of the like Attempt of another, with
whom God has met in the very Language of his Imprecation. Let him and such
remember Ananias and Sapphira.

BUT to the charges themselves: Or, ab equis ad asinos, from bad to worse: But,
before we proceed, note, Reader,

THAT there is not one Charge of the whole ten that our Author produces against
the Doctor, wherein he may be said to have done him the least piece of Justice,
or to deal equitably with him according to the matter he has in Hand, and that
in the very literal Dependant Construction of the same which, if otherwise thou
find upon an unequivocal, plain, and candid comparing of the Doctor, with
his Traducer, and that according to the pure simplicity of the Gospel, I will
lay my Head under thy Feet, to be trampled into Powder. And this, without any
manner of reserves, (God assisting) I shall nakedly clear up unto thee;
therefore look to it that thou be not deceived herein, either by the Author; or
any other, Act. 20. 29. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Act. 17. 11. for herein I must declare
my Judgment, leaving thee to thine own, and am ready to make it good at any
time, that the whole of what I have yet seen in Print against Dr. Crisp, take
it in the full matter, and compacted design thereof, will no more avail, in
order unto thy Salvation, than the Turkish Alcoran it self would: Nay further,
should any one be saved upon the Principles urged, though hut tacitly, and
somewhat obscurely for the present, by these (to say, the best of them)
Semi-justiciaries, Romans 9. 31, 32. his Hallelujahs in Heaven, as genuinly
springing from such a root, would be but mere Hypocrisy, sufficiently seasoned
with a Proud, Pharisaical, and vainglorious Spirit, Luke 18. 11. etc. This I
tell thee again and again, I will be bound to maintain. And as I would beg no
Man's Vote or Subscription to the work that lies before me, as one that
designed to catch or ensnare Souls from an appearance of Numbers and Names, one
of Bellarmine 's 15 marks of a true Church; so neither would I conceal my self
as one conscious of a vile undertaking: But that which is most lamentable, and
calls for pity in our Author, as not far distant from the unpardonable Sin it
self, if I understand any thing of the Word of God, is, His deliberate,
contrived, and consequently approved Actings against his own Light, (as with
the Jews of old; who, Three things concur to the making up of the Sin against
the Holy Ghost: 1. Light in the Mind. 2. Malice in the Heart. 3: The
Insensibleness of the Sin. Mr. Dod 's first Sheet, and 27th. Saying.
though the Matter of Fact, in the Miracles our Savior wrought was plain,
naked, and so convincingly open before them, that they themselves could not
gainsay, yet such was their Malice against the truth, that they would rather
ascribe the power which they were wrought unto Beelzebub, than the Finger of
God) for there is scarce any one of his Charges against the Doctor, but
evidently demonstrates, if the place be viewed, that his confutation lay before
his Eyes, even then when he was picking the Matter thereof out of his Works:
Therefore thou will find, that whenever he is forced to own or Subscribe unto
some things, as being Truths in the Doctor's Treatise, he endeavors thereby to
blast his Reputation, without any manner of Proof, as confidently assigning
unto the whole of his Labors, but a more crafty fetch, ridiculing of the
Gospel, and all to deceive the People, with several such dogmatical Assertions,
without any just demonstration, mixed with some Theatrical Flourishes, so far
from having in them any Savor of Grace, or appearance of truth; that indeed
there is not so much as the least Tincture o^ common-Morality in the whole
Scope of this his pitiful Pamphlet, wherein h^^ barking or canine keenness,
Psalm. 59. 6, 7. is far more acceptable than all his fawning Treacheries, by
which he would usher in his pestilent, both Antinomian, as well as Neonomian
Heresies. I must confess that the shaking of my Dog's Tail is more pleasing, as
having more of Sincerity in it, than the whole of his introductory Sycophancy
to this his Treatise.

For the Proof of which, we shall consider our Author's first Charge, to begin
withal.

1. He tells us, Page 4. That, the Doctor will not ascribe unto Faith that
which the Apostle ^aul so often does, in our Justification before God: and
withal, that under a pretense of exalting Christ, (to omit the rest of his
pitiful, wyre-drawn, and forced Sophisms) he denies that we are justified by
Faith in Christ -- Take a View (Reader) of his false Treachery herein, and
therein judge, who it is (though our Author would impudently fix it upon the
Doctor) that truly stumbles at the Threshold, whether the Traduced, or his
Accuser. The Doctor, p. 98. (whence our Author curtails his partial Quotation
against him) distinguishes between a passive and active recipiency of Christ,
(which indeed, if truly weighed, is the very plague, as well as Test, of an
Arminian. This Discrimination, and the Doctors, manifest literal and expressed
design therein, had our Author but honestly attended unto, and justly
represented to his Reader, he knew would have absolutely overthrown the whole
of his undertaking, subverted him in the very Grounds of his Proceedings
against him, and unvailed him of all his forged seemingly colorable pretenses,
whereon, and wherein he constantly fixes and shades himself in the vileness of
his Charge against him, and thereupon miserably concludes, that a Man may have
a part in Christ, either without, or destitute of Faith, (i. e.) living and
dying in unbelief. But Sir Ignoto Author, or Knight of the Post rather, know
this, that we must not be run down with bantering Impudence, empty Flourishes,
much less forged Accusation, but expect both our Information and Establishment,
from clear and undeniable Demonstrations, backed and fortified with solid and
well-quadrated Scripture-proofs. And this the Dr. does immediately in the
following Page, 99. from Jer. 31. 18, 19. which our Author takes no notice of,
though it at the very time of this his Forgery, looked, yea, stared him fully
in the Face. The sum and substance whereof is this, That Ephraim must be
turned, before she can turn unto the Lord; That she never reflected upon her
self, till after her conversion. And does not this bespeak a passive part she
had in the Lord, or a pre-possessing Act of God in her Soul, before she could
in the least put forth an active recipiency of him? And does not the latter
absolutely depend upon the former? Is not this also the Judgment of the
Assemblies? Cha. 10: Art. 2. This effectual Call is of God's free and special
Grace alone, not from any thing at all foreseen in Man, who is altogether
Passive therein, until being quickened, and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he is
thereby enabled to answer this call, and to embrace the Grace offered and
conveyed in it. This the Doctor furthet proves, Ibid. from Psalm. 110. 3. where
he tells us, Hence it is that the entrance of Christ into a Person, is
attributed unto the Power of Christ, the Power of the Lord must come over a
Person before Christ can have a possession of that Person, (and then gives this
reason) in regard of the crosness of the Spirit of Man, to the pleasure of
Christ; when Christ has once revealed himself, and made the Soul behold his
Beauty, and acquainted the Soul with his Excellency, then the Soul begins to
embrace him, (mark that, Reader) and to hold him fast, and will not let him
go.Does the Doctor now exclude Faith in the Apostle's Sense? Or rather does he
not assign to it, its proper place, according unto, Act. 13. 48. Gal. 1. 15,
16. This Orthodoxy, (though nauseous to our Authors Arminian Palate, and which
puts him upon so many miserable shifts, may be proved and cleared from several
exemplary Instances in Scripture, as well as positively Doctrinal points in the
same; for it is not the most Gracious Internal Actings of the Soul, though
wrought and maintained of God himself, that works a Change in our personal
Covenant-State; consider it well, (Reader) and weigh it in the balances of the
Sanctuary, and that without respect of Persons or Parties; for as God's Act in
Justification is purely Forensick, and therein respects our Persons, and
depends not in the least upon his Physical Operation, which is entirely
regenerative, whose subject therein properly is our Natures; so also neither
does our part in him in the act of Conversion it self, depend upon our actual
closing with him, any further than our passive recipiency of him makes way for
the same, both in its productive cause, and continued, irresistible, and yet
Gracious complying Designs. This is clear from Joh. 1. 12. wherein a passive
Reception of Christ, is that which precedes an active one. See also 1 John 4.
10, 19 Isa. 65. 1. Joh. 15. 16. comp. v. 5. chapter 1. 48, 49. 50. Phil. 1. 6.
Ezekiel. 16. 60, 61, 62, 63. Thus it was with A^am, the Proto-Applicatory Subject
of this Grace, after his fall. How did the Lord deal with him, in order to his
Recovery? Did he wait for an actual Exhibition of his Faith to justify him for
the same? Nay, did he not rather pursue him, when Rebelliously, under the
obstinate Fruits, and reigning Effects of his (and ours in him) Federal Act of
Apostasy? But with what? even a promise. But what was this promise? the Seed of
the Woman. And what was this Seed in the root, or primary Acceptance of it? I
suppose, Christ, (which is evident in Eve's mistake, Genesis 4. 1. besides many
other undeniable Scriptural positive Proofs) therefore reckoned upon as the
first Born, first Fruits, yea, first Gift, and to have the Pre-eminence in all
things, before even Faith, or any other work of the Spirit, which is fully
expressive of not only the nature as to the matter, but executive form it self
of the Covenant of Grace, which Covenant consists of Promises, or, as Dr.
Goodwin says, That the Covenant of Grace, is, Election-purposes and decrees
wrapped up in promises: But what are these promises? Mr. Strong, in his Treatise
of the Covenants, tells us, That they consist not only of two kinds, viz.
personal and real, but that the former takes place in the administration of the
same from the latter. If so, then our Doctor is right; that Christ is not only
the first Gift, but that until we receive him in a passive Sense, how can he be
unto us the Finisher, much less the Author of our Faith? And it is true, that
God convinces our first Parents of their sin, and therein begins with Adam,
which is somewhat remarkable, though Eve was first in the Transgression, yet
chose rather to deal with the former, as that in and by him, as a
Representative Head, he dealt with all his posterity. But what is the Fruit of
all his convincing, though just Proceedings against him? Nothing but a
continued act of Rebellion, and that notwithstanding all the mild Proceedings
of the Lord with him, even in the cool of the Evening, not so much as a bare
acknowledgment of a matter of Fact in a Transgressive Sense, but rather an
aggravating of the same, by their (or our first Parents) ultimate, though tacit,
casting the cause thereof upon God, rather than themselves. Which way does the
Lord take to restore them, or to bring them to himself? It is evident, by the
application of a promise, and that under a personal Consideration, before any
of that which betokens a real one, Genesis 3. 15. comp. v. 21. The Person included
in the promise, they first receive, and thereupon their Clothing or Justifying
Garment, typified in the Coats of Skins, which were made, or wrought out, and
also truly applied by the Lord himself, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26: Thus it was
with Paul himself, who had a passive part in Christ, (I speak it not of that
which is barely decretive, or redemptive) even before his actual closing with
him, Act. 9. 3, 4, 5. comp. v. 6. And is not this Dr. Crisp's Doctrine, in his
distinguishing between a passive, and active recipiency of Christ, namely, That
God, out of his Bowels of Pity and Mercy, will reach out his Christ to those
that have no Hands to receive him, no Faith to believe in him, but are rather
as froward Patients, shutting their Teeth against their Remedy: And is not this
evident, without the least reserve in the case of Paul, as well as that of
Adam? as that the part the Elect have in him, in a convertive Sense, proceeds
primarily from a passive Application of them unto their Souls, as precedaneous
unto their actual knowing, and voluntary closing with him, Act. 22. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Nay, take it in the most gentle of God's Proceedings with his Adult Elect
in the Act of Conversion, or his bringing them over by Faith unto himself, they
are primarily passive herein. Consult for an instance but the case of Lydia,
and the Lord's dealing with her Soul, Act. 16. wherein it was evident that her
Faith was the Fruit of Union, or that she had a passive part in the Lord
(besides that of a decretive, and so a Fountain one; and that of a redeemed,
purchased, and so a truly virtual one) before she actually closed with him in
the recipiency of Faith, properly so; for it is well known, though Faith be the
instrumental cause, yet that it is the Spirit that is personally, and so
peculiarly the efficient cause of our Justification, and that not by an
infusion of qualities, but positive, substantial Application of that
Righteousness (as being his voluntary, gracious undertaken Office) whereof, and
wherein he makes it not only to appear, that Christ is the Meritorious, but
material cause of the same, and that not by the Mediums of Graces, as Mediator
only, but the solid actual Obedience of him, who on that very account became
their Representative Head, Joh. 16. 13, 14. comp. Romans 5. 19. And though none
of these stand asunder in the complete uniting, as well as operative, and
consequently Testimonial Act of our Justification, but to say or suppose that
the two former are not subsequent unto, and do not wholly depend upon the
latter, and that as to the very essence of our justified State, as well as
Order, is at one blow to build and establish the Covenant of Grace upon that of
Works, and thereby to assign such a CAVSA SINE QVA NON, unto our believing (as
our Author very closely infers p. 4. l. 30, 31, 32, etc. that Faith is not so
much a Manifestation as an entitling Grace, and what that means, we know very
well) that the whole Mysteries of the Gospel, in Election, Redemption; yea, and
Vocation also in the effectual Application of them both, as to imputation on
the one Hand, and Inhaesion on the other unto a Sinner, must attend upon our
Faith, and that as the antecedent Faederal (but not meritorious by any means,
though perhaps, STILO NEONOMIANENSI, acquisititious) condition of all the
benefits, both designed by, and received from them. This is evident, I say, in
the Example of Lydia. That the Lord opened her Heart, is too notorious to be
denied, and that this opening of her Heart is expressed and cleared up from the
Fruit thereof, even her Attendance upon what Paul spoke, which was no more than
the hearing of Faith; it was Faith upon this opening that caused her to listen:
Now, is it not as evident a Demonstration of Irrationality in Logic, as it is
of Heresy in Divinity, if we do but attend unto the Analogy of the Covenant of
Grace, ut prius, in all the parts thereof, and that, both of personal as well
as real promises, the latter depending upon the former: That she should either
have her Heart opened by the Lord, and that thereby she should attend unto what
the Lord by Paul spoke unto her, and yet not to be pre-possessed of, or by the
Lord, unto both this opening and attendance.

TO deny this, is not only blockish Nonsense, but a (...), or, Man's
self-ability engaging against God. The Divinity, and therein Re^^gion and
Practice of some in this our day, may in a more especial manner, by way of
allusion, be observed from the proceeding of that wicked King Ahaz, 2 Kin. 16.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Who, though after the sight of the Altar at Damascus, and
his thereupon bringing it in the exactly, made formative frame, and material
fixing of it in the House of the Lord; yet removed not the Altar of the Lord
wholly out of the House, but displaced it, and that not as to render it
entirely useless, or of no advantage unto him, but that under a color of
enquiring by it, he might the more pretextually, or covertly go on in the
establishing himself in his own ways of Works and Holiness, as knowing that the
Merits, or Worth of all his performances, did typically lie there; therefore a
Brazen Altar, as acknowledged by himself. Thus according to our Neonomian
Heresy, some allow unto Christ but an adjunctive station (remote enough from
the fixed design of God) unto the Covenant of Grace, as to the acceptance, both
of our Persons and Performances with the Lord, i. e. That as we perform this or
the other duty, though therein we Sacrifice but to our own Nets, yet it is but
running to this Altar, or the Merits thereof, by which we must enquire into,
and come to know that our Works, and consequently our own persons become in a
justifying Sense approved by, or acceptable with him.

From hence our Author, p. 5. lets fly his barking, or concisionary Arrows
against the Doctor, through the sides of Beza, whose treatment is at best but
tragi-comoedial, or rather comoedially-tragical: Alas, poor Beza, who it seems
in his Sense is but a Pretender to mend Texts, nay, an Alterer of them, by
Daring and Presumptious Practices, instead of a just Explainer of them, as our
Author acknowledges, though with a, perhaps, (as Hobs upon his Atheistical
Entrance into Eternity) it was the only considerable fault (more canino and
dogmatico,) in that worthy (by all means to Sugar the Pill) Man's Annotations.
But however it seems, Beza must down, for in the judgment of our Scrutinous
blind-Mans-buff he has opened a Text of Scripture, that gives too great a
Countenance to the Antinomian Error, which our Author is pleased very Learnedly
to define by the Character of Crispianism, and to ^ntitle himself amongst the
number of the Critics, as having unmasked the same. The Text it seems is this,
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified, etc. Therefore! Wherefore? I suppose the
Word is an Illative, and as it makes way for an Inference and Conclusion, so it
absolutely bespeaks some undeniable Maxim or Truth formerly fixed upon, without
a retention of which, it would prove but superfluous and trifling, and indeed
it is, that no less than which our Author, together with the rest of his Tribe
under a pretense of exalting Faith, would totally overthrow. The Apostle,
having in the immediately foregoing verse, chap. 4. 25. positively as well as
inclusively declared, that in what Christ, as the Representative Head of the
Elect did, lay their Justification before God, though the mere Act of God, in
justifying is purely of Grace, Romans 3. 24. yet considering that Christ, and
that by the appointment of the Father, pursuant to the Eternal Counsels of his
Will, and that according to their mutual engagements in the Everlasting
Covenant, became Incarnate, obeyed, suffered, yea, rose again, and that not for
himself, nor barely on the Behalf, and for the good of those given unto him,
but more immediately in their room and stead. Heb. 2. 14. It became just with
God; and it is a juridical, as well as External Act in him, to reckon upon such
as justified thereby and therein, Romans 3. 25, 26. which Grace of Justification
in the prefixed matter and form thereof, they enter upon through Christ by
Faith, and all the Fruits of the same, such as Peace with God, etc. otherwise
this Text, chapter 5. ver. 2. must be read thus, -- By whom also we have access b^
Faith into this FAITH, instead of this Grace, which purely refers to
Justification, as an Act, in, of, and by God himself) wherein we stand. Dr.
Owen brings in Cyrillus Alexandri^us, in Joan. Lib. 11. Cap. 25. speaking thus:

Quaemadmodum praevaricatione primi hominis ut in primitiis generis nostri,
morti addicti fuimus; eodem modo Dr. Owen's Treat. of Justification, p 482.
per obedientiam and justitiam Christi, in quantum seipsum legi subjecit,
quamvis legis author esset, benedictio and vivificatio quae per Spiritum est,
ad totam nostram penetravit naturam. And Leo. Epist. 12. ad Juvenalem. ut autem
repararet omnium vitam, recepit omnium causam; ut sicut per unius reatum omnes
facti fuerunt peccatores, ita per unius innocentiam omnes fuerunt innocents;
inde in homines manaret justitia, ubi est humana suscepta natura.

Again, This is the clearest Testimony, that what the Lord Christ did and
sustered was for us, and not for himself. For without the Dr. Owen 's Treat. of
Justification, p. 287.
consideration hereof, all the Obedience which he yielded unto the Law, might
be looked on as due only on his Account, and himself to have been such a Savior
as the Socinians imagine, who should do all with us from God, and nothing with
God for us.

And in his answer to Mr. Baxter upon the same Charge of Antinomianism, and the
Grounds thereof, that flies about our Ears this day; He says, My second is,
that which is procured for any one, thereunto he has a right: The thing that
is obtained, is granted by him, of whom it is obtained, and that to them, for
whom it is obtained. To this is answered, 1. In the Margent, that I should make
Appendix to Dr. Owen 's Answer to Biddle, p. 35.
great Changes in England, if I could make all the Lawyers believe this strange
Doctrine; but of what the Lawyers believe, or do not believe, Mr. B. is no
Competent Judge, be it spoken without Disparagement, for the Law is not his
study: I, who (perhaps) have much less skill than him self; will be bound at
any time to give him Twenty Cases, out of the Civil and Cannon Law, to make
good this Assertion; which if he knows not, that it may be done, he ought not
to speak with such Confidence of these things. Nay, amongst our own Lawyers,
(whom perhaps he intends) I am sure I may be informed, that, if a M^n intercede
with another, to settle his Land by conveyance to a third Person, giving him
that Conveyance to keep in trust until the time come, that he should by the
Intention of the Conveyer enjoy the Land, though he, for whom it is granted,
have not the least knowledge of it, yet he has such a Right unto the Land
thereby created, as cannot be disanull'd. This is the very thing for which it
is that Dr. Crisp brings in this Text, and Beza's Annotation thereupon, and
that in the very Page, whence the Charge is fetched. Namely, that, Justification
is truly and properly the work of God himself, and cannot be the work of Faith.
Nay, he goes farther, Suppose (says he) Dr. Crisp's Works. Vol. 2. Page 325.
you should have the words to run as they are commonly rendered.I answer, Then
are we to distinguish in Faith of two things; there is the Act it self of
believing, and the Object on which we do believe; and so the words may be
understood thus: Being justified by the Righteousness of Faith, or by the
Righteousness of Christ, which we do believe, We have Peace with God, and so
ascribe our Justification to the Object of our believing the Righteousness of
Christ, and not to the Act of Believing. The truth is, Beloved, the Act of
Believing is a Work, and as much our Work as our Fear and Prayer, and love is;
and the Apostle should contradict himself, when he says, We are saved by
Grace, through Faith, not of Works, if he mean the Act of Faith: And he might
as well have said, We are not justified by Works, but we are justified by
Works. This he further distinguishes in the same Page, unto which I refer thee
(which our Author with various huffing Reflections, and rotten Inferences, most
partially and falsely quotes in his 6th and 7th Pages) That, to be short, there
is not only a distinction between the Act and Object of Faith, and that as
properly relating unto our Justification and Righteousness therein, but also to
God's Act of our Justification in Heaven, as fully Precedaneous to the
termination thereof in Conscience. Dr. Owen upon the 1 Cor. 1. 30. in his
refutation of Socinus and Bellarmine, tells us, That Christ is made of God,
Righteousness unto us in such a way and manner, as the nature of the thing does
require. Say some, it is, because by him we are justified. However the Text
says not, That by him we are justified, but he is of God made Righteousness
unto us, which is not our Dr. Owen of Justification, p. 502.
Justification, but the Ground, Cause and Reason, whereon we are justified.
Righteousness is one thing, and Justification is another. Now either this
Righteousness is in an eternal, decretive, and material sense, truly and
irrevocably theirs, before they believe, or upon what Grounds is it that God
can be reckoned just, in his justifying of them, even when they believe? But
there is a secret grub lies at the bottom of all this our Author's Indignation,
which we must endeavor to find out. See Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter, in the
forementioned Appendix. Now I say, that in the sense, wherein I affirm, that
Justification is terminated in Conscience, I may yet also affirm, and that
suitably to the utmost Intention Dr. Owen 's Appendix against Mr. Baxter, in
his Answer to Biddle. page 19.
of mine in that expression, that Justification by Faith is not a knowledge or
feeling of Justification before given, nor a Justification in or by our own
Consciences, but somewhat that goes before all such Justification as this is,
and is a Justification before God. And is not this true? How many scores of our
ancient solid Reformers might be brought in to attest this truth, wherein and
whereby they distinguished themselves in a Fundamental sense, as Protestants
from Papists? But it seems (as our Author thinks) Dr. Crisp did not pitch upon
a right Text in this of Romans 5. 1. though it and its Context undeniably prove
he did, to fix this his Discrimination upon, and therefore alters the Scene of
the Charge against him, i, e. from a distinguishing to a confounding
Explication, p. 7. where he, to his own Admiration, no doubt, Learnedly
explains Gal. 3. 24. for if the Apostle's Sense or Meaning be the same in one
place of his Epistles, as well as in another, when he speaks more especially of
being justified by Faith, (which our Author firmly asserts) why then should he
make a distinction between the Act and Object of Faith, from Gal. 3. 24. which
he denies unto the same Apostle, from Romans 5. 1. in Beza's Interpretation, and
the Doctor's Quotation of him for that end? A strong Memory I see is exceeding
requisite for a Lying and Prevaricating Spirit: This is not far unlike the
Devil's Proceedings with Job; who when he saw that his Accusation of him before
God for an Hypocrite, did not prove true, or hold Water, then does he slily
seek by his Wife in an Instrumental Sense to cause him to part with his
Integrity. Just thus it is that our Author most shamefully spews out his own
Treachery. Dr. Goodwin, upon Ephesians. 2. 6. says, that -- Our Salvation is in
God's Gifts, and in Christ's personating of us, (mark this piece of
Crispianism) and apprehending of us; it is perfect and complete, though in our
Persons, as in us, it is wrought by degrees. Further. page 218, 219. He Doct.
Goodwin upon the Epistle to the Ephesians. chapter 2. 6. p. 217, 218. 219.
tells us, You see the distinction between in Christ, and with Christ; we are
said to be quickened with Christ; why? because that Work, as it is wrought in
Christ once for us, has now some Accomplishment in us; but speaking of the
Resurrection to come, he does not say we are raised up in Christ, but raised up
with Christ; do but learn to distinguish, for the want of this makes many Men
to mistake. A Man before he is called, he is justified in Christ, but not with
Christ, that is, it is not actually applied to the Man's Person; his Person is
not put in foro verbi, in the State of Justification. Learn, I say, to
distinguish between receiving a thing in Christ, and receiving it with Christ;
you receive it with Christ when it is actually applied to your Person; we now
sit together in Christ in Heaven, would you desire no other sitting in Heaven
with Christ, than now you have? Certainly you would: As you sit in Christ, so
likewise you would sit with Christ; so take a Man before such time as he
believes, and is converted to God, would he have no other Sanctification?
Would you have for your Child, suppose you believe him to be elect, or had an
immediate infallible Warrant, so to think, no other Sanctification or
Justification than he has then? No, you would have him Sanctified with Christ,
and justified with Christ, which is to have that which he had in Christ,
applied to him; and he put actually in his own Person, in the state of it. The
want of the consideration of these things, causes a great mistake in this Age;
you shall find that still the Scripture uses that Phrase of these things,
which we not only have in Christ, as in a common person, but it must be applied
unto our own Persons also; for would any Man desire to be no more glorified
than he is now? Yet as we are perfectly glorified in Christ now, so we were
perfectly justified in Christ when he arose, and perfectly justified from all
Eternity. Who shall condemn the Elect of God? Says the Apostle, Yet these must
be applied to our own Persons, and our Persons must actually be put into this
condition: When we come to Heaven, then he says, we shall sit with Christ in
his Throne, Rev. 3. but while we are here on Earth, then it is sitting in
Christ. The Consideration of this distinction, would in a word clear the great
Controversy that is now between the Antinomians (as they call them) and others
about being justified before conversion; whether a Man be justified before
conversion, or no, or whether he be not so afterward, as in some Sense he was
not before: I say, we are justified in Christ from all Eternity, and we are
justified with Christ when we believe.

NOW, if thy Doctor be not a through paced Crispian, I know not who is; and let
me tell this Author by the way, that if he dare appear openly in this
Controversy, and in which I offer him a full unreserved meeting, whereunto let
him bring what numbers and degrees of Persons he possibly can, either by hook,
or by crook, according to the constant practice of those of his persuasion, to
back him in the same, I question not but by the wisdom, power, and Grace of
God, sufficiently to manifest, that Dr. Crisp fully accords with all those more
ancient and modern REFORMERS, truly and undeniably reckoned upon as such
(though perhaps differing in other things,) as to the Doctrines of
Justification, Sanctification, Graces, and Duties thereupon, both in their
spring, nature, order, form, matter and uses, and that in the full scope, and
agreeing with the complete tenure of the Covenant of Grace it self. But our
Author tells us, p. 8. from the text he had cited. p. 5. That the Apostle by
way of Antithesis, constantly opposes Faith to Works in Justification,
Crispianism Unmasked, page 8.
that is, an act of ours to some others of our own, not an Act of ours to one
of God, as this Author would have us think. The opposition, which you may
observe in St. Paul's Writings of Faith to Works, is sufficient to persuade
that it is but a Dream of the Doctor, that to be justified by Faith, is to have
in our Spirits the Manifestation of God's Justification. This has no relation
at all to what the Apostle so often says, etc, so far he. Now this Antithesis,
according to our Author's manifest Design therein, one Mr. Antisozzo has
notably anatomized in his Explication of Phil. 3. 8. etc. unto which I refer
the Reader for his being undeceived, and shall let Dr. Good-win answer this
from the forementioned Treatise, --

Whether it be the Act of Faith that justifies, or that is accounted a Man's
Righteousness, when Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians. Part 2d. p. 301.
we are said to be saved through Faith? Surely, no, for God might have took
work as well, if he would have taken it as an Act, he might have taken any Act,
Love it self.

THERE is this reason lies in the bottom of my Spirit against it, besides all
that else the Scripture says against it; That if when I go to God to be
justified, I must present to him my believing, as the matter of my
righteousness, and only Christ's death as the merit of it (which is the very
controversy on foot this day, for all our Author's seeming acknowledgment of
the righteousness of Christ, and the bare instrumentality of Faith in the
reception thereof in order to our Justification) What will follow? Two things
are clear to me: First, That the heart is taken off from looking upon the
righteousness of Christ wholly, and diverteth it to it is own righteousness in
the very act of believing, for righteousness, and presents that to God which
the Scripture is clear against; I say, it does take the heart off from the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus, or the eying of that, and causes it to divert
into it self, and present its own Faith to God. Secondly, Every man that will
believe to be justified, and go to God, and say, Lord justify me, he must have
an evidence that he has Faith, for how else can he present that as the matter
of his righteousness? Now Millions of Souls cannot do this, they were in a poor
case if they should be put to it.

THE Apostle says, it was of Faith that it might be sure. If Justification had
been founded on the act of Faith, it had been as sure on works as faith; for
that faith that draws out an act of love is as apt to fail as that act of love.
But here is no uncertainty, while I believe to be justified by the
righteousness of Christ; but my faith is swallowed up there; though I may doubt
of my faith relying on him, yet I have a sure object; I have a sure matter to
represent to God for me, whereas if believing was that I had to represent to
God to be justified by, suppose my faith fail me, I have not a sure matter of
righteousness to represent to God.

THE very object Faith believes on is a contradiction to this, that the act of
Faith should be the matter of my Justification.

Yet further -- Q. Is not faith an act? I^'s true, it is in a Grammatical
signification an act, but in the sense in the true real import of it, it Dr.
Goodwin on the Ephesians. part 2d. p. 287, 288.
is merely passive: Faith does not give any thing to God as Charity and Love
does, but it only suffers God to be good to it; it takes in that Salvation
which grace would bestow upon it; my Brethren, the hands of all other graces
are working hands, but the hands of faith are merely receiving hands; now says
the Apostle. Not to him that works, but believes: So that this faith, as it
believes to Salvation, it is not reckoned a worker, nor does it look upon it
self as such, but a mere receiver, a mere emptiness, a mere first matter and
chaos, the form whereof is grace, if I may so allude; no grace could have been
chosen in the heart of man, suitable thus to the grace that gives, and to the
gift it self, as this grace of Faith is.

AND there is nothing in Man that answers the promise; for this grace has put
it self out into promises; as the original lies in the heart of God, so he has
made out a Copy out of himself in the promises, and nothing answers this but
faith.

See but the very places that our Author quotes out of Dr. Crisp, and thou will
find that this is his plain, yea, literal as well as inclusive Sense of the
whole of that of Faith, as page, 85, 440. 596. compare with our Author, p. 8, 9.
and be thine own Judge therein, as to the Wretchedness of his Forged Charge
against him. Further says Dr. Goodwin, Mark it well Reader, That --

In Christ as a common person, and as a pattern of us, we may be said to have
done what Jesus Christ did or Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians. part 2d. p. 216. and --
p. 145.
does, or what befalls him; and we are reckoned by God to have done it: My
Brethren, this is one of the greatest hinges of the Gospel -- That way of the
Arminians does exceedingly detract from the love of God, (viz.) to make him a
lover of Mankind; and that that is a thing out of the consideration whereof he
gave his Son, and that he loves them in common, and loves them indefinitely,
and if they believe so, God will then show love to them. Again, But you will
answer me, how can this be, that we should be children of Wrath, and yet that
God should love us, and out of that Love call us, and yet the Love be the same?
If they will answer me another question, I will answer p. 295, 296, 297.
that; and that is this, How was Jesus Christ beloved, and a curse at the same
time? Do but answer me, how were they in Romans 11. enemies and beloved at the
same time? Whether did not God actually and really lay the sins of us all upon
Christ, who yet at the same time was without sin? And again, Was not Christ,
when on the Cross really made sin? and yet now he is in Heaven, he is without
sin, even in that very respect wherein before, when on Earth, he was Sin. Was
not Jesus Christ once made sin in a true real sense? Certainly he was; And is
not now Jesus Christ without sin in the same sense? So the Apostle says: Now
then answerably, we may be enemies, and yet loved of God: We may be children of
Wrath, and condemned already, in respect of that we stand in, and afterward
saved as truly, as once Jesus Christ was made Sin: He will appear the second
time without sin, says the Apostle, Heb. 9. 28. Is there such an alteration
made in Christ's condition, and a real one? Certainly there may be the like in
ours, in 2 Cor. 5. ult. the parallel is exact, Him did God make to be sin for
us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. As
on Christ's part there was a time when God laid all our sins upon Christ, and
then another time, in which he took all our sins off from him, when he had
satisfied for them; so on ours, there is a time when God does lay the
righteousness of Jesus Christ upon us, and takes off that state of wrath that
we were in in our own persons; And as it were absurd to say, (as some) that our
sins are translated upon Christ then, when we believe; so that then we were
made the righteousness of God in him, before we are called and believe, in that
sense, that the Apostle there speaks: The parallel then lies in this, That as
there was a time when God laid our sins on Christ, made him sin, which was on
the Cross, when also at the same time he was personally without sin; so there
is a time, when God accounts personally to us Christ's righteousness. And
again, as there succeeded a time, when Christ that was made sin, and remained
under it for a while, is without sin (as now for ever he is) so there was a
time, when we, who are now justified, were not justified, but were sinners and
children of wrath, and that truly before God, as truly as that now we are saved
before God. And that is certainly to me the meaning of that in, Romans 8. 4. The
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us. Do we fulfill the righteousness of
the Law? No, but as it was fulfilled in and by Jesus Christ before; so the same
being applied unto us, when we believe, is said to be fu^filled in us, that is,
is made good in us, as we may so express it; in that discharge of his, we, as
considered in him, are made the righteousness of God.

But you will sa^, how are we saved in Christ, and justified in Christ, upon
believing when we were justified from our sins in Christ when he rose, etc. and
had sin taken off from him, did not he represent us then?

ADAM's instance will clear all; were not all Mankind condemned in Adam? Yet no
man is condemned in his own person till he is born, yet representatively in
Adam all died: so it is here, so far as we take Christ as a common person
representing us, what was done in him, was done for us in him; and so from
eternity, before Christ died, we were saved in him in that sense, according to
the grace which was given in Christ before the World began, says he, in 2 Timothy
1. 9. Christ himself purchased it, with a reserve till we believe and repent,
or else we are not to have the benefit of his death. The Bond lay in God the
Father's hand till we should come in to him for it. I do not know that the
Scripture uses the word saved from everlasting, but only that the grace was
given us in Christ, and that Christ died representatively, but when we come to
exist in our own persons, then it is applied to us, and we are saved in our own
persons by that grace, which once made Jesus Christ a common person for us.

NOW our Author drawing toward a conclusion of this his charge, p. 10. brings
in his clinching Argumentative Inference, which questionless he takes to be a
very doughty one: Namely, That if a Man be justified before he believes, then
he is not justified by faith; that is a plain case, says he. It is so indeed;
however, I exceedingly doubt whether in this our Author, it be not an
amphibious, prevaricating and Delphian Oracle Case. And to put the matter
beyond dispute, consider Reader, That to be justified does not only import, but
irresistibly presuppose an actual, as distinguished from a personally possessed
interest in such a righteousness as that wherein God may, salva justitia, and
that not in a remote meritorious, but immediate and substantial sense, without
the least interfering with the infinite, unlimited, spotless Justice and
Holiness of his Divine Nature, whence this Righteousness is reckoned the
Righteousness of God, received by Faith; or the complete and perfect demands of
the Law; whence it is also, that Christ, as being made under the same, is
accounted in an immediate sense, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS; (the latter being
a full revealed Transcript of the former) or can groundedly and positively in
his very act of justification, without any manner of reserves, pronounce us
just (and that not in a bare meritorious, and as such subservient sense of the
same, the Diverting Kettledrum of these our Spiritual D^agooners, to stave us
off from our diligent attendance upon the Carb^nado'd and traduced Martyrs and
Witnesses of our blessed Jesus, in their distinct, as well as materially
faithful Testimonies concerning him) from and in such a Righteousness, as
actually, adequately, and materially corresponds with the forementioned
Perfections of God, both in his Nature and Law; for as possession, properly
such, gives no man a juridical Title unto that whereinto he enters by
possession, so neither does Faith, which is in this case, at most a mere
possessing grace, entitle even an elect Vessel unto any one of the least of the
promises in the whole of Scripture; but it is his juridical forensick (though
founded in grace) relation unto, and interest in this Righteousness that gives
him an undoubted Title and Right unto his Justification, and all that is
consequential of the same; hence it is that Faith follows, and that in two
respects:

1. AS a manifestating or evidencing Instrument, with all it is Adjuncts,
Concomitants and Subsequents, whence it is, that Christ as the Author and
Finisher of the same, becomes the Wisdom of God unto such a Soul.

2. AS an uniting, applying, clothing, grace-conveying, heart-renewing and
fruit-bearing instrument, and that in all the vigorous exercitious actings
thereof, both objectively and subjectively; whence it is also, that Christ as
the Author and Finisher of the said Faith, becomes the Power of God unto such a
Soul: but all this is merely the fruit of a previous Title, otherwise God could
not be just in justifying, neither could his elect ones be justly reckoned upon
as Sons, but rather Bastards or Impostors. But all this blunder in our Author,
as in the close of this Charge, p. 10, 11. is no more but to bring in the
Virtues and Graces of the Spirit, as the matter of our Justifying
Righteousness, provided that Faith as an Instrument, will but eye and betake it
self unto the Righteousness of Christ, and engagge the Soul to rest wholly upon
the same, in the bare merits thereof, for it is Justification before, and
Acceptance with the Lord.

Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba. Hor.
AS to the Second Charge.
II. HIS Second Charge, p. 11. is, That the Doctor Asserts and Defends that
Doctrine which is the bane of all godly Fear and Dread, of all suspicion of our
selves, of Spiritual Watchfulness, and a wary and cautious behavior,
Crispianis. unmasked. p. 11
which yet are Graces and Duties much commended in Holy Scripture, and greatly
practiced by the Servants of God. This false imputation of his, is managed with
the same scurrilous and lying Spirit, and to the same ends that his former and
subsequent ones, are produced for, against the Dr. As

1. THAT he never gives thee an account, upon what grounds it is, that the Dr.
urges this or the other discerpted sentence, that he, for his own vile ends,
does continually throughout his Pamphlet quote.

2. NEITHER does he declare for what ends and from what principles (as tending
thereunto, together with their uses and advantages, as assigned unto them of
the Lord, in their proper places) it is that the Dr. speaks for or against,
both duties and graces. As for instance, He tells us, That the Dr. a bold and
fearless man laughs at such silly creatures as fear and distrust their having
Faith or no, and being regenerated and sanctified or no; and withal that he
merrily brings in such an Crispianis. unmasked. p. 11.
one complaining thus, I have neglected the Day of my Visitation, I had once
the Opportunity, the presence of the Spirit of God; Alas! My fear is, that
that was the Day of God's Grace to me, and now there is no more hope left for
me. And thereupon concludes, Which words (as you will find) he speaks in way of
Mockery: And in several other places you will find him deriding such whining
timorous Christians as these, representing them as Persons of shallow
Understandings, and of a Temper, not becoming the Gospel. What Ground he has
received for this frontless, and wretched Branch of this part of his Charge,
let the very place from whence he cites it, determine p. 345. where speaking of
God's laying Iniquity upon Christ, that it is so entirely his own Act, that
none of our Duties, be they the best that we can perform, can have any Hand
therein. Therefore I shall be the more large, in transcribing the Doctor, even
in this Page, and that which follows, that thou may apparently discern into
the villainous Treachery of this Author, and justly guess thereby at the base
ends in the same. The Doctor speaking from those words in Isa. chap. 53. 6.
that our Sins are already laid on Christ, tells us;

It should therefore serve to put the People of God upon the Admiration of the
great love of God (seeing it is only the Lord that lays Iniquity upon Christ)
to give unto the Lord the Praise of the Glory of his Grace. Oh! Dr. Crisp 's
Works. Vol. II. Page 345.
let nothing go away with that, seeing none but the Lord does the thing!

And to this end, Beloved, the Lord must open your Eyes, that you may see. It
it is he alone that does it; but till you see it, what ever you may think of
your selves, you will sanctify to Nets and Drags instead of them. If
Righteousness seem to be the easing of burdens in Spirit, then Righteousness
shall be, and will be exalted above measure. From whence proceeds these strange
Expressions, Oh the Omnipotency of Fasting and Prayer, and Repentance I What is
this but to give the Glory of the Lord to our services, as if they discharge us
of our Sins, when it is the Lord only that does discharge us of them? But I
must hasten.

THERE is another observable Passage in these words, more observable indeed
than heeded by the most of them, and that is to be taken from the circumstance
of Time, when the Lord laid Iniquity upon Christ The Text says, The Lord has
laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Satan knows well enough of what great
consequence this Circumstance of Time is, both to the Manifestation of the
Glory of God's Grace, and to the establishment of the Comforts of God's People,
and therefore he has raised a foul Dust to misguide poor Wretches, that they
may not lay hold upon this Circumstance, and the Comfort that will flow from
it. The Text says not, The Lord does lay Iniquity on him, or the Lord will lay
Iniquity on him, much less that the time is overslipt now, and the Lord will
not lay Iniquity upon him.

Satan is very busy with tender ignorant Hearts, either to persuade them that
the Work is now a doing, or the Work hereafter shall be done, but yet is not
done, or the time is overslipped, it might have been done, if Men had not
neglected the Opportunity, but now it is too late, it is never to be done.

The last of these has troubled the Hearts of many People, whence comes these
expressions: I have neglected the day of my Visitation, says one, I have
neglected the Opportunity, the Presence of the Spirit of God, my fear is, that
was the day of God's Grace to me, but I have let it slip, and now there is no
more Hope left for me; but Beloved, let the evident Word of the Lord himself be
your guide, and know, that every thing that is spoken contrary to the Mind of
the Lord, revealed in his Word, is but the natural. Fruit of the Father of
Lies, who is a Liar from the beginning. The Lord has laid Iniquity upon
Christ: Has he done it already, and is it now to be done? Nay, has he done it
already, and does he revoke it, and will not suffer it to be done? The point
then briefly is this.

THIS Gracious Act of the Lord's laying Iniquity upon Christ, is not now, or
hereafter to be done, much l^ss a thing he never wills, but it is a thing the
Lord has already done.

EVERY Schoolboy will be able to tell you that this Expression (has laid)
imports the time past, the word being in the Preter-Perfect Tense; it is not in
the Present Tense, nor in the Future Tense, the Lord will lay, but in the
Preter-perfect Tense, the Lord has done it, it is an Act past.

NOW, Reader, be thy own Judge or desire no Clandestine, or surreptatious and
forced Subscriptions from thee; whether Doctrins, Graces and Duties, are not
owned by the Doctor, provided they be kept within their prescribed limits, out
of, and from which our Author, would for a base self-justiciary end divert
them, and therefore summons us to listen to what the Infallible Scripture of
Truth says, Crispianism Unmasked. p. 11, 12, 13, 14.
(though for vile and infallible ends, as by him produced) from Prove. 28. 14. 1
Cor. 16. 13. Heb. 3. 12. Phil. 2. 12. Heb. 4 1. R^m. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12. 1
Pet. 1. 17. Psalm. 34. 9. -- 76. 11. -- 147. 11. Luke 12. 5. See v. 1, 4. Heb.
12. 28, 29. But ask him, do any of these Texts tell us that a Fear and Dread of
God, or any other Duty, or Qualification in our Souls, contribute in the least
to a laying of Sin upon Christ, which ought first to have been proved, had he
dealt either in a way of reverential awe toward God, or due Respect and Regard
toward Man? But we shall find enough of this as we go on.

As to the Third Charge.
III. THAT, He has imbibed the Principles and Doctrine of this Author,
Crispianism Unmasked. p. 15.
viz. the Doctor's, (says our Author) cannot pray. And for this quotes him, p.
370. thus,

When People pray for any Grace (omitting what Intervenes, viz. that God has
passed over to Men) all their Pra^er is, that God would manifest, etc. not
regarding either what goes before, or after; therefore I shall transcribe the
substance of the same. Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol. II. p. 370.


WELL then, if you pray in Faith, that your Sins are forgiven, upon this
Ground, (i. e. our Sins being already laid on Christ) because God has made
this Grant, and you find it upon Record, then it seems your Sins were forgiven
you before your Prayer was made: You will say, God has granted this before,
and now you pray to God that he would make good that Grant to you which he has
granted before. Beloved, what is thi^ more than to make that evident to your
Understandings, and to give you the knowledge of that which he has before
granted, that you may have the Comfort of it?

I refer the Reader to the place it self, for our Author's Refutation, both in
the matter, and design of his Treacherous Charges.

NOW, from whence he runs to his old Arminian inference, that If any Man
believes this, it is impossible he should give himself to Prayer, Crispianism
V^mask'd, p. 15.
and be frequent and ardent in his Addresses to Heaven: For what should he pray
for, when there is no obtaining any good at all by it? And thereupon tells us,
that to pray for the Forgiveness of Sins is needless; and to enforce his
malicious Charge, very wretchedly quotes several Texts of Scripture; as Psalm.
65.2. -- 34.17. -- 50.15. -- 69.33. -- 145.18, 19. Page 16, 17.
Prove. 15. 29, Exodus 32. 11, 14. Josh. 10. 12, 13, 14. 1 Samuel 7. 9. 1 Kin 17.
1. -- 18, 28. -- 42. 45. 2 Chronicles. 20. 5, 22. Isa. 37. 15, 37. Jonas 2. 1. 10. 2
Cor. 12. 8. The Doctor still speaking, (which our Author never regards in any
of his Charges) that our Sins are already laid on Christ, therein referring
unto a Gracious Act of the Father, as well as complete undertaking of the Son,
and that it is by Prayer we come to receive the full manifestative and
applicatory Testimony of the same unto our Souls, and now to put Pr^yer, Graces
of the Spirit, or any other Duty in the room, and place thereof, is not only
useless and unbeneficial, but also derogatory unto the Glory of God. Therefore
he lays down hi^ objections and answers in the following words, in the Page
whence our Author cites him --

Some object and say, Christ puts us upon Prayer, and in Prayer that God would
forgive us our Trespasses; How can our Iniquities ^e laid upon Christ already,
when we are to pray that God would forgive them to us? It is a vain thing for
us to pray to God to forgive them, when they were long ago fo^given. Dr.
Crisp's Work^ Vol. II. p. 369.


I answer, They were reckoned to Christ long before we pray for the forgiveness
of our sins, and yet we do well in the Pra^ing for the forgiveness of them. We
have a common answer known to all, There is a twofold forgiveness of sins, a
forgiveness of sins in Heaven, and forgiveness of sins in the Consciences of
Men. Forgiveness of sins in Heaven is that which is acted by God alone:
Forgiveness of sins in the Consciences of Men is the manifestation of God's
former act. So then to pray for the forgiveness of our sins, is no more but to
pray that God would manifest to us that God has forgiven our sins, and that it
may be clear that God has forgiven our sins before we do pray for the
forgiveness of them: And that Prayer is grounded upon God's act before hand
made.

Consider this one thing, I would ask this of you, you that pray for
forgiveness of your sins, do you pray in Faith, or do you not? If you pray not
in Faith, mark what the Apostle James says, He that prays, let him pray in
Faith, nothing doubting; He that wavereth, let him not think he shall obtain
any thing at the hands of the Lord: Beloved, your Prayers stink and are
abominable in the Nostrils of God if you do not pray in Faith. Well, you pray
in Faith you will say; if you pray in Faith, if you pray for the forgiveness of
sin in Faith, what is the ground of your Faith? If you do believe, you have a
ground for your Faith. You will say, the Grant and Word of God is Page 370.
the ground of your Faith. Well, if the Grant of God be the ground of your
believing, then the Grant has a being before your Faith, and so consequently
before your prayer is made.

And do we not know that we ought to pray for the Fall of Babylon, and that
from this ground, That she is fallen already in the irreversible determination
of God, Rev. 14. 8. And though she be not yet actually fallen, must we not
therefore pray for her fall? Unless we can bring God's Decrees and irrevocable
Purposes actually to depend upon our own Duties and Prayers, This is our
Author's constant practice, That he would assign more to our Duties and Graces
(nay, so displa^e them, that they are neit^er Duties indeed nor Graces, for the
obtaining of this or the other benefit and mercy) than unto God himself, as the
express and fixedly donor of them, even before we ask them, upon which it is
indeed, that both our requesting d^sposition, receptive and improving ability
wholly depends. Hence it is, (under which he betakes himself as unto a forlorn
refuge, p. 16.) That, if so, how can we pray for the hallowing of God's Name,
or that his Kingdom should come; whereas, if both of the same had not been
absolutely determined of God, the matter of Prayer as enjoined of Christ upon
his Disciples, would have been wholly in vain, so the same as to the
forgiveness of sins or trespasses, he quotes, p. 369. out of the Dr's Treatise,
(which I cannot find, though the substance of the place has been cited already
--) And further proceeds in his quotation from p. 561. That the Dr. is an enemy
to Prayer, whose citation, and the Dr's end therein I shall lay before thee.
Thus much he quotes out of him, and annexes it barely unto an act of duty, not
regarding wherefore or for what ends the same was spoken; which take as follows
-- Beloved Christ became our Surety. God accepted of him for our Debt, he
cl^^'d Christ in Goal, as I may so say, for the debt; God Dr. Crisp's Works.
Vol. 3. p. 560.
took every Farthing that he could demand of us; he is now reconciled unto us,
he has acknowledged satisfaction, it is upon Record; And now shall he come
upon them again with fresh wrath, for whom Christ has done all this? Shall he
charge the debt upon them again? He has forgotten the Death of Christ it
seems, if this be true. Therefore know thus much, that it is against the Death
of Christ; it is the making of it of none effect; it makes the coming of Christ
to be in vain, to say that the wrath of God will break out upon Believers (mark
the word) if they commit such and such sins. And for this that I have said,
(Now our Proctoring Author comes in) if any man can produce one Scripture
against it; if any man can show in all the Book of God, that it is any
otherwise than I have delivered, for my part, I shall be of another mind, and
willingly recant my opinion. But leaves out what follows.) But I see the
Scripture runs wholly in this strain, and is so full in nothing as in this,
that God has generally discharged the sins of Believers. Oh then take heed of
falling into that error of the Papists, that say, that God has taken away the
p. 561.
sin, but not the wrath of God due to sin; that he has forgiven our sins, but
not the punishment of sin. But I beseech you consider, that as our sins were
then upon Christ, he was so bruised for our iniquity, that by his stripes we
are healed, and the chastisement of our peace was so upon him, that he being
chastised for our sins, there is nothing else but peace belongs to us: And the
chastisement of our sins was so upon him, that he beheld the travel of his
Soul, and was satisfied.

NOW, Reader, thou may see who this Author is, and what also his design is,
and his false representation of the Doctor, merely because he abhors Duties and
Graces in a Popish and meritorious sense: This is the plain Grammar, as
latently radical, of all his virulency against him.

As to the Fourth Charge.
IV. HE tells us, that -- The Doctrine contained in these Sermons, strikes at
all Godly Sorrow, Contrition, Humiliation, Confession, and Lamenting of sin,
and Repenting of it, and renders them useless and insignificant in the Life of
a Christian. Now what Warrant he has had for this his bold assertion, Crispi.
unmasked. p. 18.
a plain, unminced and uncurtailed quotation of the Dr. will fully satisfy,
and also discover unto thee, and therein, not only our Author's false and
disingenious proceedings with the Dr. but the ends for which he does so, as
also the Principles by which he is acted in the same. I must confess unto thee,
Reader, before we go any further, That unless this Author, according to the
complex account that this his Treatise gives of him, be a ROGERVS L'ESTRANGE
REDIVIVVS, or as genuine a Spawn dropped from him in one sense or another, as
possibly can be imagined, I am wholly at a loss to find him out: And for this
observe, p. 19. where he cites the Dr. p. 317, 319, 320. where he never regards
in any one of them the distinct, yea verbally expressed ends of the Dr.
therein. Suppose there be a sin committed, it may be more scandalous than
ordinary; which sin peradventure to sense wounds the Spirit; the Question now
is, What it is that must or does aid the Spirit of such an one? of the sting
Dr. Crisp 's Works, Vol. II. Sermon. 6. Page 317, 318.
and of the guilt of this or such like transgressio^s committed? What does
discharge the soul of such a sin? (Now our Author ^^mes in,) Usually it is
taught amongst us, by those which would be accounted the greatest Protestants,
and the greatest haters (...) that the proportion of Repentance, and Tears, and
Sorrow, and of Fasting^; (...) p^oportion of these answerable to the latitude
and height of such transgressio^^, (...) ease, this takes away the burden,
this lays the Soul at rest and quiet it. (B^t he ^^olly di^regards what
follows, namely,) Therefore when a Soul has Transgr^ssed, if i^ be (...) most
or almost all the pantings of it are after extraordinary enlargeme^ts in
bitterness and he^viness, and mourning, and melting, and tears, these are
accounte^ they that wash away Iniquity. But beloved, let me tell you, it is
impossible that all the righteousness of men, though it were more perfect than
it can be, should lay one iniquity, or any of the least circumstance of one
iniquity upon Christ. If a Man could weep his heart out, if his heart could
melt like Wax, and dissolve into Water, and gush out River^ of Te^rs for sin,
all this could not carry away the least dram of the filthiness of (...) from
(...) ^oul unto Christ; nor unload the Soul of any sin to load Christ with it.
And is not all this true? can any of our Duties cause God to lay sins upon
Christ? Does not herein ^e the secret, yea radical difference (as to what our
Author would basely insinuate both in the matter and manner, and that very
distortively from what it i^ that the Dr. assert^ the same) between the
Protestant and Popish Doctrine. See Hos. 8. 13 compard with the Marginal
R^ading, Where the Lord's charge, even against a professing People is not their
rejecti^g of his Sacrifice, but a postponi^g of it unto their own, and thereby
assigning the merit^ of all their acceptance both in pardoning and justifying
Grace unto the Sacrifice of the Lord, provided that their own believing,
repenting, etc. have but a precedent, or at least a mixed interest therein; but
what the consequence thereof was is evident, even a toral disappointment of
them, not only in their hopes and expectations, but also that, That which they
seemed to have, or thought they had, would prove but an emptiness or a Lie unto
them, in that they should find themselves but in Egypt, still, i. e. neither
changed in their state or nature. He further cites him, leaving out a part of
the Objection, and Answer also, whence he picks his Charge, wherein thou may
yet further see into the Orthodoxy of the Doctor, together with the Jesuitical
design of our Author. As -- Obj But some will say, Though our performances do
not lay our iniquities upon Christ, ^et they do prevail with God, and Dr. Crisp
's Work. Vol. II. Sermon. 6. p. 319.
move God with pity toward us and stir up God to take our iniquites off from
us, and lay them upon Christ. (Now our Author comes in) God cannot but melt,
will some say, to see the tears of his People, and the bitterness of their
Spirits, and their crying, and their earnestness, and their sorrows, These
cannot but prevail with him ^o have compassion on them.

To which he replies in these words, I know this is the general conceit of too
many in the World; But beloved, let me tell you, there is nothing in all the
Creatures in the World, that has the least prevalency with the Lord let them
do what they can; all our Prayers, all our Tears, all our Fastings, all our
Mournings, all our Reluctance, and fighting against our Corruptions, they move
God, not a jot to lay our sins upon Christ

But he leaves out what immediately follows, wherein the Doctor explains
himself thus: God is moved only from himself. If they move God, what must they
move him to? If God be moved at any thing, he is moved according to the nature
of the thing that is done; If the nature of the thing produce evil effects, God
must be moved to do evil to Men; if good effects, if there be good in the
things, they move him to Good: Now I ask, is there good or evil in any thing
Men do? When they have sinned, they pray, and they confess, and they mourn, and
they fast, is there evil or good in these looked upon in their own nature? No
Man can deny, but that there is abundance of Iniquity in the best Performances
a Man does, and God is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. That which must
move God to do good, must have a goodness in it self; all the motive therefore
in the Lord is simply himself. Now does the Doctor contradict himself at all in
any of this? Let him that runs both read and judge. These proceedings in the
manner of them, may allusively be applied unto what old Jacob charges upon his
Sons, Simeon and Levi, viz. That they made him even to stink in the Land, (i.
e.) under a pretense of estastablishing an Ordinance of God, which was
Circumcision; they had deceitfully and villainously, but gratified their own
Lusts by the same: Thus it is in reference to Reformation, when Persons so cry
up Holiness (which is an indispensible Qualification, as well as mark of a
Child of God) yet so as to dethrone what is of a higher nature, both in kind
and degree, they are (as experience all along informs us) enforced to betake
themselves to such visibly-pitiful subterfuges, and wretched Prevarications in
the Prosecution of their designs therein, that even Holiness and Reformation
themselves, have become nauseous to them about us; yea, such has been their
methods and measures in their seeming endeavors, after a promoting of them, as
that they are so far from being truly expressive of the same, both in their
nature and kind, as that indeed if practically attended unto, would prove
destructive unto the very receive^ dicta^es of the Light of Nature it self, and
that in the common moral operation of the same: Whence it is, that true
Holiness in the universal nature thereof, is not only so little regarded by*
and appearing in most of their followers, but also become a mere fancy, and but
a byword unto those who expressly prefer Morality unto Grace, by denying unto
them any essential difference in the same. These things indeed, both in their
Principles and Practices, are the very Achan of our Israel, and though they
have put a stop in some measure unto the Camp of real Reformation in its more
apparent progressiveness therein; yet I am satisfied that God is in this very
day of Controversy, a leading all such Abbetors of them so into the Valley of
Decision, as will manifest that his grand contest with them, is not so much
their espousing, but appropriating even of his own truths, his Silver, Gold,
and pleasant things, definitive of the Graces wrought by, and Du^ies enabled
unto by his own Spirit, unto their own Temples; all which, however black they
may seem for the present, yet are abso^ute Tokens of God's being nigh at hand
and that with a purposed design to decide the matter in dispute; for his
sum^oning of (...) her^u^to, is, (as is evident) but in order to his speedy
appearance, J^el, 3. 5. ^^, ^2 (...) v. 1, 14. for God will remember Amalek,
for standing in the way of Is^ael, and th^^ (...) a dreadful obliterating
remembrance, 1 Sa^* 15. 2, 3. yea, b^ how much the mo^^ he ^uffers these his
pretended Prophets, and that with a seeming t^mpor^ry Succes^, to b^ acted by a
lying Spirit, the speedier, and more total will be both their Disapp^int^ent
and Ruin, 1 Kin. 22. 19. etc. It is no small ^igitating mark of the Hand of
^rovidence in i^s permissive operation or Wheel, that the Man of Sin should be
suffered to assu^e unto himself (notwithstanding all his so long-continued
lying, impudent and bloody Villainies) the Title of, His Holiness, and not the
Lo^d his Righteousness, in the former of which it is, that not only his
professed, but also practical Adherents (who would by no means own him in the
bulk or gross) as in the former, so in these our days hope in a material Sen^e
to be justified before God, though by a Salvo, for fear of the worst,
meritoriously for Christ's Righteousness (as the Quakers assigning unto the
Spirit, what indeed is not his undertaken Office) in which it is that, not only
his professed, but also practical Adherents, as in our day hope in a material
sense, to be justified before God, though meritoriously by the Righteousness of
Christ, according to the stated fu^d^mental and more established Decrees and
Canons of their Counsels, especially that of Trent, an exact Copy whereof we
have flying about our Ears in various Pamphlets against Dr. Crisp, or rather
his Doctrine, which is the Scripture-Doctrin of Justification.

As to the Fifth Charge.
V. THOUGH thou will find (Reader) that as this our Author, throughout the
whole of his Treatise, does not only (notwithstanding all his fair pretenses)
and that under this Head of his Charge, in a more particular manner reject the
Righteousness of Christ, as to its proper and individual matter (wherein it is
absolutely distinct from a bare meritorious and subservient Acceptance of the
same, p. 27. wherein view our Auth^r) and Precedence therein in God's Act of
Justifying the elect by the Imputation thereof unto their Act of believing, but
also that there is no essential difference between Morality and Grace, as the
spring of this or the other duty, both in the objective and subjective
operation of the same, together with the different advantages, arising from
them; for because that God, as the God of nature, having s^nt by Jonah Tenders
of Mercy unto the Ninevites, upon their Repentance, which they closing with in
the moral discharge of the same, he thereupon spares them. Our Author, p. 26.
Therefore it is (I say in his Judgment) that all true Believers in their
Addresses unto God for this or the other Mercy in this or the other duty, if
they dethrone them, either as proceeding from, or tending to an exaltation of a
self-Righteousness to self-end, and therein would cause them to neglect the
main end, for which they are designed of God, viz. the Glory of his great Name,
and that in his own way, and by an entire leading them unto a naked Resting and
Dependence upon Christ and his Righteousness, for the Acceptance both of their
Persons and Performances with God, and also their Reception from him, of this
or the other Mercy, as their needs require; why then they must be termed
Antinomians; and when he and his fraternity have thus clothed them with the
Skins of their own created Beasts, They fall a baiting them with as much
virulency, as possibly can spring from a completely grown malice, intermingled
with as equal a proportion of Deceitfulness and Impudence. This is the very
case before us, for the clearing of which, let the Doctor speak for himself,
and that from the very places our Author fetches against him, p. 20. He quotes
the Doctor, p. 140. to say, that -- A Man gets nothing by all the Righteousness
he performs. And he tells us, that he enlarges upon this in his usual scoffing
Language, and that with a design to cast away all D^ties. Whereas indeed it is
but part of an Objection, which the Doctor lays down and answers; that is to
say, where self is brought into the room of, or exalted above the Righteousness
of Christ, all such Actions or Doings will be of no value. As thus,

Obj But some may say peradventure, T^is is a Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol, I. Ser.
9. Page 140.
way to ^verthrow all Righteousness at one clap. What! all that ever a Man
does, though he does it never so spiritually, though never so ex^ctly, to no
purp^se, and in vain! Does a Man get nothing by all the Righteousness he
performs? (Here our Author comes in, and leaves out what follows) Then we had
as good sit still, and do nothing at all, will some say.

Answ. This is carnal reasoning indeed; look but into the ground of this
Argument and it will discover nothing but the selfishness of the person that
makes it. I dare be bold to say, that that person that will do no
righteousness, but simply for his own sake; who if ^e should know beforehand,
that this Righteousness will get him nothing, will therefore fit still and do
nothing; I dare be bold to say, he had as good sit still indeed, and do
nothing: He serves himself, not God; and though he does perform righteousness
^ever so exactly, if he serves himself, God will never reckon that he serves
him. When Self is eyed, we can never serve God; when, if our Commodity and
Advan^age be not in the thing, we will sit still. And is not this a truth? But
yet further our Author p. 21. he quotes the Dr. p. 136. To fast sin out, to
pray it out, to mourn it out, this is that which must bring you tidings; but
leaves out, This is that which must bring you a discharge of your sins And so
go^s on in his Charge Dr. Crisp 's Works, Vol. 1. Sermon. 9. p. 136.
without regarding what fol^ows, viz. Beloved, let me deal plainly and freely
with you, They that do put deliverance from Sin and Wrath upon the spiritual
performances of that Righteousness which the Law does command of them, they do
put that Righteousness in the room and place of the Righteousness of God, they
do make it as great an Idol as can be, for they do make that Righteousness to
be that, which God's Righteousness only is. I speak not against the doing of
any Righteousness according to the will of God revealed: Let that Mouth be for
ever stopped, that shall be opened to blame the Law that is holy, just and
good, or shall be a means to discourage People from walking in the Commandments
of God blameless.

Now who is the greater Scoffer at Religion, or the things of God? he that
prefers the righteousness of Christ unto his own righteousness, may safely
determine between this our Author and the Doctor. But he tells us, ibid. from
the Dr. p. 235. That if a Soul ^et under a full Sail, filled with a stiff Gale
of the Spirit, etc, That the Dr. therein speaks rudely and profanely, as
deriding the assistance of the Holy Spirit. But he leaves out his end therein
as follows, viz.

But under favor, the attributing Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol. II. Sermon. 1. p. 235,
236.
of such efficacy to this Righteousness, though thus assisted by Christ's
Spirit, is more than is meet, though Christ be explicitly owned as the Author
of such assistance; the righteousness so assisted has no efficacy at all to
obtainany thing of the Lord, but rather an efficacy to hasten and multiply
wrath, in that it multiplies sin.

THE righteousness with which we come to God, though we bring with it the Water
of the Spirit of Christ, to wash away our old dung, p. 236.
yet there is such filth in the Vessel of our present righteous actions, that
the action does but add dung to dung, instead of washing dung away. Again, our
Author, p. 22. quotes the Dr p. 150. The sum of which (he tells us) is, That
neither Prayer, nor Hamiliation, nor Repentance, nor any other Duties
whatsoever, though they be done most sincerely, servently and zealously, though
the persons that do them be helped by the Holy Spirit therein, are means of
procuring Crispian unmasked p. 22.
any Blessing from God. They never prevent any Evil or Danger, they cannot
divert God's Wrath and Displeasure, they conduce not one jot to our peace and
joy of Mind, to our comfortable Walking; they afford us no hopes of the
Forgiveness of Sin, and the Favor and Love of God, and (as you shall he^r
afterward) they cannot be made use of as Signs and Tokens of the goodness of
our condition. Now hear what the Dr. says -- The Scripture is marvelous
plentiful in this, that no Believer for whom Christ died, should have the least
Dr. Crisp' s Works, Vol. I. Sermon. 10. p. 150.
thought in his heart of promoting or advancing himself, or any end of his own,
by doing what he does. And though as People may think, here is a mavelous
discouragement to Persons, to do what God calls them to do, when they shall
have nothing for it: I answer, when there is a spirit of ingenuity (as you know
there is even in the World) they shall be as industrious to glorify God* and
do good to Men, as if they did it for themselves. They shall do as much for
good already bestowed, as if they were to procure it by their own doing.

Secondly, I answer, there can be no discouragement at all unto the performance
of any thing God calls for at your hands, though you get nothing in the World
by what you d^, I say, there is no discouragement, because you cannot propound
or intend to your selves any possible gain by Duty; But that, whatever it is,
that is a Spur and Encouragement unto Duty, is already freely and graciously
provided for you to your hand; that all your industry could not compass and
bring in, either so certainly, or so plentifully as the very grace of God,
before the performance of any Duty has provided and established that good for
you.

In the close of this Charge, p. 28, 29. Our Author unravels (like the old
Journey-Man-Taylor) the whole of his twisted and forced Sarcasm^ against the
Dr.) though under this pretense, as if he contradicted himself, whereas indeed
it is no more than his assigning unto Graces and Daties their proper places,
both as to the spring, exercise, uses and ends of the same, which our Author
has as great a regard unto as the Turk himself, whence it evidently appears,
That our Author's zeal in this cause, is but the very self-same, both as to the
matter and end thereof, as that of the Jews mentioned by the Apostle Paul, Romans
9. 31, 32. chap. 10. 2, 3, 4.

From hence he flies to his Sixth Charge.
VI. That the Author should deny, That we ought to make any use of our Graces
as Marks, Tokens, or Evidences of our State of Salvation. Author. p. 29. This
falsehood will soon be detected from the very places whence he partially cites
the seeming matter of his miserable invective against him; for with our Author,
unless the Graces of the Spirit be allowed as the very matter of our
Righteousness, and that in, though not for which (that being transferred over
to the merits of the Righteousness of Christ, as abstracted from the real,
actual or substantial Matter of the same) we must be justified before God,
Antinomianism is presently set on foot, as will appear from the way of his
procedure, in his quoting the Doctor, page 106, 432, 446, 462. Vol. 3. Sermon. 3.
447, 453, 465, 469.

The Doctor, in the whole of what our Author quotes of him, declares, that
whatever Marks or Signs we may have of Grace, yet if they proceed not from our
actual Interest in Christ and his Righteousness, they will prove but deceitful,
there being that in Morality (which as the common Herb in the Field, has a
very nigh resemblance unto that in the Garden) that be^rs a close comparate
likeness with that of Grace. Unto which places, ut prius, that he quotes of the
Doctor, I refer the Reader for his solution. Only to avoid a further
Tediousness, I shall recite one passage of the Doct^rs in reference to this
Charge, whereunto many scores might be added. And that from p. 457. speaking
from Romans 10. 2, 3, 4: says he, Observe it well, here is a Zeal, that is, an
earnestness of Spirit, and this Zeal was after God, so then it was a Zeal,
wherein they sought God and his Glory, not in an indirect way neither, nor in a
corrupt way Dr. Crisp' s Works, Vol. II. Ser. 13. Page 457.
of their own devising; but it was a Zeal exercised in the Righteousness
according to the Law of God himself, for so much i^ intimated when it is said,
that Christ is the end of the Law: And yet for all this, says the Apostle,
though they had this Zeal of God according to the Will of God in his Law; yet
notwithstanding, they submitted not themselves to the Righteousness of God. So
then there may be a singleness of Heart to the Lord, and for the Glory of God,
and a walking in Obedience to the Will of God revealed in his Law; yet
notwithstanding there may be no portion in Christ, but a withstanding of
Christ, and not a submitting to his Righteousness. Thus he deals with the
Doctor all along; that when and wherever he finds him degrading or depressing
of Graces and Duties from an Usurpation or unsciptural Assent, he s^atches out,
to present before us the bare Expressions themselves, without a candid
Discovery unto us of the Doctors Design therein, as to the reference they have
to the genuine Matter of his Discourse thereupon.

As to the Seventh Charge.
VII. He tells us, that Another position of this our Author, (i. e. the Doctor)
is, That God is not angry with any elect Person, before or after he is
converted. If we tell Believers, says he, That except they perform such and
such Duties, Crispi. Unmasked, Page 35.
except they walk thus and thus Holily, and do these and these Works, they
shall come under Wrath, at least God will be angry with them, what do we in
this but abuse the Scriptures? These are his very words, says our Author, from
p. 559. so they are indeed; but not wholly his words, nor sense, which are as
follows: If they should terrify them, and make them to believe, being
Believers; for of those I speak, if they commit these and these Sins, they
shall be damned, and so come under the wrath of God. Then comes our Author in
with his Charge before-cited, leaving out also what follows, as that we undo
all that Christ has done; we injure and wrong the Believers themselves, we
tell that God he lies to his Face; for if we tell Believers, that except they
do these and these good Works, they shall come under the Wrath of God, what is
this but to tell God he lies, and to bring the Faithful under a Covenant of
Works? Look into the 54th of Isaiah, ver. the 9th, and you shall see how it is
a belying of God, to say, that Believers may come under Wrath and Damnation,
except they do thus and thus. Further he quotes the Doctor, p. 363, 364. very
partially, omitting what introduces the same; namely, that some conclude, that
Elect Persons are in a damnable estate, in the time they walk in excess of
Riot, before they are called. Where the Doctor, speaking of the nature of
Election, he wholly omits his purpose therein, and therefore also he leaves out
what immediately follows, which he knew would have overthrown his design, viz.
It is true, such an Elect Person, not called, is never able to know
individually of himself, that he is such an one that God has nothing to charge
upon him, because, till calling, God gives not unto Persons to believe; and it
is only believing that is evidence to Dr. Crisp' s Works, Vol. II. Sermon. 9.
Page 364.
Men of things not seen. Things that are not seen, are hidden and secret, and
shall not be known: I mean, the things of God's Love to Men shall not be known
to particular Men, till they do believe; but considering their real condition,
the Lord has not one sin to charge upon an elect Person; from the first moment
of conception, till the last minute of his Life, there is not so much as
Original Sin to be laid on him; and the Ground is, The Lord has laid it on
Christ already: He did lay Sins on him. When did he lay them on him? When did
he pay the first price of them? Now, suppose this Person uncalled commits
Iniquity, and that this Iniquity is charged upon him; seeing that his
Iniquities are laid upon Christ already, how comes it to pass that they are
charged upon this elect Person again? How come they to be translated from
Christ again, and laid upon this Person? Once they were laid upon Christ, it
must be confessed. For the Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sins, 1 John
1. 7. says the Apostle; and by one Sacrifice he has perfected for ever them
that are Sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Was there by one Act of Christ the expi^tion
of Sin, and all at once, that are committed from the beginning of the World to
the end thereof, how comes it to pass, that this and that Sin should be charged
upon the Elect Persons, when they were laid upon Christ long before? He did by
that one Act of his expiate all our Sins, or did not: If he did not expiate
them fully, then he did not save to the utmost all them that come to God by
him. But if he did, then all Iniquity is vanished and gone, he did extract it
out, ^s some Plaster of excellent Virtue, does extract out the Venom of a
plague sore: So Christ, by once offering up himself, did take away and
evaporate all the Sins of the Elect at once. Again our Author, to level his
secret Armisian stroke against Election here, as formerly against the Doctrine
of Justification in the materi^^ Righteousness thereof, he defiles and pollutes
(if possible) even Scripture it self, and (...) li^e a bold Impostor, for it to
speak for him, and against its Divine Author; and in order (...) he cites Ephesians.
2. 13. chap. 1. 1. chap. ^. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. (...). 2 3. John 3. 36. and
from hence concludes, Observe it, before they were converted they were
Strangers and Aliens, Crispi. unmasked, Page 36.
they were with at Christ, without God, without Hope, they were at Enmity with
the Father and the Son, and there was no more to be laid to their charge at
that time, than to the glorified Saints above? When they were without Christ,
in the time of their Unregeneracy, and living in all Excess of Riot, were they
not only in God's Favor, but as much as the Saints in Glory? How then was
Christ their Peace? How is it said they were reconciled? v. 16. Reconciliation
supposes falling out, it implies being at enmity. Those who are now reconciled,
and made Friends, were once Strangers and Enemies; and were they at that very
time Favorites of God, yea, as great Favorites as the blessed glorified
Spirits? Who has the Confidence to say this but Dr. Crisp? And who has a
Heart to believe it but one that dis-believes the plain Testimony of Holy
Scripture? Hence observe, Reader, the Doctor, having spoken of Election apart,
and therein in^lusively notes, That as such, it is a Doctrinal Truth, wherein
the irrefragable safety, and unerring security of all such comprehended
therein, does radically lie, and this arising from a distinguishing love in
God, whence a further free act of his Grace toward them did spring and that in
sending his only begotten Son into the World as their representative Head,
charged with their Sin to remove the same, upon the performance of which
(inferred from the word upon the Cross, It is finished) a door, passage or
entrance was made or laid open (without the least impeachment of any of the
Attributes of God) for the actual conveying, in a way of Application by faith,
that Reconciliation, Life and Peace, that God had in store for them from all
Eternity, therefore said to be in Christ, reconciling them unto himself, even
before they become by faith reconciled unto him, for it is not Faith that gives
a being unto this Reconciliation in God, no nor yet the Blood of Christ
himself, though it make way to the uttermost for the communication of the same,
without which it would have been for ever hid even from the Elect, but receives
it, which the Apostle expressly declares to be the very Ministry given unto him
and others, and adds hereunto the reason thereof (the so much despised
fundamental truth this day) by way of encouragement to bring poor sinners in
(Dr. Crisp's own method) for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19,
20, 21. Now does it follow, that because the Elect, during their state of total
unbelief, are Aliens and Strangers unto these great Mysteries, that therefore
God should not know them as being in Christ, as a public Person, and as such,
through him be reconciled unto them? 2 Timothy 2. 19. Or have any of the Elect any
more by Faith in their actual possession, than what they had through Grace an
irreversible Title unto from all Eter^ity? Tit. 1. 1, 2. But our Author tells
us (of which he seems to be very fond by his bandying of it backwards and
forwards against the Dr.) That, Because, whilst even the Elect are in a state
of Nature, they are the Children of Wrath, and also, that they that believe
not, the wrath of God abides on them, therefore they cannot be as much the
Favorites of Heaven, as the Saints now in Glory are. I beseech thee, Reader,
mark it well, and a very ordinary capacity will introduce thee not only into
the fallacy of his proceedings, but the Arminian rottenness of his Hypothesis
lu^king under the same. From whence is it that they come to be translated out
of a state of Nature into that of Grace? or to be actually removed from an
obnoxiousness unto, and an eternal abiding under the Wrath spoken of? (which
indeed is the portion of Reprobates, amongst which Hypocrites and
Double-Dealers, especially if Professors, and those of them with a witness
indeed, who would, under a pretense of Holiness, carry on their sinister ends
by those ways and means which are absolutely inconsistent with the same) I say,
is it from themselves, or from God? If the former, then we are not deceived in
these our Adversaries, but know where they are; if they say the latter, then it
is evident that their own Concessions must give their Assertions the Lie; for
it is either in the ability of the Elect to discern into, and also change both
the state of their Persons, and frame of their Natures; or, it wholly lies in
God, and that both as to his Will and Power therein: But in our Author's sense,
there is nothing but wrath in God against them all whilst in unbelief; what
then in God must be the motive to remove this unbelief, for a justly provoked
wrath, in my apprehension, would scarcely be moved to step one step to work
that in man which must remove and annihilate it self, and indeed it were
unreasonable to expect it. Therefore certainly it appears to me, That this
Unbelief, which in it self exposes to the wrath of God, must be removed by its
contrary, which is Faith* and this is wrought by the mighty operation of God.
Now whether this proceeds from Love, even the very same the Saints in Glory are
undisturbedly filled with, and consequently Reconciliation in all the fruits of
the same, the former being the root-cause of the latter, let the Learned
Athenian Club determine, in the next of their most admirably unintelligible
Debates.

Observe Reader, that Scripture, Exodus 34. 6, 7. And the Lord passed by before
him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear
the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon
the Childrens Children, unto the third and to the ^ourth Generation. Where the
Lord proclaiming his Name to be, The Lord God merciful and gracious,
long-suffering etc. yet declares, That he will by ^o means clear the guilty:
Now one would think according to our Neonomian Scheme, That this is highly
incongruous; for who can be more properly the object of this grace than the
guilty? And yet the Lord will not pardon these, though he pronounces himself to
be a God forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; who then will he pardon?
Why the Text infers, those that are clear from guilt; but where shall he find
them? since the most holy that ever was or shall be on Earth, never yet was
without sin; nay, he charges even his Angels with folly. It is only his Elect
and Redeemed ones that he will pardon, and that because he has provided for
them such a righteousness and price to cover their nakedness, and pay off their
scores, That though they be guilty in themselves, and that as considered in
their natural state, and Covenant Relation unto Adam, together with the corrupt
defilements of their Natures thereupon, and so lies obnoxious unto Divine Wrath
and Vengeance, yet he, freely of his grace, justifies, pardons and acquits
them, as being in Christ, though ungodly in themselves, and thereupon
effectually renews and sanctifies them, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. chap. 4. 5. John
17. 6. compared with v. 17. Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9. Mal. 4. 2. And hence it is, that he
sees no spot in his Spouse, nor iniquity in Jacob. Hence it is also, that the
Lord before he makes thus known himself unto Moses in this his gracious, and
yet mysterious Proclamation, does not only change his covenant station, by
putting him upon a rock, but also covers him with a complete, unspotted, and
yet external Righteousness, by his putting of him into a Clift of the said
Rock, as not willing that Christ, who indeed was figured out by that Rock,
should become a pedestal for Moses, to stand upon before God in his own
inherent righteousness of Faith, Repentance and Sincerity, but he must be
clothed with, or put on Christ, in his own Righteousness, even his actual
obedience unto the preceptive and sanction-part of the Law, and that in the
solid matter, and not meritorious or consequential effects of the same, Phil.
3. 9.

Let me further tell thee, Reader, and by then thou have thoroughly searched
into the consonancy of Scripture, thou will certainly find it so, That as on
the one hand no one's holiness, though of the right kind, can or ever did
produce the least dram or particle of the Love of God, so neither will i^ in
the perfection of it is degree, in Glory it self, when without all spot or
blemish, prove or appear to be the matter wherein their justified estate does
consist. Nay, take the very merits of Christ themselves, properly and
distinctly as such, and they will not subserve so unscriptur^l an end, for
though the King's Daughter be all glorious within, in the real and true
renovation of her Nature here, whilst upon Earth, and unspotted perfection
thereof in Glory, yet that which gives her admittance into, and an eternal
standing before God, is her clothing or covering, nor the former, which is
indeed but a result of the latter, and that not in a remote meritorious sense,
but material and substantial interesting of her in, and investing of her with
that Gold of Ophir, or Garment wrought of Gold, which is the Righteousness of
the Saints, Psa. 45. 9, 13. Rev. 19. 8.

THIS appears from the nature and manner of Christ's proceedings on his
juridical Throne at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 25. 31, etc. (A Text out
Adversaries so impertinently urge to prove that inhe^ent righteousness is the
matter in which, though for the merits of the Righteousness of Christ, all that
shall be saved, are justified, or prono^nced juridically just before God)
wherein it is evident, That the whole of the eternal Counsels of God,
concerning Mankind in the Judgment committed by the Father unto the Son are
demonstratively set forth in the very form of Christ's proceedings on that day,
and that to the stopping of the Mouths of Angels, Men and Devils, together with
the Manifestations of the faithfulness of Christ in the discharge of his
Mediatory Office, by bringing about the full and undeniable accomplishment of
the aforesaid Counsels, not only in the very matter, but order, and regular
course, and manner of the same. In short, the whole of the transactions of that
day will appear to be (as sententially declared by Christ) a perfect Epitomized
Transcript of the secret of God's Covenant, As

1. The Doctrine of Election, wherein God's eternal purpose of Love toward a
certain number of the Lump or Mass of Mankind, without any regard unto, by way
of motive or foresight of their believing or justified state, fully appears,
therefore called Sheep (separate the Sheep from the Goats) even before they
were so much as actually changed in their state, v. 32. comp. John 10. 16.

2. THE Doctrine of Justification, is made manifest in Christ's setting them on
his right hand, or changing their station, which precedes his owning any of
their works, v. 33. comp. Romans 8. 5.

3. THE Doctrine of Regeneration, attested unto in the fruits of the same, even
good works from a gracious principle to a right end, and their self denial
thereupon, v. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Rev. 14. 13. Their works follow, but go
not before them, compare Matthew. 7. 22. Luke 13. 26.

4. ALL this is apparently founded upon their being blessed of the Father; but
when was that? Even then when he had prepared a Kingdom for them, and that from
the Foundation of the World, v. ^4. comp. 2 Timothy 1. 9. whereupon it is, that
the blessed Son resigns up his Mediatory Office and Kingdom unto the Father,
together with the trust committed unto him, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Heb. 2. 13. whereby
God becomes All in All. Where now is room for boasting, ye pitiful Hucksters in
Divinity? Where are you causa sine qua nons, your Conditions, Causes and
Prerequisites?

BUT we must attend our Author, who quotes the Dr. p 15. Though a Believer,
after he be a Believer, does sin often, yet God no longer stands offended and
displeased with him, when he has once received Christ. And Dr. Crisp's Works,
Vol. I. Sermon. 2. page 15. -- Quoted by Crispia. unmasked. page 37.
hench he gives what he thinks to be the Dr's reason, on which our Modeller
fixes his mistake, but perfectly leaves out the bottom-ground thereof, by which
our Author gives us some Socinian glimmerings, more of which both as to the
matter and clearness, we may see in his next Charge, for ibid. here he tells
us, His reason is, because if Christ bore our Iniquities, he also bore the
displeasure of God for them; and though God be displeased at sin in Believers,
and hates and abhors it, yet he is not offended with the Persons of Believers,
who commit that sin, because they are justified. Now compare this with what he
leaves out in the same Page, unquoted from the Dr. as follows, whence thou
may have a little view of Socinus's Face, though pictut'd or shadowed forth
in what our Author says, but somewhat side-ways -- And (says the Dr.) unto
them, God says, Anger is not in me, Isa. 27. 4. And Isa. 53. amongst many
other notable expressions of God's being well pleased toward poor Sinners
through Christ: He says, he Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol. I. Sermon. 2. p. 15
was wounded for their transgressions; you have this admirable expression of
the effect of his wounding, He shall see the Travel of his Soul, that is,
toward the latter end of the Chapter, And he shall be satisfied; satisfied
here, is as much as pacified, they are all one; The Travel of the Soul of
Christ makes God such amends for the sinfulness of all Believers, that he can
no longer stand offended and displeased with them. If God does remain offended
with them, there is yet some of their sinfulness remaining to be taken away,
that this offense also may be taken away. All their sins must be taken away
from them, and all offenses will be removed from them. But except God will be
offended, where there is no cause to be offended, (which is Bla^phemy to speak)
he will not be offended with Believers. For I say he has no cause to be
offended with a Believer, because he does not find the sin of the Believer to
be the Believer's own sin, but he finds it the sin of Christ: He was made sin
for us, God laid the Iniquity of us all upon him: The Blood of Christ cleanses
us from all Sin: He bore our sins in his body on the Tree. And if he bear our
sins, he must bear the displeasure for them; nay, if he did bear the
displeasure, the indignation of the Lord; and if he did bear the indignation of
the Lord, either he did bear all, or but part; if he did not bear all the
indignation of the Lord, then he does not save to the uttermost those that come
to God by him, as in the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, he is said to do; I
say, not to the uttermost because he is some offense, some indignation left
behind, and for lack of taking of this indignation upon himself, it lights and
falls upon Believers. So that, either you must say, Christ is an imperfect
Savior, and has left some scattering of wrath behind, that will light upon
the head of the Believer; or else you will say, he is a perfect Savior, and
takes away all displeasure of God; then there remains none of it upon the
Person of the Believer. Beloved, for my part, I understand not what clouds are
in the Mind and Judgment of other men: To me it seems, there is no truth more
abundantly cleared in all the Scripture, than this one truth of the transacting
of our sins, and consequently the offense or God for this Sin, that it is
wholly laid upon the back of Christ, Dr. Crisp's Works Vol I. Ser. 2. p. 16
and so a poor soul has rest from the indignation of God, as Christ does take
the burden off from his shoulders. There is a twofold burden; first in sin
it self, and the second burden is the indignation of God for it. Who can bear
this indignation of his? Christ alone, and he has born it.

NOW from hence thou may observe no small little of our Author's Treachery,
and what Arminianism, as well as Socinianism lodges in the same,
notwithstanding his seemingly fair acknowledgments of commutative imputation of
Sin and Righte^usness between Christ and a Believer. The Dr. as we have heard,
positively as well as w^rrantably declares, That God cannot be displeased with
the person of a believing Sinner in a proper, vindicative or legally penal
sense, because that his sins were laid upon Christ, and that he also bore
actually, in the room of such, even God's displeasure against the same.
Therefore, says our Author, ut supra That because Christ bore our iniquities,
he also bore the displeasure of God for them, which he takes to be a mistaken
ground for the Dr. to fix his Assertion upon, Note

1. THAT in our Author's sense the displeasure of God against the very person
of a Believer, and that for sin even in a penal sense, abides with God whilst
the said Believer is in this mortal state, not the best of Believers being
without the same, during their abode in the flesh; whence it shrewdly follows,
That when they are completely sanctified and freed from all the indwellings of
sin, then and not till then are they got from under God's vindicative and
punitive displeasure against their persons for the same. This with our Author's
good leave, I take not only to be his Cryptical reserve, but downright
Arminianism, as growing in the Soil of a Self-justiciary. Therefore he tells
us, page 37. How we are to understand God's charging of sin upon a justified
person, That it shall not be his endless peril, his utter destruction; but it
feems it carries and procures that displeasure from God against even the person
of a Believer, that is the same in kind with an endless peril, and utter
destruction; from which displeasure in the everlasting continuance of the same
(though not nature thereof during this Life) the person of a Believer may be
fully secured in a state of perfect Holiness; But

2. Most absconded Sir! Methink you swell, and that most rankly too of the Cask
of Socinianism, like your Foxes, Fitchets, and such sort of Vermin, though very
reclusely lodged from the Eye, yet their nasty scent usually betrays them; for
is it possible, That Christ can be looked upon as a proper Sacrifice for sin,
and not as undergoing the full displeasure of God against, as well as
punishment from God for the same? And if so, where would this punishment be, or
what would it signific? This is to make but a mere sham, Metaphorous
appearance, or gulling Cheat of the infinite Sufferings of the blessed Jesus,
and thereby to despoil him of his Glory, even of that Baptism that he was in a
strait, till he was Baptized with the same; nay, let me tell this Author by the
way, That take away the displeasure of God against sin, or such as are in their
Persons juridically charged with the same (from which he would acquit Christ in
his Representative undertaking, and yet load a Believer withal) and I will
readily undergo the punishment thereof.

By the way, observe this as a true Mark and Token of both an Arminian and
Socinian; that if they can but be secured from punishment, they do not much
value either the Good Will or Displeasure of God. This seems to be the secret
Nursery of all their irregular Proceedings, both in frothines of Spirit,
looseness of Life, and prevarication in Doct^in, together with their treacherous
management of Authors; for so long as they think that Christ has taken away
the sin only in the punishment thereof, they little set by (self being secured
through the same) what becomes either of the Favor or Displicency of God toward
them, unless they can procure the former in their own way, unto which Christ
shall give them a remote assistance, they are very regardless, until the
appearance of a Death's Head drive them to their Tutissimum est, etc. -- Verbum
sat sapienti.

Take this that follows in a familiar comparison, as a short, yet full Scheme
of the Neonomian Heresy, touching the Doctrine of Justification, yea, the whole
Body of that Divinity included in the definition given therein of the Covenant
of Grace: That as a Surety on the behalf of another, Compounds for his Debt, by
cancelling the Bond, as to its immediate Relation between the Creditor and
Debtor, in translating over the Charge unto himself by his undertaking for the
payment thereof, after the way of a Bristol-Bargain, unto which the said Surety
enables him by a provision of all Implemental materials, together with his
derective advice, continued Presence, and recruitive Assistances upon failures,
till the poor Debtor, by virtue of the same at the end of his Seventh Year of
Jubilee, receives his complete discharge, which he (as absolutely disowning all
abilities in himself to compass the same) fully ascribes, and that justly as
well as thankfully, in the whole of it, unto the meritorious responsibleness of
undiscerned kindness, and constant actual supplies from his merciful Spouser
and Undertaker. Thus in their sense Christ becomes our Surety. Now our Author,
Ibid. comes to his Journey-man-Taylor's unstitching concessions, though not half
so honestly, yet as boobishly as possibly can be, -- Here we most readily
grant, that those who are justified Crispi. Unmasked, Page 37.
clear from the Imputation of all sin, according to some Scriptures he quotes,
1 John 1. 7. 1 Pet. ^. 24. Romans 8. 1, 33. But hereupon arises two Questions,
notwithstanding this his Armini-S^cinian Grant, as to the ends and
circumstances attending the same. As,

Quest. 1. Whether or no any one yet was, or ever shall b^ truly justified
without a praevious juridical Title unto, and interest in such a Righteousness
(and that without a present Work of Grace within him) as may constitute him
completely just as to the matter thereof, and also render and make it appear,
that God is infinitely just in the Justification of such a one?

Quest. 2. Whether this Concession of our Author, as to the Imputation of all
Sin unto Christ, and yet reserving even that thereof, which is Hell it self,
unto a true Believer; That in his Sufferings, and Afflictions, he undergoes the
very Displeasure of God, and Christ only the punishment, be in the least
consistent with Truth, common Sense, or solid Peace and Comfort? Our Author
laying a greater Burden upon the Believer in this his Concession, than upon
Christ himself.

But further he tells us in the Eighth Charge.
VIII. That this reminds him of another assertion of the Doctor's, viz. p. 38.
as a natural consequent of his former position. And so it is as natural indeed
as our Author's Proceedings against him, the former defending Truth with Truth,
the latter seeking to undermine the same by a continued Multiplication of one
treachery on the back of the other. Before we come to a precise consideration
of his quotations, note these three things:

1. That when he cites the Doctor for saying, That no Believer is punished or
afflicted for sin, he hides from thee his not only inferential, but also
literal explanation of the same, p. 38, 39.

2. That when he is forced to speak, even the Doctor's words, (as not being
able to avoid the same (no more than Bal^am could avoid his Prophecy) wherein
his consciousness appears like the Devils of old, in their owning of Christ,)
which are fully expressive of his meaning against what our Author discerpts out
of him as the matter of his accusation against him; he would cast the
imputation of Weakness and Fallacy upon him, merely to make way for the
reception of his invidious and ungrounded stroke against him, and thereupon
gives us such a disquisitive explication of the matter in hand, as roundly
bespeaks himself to be both a Fool and Cheat. p. 40.

3. That in his Concessions, even from his quo^ation of Scriptures themselv^s,
he unravels the whole, and thereby subscribes unto the Doctor, yea, confirms
him against all his false Impeachments. This Charge being much of the same
nature with the former (which our Author himself conf^s^es) I shall contr^ct my
self as briefly as I can in my remarks upon the same.

THE first the Doctor himself confirms, and that in the very place, from whence
our Author quotes him. p. 17, 8. 170. 258, In all which plac^s the Doctor
asserts two things.

1. That all the Afflictions and Troubles that b^fall a B^liever, cannot
expi^te or satisfy for the least Sin.

2. That God in his punishing of a Believer does it not in a proper vindicative
sense, as juridicall^ charged with Sin, to drive him from Sin: All which our
Author does as much MASK from thy Sight as possibly he can, as knowing, that
had he done otherwise, he must with his own Pen, have overthrown, and dashed out
the whole of this his invidious enterprise; for proof of which, take the
following Quotations.

Christ is a way to take away the effect of God's displeasure; Christ is the
only way to take it away. Shall I give the Fruit of my Body? says the Prophet,
Micah 6. 7. for the sin of my Soul; a Thousand Rams, or Ten Thousand Rivers of
Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol. I. Sermon. 2. Page 17, 18.
Oil? No, alas, this will not buy out the penance of one Sin, when he has
sinned; it is all too mean a price; there must be a better to take away that
Wrath; that is, the heavy punishment of God from a Believer. I say, a better
price than this, not a dearer price to us poor Men, but yet a more dear and
acceptable price unto God, a price in its nature Infinite and Invaluable, but
of this price, not a Farthing goes out of our purse; there is the greatness.
Christ is a way to take away all Wrath, in respect of the heavy hand of God,
which is the Fruit of Man's sin.

IN brief, Beloved, the sum plainly is this, Christ is so the Way from Wrath
(Now our Author's Charge comes in, as it lies in this Parenthesis. That God
does never punish any Believer after he is a Believer; for sin,) I say, God
does not punish him for sin. This seems to be a hard Proposition to many; but
give me leave to clear what I say, and so according to the clear evidence of
truth, reject or receive what I deliver to you. In Isa. 53. 5. a Chapter of
most admirable Excellency, to set forth the wonderful incomprehensible benefit
of Christ: Observe it, He was wounded for our Transgressions, mark the
punishment, He was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of our Peace
was upon him; and by his stripes we are healed. Now beloved, I will ask but
this Question; Are the Wounds of Christ, part only of our punishment? Or are
they the whole of our punishment? The Bruisings of Christ, were they to be part
of the punishment our sins deserved? If they were but part we must bear the
rest our selves; but then we must be Co-saviors with Christ, Co-bearers of
Indignation and Wrath, Isa. 63. 3. He has trodden the Wi^e-press alone, says
the Text; he looked for some that might help, and wondered, and there was none,
v. 5. No Creature in the World was able to be a helper with him

I speak of Believers only, they do not bear one lash of that deserved Wrath
that is poured out for sin, not one lash nor stroke; Christ trod it alone
himself. Yea, but you will say unto me, Does not God afflict his Children and
Believers? All the World sees and knows he does; therefore why speak you
against this? Beloved, give me leave to ask you, Is there not a great deal of
difference between God's afflicting of Believers, and God's punishing of
Believers for sin? (Here our Author comes in)

Quest. Are not the afflictions of Believers for their sins?

I Answer. No; Afflictions are unto Believers from sin, but not for sin: What
is the meaning of that will you say? This, God in afflicting of Believers, does
not intend to punish them, as now laying on them the desert of their sin; for
that is laid upon Christ; but he does afflict them in part to be a help to
preserve them from sin, etc.

It may be in affliction, and when the Rod of God is fallen upon thee, thy
heart will be ready to raise such thoughts as these in thee: Now God Dr. Crisp
's Works, Vol. I Ser. 2. p. 170.
will be even with me: now shall I smart for my transgressions. (Thus far our
Author.) But know this, that at that instant, when God brings Afflictions upon
thee, he does not remember any sin of thine; they are not in his thoughts
toward thee; for the Text says, not only of the present instant, that God
does not remember them; but of the future also, nay, of the everlasting future:
Your sins, and your iniquities, I will remember no more.

I beseech you, consider this one thing, you that think that God does plague
and punish you, being Believers, for such and suc^ sins of yours, and say, Does
not God now remember these sins of mine? Does God punish such and such sins in
others, and take vengeance for them, and does he not remember them? Does God
use to do things hand over head? Does God lay his Rod and his Scourge upon
them, and never think of the cause of it? And if these Afflictions be the
Judgment of God for these sins, certainly God must remember these sins, and so
know them as Mo^ives and Provocations, to inflict such Vengeance upon them, and
if God does punish them for them, certainly God does now remember them: And
what of all this? Is it a Truth that God has spoken, Your iniquities, and your
sins will I remember no more? Then surely, whatsoever things befall the
Children of God, are not punishments for sin, they are not remembrances of sin,
the Lord must be true and faithful in his Covenant; and therefore, if Men shall
cavil against this Free Grace of God, yet let me request this of you, Let the
evidence of the Holy Ghost so prevail with your Spirits, that if any Creature
in Heaven or Earth, Men or Angels, shall endeavor to contradict this, let them
be accounted as they deserve. Let all give way to this Truth; if any thing in
the World can make it appear to the contrary, then let it go away with it: But
if the Spirit of God does speak it so clearly, that nothing can be objected
against it; let not any thing cause thee to live in so much darkness and
uncomfortableness, as thou must do, till thou receive this Grace of the Lord.

Now, Reader, Be thine own Judge, and thou will find that this Author, even in
this his particular dealing with the Dr. would overthrow two main Pillars of
our Religion, as

1. The complete satisfaction of Christ, as it respects sin in the full
demerits of the same. 2. The Grace of God himself in the free and full
sovereign application thereof unto Elect Sinners.
See Dr. Owen on Heb. 12. 6. Vol. IV.
1. That love is antecedent unto chastening; he chastens whom he loves; so it
is with any Father, he has first the love of a Father before he chasten his
Son; whatever therefore is the same materially with the chastisement of
children, if it be where the Love of Adoption, does not precede, is punishment
(mark here Reader) The love therefore here in^ended, is the love of Adoption,
that is, the love of Benevolence, whereby he makes men his children, and his
love of complacency in them when they are so.

2. Ch^stising is an effect of his love. It is not only consequential unto it,
but springs from it, wherefore there is nothing properly poenal in the
chastisements of Believers: punishment proceeds from love unto Justice, not
from love unto the person punished. Chastisement is from love to the person
chastised, though mixed with displeasure against his sin. Note here, Reader,
with an especial Note, That the person of a Believer is not displeased with,
though under the chastisement, not punishment, of the Lord for sin. Therefore
the said Dr further tells us, on v. 9, 10. That the especial end of God in
Divine Chastisements is, that he may make us partakers of his holiness. And on
v. the 11th. he fur^her shows the benefit of chasti^ements; And is not all
this Dr. Crisp's own Assertion, that it is ^o^ for ^^ in a poe^al sense, but
from sin, that God afflicts his People, or that he is displeased with their
person^, whilst he does afflict them.

The second thing no^ed in this Charge, is in Page 40. where our Author gives
us the Dr's reason why God ^oth not afflict or punish any Believer for fin;
namely, because Christ bor^ ^ll the punishment due to sin; and if he bore all,
we can bear none: God w^^ld not punish Christ and B^lievers too. (And he
endeavors to invalidate Crisp. unmasked. page 40.
it ^^ as notable a Socinian distinction, saving the blockishness of it, as
most I have m^t with. Thi^ seems (^a^s he) to be a plausible reason, but it
has no solid Foundation. It is in^^ed a mere F^llacy, which I prove thus; To
argue after this manner, Christ bore all Punishment due to Sin, therefore
Believers have none to bear, is sophistical, b^c^u^e the ^n^ecedent Proposition
speaks not of the same bearing of punishment that the co^sequent Prop^sition
speaks of. The one speaks of bearing punishment, as that punishment was a full
satisfaction to God for sin, but the other speaks of bearing punishment as it is
the desert of sin. Now thinking he has come off with Flying Colors, he tells
us, Here is a vast difference between these two. And indeed there is, but not
in our Author's sense, as I humbly conceive. It seems therefore, (says he) that
there is a bearing of punishment, as a full satisfaction to God for sin, this
Christ bore; but there is also (says he) another bearing of punishment, and
that as it is the desert of sin; this the sinner bears. He further tells us,
that it is no good consequence to say, That if Christ bore all the sufferings
due to sin, then we must bear none. This might pass for a pretty Quibble, were
there not so much as thou will find of hellish Blasphemy lodged in it; for what
of punishment for sin did Christ undergo, if the full, complete desert thereof
was not laid upon him? And if this was not inflicted upon him to the very
uttermost, that an infinitely Divine Hand of offended Justice could exact, how
was God or Justice satisfied? But Sir, we ken your meaning very well, That Sin
was not the meritorious, but impulsive cause of the Death of Christ; which in
plain terms, is to assign no more unto his Death, but what is incident unto
Nature, upon Its dissolution; and therefore be pleased to take home your
sottish, as well as wicked distinction to your self: It is reckoned upon you as
being reprobate Silver, and what will by no means pass amongst the Shekels of
the Sanctuary. And notwithstanding his subsequent paring of this his Assertion,
so as to take off its more apparent rough-hewedness, which in the substance
thereof does more than once drop from him; it is for no other end than that it
may with the more undiscernedness pass off like poison in a Glass of Wine.

The third thing in this Charge is, The Scriptures he produces against the
Doctor, which evidently make for him, as Lev. 26. 18, 24, 28. Ez. Crisp.
Unmasked, p, 41, 42, 43, 44.
9. 13. Lam. 3. 39. A^os 3. 2. 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. Isa 27. 9. Not one of
these Texts bespeaks God's displeasure against the Persons of Believers, or his
bringing Afflictions upon them in a penally-vindicative sense, some expressing
warnings, some duties actually closed with, as stirred up thereunto by them,
some duties to be engaged in and under them, some gracious effects from and
through them. And that of the Corinthians is but the same with that of Vzzah,
and King Josiah: now will any one say, that this proceeds from God's looking
upon those of them that were true Believers, as not having their Sins in the
full desert as well as punishment of them upon Christ; for which it is that the
Doctor expresses himself in those curtailed Quotations that our Author brings
against him. See Dr. Owen on Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 11. And now our Author,
after all his pitiful sttuff, tells us, p. 45. That he will not here nicely
dispute about the Nature of punishment, etc.

AS to the Ninth Charge.
IX. He tells us, that -- It is not only asserted by him, (i. e. the Crisp.
Unmasked, Page 47.
Doctor) that God is not offended or displeased with Believers, much less
punishes them for their Sins; but he holds likewise, that God is not pleased
with any of their Graces and Duties, or whatever good thing they do, although
these proceed from the Holy Spirit, the Author of all Goodness. Now, should our
Author have but his mind, by a just rule of consequence, the Spirit of God must
take place of the Mediator, and the Graces and Duties of Believers stand in the
very room, and stead of the Righteousness of Christ. This will appear evidently
from the places whence he fetches the matter of his Poison against the Doctor,
or rather the Truths that the Doctor asserts. As, -- A Man would think that the
Apostle contradicted himself; works have nothing to do in Man's Salvation, or
move God to save; Not of Works, Dr. Crisp's Works, Vol. II. Ser. 6. p. 321.
says he, but of Grace; yet says the Apostle, You are created and ordained to
good Works; these stand well together. The Apostle Paul tells Titus, that Men
should study good Works, for these are profitable unto Men: A Man serves his
Generation, while he walks in good Works, and he does good too to them, among
whom he lives. A Man serves not himself in all the good Works he does; for the
Lord Christ has fully served his turn already; either we must make our
Performance Christ's, or else we must disclaim them. What a Pride and Arrogance
is this, either Men will rule the Roast, or else they will not abide in the
House! As every Man has his Office in a Family, so every thing in Man has its
Office: Good Works have very necessary Offices in the Family, but they were
never ordained to be Christ's, much less to be God's. When Christ was tempted
by the Pharisees about Tribute, he makes this reply; Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's. Let not the
Righteousness of ^^en encroach upon God, to take God's Work upon its self; I
tell you, Beloved, we know not the evil of these vain Imaginations. Should the
Lord deal with you according to your own Hearts, that as your Performances
could lay sins upon Christ, and discharge you, so you should be discharged,
when would you ever lay them upon him, when (alas) instead of laying old Sins
upon Christ, by new performance, you do but add new sins to old; all our
Righteousness is but renovation of new transgression to the old. For all ou^
Righteousness, says the Lord by the Prophet Esaias, even all our
Righteousnesses, he he speaks of every particular, they are as filthy Rags, and
a menstruous Cloth. Is this the way to ease a Man of his Sin, to throw dirt
anew in the Face of God? Is this a way for a Traitor to get the King's Pardon,
to come into the Kings Presence, and throw Poison in the King's Face? There is
not one Righteous Action a Man does perform, but he does therein anew throw
Dirt in the Face of God by that Action of his, because Sin, (as the Wiseman
says) is abomination to the Lord. Who knows the Errors of his Life, and the
Multitude of his failings in the best Righteousness he does? Man's
Righteousness may serve the turn of Men, but it will never serve God's Turn.
Though there be failing in our Righteousness, yet it may be profitable to Men,
but as there are failings in it, the Eyes of God cannot away with it.

Now let me add this unto what the Dr. says, That were our inward righteousness
unspottedly perfect, even in this life, yet I will be bound to clear and
maintain, and that from the full distinct tenure and scope of the Covenant of
Grace, That for the same, neither would our persons be accepted with, as
justified before God, no nor any of our duties, either in whole or in part be
regarded by him; for take but that righteousness away for which this worthy Dr.
so well pleads, both as to its matter and use, and this our Author together,
with the rest of his dissembling Tribe* would wholly subvert (unless it be from
a meritorious station which they are pleased to assign unto it for fear of the
worst) and there is not the most glorified Saint in Heaven, but would soon turn
Apostate; for this is their clothing; it is herein, as well as hereon their
eternal Station lies: This is the Robe in which God beholds them, they become
^^pted with him, and he well-pleased with them, without which, even their
holiness (whereby they are qualified to take in the Glory of God, and also to
rejoice in him) would soon be blasted, dwindled away, and come to nothing, nay,
eternal wrath would seize upon them. Phil. 3. 9. Malachi 4. 2. Zach. 3. 2, 3,
4. Genesis 3. 7, 21. Rev. 3. 18. chapter 4. 4. chapter 7. 9, 13. chap. 15. 6. chapter 19. 8,
14. This was the constant joy of him, that was counted a Man after God's own
Heart, Psalm. 71. 16: Herein his Spirit was perpetually exercised. Nay, it is
the very property or distinguishing character of the new Creature, especially
the leading Member thereof, to eye this, to bring this night, to see that the
Soul be clothed clad with, and wrapped in the same, unto this the Winding-stairs
of the Temple, even the Promises, as they are in Christ, do lead us, and the
more we ascend by Faith, the more shall we see the Glory of God, experimentally
know interest in him, and be dispirited of proud self, That God in Christ may
be All in All, Romans 1. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31.

Again, our Author quotes the Doctor. --

The Apostle Paul complains, That even he when he would do Good, Evil was
present with him, through the Law in his Members, rebelling against the Law of
his Mind, which makes Dr. Crisp 's Works, Vol. II. Sermon. 1. Page 232, 234.
him cry out of himself bitterly against all he did: O wretchrd Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of Death? (Romans 7. 21, 23, 24.) By this
Body of Death, he must needs mean altogether, because he does not fly to good
Works as a refuge against the evil, but to Christ alone, as a Refuge against
all. I thank God (says he then) through Jesus Christ our Lord, ver, 25. so
then in respect of the inseparable Communicative, poysonfulness of the
Ingredients of our Corruptions, mingling themselves with the best Righteousness
of the best Men, both they and their Righteousness are but loss and dung, and
are filthy Rags, and must be so counted.

Some then may object, If it be so, we ought to refrain from doing
Righteousness, we must refrain from Dung.

I answer, that it follows not; but therefore we must refrain from glorying in,
or stroaking our selves for our Righteous Doings, and rather take shame to our
selves when we have done, and so glory in the Lord. Though good works done by
us are but dung in themselves, and in God's Eye, yet must we be careful to
maintain good Works, for they are profitable to Men, Tit. 3. 8. though but Loss
and Dung. David, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. confesses that his Goodness extends not to
God, yet for all this he refrains no^, because it could extend to the Saints
that are upon Earth, and to the excellent in whom was his delight. It is no
good Plea; That because a Man cannot be wholly clean, therefore he will be more
filthy than needs. You will not like it, that because your Children cannot come
from School without some dirt, in the eleanest way; that therefore they shall
wallow like Swine over Head and Ears in Dirt.

Others will say, God often shows his Approbation of good Works, which he could
not do, if they were all Dung.

I answer, that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; but as to the Believer, all
things are clean. (Here comes our Author) So through our Faith in Christ, the
whole Filth and Dung, of our Works is extracted by Christ; and he presenting
the same, purged by himself alone they became accepted with God, Rev. 3. 4. --
But simply the works themselves, as done, though never so well, are abhorred of
God, and Christ never takes them to purge till we our selves wholly renounce
them by counting them Loss and Dung; and that acceptance procured by Christ,
imports only a liking God takes to them, no Efficacy at all they have with him.

Again, But you will say again, Christ makes our Righteousness to be Dr. Crisp
's Works, Vol. II. Sermon. 6. Page 322, 323.
accep^ed, h^ makes it pleasing and acceptable, by purging away all the Filth
that is in it, and then it may pr^vail with God to lay our Iniquities upon
Christ.

I answer (Her^ our Author comes in with his Charge) It is true, Christ does
purge away all the filthiness, both of Righ^eousness and Unrighteousness in
Believers; but he does not purge away the filthiness of their Righteousness,
(that this Righteousness may prevail with God to lay Iniquity upon Christ) but
then, that Righteousness may be accepted in the Beloved, as Services, Himself
was without spot of the least Sin, yet he takes not away the Iniquity, by
laying it upon the himself; and if our Righteousness be made complete, by his
taking away the Filth of it, and putting his own perfection on it, it is not to
that end that Iniquities may be laid upon Christ by it, but that it may be
accepted in way of service.

I should go yet one step higher, and let you know, that as it is the Lord
alone that lay iniquity upon Christ, so not only all our performances are
unable to lay iniquity upon Christ; but even our Faith and Believing it self
does not lay iniquity upon Christ: Ye may easily perceive, Beloved, what I
drive at in all this Discourse, namely; to strip the Creature stark naked, to
leave it shiftless, and unable any way to help it self, that all the help that
the Creature does receive, may appear to be of the Free Grace of God merely,
without the Creature's concurrence in it. I say therefore, it is not the Faith
of Believers that does lay their iniquities upon Christ. Suppose thou have
committed many sins, and thy sins are apparent and plain; thou would be rid
of these transgressions, and hear of them no more; what is the way? Works are
not of power to do it, you will say, But Faith is able to discharge the soul,
and quit it from all transgressions, and lay them upon Christ. But I must tell
you, albeit God has given many glorious fruits and effects to Faith, and made
it instrumental of much excellent and abundant consolation to his People, yet
has he not honored Faith with this, that it should lay iniquity on Christ, or
move God to do it.

Now thou may see, Reader, wherein the fallacy of our Doeg, or malicious
Author does ly; for that which he lays as the foundation of this his Ninth
Charge against the Dr. he quotes from p. 322. where the Dr. speaking of the
best of Man's Righteousness, that it will not serve God's turn, as the matter
of our Justification before him, he presently diverts the same from the Dr's
li^eral, express sense and meaning therein, That God is not therefore pleased
with any of the Graces or Duties of his People: A most ungrounded, impudent
falsehood! But this is the manner of the Man throughout the whole of his
Treatise, and now that the Dr. declares, which way they become of use unto us,
and acceptable with God; namely, by Christ's purging and extracting out of them
the filth that does attend them, and so presenting them to the Father, and
that, when this is done, yet none of this is that for which God is prevailed
with to lay sin upon Christ; He tells us, that Truth had at last got such a
forcible prevalency upon the Dr. That he recants what he before had said, and
withal, that the latter is a vain surmise in the Dr. against some that would be
accounted the greatest Protestants, viz. That Christ does not purge away the
filthiness of their Righteousness, that this Righteousness may prevail with God
to lay iniquity upon Christ. But their not only pitiful causa sine qua non, as
previous unto God's imputation of Righteousness in order unto Justification
fully demonstrates that there were just grounds for this gracious Dr's
surmises, even in his day, as well as now; but also that Faith, Repentance, and
Sincerity is the very matter of the same, though the merit thereof lies in
Christ.

It is no wonder therefore, that our Author is so much concerned that the Dr's
Book is got into so many hands, wherein and whereby both his, together with the
vile Treachery, as well as Doctrins and Practices of others, are so evidently
brought to light. And I am fully satisfied, that the more they engage in this
work, the more they will not only labor in the fire; but vomit out their own
shame, if there were any amongst them.

Now we come to his Tenth and Last Charge, wherein he tells us, That
X. And Lastly, another wild Position which these Sermons maintain is this,
That All is done from Eternity, and so nothing is to be done now. He often
tells his Auditors, Your Business is done to your hand already: Therefore there
is no need of begging for Faith, or any other Grace, or for Forgiveness of Sin,
or Crispi. unmasked. p. 50, 51.
any other spiritual Privilege. These are all granted already, and not to be
done now. He frequently inculcates this, and in one whole Sermon together
insists upon it, viz. That God's pardoning sinners, and justifying the ungodly,
are not now, or hereafter to be done; they are not present or future, but were
dispatched long ago, even from Eternity. Whence he infers, that we must not
look for Remission of Sins, or Justification in this Life; we are not to be
concerned in any such thing now, we need not be solicitous about it, for it is
past and over: All is done from Eternity.

Now thou may observe herein, the Method our Author takes in his dealings
with the Dr. and that in every one of his Ten Charges against him, not one of
them excepted; As

1. When he lays down any one of them all against the Dr. he fixes upon some
discerpted, dragged Sentence or Position of his, and thereon lays his load of
Invectives, by most false and violent inferences, endeavoring to suit it (by
forcing it to speak what it never was designed for) to the nature of that
Charge he is more immediately upon. But then

2. Finding by the Dr's Explanation of the said Position or Sentence, That his,
viz. our Author's Treachery would more openly appear, he reserves the said
explanation or explication of the same unto the latter end of every one of his
Chages, that thereby he might the more undiscernedly represent him as an
Impostor, Recanter, and one inconsistent with himself: Having put before a
quite contrary construction upon it (merely to blind the eyes of his Reader) to
what the Dr. produces it for. Thus having clapped his own sense to what he has
partially picked out of the Dr's work, he runs and setches what the Dr. urges to
clear and prove the same both by Scripture and Argument to render him the
vilest cheat, and most vainglorious Person imaginable. This I will be bound to
make good even to our Author's Face, if he dares openly appear in this Cause.
As for instance, he quotes the Dr. ut supra, Vol. II. Sermon. 8. viz. That God's
pardoning sinners, and justifying the ungodly are not now or hereafter to be
done, etc. And thereupon our Author fixed his virulent sense, ut prius that we
must not look for Remission of Sins, or Justification in this Life, etc. but
retains the Dr's own explanation of them for another Charge against him, even
that of Fallacy and Recantation, thus dividing betwixt the Dr's Positions and
Explications he would make way for the fixing of Heresy upon him on the one
hand, and of Double-dealing and Deceitfulness on the other.

Therefore I shall quote what our Author himself scat^eringly cites out of the
Dr. for the forementioned ends, and then let the Reader determine; as Auth. --
That God's pardoning Sinners and justifying the ungo^ly, are not now or
hereafter to be done, they are not present or future, but were dispatched long
ago, Quoted in Crispiams. Unmasked. p. 51, 52.
even from Eternity. God had all this at once in his eye, and having this
Platform before him, as if all were then in being, he sets down his own Act of
his Royal Assent, that for every such Person as he had chosen, and for every
such Transgression that should be committed at such and such a time, by such
and such Persons, he would accept of such a Christ, whom he would fit to bear
their Transgressions -- As the Elect were in the Eye of the Lord, before they
had a real Existence and Being, so all their iniquities were laid on Christ
from Eternity: But it must needs be granted, that the particular Application of
this Grace to Persons, that the Lord has laid mine iniquities, and thine
iniquities upon Christ individually, must needs be in time.

Now what grounds had our Author to deal so wretchedly false with the Doctor,
as he does? as to ^ay, That there is no need of begging for Faith, or any other
Grace, or Forgiveness of Sin, or any other spiritual Privilege, etc. this
being prefixed to one part of his curtailed bra^ch against the D^ctor, and to
usher in another part of the same, which is the Doctor's Explanation of the
former part, he tells us, -- That it fell from the Doctor's own Lips and Pen by
chance, and that here you see he expresses it as a future thing, that God would
accept of Christ. And then for the third part of his qu^tation, he tells us,
That He (i. e. the Doctor) at length submits to this, which is the real Truth,
but which he had boggled at so long, and that indeed this is his way very
often; he takes a great deal of pains to rear up a Notion, and then of a sudden
pulls it down again. Thus our Author, like a cunning Sophister, to divert his
Reader from attending upon him in his vileness, and manner of his Proceedings
as conscious to himself of what he had done, (like a Thief on the pursuit of an
Hue and Cry, leaves his theft with another) would charge them upon the Doctor.
This is not only the Jesuits Method to divide and rule, but also the practical
dexterity of the Atheist to undermine the Scripture, endeavoring to make of it
a mere self-contradiction: What Peace such Courses are like to be productive of
one day, I think it were well our Author did in time consider. Thus he deals
with the Doctor in the remainder of his Charge, p. 56. 57, 58, etc. wherein, by
endeavoring to unmask others, who fully, plainly, soundly and honestly, as in
their proper colors appear in their Writings, he drops down the Vizard of his
own Face, verifying the old Maxim, That there never yet was cheat, but sooner
or latter proved an open exposed Fool. Unto the Reader's farther Satisfaction,
as to our Author's Treachery herein. I shall refer him to an impartial
disquisition, and comparing of both Books together; which by then he has done,
he will soon be able to determine, on whose side the Scales turn; for there is
not one of those Authors he brings against the Doctor, whose Treatises I am
acquainted with, but fully speak of him, both as to Election, Justification,
Graces and Duties, which I could with ease make to appear, were it my present
work so to do; only this let me add, That amongst the many scores of black
characters that he gives the Doctor, I know not one of them (as far as I have
been informed either) by Teacher^ or Authors, Men, both of sound Matter and
excellent Spirits, to be in a State of Repro^ation, as deriding the new Birth,
(and the like, etc.) a special Mark of the Son of the Bondwoman, Gen 21. 9.
compare Gal. 4. 29, 30. And yet, that the Doctor in our Author's Judgment,
together with his Prefaces, should be a good Man, and in Heaven, is to me a
perfect Riddle, unless the measures they take here be from their owned allowed
deceit^ul practices here, and yet can retain confident hopes of Glory hereafter.

Lie not, but let thy Heart be true to God,
Thy M^uth to it, thy Actions to them both,
Cowards tell Lies, and those that fear the Rod,
The stormy working Soul spits Lies and Froth.
Dare to be true, n^thing can need a Lie,
A fault, which needs it most, grows two thereby.
Herbert 's Poems, page 3. Roma, vale, vidi, satis est vidisse; revertar,
Cum Caeno, meretrix, (...), cinoedus ero.
GREAT Carbanado'd Crisp! What Is now thy Crown,
And was thy Glory, here is ^^ampled down.
Here is no Synagouge, (alas!) for thee,
Since Christ alone gave Eyes, and made thee see.
Had thou but owned some sub-caelestial Cause,
Heaven mixed with Earth by some Creation-Laws;
A Groundwork, out of Nature for Free Grace,
As of her kind, Her Mysteries to place,
And in a Logical Phlehotomy
Let out thy Notions by Philosophy,
Thou had been crowned for thy Divinity.
But it is too late, since thou have escaped the Fire,
And yet do live unsing'd in thy Attire.
Free from Chaldean Scent, and rather more
Enlarged than cramped from what thou wast before.
Pass on Jehovah's Test, let England know
Who are her Worthies, Shibboleth, and who
Pronounce Sibboleth. -- Want of this lisp,
With some impairs thy Credit, Gracious Crisp!
Whilst others hunger, thirst, and pant for more
Of that, whereof thou have an Ocean store.
T. Edwards.

AN APPENDIX.
THERE is lately come into my Hands a small Pamphlet, entitled, The Agreement
in Doctrine among the Dissenting Ministers in London, Subscribed December. 16.
1692. And that as referring unto the present Debates against the Dissenting
Ministers, justly, and very wretchedly occasioned by one Mr. Daniel Williams,
in a most corrupt piece of his, called, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated,
wherein some of Dr. Crisp's Opinions are considered, and the Opposite Truths
are plainly Stated and Confirmed. By the said Author.

On the which Pamphlet, together with the Circumstances attending it, I crave
my Christian Liberty to fix my Remarks, the cause in Hand being every Man's
concern, whilst he has either a regard to the Glory of God, the welfare of his
own Soul, or the faithful and undaunted Service that he owes unto his
Generation. Non soli mihi natus eram and so leave shall every one to determine
for himself, though in my Judgment, I must confess (all things considered) I
never met with a more useless, un-intelligible, and yet ins^aring Engine in all
my days. But before we proceed, I shall offer thee Dr. Owen's Opinion in things
of this nature: -- It is an Agreement in words, and the outward found Dr. Owen
on Hebr. Vol. II. Exercit. p. 127.
of them, but the Belief and Profession of the same, Truths or Things, that is
alone to be valued, all that is beyond such an Agreement, being left at Peace
in the Province of Mutual Forbearance. An Agreement in words only Parrots may
learn; and it will be better amongst them, than that which is only so amongst
Men, because they have no mind to act, dissenting and contradicting Principles,
but as for Men to declare their assent unto a certain form of words, and in the
mean time in their Minds and Understandings, expressly to judge and condemn the
Faith and Apprehensions of one another about these very things, is a matter
that no way tends to the Union, Peace, or Edification of the Church: For
instance, suppose a form of words, expressing in general, that Christ was an
High*Priest: that the Acts of the Priesthood being Oblation and Intercession,
Christ in like manner offered himself to God, and makes Intercession for us,
that hereby he purges, expiateth, and does away all our sins, with many more
expressions to the same purpose, should be drawn up, and subscribed by the
Socinians and their Adversaries, as they can safely do on all Hands, will this
in the least further any Agreement or Unity between us, whilst we not only
disagree about the sense of all these Terms and Expressions, but believe that
things absolutely distant and inconsistent with one another, yea, destructive
of one another, are intended in them?

Again the same Author says, --

Considering the Agreement in all Fundamental Articles of Faith between these
Churches, thus at difference, and of what great use their Union might be unto
the Protestant Religion, Dr. Owen 's Enquiry into the Original, Nature,
Justification, Power, Order, and Communion of Evangelical Churches, p. 300.
both as unto its Spiritual and Political Interest in this World, the effecting
of such an Union among them, has been attempted by many. Private Persons,
Princes, Coll^quies, or Synods of some of the Parties at variance, have
sedulously engaged herein. I wish they had never missed it in stating the
Nature of that Union, which in this is alone desirable, and alone attainable;
nor in the Causes of that disadvantageous difference that was between them. For
hence it is come to pass, that although some Verbal Compositions have sometimes
by some been consented unto, yet all things continue practically amonst them,
as they were from the beginning. And there are yet Persons who are managing
Proposals for such an Union with great Projection in point of Method for the
compassing of it, and stating of the Principles of Agreement. some whereof I
have by me. But the present State of things in Europe, with the Minds of
Potentates, not concerned in these things, leave little encouragement for such
Attempt, for any expectation of any success.

After the Trial and Experience of an Hundred and Fifty Years, it is altogether
in vain, to be expected that any farther Reconciliation or Union, should be
effected between these Protestant Churches, by either Parties, Relinquishment
of the Doctrins they have so long taught, professed, and contended for, or of
their Practice in Divine Worship, which they have so long been accustomed unto.
We may as well expect a River should run, backwards, as expect any such things.

Page 302, That all these differing Churches, and whilst these Differences do
continue, be taught to prefer their general I^terest, in opposition unto the
Kingdom of Satan, and Antichrist in the World, before the lesser things wherein
they differ, and those occasion^l Animosities that will ensue upon them. It
has been observed in many places, that the nearer some Men or Churches come
together in their Page 302, 303.
Profession, the more distant they are in their Affections; as the Lutheraus in
many places do more hate the Calvinists than the Papists, I hope it is not so
by us. This makes it evident, that the want of necessary Peace and Union
amongst Churches, does not proceed from the things themselves wherein they
differ, but from the Corrupt Lusts and I^terests of the Persons that differ.
This Evil can no otherwise be cured but by such a Reformation, as shall in some
measure reduce Primitive Simplicity, Integrity and Love, such as were among the
Churches of the converted Jews and Gentiles, when they walked according unto
the same Rule, in what they had attained, forbearing one another in Love, as
unto the things wherein they differed. Until this also be effected, all
endeavors for further Union, whilst these differences continue (as they are
like to do, unless the whole frame of things in Europe should be changed by
some great Revolution) will be fruitless and useless.

Were this conscientiously insisted on, out of a pure Love unto Jesus Christ,
with Zeal, for his Glory, it would not only be of more use than innumerable
wrangling Disputes about the points in difference, but more than the exactest
Methods, in contriving Formularies, of Consent, or Colloquies, or Synodical
Conferences of the Parties at variance, with all their Solemnities, Orders,
Limitations, Precautions, Concessions and Orations. Let Men say what they will,
it must be the Revival, Flourishing, and Exercise of Evangelical Light, Faith
and Love, that shall heal the Differences and Breaches that are among the
Churches of Christ; nor shall any thing else be honored with any great
influence in that work.

From the whole of what our truly worthy Eleazer, Dr. Owen has, laid before us,
I would gather thus much, (who so stood in the 2 Samuel 23. 10. comp Dr. Owen 's
Discourse of the Glory of Christ, Part 1. Pref. latter end.
cause of his Lord and Master, till his Hand was weary, and yet quitted it not,
but clave unto the Sword, yea, though dead, yet still speaks, in the great
Victory the Lord wrought by him, even such as that the People have little more
to do, save to return after him only to the spoil.)

That whatever attempts may be made after an Agreement between Dissenting
Parties by a Subscrition of Articles, true in the real form and verbal the
matter thereof; yet if the scopal design, genuin energy, and unsophystieated
truths contained thereof be not attended unto, and that as arising from a
divine, clear, irresistible, and yet Heart-bowing and bending Conviction upon
the Conscience, will be so far from terminating in their satisfaction, as that
indeed thereby (all such Hypocritical measure being abhorred of God) sooner or
later a wider gap of Difference will be opened, and also deeper, and more
lasting Exasperations issue from the same. Nay, such is the watchful and
careful Eye of God over and toward, even his cajoled and deceived ones, that
if they will still suffer themselves to be decoyed and gulled by the fair, and
yet empty pretenses of a certain sort of professors, he will by one Providence
or another (as he did by Lot) even Fire them out from amongst such Associates,
which he has truly begun, and that with the Fire of his own Sanctuary, kindled
already; for though the Embers thereof may seem to be covered for the present, by
the nasty Ashes of a pretended empty Agreement cast upon them, yet in due time
he will break through the same by such a flame, as shall openly proclaim his
Zeal; and his being clothed therewith as a Cloak for his own G^ory, establish
and confirm his upright ones, and bring a dreadful Terror upon the Hypocrites
in Zion. I come not to bring Peace, but the Sword.

Now the Question to the point in hand will naturally follow, namely -- What it
is from or in this Paper of Agreement, that should provoke any Man's Pen to
drop so much Dislatisfaction against the same and especially considering that
so many and so much differing Ministers in their Persuasions, have been thereby
brought into a seeming open, and external coalescency one with another? Unto
which I shall give thee my thoughts and attend thy better Information, as

1. The first Ground of my Dissatisfaction herein is, that the Difference in
hand as to the Matter is not at all decided, or attempted to be decided by this
Paper of Agreement, but a difference be^ween Persons, wherein it appears that
the interest of Man is absolutely (and that by way of just consequence)
preferred to the Interest of Christ, whose glory in his abstracted and unmixed
Truths, must it seems be thereby postponed to the carnal welfare, and glaring
Peace or Prosperity of Man; as

On Decem^. 19. 1692. This Expedient was brought to a Meeting of the United
Ministers, who unanimously expressed their Approbation in the following Words,
viz.

That these Brethren, who at the Desire of the United Ministers, considered
Paper of Agreement. Page 16.
some Objections against Mr. Williams his Book, having brought in the above
mentioned Expedient for the Accommodation of the Matters in Controversy. The
United Ministers have weighed it, and approve of the same. Besides, it was
further declared by them, That whereas the United Ministers Collectively
considered, and as such, have not been desired to Approve of Mr. Williams his
Book: In like manner, they do not by any thing in this Agreement imply an
Approbation of Mr Chauncy his Writings in this Controversy: But yet they do
rejoice that both Mr. Williams and Mr. Chauncy have accepted this offered
Expedient.

And would not such Measures as these be reckoned as highly ridiculous, as well
as treacherous and false, for my Servant instead of adjusting my Concerns,
whereon and whereunto I send him, as entrusted with the some, to take up with a
bare sociable Act of Fellowship and Friendship even amongst those, with and
against whom my present Debate and Controversy lies?

Now is not all this perfect Sophistry? Whence should a necessity proceed of an
Agreement? Is it from the Matter in Controversy, as stated in Polemical
Writings and Argumentations between them, and that about Truths of the first
Magnitude? Or is it for the decision of a personal scuffle, that this Expedient
was formed? For we find no Agreement in Doctrine (save what is barely
subscriptive to the Articles of others) mentioned in the least, but that of
P^^^^ns, whilst all this while their Treatises are at War with, and Battling
one another, an (...) from the allowed Precautions of both Authors (as
expressed in this Paper of Agreeme^^ ^^gether with their distinct Testimonies
in the same; each resolving to keep his (...) But,

2 (...) second Ground of my Dissatisfaction herein is, That so sound Articles
and Fundam^^^^^ Doctrins therein of Faith, should be made a Pretextual Covering
of such Agreem^^^ (...) sin against such Truth or Light, and to make a Pander
of the latter to serve the (...) the former. Wherefore, lest any one might
suppose me over-censorious in this, I (...)

3 (...) Ground of my Dissatisfaction herein is. That the Matter it self mainly
in (...) which is not at all touched upon in the Paper of Agreement, but
perfectly avoided (...) therein still adhering to their own Judgment in what
they had written) is (...) Fundamental, not either Gradual or Circumstantial,
which appears from these words, -- It is hereby respectively declared that
neither they, who subscribed that Approbation prefixed to Mr: Williams his
Book, did therein more than signify (as their own words express) That they
judged he had in all that was material, fully and rightly stated the Truths and
Errors (this wants proof in a high Paper of Agreem. p. 2.
degree) therein mentioned as such, without delivering their sense about the
Preface, Explications or Proofs thereunto belonging; which Declaration is not
to be esteemed as a Disapproval of the said Preface, Explications or Proofs:
Nor they, who with Mr. Chancy, subscribed the abovesaid Paper, did therein
offer any particular Exceptions (which is a bold falsehood) against the said
state of Truths and Errors, which yet is not to be understood as an Approval of
that state of Truth and Errors.

Now Reader consider, here are Articles subscribed unto by Persons of several
and very distinct Judgments, which plainly appears from their steadfast
adherence unto what they had written, notwithstanding this form of an
Agreement; for that which they have subscribed unto must either be of an
indifferent nature, and consequently a Medium of Reconciliation between them,
or else must be obsolutely decisive of the Controversy on the one hand or the
other, and so long as things are thus agitated in the Dark, my best Advice unto
thee is, to compare the Subscribed Articles with the Treatises writ by each
Party, and by the help of the Spirit of the Lord, thou will quickly come to
know, not only where Truth does ly, but also the various interwoven Cheats, by
which some Persons would carry on their wretched and unconscionable designs
this day. The Lord give thee understanding in all things.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to Correct these following Errata's, or any other, with
his Pen.
INtroduct: Page 2. Line 18. read will not, for would. p. 3. l. 26. r. cast down,
for cast us. p. 2. l. 2. r. its, for it. l. 19. r. as, for ae, p. 7. l. 15. r.
into the state, for in the state. ibid. l. 39. r. this Doctor, for thy Doctor.
p. 13. l. 38. r. Sacrifice, for Sanctify. p. 14. l. 23. r. Surreptitious, for
Surreptatious. ibid. l. 37. r. He that has, for He has. p. 22. l. 27. r. make
it, for for it. p. 25. l. 6. r. hence. l. 45. r. of God, for for God. p. 27. l.
36. r. but to drive.


